NAVAL OPERATIONS
FROM 1785 TO 1801

WAR WITH THE BARBARY POWERS
[25 July 17851
List of American Prisoners at Algiers 9 July 1790 with the sums demanded by
the Regency for their Ransom
CREW O F THE SHIP D O L P H I N [OR D A U P H I N ] CAPTURED 3ot1? JULY 1785.

-

Richard OBryan-- - - - - - - - Captain- - - -Ransom demanded.. - - - - - - - - ZP 2000 1500
Andrew Montgomery - - - - Mate . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2000
Jacob Tessanier- - - - - - - - - French passenger - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 1500
William Paterson--- - - - - - Seaman-(Keeps
a Tavern) ----- - - - - - - - 11
- - - - - _ _ _ _ - - - . - - - 725
-_------Philip Sloan- - - - - - - - - - - Pjlig Lorin - - - - - - - - - - - - - _
"
- - - - - _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ - _ - - - - - - - - - - - - -725
John Robertson - - - - - - - - " - - - - - - - - _ - _ _ _ _ - _ - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 725
James Hall [or Hull]_____ "
..............................
725
CREW O F THE SCHOONER M A R Y [OR M A R I A ] TAKEN 25'b

JULY 1785.

Issac S t e p h e n s - - _ - _ _ _ _ _Captain-----------------..--------..--_
2000
Alexander F o r s y t h - _ _ _ _ _M
_ ate----__-_-----------------------1500
James Cathcart- - - _ _ - _ _ - Seaman-(Keeps a Tavern) _ - _ -- - - - _ -.- 900
George Smith - _ _ - _ _ -_ __ _ " (in the Kings house) - - - _ - - - - . .- .725
John Gregory- _ _ - _ _ ___ _ "
- - - - _ _ - - _ _ - _ _ - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 725
James Horrnet - - - - - _ _ _ - - " . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
725
Algerine Zequines- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 16475
duty on the above sum 10pr % - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - _ - - - - - - - - - - - 1647%
Sundry gratifications to Officers of the Deys household and
240%
Regency, equal to 1756 Zq each person-- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -

}

34792-28138 Mexicoe dollars @ 38 Mozunas each are Zequins- - - - - - -

1836276

[SDA. CL, Gibraltar, Vol. 1, April 1791-Dec. 1795.1
-

To Thomas Jefferson, U. S. Minister to Paris, France, from Richard O'Brien,
Algiers

(COPY)
N'? 1.
ALGIERS
Julze 8 t b 1786
THOMAS
JEFFERSON
Esq! HONOURED
SIR I take the Liberty of addressing these letters to
you hoping you will excuse the freedom of an American kc. and unfortunate captive at present. No doubt but Mr Lamb has given
you and M: Adams every articular information respecting the state
of affairs in Algiers. I am much s rized when I look a t the date
of your letter to us being the 4'Q o s o v e m b e r & with orders to ME
Lamb to redeem us Americans. I am surprized that from the 4'4
of November until the 2oth of March that Mr Lamb did not get our
redemption ascertained by some person in Algiers. But he retarding

2

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1785 TO 1801

the time until he could make it convenient to come himself and not
informing himself of the method generally used towards the redemption of captives, but on the contrary comes to Algiers and gives out
that he came to redeem the Americans.
I t was immediately signified to the Dey that Mr Lamb had brought
money for that purport, it became such a town talk that the Dey
hard1 knew what sum to ask. after a few days the Dey asks what
sum ! k r Lamb would give. M? Lamb signified he would give ten
thousand dollars. the Dey then said 50,000. I think the demand
was very a propos to the offer of Mr Lamb. Mr Lamb tried to get
the Dey to lower his price, but the Dey was determined not to lower
his price any thing worth mentioning.
We are much surprized that Mr Lamb should bring so trifling a
sum as five or six thousand dollars to redeem 21. Even if the Dey
had let us go agreeable to your calculation he could not have redeemed
us. But Mr Lamb when he first arrived told us he would get us
along in a few days, which much disappointed us, for he afterwards
told us he had no money to redeem us. what he had was for presents
if he succeeded in a cessation of hostilities with this Regency. one
time he would say his funds were in Holland - then in Spain, and
then that you & Mr Adams had given no power only to draw for £3300
stie & that Mr Randal must write the order. so that in his own
language his hands were tyed by the ministers. I believe the Dey
of Algiers was well convinced that Americans would give the sum he
asked. I have reason to suspect that the Dey had a hint conveyed
to him by the British Consul, who you may be assured is an inveterate
enemy to the Americans. about 5 months ago I wrote Mr Carmichael
that the British Consul had put himself to great trouble in sending
expresses to his court. about that time was the first time that he
knew that it was the intention of the Americans to sue for a peace
with the Barbary States. I t is not the interest of any commercial
nation that the Americans should obtain a peace with the Barbary
States, whilst they reap such benefits in being the carriers of our
commerce, particularly the English, French & Spanish being jealous
of us. Consider Sir what great insurance we pay in getting our
vessels insured. in a short time the great insurance we pay would
obtain us a peace, or our ships obliged to be sold or with the greatest
difliculty in procuring English registers and passes - if not soon
remedied our trade must fall into some other chanel. and with the
greatest difficulty we shall retrieve it again, our seamen having no
longer employment in the United states but must through necessity
seek a living in some other country. The British Consul I think
informs his court respecting the time when the Algerine cruisers
generally go out by that means the people of England take the greatest advantage on insurin American property. and is their policy
& benefit to spread the f a m much greater than i t really is. there
er of our commerce being prevented by the Algerines if
we
keep c ear of the streights, coasts of Spain &Q Portugal and the
is no
Madeiras. we may trade to France, England, Holland, Sweden
and any where to the N. of 44' N. LatdP
The Algerine cruisers generally go out in April but uncommon
they went out the 25th of May this year. they generdly make three
crwses a year finish about the 20t5 November & then unrig & ly b
until the next year. the Algerines have no merchant ships or vesse

dY

2

WARS WITH BARBARY POV7ERS

3

for trade excepting a few coasting craft which go along shore with
wheat &c the French b u g thew carriers in commerce & nothing
great. their marine strength is nine sail of xebecs, one of 32 guns,
one of 30. three of 24 and three of 18. and one of 12 guns - the
vessels are small to the metal they carry. X of the crews are Turks.
the remainder Algerine Moors.
A war with the Algerines would be a very expensive war they
having no merchant men ~t would be attended m t h a very great
expence, on our slde the expence of building a force adequate to the
Ugerines to get men to keep that force in commission. and still
it would be a great risque to trade, you are fully sensible the sum i t
would take ta redeem a few - and then it would dter the insurance
but trifling.
The United States should use every means to obtain a peace with
the Barbary States, although it would cost vast sums, for until all
obstacles are removed that prevent commerce we cannot expect to
be a commercial nation. it is bad policy to use any threats or make
any parade with cruisers if we intend suing for a peace, but on the
contrary let these people see that we are inclinable for a peace - no
doubt but it was great policy in the Dey to refuse Mc Lamb a t first
on the terms of peace. consider Sir the policy of this Regency in all
their transactions with the Christian nations. but I believe they are
inclinable to a peace with the Americans but should for political
views be negotiated very private, particularly by the Americans. I
believe they gave Mr Lamb su5cient reason to believe so. they seem
well inclined to a peace with us, and I believe would take some naval
stores as masts, yards, planks, scantling, tar & turpentine. the
English, French, Dutch, Danes & Swedes and I may say all nations
are tributary to them - making them valuable presents & supplying
them. The Algerines would never redeem or make an exchange with
any nation they should be at war with. the Dey of &em cares not
about his people particularly the Moors. the Turks he sets a little
store by. those nations that he has been at war with for ages have
experienced it. i t is the policy of Christian nations to keep those
nations of Turks & Moors at war with other Christian Nations. and
the people in general here wish for a war with those nations in the
streights, for I am sure that nothing but so great s sum as the Spaniards
are to give would reconcile those people to the Spaniards, they having
such an inveteracy against them for persecuting the Mahometan
religion -but money is the God of Algiers & Mahomet their prophet.
they like those nations that they are afraid of & that give them most.
But should the Algerines be influenced by the commercial Christian
nations not to make a peace with the United States, then we should
exert ourselves & fit out ships mounting about 24. guns. nine of that
force and two brigs, a schooner also -fast sailing vessels & have them
coppered for the sooner we would harrass those people the better for
we ~houldif so lucky as to take two or three of them. they would be
mclmable to a peace and on easier terms for us. To rendezvous at
Mahon & Gibraltar, and often to come in sight of Algiers. and I
make no doubt when they found a spirited nation against them they
would alter their opinion. not to be afraid of them like unto those
dastardly natiops, that have given them such reason to boast of a
superiority in courage to Christians. The Algerines have 55. gun
boats in case of an invasion or attack on the city which is very strong

4

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM

1785

TO 1801

being well fortified & I think they are a tolerable smart active people,
spirited in an attack, but with any thing of a warm reception easily
repulsed. they put great confidence in boarding therefore ought to
be well barracked. if they can avoid an action it is their choice to be
off.
The Algerines do not expect to derive any great advantage by
being at war with the Americans, our country being so far situated
from them, they will not attempt to approach our coasts. they have
very little Idea of America and I believe the British Consuls used their
influence in signifying to the Algerines the unjustness of our cause,
but since we arrived here we used our influence to convince them of
the justness of our quarrel which they say that if they were in our
situation they would do the same. There is a great difference between
negociating with those people and a Christian nation. the foundation
of all treaties should be laid by some person or Consul in Algiers that
knows how to treat with them for there are certain times & seasons
for those affairs. The Dey's sentiments aIways ought to be well
sounded and the sentiments of his ministers and head men for it is
by them all business is transacted with him for they have the Dey's
ear at command particularly the Causennage who is head minister.
the Micklassha is the next. he is son in law to the Causennage and
is Generalissimo of all the Fortiiications - entire direction of the
Marine - a particular favorite of the Dey, and I think no man fills
his office better. a valuable present to the Micklassha & Causennage
chosen by some man that is well acquainted with what suits those
men best. I am sure it would be very requisite & not hove away.
The Dey is well advanced in years, and I am sure when he goes to
his long home that there will be a very great change in the state of
affairs in this Regency. The Causennage will be his successor & the
Micklassha will be the prime minister. If anyone knows those peoples
policy I should think the Count DIExpilly does; being a year here
negociating the Spanish peace & has had so many conferences with
the Dey & his ministers. he has got the great men in office on his
side. Give a Turk money with one hand & you may take his Eyes
out with the other.
Since the Brig arrived from Tunis which is the brig which Mr Lamb
came to Algiers in, the brig was overhawled & the Captain examined
by the Micklassha respecting the property. I am credibly informed
by a Gentleman by the name of Capt. Bassline, who is a great favorite
of the Micklassha's, that the Micklassha was well convinced by the
information he had that the brig was an American property, which I
heard the evening the brig arnved in &em.
but the Micklassha
despised any such mean action but s i m e d to the Dey that the
report was false. I hope this particular favor shewn the Americans
by the Micklassha will not escape your notice but by every prudent
step cultivate the friendship of so great & so good a man. The
information by all I can learn & I have every reason to believe was
given by the British Consul, Mr Lamb's bosom friend. it is said
& I have been credibly informed that Mr Logie had the information
from a M? Gregory British Consul in Barcelona, and I should think
it a very dangerous affair for the brig to come to Algiers again particularly with money for or redemption as there is no knowing the
policy and political views of those people in Algiers. Permit me to
mention to you that if it was not convenient to redeem US when the

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

5

time is advanced which Mc Lamb signified to the Dey that it would
be good policy to get us on the Spanish list as the Spaniards have
not yet agreed on the price for their people; and inasmuch as the
Count DIExpilly may get us for less than what the Dey asks, and as
we were taken on the time when the Spaniards were about settling a
truce unknown to the Americans. Delays breed danger & opportunity
once lost is not easily recovered, and our captivity will become an
old affair and here we shall remain.
The American peace hangs on a thread but I make no doubt if well
planned but the United States will obtain it.
The Neapolitan & Portuguese Ambassadors are shortly expected
here, it is uncertain that they will obtain a peace, but if they do I will
engage the Portuguese particularly will pay well for lt. The Spaniards
have not surmounted all their difficulties yet with those people.
but I believe i t will take some time yet - a few days ago arrived a
Venitian & a French Vessel with shot &c. for the Dey. The Venitian
brought their tribute which was about 10,000 Algerine sequins and
about 5,000 dollars worth of presents, but they accepted the tribute &
I believe would not accept the presents. so that it is supposed when
the Algerines settle with the Spaniards that they will be apt to commit
hostilities on the Venitians. such tricks are very common to them.
I t is believed Mr John Wolfe will not get to be Spanish Consul in
Algiers, but I am very sure he is a very good man; no one in Algiers
better acquanted with the ways & policy of this Regency and would
be a very fit man to transact an business for any nation. I refer you
to M: Carmichael & Mr Itand& for his character and must observe
that there is no doing any thing among those people without mone
all the crowned heads in Europe to write to the Dey of Algiers wo&
avail but very little. to negotiate a peace with the Algemes should
be a statesman well acqunnted with the different languages. but as I
have said before the foundation should be laid by some Consul in
Algiers whom the United States could depend on and then an American
to come & conclude it. A good Consul is very requisite here.
We are much surprized at M: h b ' s ungentleman like behaviour
whilst he was in Algiers & could hardly believe Congress would [have]
sent such a man to negociate so important an affair as the making a
peace with the Algerines where it required the most able Statesman
& Politician.
The Count disapproved of his behaviour much & said he was a very
uncapable man to treat for the redemption of us & worse for making the
Peace. A man tbat has no regularity in small affairs m 4 l have none in
great ones. There is no Consul or man that has the least friendship
for the Americans but says he was a very unable man & not the
gentleman, which I believe sir, when we can make such an observation
On him we are sensible that a man of your abilities can have no great
opinion of him.
Mr Lamb's unguarded expressions, his hints, threats &c. despising
the French & Spaniards, signifying their deciet & in fact every thing
that he possibly could utter in the most vulgar language that i t was
mth pain we see him so unworthy of his commission & the cloth he
wore. his particular intimacy with Mc Logie the British Consul,
M! Iamb's bosom friend who I believe got all his secrets frqm
~ a l doften that the Americans had taken two forts on the M ~ s s ~ s s l p ~
from the Spaniards and often in the hearing of some servants who

NAVAL OPERATIOhTS FROM 1786 TO 1801

6

spoke English that if the Spaniards did not assist the Americans in
making their peace that we should take some of their territory from
them. no doubt but the Count was informed of all this. for one of
Mr Lamb's servants is servant to the Count a t present, & Mr Lamb
often said in my presence to Mr Wolfe that he (meaning M' Wolfe)
or the Count would have all the honor of laying the foundation of the
peace.
Sir we are very sensible of your particular attention to us, & through
your & Mr Carmichaels care of us, we are indebted for the particular
civility & attention of the Ct D'Expilly & French Consul. But still
it is impossible for us to be content whdst we are under the character
of slaves, so disagreeable is confinement to the men of the Land of
Liberty. My crew go through the severities of slavery that is possible
for men to endure. Capt? Stevens & Coffi have families. & a t
present unknown how provided for. I have an aged mother, brother
& sisters. that their whole dependance & subsistence was on me.
certainly the longer we stay here the greater expence we shall incur
on our country. If we do not make our grievances known to you sir I
am sure who can we apply to we have wrote to America when we were
first taken, but not one of us has received a letter & cannot tell what
our country has resolved on respecting us. we must submit to our
hard fate & trust to God & our country to extricate us from Algiers.
I hope Mr Barclay will succeed with the Maroccians - their situation
being more in the way of annoying us than the Algerines. I am surprized M': Lamb did not pay Mr Logie the small sum of about 5 guineas
which Mr Logie paid to the marine for excluding us from it. M'
Lamb often insisted Mr Logie to make some charge, but at last Logie
made a charge & Mr Lamb did not pay him.

*

*

*

*

*

*

*

Mr Wolfe will have occasion to write Mr Carmichael respecting
money he having orders from Mr Lamb to supply the captives &
nothing to do it with. also Mr Wolfe will give an account of our
expences &c. The Cruisers are out at present. we are treated with
the greatest civility by all the French & Spaniards here.
An account how we are situated & where
4. of us at the house of Monsr Ford
7. in the Dey's palace
9. in the marine
1. a t the Swedish Consuls I am with the greatest Respect & Esteem your
most obedient & humble servant
(Signed) RIcHQO'BRYEN
(Subjoined as follows)
[SDA. CL, Algiers, Vol.

I, Part I, April 1785-July 1795.1
128 June 1786 and 18 July 17871

Morocco--Reaty
[NOTE--A Treaty between Morocco and the United States was d e d at Morocco
by the Emperor of Morocco 23 June, 1786 and delivered to Thomss Barclay,
U. S. Agent, 28 June, 1786. Here also were signed and sealed on behalf of M o m o
an additional Article on 15 July, 1786, and a Shipsignah Agreament on 6 July,
1786. The T m t y and additional arficle were mtrfied by the United Statee 18
July, 1787.

7

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

"Treaties and other International Acts of the United States of America", by
Hunter Miller, volume 2, contains all details concerning this treaty.]
Extracts from certified translation of the treaty and of the additional article,
approved by Thomas Jefferson and John Adams

*

*

*

.1.

*

*

*

*

.2.

If either of the Parties shall be at War with any Nation whatever, the
other Party shall not take a Commission from the Enemy nor fight
under their Colors.
.3.

If either of the Parties shall be at War with any Nation whatever
and take a Prize belonging to that Nation, and there shall be found on
board Subjects or Effects belonging to either of the Parties, the Subjects shall be set at Liberty and the Effects returned to the Owners.
And if any Goods belonging to an Nation, with whom either of the
Parties shall be at War, shall be Laded on Vessels belonging to the
other Party, they shall pass free and unmolested without any attempt
being made to take or detain them.
.4.

A Signal or Pass shall be given to all Vessels belonging to both
Parties, by which they are to be known when the meet at Sea, and if
the Commander of a Ship of War of either Party s all have other Ships
under his Convoy, the Declaration of the Commander shall alone be
sufficient to exempt any of them from examination.

E

*

*

*

*

*

*

*

.6.
If an Moor shall bring Citizens of the United States or their Effects
to His %ejesty, the Citizens shall immediately be set at Liberty and
the Effects restored, and in like Manner, if any Moor not a Subject
of these Dominions shall make Prize of any of the Citizens of America
or their Effects and bring them into any of the Ports of His Majesty,
they shall be immediately released, as they will then be considered as
under His Majesty's Protection.
-7.
If any Vessel of either Party shall put into a Port of the other and
have occasion for Provisions or other Supplies, they shall be furnished
without my interruption or molestation.
.8.
If any Vessel of the United States shall meet with a Disaster at Sea
and put into one of our Ports to repair, she shall be at Liberty to land
and reload her cargo, without paying any Duty whatever.
.9.

If an Vessel of the United States shall be cast on Shore on any Part
of our Eoaats, she shall remain a t the disposition of the h e r s and no
one shall attempt going near her without their Approbation, as she is
then considered particularly under our Protection; and if an Vessel
of the United States shall be forced to put into our Ports, by tress of

8

8

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1785 TO 1801

weather or otherwise, she shall not be compelled to land her Cargo,
but shall remain in tranquillity until1 the Commander shall think
proper to proceed on his Voyage.

*

*

*

*

*

*

*

.11.

If we shall be a t War uith any Christian Power and any of our
Vessels sail from the Ports of the United States, no Vessel belonging to
the enemy shall follow untill twent four hours after the Departure
of our Vessels; and the same Reg ation shall be observed towards
the American Vessels sailing from our Ports.-be their enemies Moors
or Christians.

3

.12.

If any Ship of War belonging to the United States shall put into
any of our Ports, she shall not be examined on any Pretence whatever,

even though she should have fugitive Slaves on Board, nor shall the
Governor or Commander of the Place compel them to be brought
on Shore on any pretext, nor require any payment for then.
.13.
If a Ship of War of either Party shall put into a Port of the other
and salute, it shall be returned from the Fort, with an equal Number
of Guns, not with more or less.
.14.
The Commerce with the United States shall be on the same footing
as is the Commerce with Spain or as that with the most favored
Nation for the time being and their Citizens shall be respected and
esteemed and have full Liberty to pass and repass our Country and
Sea Ports whenever they please wlthout interruption.
.15.
Merchants of both Countries shall employ only such interpreters,
& sucb other Persons to assist them in their Business, as they shall
think proper. No Co-ander
of a Vessel shall transport his Cargo
on board another Vessel, he shall not be detained in Port, longer than
he may think proper, and all ersons employed in loading or unloading Goods or in any other La or whatever, shsll be paid st the Customary rates, not more and not less.

$

.16.

In case of a War between the Parties, the Prisoners are not to be
made Slaves, but to be exchanged one for another, Captain for Captain, O£Ecer for Officer and one private Man for another; and if there
shall prove a defficiency on either side, it. shall be made up by the payment of one hundred Mexican Dollars for each Person wanting; And
it is agreed that all Prisoners shall be exchanged in twelve Months
from the Time of their being taken, and that this exchange may be
effected by a Merchant or any other Person authorized by either of
the Parties.
.17.
Merchants shall not be compelled to buy or Sell any kind of Goods
but such as they shall t h k proper; and may buy and sell all sorts of
Merchandise but such as are prohibeted to the other Christian Nations.

*

*

*

*

*

*

*

&

9

WARS U71TH BARBARY POWERS
.19.

No vessel shall be detained in Port on any pretence whatever, nor be
obliged to take on board an Article mthout the consent of the Commander, who shall be at f d Liberty to agree for the Freight of any
Goods he takes on board.
.20.

If any of the Citizens of the United States, or any Persons under
their Protection, shall have any disputes with each other, the Consul
shall decide between the Parties and whenever the Consul shall require
any Aid or Assistance from our Government to enforce his decisions i t
shall be immediately granted to him.
.21.

If a Citizen of the United States should kill or wound a Moor, or on
the contrary if a Moor shall kill or wound a Citizen of the United
States, the Law of the Country shdl take place and equal Justice shall
be rendered, the Consul assisting a t the Tryal, and if any Delin~uent
shall make his escape, the Consul shall not be answerable for hun in
any manner whatever.

*

*

*

*

*

*

*

*

24.

If any differences shall arise by either Party infringing on any of the
Articles of this Treaty, Peace 2nd Harmony shall remain n0twit.hstanding in the fullest force, until1 a friendly Application shall be made
for an Arrangement, and until1 that Application shall be rejected, no
appeal shall be made to Arms. And if a War shall break out between
the Parties, Nine Months shall be granted to all the Subjects of both
Parties, to dispose of their Effects and retire with their Property.
And it is further declared that whatever indulgences in Trade or otherwise shall be granted to any of the Christian Powers, the Citizens of the
United States shall be equally entitled to them.
.25.

This Treaty shall continue in full Force, with the help of God for
Fifty Years. * * *
THO^ BARCLAY
Translation of the additional Article
Grace to the only God
I the underwritten the Servant of God, Taher Ben Abdelhack FenDish do certify that His Imperial Majesty my Master /whom God
preserve/ havmg concluded a Treaty of Peace and Commerce m t h
the United States of America has ordered me the better to compleat
ff: and in addition of the tenth Article of the Treaty to declare "That,
lf any Vessel belonging to the United States shall be in any of the
"Ports of His Majesty's Dominions, or within Gunshot of h s Forts,
"she shall be rotected as mucb as possible and no Vessel whatever
::belonging ei%er to Moorish or Christian Powers with whom the
United States may be a t War, shall be permitted to follow or eng
"her, as we now deem the Citizens of America our good Frien s

*

*

YTreaties,

*

*

* * * ", by Hunter Miller.]

*

*

*

Y:*

10

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1786 TO 1801

To John Adams, U. 8. Minister to London, England, from Thomas Jefferson,
V. S . Minister to Paris, France

PARIS,
July 11, 1786.
DEAR
SIR,-Our btrurtions relative to the Barbary States having
required us to proceed by way of negotiation to obtain their peace, it
became our duty to do this to the best of our power. Whatever might
be our private opinions, they were to be suppressed, and the line,
marked out to us, was to be followed. It has been so, honestly and
zealously. I t was, therefore, never material for us to consult together,
on the best plan of conduct towards these States. I acknowledge, I
very early thought it wodd be best to effect a peace through the
medium of war. Though it is a question with which we have nothing
to do, yet as you propose some discussion of it, I shall trouble you
with my reasons. Of the fonr positions laid don- in your letter of
the 3d instant, I agree to the three first, which are, in substance, that
the good offices of our friends cannot procure us a peace, without
paying its pnce; that they cannot ma.terially lessen that price; and
that payiDg it, we can have the peace m spite of the intngues of our
enemies. As to the fourth, that the longer the negotiation is delayed,
the larger will be the demand; this will depend on the intermediate
captures: if they are many and rich, the price may be raised; il few
and poor, i t will be lessened. However, if it is decided that we shall
buy a peace, I know no reason for delaying the operation, but should
rather think it ought to be hastened; but I should prefer the obtaining
i t by wm.
1. Justice is in favor of this opinion. 2. Honor favors it. 3. I t
will procure us respect in Europe; and respect is a. safeguard to interest.
4. It wiU arm the federal head with the safest of all the instruments of
coercion over its delinquent members, and prevent i t from using what
would be less safe. I think that so far, you go with me. But in the
next steps, we shall m e r . 5. I think i t least expensive. 6. Equallv
effectual. I ask a fleet of one hundred and fifty uns, the one-half of
which shall be in constant cruise. This fleet, bui t, manned and victualled for six months will cost four hundred and fifty thousand pounds
sterling. Its annual expense will be three hundred pounds sterling a
gun, including everything; this will be forty-five thousand pounds
sterling a year. 1 take British experience for the basis of my calculation: though vie know, from our own experience, that we can do in
this way, for pounds lawful, what costs them pounds sterhg. Were
we to charge all this to the Algerine war, i t would amount to little
more than we must pay, if we buy peace. But as it is proper tmd
necessary that we should establish a small marine force, (even were
we to buy a peace from the Algerines,) and as that force, laid up in
our dock-yards, wodd cost us half as much annually, as if kept in
order for service, we have a right to say that only twenty-two thousand
and five hundred pounds sterling, per annum, should be charged to
the Algerine war. 6. It will be as effectual. To all the mismanagements of Spain and Portugal, ur ed to show that war against those
people is ineffectual, I urge a sing e fact to prove the contrary, where
there is any management. About forty years ago, the Algerines
having broke their treaty with France, this court sent Monsieur de
Massiac, with one large, and two small f ' ates; he blockaded the
harbor of Algiers three months, and they su scribed to the terms he

f

5

'3

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

I1

proposed. If it be admitted, however, that war, on the fairest prospects, is still exposed to uncertainties, I weigh against this, the greater
uncertainty of the duration of a peace bought with money, from such
a people, from a Dey eighty years old, and by a nation who, on the
hypothesis of buying peace, is to have no power on the sea, to enforce
an observance of it.
So far, I have gone on the supposition that the whole weight of this
war would rest on us. But, 1. Naples wiU join us. The character of
their naval minister (Acton), his known sentiments with respect to
the peace Spain is officiously trying to make for them, and his dispositions against the Algerines, give the best grounds to believe it. 2.
Every principle of reason assures us that Portugal will join us. I
state this as taking for granted, what all seem to believe, that they
w i l l not be at peace with Algiers. I suppose, then, that a convention
might be formed between Portugal, Naples and the United Stabs, by
which the burthen of the war might be quotaed on them, according
to their respective wealth; and the term of it should be, when
em
should subscribe to a peace with all three, on equal t e r r n s . ~ h i s
might be left open for other nations to accede to, and many, if not
most of the powers of Europe, (except France, England, Holland, and
Spain, if her peace be made) would sooner or later enter into the confederacy, for the sake of having their peace with the piratical States
guaranteed by the whole. I suppose, that, in this case, our proportion of force would not be the half of what I first calculated on.
These are the reasons which have influenced my judgment on this
question. I give them to you, to show you that I am imposed on by a
semblance of reason, at least; and not with an expectation of their
changing your opinion. You have viewed the subject, I am sure, in
dl its bearing. You have weighed both questions, with all their circumstances. You make the result different from what I do. The
same facts impress us differently. This is enough to make me suspect
an error in my process of reasoning, though T am not able to detect it.
It is of no consequence; as I have nothing to say in the decision, and am
ready to proceed heartily on any other plan which may be adopted, if
my agency should be thought useful. With respect to the dispositions of the State, I am utterly uninformed. I cannot help thinking,
however, that on a view of all the circumstances, they might be united
in either of the plans.
Having written this on the receipt of your letter, without knowing of
any opportunity of send in,^ it, I know not when it will go- I add nothing, therefore, on any other subject, but assurances of the sincere
esteem and respect with which I am, dear Sir, your friend and servant.
[NR&L, Jefferson's Complete Worka, Vol. 1.1

To Thomorr Jefferson, U. 6. finiater to Pruiu, Fronce, from John Adame, II. S.
Minister to London, England

LONDON,
31 J d y , 1786.
DEARSIR,- I have received the ratification of the Prussian treaty,
and next Thursday shall set off for the Hague, in order to exchange i t

with the Baron de Thulemeier.
Your favor of the 11th instant I have received. There are great
and weighty considerations urged in it in favor of arming against the
Algerines, and, I confess, if our States could be brought to agree in the
measure, I should be very willing to reaolve upon extarnal war with

12

NAVAL OPERATIOhTS FIZOM I785 TO 1801

vigor, and protect our trade and people. The resolution to fight them
would raise the spirits and courage of our countrymen immediately,
and we might obtain the glory of f i n d breaking up these nests of
banditti. But congress will never, or at east not for years, take any
such resolution, and in the mean time our trade and honor suffers
beyond calculation. We ought not to fight them at all, unless we
determine to fight them forever.
This thought, I fear, is too rugged for our people to bear. To f i ~ h t
them a t the expense of millions, and make eace, after all, by g i m
more money and larger presents than wo d now procure perpetua
peace, seems not to be economical. Did Monsieur de Massac carry
his point without making the presents? Has not France made presents ever since? Did any nation ever make peace with any one
Barbary state without making the presents? Is there an example of
it? I believe not, and fancy you w i l l find that even Massac himself
made the presents.
I agree ~n opinion of the wisdom and necessity of a navy for other
uses, but am apprehensive it will make bad worse with the Algerines.
I will go all lengths with you in promoting a navy, whether to be
applied to the Algerines or not. But I think, at the same time, we
should treat. Your letter, however, has made me, easier upon this
point. Nevertheless, to humble the Algerines, I think you have
undercalculated the iorce necessary. They have now fifty gun-boats,
which, being small objects against great ships, are very formidable.*
None of these existed in the time of Monsieur Massac. The harbor
of Algiers, too, is fortified all round, which i t was not in M. Massac's
time, which renders i t more difficult and dangerous to attempt a
blockade. I know not what dependence is to be put upon Portugal
and Naples, in case of I-L war with the barbarians; perhaps they might
assist us in some degree. Blocking Algiers would not obtain peace
with Morocco; so that our commerce would still be exposed.
After all, though I am glad we have exchanged a letter on the subject, I preceive that neither force nor money will be applied. Our
States are so backward, that they will do nothing for some years.
If they get money enough to discharge the demands upon them in
Europe already incurred, I shall be agreeably disappointed. A disposition seems rather to prevail amon our citizens ta give up a11 idem
of navigation and naval power, and ay themselves consequent1 a t
the mercy of foreigners, even far the prices of therr produce. f t is
their concern, and we must submit; for your plan of fighting will no
more be adopted, than mine of treating. This is more humiliating to
me than 'ving the presents would be. I have a letter from Mr. Jay
but an acknowledgment of
of 7th J&, by packet, oontabng not*
our letter of 25th April. New Hampshm and Rhode Island have
suspended their navigation acts, and Massachusetts, now left alone,
w i l l suspend theirs. So that all will be left to the convention, whose
system, if they form one, will not be completed, adopted, and begin to
operate, under &eve& years. Congress have received the answer,
which you saw, to my memorial of 30th November; and Mr. Ramsay
writes me he is not &tressed a t it, because it will produce a repeal of
all the laws against recovering private debts.

f

9

7

7

* Mr. Tucker, in his Lie of Jefferson, h a sufficiently contrasted the opinions

in this letter, and in that to which it is in answer, with the m i t i o m
respectively taken by the parties at a later period. But fie does not ahow that the

eq-d

13

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

argument of Mr. Adams is one of expediencey, drawn solely from the condition
of the country at the moment, and in no way militates with his later action.
Mr. Jeffemon's letter is one of the best he ever wrote. It is printed in Mr. Randolph'~collection of hi writinge. Vol. ii, p. 37.
[NR&L, The Life and Works of John A d a m , Vol. VIII.]

[About 16 August 178613
To the Congrees of the United States from the Emperor of Xorocco
[Translation]

In the Name of God! Mahomet, Ben-Abdala!
Most iElustriaus Congress of America,
We have received your letter by the hands of your ambassador, and
perused its contents with all due attention. We have remarked therein
the inclination you express of concluding with us a treaty of peace.
To this we wilhgly have assented, and even ratifled the plans, such
as you have proposed, by setting thereunto our imperial seal. Wherefore, we have, from that very moment, given strict command to the
ca tains of our ports, to protect and assist all ships under American
co ours, and in short, to shew them every favour, due to the most
friendly powers; being fully determined to do much, when an opportunity offers. We write this in full testimony of our sincere friendship,
and of the peace which we offer on our part.
Given the 20th day of Ramadan,in the year of th Hegira, 1200.
[ N D A . Rare Bk Wa: 4 H 673.1

f

To Wiiam Carmichael, U. S. Charg6 d'AfFaires in Spain, from Richard O'Brien,
Algiers

ALGIERS
Sept. the Ist@
1786
(COPY
SIR,Your letter dated in St Ildefonso of the 2gt@Aug. I recieved
yesterday by the Spanish pttcket-boat, & am much obliged to you for
writing to me. We are very sensible of your particular attention in
every respect to serve us unfortunate Americans, & we are coddent
that it is through your means & the particular humanity of the Count
D'Expilly that we & our crews are comfortably provided for.

*

*

*

*

*

*

*

Four weeks ago we learned by the master of a Swedish Ship from
Alicant that M' Lamb had sent the brig with his despatches for Congress $ that he expected an answer shortly. We recieved a letter
from him yesterday dated in Alicant of the 7t@Inst. he informs us that
matters turned out so that he sent the brig for America, & that he
expected shortly to have new orders. I am v e y confident that MI
Adams & M Jefferson acted for the best, but take the liberty of
mentioning to you that it was badly planned & worse executed, but I
am much s u ~ r b e dthat they were not better informed respecting
From Mc Jefferson's letter he expected that we
affairs in &ern.
would be redeemed & wished us a happy sight of our country. Mr
Lamb said & shewed me his orders that M Lamb's limits were only
100 dollars for a sailor. I am sure no man could think we possibly
could be redeemed at that price. M' Lamb declared he had but 6000
dollars, & that was not appropriated for us, but for presents to these
peoples. I have mentioned you in the proper manner to ME Wolfe.
he has been unwell these five weeks. M' Wolfe also has mentioned

14

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1786 TO 1801

you.@ very friendly language to us, & has a very great opinion of your
abihties & that you had behaved m t h great zeal to serve your country.
We are losing a very favorable opportunity in Algiers respecting
paving the way towards our peace which is of very great importance
to the United States. perhaps the ministers have some other plan in
view. M: Lamb's plan was to set all Europe a fighting or to take some
of the Spanish territory in America & thereby oblige the Spaniards to
make our peace. he ought not to have thought it much more say it.

* * *

I am informed that Mr Barclay has effected a peace with Morocco.
I hope it may be so, their situation being more detrimental to our com-

merce than the Algerines. The Algerine cruisers of nine sail of chebecks sailed the 14th of August and to this date has but sent in one
prize which was a s m d vessel of 40 ton belonging to Sardinia. their
number on board was 14 men & a woman, supposed of some rank. I
hope no American will be so unlucky as to fall in their way as nothing
would be more detrimental to the peace & our redemption. I am informed by the master of a vessel lately from Gibraltar that there had
been a ship belonging to Baltimore or Philadelphia there loaded with
flour & that after discharging her cargo, she sailed for Malaga. I wish
they would be more sparing of their American colours in the streights.
I t is well known in Algiers that such vessels are in Spain.

*

*

*

*

*

*

*

Respecting the Portuguese Mr Logie says the Dey would not listen
to any proposition the Count made, for he said & they generally say
here that they have made too much peace, & that if they were to make
a peace with the Portuguese that they would have no nation worth
cruising against. I t seems reasonable to me this regency will be always
at war with some nations that they are not a f r ~ dof being invaded
by, & it is greatly in favor of the American peace that we are so far
situated from them that they cannot go on our coasts, not like those
nations in the streights that the Algerines in 36 hours are on their
coasts & successful in taking prizes. The Dey said to the Count
when he asked for a peace for the Neapolitans that be would miramus,
or see about it. Those people will not have many negotiations on hand
at one time; they want to get done with one thing first, before they
begin another. * * *
We are treated with a great deal of civility by the French consul
and Mr Gimong a French merchant here. Monsr Ford the gentleman we are boarded with is a worthy respectable character & does
every thing in his power to make our situation agreeable. I hope the
French & Spanish will experience the like return & be treated with
much lenity in America. We are four at Mr Ford's, five in the Dey's
house and one at the Swedish consuls and eleven in the marine, where
the poor men endure the severities of slavery. I wrote a long letter
by the Count to Mr Jefferson, but have no answer a s yet. * * *
[SDA. CL, Algiers, Vol. I, Part I, April 1785-July 1795.1

To whom not indicated in manuscript, from Richard O'Brien, Algiers

ALGIERSA d the Bt@
1787
Sm It is my unfortunate lot to write you many etters from Algiers

(COPY)

f

but since the pest rages so much, I take the liberty of informing you
of the lamentable situstion of my crew in the marrne where they am

WARS WITH BARBARY POWEBS

15

employed on fhe most laborious work & so much exhausted that if some
speedy measure is not adopted to redeem them from slavery I am
afraid they will all be carried off by the pest, as it rages much, on the
226 of this month there died 215 people in Algiers, & in those three
months past there have died 200 Christian slaves. The Spaniards &
Neapolitans having redeemed their people there are a t present but
800 slaves belonging to Bylicke & about 120 slaves belonging to privata
property. Therefore we expect to be called to the marine as there is
a scarcity of slaves at present to do the requisite duty on board the
Algerine cruisers. One of my crew is dead and another after having
the pest 14 days with two large buboes on him i t has pleased God
that he should recover. * * * I t is my sincere opimon that the
Dey & his Ministers consider that they made a regular bargain with
M Lamb for our ransom, & I believe it is recorded so on the public
books of this regency, & should not be surprized if another American
Ambassador was to come to Algiers, at the Dey's t e b g him he hsd
made one bargain already with the Americans, which they did not
fulfill.
I t seems the Neapolitan Ambassador had obtained a truce wit,h
this Regency for three months, & the Ambassador wrote his court
of his success, but about the l U tof April when the cruisers were fitting
out the Ambassador went to the Dey & hoped the Dey would give
the necessary orders to the Captains of his cruisers not to take the
Neapolitan vessels. the Dey said the meaning of the truce was for
not to take the Neapolitan cruisers, but if his chebecs should meet
the Neapolitan merchantmen to take them & send them for Algiers.
The Ambassador said that the Neapolitan cruisers would not want a
pass on those terms. the Dey said if his chebecks should meet either
men of war or merchant vessels to take them, so gave orders accordingly. The Blgerines sailed the 9%inst. & are gone I believe off the
coast of Italy. This shews there is very little confidence to be put
in the ro al word. no principle of national honor will bind those
people & believe not much confidence to be put in them in treaties.
The Algerines are not inclinable to a peace, with the Neapolitans.
I hear of no negotiation. when the two frigates arrive with the
money for the ransom of the slaves I believe they are done with the
Neapolitans. Theb] being so handily situated to them, in 24 hours
the cruisers are on the coasts of Italy, which is a great inducement for
not making s peace. On the 2 3 G s t . anived a Neapolitan prize to
the Algerines, & on the 25'h arrive a Neapolitan Jittan [or Jithan]
a prize. They were taken near the gulph of Genoa. The crews of
them escaped with their boats. This is a great inducement to the
Algerines not to make a peace with the N e a p o l i t ~ &
, the Algerines
being under no dread of a bombardment on them city, therefore if
they should obtain a peace, the terms will certainly be very high.
I t certainly makes a great difference with these people, a making
peace with Naples or America. for they well know we are situated
a t a great distance from them, & if we do not come in their way they
will not go on our coasts being a great dmtance & navigation that
they are not acquainted with. The Neapolitans are very handy to
them & having many merchant vessels, the Blgerines are generally
attended with success in taking some every cruise.

!I

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1786 TO 1801
The Spaniards have paid a great sum for their peace 1,200,000
dollars is the sum paid m Algiers. The Government is very rich &
the Dey is very political. No nation can fit out an equal number of
cruisers so cheap as the Dey of Algiers. In Algiers the cruisers are
not all public vessels, there me about three out of the nine that belong
to Bylic, the rest belong to head-oscers as Prime minister, General
of the Marine, & General of the County, Lord of the Bed-chamber &c.
Those great men owning the cruisers, they do not wish for peace with
these nations in the Streights. The present Dey is very old, & I
believe cannot live many ears. when he goes to his long home I dare
say there will be a great c ange in the policy of this Regency, making
war on some & making peace with others. It is a great thing in a
peace with Algiers to make the treaty with the Dey that has just got
the government in his hands as i t may be more likely he might keep
to the treaty he made himself & they generally do not mind what
treaties the former Deys make. I t is customary with every Dey to
renew all treaties. Tunis being tributarg to Algiers it would be
requisite in the treaty with Algiers to notice Tunis. I t is not very
easy to know the proper way of laying the foundation of a treaty with
those Algerines. Be assured that the foundation of all treaties should
be laid by some person that could be depended on in Algiers, & then a
wise man to come & conclude the treaty. I should not put much
confidence in any Consul in Algiers to have the managing of the
American treaty. for i t is well known that those nations that are a t
perace with the Barbary States do not wish that any other nation should
obtain a peace, that they should not reap part of those advantageous
branches of commerce in the Mediterranean. Before the mar the
Americans used to employ 200 sail of merchantmen in the streights
trade, & used to reap great advantages by it, but a t present our
trade is but smaIl being cramped on all quarters, which must certainly
hurt the Americans much, & when once commerce gets into mother
chanel, it is a long time before i t is brought back again. Certainly
the Indies of the French is their trade in the Mediterranean. The
French are too knowing to admit us to be sharers of this valuable
trade. They & many more trading nations will leave many obstacles
in the way of the Americans obtainkg a peace with the Barbary
States. The Algerines are in no measure depending on the Grand
Seignor. They reverence him on account of his being the head or
protector of their religion. a little from him to the Dey of Algiers
has some weight in favor of the nation whom the Grand Seignor writes
about but letters from the Christian Kings have no weight. Money
is their God & Mahomet their Prophet. The Dey of Algiers must
conduct himself agreeably to the Parliament or the Soldiery, he not
being absoIute in every affair. Those great men here must give their
voice, & i t must be attended to by the Dey. The Causnagee, that is
the prime minister $ second Dey, it is beheved will succeed the Dey,
in the government of this regency. The Mickelhassee, or general of
the marine & fortifications, ~sson in law to the Causnagee, & it is
supposed will be prime minister. This man has very great influence
& no man can fill his office better than he does, it is he who directs the
cruisers where to cruise, & I believe that any thing he mentions or
advises the Dey to has much weight. Amongst all those great men
the Mickelhassee I believe is most in favor of the Americans. There
should [be] some man that could be depended on here, have power to

E

17

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

lay the foundation of the American treaty & those great men should
be paid much attention to that have the Dey's ear a t command. A
few valuable resents given in a proper season to these p e a t men
would not be ove away, as I am sure no nation can obttLln a peace
here without they gain some of those great men in their favour.
When Mr Lamb asked for a peace the Dey undoubtedly mid he would
not treat, the Dey not knowing the minds of his ministry then had some
of those great men been in favour of America they would have shewed
the Dey that a war with America could not be athnded with m y
advantage to the Algerines as we were so far off & they would have
courted the Dey to make a peace with America, & once you get those
great men in favour of s nation a s they rise in office, they have the
more influence & are more apt to keep the treaties that i t was their
wish the former Dey should make than to keep treaties that they
wished the Dey had never made.

L

*

*

*

*

*

*

*

I shall mention to you a Mr Woulf who is an English merchant here,

this
mm told me he had wrote four years past to D' Franklin respecting this
Barbary affair. He is much esteemed here & in good repute. Also
a Mr Fauri who is watchmaker to the Dey & his ministers these 25
years. These are proper men for sounding these Algerines on any
subject, but if an American comes here before some step has been
taken as I have mentioned he will perhaps meet with as much success
as Mr Lamb did.
Your most obedient & very humble servant
SZazre
(Signed) RICH'JO'BRYAN,
to the Regency of Algie7.s
N B. There has arrived three Neapolitan & one Genoese prize to
the cruisers.
& is exceeding well acquainted with the poIicy of this country.

[SDA. CL, Algiers, Vol. I, Part I, April 1785-July 1795.1

17 May 17881
To Consuls at Tangier from the Emperor of Morocco
(In June 1788, the emperor of Morocco sent a letter to the several

consuls resident at Tangier - delivered by the bashaw, of whch the
following is a translation from the Arabic:)
In the Name of God - There is no Power nor strength but in God.
To dl the Consuls resident at Tangier - -peace be to those who foUow
the right way.
By these you are to know, that we are in peace and friendship with
d the Christian powers, until the month of May of the year 1203,
answering to the year 1789; and such nations as we then desirous to
continue in peace and friendship with us, must, when the said month
of May comes, write to us a letter, to let us know that they are in
peace and friendship with us, and then we s h d do the same with
them; and if any of those Christian nations desire to go to war with
us, they shall let us know i t by the abovementioned month of May;
and we trust that God wilf keep us in his protection against them.
And thus I have said all I have to say.
The 2d of the month Sfdmc, 1202, being 7th of A4ay, 1788.
[NDA. Rare Bk. Wa:4 H 673.1

18

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1786 TO 1801
[9 May 17881

To Consuls at Tangier from Secretary of the Foreign Department, Morocco

(Translation from the Arabic of a letter sent by Francisco Chiappe, the
emperor of Morocco's secretary, to all the consuls resident at Tangier,
and delivered to them at the castle, by the bashaw, on theJirst of June,
1788.)
His imperial majesty, whom God have in his holy keeping, has commanded me to make i t known to you, that i t may be made publicly
known, that he is not at war with any nation whatsoever; and that lf
an nation declare war against him, he will send ten galliots and eight
g less into the streights
part of them to be stationed at Algeziras,
and another part at Tangier and Tertuan, in order, by that means, to
kee master of the streights; and the prizes they shall make of them,
sha be burned, together with their cargoes, and the crews put in
chains. His imperial majesty will also send his frigates to America,
provided with European pilots, and if they make any prizes, they
shall be dealt with as above-mentioned, as his imperial majesty stands
in no want of money, or any worldly effects; and he trusts that God
will make him conqueror.
I have the honour to be
Your humble servant,
3'. CHIAPPE.
Secretary of the Foreign Department.
Morocco, 9th May, 1788.

J

-

E

[XDA. Rare Bk. Wa:4 H 673.1

[28 December 17901
Message of President George Washington to the Congress of the United States
PRISONERS AT

ALGIERS.

Message from the Presided of the United Stafes to Congress, communicating a report of the Secretary of State, in relation to American
prisoners a Algiers.
UNITEDSTATES,
December SO, 1790.
Gentlemen of the Senate and House of Representatives:
I lay before you a report of the Secretary of State on the subject of
the citizens of the United States in captivity at Algiers, that you may
provide on their behalf, what to you shall seem most expedient.
GEO.WASHINGTON.
[Report]

The Secretary of State, having had under consideration the situation of the citizens of the United States in captivity at Algiers, makes
the following report thereupon to the President of the United States:
When the House of Representatives, at their. late session, were
pleased to refer to the Secretary of State, the pehtion of our citizens
in captivity a t Algiers, there still existed some expectation that
certain measures, which had been employod to effect their redemption,
the success of which depended on their secrecy, might prove effectual.
Information received during the recess of Congress has so far weakened
those expectations, as to make it now a duty to lay before the President
of the United States, a full statement of what hm been attempted for
the relief of these our suffering citizens, as well before, as since he

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

19

came into office, that he may be enabled to decide what further is to
be done.
On the 25th of July, 1785, the schooner Maria, captain Stevens,
belonging to a Mr. Foster, of Boston, was taken off Cape St. tTincen$s,
by an Algerine corsair; and, five days afterwards, the s h p Dnuphzn,
captain O'Brien, belonging to Messieurs lrvins of Philadelphia, was
taken by another Algerine, about fifty leagues westward of Lisbon.
These vessels, with their cargoes and crews, twenty-one persons in
number, were carried in to Algiers.
Congress had some time before commissioned ministers plenipotenfor entering into treaties of amity and commerce with the
Bar ary Powers, and to send to them proper agents for preparing
such treaties. An agent was accordingly appointed for Algiers, and
his instructions prepared, when the hfhisters Plenipotentiary received
information of these captures. Though the ransom of captives was
not among the objects expressed in their commissions, because at
their dates the case did not exist, yet they thought it their duty to
undertake that ransom, fearing that the captives might be sold and
dispersed through the interior and distant wuntries of Africa, if the
previous orders of Congress should be waited for. They therefore
added a supplementary instruction to the agent to negotiate their
ransom. But, while acting thus without authority, they thought
themselves bound to offer a price so moderate as not to be disapproved.
They therefore restrained him to two hundred dollars a man; which
was something less than had been just before paid for about three
hundred French captives, by the Mathurins, a religious order of France,
instituted in ancient times for the redemption of Christian captives
from the infidel Powers. On the arrival of the agent at Algiem, the
Dey demanded fifty-nine thousand four hundred and ninety-six
dollars for the twenty-one captives, and could be brought to abate
but little from that demand. The agent, therefore, returned in 1786,
without having effected either peace or ransom.
In the beginning of the next year, 1787, the minister plenipotentiary
of the United States at Paris procured an interview with the general
of the religious order of Mathurins, before mentioned, to engage him to
lend his agency, at the expense of the United States, for the redemption of their captive citizens. He proffered at once, all the services
he could render, with the liberalit and the zeal which distinguish his
character. He observed, that he ad agents on the spot, constantly
emploped in seeking out and redeeming the capt i ~ e of
s their own country; that these should act for us, as for themselves: that nothing wuid
be accepted for their agency; and that he would only expect that the
price of redemption should be ready on our part, so ns to cover the
engagement into which he should enter. He added, that, by the time
all expenses were paid, their last redemption had amounted to near
two thousand five hundred livres a man, and that he could by no
means flatter us that they could redeem our captives as cheap as their
own. The pirates would take advantage of its being out of their
ordinary line. Still he was in hopes they would not be much higher.
The proposition was then submitted to Congress, that is to say,
in February, 1787, and on the 19th of September, in the same year,
their minister plenipotentiary a t Paris received their orders to embrace
the ~ffersof the Mathurins. This he immediately notified to the
generd, observing, however, that he did not desire him to entar into

tiaT

K

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1786 TO 1801
any engagements till a sugcient sum to cover them should be actually
deposited in Paris. The generd wished that the whole might be
kept rigorously secret, as, should the barbarians suspect him to be
acting for the United States, they would demand such sums as he
could never agree to give, even with our consent, because it would
injure his future purchases from them. He said he had information
from his agent at Algiers, that our captives received so liberal a daily
allowance as to evince that i t came from a public source. He recommended that this should be discontinued; enga g that he would
have an allowance administered to them, much s ort indeed of what
they had hitherto received, but such as was given to his own countrymen, quite sufficient for physical necessities, and more likeIy to prepare the opinion, that as they were subsisted by his charity, they
were to be redeemed by it also. These ideas, suggested to him by
the danger of raising his market, were approved by the minister
plenipotentiary; because, this being the first instance of a redemption
by the United States, i t would form a precedent, because a high price
@en by us might induce these pirates to abandon all other nations
in pursuit of Americans; whereas, the contrary would take place,
could our price of redem~t~ion
be fixed a t the lowest point.
To destroy, therefore, every expectation of a redemption by the
United States, the bills of the Spanish cons111 at Algiers, who had
made the kind advances before spoken of for the sustenance of our
captives, were not answered. On the contrary, a hint was given that
these advances had better be discontinued, as i t was not known that
they would be reimbursed. It was necessary even to go further, and
to suffer the captives themselves and their friends to believe for a
while, that no attention was paid to them, no notice taken of their
letters. They are still under this impression. It mould have been
unsafe to trust them with a secret, the disclosure of which might for
ever prevent their redemption, by raising the demands of the captors
to sums which a due regard for our seamen, still in freedom, would
forbid us to give. This was the most trying of all circumstances,
and drew from them the most afflicting reproachcs.
It was a twelve month afterwards before the money could be deposited in Paris, and the negotiation be actually put into train. In
the mean time the general had received information from Algiers of a
very considerable change of prices there. Within the last two or
three years the Spaniards, the Neapolitans, and the Russians, had
redeemed at exorbitant sums. Slaves were become scarce, and would
hardly be sold at any price. Still he entered on the business with an
assurance of doing the best in his power; and he was authorized to
offer as far m three thousand livres, or five hundred and fifty-five
dollars a man. He wrote immediately to consult a confidential agent
at Marseilles, on the best mode of carrying this business into effect;
from whom he received the answer No. 2, hereto annexed.
Nothing further was known of his progress or prospects, when the
House of Representatives were pleased, a t their last session, to refer
the petition of our captives a t Algiers to the Secretary of State, The
preceding narrative shows that no report could have then been made
without risking the object, of which some hopes were still entertained.
Later advices, however, from the charge des daires of the United
States, a t Paris, informs us, that these measures, though not yet
dwperate, are not to be counted on. Besidea the exorbitance of

f?

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

21

price, before feared, the late transfer of the lands and revenues of
the clergy in France to the public, by withdrawing the means, seems
to have suspended the proceedings of the Mathurins in the purposes
of their institution.
It is time, therefore, to look about for something more promising,
without relinquishing, in the mean while, the chance of success through
them. Endeavors to collect information, which have been continued
a considerable time, as to the ransoms which would probably be
demanded from us, and those actually paid by other nations, enable
the Secretary of State to lay before the President the following short
view, collected from original papers now in his possession, or from
information delivered to him personally. Passing over the ransoms
of the Mathurins, which are kept f a r below the common level by
special circumstances:
In 1786, the dey of Algiers demanded from our ngent 59,496 dollars
for 21 ca tives, which was 2,833 dollars a man. The agent flattered
himself t ey could be ransomed for 1,200 dollars apiece. His secretary informed us, at the same time, that Spain had paid 1,600 dollars.
In 1787, the Russians redeemed a t 1,546 dollars a man.
I n 1788, a well informed inhabitant of Algiers assured the minister
plenipotentiary of the United States at Paris, that no nation had
redeemed, since the Spanish treaty, a t less than from 250 to 300
pounds sterling, the medium of whichis 1,237dollars. Captain O'Brien,
at the same date, thinks we must pay 1,800 dollars, and mentions a
Savoy captain, just redeemed at 4,074 dollars.
In 1789, Mr. Logie, the English consul a t Algiers, informed a
person who wished to ransom one of our common sailors, that he would
cost from 450 to 500 pounds starling, the mean of which is 2,137 dollars.
In December of the same year, Captain O'Brien thiTlks our men w i l l
now cost 2,920 dollars each, though a Jew merchant believes he could
get them for 2,264 dollars.
I n 1790, July gth, a Mr. Simpson, of Gibraltar, who, a t some
particular request, had taken pains to find for what sum our captives
could be redeemed, h d s that the fourteen will cost 34,792.28 dollars,
which is 2,485 dollars a man. At the same date, one of them, a
Scotch boy, a common mariner, was actually redeemed at 8,000 livres,
equal to 1,481 dollars, which is within 19 dollars of the price Simpson
states for common men: and the charge des affaires of the United
States a t Paris is informed that the whole may be redeemed at that
rate, adding fifty per cent. on the captains, which would bring it to
1,571 dollars a mm.
I t is found then that the prices are 1,200, 1,237, 1,481, 1,546,
1,571, 1,600, 1,800, 2,137, 2,264, 2,485, 2,833, and 2,920 dollars a
man, not noticing that of 4,074 dollars, because i t was for s cap*.
In 1786, there were 2,200 captives in Algiers, which, in 1789, had
been reduced by death or ransom to 655. Of ours six have died, and
one has been I-ansomed by his friends.
From these facts and opinions, some conjecture may be formed of
the terms on which the liberty of our citizens may be obtained.
But should i t be thought better to repress force by force, another
expedient for their liberation may perhaps offer. Captures made on
the enemy may perhaps put us into ossession of some of their mariners,, and exchange be substituted or ransom. It is not indeed a
fixed usage with them to exchange prisoners. It is rather their

%

P

22

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1785 TO 1801

custom to refuse it. However, such exchanges are sometimes effected,
by allowing them more or less of advantage. They have sometimes
accepted of two Moors for a Christian, at others they have refused
five or six for one. Perhaps Turkish captives may be objects of
greater artiality with them, as their government is entirely in the
hands o Turks, who are treated in every instance as a superior order
of beings. Exchange, too, wiU be more practicable in our case, as
our captives have not been sold to private individuals, but are retamed
in the hands of the Government.
The liberation of our citizens has an intimate connexion with the
liberation of our commerce in the Mediterranean, now under the
consideration of Congress. The distresses of both proceed from the
same cause, and the measures which shall be adopted for the relief
of the one, may, very probably, involve the relief of the other.
T H :JEFFERSON,Seeretay of State.
Dec. $8,1790.

!

[NDA. Am. State Papers, Foreign Rel., Vol. 1.1

[28 December 17901
Report of Secretary of State to the Congress of the United States
MEDITERRANEAN TRADE.

Report of the Secretay of State relative to the Mediterranean Trade.
Communicated to the House of Representatives, December SO, 1790,
and to the Senate, January 3, 1791.
The Secretary of State, to whom was referred by the House of
Representatives so much of the speech of the President of the United
States to both Houses of Congress, as relates to the trade of the United
States in the Mediterranean, with instructions to report thereupon to
the House, has had the same under consideration, and thereupon
makes the following report:
The loss of the records of the custom houses in several of the States,
which took place about the commencement and during the course of
the late war, has deprived us of official information as to the extent
of our commerce and navigation in the Mediterranean sea. According
to the best which may be obtained from other sources meriting respect,
i t may be concluded, that about one-sixth of the wheat and flour
exported from the United States, and about one-fourth in value of
their dried and pickled fish, and some rice, found their best markets
in the Mediterranean ports; that these articles constituted the principal part of what we sent into that sea; that, that commerce loaded
outwards, from eighty to one hundred ships, annually, of twenty
thousand tons, navigated by about twelve hundred seamen. It was
abandoned early in the war. And after the peace which ensued, it
was obvious to our merchants, that their adventures into that sea
would be exposed to the depredations of the piratical States on the
coast of Barbary. Congress, too, was very early attentive to this
danger, and by a commission of the 12th of May, 1784, authorized
certain persons, named ministers plenipotentiary for that purpose, to
conclude treaties of peace and amity with the Barbctry Powers. And
it b e ' i afterwards found more expedient that the negotiations should
be carried on a t the residences of those Powers, Congress, by a further
commission, bearing date the 11th of March, 1785, empowered the
same ministers plenipotentiary to appoint agents to repair to the said

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

23

Powers a t their proper residences, and there to negotiate such treaties.
The whole expenses were limited to eighty thousand dollars. Agents
were accordingly sent to Morocco and Al 'ers.
Before the appointment of the one to h?orocco, i t was known that a
cruiser of that State had taken a vessel [*I of the United States; and
that the Emperor, on the friendly interposition of the court of Madrid,
had liberated the crew, and made restitution of the vessel and cargo,
as far as their condition admitted. This was a happy presage of the
liberal treaty he afterwards concluded with our agent, still under the
friendly mediation of Spain, and at an expense of between nine and
ten thousand dollars only. On his death, which has taken place not
long since, it becomes necessary, according to their usage, to obtain
immediately a recognition of the treaty by his successor, and wnsequently, to make provisions for the expenses which may attend it
The amount of the former furnishes one ground of estimate; but the
character and dispositions of the successor, which are unknown here,
may influence it materially. The friendship of this Power is important, because our Atlantic as well as Mediterranean trade is open to
his annoyance, and because we carry on a useful commerce with his
nation
The Algerines had also taken two vessels of the United States,
with twenty-one persons on board, whom they retained as slaves. On
the arrival of the agent sent to that regency, the Dey refused utterly
to treat of peace on any terms, and demanded 59,496 dollars for the
ransom of our captives. This mission therefore proved ineffectual.
While these negotiations were on foot at Morocco and Algiers, an
ambassador from Tripoli arrived in London. The ministers plenipotentiary of the United States met him in person. He demanded for
the peace of that State thirty thousand guineas; and undertook to
engage that of Tunis for a like sum. These demands were beyond
the limits of Congress and of reason, and nothing was done. Nor was
it of importance, as, Algiers remaining hostile, the peace of Tunis and
Tripoli was of no value; and when that of the former should be obtained, theirs would soon follow.
Our navigation, then, into the Mediterranean, has not been resumed
at all since the peace. The sole obstacle has been the unprovoked war
of Algiers; and the sole remedy must be to bring that war to an end,
or to paKiate its effects. Its effects may, perhaps, be palliated by
ensuring our ships and cargoes destined for that sea, and by forming
a convention with the regency, for the ransom of our seamen, according to a fixed tariff. That tariff will, probably, be high, and the rate
of ensurance so settled, in the long run, as to pay for the vessels and
cargoes captured, and somethmg more. What proportion will be captured, nothing but experience can determine. Our commerce differs
from that of most of the nations with whom the predatory States are
in habits of war. Theirs is spread all over the face of the Mediterranean, and therefore must be sought for all over its face. Ours must
all enter at a strait only five leagues wide; so that their cruisers, taking
a safe and commanding position near the strait's mouth, may very
effectually inspect whatever enters it. So safe n station, with a certainty of receiving for their prisoners a good and stated price, may
tempt their cupidity to seek ovr vessels particularly. Nor is it certain that our seamen could be rnduced to engage in that navigation,
though with the security of Algerine faith that they would be hber-

24

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1785 TO 1801

ated on the payment of a fixed sum. The temporary deprivation of
liberty, perhaps chains, the danger of the peat, the perils of the engagement preceding their surrender, and possible delays of the ransom,
might turn elsewhere the choice of men, to whom all the rest of the
world is open. In every case, these would be embarrassments which
would enter into the merchant's estimate, and endanger his preference of foreign bottoms not exposed to them. And upon the whole,
this expedient does not f a our wish of a complete re-establishment
of om commerce in that sea.
A second plan might be, to obtain peace by purchasing it. For this
we have the example of rich and powerful nations, in this instance
counting their interest more than their honor. If, conforming to their
example, we determine to purchase a peace, it is proper to inquire
what that peace may cost. This being merely a matter of conjecture,
we can only compare together such opinions as have been obtained,
and from them form one for ourselves.
Mr. Wolf, a respectable Irishman, who had resided very long a t
Algiers, thought a peace might be obtained from that regency, and
the redemption of our captives included, for sixty or sevenhjTthouswd
pounds sterling. His character and opinion both, merited respect.
Yet his estimate being the lowest of all who have h a z d e d an oplnion
on this subject, one is apt to fear his judgment might have been
biased by the hope he entertained that the United States would charge
him with this negotiation.
Captain O'Brien, one of our captives, who had been in Algiers four
yeam and a half a t the date of his last lettef, a very sensible man, and
to whom we me indebted for very minute mformation, supposes that
peace alone might be bought for tahat sum, that is to say, for three
hundred and twenty-two thousand dollars.
The Tripoline ambassador, before mentioned, thought that peace
could be made with the three smaller Powers for ninety thousand
pounds sterhg, to which were to be added the e enses of the mission and other incidental expenses. But he cou d not answer for
Algiers: They would demand more. The ministers plenipotentiary
who conferred with him, had judged that as much must be paid to
Algiers as to the other three Powers together; and consequently,
that, according to this measure, the peace of Algiers would cost from
an hmdred to an hundred and twenty-five thousand pounds sterling;
or from four hundred and sixty to five hundred and seventy-five
thousand dollars.
The latter sum seemed to meet the ideas of the Count de Vergennes,
who, from a very long residence a t Constantinople, was a good judge
of whatever related to the Porte, or its dependencies.
A person whoso name is not free to be mentioned here, a native of
the continent of Europe, who had long lived, and still lives a t Algiers,
with whom the minister plenipotentiary of the United States a t Paris
had many and long conversafiops, and found his information full,
clear, and consistent, was of opizuon the peace of Algiers could not be
bought by the United States for less than a million of dollars. And
when that is paid, dl is not done. On the death of a Dey (and the
present one is between seventy and ~ i g h t yyears of age) respeotable
presents must be made to the successor, that he may recognise the
treaty;. and very often he takes the Iiberty of alterin it. Whm a
co11~ul~ssent or changed, new presents must be made. f these eventa

7'

f

WARS WlTH BARBARY POWERS

25

leave a considerable internal, occasion must be made of renewing
presents. And with all this they must see that we are in condition to
chastise an infraction of the treaty; consequently, some marine force
must be exhibited in their harbor from time to time.
The late peace of Spain with Algiers is snid to have cost from three
to five millions of dollars. Having received the money, they take the
vessels of that nation on the most groundless pretexts; counting, that
the same force, which bowed Spain to so hard a treaty, may break
it with impunity.
Their treaty with France, which had expired, was about two years
ago renewed for fifty years. The sum given a t the time of renewal
is not known. But presents we to be repeated every ten yearn, and
a tribute of one hundred thousand dollars to be annually paid. Yet
perceiving that Prance, embarrassed at home with her domest.ic
affairs, was less capable of acting abroad, they took six vessels of that
nation in the course of the last year, and retain the captives, forty-four
in number, in slavery.
It is the opinion of Captain O'Brien, that those nations are best
treated who pay a smaller sum in the beginning, and an annual
tribute afterwards. In this way he informs us that the Dutch,
Danes, Swedes, and Venetians pay to Algiers from twenty-four to
thirty thousand dollars a year, each; the two first in naval stores,
the two last chiefly in money. It is supposed that the peace of the
Barbary States costs Great Britian about sixty thousand guineas, or
two hundred and eighty thousand dollars a, year. But i t must be
noted that these facts cannot be authentically advanced; as, from a
principle of self condemnation, the governments keep them from the
public eye as much as possible.
Nor must we omit finally to recollect, that the Algerines, attentive
to reserve always a sufficient aliment for their piracies, will never
extend their peace beyond certain limits, and consequently that we
may find ourselves in the case of those nations to whom they refuse
peace at any price.
The third expedient is to repel force by force. Several statements
are hereto annexed of the naval force of Algiers, taken in 1785, 1786,
1787, 1788, and 1789, differing in small degrees, but concurring in the
main. From these it results, that they have usually had about nine
chebecks of from ten to thirty-six guns, and four alleys, which have
been reduced by losses to six chebecks and four gaif eys. They have a
forty gun frigate on the stocks, and expect two cruisers from the Grand
Se' nior. The character of their vessels is, that they are sharp
b$t and swift, but so light as not to stand the broadside of a good
frigate. Their guns are of different calibres, unskilfully pointed and
worked. The vessels illy mapoeuaed, but crowded with men-one
third Turks, the rest Moors, of determined bravery, and resting their
sole hopes on boarding. But two of these vessels belong to the
government, the rest being private property. If they come out of
harbor together, they separate immediately in quest of prey; and it is
said they were never known to act together in any instance. Nor do
they come out at all, when they know there are vessels cruisin
them. They perform three cruises a year, between the middfe of
A p d and November, when they unrig and lay up for the winter.
When not confined within the straits, the rove northwardly to the
channel, and westwardly to the Western Is ands.

r'

26

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1786 TO 1801

They are in peace a t present with France, Spain, England, Venice,
the United Netherlands, Sweden, and Denmark; and at war with
Russia, Austria, Portugal, Naples, Sardinia, Genoa, and Malta.
Should the United Statas propose to vindicate their commerce by
arms, they would, perhaps, think i t prudent to posess a force equal
to the whole of that which may be opposed to them. What that equal
force would be, w i l l belong to another department to say.
At the same time it might never be necessary to draw out the whole
a t once, nor perhaps any proportion of it, but for a small part of the
year; as it is reasonable to presume that n concert of operation might
be arranged among the powers a t war with the Barbary States, so as
that, each performing a tour of a given duration, and in given order, a
constant cruise during the eight temperate months of every year, may
be kept up before the harbor of Algiers, till the object of such operations be completely obtained. Portugal has singly, for several years
past, kept up such a cruise before the straits of Gibraltar, and by
that means has confined the Algerines closely within. But two of
their vessels have been out of the straits in the last five years. Should
.Portugal effect a peace with them, as has been apprehended for some
time, the Atlantic will immediately become the principal scene of
their piracies; their peace with Spain having reduced the profits of
their Mediterranean cruises below the expenses of equipment.
Upon the whole, i t rests with Congress to decide between war,
tribute, and ransom, as the means of re-establishing our Mediterranean
commerce. If war, they will consider how far our own resources shall
be called forth, and how far they will enable the Executive to engage,
in the forms of the constitution, the co-operation of other Powers.
If tribute or ransom, it will rest with them to limit and provide the
amount; and with the Executive, obse~vingthe same constitutional
forms, to make arrangements for employing it t o the best advantage.
DECEMBER
28, 1790.
[*Betsey, Captain James Erving.]
[Am. State Papers, Foreign Rel., Vol. 1.1

Report of a Committee on the Trade of the Mediterranean, made to the United
States Senate, 6 January, 1791

The committee to whom was referred that part of the President's
speech which relates to the trade of the Mediterranean, also the
President's message of the 30th December, with the papers accompan 'ng the same, are of opinion that the trade of the United States to
the editerranean, cannot be protected but by a naval force; and that
it will be proper to resort to the same as soon as the state of the public
finances will admit.
[Am. State Papers, Foreign Rel. Vol. 1.1

C

Message of President George Washington relative to the Bansom of Prisoners

UNITED
STATES,F e b m y 22d, 1791.

GENTLEMEN
OF THE SENATE:
I will proceed to take measures for the

ransom of our citizens in captivity a t Algiers, in conformity with
your resolution of dviw of the first instant, so soon as the moneys
necessary shall be appropriated by the Legislature, and shall be in
readiness.
The recognition of our treaty with the new Emperor of Morocco
requires also previous appropriation and provision; the importance

27

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

of this last to the liberty and property of our citizens, induces me to
urge it on your earliest attention.
The resolution referred to is ss followe:
Resolved, That the Senate advise and consent that the President of the United
States take such measures 8s he m a y think necessary for the redemption of the
citizens of the United States, now in captivity at Algiera: Provided, the expense
shall not exceed forty thousand dollsrs; and slso, that measures be taken to
confirm the treaty now existing between the United States and the Emperor of
Morocco.
[Am. State Papers, Foreign Rel., Vol. 1.1
Act pertnining to the U. S. Havy

13 March 17911

United States Statutes at large. First Congress. Sess. 111
AN ACT MAKING AN APPROPRIATION FOR THE PURPOSE THEREIN
MENTIONED.

Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representative8 of th United
SWes of Ameriers in Congress assembled, That for the purpose of
effecting a recognition of the treaty of the United States, with the
new emperor of Morocco, there be, and hereby is ap ropriated a
sum not exceeding twenty thousand dollars, to be pai out of the
monies which prior to the first day of January next, shall arise from
the duties imposed upon spirits distilled within the United States,
and from stills by the act, entitled "An act repealing after the last
day of June next, the duties heretofore laid upon distilled spirits
imported from abroad, and laying others in their stead, and also
upon spirits distilled within the United States, and for appropriating
the same," together with the excess of duties which may arise from
the duties imposed by the said act, on imported spirits beyond those
which would have arisen by the act entitled "An act making further
provision for the payment of the debts of the United States." And
the President is hereby authorized to take on loan, &hewhole sum
by this act appropriated, or so much thereof as he may judge requisite,
a t an interest not exceeding six per cent. per annum, and the fund
established for the above mentioned appropriation, is hereby pledged
for the repayment of the principal and interest of any loan to be
obtained in manner aforesaid, and in case of rtny deficiency in the
said fund, the faith of the United States is hereby also pledged to
make good such deficiency.
APPROVED,
Mairch 9, 1791.

B

[Statutes, Vol. I, p. 214.1

[28 April 17911
To the United States Senate from Secretary of State

PHILADELPHIA,
December 9,1791.
SIR: The enclosed information, relative to ransom and peace with
the Algerines, being new1 come to hand, I take the liberty of w m rnunicating it to you, an through you to the Senate. It concurs in
some facts and opinions with what we had before Iearnf through
other channels, and U e r s in some others, so as, on.the whole, to
leave us still in considerable uncertainty as to interesting points.
The VICEPRESIDENT
of the U. S.
President of the Senate.

ci"

28

NAVAL OPEBATIONS FROM 1786 TO 1801
[Enclosure]

To the Congress of the United States from Richard O'Brien, Algiers

CITYOF ALGIERS,
April 28,1791.
MOSTHONORED
SIRS: I t affords the Americans in captivity some
consolation to hear that his excellency the President has drawn the
attention of Congress towards Barbary affairs, and to consider of the
decrease of American commerce to the Mediterranean.
One of your most unfortunate subjects takes the liberty of humbly
submitting to your consideration the following particulars on Barbary
affairs.
I n December last, the Philanthropic Society sent orders to Europe
to t for a peace with this regency; these orders came to Monsieur
~ a t ~ofnMarseilles,
,
who commissioned Monsieur Parnet, a French
merchant in Algiers, and agent for the chamber of commerce, Marseilles. Monsieur Parnet, made application to the Dey and ministry
on this important subject, but was not enabled to obtain any answer
of importance until the 18th of December, when he immediately
despatched a vessel for Marseilles. Monsieur Parnet was authorized
by his orders to treat for the ransom of the Americans; but as our
redemption had been ascertained the 7th of last July, by Abraham
Bushara and Dininio, for the sum of 17,225 Algerine sequins, nearly
equal to 34,450 Spanish dollars, Monsieur Parnet could only return
for answer, that our ransom was finally ascertained, and is so recorded
by the regency a t the above sum. Monsieur Parnet informed me
that his orders relative to the peace did not authorize him to make the
ministry any promises for them to use their influence with the Dey:
for if he made any promises, he must fulfil them, and by his not being
fully empowered, he could not take the proper channel for laying the
foundation of the peace, and that the Dey signified that, when the
Americans made good their agreement of the 7th last July, that then
he would consider of the peace.
I take the liberty, honored sirs, to observe, that there is no doing
any business of importance in this country, without Grst palming the
ministry; and by taking this proper channel, be assured, honored sirs,
that there is no great difficulty to carry any point.
I take the liberty of explaining that the Algerines had great reason
to think that the Americans considered them in a very singular light,
by sending orders, three different times, relative to ascertaining our
ransom and affairs that had been fixed on a few months past; then to
empower Monsieur Parnet, supposing the Algerines would lower their
rice, or deviate, in any respect, from the agreement made with
gushara and Dininio.
Be assured, honored sirs, that Monsieur Parnet found this to be a
very delicate subject to treat of, and by what I now hint to you,
honored sirs, your superior wisdom will perceive the impropriety of
an further propositions relative to ascertaining our ransom.
'$he prime minister sent to me, and desired that, when I wmte m
country, to write, that, if the Americans did not keep to their w o r z
on affairs so trifling as that of our release, that there was no great
dependence to be put in America, in affairs of more importance,
alluding to the peace. Be assured, honored sirs, that the prime
minister is a friend to America, and was the only one of the Algerine
ministry that countenanced Mr. Lamb, in 1786.

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

29

Messrs. Bulkley and company, of Lisbon, through humane motives,
writing to Mr. James Simpson, a t Gibraltar, and Mr. Simpson, supposing the orders originated in Congress, wrote to Bushara and
Dininio, to have our redemption ascertained with the regency; so
that, if ever we are to be redeemed, i t must be through the channel
of Bushara and Dininio, as the Dey, in his answer to Monsieur Parnet,
signified fully as much, snd as they are Algerine subjects, the Dey and
ministry of course will determine the affair in their favor.
At present there are but 700 Christian slaves in Algiers, and the
two-thirds of these are deserters from the Spanish garrison of Oran ;
and as the captives are much wanted to do the public work, the
regency does not seem inclinable to permit slaves to be redeemed on
any terms: for without the slaves, those people could not well fit out
their cruisers.
I n 1786, there were three thousand Christian slaves in Algiers; but
the Spaniards, Neapolitans, and other nations redeeming thew people,
and the pest, that great storm of mortality, which happened m this
city in 1787-8, which carried off nine hundred Christian captives amongst this number were six Americans - our redemption is but
trifling higher than the terms on which the Spaniards and other nations
redeemed their people, and, since those redemptions and the pest, the
price of slaves is continually rising.
Those lads that are pages to the Dey, were solicited to turn Mahometans, but they would not, which makes their prices somewhat exorbitant.
When I consider the fatal consequences that would happen to
America, if the Portuguese should make a peace with this regency,
i t makes the greatest impression on me of any thing whatsoever that
can possibly occur to a patriotic mind; and although at present the
Portuguese keep up a fleet of cruisers to protect their own commerce,
yet experience shews (by Spain) that t.hey may be negotiating a
peace underhand.
Since my captivity, the Portuguese have made two attempts to
try to obtain a peace, and fortunate (thank God) for America they
did not succeed. Should they succeed, America would be put to a
vast expense to build and fit out eight or ten cruisers; and to keep this
squadron in Europe for a few years, would he attended with a vast
expense, which Ainerica could not vell afford. Should the Portuguese make a pence, and America to abandon the Straits to the
Algerines, the alarm would be so great that no American property
would be ensured under twenty-five percent. The first cruise, they
would go as far as the Western Islands, and, by being acquamted with
the navigation that far, would be induced to go on to the coasts of
America; then, honored sirs, what would be the fatal consequences what would be the alarm! and it is well known that there is nothing
to be derived by being a t war with the Barbary States; but, by being
at peace, many adt-antages, and extended and beneficial commerce.
I t has cost Spain full four and a half millions 01 dollars to make
their eace, and redeem their people, notwithstanding Spnin acted
somet ing wisely not to be the dupe of all the commercial nations of
Europe.
Honored sirs, in my opinion, the United States may obtain a peace
with this regency for tiity or sixty thousand pounds sterling, all
expenses included; that is, if the affair is well managed; and with

g

30

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1785 TO 1801

Tunis for fifteen thousand pounds sterlin . I n making a peace with
Algiers, there should be a provisional artic e relative to Tunis, as Tunis
is a tribut
State to t b regency, and under its influence.
Instead o America giving a sum of money for the peace, I believe
this regency would find it to their interest to take, in lieu, maritme
dares, masts, yards, plank, tar, pitch, turpentine, scantling, for
constructing crmsers; and, by giving maritime stores, I believe the
peace would not cost America twenty thousand pounds sterling.
Or to purchase one hundred and fifty or two hundred passports of
the regency, at a certain fixed price, and tor these, to pay a certain
sum every two years, and those that wanted those passports, that
traded to Europe, to purchase them of the Government, so that the
passports would defray the expenses incurred in obtaining the peace.
I have frequently, these four years, had some hints of these subjects
communicated to the Algerine ministry, and ha.d favorable answers
which I wrote to the American ambassadors in Europe.
The present time is favorable for America to try for the peace;
and I further take the liberty, honored sirs, to observe, that those
nations, the Dutch, Danes, Swedes, and Venetians, that pay a tribute
annually, that their peace is on a more solid and lasting basis than
those nations that give large sums for making the peace, and not to be
tributary: for i t is the annual tribute those nations pay the Algemes
is the bait that secures their peace, and not any sentiment of national
honor or regard to treaties, but for their own interest in being supplied
with naval and military stores.
Most honored sirs, we hope you will consider what our sufferings
must have been in this country, during that trying period of nearly
six years captivity; but we now hope that you wiU give such powers
to your representatives in Europe, so as to finally extricate your
fourteen unfortunate subjects from their present state of bondage
and adversity.

f

"P

[Am. State Papers, Foreign Rel., Vol. 1.1
To Thomas Barclay, U. 6. Consul, Morocco, from Secretary of State

PHILADELPHIA
May ISt@1791.
SIR YOUare appointed by the President of the United States to
go to the Court of Morocco for the purpose of obtaining from the new
emperor a recognition of our Treaty with his father. As it is thought
best that you should go in some definite character, that of Consul
has been adopted, and you consequently receive a Commission as
Consul for the United States in the dominions of the Emperor of
Morocco, which having been issued during the recess of the Senate
will of course expire a t the end of their next Session. I t has been
thought best however not to insert this limitation in the Commission
5s being unnecessary, and i t might perhaps embarrass. Before the
end of the next Session of the Senate it is expected the objects of your
mission will be accomplished.
Lisbon b e i i the most convenient port of correspondence between
us and Morocco, sufficientauthority will be given to Col. Humphreys,
Resident for the United States at that place, over funds in Amsterdam
for the objects of our mission. On him therefore ou will draw for
the sums herein adowed, or such parts of them as s aU be neceastq.
To that port too you had better proceed in the first vessel which shall

K

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

31

be going there, as i t is expected you will get a ready passage from
thence to Morocco.
On your asrival in Morocco sound your ground, and know how
things stand at present. Your former voyage there having put you
in possession of the characters through whom this may be done, who
may best be used for approaching the Emperor and effecting your
purpose, you are left to use your own knowledge to the best advantage.
The object being merely to obtain an acknowledgment of the
treaty, we rely that you will be able to do this, giving very moderate
presents. As the amount of these will be drawn into precedent on
future similar repetitions of them, it becomes important. Our distance, our seclusion from the ancient world, it's politics and usages,
our agricultural occupations and habits, our poverty, and lastly our
determination to prefer war in all cases to tribute under any form and
to any people whatever, will furnish you with topics for opposing
and refusing high or dishonoring pretentions, to which may be added
the advantages their people will derive from our commerce, and their
Sovereign from the duties laid on whatever we extract from that
Coiln
- - trv.

~ee<
;s regularly informed of your proceedings and progress, by
writing by every possible occasion, detailing to us particularly your
conferences either private or public, and the persons with whom they
are held.
We think that Francisco Chiappe has merited well of the United
States by his care of their peace and interests. He has sent an account of disbursements for us amounting to 394 dollars. Do not
recognize the account, because we are unwilling, by doing thrat,to
give him a colour for presenting larger ones hereafter, for expenses
which it is impossible for us to scrutinize or controul. Let him
understand that o w laws oppose the application of public money so
informally; but in your presents, treat him handsomely, so as not
only to cover this demand, but go beyond it with a liberality which
may fix him deeply in our interests. The place he holds near the
Emperor renders his friendship peculiarly important: Let us have
nothing further to do with his brothers or any other person. The
money which would make one good friend, divided among several will
produce no attachment.
The Emperor has intimated that he expects an Ambassador from
us. Let h m understand that this may be a custom of the old world,
but it is not ours: that we never sent an Ambassador to any nation.
You are to be allowed from the day of your departure till your
return 166% dollars a month for your time and expenses, adding
thereto your passage money and sea stores going and coming.
Remain in your post till the la!of April next, and as much longer
as shall be necessary to accomplish the objects of your mission, unless
you should receive instructions from hence to the contr
With your commission you will receive a letter to the mperor of
Marocco, a Cypher 6c a letter to Col. Humphreys.
A private instruction which Mr Barclay is to carry in his memory,
and not on paper, lest it should come into improper hands.
We rely that you will obtain the friendship of the new Emperor,
and his assurances that the treaty shall be faithfully observed, with
as little expense as possible. But the sum of ten thousand dollars

"E

32

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1786 TO 1801

is fked as the Zimit which dl your donations together are not to
exceed.
MAY13$'! 1791.
[NA. SDA. Dip. Cor., Inst. to blin., Bk 1, Jm. 1791-Aug. 1793.1
To Secretary of State from Robert Montgomery, U. S. Agent, Alicante

ALICANTE
l Y t @ Jdy 1791 SIR I had the honour of addressing you under the 13'9 March

and am since deprived of your favours
The present will serve to hand you two Letters from one of our
slaves at Aigiers that came to hand but yesterday Those pirates
continue to cruis in the Mediteranean, a Xebeque of 20 Guns was
last sunday at Carthagena for water and provisions after having been
as he reported 40 days in the Atlantic; there is also a, row boat of two
guns off Malaga who Spoke several vessels now in quarentine on that
account but notwithstanding t,he friendly reception t.heir Vessels
meet on the coast of Spain the Bey of Mascara continues the seige
of Oran with aI1 his power and tis not doubted is Supported by his
master the Dey of Algiers, and tho the Spanish forces make Brilliant
resistanc~the Garison is by no means out of danger
[NA. SDA. CL, Alicante, Vol. 1, Aug. 1788-Dec. 1834.1
To Secretary of State from Robert Ilbontgomery, U. 6. Agent, Alicante

(COPY)

ALICANTE
26" July 1791 -

I had the honour of addressing your Excellency, under the 24th
current with advice of the death of htlahomet Bashaw late Dey of
Algiers on the 12thcurrent at six oclock and that he was immediately
succeeded by M i Hassan who after having ordered the Aga to be
strangled for an attempt to oppose him remained in peaceable possession of the regency and every tranquility seemed to be established
when the pn,cketsailed on the 1Gt? - Ali had shewn great wisdom and
talents while Minister of Marine which department he filled for many
years till he was prime Minister on the death of the former who notwithstanding he was his father in law and ordered to be strangled for
treasonable practices never caused s moments interuption of Mahornets confidence in Alli; he is considered as a man of uncomon
Abilities and a wise polititictn he has also during his administration
shewn as much partiality to the people of the united states as was in
his power to do; I had the honour of being known to him when carried
in to Carthagena prisioner of war from whence he m-ent to Algiers
near twenty years ago; nrnd I have since my establishment here had a
very friendly intimacy with his friend and confident Haggi Soliman
Benchellon a Moor of some Learning and knowledge of European
languages and manners; this man has been sent by Alli Hassan to the
Court of Spain frequently; and as he landed and embarked a t this
place I made him make my house his home with every other mark of
civllity which I thought could tend to secure his friendship and confidence and trust I have not lost my labour, my views you may suppose
was pointed a t this cricis when my friend and his master should both
be at the summit of power, and hope I am not ho,vain when I venture
to say that if your Excellene will get me pormisslon from Congress to
make s tryal a peaee with ATgiers may now be obtained on such t e r n

33

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

as may with honour be accepted and at an expence that will be very
fully compensated by a few ears trade with this Country: I would
not desire nor recomend my eing sent there a t first as if by order of
Congress for being Merchant I could go over as such and on the perticu1ar business of my house for which I can easily get permission from
the Dey and be well received by Soliman, they both already know my
hearty desire to bring about a Concdliation and this would naturaly
be our topic of Conversation; I should then let him know that the
few slaves they have of ours were picked up by accident when they
apprehended no danger but that they must expect no more now we
are on our guard, and that the profits tbey can have in continuing a
war like this can never be equal to the solid advantages the must
reap from making a peace with us on such terms as we cod afford
besides that I know his Excellency wishes to do me service he could
never have so good an opportunity as the present by enabling me to
have the honour of bringing about a peace between him and the
United States: This language and what else your Excellency might
think more proper to advise I should make use of to him and as he
understands Spanish very well I should not require. an Interpreter,
which might make him less cautious to develope his rmnd to me on the
business As no Nation has been able to make peace with this Regency without paying for it in some manner or other we of courso need not expect
to do i t for Nothing but it may be done in the manner the [United]
States will suffer least by it; some armed Vessels for Corsairs and such
Naval stores as are the produce of America would I dont doubt be
made to do; but a visit to Algiers will be necessary before anything can
be said on the business with certint at which time our prisioners there
could also be thought of - Sho d your Excellency approve of m y
part of what has struck me on this important business and honour me
with your Confidence I should immediately go to Algiers and purchass
some wheat for this market, when I should have an opportunity of
informing my self pretty fully without discovering any such intention
after which I shall comunicate such advices as may be laid before
Congress and if in the business you chuse to correspond in cyphers a
person ought to be sent m t h them or forward them to the resident in
London who may send them to me pretty safly by post; but if your
Excellency would prefer it I would not think my labour too great to
wait on ou in person for instructions * " * There have been
several ruizers on the coast tlvs Summer and one of them so large
as twenty guns, should they cruize to the westward of Cacliz & Lisbon
they must certainly pick up some of our Vessels and the Portuguese
Squadron are by no means Vigilant but should this power make peace
with the Algerines we must expect to see their Cruizers on the coast
and in the Bays of America the summer following or so soon as the
Russian war is ended; the seige of Oran continues with very little
advantage to either side - I have the honour to be with sincere
Respect and attachment
[NA. SDA. CL, Alieante, Vol. 1, Aug. 1788-Dee. 1834.1

g

~f

9

2'

To Secretary of State from Thomas Barclay, U. S. Consul, Morocco

GIBRALTAR
1gth December 1791.
SIR, I wrote a few Lines to you on the 12tb by a vessel bound to
Salem, and informed you of my expectation of getting to Tangier

34

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1786 TO 1801

that day, but the wind returning and blowing Strongly against us,
we remain here. For Some time past the accounts received from the other Side of
the Streight have been various and consisted so much of conjecture
that a thorough reliance could not be placed upon them, however
Several letters arrived three days ago, all of them agreeing in the
intelligence which I shall proceed to communicate, and presenting the
leading features of a picture of that Country, but I think it will not
be improper to take up the Subject at an earlier period than the
present, and therefore I will, as briefly as I can, mention Some circumstances, the Knowledge of which perhaps has not hitherto reached
America.

-

Sometime before the Death of the Late Emperor, which happened
on the 11" of April 1790, his Son Muley Yezid took refuge in a Sanctuary near Tetuan, t o avoid the resentment of his father, who ordered
Muley Slama a younger Son by the Same Mother to invest the
Sanctuary, which he was afraid to violate in a more direct manner,
So as to Cut off all communication between it and the Camtry, and
consequently in the end compel Muley Yezid from the want of Subsistance to Surrender himself to his father, before this could be
effected, the Emperor died at Saffy, and the Prince quitted the
Sanctuary having been proclaimed his Successor in the North, as well
as in the Cities of Fez, Mequinez, and Morocco, while Muley Slema,
by one of these changes of fortune not uncommon in his Country, to
escape the power of his brother, placed himself in the Sanctuary
where he Still remains. The new Emperor, who has sssumed the name of Mabomet El
Mehedy El Yezid has had pressing Solicitations to appear at the great
Cities that I have named, each of which is occasionally Looked upon
as the Capital of the Empire, *
*
Triplicate
Original by way of Cadiz
Duplicate - to Lisbon +

(N? 1 )
[NA. SDA. CL, Gibraltar, Vol. 1, April 1791-Dec. 1795.1

122 February 17921
senate of the United States Resolution to Ransom Prisoners at Algiers

The committee to whom had been referred the petition of Charles
Colvill, late a prisoner in Algiers, praying for the reimbursement of
the price of his ransom, and other expenses, and th? several communications on file relative to American cltizens now m captivity at
Algiers, reported the following resolutions:
Resolced by the Senate of the United States, in their Capacity as
Cmmcil of Advice, That, if the President of the United States shall
enter into any treaty or convention, for the purpose of establishing and
reserving peace with the regency of Alpers and \nth Tunis and Tripo"at an expense not exceeding one hundred thousand dollars annually," for such a term of years shall be stipulated,. and for the purpose of ransoming the citizens of the United States m captivity with
the Algerines, "at an expense not exceeding forty thousand dollars,
for the said ransom,'' the Senate d l advise and consent to the same,
and ratify or approve my measures which the President of the

i,

WARS WITH BARBARY POWEZS

35

United States shall take for accomplishing these objects, to t ~ m
n ount
not exceeding five thousand dollars, although such measures should
prove unsuccessful.
Resolwd, That, if a convention or treaty for the establishment and
preservation of peace, cannot be made with the regency of
the sum of two thousand four hundred dollars, annually, sh
distributed among the said capt.ives or their families, as they may
prefer, in such manner, and in such proportions, as the President of
the United States shall order and direct, during their captivity.
Resolved, That the President of the United States be authorized
and empowered fo draw on the treasury of the United States for the
sum of one hundred and forty-five thousand dollars.

%FES

[Am. State Papers, Foreign Rel., Vol. 1.1

129 March 17921
Petition of Prisoners at Algiers

The Petition of the Prisoners st &em, Sheweth That we were Captured nearly Seven Years ago b Cruisers belonging to the Regency of Algiers, while we were avigating Vessels
belonging to Citizens of the United States. That we were for a Considerable time flattered with the expectation held u to us that we
would be redeemed from Captivity, as soon as it Co d be done Consistant with propriety, and the mterest of our Country. That to
Effect this Redemption M' John Lamb was sent to Algiers on the
part of the United States, and that he entered into an agreement with
the Regency at Algiers for our ransom, in consequence of which, the
terms were recorded on the Books of the Regency, But M' Lamb
never returned to fulfill them by the payment of the Ransom Money,
though he promised in the Name of the United States to do it in four
Months. That we understand severd persons have since been employed to make inquiries whether the Ransom agreed upon by Mr
Lamb, might not be reduced, but all attempts of that sort have hitherto proved inefectud, the Regency declaring that the Contract made
by the Agent on the part of the United States ought to be discharged That we were for some time supplied with such sums of Money as
served, together with the prospect of Redemption held up to us, to
alleviate in some degree the rigor of our Captivity, but those supplies
have Ceased for a Considerable time, during which we have been
reduced to the Utmost distress, and we are Compelled in a great
Measure to depend on the Charity of Transient people That owing to the Meioncholy situation to which we are reduced,
one of us, James Hormet, has been deprived of his senses, and Confined in a Dungeon, the rest remain destitute almost of all the necessaries of lfe, and in this Deplorable situation we have resisted any
temptations to Enter into the service of the Regency, that might
hereafter be attended with Repentance or Remorse, trusting in the
Justice and Humanity of Congress that we shall never be reduced to
the Necessity of abandoning our Country and our Religion Your Most humble petrtioners further pray you will Consider
what our sufferings must have been for Nearly seven Years Captivity,
twice surrounded with the Pest, and other Contagious distempers,
which has numbered six of our brother sufferers in the tills of Mortality, and we remain employed in the Most laborious work, f a r distant

d

3

36

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1785 TO 1801

from our friends families and connections, without any real prospect
of ever seeing them more But we entreat that some attention will be paid to our situation,
and that Congress will, before the whole of us perish, take such steps
towards our being liberated, as shall in their Judgement appear proper
and right, and Your petitioners will Ever pray and be thankful. Signed by the 13 Prisoners
[See 25 July 17851
ALGIERS29 March 179.2
[SDA. CL, Gibraltar, Vol. I, April 1791-Dec. 1795.1
To John Paul Jones, appointment of Commissioner to treat with Algiers, from
Secretary of State

To Admiral JOHN
PAUL
JONES.

PHILADELPHIA
June 1. 1792'.

SIR The President of the United States having thought proper

to appoint you Commissioner for treating with the Dey and Govern-

ment of Algiers on the subjects of Peace and ransom of our captives,
I have the honor to enclose you the Commissions, of which Mr Thomas
Pinckney now on his way to London as our Minister Plenipotentiary
there, d l be the bearer. Supposing that there exists a disposition
to thwart our negotiations with the algerines, and that this would
be very practicable, we have thought i t adviseable that the knowledge of this appointment should rest with the President, Mr Pinckney
and myself: for which reason you will perceive that the Commissions
are all in my own hand writing. for tho same reason, entire secrecy
is recommended to you, and that you so cover from the public your
departure and destination, as that they may not be conjectured or
noticed; and at the same time that you set out after as short delay as
your affairs will possibly permit.
In order to enable you to enter on this business -4th full information, it will be necessary to give you a history of what has passed.
On the 25. July 1785. the Schooner Maria,Captn Stevens, belonging to a Mr Foster of Boston, was taken off Cape St Vincents by an
Algerine Cruiser; and five days afterwards, the Ship Dauphin, Capt?
Obrian, belonging to MessTs Irvins of Philadelphia was taken by
another about 50. Ieagues westward of Lisbon. These vessels with
their cargoes and crews, twenty one persons in number, were carried
into Algiers. M' John Lamb, a pointed Agent for treating of peace
between the United States an$ the Government of Ahgem, was
ready to set out from France on that business, when M' Adams and
myself heard of these two captures. The ransom of prisoners, being
a case not existing when our powers were prepared, no provision had
been made for it. We thought however we ought to endeavor to
ransom our countrymen, without waiting for orders; but at the same
time, that, acting without authority, we should keep within the
lowest price which had been given by any other Nation. We therefore gave a supplementory instruction to M' Lamb to ransom our
captives, if it could be done for 200. dollars a man, as we knew that
three hundred French captives had been just ransomed by the
Mathurins, at a price very little above this sum. E e proceeded to
Algiers: but his mission proved fruitless. He wrote us word from
thence, that the Dey asked 59.496. dollars for the 21 captives, and that

WARS WITI1 BAHL'ARY POWERS
it was not probable he would abate much from that price: but he never
intimated an idea of agreeing to give it. As he has never settled the
accounts of his mission, no further information has been received.
I t has been said that he entered into a positive stipulation with the
Dey to pay for the prisoners the price above mentioned, or something near it; and that he came away with an assurance to return
with the money. We cannot believe the fact true; and if i t were,
we disavow i t totally, as far beyond his powers. We have never
disavowed it formally, because it has never come to our knowledge
with any degree of certainty.
I n Peb? 1787. I wrote to Congress to ask leave to employ the
Mathurins of France in ransoming our captives, and on the 19. of
Septem' I received their orders to do so, and to call for the money
from our bankers at Amsterdam as soon as it could be furnished. I t
was long before they could furnish the money, and, as soon as they
notified that they could, the business was put into train by the
General of the Mathurins, not with the appearance of acting for the
United States or with their knowledge, but merely on the usual
ground of charity. This expedient was rendered abortive by the
Revolution of France, the derangement of ecclesiastical orders there,
and the revocation of church property, before any proposition perhaps
had been made in form by the Mathurins to the Dey of Algiers. _
I have some reason to believe that Mr Eustace, while in Spain
endeavored to engage the Court of Spain to employ their Mathurins
in this same business, but whether they actually moved in it, or not,
I have never learned
We have also been told that a M': S i p s o n of Gibraltar, by the
direction of the Mess~"ulke1eys of Lisbon, contracted for the ransom
of our prisoners (then reduced by death and ransom to 14) a t 34,792
28/38 dollars. By whose orders they did it we could never learn.
I have suspected it was some association in London, which finding
the prices far above their conception, did not go through with their
purpose, which probably had been merely a philanthropic one: be
this as i t may, i t was without our authority or knowledge.
Again, Mr Cathalan, our Consul a t Marseilles, without any instruction from the Government, and actuated merely, as we presume,
by a willingness to do something agreeable, set on foot another
negociation for their redemption; which ended in nothing.
These several volunteer interferences, though undertaken with
good intentions, run directly counter to our plan; which was to apold
the appearance of any purpose on our part ever to ransom our caphves,
and by that semblance of neglect, to reduce the demands of the algerines to such a price as might make it hereafter less their interest to
pursue our Citmens than any others. On the contrary they have
supposed all these propositions, directly or indirectly, came from us:
they inferred from thence the greatest anxiety on our part, where we
had been endeavoring to make them suppose there was none; kept
up their demands for our captives at the highest prices ever paid
by any Nation; and thus these charitable, though unauthorized
interpositions, have had the double effect of lengthening the chains
they were meant to break, and of making us at last set a much higher
rate of ransom, for our Citizens present and future, than we probably
should have obtained, if we had been left alone to do our own work,
in our own way. Thus stands this business then a t present. A

33

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1785 TO 1801

f o m d bmgain, as I am informed, being registered in the books of the
former Dey, on the part of the Bulkeleys of Lisbon, which the
Buppose to be obhgatarg on us, but which is to be utterly disavowed:
as having never been authorized by us, nor its source even known to us.
In 1790. this subject was laid before Congress fully, and a t the late
Session monies have been provided, and authority given to proceed
to the ransom of our captive Citizens at Algiers, provided it shall not
exceed a given sum, and pro$ded also a peace shall be previously
negotiated within certain b u t s of expense. And in consequence of
these proceedings your mission has been decided on by the President.
Since then no ransom is to take place without a peace, you will of
course take up first the negotiation of peace, or if you find ~t better
that peace and ransom should be treated of together, you will take
care that no agreement for the latter be concluded, unless the former
be established befoye, or .in the same instant.
As to the condit~ons,it is understood that no peace can be made
with that Government but for a larger sum of money to be paid at
once for the whole time of its duration, or for a smaller one to be
annually paid. The former plan we entireIy refuse, and adopt the
latter. We have also understood that peace might be bought cheaper
with naval stores than with money: but we will not furnish them naval
stores, because we think it not right to furnish them means which we
know they will employ to do wrong, and because there might be no
economy in it, as to ourselves in the end, as it would increase the
expense of that coercion which we may in future be obliged to practice
towards them. The only question then is, what sum of money will
we agree to pay them annmUy for peace?
By a letter from CaptF Obrian, [dated 27 September 17911 a copy of
which you receive herewith, we have his opinion that a peace could be
purchased with money for £60,000 sterling, or with nu& stores for
100,000. dollars. An annual payment equivalent to the k t , would be
£3000. sterling, or 13,500. dollars, the interest of the sum in gross.
If we could obtain it for as small a sum as the second in money, the
annual payment e uivalent to it would be 5000. dollars. In an other
part of the same etter Capt? Obrian says "if maritime stores and
two light cruisers given and a tribute p a d in maritime stores every
two years amounting to 12,000. dollars in America", a peace can be
had. The p f t of stores and cruisers here supposed, converted into an
annual equvalent, may be stated at 9000. dollars, and adding to i t
half the biennial sum, would make 15,000. dollars to be annually paid.
You will of course use your best endeavors to get it a t the lowest sum
practicable, whereupon I shall only say, that we should be pleased with
10,000. dollars, contented with 15,000., think 20,000. a very hard
bargain, yet go as far as 25,000. if it be impossible to get it for less;
but not a copper further, this being fixed by law as the utmost limit:
these are meant as annual sums. If you can put off the first annual
payment to the end of the first year, you may
exceeding that in presents to be paid down: but
to be m d e in hand, that and the presents
25,000. dollars.
And here we meet a d%cult4y, arising from the small degree of information we have respecting the Barbary States. Tunis is said to be
tributary to Algiers; but whether the effect of this be that peace being
made with Algiers, is of course with the Tunisians without separate

I

W&S

WITP BA&BABY POWEBS

39

treaty, or separate price, is what we know not. If i t be possible to
have it placed on this footing so much the better. At any event it will
be necessary to stipulate with Algiers that her influence be interposed
as strongly as possible with Tunis, whenever we shall proceed to treat
with the latter; which cannot be till information of the event of your
negotiation, and another Session of Congress.
As to the articles and form of the treaty in general, our treaty with
Marocco was so well digested that I enclose you a copy of that to be
the model with Algiers, as nearly as it can be obtained, only inserting
the clause with respect to Tunis.
The ransom of the captives is next to be considered. they are now
thirteen in number, to wit, Richard Obrian, and Isaac Stevens, Captains, Andrew Montgomery and Alexander Forsyth, Mates, Jacob
Tessanier, a French passenger, William Patterson, Philip Sloan,
Peleg Lorin, James Hull, James Cathcart, George Smith, John
Gregory, James Hermit, seamen. I t has been a fixed principle with
Congress to establish the rate of ransom of American Captives with
the Barbary states at as low a point as possible, that it may not be the
interest of those States to go in quest of our Citizens in preference to
those of other Countries. Had it not been for the danger it would
have brought on the residue of our seamen, by exciting the cupidity
of those rovers against them, our Citizens now in Algiers wouId have
been long ago redeemed without regard to price. The mere money
for this particular redemption neither has been, nor is an object with
any body here. I t is from the same regard to the safety of our seamen
at large that they have now restrained u s from any ransom unaccompanied with peace: this being secured, we are led to consent to terms
of ransom, to which otherwise our government would never have consented; that is to say, to the terms stated by Captq Obrian in the following passage of the same letter - "by giving the Minister of the
Marine (the present Deys favorite) the sum of 1,000. sequins. I
would stake my life that we would be ransomed for 13,000. sequins &
all expenses included". Extravagant as this sum is, we will, under the
secunty of peace in future, go so far; not doubting a t the same time
that you will obtain it as much lower as possible, and not indeed without a hope that a lower ransom will be practicable from the assurances
given us in other letters from CaptWbrian, that prices are likely to be
abated by the present Dey, and particularly with us, towards whom
he has been represented as well disposed. You will consider this sum
therefore, say 27,000. dollars, as your ultimate limit, including ransom,
duties, and gratifications of every kind.
As soon as the ransom is completed, you will be pleased to have the
captives well cloathed, and sent home at the expense of the United
States, with as much economy as will consist with their reasonable
comfort.
I t is thought best that Mc Pinckney, our minister at London should
be the confidential channel of communication between us. He is
enabled to answer your draughts for money within the limits before
expressed: and as this will be b redrawing on Amsterdam, you must
settle with him the number o days a f t e ~sight a t which your bills
shall be payable in London so as to give him time, in the mean while,
to draw the monev from Amsterdam.
We shall be anxious to know as soon and as often as possible, your
prospeats in these negociations. You will receive herewith a cypher

9

40

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 17'85 TO 1801

which will enable you to make them with safety. London and Lisbon
(where Col. Humphreys will forward my letters) will be the safest and
best ports of communication. I also enclose two seperate commissions
for the objects of peace and ransom. To these is added a commission
to you as Consul for the United States a t Algiers, on the possibility
that it might be useful for you to remain there till the ratification of
the treaties shall be returned from hence; though you are not to delay
till their return, the sending the Captives home, nor the necessary
payments of money within the limits before prescribed. Should you
be willing to remain there, even after the completion of tho business,
as Consul for the United States, you will be free to do so, giving me
notice, that no other nomination may be made. These Commiss~ons,
being issued during the recess of the Senate, are in force, by the
Constitution, only till the next Session of the Senate; but their renewal then is SO much a matter of course, and of necessity, that you
may consider that as certain, and proceed without interniption. I
have not mentioned this in the Commissions, because it is in all cases
surplusage, and because it might be difFicult of explanation to tbose
to whom you are addressed.
The allowance for d l your expenses and time (exclusive of the ransom, price of peace, duties, presents, maintenance and transportation
of the Captives) is a t the rate of 2000. dollars a year, to commence
from the day on which you shall set out for Algiers, from whatever
place you mag take your departure. The particular objects of peace
and ransom once out of toheway, the 2000. dollars annually are to go
in satisfaction of time, services, and expences of every kind, whether
you act as Consul or Commissioner.
As the duration of this peace cannot be counted on with certainty,
and we look forward to the necessity of coercion by cruises on their
coast, to be kept up during the whole of their cruising season, you will
be pleased to inform yourself, as minutely as possible, of every circumstance which may influence or guide us in undertaking and conducting such an operation, making your communications by safe
opportunities.
I must recommend to your particular notice Captg Obrian, one of
the Captives, from whom we have received a great deal of useful
information. The zeal which he has displayed under the trying circumstances of his present situation has been very distinguished, you
will find him intimately acquainted with the manner in which and
characters with whom business is to be done there, and perhaps he
may be an useful instrument to you, especially in the outset of your
undertaking, which will require the utmost caution, and the best
information. He will be able to give you the characters of the European Consuls there, tho' you will probably not think it prudent to
repose confidence in any of them.
Should you be able successfully to accomplish the objects of your
mission in time to convey notice of i t to us as early as.possible during
the next Session of Congressl which meets in the beginmug of November
and rises the 4. of March, i t would have a very pleasing effect.

41

WARS TTrITH BARBARY POWERS

rough estimate not contained in the letter.
Peace----------------------------------------25,000.dollars.
R m m ---- -- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 27,000.
cloath! & pasGe. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1,000.
Negotiator - - - - - - - ---,
- - - -,---------2,000.
---------,-

_,-

55,000.
sum dowed - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - _ - - - - - - - - - -50,000.
[NA. SDA. Dip. Cor., Inst. to Min., Bk 1, Jan. 1791-Aug. 1793.1
[2 June 17921
Appointment of John Paul Jones as U. S. Consul, Bigiers

GEORGE
WABHINGTON
President of the United Rates of America
To ad who shall see these presents shdi come Ureetingg
KNOW YE, That reposing special Trust and Confidence in the

Abilities and Integrity of John Paul Jones, a citizen of the United
States of America, I have nominated and appointed him Consul for
the United States of America at the Port of Algiers and for such other
ports within the same Allegiance as shall be nearer to the said port
than to the Residence of any other Consul or Vice Consul of the
United States, in the said allegiance; and do authorize and empower
him ta have and to hold the said office, and to exercise and enjoy all
the Rights, Pre-eminences, Privileges and Authorities to the same of
right appertaining, during the Pleasure of the President of the United
States for the Time being: He demanding and receiving no Fees or
Perquisites of office whatever which shall not be expressly established
by some Law of the said United States. And I do hereby enjoin all
Captains, Masters and Commanders of Ships and other Vessels, armed
or unarmed, sailing under the Flag of the said States, as well as all
other of their Citizens, to rzcknowledge and consider him the said
John Paul Jones accordingly. And I do hereby pray and re uest the
Dsv and Government of Algiers and their Governors and 0 cers to
permit the said John Paul Jones. fully and eaceably to enjoy and
exercise tho said office, without gving or s ering to be given unto
him any Molestation or Trouble, but on the contrary to aeord him
all proper countenance and assistance; I offering to do the same for
all those who shall in U e manner be recommended to me by the said
Dey and Govenunent of Algiers.
I n Testimony whereof I have caused these lettors to be made
patent and the seal of the United States to be hereunto afbed.
Given under my hand at the City of Philadelphia the 2Q [?I day
of June in the Year of our lord one thousand seven hundred and
ninety two, and of the Independence of the United States of
America the sixteenth.
GQWASHINGTON
By the President

'ts

2

TH.JEFFERSON

[SDA. CL, Algiers, Vol. 1, Part 1, April 1785-July 1795.1

42

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1786 TO 1801

To Thomas Barclay, U. S. Consul, Morocco, from President George Washington

PHILADELPHIA
J ~ n e11.1792.
SIR Congress having furnkhed me with means for procuring peace,
and ransomug our captiv? c~tizensfrom the government of Algiers,
I have thought it best, whde you are engaged at Marocco, to appoint
Admiral Jones to proceed to Algiers, and therefore have sent him s
Commission for establishing peace, another for the ransom of our
ca tives, and a third to act there as Consul for the United States, and
f u 8 in~tructionsare given in a letter from the Secretary of State to
him, of all which papers, Mr Pinckney, now proceeding to London as
our Minister Plenipotentiary there, is the bearer, as he is also of this
letter. It is sometime however since we have heard of Admiral Jones,
and as, in the event of any accident to him, it might occasion an
injurious delay, were the business t~ await new Commissions from
hence, I have thought i t best, in such an event, that Mr Pinckne
should forward to you all the papers addressed to admiral Jones, wit
this letter, signed by myself, giving you authority on receipt of those
papers to consider them as addressed to you,. and to proceed under
them in every respect as if your name stood m each of them in the
place of that of John Paul Jones. You will of course finish the business
of your mission to Mnsocco with all the dispatch practicable, and then
proceed to Algiers on that hereby confided to you, where this letter
with the Commissions addressed to Admiral Jones, and an explanation
of circumstances, will doubtless procure you credit as acting in the
name and on the behalf of the United States, and more especially when
you shall efficaciously prove your authority by the fact of making, on
the spot, the pa ents you shall stipulate. With full confidence in
the prudence a n g t e g r i t y with which you will fuliill the objects of the
present mission, I give to this letter the effect of a Commission and
full powers, by hereto subscribing my name this eleventh day of June
one thousand seven hundred and ninety two.
[NA. SDA. Dip. Cor., Inst. t o Min., Bk 1, Jan. 1791-Aug. 1793.1

g

To David Hnmphreys, U. S. Xinister to Lisbon. Portugal, from Secretary of State

PHILADELPHIA,
March 21" 1798.
To CoI. DAVIDHUMPHREYG
SIR,The deaths of Admiral Paul Jones first, and afterwards of M?
Barclay, to whom the mission to Algiers explained in the enclosed
papers [letter dated June 1, 17921 was successively confided, have led
the President to desire you to undertake the execution of i t in person.
These papers, being copies of what had been delivered to them will
serve a0 your guide. But M' Barclay having been also charged with a
mission to Morocco, it will be necessary
- to -e v e-you some trouble with
respect to that also;
Mr Nathaniel Cutting. the Bearer hereof, is dispatched s~eciallv.
first to receive from Mc f i c h e y in London a'ny papers or infohatioh;
which his Agency in the Al erine Business may have enabled him to
communicate to you: He WI% then proceed to deliver the whole to you,
and accompany and aid you in the character of Secretary I t is thought necessary that you should, in the first instance settle
Mr Barclay's accounts respecting the Morocco mission, which will
probably render it necessary that ou should go to Gibralter. The
communications you have had wit Mr Barclay in this mission will

g

43

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

assist you in your endeavours a t a settlement. You know the sum
received by M' Barclay on that account, and we wish as exact a statement as can be made of the manner in which it has been laid out, and
what part of it's proceeds are now on hand. You will be pleased to
make an Inventory of these proceeds now existing. If they or any
art of them can be used for the Algerine mission, we would have you
all means apply them to that use, debiting the Algerioe fund, and
crediting that of Morocco with the amount of such application. If
they cannot be so used, then dispose of the perishable articles to the
best advantage, and if you can sell those not perishable for what they
cost, do so, and what you cannot so sell, deposite in any safe place
under your own power. In this last stage of the Business return us an
exact account I"! of the specific articles remaining on hand for that
mission, and their value. 2"g of it's cash on hand. 3 d of any money
which may be due to or from Mr Barclay or any other person on account of this mission, and take measures for replacing the clear
balance of cash in the hands of Messr! W. & I. 'CVillinks and NichQ&
Jacob Van Staphorsts and Nubbard This matter being settled, you will be pleased to proceed on the
mission to Algiers. This you will do by the way of Madrid, if you
think any information you can get from Mr Carmichael, or any other
may be an equivalent for the trouble, expense and delay of the journey.
If not, proceed in whatever other way you please to Algiers Proper powers and Credentials for you addressed to that government
are herewith enclosed. - The Instructions first given to Admiral
Paul Jones are so full that no others need be added, except a qualification in one single article, to wit: Should that Government h a l l y
reject peace on the terms in money, to which you are authorized to go,
you may offer to make the first payments for peace and that for ransom
m nuvd stores, reserving the right to make the subsequent annual
payments in money You are to be allowed your travelling expences, your salary as
Minister Resident in Portugal going on. Those expences must be
debited to the Algerine Mission, and not carried into your ordinary
account as Resident. Mr Cutting is allowed one hundred Dollars a
month, and his expenses, which as soon as he joins you, will of course
be consolidated with yours. We have made choice of him as parhcuIarly qualified to aid under your direction in the matters of account,
with which he is well acquainted. He receives here an advance of
One thousand Dollars by a draught on our Bankers in Holland in whose
hands the fund is deposited. This and aJl other sums furnished him,
to be debited to the Algerine fund. I inclose you a letter to our Bankers giving you complete authority over these funds, which ou had
better send with your f i s t Draught, though I send a copy o it from
hence b another opportunity Tlis usiness belng done, you will be pleased to return to Lisbon,
and to keep yourself and us thereafter well informed of the transactions
in Morocco, and as soon as you shall find that the succession to that
Government is settled and stable so that we may know to whom a
Commissioner may be addressed, be so good as to give us the information that we may take measures in consequence.

gy

9

g

[NA. SDA. Dip. Cor., Inet. to Min., Bk 1, Jan. 1791-Aug. 1793.3

44

NAVAL OPEBATIONS FROM 1785 TO 1801
To Secretary of State from James Simpson, U. S. Consul, Gibraltar

GIBRALTAR
Is! June 1793 SIR: Contrary Winds having detain'd the Vessel this goes by,
affords me an opportunity of adding to my advices under 224 last
Month, forwarded by same conveyance, the intelligence we have
since received of the American Schooner Lark Captc Pulling from
Carthagena, having been captured off Cape de Gat, by an Algerine
Row Boat; - fortunately the Master & Crew escap'd in their Boat,
and landed in Spain. By our latest advices Muley Soliman remained a t Rhabat - most
of the Provinces sent him deputies, and he has been encouraged to
send part of his Army forward to Shauia or Tremecena, in order to
give the Alcaydes Ben Assar & Bellaroni an opportunity of joining
him if they should be inclined to do so - those Men have for some
time back lived in a state of Independency, and not taken part with
any of the contending Princes When Spain supported Muley Ishem in opposition to Yazid &
Islema they had no communication with any other part of the Empire
but that under his dominion - permission has lately been given for
their Vessels to trade as before to all the Ports, and I have it from the
best authority that the Court of Madrid will be one of the first to
send an Ambassador to Soliman, so soon as he can establish himself in
Morrocco.
The report of the Toulon Fleet having sailed has not been confirmed. The allied Army has enter'd France - by our latest advices they
were before Cond6 and Valenciennes. [SDA. CL, Gihmltar, Vol. I, April 1791-Dec. 1795.1
To Secretary of State from Edward Church, U. 5. Consul, Lisbon

LISBON224 Septr 1793
SIR Col1 Humphreys with M Cutting embarked the 17" Inst: on
bg a Swedish Vessel called yVostillion commanded by Ab* Herbst
bound first for Gibralter. - The Algerine Corsairs are (unfortunately for us) more at Liberty just at this time than heretofore, the
Portugueze Ships of War, which were stationed on that Coast, being
obliged to quit it, to follow the orders of their Masters the English;
it is therefore to be feared that this circumstance may increase the
dBculties of the proposed negotiation, as the Algerines only wanted
this obstacle removed to have become Masters long ere this of many
of our Vessels and fellow-Citizens - Coll H. has probably informed
you that an American Vessel was taken by the Aulgerines the 18tP
UltQ& that the Men fortunately escaped in thee boat to the opposite
Shore near Malaga, had the men been taken, it E more than probable
that the great object in view would have been defeated, the Algerines
were in an American Vessel which they had taken some time before
and armed for the purpose, the Crew of this Vessel had also effected
their escape in the same way. - An American Vessel from Boston
sailed from this Port last Week bound for Malaga, it is of the utmost
importance that She also she escape, for should one other American
Crew fall into the Dey's hands, our Friend's means would be totally
inade uate, & his mission of c o v e fruitless. Un er the most favourable c~rcumstance.~,
with his present means,
We have no great reason to be very sangme of his success - The

1

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS
extreme ignorance and imprudent conduct of one of the precursors on
the same errand, have great1 magnified the expectations and demands of the Dey, and the tri ute paid by other Nations far exceeds
the Sum prescribed by the U. S. - Fortunately for America She
has every thing possible to hope from the present Agent, who goes
with a heart tremblingly alive to the Sufferings of the unfortunate
Captives, and who also possesses every other reqmsite conducive to
the success of such an Enterprize; but when we consider that he has
to treat with a rapacious Despot who is probably actuated solely by
self-interest, and restrained only by fear, that it is palpably for the
interest of all the European maritime Nations that We should be
excluded from a share m the mediterranean trade, and therefore
that all the Barbary Powers should be our Enemies; I would hope,
whatever may be the issue of this negociation, that my Countrymen
will give Col! Humphreys all the credit due to a Man who has done all
that Man can do. - No man is more thoroughly convinced than I
am of the importance,.and vast c o ~ e r c ~advantages
al
to the U. S.
of Amy of a free Mechterranean Navigation, but I am by no means
convinced that these advantages can possibly be secured to Us in our
present Situation; the faith of Puates - whose only support is plunder,
and who have hitherto contemned all those times and obligations
which clash wth their interest, and we sometimes bind more civilized
Despots, - seems to me to be but a feeble dependence on which to
place a large Stake.
When wc can appear in the Ports of the various Powers, or on the
Coast, of Barbary, with Ships of such force as to convince those
nations that We are able to protect our trade, and to compel them if
necessary to keep faith with Us, then, and not before, We may probably secure a large share of the Medit-rade, which would largely
and speedily compensate the U. S. for the Cost of a maritime force
amply sufficient to keep all those Pirates in Awe, and also make it
their interest to keep faith. We are here almost as ignorant of what the belligerent Powers are
doing as if We were in the moon, being excluded from all communication with France, and having only the garbled accounts in the London
papers, calculated in general to tickle the Ears, and drain the pockets
of that duped, and almost mimd Nation. This Nation seems in general extremely averse to engaging in the
War, both Nobles & People, but the Prince Regent is said to be under
the absolute guidance and controul of one Man, Martin de Mello,
who is the Creature and Idolator of the English - 6000 Troops are
just embarked to join the Spanish Army, and the Portug?~have some
time since furnished their Quota of Ships to the English, but it seems
the French still consider this nation as not involved in the War
against them, as .a Portugueze Ship is lately arrived from Bayonne in
France laden with pitch, tar, and paper - All the portugueze
vessels lately arrived, as well as many tl;mericans, complain bitterly
of the insults and pillage of the british privateers which they meet at
Sea, and of the pobteness of thefrench - but it is probably more wise
and prudent for both, to pocket the abuses a t present, than to resent
them. * * *

g

46

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1786 TO 1801

HonbleTHOMAS
JEFFERSON
Esqr
Secretary of State for the Und States of Ame*
Or to
His Successor in the Office P. S. Col! Hurnphries (from whom I recd the information) has
doubtless aquainted you, that England & Spain seem to be plotting
in what way they can most effectually clip our Eagle's Wings, They
are both extremely envious of her soaring; this may probably be one
cause that retards the conclusion of the business whch occupies our
Commissioners a t the Spanish Court Sept':23g I t is whispered that there has been a second severe Action
near Perpignan between the French & Spaniards m whlch
the latter have been greatly worsted, the best voucher wch
I can produce at resent in confirmation, is the sombre
Visages of almost a the English here, but this may proceed
more from their fears, than from their knowledge of the
truth of the report.

8

[NA. SDA.

CL, Lisbon, Vol. I, 1791-1802.1

To John Marsden Pintard, U. S. Consul, Madeira, from David Humphreys, U. 6.
Minister to Lisbon, Portugal

GIBRALTER
Odo. 6.1798
DEARSIR Authentic advice is just Received that a truce for 12
months, is concluded between Portugal & Algeirs - In consiquance
of which eight Algeren Cruizers Viz Four frigates, one Brig & three
Xebeques passed through the streights last night into the Atlantic I write you in great haste this information in order that you may take
such measures as you shall judge Proper to give to our Countrymen
the most rapid & extensive notice thereof possible
The within is a true Copy of an Original Letter I this day received
from Colonel Humphreys
JOHN
M PINTARD
MADEIRA
30 0 ~ 1 01793
.
[NA. SDA.

CL, Funchal, Vol. 1, March 1793-July 1831.1

To Xichael Iorphy, U. S. Consul, Malaga, Spain, from David Humphreys, U. 6.
Minister to Lisbon, Portugal

COPY.

GIBRALTAR
Sunday morning 6'F Octrl79S SIR, I have this moment received authentic intelligence that the
Algereens have concluded a Truce for twelve months with the Portugueeze; in consequence of which four Frigates, three Xebecks and a
Brig of 20 guns have past the streights into the Atlantic in course of
last Night, probably to cruize against the American Flag. I have to
request that you will immediatly communicate t,his information to
every Commander of an American Vessel that may now be, or may
arrive, at your Port: -and also that you will transmit the same advice
to any American Consul or Agent with whom you may have opportunit of Corresponding:
f ~ i s ~ a t this
e h per Express and embrace the same opportunity of
forwar*
ou a Packet which I received some time since from the
Secretary o State for the United States of America:

I

[Similar letter to Edward Church, U. S. Consul, Lisbon, 6 October 1793.1
[NA. SDA. CL, Malaga, Vol. 1, June 1793-May 1814.1

WARS WITH BARBARY P0Ti7ERS

47

[8October 17931
Circular concerning Truce between Portugal and Algiers, from David Humphreys,
U. S. Minister to Lisbon, Portugal

To

ALL

GOVERNORS,
MAGISTRATES,
OFFICERSCIVIL, MILITARY

& others concerned, in the United States of America.

You are most earnest1 desired, as speedily as possible, to give an
un~versalalarm to all Jitizens of the United States concerned in
navigation, particularly to the southern parts of Europe, of the
danger of being captured by the Algerines, in prosecuting their
voyages to that destination.
A Truce for twelve Months is concluded between Portugal and
Algiers. In consequence of which a fleet of Algerine Cruizers passed
through the Streights into the Atlantic on saturday night last. Given a t Gibralter this 8th day of Octr 1793.

D. HUMPHREYS.

[NA. SDA. CL,Lisbon, Vol. I, 1791-1802.1
To Secretary of State from Edward Church, U. 6. Consul, Lisbon, Portugal

(COPY)
LISBON12th Octor 1793.
SIR Yesterday ye l l t p I rec* the following note from Coll Humphreys, our Minister Resident at this Court, but now at Gibraltar.
"DEARSIR" "We have advice of a Truce between the Portuguese
"and Algerines, and that an Algerine Fleet has gone into the Atlantic,
"Pray forward the inclosed with the intelhgence and believe me"
Your's
(Signed) D. HUMPHREYS
Immediately on receipt of this very alarming news, I called together
all the American Captains now in this Port, and communicated the
Contents of the above Letter, with such farther information as I had
a few minutes after obtained from a friendly and always well informed
Portuguese Gentleman - which was, that on the 5t@ instant an
Algerine Fleet consisting of eight armed Ships had been seen by a
Portuguese Frigate (just arrived) sailing out of the Mediterranem,
there were 4 Ships carrying 44,36,30, & 28 Guns - 3 Xebecs 20,24 &
26 Guns and one Brig of 22 Guns,
Their Signals to the Portuguese & English are said to be an English
Jack at the fore-top-gallant-Mast-head, and a Flag with blue and
white, or blue & Yellow stripes, at the Main top gallant mast head. Early this Morning I waited on his Excellency Luiz Pinto de Sousa
Minister & Secretary of State for foreign Affairs, on the subject of
in which i t had
this unexpected Event, and the unfortunate sit~at~ion
placed not only the American Ca tmnow here, but our Nation at large,
whose injury seems to have teen particularly meditated in this
nepociation: The Minister received me with great politeness, and anticipating
the cause of my visit, informed me that he was a t the moment of my
arrival occupied in writing to me on the subject, but was better
pleased to see me, as he could more fully and particularly explam the
nature of this business to me viva voce, than b letter, and assured
me that he would candidly communicate to me ow far the Court of
Portugal were concerned, or chargeable for the Mischiefs resulting from

g

48

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1786 TO 1801

this Truce, to all other Powers not at peace with Blgeirs, he declared
that it was as unexpected to the Court of Portugual as it could be to

us, and if it was not quite so unwelcome, yet it was by no means
agreeable to their Court, who never intended to conclude either a
Peace or Truce with the Dey without giving timely notice to all their
friends that they might avoid the dangers, to which they might otherwise be exposed by trusting to the Protection of the Portuguese Ships
of War stationed in the Mediterranean, - He acknowledged that
the Court of Portugal had about 6 Months past, expressed to the
Courts of England and Spain, a desire of their friendly cooperation to
induce a disposition in the Dey towards the establishment of a firm
and lasting peace with her most faithful Majesty, but having appointed
no Person directly or indirectly to negotiate in behau of her Majesty
they considered the business as only in embryo; but the british Court
zealous over much for the happiness of the two nations Portugal and
Algeirs, in order to precipitate this important business, very officiously
authorized Charles Logie the british Consul-General and Agent a t
Algiers, not only to treat, but to conclude, for and in behalf of this
Court,notonlywithout any Authority, butwithoutevenconsultingit ;A Truce was accordingly concluded between the Dey, and the british
Agent (for twelve Months) in behalf of her most faithful Majesty, for
the performance of which on the part of her Majesty the
British Court is Guarantee - the Condition is, that this Court shall
pay to the Dey one third as much as he receives, annually from the
court of Spain, - When this Court received information of this
proposed Condition from hl':Walpole the british Envoy to this Court;
They informed him, that however desirous they might be of a Peace
with Algiers, they were so far from being disposed to submit to such a
condition, that it was the determination of her most faithful Majesty
not to pay one farthing, but in the interval the Truce was signed by the
self constituted Agent Mr Logie, - The Minister Mr Pinto farther
informed me that this Court had ordered an Augmentation of their
Number of Armed Ships on the Mediterranean Station, so little mas
their expectation of a Truce or Peace with Algiers, and intimated that
the Algerines would probably ere long be less at liberty to cruise than
at present, and mentioned less than a Month but though I have great
confidence in his sincerity, and in the good wishes and disposition
towards us of many of the Portuguese Nobility, and of their sincere
hatred of the Enghsh, yet the Prince is young, weak, and obstinate,
and can, and probably mill determine as his own Caprice or Martin
de Mello may direct, - The Conduct of the british in this business
leaves no room to doubt, or mistake their object, which was evidently
aimed at Us, and proves that their envy, jealousy, and hatred, will never
be appeased, and that they will leave nothing unattempted to effect
our ruin, - as a farther confirmation it is worthy of remark, that the
same british Agent obtained a Truce at the same time between the
States of Holland and the Dey, for Six Months, whereby We and the
Eanse towns are now left the only prey to those Barbarians, - This
last Truce has in all probability cost the English very dear] as the
Algerines had profited much by Captures from the Dutch, slnce the
commencement of the late hostilities between the two Nations, This will I fear give a fatal Stroke to the advantages which we
might otherwise have derived from our Neutrality. -

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

49

I am a t this place interrupted by intelligence from A staunch friend
to America, who has information from the fountain head -it has
greatly shocked me -I have reason to fear that there is an infernal
combination in Europe against Us, France excepted, - and that we
have no other hope or resource but in our own Strength. Monday 14" I have just received a letter from Gibraltar of the 8'?
with orders to charter a Vessel to carry the intelligence to you Copy
of which letter I send herewith - At this moment a Sweedish Vessel
axrives - on the 94'' in Lat: 38. 13, She was boarded by an Algerine
Frigate, a t a small distance She saw another, which had just Captured 4 Americans, 2 Brigs, 1 Ship & 1 Schooner, - and one Genoese
ship She was informed of the Truce, and that it was for 12 Months with
Holland & Portugal - I have forwarded letters by Express wherever
I thought it necessary to notify our Citizens of their Danger, - We
are betrayed and many, many of our Countrymen will fall into the
Snare, - I send you a list of those in this port, - I have chartered
a Ship this Moment for £800 Sterle to carry my Dispatches, She sails
tomorrow - they will be delivered to you by Mr Livingston to whom
refer you for farther particulars, which In my great hurry I may omit;
I have not slept since Receipt of the news of this h e h h plot, - pardon
me for such Expressions - Another Corsair is in the Atlantic, God preserve Us, - News is just arrived P Post, that the French
have retaken Toulon - have repulsed the Duke of Brunswick with
great Slaughter; and that the Prince de Cobourg is in great Danger
of a total defeat, being hemmed in by a very powerful Army, whch
he dares not attack, Cetera desunt, - I have chartered the Vessel to
go, and return with a Cargo of wheat, or Flour to this Port or Cadiz,
for $800 Stlf, her freight back will go far to pay the Expence of her
hire - - God grant her a safe and speedy passage - Small hopes
now of a peace with Algiers - I t is currently reported here, that 3
or 4 some say 2 & some but 1 of the Algerine Frigates now cruising
against Us, were a late present from the british King, but for this I
have no other Authority than common report; if it should be thought
I have chartered the Vessel at a high price, I wish the Governmr to
be informed that all the protected Ships demand at least double since
the confirmation of this Algerine News, and I have been rather
favoured in the Contract which I have made, and therefore, hope no
blame will fall on me, but that I shall be enabled by the Government
to fulfill my Engagement, Upon farther e n q u q I am sorry to inform you that the letter cont a h g the above french News, comes from doubtful Authority. - I t
is a matter of certainty, which I have received from undoubted
Authority, though contradicted by the Minister Luiz Pinto, and at
present a great Secret, that one of the present Portg:" Ministers is in
this execrable plot, a plot loudly and publickly execrated by this
Nation - I asked if i t wns Martinio de Mello? and was answered
that all his consequence & his pecuniary Resources were derived from
the Meditefl fleet, or Algerine War, and of course no suspicion could
justly fall upon him - Was it the Secretary Luiz Pinto? my Informant only knew at present that one of the four Ministers had been
p r i z to the whole transaction, but could not fix it, but could and
wo d tell me very soon, at present he seemed disposed rather to suspect the first Minister, the Marquis Ponte-de-Lima, because he was

50

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1786 TO 1801

the inveterate Enemy of Martinho de Mello, whom my Author heard
say on a former occasion to An Ambassador on his taking leave of the
Court to go to Algiers to Negociate a peace, Sir! the Ships attend you,
you will therefore proceed without delay on your Embassy, but
remember what I have said, and what I now repeat, as of the greatest
consequence (meaning to himself) if you succeed in making a peace
you will do well, but if you should not succeed you will do much
better - the relation of these circumstances tho' trivial in themselves, may possibly enable ou to form a more adequate idea of this
Court than I should be ab e otherwise to give you, i t is with this
view I trouble ou with them, One of the rigates now Cruising under Algerine Colours was a
present from the King of Spain but not very lately - and one is
certainly a very late present from the british King - I write in
great haste, and perturbation of mind, yet hope and believe I have
omitted nothing in my power to communicate for the public good &
Safety, to promote which, I pray you to believe me ever most firmly
and sincerely devoted - If by the harshness of some of my expressions I should appear to ou to be more strongly prejudiced against
the british, or british po iticlrs, than my Countrymen in general, I
trust it is only because I know them better; Few of my Countrymen
having been so much conversant with them for 30 years last past,
the Interval of the late War excepted, and Fewer perhaps have observed & Studied them so much, I am convinced they were making
large Strides again in America, and would probably ere long have
possessed an influence there which sooner or later would have proved
our ruin, but Heaven I hope has timely interposed, and doomed them
to fall into the pit which they were digging for Us, and that great good
will ultimately be derived to Us from this great Evil, it is greatly to
be deplored that so many of our Citizens must be doomed to perpetual
Slavery, but better so, than the whole Nation, of which there seemed
to be not a little danger. I keep this letter open to make such additions as occasions may
offer, 'till the moment the Vessel weighs Anchor, She has nothing to
do but to take in Water I send you by this opp? a large Packet of letters from Col! Humphrey~which doubtless contain the most important intelligence -

I

$

r

[SDA. CL, Lisbon, Vol. 1, 1791-1802.1

[14 October 17931
Circular to Citizens of the United States from Edward Church, U. 6. Consul,
Lisbon, Portugal

CITIZENSOF THE UNITEDSTATESOF AMERICA
Nine Algerine Corsairs are now cruising in the A t l e i c , They
carry from 22 to 44 Guns - They sailed out of the Medrterranean
on the 6"? instant, and were seen on the 9') to capture four American
Vessels, and one Genoese - A Truce for 12 months between Portugal and Algiers, was signed the 12:? Septr last, by the british Agent
a t Algiers, in behalf of her Majesty the Queen of Portugal - and
behalf of
another Truce by the same Agent about the same t p e
the United Netherlands - The foregoing authsntx mtehgence goes
by Express, from your truly distressed, and faithful fellow-Citizen

LISBON
14 OCdl1793

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

51

N. B A Swedish Ship saw the Algerines after taking an h e r i c a n
d i s c h q e part of the Cargo of Grain into the Sea, this was probably
that the Vessel might sad better meaning to arm her on the Spot
with a few Guns, in order to increase their Number of Cruisers
We are informed that ten of the Dutch Captains taken by Algerines
since their War with Holland have died of the plague in Algiers, how
many of other descriptions or Nations I have not heard,
By an American fortunately arrived this day from Falmouth, We
are Informed that the American Vessels now in England are returning
in Ballast, the English not chusing to risk their property in American
bottoms, but no reason has been assigned for this mysterious conduct,
mysterious in England, but evident Enough here
E C
LISBON
15 Octr 1793
[NA. SDA. CL, Lisbon, Vol. I, 1791-1802.1
To Secretary of State, from Peter Welsh, of Dominick Terry and Company, Cadiz
SP-

Cadiz 17thOctober 1793
SIR I have the honour to transmit you by the Brig Fair Hebe
Cap-rown,
for Philad" a Copy of my Letter to you of yesterday
[referring toMr. Humphreys' circular of 8 October 17931 by the Two
Sisters' Cap' Sheffield. - both vessels go out together, which affords'
a better chance of the Dispatches reaching you which I have received
from Mr Humphreys', & of which a duplicate goes heremth. While I am writing there are two American vessels' beating in,
which I have advised of their danger; - they are within the reach of
our Guns. We labour under great difEculty on account of a ractice which
calls' loudly for redress. whatever English ships' of orce come into
this Bay strip all American Vessels of their Men, the Natives of that
Kingdom they take out of them by main force, tho' these always'
enter as American Citizens', & Swear themselves to be Such, & the
Americans they use every endeavour to entice away. - There is
now here an English Frigate, the Adomache CapWones, which has
hardly left two Men on board of any American Vessel, & we have the
mortification to see Cap' Sheffield threatend with being deprived of
3 of his, which if executed, he will not be able to get away. - 1.m
endeavouring to prevent it, but as there is no Person here.authonsed
to represent the American cause, there is no redress of grievances to
be obtain'd.
My exertions on these occasions' proceed not from Officiousness,
but from a sincere attachment to a Country in which I have reaided
upwards of 3 year's, & of which I became a Citizen, & shall ever consider myself as such tho' Establish'd here in Trade. - My House is
extensively connected in Business with the United States, & the
grievances which I complain of bear hard on it. The Dispatches with which you entrusted me in November 1791
for Mc Carmichael at Madrid were duly forwarded & received by
him. [SDA. CL, Cadiz, Vol. 1-1791-1805.1

!'

52

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1785 TO 1801

To Secretary of State from Peter Walsh, of Dominick Terry and Company, Cadk,
Spain

CADIZ17th Oct?17QS
SIR In addition to what I wrote you this Morning by the Fair
Hebe I have now to advise that Two American Brigs & a Schooner
are just arrived, with the Ship Nancy Cap? Butler, from New York,
bound to Barcelona, which was chased several hours, & got clertr by
means of her Superior sailing, & runing into four fathom water for
the shore; on seeing which the Algerine made for an American Sloop,
which CapWutler apprehends must have been Captur'd. - humanity
shudder's for the fate of those who may have the misfortune to fall
into the hands of the Pirates.
[SDA. CL, Cadiz, Vol. 1, 1791-1805.1
To Secretary of State from Edward Church, U. 8. Consul, Lisbon, Portugal

LISBONTuesday 22°C Octor 1793
SIR 011 Saturday the 19" Instant, the Vessels belonging to the
Hanseatic Towns were ordered to be in readiness to sail the 25" under
Convoy of Two Portugueze Frigates, ordered by her Majesty to
Convoy them to a certain Latitude. - One of the Articles of the
Truce with Algiers which was communicated to me on the 12t!'
Instt by Luiz Pinto the Minister for foreign Affairs, expressly restricted the Portugueze from affording protection (without exception)
to any one Nation, Nevertheless the Consul and Agent for the Hanseatic Towns, petitioned for a Convoy, apd strongly .Urged a right
founded on a prior Treaty of a very ancient date exlsting between
the two Nations, this was generally understood to be the principle
upon which the Convoy was granted, and was so publickly declared
by the Agent, - but I had strong reasons to believe that this Government were by no means pleased with the conditions of the truce, or
the manner in which it had been negociated FOR and not BY this
Nat'ion, and that tho' they did not think proper formally to disavow
and reject it., yet that they wou'd not be displeased if a plausible
retence shou'd offer to break it, - I was also convinced that a great
LajoritY,if not the whole Nation, were extremely offended for various
reasons, they conceived it intended not only to throw on them the
odium of the manifest treachery in the business, but that it was also
aimed at their Navy, which was now an object of their particnlar
attention, and which for want of some employment, wou'd again sink
into neglect, which they suppose to have been one object of the
English in so eagerly precipitatin this Truce. - Upon the presumption that such was the genera opinion, and my knowledge that
the Spanish Ambassador when at Court on the 15t? Instt had been
treated rather roughly by all the Nobility present when he congratulated the Prince on the happy event of the Truce; - I wrote
a letter to the Minister Yesterday, of which transmit you a Copy pr
this opportunity, and as I have been diligent, i n my Enquiries prior
to my writing, and am particularly favoured m t h the mterest and
support of two very distinguished Personages here, who have honored
me with some particular attentions, I am greatly flattered with
hopes of Success; if I find there is a prospect of a speedy and favorable
Answer, it is probable I may detain the Vessel a day or two in order
to Convey such intelligence which will be so very important and
acceptable to the United States. * * *

5

53

WARS WITH BARBARY PObt7ERS

P. S. I cannot give a stronger proof of the Sincerity of the disgust
and disappointmt of this Court on account of the Truce w* Algiers,
than that the Spanish & British Ministers were unsuccessfully opposed
to the granting Us a Convoy, this comes from the best Authority,
even Martin ho de Mello favoured Us in this instance - in short the
British have lost ground by this left-handed policy, and the general
opinion that I do not love them over-much is now no small recommendation of me; I think this would not be an unfavblemoment to
propose a commercial Treaty upon a broad & liberal Basis
the
advantage could not fail in every view to preponderate in our favor I wish this may be taken into immediate and serious consideration as
our Commerce wtF this C o u t r y holds out very many advantages to
the U. S. if under proper regulations. -

-

[NA. SDA. CL, Lisbon, Vol. I, 1791-1802.1

122 October 17931
To Edward Church, U. S. Consul, Lisbon, Portugal, from Luiz Pinto de Bouza,
M i t e r and Secretary of State, Portugal
Translation

In answer to the letter you addressed to me of yesterday's date on
the protection & convoy which you sollicit in favor of the vessels of
the U S. of America which have to sail to their destinations, in danger
from the cruizers of Algiers, I am ordered to inform you that her most
faithful majesty, desirous of manifesting to the said states whatsoever
may benefit their navigation or commerce as far as may be compatible
with her own supreme justice, is very ready-to give her royal orders
that the vessels of the said states shall enjoy m their passage the same
protection which she has ordered to be extended to the vessels of the
Hanseatic towns until the conclusion of the ratification of the truce
adjusted between her M. F. Majesty $ the regency of Algiers: provided nevertheless that the vessels of the US. which shall desire to
shelter themselves under the protection of the said convoys, shall
unite & assemble in sufficient nuplber to merit to be convoyed; as
this measure cannot be practised m favor of a few, for clear reasons
which manifest themselves.
PALACE
OF QUELUZ
22. Octob. 1793.
[NA. SDA. CL, Lisbon, Vol. I, 1791-1802.1
To Secretary of State from John M. Pintard, U. S. Consul, Madeire

SIR

*

MADEIRA
dgtP October 1793

*

*

*

*

*

*

It is with great concern that I now Inform you the Portugese Gov-

ernment have Concluded a truce for one year with the Algireens
In concequence of which they have permitted five Algireen Corsairs
to Come out of the Streights and they are Now Cruising of[fJ Cape
St Vincents and the Rock of Lisbon two vessells arrived yesterday
from Lisbon that were Boarded by them & I am very fearfull they
will Make great Havock among our ShippingBound to Cadis or Lisbon.
Coll? Humph es Sailed from Lisbon for GiberaIter on ye 16*P of
Septembr and%: Church Remained in Charge with the &airs of the
United States I had no letters from him by ather of the vesaells that

54

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1786 TO 1801

arrived here another vessell was to Sail the next day by w"P I presume
I shall hear particularly from him But the Intelhgence I now give you
If too true I t is said that the treaty or truce was Negotiated by the
English Government at Giberalter. the Season being now so far
advanced I presume they will go in the Strelghts again soon but in -the
Spring of the year they will be out in Swarms. This I presume is a
political Maneuver of the Combined powers who were envious of the
growing prosperity of the United States. I shall Continue to give
Such Information as may come to my Knoledge in this as well as
every other Matter which may Relate to United States
[NA. SDA. CL, Funchd, Vol. 1, March 1793-July 1831.1
To the House of Dominick Terry and Company, Cadiz, Spain, from Samuel Cdder,
Master of American Schooner Jay, and Slave in Algiers

ALGIERS
F?Novem' 1793 GENTLEMENI am very sorry to inform you of my present Situation which is most deplorable, I was taken by an Algenne Cruizer on
the 8* [*I of October 45 Leagues to S: W: of Cape S* Vinsent. and
arrived here the 30* inst [October] and am sorry to inform you that
I found ten sail of Americans amon st which was Capmewman
of the ZJwrnacs Cap? Morse of the am Capmallace of the Dispatch all from Cadiz, the others from America-we was all stript
of all our Cloaths some Came on shore without even a shirt, we was
immediately put into Chains and put to hard Labour, with only the
allowence of three small loaves of black bread pr day & water & as it
will take some time to get any supply from America, & its not possible
to Live long, in this situation, I am under the Necessity of beging
you to suply me with about. one hundred dollars, throu the hand of
the Spanish Cousul, for which I will send you bills upon Mc David
Pearce, or upon my wife in America, I must Like wise beg you to
forward the Inclosed By the first opportunity to America, and shall
write to Mr Pearce Jun' by New opportunity if you should be writing
to M: Pearce please to inform him of my Capture-- * * *
[*Document of 4 December s t a t e s llth.]
[SDA. CL, Cadiz, Vol. 1, 1793-1805.1

f

To Secretary of State from Peter Welsh, of Dominick Terry and Company, Cadiz,
Spain

CADIZ20 Novr 1795
SIR My last respects' to you were of the 12*?inst, & as an American Citizen I shall continue to advise you of what occur's here, until
M Yznardi arrives, but afterward's it wou'd be officiousness in me to
do it. Four American Vessel's arrived here since my said last, which are
performing Quarantine at the upper Part of this Bay by order of the
Governour, who has received alarming accounts' from the Spanish
c h q 6 , of a Pestilential disorder which prevail's in Philad" & carry's
off great number's of People, but as there are recent advices from New
Pork, mentioning this disorder to have nearly subsided I expect these
Vessel's will be admitted to Pratick in 10 to 15 day's. -Their Cargo's,
Consisting of Wheat, Flour, Indian Corn & Rice will sell exceeding
well, these articles having risen considerably in Consequence of what
happen's with the Algerines

WARS WITH BARBABP POWERS

55

Some of these are still out, and Cruize Considerabl to the Nor'd
of the Westr Island's. - I received an Express $sterday from
Edw@Church Esqr a d v i s i i of their having chaaed into Lisbon the
American Brig Neptune CapP [space] Gdith's, who was coming from
Amsterdam to this Place with Wheat for the King's ace,. my House
has prevail'd on the Agent's to suffer the Cargo to be tranship't on
board of Neutral Vessel's for this Bay, which frees the Neptune a t
Lisbon & secures her Freight, and we have made similar arrangement's
for several more American Vessel's which have put into different Ports
to take Shelter from the Algerines The sum of four Hundred thousand Hard Dollar's has been just
raised here by a number of English, Irish, & Scotch Houses for the
purpose of speculating on the American Property which may be taken
by the Algerines, The Merchant's of Gibraltar are disposed to do
the same, & I am sorry to observe many among them there & here,
who owe much to America, This I fear will encourage these in their
attempts' against our Vessel's,
I am much alarm'd for the saftey of my Brother Walter Walsh who
Command's, & own's, the American Brig Hope, & must have sailld from
Charleston for this Place two months' ago, shou'd he be so unfortunate
as to fall into their hand's his Ransom wou'd fall heavy on me there is no Insurance to be obtain'd here under 25 pr ct, & I am ask'd
50 pr c* for one on my said Brother. - all this mll put an effectual
stop to our intercourse with America untill something is done with
these Algerines
[SDA. CL, Cadis, Vol. 1, 1791-1805.1
Secretary of State from James Simpson, U. 6. Consul, Gibraltar
GIBRALTAR
25" November 17'93 SIR Its with extreme concern I have to acquaint you, I yesterday
received a letter from Captain OBryen dated Algiers 5tg Ins: in which
is the following paragraph, "In consequence of the Portuguese and
"Dutch obtaining a Truce with this Regency, the Algerine Cruisers
"has captured in the latter end of October ten American Vessels, the
"Masters & Crews to the number of 110 Men is brought to Algiers and
"is made Slaves of to this Regency, these and all the other Ameri"can Captives is in a distressed and naked situation"-he adds at foot
of his letter
2 of Philadelphia Captains Penrose &
"Captured 4 Ships
4 Brigs
McShean
2 Schooners
also Ship Hope of N York" I am induced to give you this quotation verbatim because it appears to make eleven Vessels, and ten are only mention'd in the letter,
but it would seem as if the Ho e had arrived after it was written. ALI the Cruisers were a t dgiers save one Ship and ready to sail
again, with the addition of a Genoese Polacra they had armed. This ship I am very sorry to add passed up about ten days ago, having
been at anchor 12'Vnst off Larach with an American Brig loaded at
SP Cruz with Wax, Hides & other Articles the produce of that
Country. I have only to add to my advice of the 21s' last Month, that the
report still gains ground that the Portuguese Squadron have orders, to
To

56

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1785 TO 1801

prevent the Algerines passing again to the Atlantic, but I dare not
give i t to you as a fact; altho' yesterday a Ship of the Line, one of the
Convoy sailed from the Tagus on the 41.9Insharrived in this Bay, and
the Captain reported the same as the others, that he expected the
whole Fleet here; - I cannot think of any other object they can have
in view at this Season of the Year, but to guard the Straits, certainty of
which we shall know first Levanter. [SDA. CL, Gibraltar, Vol. 1, April 1791-Dec. 1795.1
List of American Vessels Captured by the Algerines in October & November 1798

Ship Hope of New York George Burnham Master bound from
Rotterdam to Malaga in Ballast.
Minerzvt J.?MFShane from Philadelphia to Barcelona.
Prudent of Philadelphia William Penrose Master from Philadelphia to Cadk with Grain Flour &?
-Tlbomas of Newberry Port Thomas Newman Master from
Cadiz to Arnsteirdam with Sugar, Wooll & Sundries.
Brig George of Road Island James Taylor Master from Lisbon
with Grain & Indian Corn.
PoUy of Newberry Port Michael Smith Master from Baltimore to Cadh with Flour.
The Olive Branch of Portsmouth William Furness Master
with Grain from Virginia to Lisbon.
Jane of Haver %ill Moses Mosse Master with Hides, Indigo
from Cadiz to Ostend.
Schooner Jay of Colchester Samuel Calder Master from Malaga to
Boston with Raisins, Figs, Wine &?
Dispatch of Petersburg William Wallsy Master from Cadiz
to Hamburg with Sugar Indigo Sarsaparrilla &op
Brig Minerva Joseph Ingram Master with Sundries bound from
Leghorn to New York 7 Men
105 American Slaves.
[SDA. CL, Gibraltar, Vol. 1, April 1791-Dec. 1795.1

[I December 17931
Instructions to Robert Montgomery, U. S. Consul, Alicante, from David Humphreyrr,
U. 8. Pinister to Lisbon, Portugal

SIB In the application of that part of the money (the property of
the U. S. of America recg by you from me which is design'd for releiving the necessities of the Citizens of the U: S. who are prisoners in
Algiers; and for defraying the Contingent expences which have been
or may be inevitably incurr'd on the subject of Algerine &airs; you
will be pleased to be guided by the following gineral &inciples Vizs
In the first place in order to h d e the nakedness and s een from the
inclemency of the weather the poor American prisoners in Algiers, you
w i l l have the goodness to provide for each one of them a comfortable
suit of Cloathlng as nearly in conformity to the estimate which has
been made out for the purpose: unless the Captains should chuse rather
to receive the am: in money in which case you will comply with their
wishes.
Second1 you will please to transmit regularly by way of subsistance
and for d o t h e r ersond expences eight dollars pr Month to each of
the Captains six lollam pi month to each of the Mates & at the rate

57

WARS WITH BARBARY POW-ERS

of twelve Cents pr day to each of the Mariners. Thirdly you will
please repay whatever monies have been advanced by the Consul
General of Sweden or his Brother Pierre Eric Skjoldebrand Esquire, to
releive the pressing necessities of the Citizens of the U. S. lately captur'd & Carried into Algiers; also ?uch other sums as may be expended
by either of them for Communicatulg intelligence of importance, or for
other Contingent charges which may become indispensibly necessary.

*

*

*

*

*

*

*

Given at Alicante this first day of December 1793.
Signed D: HUMPHREYS
Commissioner Plenipotentiary f ~ o mthe united
States to the Dey & Regency of Algiers (COPY
[NA. SDA. CL, Alicante Vol. 1, Aug. 1788-Dec. 1834.1

To David Pearce, Junior, from Samuel Calder, Slave, Algiers, formerly Master of
American Schooner Jay

(COPY)

ALGIERB
Deer 4* 1783
SIR I wrote you on my f i s t arrival here which perhaps may not
come to hand, for fear of which I now write you informing you of my
being Captured the llth[see 3 November] of Oct. by an Algirine
Frigate of 26 Guns 50 Leagues S W. of Cape SVincent and brought
to this place where I arrived the 30* of Oct. when we were all put on
shore, where I found the unfortunate Crews of 10 more Americans all
captured in October, On our landmg we were all put into Chains
without the least distinction and put to hard labor from daylight
untill night with only the allowance of two small black loaves and
Water & close confined a t night we suffered much on board the Cnriser,
for when they boarded us they even took the clothes from our backs
& brought us on board almost naked in this s~tuationthey put us
into the Cable Tier without any thing, not even a blanket to Cover
us where we remained untill our m v a l here without even a shirt
to shift us. Death would be a great relief & more welcome than a
continuance of our present situation, without a peace you may be
assured that the whole coast of Europe will be blockaded by their
Cruisers, as they have been as far as Cape Ortegal, and it is not a
doubt but they will go as far next Sp
as the Channel of England,
as they are building more Cruisers, T ey have now four Frigates
from 26 to 46 Guns. Two Brigs of 24. four Zebecks of 20 p & four
smaller ones which have all been at sea since their Truce w?th Porm more
tugal. The Cruisers that are now at sea we expect will b
Prizes tho' God forbid for the situation of the Convicts at t e Castle
would be happiness to our situation, for we think ourselves happy if
we escape through the day being beat by our drivers, who c m e s a
stick big enough to Knock a man down, v d the innocent, often suffer
with the guilty as they say we are all Christians - In my last letter
to your father I gave him an account of what Cargo I had on board
whch was 650 Casks Raisins, 20 Casks Wine. 30 Jars of Raisins & 3
d Qof Grapes & 40 boxes dQthe gross Sales of my Cargo was 68-000
R w [possibly real de veUon] by which you will find the Ca o tho'
damaged paid a Freight out - and from the goodness of the ruit &
wine, I make no doubt I should have done well had I got safe home as
I got my Fruit 6 Rws cheaper than any that waa then ship'd But

-%

-f

7

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1786 TO 1801

58

alas! all my hopes are blasted & whether ever I shall get away from
this is entirely uncertain, indeed if I may judge by the unfortunate
Cape OBrien & Stevens who have been nine years here & most of
their Crews are already Dead, & if our Country could not relieve so
small a number what will they do where there is nearly 140 men
in the 13 Vessells that's already taken & we have no reason but
to ex ect more - however we have no Reason but to expect but
that e Plague will in the course of a year take off many of us, as the
last Plague took away 800 out of 2000 Slaves - I hope your father
had the Jay Insured as I make no doubt you had the Cargo. I would
if it was in my power forward you a regular Protest, but you know
its impossible m this Country & I suppose one from a Slave would be
of no mportance I am very sorry for ypur Misfortune but my Own
is so much greater than yours that there is no Companson

&

[SDA. CL, Algiers, Vol. 1, Part 1, April 1785-July 1795.1
To Secretary of State from Michael Morphy, U. S. Consul, Mdaga, Spain
the 4* December 1793
MALAGA
N9 6
SIR, Since my letter N G , of which the foregoing is a Copy, I have
been deprived of a Conveyance from hence to America to have the
honor of addressing you. Captain Gooch of the Deboniar was chased
by an Algireen which obliged him to put into Gibraltar and continued
there till the 28'" of November when he Sailed with four other American Ships bound home under convoy of a portugueeze Frigate of war
destined for Lisbon: I had the pleasure of seeing Colonel Humphreys at Malaga very
soon after he sent me the express from Gibraltar mentioned in my
former letter, from hence he proceeded on by land to Alicante where
he has been waiting for an answer from Algiers to know if he would be
allowd to go and treat with the Dey of that Regency. I have no
advice from the Colonel on the Bussyness, but advices have come
here lately from Alicante that he has received a most arrogant Denial
forbidding his going to Algiers, I wish the report may not be true. By advlces from Algiers of the 4'p November I am informed that y9
Algereen fleet that Saded the 6" of October through the streights into
the Atlantic were all returned to that Port and had brought m t h them
thirteen American and three Genoeese prizes, but no list of the Names
thereof have yet appeared excepting one Capital Ship called the Hope,
John Burnham that was coming to Malaga from Rotterdam in ballast
and was met by the Enemy at the entrance of the streights, this Ship
is of four hundred Tons measurment her crew consisted of eighteen
men and two British Passengers one of which has a house of bussyness
Established at this place to whom he gives a very deplorable account
of the treatment given to the American and other prisoners taken by
them Barbarians. I t is well known that her Faithfull Majesty is much displeased with
the Algereens having so suddenly committed a breach of the truce
agreed for her with the Regency, for i t would appear that the latter
was bound not to send a Cruizer into the Atlantic until1 the expiraand the Comtion of four months after exchangeing the prelemina
mander of her naval force that was Stationed in t e Strelghts was
blamed for letting their fleet pass on the 6'p october. -

r-p

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

59

The Portugueese in lieu of calling home their Squadron Stationed
at Gibraltar, have reinforced it with two Sail of the line and three
Capital Frigates that arrived last week from Lisbon and they are now
ten sad. but the object of their having so strong an Armament is not
publickly known. some pretend to say, it is to hinder the Algereens
from passing to the westward, and others that the Truce cannot last
long whereas the Regency makes a demand of a very Considerable
Sum for Concluding a peace: - in the mean while the Portugueeze
Admiral have offered to give convoys to our Ships going from Gibraltar
to the westward as far as he can leave them in Safety under which
surity the bearer Captain Thomas Sanders of the Schooner Goddess of
Liberty bound for New York will leave this Port the first Spirt of a
fair wind: --

The interruption given to the trade of our flag by the Algereens
getting into the Atlantic, is greatly regretted both in Portugal and
Spain wblere the products of America such as flour Wheat Indian Corn
Rice Lumber and other articles are much wanted and deal of money
was making by the Subjects at all Sides I t is to be hoped Sir, that the trade and Navigation wont be kept
long in its present State and that Congress will use the necessary
means for repelling the force of those Sea plunderers that are causing
such destruction to our flag that our subjects may again benefitt of
the fruits of their Industry I have the honor to assure you that notwithstanding a Commercial
treaty has not been yet concluded between the United States and
Spain, that our flag and subjects are shewn the same priviledges and
meet the Same protection within my District as does the most favored
Nation, [NA. SDA. CL, Malaga, Vol. 1, June 1793-May 1814.1
1
1
1
1
1
2

Frigate--..DQ-------Corvetta - DQ-------Polacre---Brigs-----1 Xebeck---1 DQ-------2 DQ--------

-

Marine Force in Algiers in January 1794
44 Guns built in Algiers by a spanish Constructor
English built
36
24
French DQ
24
Levant DQ
18
Genoveese D?
each- ,--DQby the Spanish Constructor
20
20
- - - - - - - - - DQ- - _ - - - - - - - DQ
14
each---..- - - - - - - ) b u i l t on the Coast
12

11 Sail besides Sixty Gun & Mortar Boats

-

3 Small Galliots of 4 Guns each at Oran
1 Brig- - - - - - 22 Guns launched last November by the spanish Constructor at Algiers -

N, B, they carry at the Rate of Ten Men to each Cannon in the
large C o r s m - There is about twelve thousand Turks in the
Regency, every one of which is a soldier and Noble The Treasury is Computed to be worth from 20 to 30 Millions of
hard Dollars [NA. SDA. CL, Malaga, Vol. 1, June 1793-May 1814.1

60

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1786 TO 1801
To Secretary of State from James Simpson, U. S. Consul, Gibraltar

NO 19

GIBRALTAR
Qc January 1794 COPY
SIR, Having already written you by this opportunity of Captain
Saunders, I have now only to acquaint you, I yesterday received a
letter from Capt? OBrien, dated Algiers 6'? Ult9, in which he confirms that no more than ten American Vessels, were Captured on the
Algerines first Cruize, notwithstanding the reports to the contrary. I am Sorry to tell you, he advises Capture of the Brig Minema of
New York-CaptQ Ingram from Leghorn, on the Second Cnrize. OBrien Says the condition of peace to Portugal is to be, Redemption
of their 90 slaves now there, 1,200,000. dollars to the Public Treasury
600,000. ---to the Dey & Family 600,000. --- to the Officers of the Regency Ambassadorial & Consular presents, which he Estimates at 600,000.
dollars more. If this be a true representation, I am very much of Mr OBrien's
oppinion, that the truce will not be matured into a Peace. P. S. On the 6'? December the Truce between Algiers & the Dutch
was renewed for three Months by Consul Logie.
[SDA. CL, Gibraltar, Vol. 1, April 1791-Dec. 1795.1
Concerning Naval Force adequate to protection of commerce of the United States
against Algiers

Communicated to t h House of Representatives, 20 Januanj, 1794
Mr. Fitzsimons, from the committee appointed to report the naval
force adequate to the protection of the commerce of the United States
against the Algerine corsairs, together with an estimate of the expense,
and the ways and means for defraying the same, made the following
report:
THAT,
by the best information the committee could obtain, it
a pears that the naval force of the Algerines consists of light vessels,
of' different size and force, (exclusive of galleys) carrying in the whole
two hundred and eighty-two guns; and that it has not varied considerably for many years past; that the vessels (except two*or three)
are slenderly built, smaller in size than vessels of war belongmg to the
Christian Powers, c a m the same number of guns, and principally
manned with people bttle accustomed to the management of large
ships.
From a consideration of these circumstances, the committee are of
opinion that four ships, capable of carrying forty-four guns, each, and
two ships, carrying twenty-four guns, each, will be sufficient to protect
the commerce of the United States against the Algerine corsairs.
That the cost of the naval armament aforesaid, including six months'
stores and provisions, and three months' pay to the officers and
seamen, will amount to- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - $600,000
That the annual expense of the said armament, as the same may
probably be kept in service, will amount to - - - - - - - - - - - - - 247,960

.

WARS WITH BARBARY POU'ERS

61

The particulars of which estimate are detailed in the papers submitted with this report.
The ways and means proposed by the committee for defraying the
cost and annual expense of all the said armament are,
An additional duty of one per cent. on all goods which now pay a
duty of seven and a half per cent.
An additional duty of five per cent. on all stone and earthen ware,
and marble and slate, bricks, k c . imported. An additional duty of
three cents per bushel on salt; of twenty-five cents per ton on alf ships
or vessels, other t n ships or vessels of the United States; and of six
cents per ton on a ships or vessels of the United States, employed in
foreign trade; which said several duties they estimate to produce three
hundred and three thousand seven hundred and thirty-two dollars,
agreeably to the estimate No. 1, herewith.
In pursuance of all which, the committee submit the following
resolutions:
Resol~ed,That a naval force, to consist of four ships of forty-four,
and two ships of twenty guns, each, be provided, for the protection of
the commerce of the United States against the Algerine corsairs.
Resolved, That, for the purpose of defraying tohecost of a naval
armament, and the annual expense thereof, after the - - - - - - day of
------,------,
there be levied, collected, and paid, upon all goods,
wares, and merchandise, imported into the United States, and on
which a duty of seven and a half per cent. is now payable, an additional duty of one per cent.
Upon all marble, slate, and other stone; on bricks, tiles, tables,
mortars, and other utensils of marble or stone; and, generally, upon
all stone and earthen ware, an additional duty of five per cent. Upon
salt, three cents per bushel, estimating the bushel at fifty-slx pounds.
On ships or vessels of the United States, employed in foreign trade,
six cents per ton; on all other ships and vessels, twenty-five cents
per ton.
That the like drawbacks and allowances be mado of the said additional duties as are now made of the duties upon go,~dsexported from
the United States, and upon fish and salted provisions.
That a separate account of the said duties be kept.
That the President of the United States be authorized to receive,
on loan, a sum not exceeding - - - - - - dollars, to be applied towards
the building and equipment of the said naval armament, a t an interest
not exceeding - - - - - - per cent. per annum; and that the said l o a ~be
open to any individual, body politic or corporate, within the United
States. That the revenues herein before recited he pledged for the
payment of the interest on the loan aforesaid, and the annual expense
of the said armament; and that the surplus of such revenue be applied
to the repayment of the principal, and to no other purpose whatever.
That a committee be appointed to bring in a bill or bills in conformity with the foregoing resolutions.
[See Act of Congress approved 27 March 1794.1
[Am. State Papers, Nav. Af., Vol. 1.1

'lp

To David Humphreys, U. 6. Minister to Lisbon, Portugal, from Secretary of State

PHILADELPHIA,
Januury ZOt? 1794.
SIR 1 had the honor of writing to ou on the loth insfant by the
nay of h n d o n , through the hands of
Pinckney; and I shall puna-

hr

62

NAVAI; OPERATIONS FROM 1786 TO 1801

tually transmit to you the state of things a t the moment, whensoever,

I shall receive notice from this port, New-York, or Baltimore, in consequence of the arrangements, which I am taking, that any vessel is

sailing for your residence.
I did not expect to have troubled you with another letter, before
an answer was prepared to that of compliment from her Majesty.
But being just informed that the vessel expedited with the Algerine
intelligence, is returning directly from New-York to Lisbon, and that
the mail of to morrow is the last, which will reach her, I cannot neglect
the opportunity of enabling you to anticipate by your informal and
occasional interviews with the Ministry those sentiments of regard,
which her Majesty's late conduct has inspired, and which the President
will soon embrace an occasion of interweaving in the reply to her letter.
By advices from several respectable quarters, we dady learn, that
some one or other of the powers of the Mediterranean, who have
hitherto contributed to keep the pirates of Algiers in check, are withdrawn, by negotiation, terror, or actual invasion from hostility against
them. If our correspondents had been even silent as to the original
author of this defection, our general suspicions would have directed us
to the B d i s h government. But all doubts would vanish ij it be true as
it it represented, t h d a british Consul, without authority from the @een
of Portugal, has presumed to conclude a truce with the Algennes,
imposing a heavy tribute upon her, and annihilating the principal
cause of vigor to her marine.
It cannot, therefore, be too strongly impressed upon the Court of
Lisbon, how highly the President of the United States esteems the
ma animity with which that t m e , has been resisted by her Majesty,
wit what satisfaction he discerns in her o position an attention-to
the welfare of the United States - how apt y it reciprocates our m h
to bind the two natiolls more closely together; how grateful the
Citizens of the United States have shewn themselves to this instance
of her favor; and how much i t must be an object with the American
shipping to resort to her ports, where they will find such ample
protection. The arrogance of the British Consul, in forming the truce,
if he acted without orders from home, and the indignity to the Portuguese
nution, if no previous assent was given to the measure, - strike us here
very forcibly. But you, who are on the spot can alone determine,
whether t h sensibility qf the Court be enough alive, and circumstances
permzt. thud remarks of this kind may be used. I t is the earnest desire
of the President, that nothing be omitted, which is conciliato~y,and
that every thing which may irritate, be avoided.
We entertain a hope, founded upon your zeal and knowledge, that
Algiers before the receipt of this letter, will have been soothed into
terms, proper for our acceptance. But as this is uncertain, and a
peace with those, who are educated in Sea-robberies, is very unstable,
altho' sanctioned by every profession and solemnity; we ought to
obtain a statement of some facts, which we do not seem yet to possess
with accuracy. I am anxious therefore to be precisely informed.
1. What are the nations, bordemg on the Mediterranean, who are
generally exposed to the ravages of the Algerines 2. What naval force those nations have been accustomed to employ,
or can, in case of exert.ion, employ against the Algennes.
3. Is it probable, that they would associate with us, to restrain the
Algerines; and upon what terms?

f?

f'

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

63

4. Upon what terms, is i t probable, that they would furnish a
stated armament, equal to the object, without any Ships being supplied b the United States.
5.
ch of the Mediterranean Powers, who are commonly a t war
with Algiers, have been debauched from it, by the interposition of
Great Britain, or any other Go~ernment.
Portugal, however, is the best bulwark which any alliance on
our part can find against those Rovers. Let me entreat you therefore,
to enter freely into discourse with her Minister, and fix with precision,
his ideas of the mode, which promises most success. We cannot
doubt his candor; but the ascendancy of Great Britain, is too often manifested in her Councils. Hence you will impose no restraint on yourself,
in your conversation with him, except sofur, as there may be a danger of
injurious communications being made to the Court of London.
The President has instructed me to urge you to seize the present
moment for discovering what may be expected from an attempt to
accomplish a treaty of commerce. With the omen of a good disposihon
in Portugal; with the intrinsic importance of our trade with her,
increased by the multiplication of our Citizens, and secured by a
neutrality, which a convulsion in Europe, although nearly mversal,
cannot compel us to abandon; - Portugal must discover inducements
to a connection with us now, which perhaps may not be so strongly
felt, when the other nations are less engaged in war, and thelr bpleasure may fall more sorely. * * *
EDM:[EDMUND]
RANDOLPH.
[Italics indicate words written in cypher.]
[NA. SDA. Dip. Cor., Inst. to Min., Bk. 2, Aug. 1793-June 1795.1

&

To Secretary of State from Nathaniel Cutting, Lisbon, Portugal
(Duplicate.)

SIR,Knowing that Colonel Humphreys has beed very assiduous in
improving every opportunity to acquaint the Executive of the Umted
States with the steps he has taken in pursuance of his mission to the
Dey & Regency of Algiers, I have hitherto thought i t unnecessary
for me to give you the trouble or perusing anything on that Subject: - but as I had the honor of bemg employ'd by tbe Department
of State, in a subordinate capacity [Secretary of David Humphreys],
on the same mission, I hope ou will not think me impertinent @
communicating to you some o servations reJative to the busmess m
question which have occurred to me in its progfess. The only
Letter I have written relative to my proceedings m ~t was from this
City soon after my arrival here last year, - giving a simple narrative
of my progress towards Algiers, and of the circumstances which had
unexpectedly impeded it. - I beg leave to refer you to that Letter,
and to resume the subject a t the period when it is datad. The intelligence that I received soon after my arrival a t Lisbon,
and a comparative view of all the information I previously possessessed,
confirmed me in the opinion I had long entertained that the mission
to Algiers would prove fruitless. As a proof that my mind was then
imprest with that idea, I take the liberty to observe that m 8 Letter
which I wrote to John Vaughan Esq' - Philadelphia, under date
Lisbon 9*) Septl ultQ,without giving any indication of my real pursuit,

g

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1786 TO 1801

I exprest my apprehension that Coercion would be an indispensible
preliminary to a Treaty of Peace with Algiers on reasonable terms.
The Event but too fully justifies my opinion. I presume that Colonel
Humphreys has given you in detail, as far as was necessary, an account
of the slow & tedious jobb wh[ic]h I undertook a t Gibraltar; I mean
that of adjusting the affairs which the late Thomas Barclay Esq: had
at that place, (in his capacity of a Public agent.) - As he left no
books of accounts nor any regular Invoices, to direct us, I had to
proceed on such detached documents as happened to be deposited
with M' James Simpson of that City, with whose friendly and unremitted assistance, I was enabled to make the arrangement which
Colonel Humphreys has, I suppose, transmitted to your office, and
which I hope is honored with your approbation. We had to examine
and repack every article of merchandlse left there by Mt Barclay, in
order to select such as might be useful in the negotiation we had in
hand, - and likewise that we might ascertain precisely, & obtain
a specific receipt for, the merchandise that might still remain deposited
a t Gibraltar. Before this business was accomplished, we had the mortification to
hear of the Truce between Algiers & Portugud, and to see the Pyratical
Flag display'd in the Bay of Gibraltar by one of those Ships of War
which the insidious policy of certain European Powers has let loose
to ravage the Commerce of America in the Atlantic. Though from
that moment i t might naturally be concluded that our mission would
prove abortive, yet Colonel Humphreys, whose attachment to, and
zeal in support of, the True Interests of his Country is not to be
shaken by any common obstacles, - thought it indispensibly necessary for us to proceed on our expedition as far as we could with any
degree of safety to ourselves, or prospect of advantage to the United
States.
A previous step to be taken was to dispatch Expresses both by
Sea & Land to convey intelligence to Cadiz, Lisbon & Malaga respecting this unforseen occurrence, which threatened such terrible depredations on the Commerce of the United States.
Mr James S i son of Gibraltar, seconded all our opperations with
that indefatigab e zeal and activity which indicates sincere amity
and an invincible attachment to the cause of humanity. * * * * * *
We had reason to apprehend that certain British Agents, either
authorized by Government, or self-constituted in the hope of promoting their own interest by injuring that of the United States, had vgilantly regarded our proceedmgs and had transmitted such
intelligence to the Algerines as might render it particularly dangerous
for us to proceed up the Mediterranean by Sea, though under the
protection of a Flag now respected by the Dey & Regency of Algiers; - and the property of the United States aboard the Vessel,
it was thought, would pass more securely to Alicante without us, in
case of being examined by any of the Pyrates, than if Colonel Humphreys and myself were on board. For if any of the Renagadoes discovered that we were Americans i t would immediately excite their
suspicions respecting the property on board; and discovering so large
sn amount in Specie, they would probably have been induced to
disregard the neutrality of the Flag we were under, and either take
us and the property out, or carry the Vessel and all into Algiers. I t
was therefore thought expedient for us to proceed to Alicanta by

P

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

65

Land; - t h being the Port where we could have the most ready
communication with Algiers. After a tedious & fatiguing Journey of
above four hundred miles, over the worst roads, perhaps, in the
Universe, we arrived a t Alicante on the 2e November. - We found
in Mr Montgomery the American Consul there, a shady, zealous
and active friend, firmly attached to the interest of the United States,
and disposed to co-opperate in our pursuits even to the neglect of his
private affairs. - Doubtless Colonel Humphreys has transmitted
you in detail the account of his dispatching run Express Boat to
Algiers - Of the haughty and insolent reply of the Dey to the person
who acquainted him with our mission, - and finally, of his utter
refusal to receive Colonel Humphreys as Commissioner Plenipotentiary
from the United States, or to treat with him on any terms whatever.
The property which we had in charge belonging to the Unitad States,
yet remained on board the Swedish Vessel which convey'd i t to
Alicante; - and as the object of our mission appeared now to be
unattainable, it became necessary to deposite this property in other
hands. The pressing necessities of those unfortunate Americans who
had been recently carried into Algiers, a9 well as those who had been
years in Captivity there, demanded an appropriation of a considerable
proportion of the Specie. Colonel Humphreys, whose humanit was deeply interested on this
occasion, naturally judged that not on!ry the Executive of the United
States, but the Citizens at large, would applaud the exercise of his
discretionary power in applying such a sum to the immediate relief
of the suffering prisoners as might prevent their sinking under the
hardships which they must inevitably encounter. - He therefore
determined to take immediate order for that benevolent purpose. On
mature deliberation it was thought proper thus to appropriate Sixteen
thousand dollars, - as being a supply sufficient for one year, in the
course of which the Government of the United States might make such
further arrangements as should be found expedient. Intelligence
from Madrid, & the critical situation of the political Connection between Europe and the United States of America, excited some suspicion that a rupture might soon take place between the latter &
Spain: - I therefore took the liberty of advising Colonel Hurnphreys
not to leave the remaining twenty-four thousand dollars in specie,
within the power of the Spanish Government; but to authorize Mr
Montgomery to invest i t immediately in good B a s on London,
which were then under par at Alicante; -by which means it might be
transferr'd to Lisbon so as to gain about ten p: Cent whenever i t should
be necessary to re-invest the amount in mexican dollars. - My advice
was seconded by the opinion of Ms Montgomery, - but Colonel
Humphreys, no doubt for very good reasons, did not think proper to
follow it; - and postponed any final decision on the subject till he
should have consulted M' Carmichael and Mr Short at Madrid.
Therefore by direction of Colonel Humphreys I had both the specie
and rnerchandize landed; the former deposited with Mr Montgomery;
the latter in the Custom House. What ulterior arrangements Colonel
Hmphreys has made in the business, I do not know, - as he has not
honored me with any communication on that subject since we left
Alicante. - We returned via Madrid, and arrived safe at this City
on the night of the 24'? ultv -

66

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1786 TO 1801

Pennit me now to make a few observations which occur on the subject of the foregoing narrative. From the best intelligence I have obtained, and from comparing circumstances, I am fully of opinion that the English Government has
been the principal and primary cause that our mission to Algiers has
proved abortive. The Portugueze Cabinet of itself has had but little
hand in bringing about the melancholly catastrophe which has added
so greatly to the number of our suffering Citizens - to the actual loss
of property as well as to the general injury of our Trade.
The Success which the Corsairs of Algiers have already had, has
confirmed the Dey in his exorbitant conhtions for a Peace, & rendem
it more necessary than ever that the principal preliminary on our part
be a respectable naval armament. If Colonel Humphreys had been so
fortunate as to arrive in Algiers previous to the Portugueze Truce
being agreed on, he might possibly have retarded that Event, or have
contrived some means to prevent its immediate ill consequences to
the Commerce of the U. S. A. ;- but I M y believe that neither the
Logic or Eloquence of an Angel would have prevailed on the Dey &
Regency to have agreed to a peace with the U. S. A. on any of the
Terms prescribed by our Legmlature. The pecuniary consideration
was not sufficient, - no, not by some hundreds of thousands of dollars! - I wish, however, very sincerely, that the experiment could
have been tried. * * * * * *
In my opinion it would be more to the honor and advantage of any
nation which is determined to keep up a naval establishment, to expend ten times the sum in supporting a Squadron of Ships of War in
the Mediterranean sufficient to protect its Commerce, than tamely to
comply with the insolent demands which the chief of a gang of Robbers
is leased to make. !he grand principle that has hirtherto opperated upon all the maritime Powers of Europe in this business, appem to me to be not so
much the offspring of fear and avarice, as of jealousy & envy. - A
miserable spirit of illiberality has induced them to practice all the
infamous arts offinesse rather than openly and steadily to pursue a gallant warfare against those petty villains who wantonly infringe the
rights, and impede the social intercourse between different members,
of "the great family of mankind". - Each one seems to entertain the
contemptible apprehension that some other, or perhaps all the other,
Commercial Nations might profit of its exertions, and enjoy the advantages of a peaceful Commerce without being at any trouble or
expense in protecting it; - therefore each aims seperately to bribe the
common aggressor, whom they might easily Crush, - in the expectation of gainmg some exclusive advantage by it: or rather, actuated by
the despicable motive abovemention'd, no one of them is w d h g disinterestedly to promote the general welfare of mankind; - but occasionally plays off this scourge of Commerce upon each other, according
as particular passions or interests may happen to predominate. How small a proportion of the immense amount that has been received by the States of Barbary as the price of peace with this last
half Century, would support a naval armament sufficient to annihilate
their Marine! This, I am aware, would not be so eas an achievement
as many imagine; - but still I think it within the k e of possibility
if proper methods are ursued. It is not great f o ~ c ethat is so necessary
to effect this desireab e purpose, as great vigihnce, activity, p h m t ~ .&

f'

67

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

-

persevereance.
Portugal, by keeping a small Squadron on this
service for some years past, has demonstrated that the depredations
of the Pyratical Corsairs of Algiers & Tunis may easily be confined to
the Mediterranean. The Portugueze Naval Commanders though
brave, & their mariners though probably capable and obedient, yet
are supposed to have been rather remiss in pursuit of the object for
and
which they were, ostensibly, stationed in the Mediterranean;
are known to be very timid with respect to cruizing where time or
place presents any djfllculty. If the Portugueze so effected much,
what might be expected from a similar force, the opperations of
which would be directed by skill & intrepidity, stimulated by resentment of unprovoked injury, - by a
of obtaining exemplary
revenge, - and above aLl actuated by the noble desire of serving the
cause of humanity & promoting the interests of Universal Commerce! -

-

*

*

*

*

*

*

*

Another proof of the envious and .rindicti~redisposition of the
English Government towards us is the unjust capture & detention of
so many of our ships on false or frivolous pnetences. - And, finally,
to cramp our flourishing Commerce still further, and to do us irreparable injury, I am convinced that the same Government, by its
malevolent machinations, has paved the way for, and incited the
Algerines to, actual Hostdities against our nation; for the consequences of which, it is impossible in the nature of things that we can
ever obtain adequate compensation. The l a o m and immediate agent in this infernal conspiracy against
our peace and prosperity is at this instant walking in the Garden
beneath my window, with all the apparent composure & self-complaoency that can be inspired by successful villainy: Mr Logie, late
the British Consul a t Algiers, - who, unsolicited by the Court of
Portugal, negotiated the fatal Truce which has eventually wrested
from a considerable number of our industrious Citizens their Liberty,
from others their property - and from some, both: - and probably
has deprived their sympathizing Country & Connexions of the services
of many of them forever!
Mr Logie the other day in conversation
with Colonel Hurnphreys had the impudence to attempt excr~lpating
himself and the British Government from the blame cast upon them
by every disinterested person, - and, so far as I can learn, by the
Court of Port?lgul itself - for this nefarious and abominable transaction. He asserts that this Court earnestly prest lum to it; but
I do not believehim. * * *
After maturely weighing in my own mind actual circumstances and
their consequences, I feel confident that if my Fellow Citizens at
large in the U. S. have the WILL,they will find no deficiency in the
POWER, immediately to equip a naval Force that would be sficient
to defeat the malicous purposes of their enemies abroad, and be the
surest parrantee of peace and prosperity at home. -

-

*

*

*

*

*

L

*

As I have hinted above, some politicians, - as shallow, perhaps,
as myself
may think it premature to launch into the expence of a
naval expedition against the Algerines, till we have by Treaty secured
certain privileges in any or all of the European Ports. - I n my
humble opinion no other possible circumstance nor argument could
give so much efficacy to our negociations for those privileges, or any

-

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1785 TO 1801

68

other of a Commercial nature, as our having a respectable naval armament ready to put to sea. - This spirited & necessav exertion on
the part of the United States, though expensive in the h t instance,
would eventually prove good economy, - and must opperate every
way in their favor. It would, I am persuaded, preclude much useless discussion that now protracts the negociations of their Agents
with foreign Courts - it would almost instantaneously liberate our
valuable Commerce in the Mediterranean, and greatly facilitate our
intercourse with other markets where many productions of our Country would meet an advantageous sale;-and i t is evident that the
result would be a reduction of expence in some instances and an
increase of revenue in others. -

*

*

*

*

*

*

*

[SDA. CL, Algiers, Vol. 1, Part 1, April 1785-July 1795.1
To Secretary of State from Stephen Decatur, Senior, Philadelphia, Pa.

PHILADELPHIA
1 It? March 1794
SIR An Act being under consideration of the Legislature of the
United States, for the equipment of some Ships of War, to check the
depredations of the Algerines upon the Commerce of America, and
understanding that it will rest in the option of the President, either to
build the proposed Armament here, or to procure them in any way,
that he may judge most elegible. - You have promised to excuse me,
while I take the liberty to communicate such information as fell under
my notice when I was last in France. - I was a t Bourdeaux iil June
last when I saw a number of fine large Copper-bottomed Frigate built
ships, from 26 to 30 Guns - some of which were quite new - these
Vessels had been built for the East India and Guinea trade, and which,
from the situation of that Country were become useless to the Ownersmany of whom would have been happy to have disposed of them, for
less than half their first cost - I had certain information that a t
Brest, there were several ships mounting forty Guns, under similar
circumsta~lceswith those a t Bourdeaux I cannot indeed say whether
the French Government will permit those Ships to be fitted under the
Flag of the United States - but I will venture an opinion, that if this
permission could be obtained, those ships might be put to sea a t an
expence far below what such Vessels would cost here, & several Months
earlier a t sea. I am just now about sailing upon a Voyage to Havana shall be
ready on my return to answer any questions you may think proper
to ask respecting this business. I will esteem it as a particular honour, if You will be pleased to
mention my name to the President of the United States, for the
Command of One of the Armed Vessels - my character is well known
in this City, Yet should it be necessary to present a recommendation
my Friends Gurney & Smith will procure i t and act for me during my
absence which I don't expect will exceed two Months. [SDA. CL, Algiers, Vol. 1, Part 1, April 1785-July 1795.1

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS
Act pertaining to the Ravy

69

L27 Maroh 17941

UNITEDSTATES
STATUTES
AT LARGE.THIRD
CONGRESS.
SEBB.I.
An Act to provide a Naval Armament.
WHEREAS
the depredations committed by the Algerine corsairs on
the commerce of the United States render it necessary that a naval
force should be provided for its protection:
SECTION
1. Be it therefore enacted by the Senate and Uouse of Representatives of the Linided States of America in Congress assembled, That
the President of the United States be authorized to provide, by purchase or otherwise, equip and employ four ships to carry forty-four
guns each, and two ships to carry thirty-six guns each.
SEC.2. And be it further enacted, That there shall be employed on
board each of the seid ships of forty-four guns, one captain, four
lieutenants, one lieutenant of marines, one chaplain, one surgeon, and
two surgeon's mates; and in each of the ships of thirty-six guns, one
captain, three lieutenants, one lieutenant of marines, one surgeon,
and one surgeon's mate, who shall be appointed and commissioned
in Iike manner as other officers of the United States are.
SEC.3. And be it further enacted, That there shall be employed, in
each of the said ships, the following warrant oEcers, who shall be
appointed by the President of the United States, to wit; One sailingmaster, one purser, one boatswain, one gunner, one sail-maker, one
carpenter, and eight midshipmen; and the following petty officers, who
shall be appointed by the captains of the ships, respectively, in which
they are to be employed, viz: two master's mates, one captain's clerk,
two boatswain's mates, one cockswain, one sail-maker's mate, two
gunner's mates, one yeoman of the gun room, nine quarter-gunners,
(and for the four larger ships two additional quarter-gunners,) two
carpenter's mates, one armourer, one steward, one cooper, one masterat-arms, and one cook.
SEC.4. And be it further enacted, That the crews of each of the said
ships of forty-four guns, shall consist of one hundred and fifty seamen,
one hundred and three midshipmen and ordinary seamen, one sergeant,
one corporal, one drum, one fife. and fifty marines; m d that the
crews of each of the said ships of thirty-six guns shall consist of one
hundred and thirty able seamen and midshipmen, ninety ordinary
seamen, one sergeant, two corporals, one drum, one fife, and forty
marines, over and above the officers herein before mentioned.
SEC.5. And be itfurther enacted, That the President of the United
States be, and he is hereby empowered, to provide, by purchase or
otherwise, in lieu of the said six ships, a naval force not exceeding, in
the whole, that by this act directed, so that no ship thus prov~ded
shad carry less than thirty-two guns; or he may so provide any proportion thereof, which, in his discretion, he may think proper.
SEC.6. And be it further ewted, That the pay and subsistence of the
respective commissioned and warrant officers be as follows: - A
captain, seventy-five dollars per month, and six rations per day; a Lieutenant, forty dollars per month, and three rations per day; - a
lieutenant of marines, twenty-six dollars per month, and two rations
per day; - a chaplain, forty dollars per month, and two r a t i ~ n s ~ p e r
day; - sailing-master, forty dollars per month, and two rabons
per day; - a surgeon, fifty dollars per month, and two rations per

70

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1786 TO 1801

day; a surgeon's mate, thirty dollars per month, and two rations per
day; - a purser, forty dollars per month, and two rations per day; a gunner, fourteen dollars per month, and two rations per day; - a
sailmaker, fourteen dollars per month, and two rations per day; - a
carpenter, fourteen dollars per month, and two rations per day.
SEC. 7. And be i t further enacted, That the pay to be allowed to the
pett officers, midshipmen, seamen, ordinary seamen and marines,
s h d b e fixed by the President of the United States: Provided, That
the whole sum to be given for the whole pay aforesaid, shall not exceed
twenty-seven thousand dollars per month, and that each of the said
persons shall be entitled to one ration per day.
SEC. 8. And be 12 further enacted, That the ration shall consist of,
as follows: Sunday, one pound of bread, one pound and a half of beef,
and half a pint of rice: - Monday, one pound of bread, one pound of
pork, half a pint of peas or beans, and four ounces of cheese: - Tuesday, one pound of bread, one pound and a half of beef, and one pound
of potatoes or turnips, and pudding: Wednesday, one pound of bread,
two ounces of butter, or in lieu thereof, six ounces of molasses, four
ounces of cheese, and half a pint of rice: - Thursday, one pound of
bread, one pound of pork, and half a pint of peas or beans: - Friday,
one pound of bread, one pound of salt fish, two ounces of butter or one
gill of oil, and one pound of potatoes; - Saturday, one pound of bread,
one pound of pork, half a pint of peas or beans, and four ounces of
cheese: - And there shall also be allowed one half pint of distilled
spirits per day, or, in lieu thereof, one quart of beer per day, to each
ration.
SEC. 9. Provided always, and be it jurther enacted, That if a peace
shall take place between the United States and the Regency of Algiers,
that no farther proceeding be had under this act.
APPROVED,
March 27, 1794.
[Statutes Vol. I, p. 350-351.1
To Secretary of State from Michael Morphy, 11. 8. Consul, Malaga, Spain

NP 11

MALAGA
S+ April 1794 -

SIR. I had the honor to address you the 13@ of last Month (Via
Boston) which conveyed a copy of my letter NQ9 of the foregoing day
under cover of our Charge des afTaires Colonel Humphreys a t h b o n
which I hope went safe;
I have now the pleasure to write by the American Ship Friendship
Captain William Baxter Smith bound to Baltimore who came here the
2@March from the Port of Cartagane on this Continent. - I judged
it necessary for the Publick Service to detain this Vessel on account of
the evident risk that threaten'd her of falling into the hands of the
many Algerine Corsairs that are at sea, till I could procure her protection to proceed with safety on her intended Voyage; - I have luckily succeeded, and have now Sir, the pleasure to inform. you that she
goes from hence under the Convoy of the Swedish Fngates of war
Cam& and Eurydice of 40 Guns,who are bound to Sweden and will
Guard her from all Danger at my Solicitation; The advices at Gibraltar from Algiers, which are of a fresh date,
does not say any thing of new captures having been made on our Fl ;
The Ultimatum of her Faithfull Majestys determination with the -

2

WARS WITB BARBABY POWERS

71

gerines for maturing, the Truce made by English Agent a t Algiers,
znto a Peace, i t is believed will not be satisfactory to the Regency,
the ship that co[n]veyed those Dispatches calIed at Gibraltar in her
way up the streights the 13'Q Ult9, so that we may very soon expect
to hear what will result on the Bussyness; There is now a certainty of the English forces under the Command
of Lord Hood, having landed on the Island of Corsica the 6 t h february.
the earliest accounts received after then at Gibraltar, are of the 1 l ' 8
March, brought by the Aquilon frigate who left the british wlours
hoisted at Martello, and Saint Fiorenzo, and by which it appears that
the Conquest is not intended for Lewis the 17* [P. S.]
The Yt@ April - [I7941
SIR Captain Smith with the swedish Frigates having been Stopped
here by Contrttry winds, I have opend this letter to hand you the
following pleasing intelligence which I just now received from M f
James Simpson of Gibraltar dated the 3 d Instant "I have the pleasure in acquainting you that the Algerine
"Vessels did not take any American Vessel, in their late Cruize,
"and that the Truce between that Regenc and Portugal ended
"the 26 tb Ult? - this news we have by apt! Thompson who
"returned to this Bay on thursday Evening last, five days from
"Algiers - the Cruizers were all in Port - and fitting for Sea,
"but the Portugueese Squadron here u4ll of course be watchfull
"to prevent their passing the streights."
I am quite happy Sir, with the Spirrited determinations of the
Portugueese Government on the occation. the Truce, from best authority, was made without her Majestys knowledge by the Agent of a
certain Power to hurt our trade, without a cause but providence has
prevented it, and will, I trust put our flagsoon on a most respectable
footing. - I wish much for seeing our squadron in the Mediterranean
and if joined to the Naval force of Portugal it will cause Such terror
to the States of Barbary, that it cannot fail of bringing them to seek
for peace with both powers on easy terms, and for gaining the liberty
of our Subjects in slavery at Alsers [NA. SDA. CL, Malaga, Vol. 1, June 1793-May 1814.1

8

To Secretary of the Treasury from Secretary of War

[PHILADELPHIA]
f i r Department April d l . 1794
SIRI have the honor to transmit you an estimate of the quantity
and quality of Timber, Plank, Scmtlmg and Copper &c. which will be
required for each of the four largest frigates contemplated by the Act
entitled "An Act to provide a naval armament" nearly the same quantity will also be wantad for each of the thirty six gun ships mentioned
in the said Act.
I t has been decided by the President of the United States that the
said frigates be built ia the following ports, to wit
Boston- - - - - - -,
--- - - - - - - - one 44 gun ship
New York - - - - - - - - - - - - - - do
Philadelphia-, - - - - - - - - - - - do
Baltimore- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - one of 36 guns
ia ----- - - one of 44 do
Portsmouth V'
CharIeaton So arolina-- - - one of 36 do

7-Y

72

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1785 TO 1801

It appears to be of indispensable necessity that immediate arrangements should be made to obtain the articles contained in the estimate
and to have them transported to the ports before mentioned - excepting such articles of the timber as may be obtained at, or in the neighbourhood of, the said places.
The live oak and red cedar must principally be obtained from the
islands on the coast of Georgia. Some parts however may be obtained
in North Carolina, although it is alledged that the farther South the
live oak the better
Different opinions are entertained as to the most certain, and the
most occonomical mode of obtaining the live oak and cedar from
Georgia, and transporting the same to the ports where the ships are
to be built.
Some persons recommend that one or more persons in whom due
confidence may be placed, should repair to the Islands of Georgia,
and contract with the proprietors of the timber as it stands for such
parts as will serve the moulds, and that a sufficient number of axe-nzen
with their provision, be sent from the northward, in order to cut the
same, and transport it to the places where it is to be used. These
persons assert that any contract made in Georgia or other parts to the
Southward, will be executed by negroes, whose indolence and carelessness will inevitably produce disappointment or loss.
The moulds for the timbers of both sized ships are preparing and
nearly finished. These must be transported to the places where the
timber is to be cut, otherwise mistakes would arise and disappointment of course ensue.
Besides the mode before mentioned, there are ersons who recommend a contract with some persons, if such coul be found, which is
said to be the case to procure the timber in Georgia, and transport it
to the respective ports or places.
You will please to judge which of these two modes will be preferable.
I have understood that in 1776 or 1777 the frames of two 74
were cut under the authority of the United States, part at unbury
ships
and part a t a place called Eilkenny near the mouth of Savannah River,
and that as the said timber was very large, part of it yet remains it may
therefore be proper to look it up, and if it should answer for the frames
of the proposed frigates as probable it would be excellent from its
long seasoning.
I have the honor to submit to you a letter from M' Wereat of Georgia
upon this subject, the purport of which is confirmed by Brigadier
General Gunn of the same state.
The manner in which these vessels ought to be built has been under
consideration, that is whether the hull and other parts susceptible of
the measure should be built by a contract, or by a capable agent or
agents appointed for the purpose of procuring the labor and materials.
Upon enquiry however it a pears improbable that a contract could
r s this place for the one directed to
be formed with the ~ h i ~ b u g d ein
be built here. They alledge that if a contract was offered and accepted by two or more it would excite the ill will and envy of those
who had no part in it, and as the frigate would require many hands
the price of that sort of labor would rise, and that therefore it would
be in the power of those not employed to raise the wages of the Journeymen a shilling or two per day, which would occasion great embarrassments, if not ruin, to the undertakers. Hence it would appear to

f

6

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

73

follow as a consequence that if the Shipbuilders of Philsdelphia, some
of whom have considerable capitals, would decline a contract, that it
would be almoat or quite impracticable to obtain the building by contract elsewhere. If this should be so, then Agents respectable for
their int.elligence, activity, and integrity must be sought in the places
in which the said frigates are directed to be built.
The President of the United States has approved of the said vessels
being built under the directions of some agent or a ents which I presume it will be in your department to nominate to $,
I suppose however if you should find it practicable to build them by
contract, that the subject will still be reconsidered by him,and as for
myself I should find great satisfaction in a contract, if one, upon solid
principles, could be obtained.
Estimate mentioned in paragraph 1
An estimate of the quantity of Timber Plank kc. for a
~ ~ $ $ A ~ ~frigate
Y ~ of
~ 147
~ ~feet
y keel, 43 feet beam, 14 feet hold, 6 feet 9
~nchesbetween decks. and 7 feet waist
1piece for keel 80 feet long, 18 by 24 inches in middle
2
d~
55 do 1 of 18 by 30 do, and 1 of 18 by 23
1 stern post Knee as long a s can be had
1 stem keelson rider, and one for stern
1 piece dead wood forward
1 do do
24 inches by 8, 100 feet, or 2 of 50 feet
1 lower Diem stem and five pieces for keelsons 310 ft. 18 in.
square
80 floor raising timbers and crotches.
2000 feet of 6% inch wales 9 inches wide running measure
200 d o
5 do
9 do
do
do
All the plank to be a! 4200 do wale stuff 6 by 9 for decks
long as possible 60
2000 do 4 inch plank for gun deck
70 faet if possible
4000 feet scantling for carlings 6 by 6 reduced measure
do
-3 1000 do - - - - - - - . . - - - - - - - - - - - 6 b y 9
0
1 deck stem and 1 deck sternpost knee t o mizen & foremast
1400 feet of 5 inch plank 12 inches wide for clamps.
600 feet of 6
do
10 inches wide for limber streaks
running measure
1000 do 5
do
14 do inside bilge streaks do
1500 do scantling for carlings for orlop deck
18000 feet of 4 inch plank for bottom and -ling
200 good
white oak logs
1000 feet running measure of 5 inch plank 900 of 431 inch and
5000 feet 3 inch
'10000 feet of 3% heart pine plank for lower deck
7000 do
4
do
gun
do
8000 do
3
do
quarter deck & forecastle
54 heart itch Dine beams for lower deck 14 by 16, 30 to 42 f t
long
60
do
do
gun deck 15 by 18, 30 t o 40 f t
long
12
do
forecastle 10 by 11, & 12 by 13,
22 to 35 feet long
34
do
for quarter deck 10 by 11 and 13
by 14from28 t o 3 6 f t long
orlop beams 10 by 12,30 to 38 feet long
50
do
6000 f t Jersey pine two inch plank for orlop deck

Estimate of timber drc

I

74

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROLM 1785 TO 1801
170 live oak lower futhooks
174 d o
middle do
are calculated for
178 do
upper
do
four tier, but it is doubtful
150 live oak toptimbers
they can be procured
that length, if not add 340
50 red cedar}
200 cedar half timbers
2 live oak Knight heads
8 do
hrtusepiece
12 do
bow timbers
1 do
upper piece stem & I piece apron
140 do
stanchion

other$ in Georgia

I

OIleS

2 do
corner counter timbers
6 do
middle
do
-c
12 cedar half timbers
do
8 2 500 knees for lower and gun deck of live oak
*$ 130 do
quarterdeck and
b"
forecastle
do
8
do for transom
do
2
do
do standard
do
8 live oak breasthooks from 18 to
20 feet long
do
.6 pieces for partners for masts live oak
200 feet 1>$inch copper bolts for breasthooks
1600 d o 1%
do
for floor, keelson dead wood,
.and sternpost knees.
from Sweden
850 do 136
do
for stem, stern, keel scarfs
rudder and riders
1550 feet 1%inch for but & bilge bolts
7 pair composition braces and pintles for rudder
made in Philad*
16 composition dovetail plates
12000 feet of sheet copper for bottom
5000 feet cedar, 1 inch, and of half inch.
30000 feet boards and scantling
50000 locust trunnells, 18 inch, 24 inch, dr 30 inches long
I think it will take 55 men two months, to cut the timber of
live oak and red cedar, calculating 24 working days in a
month, for one ship

I

i

JOSHUA
HUMPHREYS

[NDA. Correspondence, when Navy was under War Department, 17%179&.]

[24 April 17941
To secretary of State from John Marsden Pintard, U. S. Consul, Xadeka

Honb!" EDMOND
RANDOLPH
ESQ~
I
have
but
a
moment
to inform you Via ST Cruz, that a Vessel
SIR
arnved here the day before Yesterday, from hsbon. by which I
have received a Copy of the Declaration of War, by the Court of
Portugal, Against the Regency of Algiers - dated the 10. Inst at
Lisbon,. in Consiquence of which I am informed from Undoubted
Authonty that two sail of the Line & two frigates are already dispatched by the Court of Portugal to the Streights in order to shut up the
Hell hounds, that were lately let loose on our Unfortunate Countrymen - This Intelligence altho by way of the West Inhes may reach
you sooner than any Accounts direct from Lisbon, And you may rely
on the fact - * * *
MADEIRA
24. April 2794
[NA. SDA. CL, Funchal, Vol. 1, March 1793-July 1831.1

75

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS
To Captains Barry, Nicholson, Talbot, Barney, Dale,and *tun

War

from Secretary of

[PHILADELPHIA]

War department, June 5'? 1794

SIR The President of the United States, by and with the advice
and consent of the Senate, has appointed you to be a Captain of one
of the Ships to be provided, in pursuance of the Act to provide a
Naval armament, herein enclosed. It is to be understood that the relative rank of the Captains are to
be in the following order John Barry
Samuel Nicholson
Sias Talbot
Joshua Barney
Richard Dale
Thomas Truxton You will please to inform me as soon as convenient whether you
accept or decline the appointment. [NDA. Correspondence, when Navy was under the War Department, 1790-1798.1
To Secretary of War from Captain John Barry, U. S. Navy

STRAWBERRY
HILL June 6: 1794
(COPY)
SIR The honor done me in appointing me a Commander [Captain]
in the Navy of the United States is gratefully Acknowledged and
Accepted by - * * *
JOHN
BARRY
The Honk: HENRYKNOX
Secretary of War
[NYPL, Ford Col.]
To Joshua Humphreys from Secretary of War

[PHILADELPHIA]

War Dept Jane 28.1794 SIR - YOUare appointed the Constructor & Master builder of
Forty four Gun Ship [frigate United States] to be built in the port of
Philadelphia at the rate of compensation of two thousand dollars p.
annum.
T b s compensation is to be considered as commencing on the first
of May last, - in consideration of your incessant application to the
public interest in adjusting the principles of the Ship, drawing up
draughts and making models [NDA. Correspondence, when Navy was under War Department, 1790-1798.1
[I July 17941
Captain John Barry's Oath

I John Barry do solemnly swear to bear true allegiance to the
United States of America and to serve them honestly and faithfully
against all their Enemies or opposers whomspever; and to observe
and obey the orders of the President of the Umted States of America,
and the orders of the Officers appointed over me, according to the

76

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1785 TO 2801

Articles of War, and that I will support the Constitution of the United
States --Sohelp me God
BARRY
(Signed) JOHN
Sworn before me this
first day of July 1794
RICHARD
PETERS
[NDA. Correspondence,when Navy was under the War Department, 1790-1798.1
To Henry Jackson, Navy Agent, Boston, Xass., from Secretary of War

[PHILADELPHIA]

War dept July bd1794

SIR, I am desirous that M' John Hacket near Newbury Port who
built the Alliance frigate during the late War, should be engaged as
the Constructor of the Forty four gun Ship [frigate Constitution] to
be built at Boston. I t has been decided as the best mode that the
Constructor shall be engaged upon a salary, including all his personal
expences. - Any sum therefore for which the said Mr Hacket may
engage not exceeding at the rate of Two thousand dollars p. annum
ou will stipulate to him. - I should think the sum ought not to be
Lss than one thousand four hundred dollars 6r certainly cannot
exceed Two thousand. -- I t is to be understood that there are three
Hackets, one of whom, named William I believe, and who is subject
to temporary insanity - you will of course not engage. This point
must be well ascertained [NDA. Correspondence,when Navy was under thewar Department, 1790-1798.1

T o Josiah Fox, Clerk in Department of War from Secretary of War
[PHILADELPHIA]
W ~dept
T July 16. 1794
SIR, YOUare hereby appointed a Clerk in the department of War,
s t the rate of Five hundred dollars p. annum, to be appropriated at
present to the assistance of Joshua Humphre s who is constructing
the models and draughts for the frigates to e built in the United
States, and when that business shall be finished you will be directed to
perform - Your compensation to commence the lBt
instant. -

g

[Josiah Fox's Oath]

I Josiah Fox appointed a Clerk in the Department of War of the
United States do solemnly af6rm that I will support the Constitution

of the United States, and that I will well and faithfully, to the best of
my abilities, execute the Trust committed to me in my aforesaid
Capacity (signed) JOSIAH
FOX.
AEumed the 17th da of July 1794 before me - Hilary Baker, one
of the Aldermen of ~ d a d e l ~ h i a

[NDA. Correspondence, when Navy was under War Department, 1790-1798.1

T o William Pennock, Navy Agent, Norfolk, Va., from Secretary of War
[~HILADELPHIA]

War dept July 19.1794
SIR, I have recs your letter of the 13 instant. - I have now the
honor to enclose ou eneral instructions for your government as
Naval Agent. - %he Lcretary of the Treasury will furnish you with
money & instructions for the purchase of certain articles. -

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

77

A M; Morgan, a Master builder of considerable abilities will probably be appointed to construct the proposed frigate [eventually
named Chesapeake] - he is now employed in superintending the
cut.ting of the Timber for the Ships in South Carolma and Georgia,
after having effected this object he will be directed to repair to
Portsmouth I request to know the prices at which Journeymen Shipwrights and
Blacksmiths may be obtained p. day. General and particular instructions will be given to the Master
builder and Clerk of the Yard. [NDA. Correspondence, when Navy was under War Department, 17!40-1798.1
To David Humphreys, U. S. Minister to Lisbon, Portugal, from Secretary of State

PHILADELPHIA,
Jdy 19" 1794.
SIR, From experience I know the unpleasantness which you mention
in your letter of the 6" of March last, of managing public money.
But as it is the inevitable fate of diplomatic men to submit to these
inconveniences, when they arise in the course of their functions, I c m
compensate it only by a promise not to heap such business upon you
unnecessarily. But I trust, that you will take the proper measures,
respecting the public money in M' Montgomery's hands at Alicant,
and reimburse the Swedish Consul, according to the ideas, which you
have expressed on that occasion We were fearful from your letter of the 17" of Februarg 1794,
that the important, interesting, and never to be forgotten su ject of
our fellow citizens in Algiers would suffer from the want of some person
who might embrace any favorable moment. You then declared, that
you considered yourself as discharged from the Algerine mission. But
a subsequent indication of hope, and your reassumption of the &air,
until you should be relieved, have banished much of the anxiety which
- - entertained. In truth, Sir, it is impossible to dismiss you from
was
this service The enclosed letter from M' Gouvr Morris, connected with your
former instructions, this letter and your own operations mark the
sense of the Executive and the point at which the Algenne buslpess
has arrived. Col. Monroe, the Successor of Mr Morris as our mlnlster
in France, has been written to on this subject. He has been informed,
that the President learns with great satisfaction the new testimony,
given by the French Republic of attachment to the interests of the
United States; not doubting at the same time, that it must prove
beneficial to the supplies of France from hence: that the powers derived
from Mr Morris to the Agent who was to accompany on our part, the
French Commissioner, though as yet unknown to us, have no doubt
been judicious, and the acts in conformity with those powers will be
confirmed if they be found to come within the plan hitherto adopted:
that you were however appointed to this business in a special manner,
possess a full knowledge of our views and our means, and have been
particularly conversant in our attempts for peace with Algiers: that
you will therefore instruct, if you shall find it necessary, the Agent
appointed b Mr Morris; that we trust the auspices of the French
be continued to the efforts under your guidance; and
Republic
that as an evidence of our confidence in the French Government Col.
Monroe is empowered, if he thinks proper, to impart the terms, upon
which we offer to buy peace.

A

78

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1785 TO 1801

You will therefore consider yourself, as again charged with this
important interest of our country, according to the former instructions.
A power is lodged with Messp Willinks, Van Staphorsts and Hubbard
to borrow 800,000 dollars, and to hold the same to your draught.
Whensoever therefore the money can be used in our objects at Algiers,
you will draw for it. I t must be submitted to your discretion, upon
the view of all circumstances, as well of personal danger as public
benefit, whether you will go over yourself: a measure which unquestionably would enable you to seize more certainly, than when at a
distance, one of those moments of good humour and caprice, which
the letters transmitted through you from Algiers designate as the
lucky seasons for impressing the Dey, and consider, as having unfortunately for our country escaped without being caught. If however you
find it unsafe or impracticable to undertake the mission yourself, it
will then be proper to use the instrument, selected by Mr Morris and
to instruct him accordingly; maintaining always perfect cordiality
and concert with the French Commissioner, but a t the same time not
hesitating to follow your own ideas, when they shall seem preferable;
and resorting to the Swedish Consul at Algiers, his brother, or any
other individual or expedient according to your judgment on the best
mode of accomplishing success The President has under consideration the mode, in which the 800,000 dollars may be expended in the purchase of a peace; that is how
much shall be applied to the ransom and how much to the peace The newspapers will be sent by this conveyance. The letters whose
receipt I have to acknowledge since my last are the following. N Q
117. 118. April lo'!' 121. April 20. with sundry duplicates and triplicates I should not have closed this letter, before an addition, which I contemplate on the general state of our &airs was completed; were it not
for my solicitude for our friends in Algiers. I will however add at present, that finding a loss to the United States by the exchange of bills on
Amsterdam, I have determined to remit for the use of our ministers
at Lisbon and Madrid in an order from the Commissioners of his
Catholic Majesty here on the public treasury at Madrid. I have
accordingly sent to Ma Short a draught from them for 9,000 dollars;
u on which you wiU be pleased to draw; and I shall continue this mode
o remittance half yearly, unless you should disapprove it.

f'

[NA. SDA. Dip. Cor., Inst. to Min., Bk. 2, Aug. 1793-June 1795.1
To Naval Constructor Joshua Humphreys, U. 6. Iiavy, from Secretary of War

[PHILADELPHIA]
War dept Jdy $4. 179.4

Sir, I request that ou would have the moulds for the Frigates prepared with all possib e dispatch for the purpose of being transported
to the following places, towit -

P

- 44 gun ship - to the address of
Norfolk
Baltimore
- 36
ditto
New York
- 44
ditto
Boston
- 44
ditto
Portsmouth
New Hampshire - 36
ditto

Wm Peanock - Aqfnt
JeremiahYellot
John Blagge
Henry Jackson
"

John Langdon

"

Mr Fox who is under your direction will also apply himself closely
to this b11sinw[NDA. Correspondence, when Navy was under War Department, 1790-1798.1

WARS WITH BARBARY P0Ff7ERS

79

To Captain John Barry, U. S. Navy, from Secretary of War

[PHILADELPHIA]
War dept Augt 7'" 1794.
SIR, YOUare to consider yourself as the Superintendant of the
Frigate to be built at the port of Philadelphia and which is to mount
44 guns.
Your constant attendance will be necessary for the purpose of observing t b t all parts of the business, harmonize and are conformed
to the Public interests. The Frigate will be built and equipped under the following general
regulations. The Treasury of the United States will make special contracts for
the principal materials which will be used in the construction and
equipment of the Ship. The Agents Messr%urney and Smith will provide all the materials
not otherwise provided by the Treasury. They will also excepting
the Constructor, procure and pay all the workmen and labourers of
all sorts necessary for the b$dlng and equipment of the Ship.
The numbers and qualities of Workmen and labourers .are to be
furnished by the Agents in pursuance of requisi~ionsin writrng by the
Constructor for the Hull or Master Mechamc on each branch of
equipment, but in both cases to be counter signed by the Superintendant
All the materials for the Hull not provided by the Treasury, are
to be provided by the Agents in pursuance of estimates in writing by
the Constructor, countersigned by the Superintendant.
The materials for the equipment not provided by the Treasury
are to be obtained by the Agents in pursuance of the estimates of the
Master Mechanic in each branch, countersigned by the Superintendant. The Constructor will have the immediate direction of all the workmen employed upon the Hull of the Ship - The rolls of the workmen
and of the labourers must be called every working day a t the commencement and termination of their labour and after returning from
dinner. This must be done in the presence of the Constructor and
Clerk of the Yard, whose certificate will be an indispensible condition
of payment.
The Clerk of the Yard will receive, issue and account for all the
public property. The orders for the issue of Articles for the Hull must
be signed by the Constructor and countersigned by you. The Articles for the equipment to be issued on the estimate of the
principal mechanic in each branch with your order thereon. You will as well as the Constructor be particularly careful that
none but the best materials be used in the construction of the Hull,
and you will observe the same precautions with respect to the equipment of all sorts You will also carefully observe that there be no deviations from the
directions which shall be issued with respect to the proportions of the
Hull and equipment of all sorts. You will report to me weekly the number of Workmen employed
and the progress made in the execution either of the Hull or equipment. [ N b k Correapondencqwhenthe Navy was under Wsr Department, 1790-1798.1

80

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1786 TO 1801
To Captain Richard Dde, U. S. Ravy, from Secretary of War

[PHILADELPHIA]
War dept Augt 8.1794
SIR,It will be proper that you repair to Norfolk without delay in
order to concert with the Agent every thing necessary to commence
the E'rigates, as soon as may. be with all possible vigor.I have provisionally appointed M: John Morgan the Constructor
of the Frigate at Xorfolk, but it is possible he may be delayed You will therefore in conjunction with the Agent Mr William Pennock
endeavour to find a builder capable of constructing as well as actually
building the frigate. The terms to be the best you s h d be able
to make [NDA. Correspondence, when Navy was under War Department, 1790-1798.1
To Captain Sias Talbot, I). S. Navy, from Secretary of War

[PEIILADELPHIA]
?+Tardepr August 8, 1794
SIB,You will immediately repair to the City of New York for the
purpose of superintending the construction of the Ship [frigate
President] to be built a t that place and to concert every thing with the
Agent Mr John Blagge. - Your instructions will be forwarded to
New York to the care of hfr Blagge, who wiZl deliver them to you on
your arrival there[NDA. Correspondence, when Navy was under War Department, 1790-1798.1
To Captain James Sever, 0.6. Navy, from Secretary of War

IPHILADELPEIIA]
War dept Augt 8.1794
SIR,YOUwill immediately repair to Portsmouth in New Hampshire for the purpose of superintending the construction of the Ship
[eventually named Congress] to be built at that piace, and to concert
every thing with the Agent. - Since my letter to you of l B t h ult?
it has been thought adviseable for the public advantage that Capu
Thomas Truxton should go to Baltimore.
[NDA. Correspondence, when Navy was under War Department, 1790-1798.1
To David Hnmphreys, U. S. Minister to Lisbon, Portugal, from Secretary of State

PRILADELPHIA,
A~gwt25" 1794
SIRI beg leave to refer to my Letter of the 19"pJuly, a duplicate of
which is now endosed as indicative of the Prewdent's wish, that you
should continue in the destination for Algiers. It is too interesting
to the feelings of us all, not to retain you in.&mission, for which your
experience in the subject and other quahties combine to fit you,
rather than any other person, who wuld be sent These are the instructions of the President 1. Ransom and peace are to go hand and hand if practicable; but
if peace cannot be obtained, a ransom is to be effected without d e b .
2. After endeavouring to obtain a ransom a t the lowest possrb e
rate, or a t the rate, allowed by Portugal or other Nat~ons,the least
favored; you may, if necessary, go as far as three thousand dollars
per man.
3. You will refer to the former instructions for the real wbbes of
the government as to the sum to be paid for peace; keeping in mind

9

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

81

the preference of a larger annuity and a smaller douceur in hmd,
to the reverse. But we would not break for fifty thousand dollars
per annum, and two hundred thousand dollars by way of douceur,
to secure a peace for a convenient term of years. But tho' this form
of the thin is most eligible; yet it is not judged to be a tine q.~canon.
For after a ,what is usual and effectual must decide, and the pa
in gross may be accommodated to the necessity of accornp 'shing
the object 4. If, however, by any other modification of the sum of eight
hundred thousand dollars, a peace, and ransom can be obtained, you
may modify accordingly; restricting yourself on the head of a ransom
within the above mentioned limit of three thousand dollars per man.
The President contemplates to send immediately a Consul for the
Barbary coast, who is well acquainted with Algiers in particular. He
will be directed in the first instance to Lisbon, there to receive your
orders.
Augt 26t? - After the hope, which these liberal means for the
delivery of our fellow citizens a t Algiers presented, it was with great
pain, that we were informed by your letter of the ll* June, of the
fleet equipped at h r a c h . I t is certainly a quarter, from which the
evils of plracy may be renewed upon us, even after the cessation of
hostility with Algiers. Your attention has been therefore v e q properly turned to the anticipation of the consequences which may flow
from this armament, and we wish to be acquainted with every circumstance, as it arises.
It would seem from the representations which you have received,
that Muley Solyman must keep his ground against his rivals. If on
the receipt of this letter, or rather when you enter upon the measures,
which I shall immediately here suggest, he shall be m h possession
of the ascendsncy, which he has gained, he may be addressed, as the
established Prince. For under the threatening appearmce of the
naval preparations, we must regulate ourselves, upon the probability
of his being permanent Altho' you have copies af the instructions given to Mr Barclay, I
inclose another copy of them, as containing still the sentiments and
pleasure of the President; with thxs difference, that the sum for the
recognition of the treaty may be twenty thousand dohrs, instead of
the limit of ten thousand A h/lr Gabriels, of Portsmouth in Virginia, is allotted by the President to be Consul of the United States on the coast of Barbary. He
will be expedited without delay. But a61 the occasion may press, you
are authorized by the President to name any proper person as an
Agent You will draw on Mess? Willincks &c. our bankers in Anwtsrdam
for the monies necessary for these several objects; except the twenty
thousand dollars, which may be very urgent; and therefore you may
find i t more convenient to draw on Mr Short at Madrid for that sum.
He is instructed to honor the b a s This particular letter is sent by exprey to New York, where a
vessel is hastening to sail. By another gomg from this Port a few
days hence, a general letter will be forwarded [NA. SDA. Dip. Cor., In&. to Min., Bk. 2, Bug. 1793-June 1795.1

8

gment

82

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1786 TO 1801
[about 28 August 17941

[No=.-In
a Letter Book in the Navy Department Archives entitled "Corresoondence on Naval Maim when Navy was under War Department. 1790-1798"
h e the following:
Pages 60, 61
Dimensions of the Timber and Rank for the Frigates (1794)
Pages 62 to 73 inclusive - Dimensions and sizes of Materiala for burlding a
Frigate of 36 guns. (1794)
Pages 74 to 85 inclusive - Dimensions and Sizes of Materials for building a
Frigate of 44 guns. (1794)
Signed by Joshua Hurnphreys.
Follows after letter dated Auaust
- 28, 1794, and is before a letter dated October
17, 17941

--

To Secretary of State from Peter Walsh of Dominick Terryand Company, Cadb,
spein

CADIZ20 Sep' 1784
SIR I remit you herewith Copy's of Several Letter's which my
House has just received from Algier's by a Vessel from thence, t a
Correct List of the American Vessel's taken, with the number of
Person's on board. - it seem's there are Ten still existing in Captivity of the American's that were formerly taken, This List has
been sent to us by the Swedish Consul. we have a Letter from the
Danish Consul at said Place of the 25" ult?, mentioning the several
Cruizer's to be again ready for sea; the wind has ever since been from
the Eastward, & I am much alarm'd for the safety of our Vessel's. my House has again prevail'd on the Captain General of this Marine
Department to p a n t Protection to the American Vessel's now here,
& 22 of them are toasail tomorrow under Convoy of a 74: & I have
no doubt but they d l be taken good care of
I have in a former Letter taken the liberty to mention the practice
of En lish Commander's pressing American sailor's in the Bay, which
still Bontinues. we have Several American Vessel's now to our
address which have been Strip't of their Men in this way, & are exposed to lose the Convoy for want of hands' to Man them. anable,
Spirited Consul is much wanted to redress this Evil. I forward by this opportunity a Letter I have just received from
M r Carmichael for the President
My House sent a thousand Dollar's for the relief of the American's
at Alger's early in November last.
[SDA. CL, Cadiz, Vol. 1, 1791-1805.1
[October 17941
To David Bumphreys, U. S. Minister to Lisbon, Portugal, and charged with negotisting Treaty with Algiers from Bichard O'Brien, Algiers
No. 1
POLITICAL
REMARKS,
AND OBSERVATIONS,
ON THE DEYOF ALGIERS',EXOXBITANT
DEMANDE
FOR A PEACE
WITHTHE UNITEDSTATESOF AMERICA
Recapitulation of the Terms exacted by the Dey and regency of Algiers for
apeace with the United States of America & for the Ransom of 100 American
Captives.
Vi~t
Douorr 2 frigates of 36 Guns Each Coppered at the lowest Calculation E q u d
to------------------_--^-----------------

248,000

For the Casna or Treasury the Sum of - --- - - - ------------ - - - - -- 1080,000
For the Deyn private Emolument-- -- - -- - - - - - - - - - - - -- - - - - - - - - - - 540,000
For the 24 Clase of officers of the Regency - , , - - - - - - - - 98,000
------For the Redemption of one hundred American Captives- - - - - - - - - - 354,000
For the Principal officers of the Regency---,---------------.--115,000

Firat Coat for the Peace and Ransom in Mexico Dollsra- -- - - -- - -- 2435. MKk

-

ALGIERS FROMSEAWARD.

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

These are the Terms perscribed by the Dey for a
ce with the United States
and which the Dey intends to present to $he =rim
Ambassador. The
Honourable Coloniel David Humphreyr on his arrival in Algiers, which when
read and perusued by the Ambassador, should not hesitate to Reject the whole
And Observe that his Country or no nation could ever conceive or Imagine
that the Dey and Regency would ever expect such an exhorbitant Sum, to be
asked from the U S. which is one thousand Leagues distant Over a Vast Ocean
from Algiers, and from a new nation that wished to be friends with all Mankind,
and that never armed a Coraair against Algiers
& never gave any Jusf or
offensive motives for war, tiat we were a nation much in debt. The productions
of our Country not Valuable, therefore, the U S. hoped and expected the dey and
Regency would admit them to apeace on as Moderate Terms ss those Concluded
on with the Swedes and dutch, and that he the Said Ambassador, Could only
propose to the Dey, and regency such Terms As wae in the power of the U S. to
perform, or pay, which were as ViZDollars
For the peace for 60 years the sum of - - - - - , - - - - -200000
----------To the Dey for h i Particular friendship . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1OOOOO
For the one hundred American Captives the Sum of - - - - - - - - - - - 200000 -

-

-

Thii offer to include the whole expenoes in. Mexico Dollam----- 500000
For a free gift annually in Maratime & Military Stores & Money
&q - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 30000 - Dire

Then there is a regala - as Customary on the peace, of Stores &p
Allso Ambassadorial and Consolary presents, & Money to persons of Influence which in my Opinion would amount to upwards of B t y thousand Dollars
Allso to be paid a duty of 16 per Ct. on the ranmming of Captives which with
this Statement all expences included, by Establishing the peace ransom of
Captives and setling the Consul in his post, would cost the United States
upward8 of 600000 Dire

-

*

*

*

*

*

*

*

If the Dey Gets in his usual Blustering Comvulsions of Passion. and orders the
Ambassador. to be gone from his p m n c e and depart Algiers. Obey these ordem
Instantaniously. but remember that from the fluctuateing and Variable character
of the Dey, that the Ambassador should leave some person of Coddence empower$ To Conclude with the Dey. on the Terms you offered or proposed. that
is proviso if the Ambassador. will find himeelf Justifyable to Delegate his commission or powers to persons of Confidence. and friends. of the United States,
is Mons: Skjoldebrf' If the[?] can Act without the orders. of theire Court, or
Monsr ValIier the Consul of the French Republic. or Monsr faure. none Else of
the Christians The Bockeries. Jew Merchants is a good house. for Algn of
Influence with the Dey & Ministry. and for theire own interest or to serve
themselves if Comision* The[yJ will make the Greatest exertions to Bring about
the peace for the U S The Turks might revel Kill the Dey Elect a chief. war
with the U S. the two frigates. we gave at the peace is employed oaptureing
& draging into Slavery, the American?
What can be the Dey* motives for asking such an exorbitant sum for apeace
with the U S there still remains some of Seeds or Dregs. of the p o l i t i d influence
of the britjsh on his mind, which was imbibed into him, when the[y] were all. and
all. and of jnfluence dureing many years past - and particularly dureing the expectations. on the portugeeae Truce and particularly on msertaining the Terns
of t.he peace which buoy4 up this regency with such Great expectations that
Portugal would acquise to the Demands. of the Regency, but since the Dey &
Ministry has been fully convincd that no peace with portugaI will take place, on
account of the Americans threaten[inlg to starve the Portugeese by prohibitin the
upl lies of provisions and further threatened portugal with a war, in Case o the
peace takeing place with Algjem. as jt would be Very prejudicial to the U S
the Dey thinks as the americans prevented portugal in gveing him [h]is demanda.
There Motives must be by theire looking for the peace to give me what t h e m
would not let the ortugeese give And the Dey &nsiders as the Americans is a great Commercial people. that
the[y] have Considered the extent of his Demands. and aonaider it ransom Otherwise the[yl would not sollicit. my prices current for apeace & ramom is well known,
therefore the Dey builds his demands on the U S. as he did on Portugal, * * *
he asked 3 times more then he afterwards agreed to in Mskeing the Swede &
Dutch peace
but a t the time of the Swede peace the Dey was poor and by hi

f

-

-

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1786 TO 1801

84

exorbitant demands he has certainly some inward or secret Motive for not wishing
to be a t peace with the U S. his Demands will never be complyed with by Congress. The[y] would certainly be the most dishonourableat that was ever brought
before a Republican Government to Debate on
It is worthy of Fkmark and Political Observation - that a t the period when
Bussara & Dininio was empowered on American aflairs and that our Views bem e to be Known and that an American Ambsssador. was expected to come and
put a finishing hand to the bueiness. that a t this period in order that the dey
should be diverted from tks American peace. the Spaniarde proposed. to the Dey
the prusian peace. and about thi8 time or s little after the Spanish Consul had sent
a Spanish Gaaetta. or newspaper. to the Dey, whe&in i t stated. The importations
and amount of the exportations of the U S, which by this political Lying &9
Invidious Gszetta. the exportations of the U S. for one yeare was calculated t o
amount. to 26. or 28 Millions of dollars - whether this was the Truth or not it
certainly was not a favourable Symptom of the friendship of Spain towards the
U S, but of course this information or Political Lancet of Spain had its full force
or room & i t aonwith the Dey. the Gazette; I procured from the Dey* Gulfs
tained no other interesting news - b u t this on American &airs - These part i c u l m I communicsted to Mr Carmichael & Montgomery i t was theire duty to
oommunicate the same to Congress. whether the[y] did or not I do not know Notwithstanding this information to the Dey. had the Ambassador come t o
conclude on the Tenns assertained by Bushara & Dininio. the Dey then being
poor & needy he would not extort but would conclude - but as I then declared,
on the part of the U S. was undoubtedly & Irrethat favourable Opwrtunity
-trieveably lost.
But I observe that the d a i r e of tbe Gaazetts intiliigence and frequently eince
backed by underhand Spanish insinuations and aided by theire Confederate the
British, that all must have its Just weight & influence with the Dey. and of course
he-recollects, that if the export* of the U S. amounts to such a sum 8s 26 or 28
Mlll~onsof Dollars that is in one yeare: that for apeace with this regency for one
hundred years that i t is not exorbitant in him to Demand 2% Millions

-

*

*

*

*

*

*

*

We shall take a view of the Political proceedings of the present Dey - when he
became the Chiefe or head of this Government. he renewed the peace with the
British irnd in all the principal articles. adhered to the Treatie. this he did through
fesre. knowing the English was a strong nation by Sea - that would not admit
of any Gross insult.
The same motives neceasiated the Dey, to observe the same line of conduct
relative to France, but a little weavering, * * *
The Dey when General of the Marine brought about the peace for Spain by
bribery well palmed and regalled. Signed to the treatie, to preserve every article,
but no sooner he became Dey and he finding Spain as usial Dastardly, haveing
heretofore changed theire national flag - paid Vast sums for the peace 7the
Dey considered the[y] would give him what he wants, sooner than run the nsque
of looseing all. Therefore this Very Dey thst the U S.is to leave a t his Mercy 2 5
Millions of DolIars
this Dey tells the Spanish Consul. that he can. renew no
peace with Bpain except Spain will firat surrender to Algiers the Garrison of Oran what must Spain do - acquise surrender Oran, make immence presents allso

-

*

*

*

*

*

*

*

Next the Dey renews the peace with Sweden - but sayr I shall see now, what
I get, by dl appearance, being friendly, but finding but as Ihs] customary pres-

ents, he then say* and considers that this is an Old peace. it must be renewed or
repaired. makes war. expects many prizes to make him popular as a new Dey dim pointed Gets no prizes makes the peace fills his belly a little content.
4 t h the Dutch the Dey a$eerfully renews the peace receives the Customary
but extra presents. the Dey writes the States in the most friendly manner. giveing
the strongest assurances. after the expiration of 1%years - receives the Tribute.
& presents Eats the whole. and under a pretence. of 14 Spars being indifferent
makes the war with the Dutch captures and condemns 5 Bsil make8 the peace
Got 153 thousand Sequins this was certainly for the interest of the regency. i t
waa puting money in the stuffed or cremed treasury. it was following the preoepte.
of the holy A1 Koran. the Evangelists of the Muaselmen. i t was takeing from the
infidels i t was Enriching the True Bilivera The Vinitiana had been run pretty strong. the[y] cringed bribed underhsnd &
has so fur weathered the Gale - more favourable than when the late Dey e b b
Mt the Saint of Algiers - Came to the throne whom Observed to the Vmkian

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

85

-

Comodore & Consul. that he knew his friends by the resenta theb] brought.
* * * the De declared the war took priaes and &en after the Vinitians
obtaina apeace thefy] bought i t but is threatened strong it ia old it wants Renewing
or refreshing with one hundred thou64 Vinitian Sequine The Deans *th this Regency is Very F u n c t i i in theire Regalas
or - in tbe
pa ment of t h e m tributes * * *
will Observe that it is bad n e m to the Consula in Algiefs when the Algerine
Corsairs returns to port without takeing a prize. The Dey We the hun
nay, what must I do I cannot starve I mu& Eat my friend. u I cannot
Enemies - and allso Discontent is all the officers & crews. of the Marine theb]
take no rim thebl say the[yl are a t peace with too many nations
thinlis & conjectures that the Dey will make war with the dThe 8dor Vinitiana thew two thinke the Spanish ace will be of no duration. It cannot
be me nap the Dean I stand well with the
* * *
We shall Observe that if it was a fact. or Certainty or well secured or gaurenteed
to the U 8. that for the sum of 2% Millions the[y] should have peace with Algiera
for 100 y e w , i t would under this security and Consideration be a Very Cheap and
but if secured
Moderate peace, but dishonourable to all intents and pu osee
Certainty in the run of 100 years the commerce of the
to the Meditteranian
would gain or rofit full, the sum of 150 Millions But who wfl Gaurentee this peace - where is the security. Certainly those
people will not reform. the next De would say - you gave me nothing. You
gave the other Dey - 2% Millions must have the same. do you think that I
shall observe treaties made by a dead foolish man. no Consul of the U S. agree to
give me my demanda. I am poor - the Christim nations must make me rich I
cannot take the public money out of the treasury - when I can extort
from you- * * *
Well we shall supose the United States agrees to the D e p it is well known that
even [if] we are a t peace with Algiers our flag i~ not free in those Sess we have to
obtain peace with Tunis & Tripoly and the Grand Signiors Dominions - our
peace is Eetablished with Algiers We go to Tunis ask for apeace - what is the
ansr of the Bey or Bashaw of Tunis. you know the Tenns you agreed to with
Algiera you must pay me nearly the same. we Obtain the peace with Tunis for 2
Millions. our next look out is Tripoly - and as we succeed in one place our
enemies bribes ahead of us & is allway*throwing Obstacles in our way - however
with difficulty we shall supoa we are a t r a c e with all the Barbary States, & with
the Grand Turk which b the time the olours of the U S. IE free in those Seas. i t
Costs the U 8. full 6 d d i o n s of Mexico Dollars - not mentioning our annual
Tribute as it will be Observed that those people only thinks of the Money whilst
the[y] are receiving it. next day all is forgot.
next our Enemies will try in what manner our Comerce is to be alarmed. A Dey
or Bey Dies our enemies immediatly Bribes the new Dey. to Make war with the
U S. Remember in all treatiea there is to be found some pretence for hostilities but
;i
supose suddenly 50 - or 70 thousand Sequins from fmnce Spain or ~ n ~ l a n d [has
not this Money its full weight do you think you american Politicians. but this sum
on the like instance but you lost youre ace I say yes - and Quote frpm the
experience of My Observfbtions dureing a g r i o d of n e w 10 yr Captivity [slo].
How fur would it be prejudicial to those nations that is a t peace a t present with
this Regency if the Americans agreed to the Deyr exorbitant demands for the
peace and Ransom It would be as giveing a bounty to those people for every 2 - or 4 3W8rs to make
war with one of those weak nations the[y] are a t present a t peace with. the Swedea
Deans Dutch Vinitians & shortly Spain would in Rotation of Each other loose
theire peace. and u naturally for the intereet or benefit of commerce the[y] would
try for apeace - would not the Dey to Each of those mentioned nations perscribe
those terms for theire peace which the Americans had agreed to would not the
Dey - ask a t that period more exorbitant sums for the ransom of &a Captives
then he does a t preeent for the Americans I say yes - therefore I observe that if
the Americans obtrrins apeace it is the interest of many of those nations a t preeent
at Deace to trv that the Americans obtains a t a vew moderate rate so that in case
ani of those kentioned nations ahould loose theire-peace that t h e w may hope to
Obtain theire peace on the same moderate Terms & the ransom of theire Subjecte.

-

agi

gy

UX -

f

Since the 12P October Busham hss been often up with the Dey. and discourwing
with' the Dey on smericsn &airs
Catheart Basurea me that he baa reseon t o
think that Bushara & Dininio ie the Enemiea of the U S. 6; 1s conjectured to be
rewarded on this businem by the Spanish dc English -

-

86

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1786 TO 1801

ALGIERSOduber 1794
and 10'P yeare of American Captivity
in thi~
Regency NB On all other affairs I refer & submit to youre perusal, my remarks on the
Portuges & Dutch Truce & peace - and My Observations on the affairs of the
United &tea relative to this Regency, and includeing Observations on all other
nations that is at peace or is at war with the ba~bmyStates.
To the Honourable Coloniel HUMPHFIEYP
American Ambaasador,
expected in Algiers. on affairs of importance whom I trust the Allmighty will
instruct for the Good of the U S [SDA. CL, Algiers, Vol. I, Part I, April 1785-July 1795.1

To Secretary of State from Michael Morphy, U. S. Consul, Malago, Spain

MALAGA
1Yth November 1794
NQ18
SIR, I had the honor to address you my respects the 19*) September NQ 17, after then no opportunity has offered for any Port of
the U S from hence tilt the present one of Captain Reed for New
York Since that Period nothing material has occurred with the Naval
forces of the beligerant powers in the Mediterranean that I can learn,
Admiral Hood in the Victoy is lately gone home and the Command
of the Fleet left with Admiral Hotham who by last accountscontinued
the blockade of the french Ships at the Island of St Jean but i t is
expected that he w i l l be obliged to leave that Station when the bad
weather sets in being a very dangerous Coast;
The Algerine Cruizers have ve recently put to Sea they are eight
in Number of their largest Vesse s. Two of them put into Alicante
and six have been seen about a month since cruizing between Cape de
Gat and Barcelona I dont apprehend they will venture to make their
approaches nearer to the Streights on account of the Portuguees
Squadron their e w m that keeps that Station. - Our Vessels Seldom
venture to come the ength of this Port for fear of accidents and hitherto they have been very safe in their navigation to Cadiz and Gibraltar
and may continue so while the portugueese forces continue at the
entrance of the streights. The present unsettled State of the Empire of Morocco under the
present Government of Mulley soliman the chosen Emperor of the
people of Fez and Mequinez gives room for dreading that his operations with the Christian Nations who were in eace with ye late deCruizers have been
ceased Emperor may not be very Satisfactory,
lately at Sea and it is reported that they had orders given them to
take all Vessels of such Bags as had not a Consul A d e n t in his Dominions, wherefore when I got this intelligence I instantly furnished Mr
James S i p s o n of Gibraltar with a copy of the treaty established by
the deceased Mr Barclay with Sidy Mahornet supposeing that Sohman had not it that it may be laid before him for the purpose of the
lstters paying due respect thereto, m d I have the pleasure of knowing
since from Mr Simpson That he had accordingly wrote to M d e y
Soliman and that he was in hopes of receiving a favorable answer soon,
in the mean while he aclcquaints me that he had advice of the Emperor
Cruizers being returned into Port and he had heard only of a Ragusean

7

I

&s

87

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

Vessel that they had Stopt which had 60,000 Mexico Dollars onboard -

*

*

*

*

*

*

*

[NA. SDA. CL, Malaga, Vol. 1, June 1793-May 1814.1
To David Humphreys, U. S. Minister to Lisbon, Portugal, from Secretary of State

PHILADELPHIA,
Novemf dl'.t 1794.
SIRI have been honored by your letter of the 18tp of September
last - Mine of August 25'P 1794, has come up to your calculation for
redemption; as it is understood by the President. There is therefore
no difllculty in repeating, that the terms are acquiesced in. The same Letter has also conveyed the Instructions, which you requested; and the means of executing them As to the four points, upon which you desire the explicit assurance
of government; the answer is, that Skjoldebrand's terms are to be
acceded to; if better cannot be obtained - that wood for construction,
military Stores and ammunition are not to be promised, unless it be indispensable, after every effort for procuring a peace and ransom: and
that contingent expenses and adequate assistance will be allowed. [NA.

SDA. Dip. COT.,Inst. to Min., Bk 2, Aug. 1793-June 1795.1

To the House of Dominick Terry and Company, Cadiz, Spain, from Moses Morae
Master of American Brig Jane and slave in Algiers

COPY

ALGIERS
I* Deer 1794
GENTLEMEN
I have the disagreeable new's of informing you that 4
days after my departure from Cadiz I was captur'd b an Algerine
Corsair of 24 Gun's, & a few Hour's after my Friend apq Newman
was likewise captur'd by the same ship, and arrived a t this Place the
1" Novr the whole of the American Vessel's Captur'd during the
cruize was 10 in number, since which on another cruize there has one
American Prize Brig arrived here, the Minerva of Portsmouth. we
were all of us Strip't of e a y thing, even part of our old sea cloths
on our backs were taken, and the day after our arrival here was put
in Iron's, & a chain of about 30 lb. and in that situation, without the
least Distinction was put to the Hardest Labour, and continue at the
same every day. they have since taken off our Iron's, but the cruel
treatment is too much for me to discribe. as it is uncertain if there
will be a Peace, or the redem tion of Prisoners the Dey having refused to admit of Col: HumpErey's, who is empower'd by Congress
to treat with him, (to an audience at Present and nothing allowed us
to subsist upon but bread & water, I have desir'd my Friend M:
Philips Kidder of Haverhill to ay any draft you shall draw on him
at sight for any money you sha f Please to send to me for my support
while a distressed slave in this Place, & have to re uest as a singular
favour you would advance me one hundred Spanish ollars & transmit
the same to me by the way of the Spanish or Swedish Consuls.
[SDA. CL,Cadiz, Vol. 1, 1193-1805.1

d

b

88

NAVAL OPEEATIONS FROM 1786 TO 1801
118 December 17941

To Secretary of State from John Burnham, Wethersfield, Hartford County, Conn.

To the Honb!"EDMOND
BANDOLPH
Esq:
Secretary of Stmate for America The Memorial of John Burnham late Master of the Ship Hope of
New York - humbly sheweth that he was born in the County of
Hartford in the State of Connecticut - and that at the age of seventeen years he entered into the Service of the United States in the year
1777 - in a Battalion commanded by Col: Sam! B: Webb - that
within a few months he was in an action with the british Troops
taken a prisoner and lodgg in a loathsorn Church in New York, where
in an inclement Season of the yew he endured almost every thing
but Death - & by the Interposition of his friends after about four
months he wrts released and joined the Battalion to which he belonged
in which he served for three years and then was honorably discharged after which he went into Sea Service on board an armed vessel
belonging to America - your Memorialist after a great variety of
fortune a t the end of the war, took the command of several vessels
employed in the Merchant service from New York & Virginia to
Europe - and in June 1793 he sailed from James River in Virginia
for Rotterdam in the above sg Ship Hope and after his Cargo was
discharged in Rotterdam he sailed for Malaga in sq Ship - and on
the 6t4 Day of October 1793 near the Straits of Gibralter he fell in
with & was taken by a Ship of forty four guns belonging to & in the
M c e of the Re ency of Algiers - when your Memorialist & the
people under his mrnand were carried into Blgiers & there made
Slaves, where he continued in the most abject & wretched Situation
which can be imagined untill the 2 7 t W a y of March AD 1794 when
by writing to MI James DUE Consul to his Brittannic Majesty in
Cadi he procured on loan four thousand Dollars which he paid to
the Dey of Algiers - for which together with four hundred Dollars
for the Duty freight and Insurance of the money from Cadi to
Algiers he has given his bond to the sq Mr Duf£ payable in London
on the third day of April next Your Memoralist would beg leave further ta observe that when
captured he lost almost the hard earned savings of his whole life,
having on board s @Ship to the amount of five thousand Dollars in
rnerchandize - your Memorialist is now reduced from easy circumstances to want & has not where withal to compensate his generous
& disinterested friend Mr Duff for the Monies advanced for his
redemption And he is now informed that monies are placed in the hands of the
Executive of America by the government of this Country, for the redemption of 9 American prisoners who have ben captured by the
Blgirenes - e conceives Chat altho he has found a friend who has
advanced his Redemption Money he is in equal Equity entitled to his
share of as tho he was now in Slavery Wherefore he prays that the money may be delivered to him to
discharge the mid Bond or that some measure may be taken whereby
he may be exonerated from the same or such part thereof as shall seem
Just & reasonable & he as in Duty bound will pray Dated a t PEILADELPHIA
this it?+ Decr 1794
[SDA. CL,Algiers, Vol. I, f s r t I, April 1785-July 1795.1

60

K

89

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

122 December 17941
Presents exacted from the United States by the Dey of Algiers

LAUSDEO.
The Terms exacted by the Dey & Divan of the Regency of Algiers to
conclude a treaty of Peace with his Excellency the President & Citizen
Subjects of the United States of America for the tenn of one Century
to commence from the day said Peace is ratified, an account of said
treaty being duly register'd in the Publick Register of this Regenc
Copied by James Lea! Cathcart, the Deys Head Christian ~ l e r % .
Decr 22?d1794 The Dey demands on the part of this Regency, two Frigates
sheath'd m t h copper to mount 36 Guns, 12 pounders on the Gun deck
& every way compleatly equipd &".^-

.

1

Mmicnn Dollar8

The Dey demands the United States of America to pay to the
Publick Tressury of this Regency in Six different payments
the sum of Six hundred thousand Alaerine Seauins.
*
. Value in -----1080,000
Mex* ~ o l----h - - - - - - - - - ----------I- _--- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - .J
The Dey expects for his own private emolument three hundred
-...
540,000
thousand Algerine Sequins, eq! to ..........................
The following sums to be paid to the Dey to be distributed by
him a t his own discretion
For the Deys Wife & Daughter _ - - - - - - - - - - - _ _ - _ - - - - - -60,000'
For the Deys Casnadar or Chamberlain---- 5000 - - - - - - 5,000
For the Deys two Head Cooks_ _ _ _ - - - - - - - -5000
each- 10,000
For the two Vikilhadges of the Pallace------ 3000 DQ--- 6,000
For Hadgi Omar 1.r Moorish Clark -------- 4000 DQ--- 4,000
For Ciddi Yousef 2P* DQ
DQ - - - - - - - - 3000 DQ--- 3,000
For the two Money Counters - - - - - - - - - - - - - 3000 DQ--- 6,000 * - - - - - - 158,000
For the Hodge of the Pallace door - - - - - - - - - 3000- - - - - - 3,000
For the head mooriah Chaux - - - - - - - - _- - - - - 1000------ 1,000
For the Moorish Chauxes----------------- 3000- - - - - - 3,000
For 13 Officers of Justice . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5,000
For 62 Officers of the antient Divan - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 13,000
For 125 Cappa negroes or Officers of the pay Table- - - - - 39,000,
The Sum Exacted for the Ransom of one hundred American
Captives is as Vis
For 11 Mssters & one Super cargo @ 6000 Dolls
For 14 Matea - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 4000 Doll?For the Deys Christian Clerk------- 4000
---- --354,000
For His three American pages or
Serv* @ - - - - - _ - - - - - - - - - _ - - - - - - - 4000
Do--- 210,000
For the Redemption of 70 Mariners @ 3000
The following sums are to be sent privately to the following Grandees Houses Vis
To the Hasnagi or prime Minister -------------------- 15,000
To the Aga or Generallissimo of the Turks ------------- 15,000
To the Hodge of Cavallos or Farmer General---------- 15,000
To the Beitalmel or receiver de lea droits d'Aubain- - ---- 15,000 ------ 115,000
To the Vikilhadg or Intendant of the Marine ---- ------- 15,000
To the four Hodges or Turkish Secretary's - 10,000
Doll* each . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40,000

1..

I

The whole sum exacted for the Peace & Redemption
of 100 American Captives is -------- -- -------- --------------

!2247,000 D@
The Dey & Divan of the Re ency of Algiers farther demands, that
the,United States of America sghall pay a n n u d y unto this Regency the
sum of twelve thousand Algerine Sequins in Warlike Stores timber
&". The Dey & Divan on their parts farther declare that in Conse-

90

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1786 TO 1801
-

--

quence of the United States cornplying with the above demands on
the Brival of an Ambassador Plenipotentiary from said United States,
That they will insure the United States an advantageous Peace with
the Regency of Tunis, even below their most sanguine expectations,
and wiU grant the United States every Commercial priviledge equal to
the most favour'd Nation, & will likewise comply with any reasonable
request said Ambassador may make on the part of the United States
of America - - DONEby our ORDERin the DEYSPALLACE
ALGIERS
Decl the 22@
1794
AUTHENTICATED
& SEAL'D
with the PUBLICK
STAMP
of this REGENCY
HABSAN
BASHAW
Dey of the City & Regeny of Algkre

JAMEB
LEA!CATHCART
Deys Head Christian Clerk
[SDA. CL,Algiers, Vol. I, Part I, April 1785-July 1795.1

I27 December 17941
Report of Secretary of War concerning Construction of Frigates under the Act of
27 March 1794, communicated to the House of Representatives, 29 December
1794

The Secretary of War, in obedience to the orders of the President
of the United States, submits to the House of Representatives the
following report respecting the frigates authorized by the "Act to
provide a naval armament."
That the passing of the said act created an anxious solicitude that
this second commencement of a navy for the United States should be
worthy of their national character. That the vessels should combine
such qualities of strength, durability, swiftness of sailin and force,
as to render them equal, if not superior, to any frigates %e longing to
any of the European Powers. Researches, therefore, have been made
for the best principles of construction, and such proportions adopted
as have appeared best, upon the most mature advlce and deliberation.
be constructed upon a
The largest ships, of forty-four guns,
scale to contain thirty cannons of the cahber of twenty-four pounds
upon the gun deck. The others, of thirty-sm, twenty-eight cannons,
of the same caliber, upon the gun deck. The remaining force will be
made up of twelve pounders and brass howitzers.
The frigates will be built of live oak and red cedar, in all parts where
they can be used t o advantage. These valuable woods afford the
Uluted States the highest advantages in building ships, the durability
being estimated a t five times that of the common whte oak. Besides
these woods, the best whitf oak, pitch pine, and locust, are directed
to be used in the construction.
Expedients have been devised for seasoning the plank, as expressed
in the letter of Joshua Humphreys, herewith submtted.
But the procuration of the live oak and cedar, being pf Southern
growth, has been retarded b the circumstances specified m the letter
of the Commissioner of the evenue.

6

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

91

The building of the ships has been directed in the several following
ports of the Union, in order, as well to distribute the advantages
arising from the operation, as to ascertain a t what places they can be
executed to the greatest advantage, to wit:
One thirty-six a t Portsmouth, New Hampshire;--- - - - - - - - -[Congressj
One forty-four at Boston; ...........................
[Comtitzltwn]
One forty-four at New York;- - ........................
[President]
One forty-four at Philadelphia;- - - - - - - - - - - - - -,
- - - - - - [United States]
One thirty-six at Baltimore; and - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - [ConsteZZution]
One forty-four a t Portsmouth, or Norfolk, Virginia- - - - -[Chsapeakej
The following arrangement has been adopted for the building and
equipment of the fri ates:
1. All contracts or the principal materials of construction and
equipment have been made m pursuance of law, under the direction
of the Secretary of the Treasury.
2. All labor, and inferior materials, not otherwise provided by the
Secretary of the Treasury, are to be procured by agents whose compensations are two and a half per cent. conformably to their instructions, hereunto annexed, marked No. 1.
3. The captains of the frigates are to superintend the constructio~l
and e uipment, in pursuance of their instructions, No. 2.
4. $he constructors, or master builders, are to be regulated by their
general instructions, No. 3.
It has been endeavored to take these characters from the best
qualified of their profession; and in order that the public should derive
all the advantage of their whole time, they have been detached from
all private pursuits by a liberal compensation, a t the rate of two thousand dollars per annum. I t is possible that, in one or two instances,
agreementsfor their services might have been obtained at a rate somewhat lower; but the invidiousness of the distinctions of different
rewards for men performing the same services would but ill comport
either with the invariable feelings of the human heart, or the public
service; they have, therefore, all been placed upon the same footing.
A clerk to each yard, or place of building, ~sto receive, issue, and to
account for, all public property belonging to the ship, according to his
instructions, No. 4, at the rate of seven hundred and fifty dollars per
annum.
The progress which has been made in the business is generally stated
in the letter of the Commissioner of the Revenue, and the letter of
the captains and constructor of the port of Philadelphia, herewith
submitted.
I t is to be understood that no ex enses were authorized until the
appropriation of the 9th day of June ast, although the act for building
the fngates was passed the 25th day of March.
That few or no materials of any sort, either for construction or
equipment, existed in their proper shape.
That every thing, H not to be created, was to be modified. That
the wood of which the frames were to be made was standing in the
forests; the iron for the cannon lying in its natural bed; and the flax
and hemp, perhaps, in their seed. That the materials will be soon
collected, and the building vigorously pushed, so that the frigates,
according to the o inions contained in the documents herewith submitted, mag be &at in the course of the year one thousand seven
hundred and ninety-five.

f

P

92

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1786 TO 1801

That, from the expenditures hitherto made upon the naval armament, no accurate judgment can be formed a t present what further
sums, if any, will be wanting to complete the same.
It is respectfully suggested, that the idea contained in the letter of
the C o d o n e r of the Revenue, respecting the publicity of some of
the measures upon this subject, merits considerahon.
AU which is respectfully submitted.
H. KNOX,Secretary of War.
Department of War,
December %7'th, 179.4,
[Am. State Papers, Nav. Af., Vol. 1, pp. 6-8.1
To Secretary of State from James Simpson, U. 6. Consul, Gibraltar

GIBRALTAR
1lYP February 1796
SIR,I had the honor of addressing you (47) yesterday, as this by
way of Cadiz, and have now the unpleasant task of imparting the
result of my friend's enquirys a t Muley Taib, which is that vessels of
the United States will not be in Security from Muley S o b a n ' s
Cruizers, until1 arrival of an Ambassador: - unpleasant as this is,
it's better to be known, than continue in the State of uncertainty we
were, and I shall in consequence take the most immediate measures
for conveying the intelligence to All Ports in this Country, as well
as Portugal and England. I shall now very anxiously wait answer to the last letter I wrote
Muley Soliman, of which NQ 47 conveyed you copy - unless that
moves him to give the Sollicited orders to the Captams of his Cruizers,
much fear they wiU continue their Endeavors to interrcept
vesse
Ive? s of the United States until1 a peace be made. The Brig carried to Tangisr having been clearly proved to be
English, has been released, and arrived here this morning. -

NQ48

[SDA. CL, Gibraltar, Vol. I, April 1791-Dec. 1795.1
Xeslr~geof President George Washington to the Congress of the United Staten

UNITED
STATES,
February 68,1796.
Gentlemen of ths Senate and of the House of Represenfatives:
In my h t communication to Congress, during theif present session,
I gave them reason to expect that "certam circumstances of our intercourse with foreign nationsJ' would be transmitted to them. There
was at that time every assurance for believing that some of the most
important of our foreign a B h would have been concluded, and others
considerably matured, before they should rise. But, notwithstanding
I have waited until this moment, i t has so happened that, either from
causes unknown to me, or from events which could not be controlled,
I am yet unable to execute my original intention. That I may, however, fulfil the expectation pven, as far as the actual situation of
things will, in my judgment, ermit, I now, .5ncmJidem,lay before
Congress the following gener'a! statement:
Our minister near the French republic hm urged compensation for
the injuries which our commerce has sustained from captures by
French cruisers, from the nonfulfilment of the contracts of the agents
of that republic with our citizens, and from the embargo at Bordeaux.
He has also pressed an allowance for the money voted by Congress for

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

93

relieving the inhabitsnts of St. Domingo. I t affords me the highest
pleasure to inform Congress that perfect harmony reigns between the
two republics, and that those claims are in a train of being discussed
with candor, and of being amicably adjusted.
So much of our relation to Great Britain may depend upon the
result of our late negotiations in London, that, until that result shall
arrive, I cannot undertake to make any communication upon this
subject.
After the ne otiation with Spain had been long depending, unusual
.
and unexpeete embarrassments were raised to interrupt its pro
But the commissioner of His Catholic Majesty near the United tates
having declared to the Secretary of State, that, if a particular accommodation should be made in the conducfing of the business, no further
delay would ensue, I thought proper, under all circumstances, to send
to.His Catholic Majesty an envoy extraordinary, specially charged to
brmg to a conclusion the discussions which have been formerly
announced to Congress.
The friendship of Her Most Faithful Majesty has been often manifested in checking the passage of the Algerine corsairs into the Atlantic
Ocean. She has also furnished occasional convoys to the vessels of the
United S t a b , even when bound to other ports than her own. We
may, therefore, promise ourselves, that as, in the ordinary course of
things, few causes can exist for dissatisfaction between the United
States and Portugal, so the temper with which accidental difEculties
will be met on each side will speedily remove them.
Between the Executive of the United States and the Government
of the United Netherlands but little intercourse has taken place during
the last year. It may be acceptable to Congress to learn that our
credit in Holland is represented as standing upon the most respectable
footing.
Upon the death of the late Emperor of Morocco, an agent was
despatched to renew with his successor the treaty which the United
States had made with him. The agent unfortunately died, after he
had reached Europe, in the prosecution of his mission. But, until
lately, it was impossible to determine, with any degree of probability,
who of the competitors for that empire would be ultimately k e d in
the supreme power. Although the measures which have been since
adopted for the renewal of the treaty have been obstructed by the disturbed situation of Amsterdam, there are good g r o ~ d for
s presuming,
as yet, u on the pacific disposition of the Emperor in fact towards the
United tates, and that the past miscarriage will be shortly remedied.
Congress are already acquainted with the failure of the. loan attempted in Holland for the relief of our unhappy fellow-citiz~nsin
Algiers. This subject, than which none deserves a more affectionate
zeal, hm constantly commanded my best exertions. I am happy,
therefore, in being able to say, that, from the last authentic accounts,
the Dey was disposed to treat for a peace and ransom, and that both
would in all probability have been accomplished, had we not been
disappointed m the means. Nothing which depends upon the Executive shall be left undone, for carrying into immediate effect the
supplementary act of Congress.

f

8

[Am. State Papers, Foreign Rel., Vol. 1.1

r

94

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1785 TO 1801
To President George Washington from Secretary of War

[PHILADELPHIA]
The PRESIDENT
W . D.March 14. 1795
SIR, Solicitous to retain in the Public service so estimable an
officer as Captain Dale, I wished to place, the indulgence he requests
on such ground as might save that service from injury & afford a
justification to the Executive of the United States in granting him a
furlough.
Cap, Dale will undoubtedly return from China in full time to take
command of the frigate to which he has been appointed. The superintending of her while building may be committed to
Captain Samuel Barron as soon as he returns from Sea, and in the
interim to his uncle Cap-obert
Banon. Both are of Norfolk
experienced Seamen, & recommended by the Agent Mr Pennock &
others. Samuel Barron is a Candidate for s, first Lieutenantcy in the
Navy; & will feel a peculiar interest in performing attentively the
office of Superintendant. - Cap; Dale will compensate them for the
services they render in his stead.
Caps Barry & Cap? Truxton have engaged to afford every advice &
assistance that may be required, relative to Cap*Dale's frigate during
his absence.
Under these circumstances I have thought i t would be expedient
that Cap1 Dale should be indulged with a furlough, during the time
necessary for performing his intended voyage to China; otherwise
an officer so universally & high1 valued & esteemed will be forever
lost to the Naval service of the 6nited States. On communicating the matters here stated to Genl &ox, I have
the pleasure to find his opinion entirely concurring with my own.
Should the reasons, Sir, appear satisfactory to you, I shall beg to
be honored with your determination as early as may be convenient. Captain Dale, had an expectation of sailing Tomorrow. [NDA. Correspondence, when Navy was under War Department, 1790-1798.)
To David Humphreys, U. 6. Minister to Lisbon, Portugal, and in charge of
negotiations with Barbary Powers, from Secretary of State

[PHILADELPHIA]
Department of State, March 98*."1796.
Instructions to Colonel DAVIDHUMPHREYS,
SIR The instructions heretofore communicated to you in several
letters from the office of the Department of State, respecting the
negocirttion with the Dey of Algiers &c: for concluding a treaty of
peace and liberating our Citizens from captivity, contain the sentiments of the President on those subjects, and will serve accordingly
for your general government. If we should not be able to make a
Treaty, comprehending all the articles contained in our Treaty with
Morocco; we must acquiesce in the liberation of our Citizens and a
Treaty of Peace only.
With respect to Morocco, it is proposed to obtain from the Prince
Muley Sol~rnm,a recognition of the Treaty between the United
States and his father the former Emperor. This you will endeavour
to effect if possible for twenty thousand Dollars; but if you shall find
that i t cannot be accomplished under twent five thousand Dollars,
you are authorised to go to that amount.
negotiation you may

I%is

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS
-

95

-

either accomplish yourself, or by such Agency you ahall deem best
calculated for the purpose, according as you shall find the state of
sirairs in Morocco, upon your arrival in Europe.
For want of more particular knowledge of Tunis and Tripoli, you
can only be informed generally, i t is the instruction of the President,
that Treaties of Peace should be concluded between the United
States, and each of those States, upon as nearly similar principles to
those contained in the Treaty between the late Emperor of Morocco
and the United Stafes, as the circumstmces will dlow, or upon such
general friendly terms as the existing state of affairs may seem to
Justify. - Provided 6 Treaty with each one of the said States can
be concluded for the sum of twenty five thousand Dollars in money or
presents. Joseph Donaldson Junior is named by the President tbs
Consul to those two States. He will of course be employed as Agent
to negotiate with them, unless circumstances should make it necessary for you to proceed up the Mediterranean. In case of the death,
sickness or inability of the said Joseph Donaldson Junior, you are
authorised to appomt such A ent for the purpose as you shall judge
proper. - In the first place, %owever,it is expected that Mr Donaldson will (if deemed necessary) be employed in an Agency with Mr
Pierre Eric Skjoldebrand (now named m Consul of the Umted States
for Algiers) in ascertaining and agreeing upon the provisional or p r e
liminary terms of a Treaty with Algiers; and in causing (under your
directions and instructions) the money appropriated by law for that
purpose, to be paid a t Algiers, in the manner which shall be agreed
upon. Mr Donaldson while employed on these Agencies, will be
allowed by the United States his expenses and one hundred Dollars
per month. After he shdl be established as Consul, he will be entitled only to the sdary limited by law. - As it is conceived that
Phili Sloan (second mate of CaptQOBrien's vessel when taken by
the gerines and lately returned from slavery) will be a very useful
man on this service, he may be employed as Interpreter and Messenger
accordingly. - In addition to his outfits, as furnished by the Purveyor of the United States he will be allowed his expenses - and
twenty six dollars per month, that being the pay of a first Mate of a
revenue cutter in the service of the United States Ms Pierre Eric Skjoldebrand is named Consul of the United States
for Algiers, to whom you will transmit the Commission accordingly.
If Captq Hans Heissel should accept the Consulship for the territories of Morocco, under the dominions of the Prince Muley SoIimaa,
to reside a t Tangier or such place w i t l h the same as shdl be named
you will cause the Commission to be delivered to him accordingly otherwise you will retain the same and give information to the
Executive The funds, appropriated b Law for Barbary affairs, are placed
under your controul. You
obtain information of the particulars
thereof from the Secretary of the Treasury. You will correspond with
Messq John & Francis Baring and draw upon them (in order to remit
to the Barbary States in money, presents or bills) for such sums as
may be necessary (in conformity to our +structions) for the negoaations t c : with Algiers, Tunis and ri oh In sddition to the presents which will pe carried from this port and
those at Gibraltar (intended for the Morocco negotiation) you will
draw for the money belonging to the United States in the hands of

A

&

F

96

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1786 TO 1801

Messr! John Bulkeley and Son of Lisbon, and such further sum from
the money belonging to the United States in the hands of Mr Robert
Montgomery, Consul of the United States a t Alicant, as to make the
whole amount equal to the sum before specified, to be applied to the
Morocco negociation, viz, Twenty five thousand Dollars. - A letter
is given to you for Mc Montgomery, for placing the whole public property in his possession under your controul, as appears necessary from
the tenor of his receipt for the same. The residue of that property
may be applied to the Barbary negociations, according to your
instructions You d endeavour to state in as satisfactory and clear amanner as
the nature of the circumstances will admit, the application of the public
money or property appropriated for Barbary affairs wFch may come
into your management, under your Commissions or these mst~ctionsand you will endeavour to keep the Executive as regularly Informed
as may be of the state of these negociations [NA. SDA. Dip. Cor., Inst. to Min.,Book 2, Aug. 1793-June 1795.1

[30 March 17951
To the Emperor of Morocco from President George Washington

GEORGE
WASHINGTON,
PRESIDENT
OF THE UNITED
STATES
OF AMERICA,
To His Imperial Majesty the Emperor of Morocco.
Being desirous of establishing and cultivating peace and harmony
between our nation and his Imperial Majesty theEmperor of Morocco,
I have appointed David Humphreys, oneof our distinguished citizens,
a commissioner plenipotentiary, giving him fu! power to negotiate
and conclude a treaty of a m t y and commerce m t h you. And I pray
you to give full credit to whatever shall be delivered to you on the
part of the United States by him, and particularly when he shall assure
you of our sincere desire to be m peace and friendship with you and
your people. And I pray God to give you health snd happiness.
Done at Philadelphia, this thirtieth day of hfarch, one thousand
seven hundred and ninety-five, and in the meteenth year of the
independence of these States.
G. WASHINGTON.
By the President of the United States of America:
EDM.RANDOLPH,
Secretary of State.
[Am. State Papers, Foreign Rel., Vol. 1.1
To David Humphreye, U. S. Minister to Lisbon, Portugal, and in charge of
negotiations with Barbary Powers, from Secretary of State

[PHILADELPHIA]
Department of State, April Q!' 1796.
SIRIn addition to the instructions of the 28%ultimo, you are hereby
authorized to associate or not Mr Donaldson and Mr Skjoldebrand in
the negotiation a t Algiers: to employ Pvlr Donaldson alone therein, if
you thmk proper: and to withhold Mr Skjoldebrand's Commission or
cause i t to be delivered, as may seem best. - On my part I will
remove the idea of indelicac towards the French Republic, by
sssigning to our Minister a t aris the reason, why an attempt to
negotiate was made in the first instance without their aid. But it is

5

97

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

supposed proper and is therefore recommended to you, to proceed as
early as possible to France, for the purpose of obtaining the cooperation of that government in this negotiation.
[NA. SDA. Dip. Cor., Inst. to Min., Bk 2, Aug. 1793-June 1795.1
To Secretary of State from Robert Montgomery, U. 6. Agent, Alicante

ALICANTE
2 May 1795.
SIR I had the honour of addressing your Excellency under the 14
ultimo, to which have only to add that the boat sent by Captain
Heysell to Algiers is returned but without bringing him any answer
to his letter to the Dey, but for this he consoles hunself in his usual
way and has now recourse to the expectation of a large Packet from
him Via Carthagena by k t oppertunity
I have by this Vessel of Heysells received several letters from
Algiers, in perticular from Mr Valliere the French Consul and from the
first Secretary to the Dey, these agree in advising what I had apprehended, that Heysell's letter had given Very great ofence to the Dey
who called it audacious impudence, and say that only by assuring
him that this was a peice of oficious folly in the Dane he could be induced to lave thin s m Statu[s]Quo as when Colonel Humphreys sailed
for America, the 8 e y will wslt for the return of that Gentleman but
not listen to any Overtures from this man who he calls imposter and
says his designes were to ruin pur affairs in Algiers, thus we may
congratulate our selves with h a m 3 escaped with so little harm, and
I trust i t will never be agam m h s power to do so much
I cannot yet conceive what could be this mans designs in precipitateing the business, whether in order to supplant his friend Humphrey~(who brought him to light) or as the Dey alledged to ruin the
business and prevent our sharing the Trade of the Medeterranian with
his Country men, or elce from IS gross Ignorance of Business and Vain
of what he thought his appointment which he published with the
greatest secrecy to All who knew him he could not contain his desere
of becoming conspicuous, but certain l t is that contrary to my best
advice and warmest remonstrances contrary to Writen orders which
I had received from Mr Humphreys and contrary to every thing that
good Sence or prudence could dictate he sent forward his letters the
purport of which he totally concealed from me, I should not have
dwelt so long on this subject but the unpertance of it was great and I
trust your Excellency d thmk that t$o the whole transaction I
hare faithfully endeavoured to comply m t h my duty
A Cruiser belonging to Or?n of 10 [or 181 guns and 150 is now
here She has yet made no pnze
[NA. SDA. CL, Alicante, Vol. 1, Aug. 1788-Dec. 1834.1
TO W i a m Pennock, Navy Agent, Norfolk, Va., from Secretary of War

[PHILADELPHIA]
W . 0. May l.@ 1796.
SIR, The bearer is Mr Josiah Fox who for near a year past has
been employed in the Navy .department in this city, assisting Mr
Humpheys the Constructor m makmg the draughts & moulds for
the frigates. He is handsomely spoken of b Mr Humphre
who
thinks there are few men in this Country equa y qu&ed in
line.

f

tg

98

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1785 TO 1801

Mr Fox's good character & professional skill, render him a valuable
acquisition to the U. S.; & I beg leave to recommend him to your
attention. The absence of M' Morgan, who was destined to construct the
frigate to be built at Norfolk in Virginia, has induced me to send Mr
Fox to that place as an Assistant Constructor; & who will be able to direct with certainty the application of the draughts & moulds in
fashioning all the timbers & building the Ship. [NDA. Correspondence, when Navy was under War Department, 1790-1798.1

[18 May 17951
To Joseph Donaldson, Junior, U. 8. Agent, Algiers, from David Humphreys,
U. S. Minister to Lisbon, Portugal, and in charge of negotiations with Barbary
Powers

(Secret & confidential)
I
You will be pleased to proceed to Algiers, without d e l ~ in
,
order to deliver the letters herewith committed to you, and partic arly
that addressed to the Consul of France, who has on a former occasion
offered us his friendly assistance & who is now most earnestly solicited
to use his best influence in favour of our negotiations with the Dey &
Regency.
If, upon conferring in a confidential & secret manner with the
Consul of France, you shall fmd that a Treaty can be effected within
the limits of the Sums mentioned in the enclosed Extract of a letter
of the 16" of Aug? last from Algiers, marked NQ1. (or upon better
terms if they can be obtained, and which you will endeavour to
obtain if possible) - or for the amount of the Sum appropriated by
Law for the purpose (as specified in the enclosed Memorandum, marked
NQ2.) you will proceed to arrange & agree upon a Provisional Treaty.
That is to say, a Treaty providing, that the liberation of our Citizens
in Captivity at Algiers shall take effect, as soon as the Money can be
paid according to agreement. If this object should be so far accomplished, i t will then be necessary for you to come to Lisbon, with as
much expedition as possible, for the purpose of transferring the Money,
which it is hoped & expected may be in readiness by that time or very
shortly afterwards. The more haste is urged on this occasion because
it is most ardently wished that we may be enabled to extricate our
Citizens from Slavery, if it be by any means practicable, before they
shall again be visited by that dreadful scourge of Heaven, the Plague.
The early liberation of these unhappy men from their present distressing & perilous condition is considered to be an object too dear &
too interesting to all the feelings of humanity, to admit of one moment's delay. - even of that delay which would in the first instance
be requisite to concert with the Government of France (as we contemplate to do immediately, and as we flatter ourselves from their
friendly dispositions & intimations we shall be able to do) such measures as may be efficacious for giving success to our negotiations with
Algiers, Tunis & Tripoli.
But if, by your confidential & secret conferences with the Consul of
France, you should find, that, in aJl probability, a Treaty can not be
by any means effected, at the time when you may be a t Algiers,
within the limits before alluded to, you
carefully abstain from
making any propositions or overtures whatsoever, and appear as a

99

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

rivate Person, who, under Sanction of a Flag of Truce, is the bearer of
Etters &9 - And, after having gained all the information you can
acquire from the Consul of France & other Persons friendly to the
interests of the United States, you will come to Lisbon, as expeditiously
as may be, in order to our prosecuting the farther measures proper to
be pursued, in this thorny business; in consequence of the m a n g e
ments which shall in the mean time have been made in France. Bs
you will perceive, from what has already been intimated, that we have
great reason to expect the friendly and efficaciousco-operation of the
French Republic in our Barbary negotiations, & particularly with those
States, where we have not hitherto had Treaties established; you will
be pleased to keep this expectation constantly in mind, and act entirely with the privity & concert of the Agents or Consuls of that
Republic accordmgly.
In case of forming a Provisional Treaty, it is wished that it may be as
nearly conformable to the Draught herewith delivered to you as the
circumstances will &ow. But we must acquiesce with having the
negociation terminate in the liberation of our Citizens & a Treaty
of Peace & Friendship only, if nothing farther can be obtained.
Philip Sloan, who is lately returned from captivity in Algiers, & who
appears to be well acquainted with the Dey, will attend you as Interpreter and Messenger, and be employed in such manner as you shall
judge advisable: - he being engaged in the service of the United
States for the purpose, at the rate of twenty Six Dollars p: Month &
his expences; which you will be pleased to pay from the fund allotted
therefor in the next Article
During the time you may be employed on this Agency (that is to
say, previous to your commencing to act under your Commission as
Consul for Tunis or Tripoli) you will be allowed by the United States
at the rate of one hundred Dollars pr Month & our expences. A
Credit on M' James Simpson, Consul of the United tates at Gibralter,
is herewith given to you for the pay & expences of yourself & Philip
Sloan: who has received his monthly pay to the first of June next. The circumstances of the United States require such aconomy as may
consist with conveniencey, decency & propriety, and which is accordingly recommended. At the same time, lt is dso requested that the
Statement of your Account together with the Vouchers for Expenditures, should be as accurate, clear & satisfactory as possible.
I t will not escape your attention that the greatest possible secrecy
ought to be preserved. I t is requested that you will keep the Secretary
of State (if you should have good opportunities of writing direct1 to
him) and myself, as fully advised of your proceedings, as the
culties of conveyance and other circumstances may permit: taking the
best precautions to prevent any important events relating to Barbarg
afTairs from falling into the possession of the Individuals or the Agenta
of Nations, not friendly to our interests. You are therefore authorised
to incur such expences on account of the
States in em loying
Messengers or Expresses as you ma conceive, m your best ju gment,
the service of the united States sha% r e q m .
Given at Gibraltar this 18Q day of May 1795.

8

&-

a

D[AVID]
H[UMPHREYS]
INA. SDA. Disp. Spain, Vol. 3, 1795-1797.1

100

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1786 TO 1801
[Enclosure No. I]

Extract from a letter from Algiers dated August 16, 1794

NQ1 Memorandum.

Translation.

As to the first, I think I can tell nearly what a Peace will cost; that
is to say, to the Dey himself 200,000 Piastres fortes of Spain. to the
Treasury (either in Money paid in hand, or timber for construction)
50,000 Dollars-to t.he first Lords & the Relations of the Dcy 100,000Consulnr Present in Jewels, Cloths &9 to the value of 30,000 - the
Redemption of all the Slaves from 200, to 250,000 Dollars - in the
whole between 6 & 700,000 Piastres fortes - and every year a Present
of Ammunition or of Timber for Construction to the value of 25 to
30,000 Piastres fortes - and also, every two years, a Consular Present
to the amount of about 9 or 10,000 Dollars.
[NA. SDA. Diap. Spain, Vol. 3, 17951797.1
[Enclosure No. 21

NQ2 - h4emorandum.
The Sum lately appropriated by Law, by the Legislature of the
United States of America, for Barbary Affairs is 800,000 Dollars. Deducting from this Sum the probable diminution, by transmitting
& converting a Loan of a particular description into hard Money the application of a part of it (according to Instructions) to the other
Barbary States - together with the possrble loss of Exchange or cost
of transferrence - it will then remain to be ascertained how far the
Nett amount of the appropriation to this particular object, may correspond with the preceding Est.imate. In case of success, it would be extremely interesting for us to know,
whether Bills on Leghorn, Gibrtilter, Cadiz, Lisbon, or any commercial Place will answer the purpose, or whether Dollars must
actual1y be transported to Algiers.
[NA. SDA. Disp. Spain, Vol. 3, 1795-1797.1

[21 May 17951
To James Simpson, U. S. Consul, Gibraltar, and Agent at Tangier, from David
Hnmphreys, U.6. Minister to Lisbon, Portugal, and m charge of negotiations with
Barbary Powers

(Secret & confidential)
SIR. After you shall have received the necessary advices now espected from Barbary, You will proceed as expeditiously as may be
to Tangier, or such other Port in the Empire of Morocco as you shall
judge most convenient for carrying into effect the Agency committed
to yo11. In accomplishing this business (as defined in the authentic
Documents & Powers herewith put into your hands) You will endeavour to c o n h e the expenditure, in addition to the Arms, Military
Stores & other Presents allotted for this purpose according to the
annexed Invoices, to as small a sum in money as the nature of the
circumstances will admit: always remembering, and, if occnsion shall
require, alledging that our circumstances are very dfferent from those
of the other Nations of the Earth. Indeed our pecuniary resources
are a t this time so limited that it would not be eligible to exceed the
small fund this day placed at your disposal by my Bills on Mess?

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

101

John Bulkeley & Son of Lisbon. In short, the less money shall be
thus applied, the better - provided the business can be effected, as
I hope it may by means of the Presents. - As economy is most
essentially requisite in all the public transactions of the United States,
and more particularly so with regard to all transactions with the
Barbary States in order to avoid improper Precedents for the future.
I t is hoped & believed that the little Supply of Arms & Military
Stores will be particularly useful & agreeable to his Imperial Majesty.
Even this little Present has the merit of being the result of more
exertion than might be supposed, as we have but too much occasion
for such articles ourselves on account of our war with the Natives of
America. But conceiving that such articles would be peculiarly acceptable to the Emperor in his present situation, we have notwithstanding the inconvenience to ourselves spared them accordingly, and
hope as a token of our hearty good will they may tend, very much
to conciliate his particular friendship for the United States. In the
distribution of the other Presents, you must be governed in a great
degree by your own knowledge of the Country & the Customs prevalent on similar occasions: a t the same time endeavouring to avail
yourself of the experience of others, and especially to obtain such
information from the Swedish & Danish Consuls as to the best mode
of proceeding, as may render your conduct most honorable to yourself & beneficial to the United States.
On a former occasion, it was suggested to the late M; Tho-arclay,
that, in the distribution of Presents, he would treat Francisco Chiappe
(who was thought to have deserved well of the United States & who
had exhibited an Account of 394 Dollars of expenditures against them)
so liberally as not only to cover that demand, but to go beyond it in
such a manner as to fix him deeply in our interest. This, however,
to be done without recognising the Account, as our Laws oppose the
application of Money so informally. To other Persons who might
have claims, or pretend to have them, without having been in any
manner employed, i t was not judged advisable to pay the same regard.
To these original instructions I request your attention. The reason
originally assigned, being, "the money which would make one good
friend, divided among many would produce no attachment".
You will be pleased to exhibit as clear a Statement as possible
(with such Cerhficates or Vouchers as the nature of the business will
admit) of the application of all the public Money or Property put
into your charge for the purposes of your present Agency.
You will be allowed by the United States of Arnenca all the necessary expences attending the transaction of this business, and a t the
rate of one hundred Dollars pr Month while employed upon it.
The form of the Treaty, Act or Instrument of recognition, by which
his Imperial Majesty Muley Soliman will renew or recognise the
Treaty made by the United States of Ameiica with his father Sidi
Mahomet (according to the Copy of the original Treaty given to
you) may either be in conformity to the Sketch herewith delivered
to you, or of any other due form & diction which shall substantially
& effectually comprehend the same objects. That Treaty, Act or
Instrument to be forwarded to me by the first safe conveyance, in
a final Sanction in the
transmitted for recei
order to ita be
legal Mode. -"gn the mean time you WI be pleased to keep me
advised of the progress of the business.

-5

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1786 TO 1801

102

In recommending to you to avoid all injudicious ostentation, &
unnecessary expence; and to use your best judgment & prudence to
promote the real interests of the United States, I remain,
GIBRALTER
May 21. 1795.
[NA. SDA. Disp. Spain, Vol. 3, 1795-1797.1

[21 May 17951
To Muley Soliman, Emperor of Morocco, from David Eumphreys, U. 8. Minister
to Lisbon, Portugal, and in charge of negotiations with Barbary Powera

To His Imperial Ma'esty Muley Soliman, Emperor of Morocco, Fez,
Mepimz, and ad the Garbe. &q &9 &'
I have the honour to inform your Imperial Majesty, that the President of the United States of America has caused to be made out, under
the Seal of the United States, the full Powers necessary for renewing
with our Imperial Majesty the Treaty of Peace which was so happily
estab ' hed between the Empire of Morocco & the said United States,
in the reign of your late August Father, of glorious Memory. On this
auspicious occasion, I had flattered myself with the hope of approaching your Royal & Illustrious Person, as the happy Instrument of renewing the Treaty, the faithful Organ of my Country for expressing its
friendship, and an additional witness to the World of the Wisdom,
magnanimity & virtues for which your Imperial Majesty is so justly
celebrated. And I pray your Imperial Majesty to be assured, that
nothing could equal my grateful sensibility of the favourable expressions contained m your letter written to me, on the 79h of Janr? 1795
(according to the Christian Era) except my ardent desire to avail myself of your goodness by visiting your Royal Residence. But being
myself a fixed Minister of the United States, several years since, destined to reside constantly near Her Most Faithful Majesty, and being
moreover actually charged with the performance of certain objects
relating to my official duty, which indispensably require my presence
elsewhere, the imperious dictates of necessity debar me from the high
gratification of passing to your Majesty's Dominions. Insomuch that
I shall be obliged to hasten my departure from this Place, before this
letter can reach your Imperial Ma'esty. It is therefore most respectfully entreated, that your Imperial Majesty will be pleased to receive
graciously Mr James Simpson, Consul of the United States of America
a t Gibralter, as the Person duly charged with plenary Powers authority
(as will appear b the authentic Powers & Documents in his possession)
on the part of t e United States to renew the aforesaid Treaty with
your Imperial Majesty.
I t is likewise most respectfully requested that information may be
communicated to Mr James Simpson, a t what place he may have the
honour to present to your Majesty the Military articles brought by
me from America.
May God Almighty preserve the precious life of your Im erial
Majesty, and crown i t with health, happiness & glory to the ateat
period.
At Gibralter on the 21:' of May 1795
(according to the Christian Era)

ts

t

P

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS
-

-

103

Thisletter is riddressed to your Royal Presence, with the profoundest
veneration & homage, by
Your Imperial Majesty's
Most humble & most devoted Servt
DAVIDHUMPHREYS
[NA. BDA. Disp. Spain, Vol. 3, 1795-1787.]
To Josiah Fox, Clerk in Department of War,from Secretary of War

[PHILADELPHIA]
War O&ce June 23.1795.
SIR. I have received your letter of the 9th)and handed it to Mr
Humphreys for his information, and remarks.
His o p d o n on the laying of the keel of the frigate, building a t
Portsmouth, Virginia, is expressed in the inclosed copy of his letter of
the 22e to which you will substantidly conform.

-

[Enclom]

NAVYYARDJune 22.1795.
SIRI have to observe on M?Fox" letter to you, dated Naval Yard,
Portsmouth, June 9. 1795, that neither time nor expence should be
spared in laying the keels of the frigates in the best possible position
for launching: I think from his description of the ground, it will be very
proper to lower the keel abaft, in fact, to keep i t as low as possible
on the blocks, all fore and aft, as will barely admit of putting on the
false keel. If they have sdicient water for launching, I would give
the keel the same declivity as the launching ways. If the water is
scant, i t shouid be less, as described in a former letter to you on that
subject.
(signed) JOSHUA
HUMPHREYS.
The SECRETARY
OF WAR.
[NDA. Correspondence, when Navy wss under War Department, 1790-1798.1
To Tench Francis, U. S. Purveyor, from lecretary of War

PHILADELPHIA]

War O@
June $8.1796.
SIR. The report of CoI? Copperthwait, returned from his mission
to Georgia, relative to the live oak to be procured for the frigates.
That i t will now take one year to complete the quantity wanted,
induces me to change the plan of sending pmtial supplies to all the
six Na
yards. By continuing that plan, the business in every
yard J b e kept in a lingering condition, at a heavy expence, without
completing anything. Had the difEculties of getting the live oak been
foreseen - had i t been known that full and regular supplies for two
only, could be kept up - certainly, the carrying forward of 8ix
frigates a t the same time, would not have been attempted. What
should not have been begun, ought now that the facts are known, to
be laid aside. Consequently I shall direct four of the Constructors
to suspend their labours, or to dismiss all their hands for whom they
cannot find conatant, and useful employment. Here I refer to any
unwrought timber on hand, and to what may be expecbd by them
in the vessels which shall be loaded wholly, or in part, when these
new orders shall reach Mr Morgan, for their respective yards. If
indeed, they should have on board only a mall number of timbers

104

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1785 TO 1801

(say about a dozen, in any one vessel) which have been already
supplied to the two yards which are to be kept o en, they may be
i those of
sent to one or the other of those two yards - w%
ch are
Philadelphia, and Baltimore. Those few surplus sticks may be reshipped, with any other surplus timber, to New York, and Norfolk. Philadelphia and Baltimore are preferred for continuing the work,
because those ports, especially the former, are the most likely to be
cut off from winter supplies, by means of ice.
Besides the saving of expence by changing the plan as now proposed,
other advantages may arise. Two frigates may be completed many
months before the whole, if carried on together, could be finished;
and should there be a call for their service, they might be equipped,
and sent to sea, while the rest were progressing. - Some errors may
be committed in the construction of the first frigates; or improvements
suggested. Then in the residue, the errors may be avoided, and the
improvements adopted. You wiU now be pleased to give the requisite
orders for the live oak procuring for the frigates in conformity with
the ideas here expressed; including in your orders the pine beams, and
plank intended for the frigate building at Philadelphia.
[NDA. Correspondence,when Navy was under War Department, 1790-1198.1
[25 July 17951
To Secretary of State from James Simpson, U. S. Consul, Gibraltar, and Agent at
Tangier

N? 3

SIR Under 15" Ins! I had the honor of addressing Nq 2 by way of
Tangier & Cdiz, containing detail of occurrences up to that time. I have now to request you will be pleased to acquaint His Excell?
the President, that Sidy Mohamet Ben Ottman, having on the morning of the 18'? laid before Muley Soliman, translation of the Treaty
made with his Father; he sent me a message same Afternoon by His
Majestys order, desiring to know "what sum it would be agreeable
"to the United States of America, to pay him annually." - After
the assurances of Muley Soliman, in the letters written since the
Month of October last, by bis order, of which you have seen translations, and his declaration in the public meshooar on the 9" Ins!, such
a message would scarce have been listen'd to as serrious, by any other,
than n erson already accustomed to such inconsistent proceeding,
in this ountry; - on this occasion i t gave me the most poignant
concern. - I instantly waited on the Secretary of State, and in consequence of a very long conference with him,wrote the letter of which
I have the honor of submitting to His Excell7 the Presidents perusal
the accompanying copy - This letter with a translation in Arabic,
which I thought well to accompany it with, were laid before the
Emperor on the 20" by Sidy Mohamet Ben Ottman; who has aince
assured me, he dwelt on those passages most likely to have weight
with the Emperor, towards enducing him to ratify the old Treaty;
but after pausing a short time, he was pleased to say, "as the American
"will not agree to pay any thing yearly, he must get ready to
"return from whence he came, and on his way see Mule Taib." This determination was conveyed to me same evening, a ter which I
had a farther conferrence with the Minister, who assured me the
Emperor was determined not to see me again unless I would previously allow him to say, I would treat for a Peace, subject to pay-

8

9

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

105

ment of a Subsidy, a thing I saw myself in no shape authorised to do,
of course assured him I could not treat on any such terns; and I
gladly hope the lettar written on the subject, as well as my subsequent adherence t.0 the sentiments therein held forth, will meet
approbation. Early on the 21" I was called upon to give my determination, in
consequence of His Majestys Resolution, which was of course an
acquiessence to his pleasure of my retiring from hence; - I was
induced to do so in explicit terms, because the Cheif Alcayde conducted
me hither, came at same moment, to say he had received directions to
accompany me on my return. - A firm and determined conduct, I
have always found best with the people of this Count , as a shadow
of the reverse is construed into what best suits themse ves.
Aware on this occasion however, that an immediate retreat, would
have exposed the American Flag to danger, and desirous of having a
little more time to consider what was best to be done, I sought to
ward that blow, by solliciting permission from the Emperor to go to
Gibraltar by Sea; because of the inconveniency of travelling by land,
in the present excessive hot season, knowing a t same time no opportunity then offered. - At a subsequent conferrence with the Minister that day, whom I have endeavour'd to make our F'reind, it was
thought advlseable to defer my departure, to afford opportunity for
the Freinds of the true Interests of the Emperor, to endeavour to
prevail on h i to adhere to the old Treaty; and for that purpose 1
sent notice to His Majesty, that the matter of Subsidy wm what had
never been thought of on our part, so of consequence I could not have
taken Coll Humphreys sentunents or oppinion upon the subject;
and being highly desirous of compleating happily, the busyness I had
come to this Country on, I signrfied my having no objection to take
the Collonels oppinion upon His Majestys demand, before I quitted
the Country, whlch met his entire approbation.
In consequence I immediately wrote Coll Humphreys a full statement of the matter, and sent a Young Man I brought with me from
offer'd for Faro: - I now
Gibraltar with the letter, by an opport~~nity
wait the answer, which I am satisfied will be not to listen to the proposed terms - in the mean time I have not failed to take those
meaaures necessary for guarding against accidents a t the issue, in
case of the worst. - You will no doubt remark in the latter part of
the Emperors resolution, a kind of opening left for farther Treaty with
Muley Taib, but I have the best founded reasons for wishing to avoid
that, and finish the busyness here, if possible -no less thm the highest
authority for knowing, that the proposition fur the demand has been
made by Muley Solimsn of a Subsidy, positively came from that
Prince: and I have equaly good proof that the h t Idea given his
Highness on the subject, was by that unworthy Man John Lamb; who
for the trivial object of obtaining permission to ship some horses,
flatter'd the Prince at Larach in May last, with the assurance that the
United States would pay Morocco twenty thousand dollars annually,
for a, Peace: -it is some time since I laid all this unfortunate busyness
of Lambs open to Coll Humphreys, but should not have troubled you
with it, had I not now consider'd it necesgasg. - I have not been
neglectfull in these five days past., to a v d of the means put in my
ower for makeing Freinds here, amongst those people whom I know
gave the beet opportumties of b e q usefull on this occasion; and

r

106

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1786 TO 1801

henceforward untill I receive Coll Humphreys answer, I shall take
every means for prepairing his Majesty, for the renewed attempt,
must then, I expect be made for solliciting his agreeing to Peace with
the United States, on the terms I have already proposed. - Permit
me Sir on this occasion, with due respect and defference, to urge the
grand necessity there is, for the Flag of the United States being seen
in these Seas, in such force as to command Respect; - even part of
the Frigates you have building, with some Tenders, or smaller Vessels,
would be found perfectly sufficient, under prudent Commanders for
every purpose of that nation both within, & without the Straits: here they need only be seen, there i t may be necessary for them to act

*
*
*
*
*
RHABAT
25* Jdy 1795 [SDA. CL, Gibraltar, Vol. I, April 1791-Dec. 1795.1

*

*

[About 30 July 17951
[No'r~.--In Letter Book, Navy Department Archives, entitled "Co~espondence on Naval Uairs when Navy was under War Department, 1790-1798" are
the following: Page 118 to - Particular dimensions of 44 Gun Frigates of the U. S. - taken
from the Mould Loft Floor.
123
Page 124 to

- Particular dimensions of 36 Gun Frigate9 of the U. S. -taken

from the Mould Loft Floor.
Signed by Joshua~umphreys. (Follows letter dated July 30,1795, and is before
letter dated August 17, 1795).]
128

To Edward Church, U. S. Consul, Lisbon, Portugal, from James Simpson, U. 8'
Consul, Gibraltar, and Agent at Tangler

COPY
REABATIF!' August 1735
SIR I have the honor to acquaint you, that the Peace which has
hitherto happily subsisted between the Empire of Morocco and the
United States of America, has this day been confirmed by His Imperial
Majesty Muley Soliman, in terms of the Treaty made with his late
Father a t Morocco, in the year 1786.
[SDA. CL, Gibraltar, Vol. I, April 1791-Dec. 1795.1
To Secretary of State from James Simpson, U. S. Consul, Gibraltar, and Agent at
Tangier

RHABAT,
Augzcst 18,1796.
SIE:I have at last the happiness to acquaint you, and request you

will be pleased to inform His Excellency the President, that this
morning, by appointment, I attended his Imperial Majesty Muley
Soliman, at Meshooar, when he was leased to say to me in public,
nearly as follows: "The Americans, find, are the Christian nation
my father, who is in glory, most esteemed. I am the same with them
as my fatber was; and I trust they will be so with me. I have given
orders to Sid Ben Ottman to write my answer to tbeir letter, which
will be given to you, and to tell them I am upon the same footing
with them as my father was."
I did not fail to assure his Majesty that the United States would,
on their part, be equally emulous to maintain that peace and ood
friendship wbich had so happily subsisted between them a n t his
father. His Majesty came out of the palace on horseback; and immediately after the recited conversation, proceeded for Mequinez

P

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

107

and Fez. The Secretary of State, who remains a few days to give
the Swedish ambassador and myself our despatches, bas assured me
the letter for the President shall be written immediately; and as he is
also entrusted with His Majesty's seal, there needs be no delay. My
next will, of consequence, convey the original, or translation, as the
conveyance may appear to be secure.
From what I have said, you will readily observe that all I shall
(to appearance) obtain will be a letter from Muley Soliman, declarato of his being on the same terms of peace with the United States
as'K,s father was.
I a m sorry that the resistance made to my solicitations of a recognition of the old treaty, in form, has been spun out to the last hour of
the Emperor's being here, and that I have thereby been prevented
from exerting the powerful interest I had happily raised, for accomplishing, in a more satisfactory manner, the end of my mission;
though I trust the promised letter will be expressive of what is in fact
wished to be established, namely, that peace shall subsist between
Morocco and the United States, as in the time of Sidi Mahomet,
which, in my opinion, will fully answer the purpose of keeping peace
during the present reign, and of resisting any unpleasant demands,
should succeeding emperors make such.
Muley Solirnan's sudden departure for Fez is difFerently accounted
for. Some allege he is gone purposely with the army to quell some
disturbances which have lately happened in the vicmity of that city
and Mequinez; others, that i t is the consequence of the defeat the
troops he sent to the southward, under Muley Cadour, have sustained. In my opinion, both occurrences have their part in it, and
that he will not, for the present, contest with his brother, Muley
Ishem, the possession he certainly enjo s of the country south of the
Morbeya. The gwrison of Mazagar ave quitted that fortress as
untenable, and are expected here by sea.
[Am. State Papers, Foreign Rel., Vol. 1.1

K

[5 September 1795-7 March 17961
Algiers-Treaty

NOTE.-^ "Treaties and other International AcB of the United States of

America" by Hunter Miller, Volume 2, is printed the Treaty between Algiem and
the United States. The following is copied from above publication:
"Treaty of Peace and Amity, signed a t Algiers September 5, 1795 (21 Safar,
A. H. 1210). Original in Turkish.
"Submitted to the Senate February 15, 1796. ResoIution of advice and consent
March 2, 1796. Ratified by the United States March 7, 1796."]
TRANSLATION

ARTICLEla$
From the date of the Present Treaty there shall subsist a firm and Sincere
Peace and Amity between the President and Citizens of the United States of
North America and Hassan Bashaw Dey of Algiers his Divan and Subjects &he
Vessels and Subjects of both Nations reciprocally treating each other with Civility
Honor and Respect
ARTICLEYE 24
All Vessels belonging to the Citizens of the United States of North America
Shall be permitted to enter the Different ports of the Regency to trade with our
Subjects or any other Persons residing within our Jurisdiction on paying the usual
duties a t our Cuatom-House that is paid by all nations a t Peace with this Regency
observing that all Goods disembarked and not Sold here shall be permitted to

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1786 TO 1801

108

be reimbarked without paying any duty whatever either for disembarking or
embarking all naval & Military Stores Such as Gun-Powder Lead Iron Plank
Sulphur Timber for building Tar pitch Rosin Turpentine and any other Goo&
denominated Naval snd Military Stores Shall be permitted to be Sold in this
Regency without paying any duties whatever a t the Custom House of this
Regency
ARTICLE34
The Vesseh of both Nations shall pass each other without any impediment
or Molestation and afl Goods monies or Passengers of whfitsoever Nation that
may be on board of the Vessels belonging to either Party Shall be considered aa
inviolable and shall be allowed to pass unmolested

ARTICLE4th
All Ships of War belonging to this regency on meeting with Merchant Vessels
belonging t o Citizens of the United States shall be allowed to Visit them with
two persom only beside the rowers these two only permitted to go on board said
vessel without obtaining express leave from the commander of said Vessel who
shall compare the Pass-port and immediately permit ssid Vmsel to proceed on
her Voyage unmolested All Ships of War belonging to the United States of
Xorth America on meeting with a n Algerine Cruiser and Shall have seen her
pass port and Certiicate from the Consul of the United States of North America
resident in this Regency shall be permitted to proceed on her cruise unmolested
no Peas-port to be fasued to any Ships but such aa are Absolutely the Property
of Citizens of the United States and Eighteen Months Shall be the term dlowed
for furnishing the Ships of the United States with Pnas-ports
ARTICLE5th
No Commander of any Cruiser belonging to this Regency shall be allowed to
take any person of whatever Nation or denomination out of any Vessel belonging
to the United States of North America in order t o Examine them or under pretence of making them confess any thing desired nzither shall they inflict any
corporal punishment or any way else molest them
ARTICLE6th
If any Vessel belonging to the United States of Korth America shall be Stranded
on the Coast of this Regency they shall receive every possible Assistance from
the Subjects of this Regenc all goods saved from the wreck shall be Permitted
to be Keirnbarked on boariof any other Vessel without Paying any Duties a t
the Custom House
ARTICLE7 t h
The Algerines are not on any pretence whatever to give or Sell any Vessel of
War to any Nation a t War with the United States of North America or any
Vessel capable of cruising to the detriment of the Commerce of the United Statee
A ~ r r c wY E )3th
Any Citizen of the United States of North America having bought any Prize
condemned by the Algerines shall not be again captured by the Cruisers of the
Regency then a t Sea altho they hsve not a Pass-Port a Certificate from the Consul resident being deemed Sufficient until such time they can procure such
Pasf+-Port
ARTICLEYE 9th
If any of the Barbary States at War with the United States of North America
shall capture any American Vessel & bring her into any of the Ports of this
Regency they shall not he Permitted to sell her but Shall depart the Port on
Procuring the Requisite Snppliea of Provision
A R ~ C LYE
E loth
essel belonging to the United States of North America, when a t War
with any other Nation shall be permitted to send their Popesinto the forts of
the Regency have leave to Dispose of them with out Pay~ngany duties on Sale
thereof All Vessels wanting Provisions or refreshment& Shall be permitted t o
buy them st Market Price
ARTICLEY E ll(h
AU Ghips of War belonging to the United States of North America on Anchoring
in the Ports of y- Regency shall receive the Usual presents of Provieions & Refwh-

Any

3

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS
ments Gratis should any of the Slaves of this Regency make their Escape on
board wid Vessels they shall be immediately returned no excuse &all be made
that they have hid themselves amongst the People and cannot be found or any
other Equivocation
ARTICLEYE 12th
No Citizen of ye United States of North America shall be Oblidged to Redeem
any Slave against his Will even Should he be his Brother neither shall the owner of
A Slave be iorced to Sell him against his Will but 4 1 Such agreements must be
made by Consent of Parties. Should Any American Citizen be taken on board
an Enemy-Ship by the Cruisers of this Regency hsving a Regular paas-port
Specifying they are Citizens of the United States they shall be immediately Sett
a t Liberty. on the Contrary they having no Passport they and their Property
aha11 be considered lawfull Prize as thie Regency Know their friends by their
Paasporb
ABTICLEYE 1 3 t h
Should any of the Citizens of the United States of North America Die within
the Limits of this Regency the Dey & his Subjects shall not Interfere with the
Property of the Deceased but it Shall be under the immediate Direction of the
Consul unless otherwise disposed of by will Should their be no Consul, the
Effects Shall be deposited in the hands of Some Person worthy of trust until1 the
Party Shall Appear who has a Right to demand them, when they Shall Render a n
Account of the Property neither Shall the Dey or Divan Give hinderence in the
Execution of any Will that may Appear

ARTICLE14th
No Citizen of the United States of North America Shall be oblidged to purchase
any Goods against his will but on the contrary shall be allowed to purchase whatever i t Pleaseth him. the Consul of the United States of North America or any
other Citizen shall not be answerable for debts contracted by any one of their o m
Nation unless previously they have Given a written Obligation so to do. Shou'd
the Dey want to freight any American Vessel that may be in the Regency or
Turkey said Veseel not being engaged, in consequence of the friendship subsisting
between the two Nations he expects to have the preference given him on his paying
the Same freight offered by any other Kation
ARTICLEYE
Any disputes or Suits a t Law that ma take Place between the Subjects of t h e
Regency and the Citizens of the United Jtates of North America RhaIl be decided
by the Dcy in person and no other, any disputes that may arise between the Citizens of the United States, Shall be decided by the Consul as they are in Guch
Cases not Subject to the Laws of this Regency
ARTICLEYE 16th
Should any Citizen of the United States of North America Kill, woundor
Strike a Subject of this Regency he Shall be punished in the Same manner as a
Turk and not with more Severity should any Citizen of the United Ststes of
North America in the above predicament escape Prison the Consul Shall not
become answerable for him
AETICLEYE 1 7 t h
The Consul of the United States of North America Shall have every personal
Security given him and his household he ShaU have Liberty to Exerciee his
Religion in his own House all Slaves of the Same Religion shall not be impeded in
going to Said Coneul's House a t hours of Prayer the Consul shall have liberty &
Personal Security given him t o Travil where ever he pleases within the Regency.
he Shall have free licence to go on board any Vessel Lying in our Roads when ever
he 8hall think fitt. the Consul Shall have leave to Appoint his own Drogaman
& Broker
ARTICLEYE 18+h
Should a War break out between the two Nations the Consul of the United
States of North America and all Citizens of Said States Shall have leave to Embark
themeelvea and property unmolested on board of what Vessel or Vessels they Shall
think Proper

110

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1785 TO 1801

ARTICLE YE 19th
Should the Cruisers of Algiers capture any Vessel having Citizens of the United
States of North America on board they having papers to Prove they are R d y
so they and their property Shall be immediately discharged and Shou'd the Vesaela
of the United States capture any Vessels of Nations a t War with them having
Subjects of this Regency on board they shaU be treated in like Manner
ARTICLEYE 20(h
On a Vessel of War belonging to the United States of North America Anchoring
in our Ports the Consul is to inform the Dey of her arrival and She shall be Saluted
with twenty one Guns which she is to return in the Same Quanty or Number and
the Dey will Send fresh Provisions on board as is Customary, Gratis
ARTICLEYE 21at
The Consul of yo United States of North America shall not be required to Pay
duty for any thing he brings from a foreign Country for the Use of his House &
family
ARTICLEYE 22d
Should any disturbance take place between the Citizens of ye United States &
the Subjects of this Regency or break any Article of this Treaty War shall not be
Declared immediately but every thing shall be Searched into regularly. the
Party Injured shall be made Repairation
On the 21Qt of ye Luna of Safer 1210 corrisponding with the 5*h September 1795
Joseph Donaldson Junr on the Part of the United States of North America agreed
with Hassan Bashaw Dey of Algiers to Keep the Articles Contained in this Treaty
Sacred and inviolable which we the Dey & Divan Promise to Observe on Consideration of the United States Paying annually the Value of twelve thousand Algerine
Sequins 1 in Maritime Stores Should the United States forward a Larger Quantity the Over-Plus Shall be Paid for in Money by the Dey & Regency any Vessel
that may be Captured from the Date of this Treaty of Peace & Amity shall immediately be deliver'd up on her Arrival in Algiers
Sign'd VIZIR HASSANBASHAW
JOSEPH
DONALDSON
Jun
To all to whom these Presents shall come or be made known.
Whereas the Underwritten David Humphreys hath been duly appointed Commissioner Plenipotentiary, by Letters Patent under the Signature of the President
and Seal of the United States of America, dated the 30th of March 1795, for negociating & concluding a Treaty of Peace with the Dey and Governors of Algiers;
Whereas by Instructions given to h i on the part of the Executive, dated the 2 8 t h
of March & 4" of April 1795, he hath been farther authorised to employ Joseph
Donaldson Junior on an Agency in the said business; whereas by a Writing under
his hand and seal, dated the 21Qt of May 1795, he did constitute & appoint Joseph
Donaldson Junior Agent in the business aforesaid; and the said Joseph Donaldson
Junior did, on the 5th of September 1795, agree with Haman Baahaw Dey of
Algiers, to keep the Articles of the preceding Treaty sacred and inviolable.
Now Know ye, that I David Humphreys, Commissioner Plenipotentiary aforesaid, do approve & conclude the said Treaty, and every article and clause therein
contained, reserving the same nevertheless for the final Ratification of the President of the United States of America, by and with the advice and consent of the
Senate of the said United States.
In testimony whereof I have signed the same with my hand and seal, a t the City
of Lisbon this 28th of November 1795.
[Seal] DAVID H U M P E ~ Y S .
T H E TRANSLATION OF 1930
(The Turkish text of the original treaty which is reproduced above has been
examined by Dr. J. H. Kramers, of Leiden, in collaboration with Dr. C. Snouck
Hurgronje. The new translation of the Turkish made by Doctor gramera, with
his notes thereon, is printed below, following this general comment of Doctor
Kramera on the text:
AB the 1795 English translation of nearly all the articles of this treaty diecloses
coneiderable difference from the Turkish text, a complete new English tramlation
has been given.
1

or S I . ~ .

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS
The treaty is written in excellent Turkish and doea not show any sign of being a
translation from an Arabic original.
It seems that the laat page of Turkish text of the document waa originally the
beginning of the treaty, for i t contains the preambulary stipulations to the articles
of the treaty, aa is also the case in the treaty with Algiers of 1816 (Document 37).
Accordingly the translation begins with those introductory clauses.)
[Translation]

Reason for the Drawing Up of the Peace Treaty with the American People
The reason for the drawing up of this treaty and the motive for the writing of
this convention of good omen, is that on Saturday, the twenty-first day of the
month of Safar of this year 1210,' there have been negotiations for a treaty of
peace between the ruler and commander of the American people, living in the
island called America among the isles of the ocean, and the frontier post of the
holy war, the arrison of Algiers. To this purpose hss been appointed as his
Ambamdor,a foseph Donaldson, who has, in confirmation of the articles and
paragraphs of the present treaty, strengthened the mutual friendship and good
understanding in the exalted presence of His Excellency the noble Vizier and powerful Marshal who sits on the throne of lordship, the destructor of tyranny and
injustice and the protector of the country, Hassan Paaha-may God grant to
him what he wishes; and in the presence of all the members of the Divan, of the
chiefs of the victorious garrison, and of the victorious soldiers. This peace treaty
h a been concluded, together with the contractual promise to give annually to
the garrison of Algiers 12,000 Algerian gold pieces, provided that, in equivalence
of these 12,000 gold pieces, being the price of the peace, there may be ordered and
imported for our garrison and our arsend, powder, lead, iron, bullets, bombshells,
bomb stones, gun stones, masts, poles, yards, anchor chains, cables, sailcloth, tar,
pitch, boards, beams, laths, and other necesssries, provided that the price of all the
ordered articles shall be accounted for, so that, if this is equal to 12,000 gold pieces,
i t shall be all right, but if the price of the articles is higher, i t shall be paid to them,'
and if there remains something to our credit, they promise to complete it. If,
before the conclusion of our peace, our vessels of war have captured vessels of the
said nation, these shall not be restored and shall remain our prizes, but if our war
vessels capture one of their ships after the date of the conclusion of the peace
treaty, it is promised that this ship shall be given back.
All this has been put down in the present document, which shall be consulted
whenever needed and according to which both parties shall act.
21 Safar, 1210.
[Tughra 6 of HASSANPASHA]
[Seal of HASSANPASHA]
ARTICLE1.
The statements of the first article are that in this year 1210 an agreement has
been reached between the ruler of America, George Washington, President, our
friend and actually the Governor of the States of the island of America, and the
Pasha-may
lord of our well-preserved garrison of Algiers, His Highness H-n
God grant to him what he wishes-the Dey, together with the Agha of his victorious army, his minister, all the members of the Divan, and all his victorious
soldiers, and equally between the subjects of both parties. According to this
agreement our peace and friendship shall be steady and haa been confirmed.
After this date nothing has been left that is contrary to our peace or that may
disturb it.'
21 Safar, 1210.
ARTICLE
2.
The statements of the second article are that when large or small ships belonging
to our friend the ruler of America, and equally ships belonging to his subjects,
amve in the port of Algiers or in other ports dependent on Algiers, and they sell
from their goods according to the ancient usage, there shall be taken a duty of
1 In the chronological tabla 21 Salar, A. a. 1210. conasponds to September 0, 1795, which was a Sunday,

In this w e however 21 S a k A . A. 1210 no doubt answers to September 5,1786.
*"oarrisdnp'rend& the ~ u i k i s hword'"orfgi&," which means originally "a hearth" and, as a mflitary
term, "a wiment" of the Janizaries.
The Turkish text has here "paahador." which m.ms to be an attempt to render the word "ambawdor."
4 That is the difference shall be pdd to the Amencam.
6 "Tu h;a'*is the "name sign," a kind of calligraphic monogram in which a ruler's names are inscribed.
The tuptra takas the plats nf the signature.
6 Each article concludes with the word "salsam," saiutation O
r peace, which has been left untnmshted.

112

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1786

TO

1801

5 piasters from every 100 pisstere, in the same way as this is paid, according to the
treaties, by the English, the Dutch, and the Swedes, and that no more shall be
taken. Also that if they wish to take back their unsold goods and reembark
them, nobody shall require anything from them, and equally that nobody in
the said ports shall do them harm or lay hand upon them.
21 Safar, 1210.
ARTICLE3.
The statements of the third article are that if war vessela or merchant vesaels
belonging to our friend the American ruler meet on the open sea with war vessels
or merchant vesaels belonging to Algiers, and they become known to each other,
they shall not be allowed to search or to molest each other, and that none shall
hinder the other from wending its own way with honor and respect. Also, that
whatever kind of travelers there are on board, and wherever they go with their
goods, their valuables, and other properties, they shnll not molest each other or
take anything from each other, nor take them to a certain place and hold them up,
nor injure each other in any way.
21 Safar, 1210.
ARTICLE4.
The statements of the fourth article are that if war vessels of Algiers meet
with American merchant vessels, large or small, and this happens out of the places
under the rule of America, there shall be sent only a shallop, in which, besides the
rowers, two persons shall take place; on their arrival no more than two persona
shall go on board the ship, the commander of the mid ship having to give permission, and after the showing of the Government psssport, these persons shall
perform quickly the formalities with regard to the ship, and return, after which the
merchant vessel shall wend its own way.
Further, that if war vessels of the American ruler meet with war veseela or
merchant vessels of Algiers, and these vessels are in possession of a passport
delivered by the ruler of Algiers or the American Consul residing in Algiers,
nobody may touch anything belonging to the said vessel, but it shall wend its
way in peace.
Further, that the war vessels of Algiers, large or small, shall not touch Americana
not possessed of American paasporta within a period of eighteen months after the
date of the passports given by reason of the peace treaty and after the date of the
peace treaty', and they shall not hinder them from going their way. Equally, if
the war vessels of the American ruler meet with Algerian ships, they shall not
prevent them from continuing their journey in the same way, within a period of
eighteen months, but they shall wend peacefully their way.
Further that our frlend the American ruler shall not give a pawport to any
crew not being under his rule and not belonging to his own people; if an American
passport is found in the hands of a crew not belonging to his own people, we shall
take them ss prize, for this is not covered by the stipulations of this p a c e treaty.
This has been expressly stated in this article in order to prevent A. rupture of peace;
so it shall not be neglected.
21 Safar, 1210.
ARTICLE5.
The statements of the fifth article are that none of the captains of Algerian
ships or of their officers or commanders shall take anybody by force from American
ships into their own ships or bring such a person to other places, that they shall
not interrogate them on account of anything or do them harm, whatever kind of
people they may be; as long as these are on American ships, they shall not molest
them.
21 Safar, 1210.
ARTICLE6.
The statements of the sixth article are that if a ship of the American ruler or
belonging to his subjects shall be stranded on one of the coast4 of the territory
under Algerian rule and is wrecked, nobody shall take anything from their properties or goods or plunder them.
Also, that if such a thing should happen, their goods shall not be taken to the
cudamhouse, nor shall there be done any damage to their ople, and if a similar
thing should happen in the plaoa that are under the rule of r i e r s , the inhabitants
shall do anything in their power to give every possible aid and mistance and
help them to bring their goods on dry placee.

21 war, 1210.
b a lltael translation, bat the sensa is not very clew. The words "of the passports glven by r e s ~ m
ofthe pem tresty" awn to be E
U
~
~
~
.
--

- - ~

1 Thls

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS
ARTICLE7.
The statements of the seventh article are that no Algerian ship, small or large,
shall, with the permission and the authority of the ruler of Algiers, be equipped
from countries a t war with the ruler of America and commit acts of war against
the Americans.
21 Safar, 1210.
ARTICLE
8.
The statements of the eighth article are that if an American merchant buys a
prize in Algiers, or if an Algerian cruiser captain who has taken a prize on the open
sea sells his prize to an American merchant, either in Algiers or on the sea, so that
it is bought immediately from the captain, and there is drawn up a document
concerning this sale, and if he meets afterwards another war vessel from Algiers,
nobody shall molest the merchant who has bought this prize, nor shall he prevent
him from wending peacefully his way.
21 Safar, 1210.
ARTICLE9.
The statements of the ninth article are that the inhabitants of Tunis, Tripoli,
Salt?,or others shall in no wise bring the people or the goods of American ships,
large or small, to the territory under the rule of Algiers, nor shall there be given
permission to ell them nor shall they be allowed t o be sold.
21 Safar, 1210.
ARTICLE10.
The statements of the tenth article are that if the warships of the American ruler
bring t o Algiers, or to ports under Algerian rule, pfizea or goods captured by them,
nobody shall hinder them from doing with them booty as they wish, namely,
selling it or taking it with them.
Also, that American war vessels shall not pay any tithes or duties whatever.
Further, that if they wish t o buy anything for provisions, the inhabitants shall
give it to them a t the same price aa they sell it t o others and aslr no more.
Likewise, if those people want t o charter ships for the transport of goods to
whatever region, province, or port, be it to Smyrna or from Constantinople to this
reglon, or for the transport of travelers from Smyrna or other provinces, or in
order t o convey pilgrims to Egypt, they may charter those ships a t reaaonable
prices, in the same way as otherpeoples, and from our side they shall not be opposed
by pretexts such as that it is contrabrqnd or that i t is not allowed among us, so
t h a t we do not allow those ships to leave.
21 Safar, 1210.
ARTICLE11.
The statements of the eleventh article are that if war vessels belonging t o our
friend the American ruler come t o anchor in front of Algiers, and a slave, being an
American or of anbrhar natignality, takes refuge on board the said war vessel, the
ruler of Algiers may claim this slave, a t which request the commander of the war
vessel shall make this fugitiveslave leave his ship anddeliver him into the presence
of the ruler of Algiers. If the slave is not to be found and reaches a country of
unbelievers, the commander of the ship shall pledge his word that he shall return
and bring him to Algiers.
21 Safar, 1210.
ARTICLE12.
The statements of the twelfth article are that from this time onward the subjects
of the American ruler shall not be bought, nor sold, nor taken as slaves, in the
places under the rule of Algiers.
Also, that since there is friendship with the American ruler, he shall not be
obliged to redeem against his will slaves belonging to him, but that this shall be
done a t the time he likes and that it shall depend on the generosity and the
solicitude of the friends and relations of the slaves.
Further, that there shall be put no term or time for the redeeming of prisoners,
that the amount which shall be found convenient shall be paid in due order, and
that there shall be negotiations about the price with the masters of the slaves;
nobody shall oblige the masters t o sell their slaves a t an arbitrary price, whether
they be alavea of the State, of others, or of the Pasha; but if the redeemed persons
are American subjects, there shell not be asked of them more than of other nations
in similrir circumstances.

114

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1786 TO 1801

A h ,that if the Algerian vessels of war capture a ship belonging t o a nstion
with which they are a t war, and there are found Americans among the crew of this
ship, these shall not be made slaves if they are in possession of a paes,' nor shall
there be done harm to their persons and goods; but if they are not in possession of
a pass 1 they shall be slaves and their goods and properties shall be taken.
21 Safar, 1210.
ARTICLE13.
The statements of the thirteenth article are that if one of the merchants of the
American ruler or one of his subjects shall die in Algiers or in one of the dependencies
of Algiers, the ruler of Algiers or other persons shall not touch in any way the
deceased's money, property, or goods; if he has designated before his death an
executor, nobody eke shall touch any part of his property or goods, either if the
executor mentioned is present in Algiers or if he ~snot there. Accordingly, the
person designated as executor by the deceased shall take the properties and the
goods, and nobody eke shall touch the slightest part of it; so shall it be. The
executor or the person delegated by him as his representative shall make an inventory of his money and property, take possession of it, and forward i t in due time
t o the heir.
Further, that if no subject of the American ruler is present, the American Consul
shall make an inventory of the said deceased's money and goods and take
possession of them and keep them in charge until the arrival of his relations living
In their own country.
21 W a r , 1210.
ARTICLE14.
The statements of the fourteenth article are that neither in Algiers itself nor
in its dependencies shall the American merchants be obliged to purchase goods
which they do not desire, but they shall be free to purchase the goods they desire.
Also, that the ships visiting the ports of Algiers shall not be molested in this
way-that goods which they do not wish be put into the ships.
Further, that neither the American Consul or anyone else, in case an American
subject is unable to pay his debts, shall be held reponsible for those debts and be
obliged to pay, unless some persons, according to their free will, are bound for the
debtor.
21 Safar, 1210.
ARTICLE15.
The statements of the fifteenth article are that if one of the subjects of the
American ruler has a suit a t law with a Mohammedan or with some one subjected
to the rule of Algiers, the said suit a t law shall be settled in the presence of His
Excellency the Dey and the honored Divan, without intervention of anybod else.
If there occurs a suit a t law among those people themselves, the American C?ousul
shall decide their d i s p u h .
21 Safar, 1210.
ARTICLE16.
The statements of the sixteenth article are that should one of the subjects of
the American ruler have a fight with a Mohammedan, so that one wounds the
other or kills him, each one shall be punished according to the prescriptions of the
law of his own country, that is, according to the custom in all other places. If,
however, an American kills a Mohammedan and flies and escapes after the murder,
neither the American Consul in Algiers nor other Americans shall be compelled
to answer for him.
21 Safar, 1210.
ARTICLE17.
The statements of the seventeenth article are that the American Consul, now
and in future, without regard to who he is, shall be free to circulate without fear,
while nobody shall molest his person or his goods.
Also, that he may appoint anyone whom he desires as dragoman or as broker.
Also, that whenever he wishes to go on board a ship or to take a walk outside,
nobody shall hinder him.
Further, that a place shall be designated for the practice of their void religious
ceremoniee, that a priest whom they need for their religious instruction may dwell
there, and that the American slaves preent in Algiers, either belonging to the
Government or to other people, msy go to the house of the Consul and practiae
1 The Tarkish

hss "passavmt."

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

115

-

their vain religious ceremonies without hindrance from the chief slave guard or
from their masters.
21 Safar, 1210.
ARTICLE18.
The statements of the eighteenth article are that now there reigns between ua
peace and friendship, but that if in future there should occur a rupture of our present state of peace and friendship, and there should be caused trouble on both sides,
the American Consul, and besides him the subjects of the American ruler either in
Algiers or in its dependencies, may not be hindered either in peace or in trouble,
and that whenever they wish to leave, nobody shall prevent them from leaving
with their goods, properties, belongings, and servants, even if such a person be
born in the country of Algiers.
21 Safar, 1210.
ARTICLE19.
The statements of the nineteenth article are that a subject of the American
ruler, to whatever country he goes or from whatever country he comes, and to
whatever kind of people he belongs, shall not be molested in his person, goods,
property, belongings, or servants, in case he meets with Algerian vessels, large or
smd.1 Equally, if an Algerian is found on board a ship belonging to enemies of
the American ruler, they shall not be molested in any way in their person, their
property, their goods, their money, or their servants, but the properties of these
people shall not be regarded with disdain, and they shall always be treated in a
friendly manner.
21 Safar, 1210.
ARTICLE20.
The statements of the twentieth article are that every time that a naval commander of the American King, our friend, arrives off Algiers, the American Consul
shall inform the commander as soon as the vessel is seen: after the said captain
hss anchored before the port, the commander of Algiers shall, in honor of the
American ruler, order a salute of twenty-one guns from the citadel, after which the
captain of the American ruler shall answer gun for gun, and, as the said vessel is a
vessel of the King, there shall be given provisions according to the custom, in
honor of the King.
21 Safar, 1210.
ARTICLE21.
The statements of the twenty-first article are that there shall not be ssked duty
and taxes for goods that are destined for the house of the American Consul, consi~tingof eatables, drinkables, other necessaries, and presents.
21 Safar, 1210.
ARTICLE22.
The statements of the twenty-second article are that if there occurs from this
time onward a disturbance of our peaceful relations, from whatever side this happens, this shall not rupture our peace, but the peace shall be maintained and our
Friendship shall not be disturbed. The person injured, to whatever party he
belongs, shall cldm justice. If, however, the fault and the guilt are on both sides,
or on the side of s, subject, and the matter is kept secret? our beIief in our friendship shall remain and our word shall remain a1.3 good
ever.
21 Safar, 1210.
NOTES
The original of this treaty is in Turkish, not in Arabic as stated in the proclamation. The articles which are written in English on pages of the original document
are a translation, signed by Joseph Donaldson, jr., who negotiated the treaty a t
Algiers.
There is an interesting account of the negotiations, entitled "Narrative of $he
proceedings of Jose h Donaldson Esqv," written by Richard O'Brien, afterwards
Consul General a t XIgiers, in D. S., 1 Archives, Tunis, 1793-1801 (a volume from
the consular archives a t Tunis), where O'Brien gives this account of himself:
Late Master of the Ship Dau hin, of Philadelphia, but was Captured the 30'P of
July 1785, fifty leagues to tho h a t w a r d of Lisbon, by an Algerine Corsair of 34
I The h k l s h text d m not mention the condition that these Ammicans and their goods us On Ship
balonpin~to enemies of Alpiers, but this, of course. is the meaning.
a Thls papsage is not vsry clear in the Turkish text.

116

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1786 TO 1801

Guns & 450 men-& Remained i n Captivity until1 the 11th of September 1795
Redeemed in Consequence, of the Peace made by the United States, with Algiers.
The report of Donaldson on the treaty, dated September 7, 1795 (D. R., 1
Consular Despatches, Algiers), is somewhat confused and in certain respects
obscure; but he mentions that the text was in Turkish, saying that James Leander
Cathcart, who was one of the American captives and was chief Christian clerk of
the Dey of Algiers, "returned to me with Articles of s Treaty in Turkish & then
Englished, which Proves to be that of the Sweedes." The Swedish treaty here
referred to h the Treaty of Peace and @mmerce with Algiers of April 25/May 5,
1792, which was a renewal, with additrons, of a treaty of April 5/16, 1729. For
the Swedish text and a French translation, see Von Martens, Recueil des principaux trait&, 1st ed., VI, 296-311; 2d ed., V, 316-31. The substance of each of
the respective twenty-two articles of the Swedish and American treaties is in
general similar.
The date of the treaty is stated above in the two calendars according to the
original documents, namely, Saturday, September 5,1795, and 21 M a r , A. E. 1210.
According to the chronological tables the Mohammedan date corresponds to
September 6, 1795; however, the mention of the day of the week (see the opening
phrase of the translation of 1930) fixes the date definitively, and in this case there
is no doubt that 21 Safar, A. a. 1210, answers to September 5, 1795. From the
report of Donddson above mentioned i t appears that the money bargain, to which
the negotiations in reality wholly related, was struck on Saturday, September 5,
and the treaty was delivered by Cathcart to Donddson "the next morning."
* * * * [see source below-mentioned.]
[Treaties, ***", by Hunter Miller.]

List of Presents made at the Conclusion of the Peace between the United Gtatea
and the Dey & Regency of Algiers concluded 6 September 1706
rrhe original document itemizes several pages of presents to the Dey and his
suite. They included jewelry, linen, brocades, damask, broadcloth, and certain
indemnities amounting to1
Dollars

.%pins

Peace Presents- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 20016 Equal to 36028.80
Hire of Ragusan Brig whh came to
Alicante for me- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 277.56
500.00
Present to Hadgi Ali --------- - - - 922
1659.60
38188.40
21, 215.56
[SDA. CL, Algiers, Vol. I, Part I, April 1785-July 1795.1

[After 5 September 17951
American Captives released by Algiers, arrived in Philadelphia, Pa.
Mens Namas

Btations

I

W-

bslonging

Master---.---.---Baston
Isaac Stephens (Sehr Maria) .--.--.-------------------Ma@
-------------.
Ahr Fmg)h.
d~ - - - - - - - - - - . - -- - - - . -Boston
----

----------Thomas B i b @
d9 - - - - - - - - - - - - -Seaman
-.-- - - - -Bmton
----Philadelphia
Seaman-.-.---.--Jams Huse--------.--.-.-------------------------Besman ..----.--..
Pommouth, N. H.
P e w Page .---.----.--.-----.---.--.--.-.-----.
Beaman-.--.
..---.Lancaster in Pennsylvania
John Lemmon...-...--....--------------------------Beaman- ..-._---.Philadelphia
w
e0
- .
.... . .
..
.- Portsmouth N . H.
Master
-.
---.
William Furnass (brig Of& Branch) .....-------------.
Nath l Koin
d9
.
.
Ditto
Ditto
Danl Fall
d~
--..---.-.-...----.
DO.-.------------Ditto
John Earl
d?
---------------..-DO...---..---.---.
---------.--------------.-.--..-.-.--------Oeo. Bnebanan (of Philadelphia---..-.---------------Haverhill
Moseg M m (Brig. Jane) - - - - - - - - - - - . -Mastar
- - -..------.---..-.-.
Mate---..--.-.---Balsm
Edward Harwood dv
8saman--..----....
Ditto
James Pesse
d~ -.-_-----------------------Ditto
Saml Henry
dq
---.-.-.-..-....--.--------Ditto ---.-------.~itte
Thonus Fry
do
.--.--__-------------------itt to --..--..----.
Havsrhlll
Dim---..------.Thomas Sfmmons dv
...-..--.--.---------------Philadelphia
24 Mate.-...--..-.
John McFarlin.-------.-----------------------------&*unan----------.
DO
John Sotton--..--...---.-------.----------------Do
Ditto .....-.--.--John Fittzjmdd
Norfolk
Ditto..- ..--......
Chsrles Smith
Philadelphia
Ditto.--.-...---..
ThoBudding.-.-.----..--------------------------ProvidBncB
DltW
W POrafton
.
.
.
.
g
T
g
T
g
T
g
T
g
T

..-~.-~..~--~.leslesleslesleslesles.lesleslesles.lesleslesleslesleslesleslesleslesleslesles

--.-.----..ILILILILILILILILILILILILILILILILILILILILILILILILILILIL.ILILIL

---.........-

WRRS WITH BARBARY POWERS
American Captives released by Algiers, arrived in Philadelphia, Po.--Continued
Mens Names

Station6

Where belonging

.-..--....-..

Jmrph Deitz ~--.-.----....--------------------.------Phfladelphis
Ditto
Thomss Burgens. ._-..--..---..----..--------------Norfolk
Ditto- ---..__---..
Jacguin .--.-..-...-----------------------------------Ditto ....-..-..-..
Philadelphia
J
T
I- Mmter.------.---Newport R I.
Btsntrm Hazard .---.....--..-------------.--------Seaman
Uitto
Qideon Brown
Ditto
Ditto. -.---------Benjr Church ---.----.---.----.
......................
Sailor- ..---.-.
..--Newport. R I.
6aml Cdder-.--_----__..-----------------------------Qloucester
Master -----.--....
John Walker
Ditto
Mate...--.---.-.-Thomas Manning-.---.---..--------------------o r
Ditto
Timothy N e w (Ship Thomad)----..--------------Newbury port
Master ..---.--....
Norfolk
Qeome Welh
d~
.--.----..---.------M6te ---.----.---John Woodmansee
dv
------------...-----!2d Mate----------- B W o
Sailor------------- Balthore
Rcsmus Morton
d?
-..---.-.-----------Barney M~Olotharing d~
-.-.-...-----....-.-Sailor------..----.
Boston
Do
Pedro Lsman
d~
Do--------..--.--W r Dnnbar .--.-.---...-...----------------.---Do .-.-.----.--.-..
PhiIsdelphia
Sew York
Edwd Smith (brig. Mfnem)-.--.--.---..--..---------Mate .-----..---.-John PampIin
dv
---------..........-------Sailor--.-....----.
Ditto
Ditto
Philip New
d~
.-----......--------------Ditto --.-.-.---.-.
Peter Barny..-----.---..-------------.----.---.---.--Philadelphia
Mate--.-----.--...
James Allen .-.----.---.---._---.-.-_-...-__._--._--.-n
o
2d Mate .---...--.John Dioks
Baltimore
Sailor.-......---.Henry Pitson.----.------------.---..---..-.-.--------Philadelphis
Do .--.---.--.---..
Anthony R&1
Ditto
Do----.-.-.....--Beoj. Edwards (brig. Polly). .--.---.-.--------------Newbury port
Mate --.----..--.-.
W r Diron ---_-..---...-....--..-..-..-------------New York
Mate -....-.--.---Peter Ingrahm...-.-..-...--.--------.----.---------Do
21 Mate--...---.-Jsmss B y m e --...---.---.-.--..----------------------Do
Seaman..------.-James Fox..-..-.-.-.-...------.--..-----.--------Do
Do.-.-.-.---.--.-Benjamb Lnnt---_----------.------------------------Newbury port
Do .-..-----.--..-.
Harmon Alike---.-....------------------------.-----New York
Da --.-.-.----.---.
New York
John P. Peterson-----.-.--.--.-----------------------Do.-...---.------Cornelus Fanviforum.-...-.------.
-----.----.------Do.--......-.-....Do
J bh
.
.
. Do.
Do
Martin Deswart....-----.----------.---..---..-----.
Do
Do------.---.-.-..
Cornelus Wssterd& - - - - - - - - - - - - - - . - - - - - - - - -Do
------Do
-.---.-..------Peter Vandertown.--...-.----.-----------.--- - - - - - - Do.--.-.
DO
-_-.._--.
Jnv Fredrik Ackhert---..-.-.-.---------.-----------Do
Do.---.-...-.---_P e r B r i- Do Do
John
i c k w a.
..
. Do .
Do
..

--.-.--....--_---.----.--------------------.-----

.-..------.-------------------.----------.

..----...-----.-----.

.-.-------....--.---.-.---------------a----

_----..-.-----rr-rrrrr--rrrr--r------

.

.

[SDA. CL, Algiers, Vol. I, Part I, April 1785-July 1795.1

(7 September 17951
Instructions to Joel Berlow, U. 6. Agent, Algiers, from David Humphreys, U. 6.
Yhbter to Lisbon, Portugal, and in charge of negotiations with Berbary
Powers

COPY
(Secret & coddentid)
SIR. The French Republic having lately agreed to make use of its
influence in favour of the negotiations of the United States for Peace
$ 9 with the Barbary Powers, it becomes indispensable on our part to
take the most prompt, prudent & effectual measures in our power for
availing ourselves of the same. Upon the conference of the Minister
Plenipotentiary of the U. S. t o the French Republic, with the Cornmissioner of exterior Relations & the Members of the Committee of
public Safety charged with that part of the Department of exterior
Relations which respects the Barbary States, it is judged essentiall
for the interests of the U. S. that a Citizen of the said
States s ould be appointed to proceed immediately from hence to
&era.
The object of this arrangement, is, that the Person so
appointed should be charged with the special Instructions of the Goyernment of the French Republic to the Agents or Consuls of the m d
Republic in Barba
(particular1 in Algiers, Tunis & Tripoh) to
employ all the goo offices 8 d u e n c e of the Republic with those

8

necasY

'B

118

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1786 TO 1801

Powers, for the purpose of effecting a Pacification between them &
United States. For the accomplishment of this object you are
appointed: and you are moreover invested with full Powers on the part
of the United States (either solely, or in conjunction with Joseph
Donaldson Junior, to whom from partievlar considerations provisional
Instructions have already been given) to enter into a negotiation with
the Dey & Regency of Algiers and to conclude a Treaty of Peace
between them & the U. S., as well as a Treaty for the liberation of the
Citizens of the U. S. in captivity a t Algiers. In order that you may
be fully acquainted with the particular considerations before alluded
to, as well as with the present position of our affairs in regard to the
Barb
Powers beforementioned (so far as facts are known) I conceiveycannot do better than to furnish you (as I do herewith) with
Copies of all the Instructions which have been given to Joseph Donaldson Junr on the subject. From those Documents you will perceive
the unequivocal dispositions of our own Government, and the firm
reliance placed by us on the friendly & efficacious co-operation of the
French Republic, together with the frankness & good faith with which
our proceedings have been directed. On the general principles contained in those Instructions you will likewise act. As our Government has an unbounded confidence in the sincere desire of the French
Republic to yield effectual assistance towards our attainment of the
beforementioned objects; it is especially wished to be impressed u on
your mind, in the strongest manner, that the whole business, in alf' its
stages, ought to be carried on with the most perfect good faith, intelligence & concert with the Government of the French Republic.
All the particular arrangements with respect to your route, place
of embarkation & manner of co-operation are left to your discretion.
However, if no obstacles or objections (at present unforeseen) should
occur, it is 'udged that it would be eligible, on several accounts, which
have alre y been verbally communicated to you, for you to proceed
by the way of Alicante.
The cordial interposition of the French Republic in our behalf, and
the actual provision of funds by our Government to enable us to comly with such necessary stipu[lations] as may be made, place the
{usineas on a very d l e r e n t footing from what it has ever hitherto
been; and give us far greater reason to expect success than any other
circumstances, would have afforded. I t seems now to be the moment
for deciding, once for all, whether our means & the mediation of our
Ally, can offer sufficiently powerful motives to induce the Dey &
Regency to treat with us or not. - I have no doubt that yourself &
your Colleague, deeply impressed with a conviction of the great utility
to France as well as to the U. 8. of opening the Navigation of the
Mediterranean to our vessels, and animated with the lively hope of
being instrumental in delivering our fellow Citizens at Algiers from
the miseries of captivity, will exert every nerve for the accomplishment of those most desirable & important objects.
I n all possible events, it will doubtless be a great consolation to our
unfortunate fellow Citizens who are groaning in chains a t Algiers, to
be. convinced themselves, as well as to have i t known to their sym atlusing Countrymen a t home, & to the whole human Race, t at
nothing within the limit of the abilities of the United States, has been

d

%

119

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

left undone to rescue them from their deplorable situation, & to restore
them to the bosom of their Countrv and their friends.
Given a t Paris this 7" day of siPt~
1795.
D. HUMPHREYB.
[NA. SDA. Disp. Spain, Vol. 3, 1795-1797.1
[about 7 September 17951
To David Bumphreyr, U. 6. Minister to Lisbon, Portugal, and in charge of negotiatiom with Barbary Powera, from Jemee Leander Cathcart, Algiem

ALGIERB
7b9rlot? I796 & 6* Day of ow Rerunecfion
HONQSIB Nothing can eaqual the innate satissfaction of yr unfortunate countrymen in captivity on the hap y result of Mr Donaldsons embassy which was determined on Satur ay the 5* inst when the
banners of the United States was display'd in this Regenc & saluted
by the Marine Fortifications with 21 Guns, the partic ars of said
Negotiation you will be inform'd of by Mr Donaldson Monsr Skjoldebrand & CapM OBrien? suffice it to say that our affairs has been
attended with success even beyond our most sanguine expectations,
indeed it has been unparalel'd in the Annals of this Regency.
My Worthy Friend Capta OBrien will have the Honour of delivering
ou Mr Donaldsons dispatches with a small prest from his EhcelLncy the Dey. who esteems you as his Friend and Respects you as a
worthy & atriotic Citizen of the United States. You d p l e a s e to accept the most sincere thanks of myself & the
small remnant of Captives taken in 1785 for the share you have had
in our liberation as we are well convincJd that for the honour of our
Country & our own private benefit you have been infatigable ever
since you were charged with the Affairs of Barbary - I shall not
touch on our &airs at present as you will be informd of every particular by Cap?"OBrien but at some future period I hope to have the
honour of presenting you a relation of facts for the inspection of yourself & other Distingulsh'd Citizens of the United States. May that great & Omnipotent being that searches the most Hidden
recesses of the Heart reward you according to your Merits is the
sincere prayer of him that has no greater ambition than to stile
himself. * * *
P S, should you immagine I can be of any service to our Country I beg
you will honour me with yr commands as my Life liberty & property
are wholly dedicated to its service Honb!" D A V ~HUMPHREY~.
D
-

?‘

UT

[SDA. CL, Algiers, Vol. I, Part I, April 1785-July 1795.1
To Captain Thomas Tmxtun, U. S. Navy, from Secretary of War

[PHILADELPHIA]
War m
e October 10.1796
SIR. Understanding that you were in town, as well as Captains
Barry and Talbot, I wrote a line desiring that ou would meet with
Mr Humphreys, to consult on the dimensions ofthe masts and yard.
for the frigates, but it seems you had departed for Baltimore.
I now inclose you a Statement made by Mr Humphreys of the result
of different calculations, as to the total measurement of masts and
yards. They all exceed your dimensions

120

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1786 TO 1801

[Enclosure]
A tme Statement of the total lengths of the Masts and Yards for the Frlgates of 44 Guns. calculated from
the proportions laid down by the following Gentlemen.

According to

Mr

Steel's
system.

ing to

;zt;,

Accord- According to
ing to
Mr
Capt.
Humph- Tnumy's
tun's
propor- proportions.
tions.

z:g---Total length of Main Mast, Top Mast, and Top Gallant ditto,
with Royal ditto added together without any d e
duction for heads -------------------------------.221.7
214.3
212.6
210.11
ditto of Main Yard. Topsail ditto. Top Gallant ditto,
and Royal ditto-.----.---------------------------240.4
234. lo
237.6
226.1
ditto of Fore Mast, Top Mest, and Top Gallant ditto,
with Royal ditto------_.-----.-------------------197.1
199.8
198.0
197.4
dittoof Fore Yard, Topsail ditto, Top Gallant ditto,
218.0
and Royal ditto.---_-.----------------------.-.--220.0
214.1
211.5
dittoof Mizen Mast, Top Mast, Top Gallant ditto,
with Royal ditto--.----..--------.--------.------.
161.8
175.8
156.0
177.11
ditto
of Cross Jack Yard, Topsail ditto, Top Gallant
172.6
158.2
ditto, and Royal ditto ---..-.---.-..----.--.--.-.176.0
137.1

-

---1206.6

NOTE

- In Captain Tnutun's

included.

proportions, there is no Mizen

1203.7

1217.0

1140.6

- Royal Yard, or Mizan Royal Mast

[NDA. Correspondence, when Navy was under War Department, 1790-1798.1
To David Humphreys, U. 8. Minister to Lisbon, Portugal, and in charge of
negotiations with Barbary Powers from Joseph Donaldson, Junior, U. S.
Agent, Algiers

ALGIERS
October yV&? [I7195
SIR This moment Mr Skjoldebrand informs me he is dispatching
a person by land towards Gibraltar therefore take advantage to hand
you some communications from the Dey receiv'd this morning, thro.
Cathcart, in the first Place in consequence of the Arrival of Presents
from Tunis on the morning he was sending of[Q a Courier for Tunis
would be glad to know If I had any overtures for the Bey. this came
in Such a shape as to induce a belief (on his part) that I was disposed
& at the Same time instructed to tender terms in some measure Sunilar
to those Adjusted with him accordingly I inform'd him I did not consider myself a t Liberty to take up the Business with Tunis untill
matters was finally adjusted here this was only to Parry it for the
present knowing the Bey of Tunis had an Agent along with the Presents - Some tune elapsed when Cathcart return'd to me from the
Dey with the Annex'd Memo! handed him from the Lips of the Dey.
in answer I only reiterated what I had before offered & thus. it ended
with the Accustomed phrase bona bona -from the Tenor of your
Instructions I conclude the U. S. entertain not a distant Idea of any
thing Annually with Tunis or Tripoli I can not find that any State
but Venice maintain their Peace on these terms. the Sweede & Danes
only make Presents Occationally when they have a New Kin or a
New Bey is declared to them. I Shall take an opportunity of ee'
the Agent. of the Bey & Perhaps a Present to h.un whilst here
have its influence he shall be Sounded on this head as well in relation
to what may be the expectation of the Bey, from the U S. in the
mean while I am
Memo - from the Dey of Algiers relative to the Bey of Tunis
Octo 24/95

8%

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

121

For the Bey - Dollars 30,000. Peace Presents of Watches Clothes
$5 - and Annually 200C Lead
200 p"canons
50 Bbs Tar
3000. Cannon ball
15
Yards
50 do Pitch
10
Masts
50 Bls Gun Powder
and three
5
Cables
thousand
10 Hausers
Dollars for Hadge Ally. who is the
Agent now here 1 0 K Cordage
300 Pine Planks
300 Oak do
$5

NOVEMBER
2/95

SIR the forgoing is copy of my last respects. still I continue with
out any thing from you altho I have letters down to ye 219' Ultimo

from Alicant by which conveyance came to hand letters from the
Minister Lisbon to a Spaniard here dated the 16 ulto. the Purport of
which was to know if a Peace with the regency wasl'racticable and
the Probible terms I find the reply from the Dey was very Short. that
whilst things were in the Present Posture. hating a reference to the
dis ute with England he wou'd not make a Peace. but they might
regem their Captives. I do not b a r n on What Terms
What consequences M? Mace's departure may Produce I am not
able to divine. the Dey is so wavering a Character. - I now beleive
he regrets. Mace's departure and would take h s words back again.

* * *

I have requested the Dey as well as Hadge AIy to Propose a truce
for twelve month with Tunis & Tripoli as there is now Some Probibiity of an Accommodation. the Latter (to whome a Present has
been made at the recommendation of the Sweede) has promised his
influence at the Same time has no doubt. it will be Granted
the Dey has been told as he has got dl the money. that he must
dictate to the State of Tunis and rec'd us on our own terms this was
pleasantly receiv'd and I think Augurs well. the Jew tells me that
Hadge Aly is disposed to Serve us he is the Man that commanded on
the Service Against Tripoli and reduc'd it therefore an arrangement,
with Tunis is preparatory to Tripoli
What Promoted my request of a Truce was the Probibility of Some
of our Ships in consequence of the Brrangement m-ith Algiers, find the
Way into the perlieu of these States & be ca tured and render it an
other Algerine Business I have written to the ifferent Consul on the
Mediterranean to disuade Such Captains as Come within reach of
them to use their influence, on them there has Already two found the
Way to Cathagena to Embrace a high Freight offering for England &
Ireland This being the needfull I am

!b

[NA. SDA. Disp. Spain, VoI. 3, 1795-1797.1

[8November 17951
Copy of a Truce Concluded between the United States of America and the Begency

of Tunis

I n the name of God under our hands we give unto the american
Ambassador a, truce with our Regency for the United States of America, until he receives intelligence - from Arnenca for which we allow

122

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1786 TO 1801

the time of eight months b our specid order unto Hamada Bashaw,
ey of the City and Regency of W e r s
desires that he may command all the raises commanding vessels under
his command and jurisdiction not to damage plunder or impede in her
voya e any nmerican vessel until the time herein specified shall be
comp eted and they receive our second orders. Given under my hand
by order of Hassan Bashaw Dey of Algiers the 26'' of the Luna
Rahabia thani in the year of the Hegira 1210 which corresponds with
the 8" of November 1795.
Signed Hadge Ally Vikel or Charge des affaires and agent for the
Regency of Algiers and Tunis Translated by James Leander Cathcart

f Vizer Hassan Bashaw

d

9

ISDA.

CL, Algiers, Vol. I, Part I, April 1785-July 1795.1
[12 December 17951
Communicated to the United States Senate, 16 December, 1795

[PHILADELPHIA]
War O&e, December I%,1796.
SIR:By the direction of the President of the United States, I have
the honor to present, herewith, a report of the progress made in providing materials for the frigates, and in building them,
And am, most respectfully, sir, your obedient servant,

TIMOTHY
PICKEBING.

The VICE PRESIDENT
of the U. S.
and PRESIDENT
of the SENATE.
A statement of the progress in providing materirrle for the frigates, and in

building them
If the frigates had been constructed with the timber a t hand in the several
places where they were destined to be built, they might by this time have been
completed. But the design of rendering them permanently useful having determined the Executive to have them constructed with live oak and cedar, the
measures deemed necessary and adequate to the procuring of those materiala
were taken during the last year. The common and easy acquisition of those
articles for the ordinary service of the merchants forbade any a prehension of
extraordinary difficulty in procuring the same for the frigates. g u t in the experiment i t has been found, that timber of the bngths and sizes necessary for
frigate, was greatly dispersed, and grew generally in places difficult of access,
and required extraordinary means of transportation to the landing. The natural
difficulties of the country have been increased by unusual quantities of rain. Ship
cerpenters were sent from the Northern States to the islands bearing the live
oak, and employed during the last winter in cutting and hewing the timber: but
the c l i i t e deterred them from staying to proeecute their work; so that three
men only, capable of selecting the proper timber and moulding i t in the requisite
forms, have been prevailed on to remain. These, with negro laborers, have eontinued the work, and are still employed. With these, however, i t wae jud ed
practicable to procure the whole of the Live oak timber by the month of
1796. Such was the report of an intelligent agent employed in Georgia dunng
the lsst winter, and who has now returned hither to superintend, and, 8s far
possible, to expedite, the operations.
Upon this report, made in June last, it was judged eligible to concentre the
efforts that were making to furnish the yards w ~ t hhve oak timber, and sccordingly ordera were given to accumulate at two of the ysr& so much of i t as would
be necessary ta complete two frigates by the enauing 8pring. But before these
orcould reach the manager, s e v e d veasels were despatched to different
yards; and one was cast away and her cargo l&.
&me difficulty occurred in
procuring proper vessels to transport the timber: several of those which had made
one voyage having encountered such hardships and eicknass an to be deterred
from making a second.

dY,

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

123

Nevertheless, under all these embarrassments, the work is continued, and
with the well grounded expectation, before expressed, that all the live oak timber
will be cut and tramported to the different ship yards a t farthest by the next
midsummer.
Details of the quantities of timber and other materials already provided, and
of the progress in building, will appear in the annexed schedules. The live oak
and white oak timber mentioned are generally or wholly moulded and dre88ed
and ready for raising.
Since draughting the foregoing report, a letter has been received from the
chief carpenter employed in procuring timber in Georgia, presenting a very
favorable account of his progress. Two vessels laden with live oak had recently
sailed for the two yards of Philadelphia and Baltimore, and the rest of the timber
to complete the frames of the frigates building a t those places was cut and ready
to be shipped. These were the two frigates which, as before mentioned, it was
proposed first to finish. The chief carpenter adds, that if he is furnished with
vessels fit for the service, he will have all the timber in the six yards in the month
of May next, excepting the knees, all of which he thinks cannot be got of live
oak. The agent who engages the vessels for transporting the timber hm no
doubt of procuring timely all that will be wanted for the service.
Sail cloth has been provided for one suit of sails for each of the frigate. It
was contracted for, and manufactured in the United States, in the year 1794.
I t haa been proposed to procure one kind of foreign cloth, of a superior quality,
for the second suit: but the purchase haa been suspended, to avoid an expenditure of money until it could be ascertained a t what time the cloth would actually
be wanted to equip the frigates. For the like reason, no more hemp has been
purctmed than will be required for the cordage of the two frigates the building
of which i t was intended to advance in preference to the others; and which i t
was then hoped would be constructed by the close of the ensuing spring. For
the same cause, the number of anchors which will eventually be required remains
incomplete.
All which is respectfully submitted to the Senate of the United States.

DEPARTMENT
OF WAR,
December 12, 1796.

TIMOTHY
PICKERINQ.

Progress in building frigate at Baltimore, Maryland
Statement of progress made in building a Frigate, to carry thirty-six guns, a t
Raltimore, under the direction of Mr. David Stodder, Naval Constructor, and
Captain Thomas Truxtun, Superintendent. [Constellation]
The keel is completed and k i d on the blocks; the pieces are scarfed and bolted
to each other in the best manner. The stern frame is not quite complete. Near
two-thirds of the live oak timber for framing the ship is arrived; great part of
which is worked to the various moulds, and some part bolted together in frames,
and ready to go into the ship. The beams for gun deck and lower deck are
received, and are put to season. The plank for some of the decks is in the yard,
and ready for laying; most of the plank for outside and ceiling are ready, and
are in the yard. The copper for securing the various parts of the ship together,
and for sheathing the bottom, is in the public stores. The masts, bowsprit,
yards, and all the other spars, are cut, and ready to be delivered. The boats
are building; and the bits for the cables, comings for the hatchways, carlings,
ledges, and partners for the m a t s , are getting out. The principal part of the
iron work is done for the hull, and materials and all the necessary contracts are
entered into by the agents, and the articles contracted for are daily arriving.
Progress in building frigate at Boston, lldassachnsetta
Statement of the progress made in building a Frigate, to carry fort -four guns*
a t Boston, under the direction of Mr. George Claghorne, Naval 8omtructor,
and Captain Samuel Nicholson, Superintendent. [Comtitzction]
The keel is completed and laid on the blocks. The pieces are scarfed and
bolted to each other in the best manner. The stem frame is now completing,
and will be soon ready to r a m . The stern is also putting together, every p e
being worked to the moulds. About two-third of the live oak timbers have
been received, and are ell worked agreeable to the moulds; great part of those
timbera are bolted together in frames, and are ready t o put into the ship, but
some of the principal pieces for the frame have not yet arrived. All the gun
deck and lower deck beams are procured and ready for delivery, and the p h k
for those decks are received into the yard. The plank for ou&ide end ceiling

124

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1785 TO 1801

are slso received, and are now seasoning. The copper is alI in the public stores.
The masts, bowsprit, yards, and other spars, are all ready for working. The
b i b for the cables, coamings for the hatchways, partners for the masts, are all
ready. The caboose, with a forge, hearth, armorer's tools, spare coppers, boilers,
kc. are all complete. Most of the iron work is in great forwardnees. All the
necessary contracts are entered into by the agent, and the articles contracted
for are daily arriving.
Progress in building frigate at New York, H. Y.
Statement of the progress made in building a Frigate, t o carry forty-four guns,
at New York, under the direction of Mr. Foreman Cheeseman, Naval Constructor,
and Captain Sibs Talbot, Superintendent. [President]
The keel is completed and laid on the blocks. The pieces are scarfed and bolted
to each other in the best manner. The stem frame is not yet complete; several
transoms are wanting. About one quarter of the live oak timbers for the frame
of the ehip are arrived; all of which are worked to the molda. Timber for the
gun deck and lower deck beams are received, and the plank for those decks is
ready. The copper and the treenails are all in the public stores. The plank for
the outside of the ship, as well as the ceiling, are nearly all cut; great part are put
into the sea water to draw out the sap and to eeason them. The carlings, ledges,
comings for the hatchways, and bits, are sawing in the yard. The masts, bowsprit, yards, and the other spars, are procured, and ready for finishing. The kentledge for b a l h t is all cast and delivered; and the iron work for the hull and materials are now in hand; and the articles, when finished, are placed in the public
stares. All the necessary contracts are entered into by the agent, and the articles
are daily arriving.
N. B. A larce schooner with live oak, bound to New York, was unfortunately
lost on Cape Hatteras, and w e m Dart of the cargo lost. On board of this schooner
were man? of the principd pieckesof timber nec<ssary for the frame.
Progress in building frigate at Norfolk, Va.
Statement of the progress made in building a Frigate, to carry forty-four guns,
a t Norfolk, under the direction of Mr. Josiah Fox, Naval Constructor, and Captain
Richard Dab, Superintendent. [Chesapeake]
The keel ia completed and laid on the blocks; the pieces are scarfed and bolted
t o . v c h other in the best manner. The stern frame is complete and ready for
ralslng. More than two-thirda of the live oak for the frame is arrived, which is
worked to the various moulds; great part of the timbers are bolted together in
frames, and are ready for raising. The gun deck and lower deck are all finished,
and are ready to put into the ship. The plank for the decks is not yet arrived.
The outside lank, as likewise the ceiling, are preparing, and some part have been
delivrred. &the
l copper necessary for securing the various parts of the rhip
together, and for sheathing the bottom, is in the public atores. The keelson and
midship dead woods are complete. The maats, bowsprit, yards, and all the other
spars, are cut, and several of them are received at the yard. The carlings, led es
coaming for the hatchways, and the partners for the mast, are now in hand. ' f h ~
iron work for the hull and materials are getting ready. The caboose, with a
hearth, forge, armorer'e tools, spare coppers, boilers, kc. are complete. All the
neceesary contracts are entered into by the agent, and the articles contracted for
are daily arriving.
Progress in building frigate at Philadelphia, Pa.
Statement of the progrew made in building a Frigate a t Philadelphia, to carry
forty-four gum, under the direction of Mr. Joehua Humphreye, Naval Constructor,
and Captain John Barry, Superintendent. [United States]
The keel is comphted and kid on the bloch. The pieces are scarfed and bolted
to each other in the beet manner. The stem frame is complete and ready for
rsising. About two-thirds of the live oak for the frame is received, nearly all of
which ia worked agreeable to the moulds; and many of the frames are together
and bolted, and ready to put into the ship; two-thirds of the plank for outside and
ceiling are received, and a b u t one-third for the wales; the remainder ia nearly
ready. The beams for the orlop deck are all procured and worked, and many of
the up r deck beams are likewise worked, snd the remainder are expected to
A lvg quantity of l i r e oak t o e a are arrived for the security of th.

.

125

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

decks, and pieces for coamings for the hatchways, partners for the masts, and several other purposes, are ready. The masts, bowsprit, yards, and the other spars,
are procured, several of which are received. The copper necessary for securing
the various parts of the ship, and for sheathing the bottom, is in the public stores.
The iron work is now preparing and ready for delivery, as fast as i t is wanted.
The boiler for boiling the white oak plank in salt water, to render it durable in the
greatest possible proportion to live oak, is completed. All the anchors are procured, and the hemp for the cables and materials is now spinning and preparing;
all the canvass necessary for one suit of sails is in the public stores. The blocks
for the rigging are manufacturing, and a great part are ready for delivery. Kentledge for ballast is all cast and delivered; a contract for the treenails haa been
made, and next month appointed for delivery. Bunting for the colors is on hand,
and a great number of smaller articles, for the hull, rigging, and equipping the ship,
are stored in the public stores.
Progress in building frigate at Portsmouth, R. H.
Statement of the progress made in building a Frigate, to carry thirty-aix guns,
a t Portsmouth, N. H., under the direction of Mr. James Hacket, Naval Constructor, and Captain James Sever, Superintendent. [Congress]
The keel is completed and laid on the blocks; the pieces are scarfed and bolted to
each other in the best manner. The stern frame is nearly ready for raising. The
principal framing of the body of the ship is not yet complete. About two-thirds
of the live oak timber have been delivered into the yard, which is nearly all worked
to the moulds. Great part. of the timbers are bolted together in frames, and are
ready to go into their proper places. The beams for the gun deck and lower deck
are ready, as well as the carlings and ledges, for framing the decks; and the plank
for those decks are also procured, and great part are in the yard. The outside
plank and the wales are a11 cut, and will be ready in a few weeks, ss ia the ceilings;
great part of the plank are already received into the yard, and are now seasoning.
All the copper necessary for securing the various parts of the ship together, and
for sheathing the bottom, is in the public stores. The masts, bowsprit, yards, and
the other spars, are delivered by the contractors. The bits for the cables, coamin@ for the hatchways, partners for the mssts, are all received and trimmed
Most of the iron work is in great forwardness, and all the necessary contracts are
entered into by the agent, and the articles contracted for are daily arriving.
[Am. State Papers, Nav. Af., Vol. 1.1

117951
Passport granted by the Dey of Algiers to an American Vessel
[Translation]

in the yeare. 1210 - the 23c day of the munth. Saphir in this war
like city of Algiefl the American nation. who has made peace with
us - for this American Vessel and her Crew - to navigate with this
passport for 1 yt this is to certify that the Bearer or possessor of this
Passport is a true American and allso the Crew - and if navigateing
on the Seas - he should meet a Corsaire belonging to al 'ers or this
Regency - or Tunis Tripolia or Morrocca - theb] s all not be
permited to detain or molest, or stop him his Crew - Cargo - and
Vessel - and assen ers that might be - on board - but imrnediatly
let said Vesse in a1 Security continue her destined Voyage - and
for this purpose the[y] have requested this Passport. which I have
given and Slgned with my hand - and Sealed with the public Seal
of this regency So that if in case any a erine Corsaire should in any manner -stop
hinder or Molest Suid essel cargo - & crew - the Comander of
said Cruiser - or offender shall by me be severely punished - &
restitution made if a corsaire of Tunis or Trjpoly - or Morrocco should in any Manner injure stop. or molest s a d Vessel -thire government shall be obliged to punish the Said offender and Make restitution. of all damages for t h purpose we have given this Passport to be

&:

f

f

$"

126

NAVAL OPERATIOATSFROM I785 2'0 1801

presented to every corsaire of the above Mentioned nations that the Said American Vessel may - meet -4th.
Signed & Sealed by HASSAN
BABHAW
Dey - of Algiers [SDA. CL, Algiers, Vol. I, Part I, April 1785July 1795.1

[4 January 17961
To David Humphreys, U. 6. Minister to Lisbon, Portugal, and in charge of
negotiations with Barbary Powers from Hassan Bashaw, Dey of Blgiers

COPY
Hassan Bashaw Dey of the City & Regency of Algiers, unto the
HonbleDavid Humphreys, Minister Plenipotentiary from the United
States of North America at the Court of Portugal and Charg6 des
Affaires de Barbaria.
Whereas our Messenger or Envoy, Joseph Donaldson, concluded
a Treaty o Peace between the United States of America and this
Regency on the 5" of Septr 1795. The Copy of which was forwarded
for your Inspection on the lltbof said Month by Capt? Richard
OIBrien. From which time four Months, has expired without the
least Ratification on the part of the United States of America: which
makes me doubt the authenticit of the said Donaldson's Commission,
notwithstanding my Christian Jlerrk has absolutely informed me that
he was authorised by the Sign Manual of His Excellency George
Washington, President of the United States of North America and
confirmed by the Great Seal of the said States: Nevertheless, I cannot
help doubting the Veracity of his Credentials untill I hear persondy
from you either to object to his proceedings or confirm them.
I therefore desire that you may immediately dispatch a Courier on
receipt of this to inform me of the cause of such detention, as the
Divan in general are, very impatient, and by discontenting them, it
is out of my power to remedy the fatal consequences that m e h t
ensue - even to risque the ruin of your cause in t h Regency
~
dunng
my Reign and for a number of years afterwards. I therefore recommend Dispatch.
HASSAN
BASHAW
Dey of the City & Regency
L. S.
of Algiers done in the Dey's Palace
Algiers the 4" of JanrT 1796
By Order of the Dey JAMES
LEAD^ CATHCART.

9

[NA. SDA. Disp. Spain, Vol. 3, 1795-1797.1

To Chairman of Committee of the Eouse of Bepresentativea from Secretary of

War

[PHILADELPHIA]

W ~OfFce,
T Janua y 2'0,1796.
SIR: f have the honor to send, herewith, for the information of the
committee to whom was committed the report on the frigates, the
best returns of materials provided, and yet wanting, that can be
formed, together with an account of the Foneys expended, and the
sum necessary to complete their construct;on and eqmpment, exclusively of men and provisions; this s u m b e q estimated at $453,272.

Honorable JOBIAH
PARKER,
Esq.

TIMOTHY
PICXERING.

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS
No. 1.
Report, kc. agreeably to a request of a committee of the House of
Representatives of the United Strttes, appointed to inquire into the
state of the Naval Equipment, viz:
To the first inquiry, I am of opinion that, on the most minute
calculation that I can possibly make or procure, from a general
consultation of the different persons concerned in the building and
equipment of the frigates, that their actual cost, when completed,
w1t.h ordnance and ordnance stores, including powder, k c . (but without being provisioned or manned) will be one hundred and twenty
dollars per ton. That the four forty-four gun ships will tonnage,
according to the new mode of measurement adopted by the carpenters
of this port, six thousand eight hundred and fifty-two tons, and that
the two ships of thirty& guns wiU tonnage two thousand six hundred
and sixty-six tons.
Consequently the six frigates will measure nine thousand five
hundred and eighteen tons, which, at the rate of one hundred
and twenty dollars, aforesaid, will cost ------------ $1,142,160
Deduct appropriation made by a former act of
Congress for budding the said frigates, &c. exclusive of eighty thousand dollars appropriated for
galleys, k c - - - . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
688,888
Further provision necessary to complete the six
frigates for sea, according to above calculation,
manning and provisions excepted---- - -------- - - - -

453,272

In the accompanying paper, No. 2, is s n account of all money disbwsed, or paid to the different agents and purveyor of supplies,
including the sum of ------ dollars, remitted to our minister in
England, for the purpose of purchasing copper and sundry other
materials, and will be accounted for by them, respectively.
No. 3 wilt show the materials on hand, and No. 4, such as are still
wanting in the yards and stores; many of which are procured and will
be speedily received.
No. 5 is an estimate of the further sum supposed to be necessrtry to
completely equip one forty-four and one thirty-six gun frigate, lf the
others should be discontinued.
From the present arrangements that are made, and apparent propect, i t is expected that the six frigates may be b d t , launched, and
completely equipped, in the course of the present year; and that one
fourty-four and one thirty-six may be completed with great ease by
the month of November next a t furthest.
The foregoing is, at the request of the Secretary of .War, made out
and submitted for his inspect~onand revision by h s very humble
servants,
TENCEFRANCIS,
Purveyor,

THOMAS
TRUXTUN,
JOSHUA
HUMPHREYS,
Navy Gonsbrplctor,
Josua Fox,Navy ~ondmccbor.

PEII~&ELPBIA,

Janwty 13,1706.

Nos. 2, 3, 4 and 6 are on pages 20 to 25, American State
Papers, Naval Affairs, Vol. I.]
[Am.State Pepere, Nav. Af., Vol. I,]
[Nm.-Papers

128

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1785 TO 1801
Circular from Secretmy of War

[PHILADELPHIA]
War m e January 25"h1796
C~rmrlarto the Naval ConstmcSIR The Masting the Frigates now building
tors and the Supennteadents
- - - - - - - - - - - having been submitted to several Gentlemen of
Capt DALEbeing absent h ~ s
determlnatlon m o t be had - considerable abilities and reputed skill in Naval
Affairs, for their opmon as to the best proportions for Masting the two Classes of Ships so
as to answer all the purposes necessary for
Ships of War - but a diversity of opinions
having arisen on the length of particular Masts
and Yards, I am induced to propose, that the
Captain, and Constructor, of each Frigate,
shall have liberty to Mast and Spar their own
Ship according to the best of their judgements You will therefore pay an i m m d a t e attention to this Subject, in which the Constructor
(or) Capt.' (----) will assist, and the result of
your united opinions you will sign, that it may
be transmitted to this OEce as soon as convenient specifying very minutely, the exact length
and diameter of each Mast, Yard and Bowsprit.. also the length and size of Mastheads
and Yard Arms that they may be recorded in
this Office - - - [NDA. Correspondence, when Navy was under War Department, 1790-1798.1
Communicated to the House of Representatives, 29 January 1786

Mr. Parker, from the committee appointed to inquire into the
actual state of the naval equipment ordered by a former Jaw of the
United States, and to report whether any, and what, further provision
is necessary to be made on this subject, reported:
That, by a law, passed the 27th of March, 1794, i t was enacted that
six frigates should be built for the protection of the trade of the
United States against the Algerines, then a t war with the United
States; that four of the frigates should carry forty-four guns, each,
the two others thirty-six guns, each. By this law it was enacted,
that, in case of a peace with Algiers, no further proceeding should be
had under the said act.
That, on the 9th of June ensuing, an act passed, appropriating six
hundred and eighty-eight thousand eight hundred and eighty-eight
dollars and eighty-two cents, for the purpose of carrying on the
building and equipping of the six frigates ordered by the preceding
law; and the sum of eighty thousand dollars was appropnated, by
the said act, for the building of galleys or other vessels, as the President
of the United States might direct; the above sum of six hundred and
eighty-eight thousand eight hundred and eighty-eight dollars and
eighty-two cents, a t the time of passing the act, was thought would
be sutficient to build and e uip the said frigates; and they might
have been built and equippe in one year, if common materials had
been put together, and the size of the frigates had not been extended.
But it appears to your committee, that, after the law passed, the
President of the United States, under whose direction they were to

1

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

129

be built, deemed it most advisable to extend the size of the frigates,
and determined that they should be near three hundred tons la er,
each, than the committee who reported on the naval armament ad
estimated; that, instead of making use of common timber for building
the frigates, he caused the best live oak and red cedar to be got in
Georgia, from whence i t was to be exported to the different naval
yards, established under his direction, a t the following places, viz.
one at Portsmouth in Virginia, one a t Baltimore, one a t Philadelphia,
one a t New York, one st Boston, and one a t Portsmouth in New
Hampshire; a t which places much of the timber has arrived, more is
daily expected, and the whole is probably contracted for, and may be
expected in the different yards by May or June next; as may more
fully appear by a letter from the Secretary of the Department of
War, received the fourteenth of December last, to which the committee beg leave to refer.
Your committee further report, that, from the best information
they can obtain, in consequence of the increased size of the frigates,
the additional expense of live oak and red cedar timber, and the
unexampled rise of labor, provisions, and all other articles necessary
to the equipment of ships of war, since March, 1794, when the law
was passed for providing a naval armament, that the cost of the six
frigates, exclusive of provisions and men's wages, when equipped for
sea, will amount to one million one hundred and fifty-two thousand
one hundred and sixty dollars; hence, if they are to be completed,
they will require the further sum of four hundred and fifty-three
thousand two hundred and seventy-two dollars-a sum, in the opinion
of the committee, which i t would be inexpedient to apply to this
object, whilst labor, provisions, &c. &c. remain a t the present advanced prices; and as the committee are of opinion that many of the
articles on hand may be preserved a long time without injury, and
such as are of a perishable nature may be sold without loss, if not to
advantage; and as the primary cause for which the six frigates were
to be built is probably accomplished, although the committee reluctantly give up the idea of finishing the whole for the present, are of
opinion that two of the frigates, one of forty-four uns, and one of
thirty-six guns, should be finished as soon as possib e; which, in the
opinion of the committee, may be effected with the money already
appropriated, and completed by November next. Therefore,
Resolced, As the opinion of this committee, that, as there is a peace
with the Emperor of Morocco, and good reason to believe that there
is one with Algiers, that only two of the six frigates should be completed a t present, and that as speedily as possible; and that the
President of the United States should be authorized to dispose of such
part of the materials procured, as may be of a perishable nature, after
reserving a sufficiency to complete one frigate of forty-four guns,
and one of thirty-six guns. That the surplus be secured in the best
manner the nature of the case will admit, to be rfeady whenever Congress may deem i t advisable to direct the fi~lishngof the other four
frigates.
Resolved, As the opinion of this committee, that the surplus moneys
appropriated for bullding of frigates, after completing two of them,
should be applied to the sinking fund, for the reduction of the public
debt.

f

f

[Am. State Papers, Nav. Af. Vol. 1.1

130

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM l?'Sb TO 1801
[February 179611

Bemarks and Observations relative to the New Brig, for the Dey of Algiers
Said Brig is building of Ceder and live Oak.
Copper bolted Spiked. & Cop er Sheathed.
is 75 feet Strait rabit by the Reel
27 feet Beam.
11 feet in the Howl
4% feet Solid waist
10 ports a t Each Side, bridle ports included
to have two Stern Chace ports.
to have for a Swivel. fitted. between Each gun
and for 2 forward. and 2 aft. over the Stern
to have row ports, between Each Gun,
and 2. or 3 row orts t o the Stern.
to have a flush 8 u n deck fore rand aft.
with all the requisite ring bolts and Eye bolts,
requisite for her batteries. with her hatches gratings
Skylights cabin companion, cable & bowsprit bits & Ms T. St S. bits
a bittacle a t Each Side of the Companion, with a light house &$
to finish the fore end, as a hen coop*
to have 2 Shieves in Each Cat head - 2 Cat blocks, 2 Bumkins.
A Ca stan. 2 good Chambered pumps, pump well Snug - Pump geer,
The &lop. or tween deck t o run fore and aft. The part that forms
the Cabin. t o have a t Each Side Cleare 2 births of Cabins
to have A Slideing door, to the Cabin bulkhead, to have a Cobuse no house
about one for 40 or 50 men with an Oven
a large Skylight over the Cabin.
The Orlop deck. to have long grateing hatchway
A small ssilroom
A powder Magazine. and filling room on the best plan
Carved work the Brig to have a light airy head. a tyger destroying. a wild Cat
On the Quartem. a very airy nice Badge.
on the Stern to hsve 3 haif Moons, 2 gun boat locks chains &?
1 Capstan 4 hauze holes,
Said Brig to steere with a tiller & above to have a n Iron one to Ship Occasionally
M a t e war dimensions. the main mast 9 or 10. feet longer then the foremast
the foremast to rake aft about a point. the main mast 155 point rake aft.
to be well apart. the topmasts to be Equally alike the yards dq the top GI!
masts dq, 80 that the tower y a ~ d is
s alike. the tops! yards d9 top G!' d~
The Main boom to be 12 feet. Over. the stern. the gaf $ the length of the boom
Spritsaii yard and topsail yards alike, the Main Sail to peak well
The Jib boom & flying Jib boom in One. 20 Sweep. 27 feet long
The bowsprit on a Customary Stive
2, 32 feet. for the Stern
GUNS.
to have 2 Spare topmasts.
2 dq top.grt masts.
22 Six pounders
I Spare top eail gard
23 Cariages for d~
Cariages to have a brace or sweep
2 Spare top $ y .
1 Spare mya? yard forward - for the fore part,
2 Spare top m a t Studing sl booms
50 rounds. shot - 1100 550
double head 550
275
2 dq Top gl!
1 Spare gaf. 1 rin tail boom & david - Canister dq
550 - 275
& light yards for%tuding Saila Powder Magazine & filling room on the
Match rope
best phn Powder
220 Catridgee filled 50
Catridge boxes 22
1 Iron crow Small to Each gun
Each gun to have
24 Gunners Hand spikes
Britchen [Breechingal & 3 tackles
12 ladles & worms. on the Same Staff.
22 powder horns worms bits &q
Water Casks 20 Puncheons Iron bound
10. 60. GaIlon Casks. 8 bucketh. 1 funnel 1 Copper Pump
T o hsve 3 anchors. that is two bowers & 1 sheet & 1 Kedge
tv. have cables 100 fathom? Each b Cotrespond with Said Anchors
6. lower Shrouds. of a Bide fore and aft.

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

131

4 topmast Shrouds a t Each Side
No royal Stayr
to have a Martingal
A Standing backsta & breast. d9
1 hour glsss.
lower S t a p Spring J t a p
1 half. hour d~
Top Mast Sta &Q Spring Stay*
TOP GG"stayt g o n travellers
1% Minute glsss
Pendants to the foremast & main mast. 1 of % Dq
Each Vessel to have this number of
& yard tackles. 2 Cat blocks 1 fish hook
2 Main Sheets. Peek & throat haliards
Glasses
to unhook Occasionally,
Yards. to Sling with rope & Iron Chain
Solid Chains. no brace pendants.
1 boat. aa long boat as described to Mr [Joshua] Humphrey9
Said boat Cutter riged to have a well & windless.
This Brig to have in all
to row 2 Oars. on Each Bench1 Yawl. to Stow in the long boat
20 Men 1 Yawl to hang over the Stern
The large Schooner 15 The Small One 13
2 Brass Corn asses 1 wooden d~
1 american &sign Pendant & Jack
1 broad pendent.
1 Algerine Ensign & Pendantj entirely
*
red. 1large Speaking Trumpet 1 Small.
1 log reel 12 lines 2 leads. 1 dipsie d9

-

-

This brig. is Strongly recommended. to Comnnd. Cap+John Smith
No 17 Wine Street.
SAILS
All Omisions herein not Mentioned to
2 foresails
be attended to.
2 fore to mast Stay sails
1 Jib. 1 fib. of Jibbs
3 topsails alike Each 3 reefs.
24 Lanthorns
3 top GI?Sails. alike 1 reefe Each.
3 Royals.
2 lower Studing Sails.
2 topmast Ds 1reefeTinEach
2 top G'! d~ - d~ reefe.
1 Main Staysail
1 Main topmast Staysail
1 Midle d~
1 top C%' dQ
1 Cross Jack Sail Called Square M Q SJ
2 top Mast Studing Sails aft.
2 top G'! dQ
1 Main Sail fore & aft.
1 Tracil
1 Ring tail
1 Water Sail
long boat 3 Sails.
1 Awning tarpolians
Coats to the masts & umps
& top Cloths Ruther Eoat,
*In the Brig the Companion Should Open forward. and the Bittacle. could.
be. aft of it. look. out & plan & contrive to advantage, Every 24 beam to the Gun
deck to. be. well Stantioned [Note: The original of this document was undated, but was bound with other
manuscripts dated February 1796. However, i t is believed the date should be
1797.1
[NA. SDA. CL, Algiers, Vol. I, Part 11, Feb-Nov. 1796.1
To Secretary of State from Richard O'Brien, London, England

Dr SIR:

LONDON
the 6" February 1796

[This letter begins with lengthy comment on money transactions and exchange
rates of different countries.]

132

NAV&

OPERATIONS FROM 1786 TO 1801

* * * I am Very apprehensive of some fatal conse uences. in so
much time haveing Elapsed. that as the Dey and binistry, has
received. the sum of 60 thous# Dollars in pfesent.?. and that the Dey
expected the money - agreed on, to be m A1 ers by November.
and finding it not likely to come soon, that he
declare the treatie
void. and send out his Corsairs - to try and capture the American
Vessels that has Very imprudently entered the Meditteranian.
even that we are a t peace with Algiers we are a t war with Tunis &
Tripolie. the Corsairs. of Tunis is 12 Sail. and I am affraid that man
Americans will be Captured by the Tunieians if so - depend it
be difEcult for the U S. to make apeace with Tunis it. would make
the Terms exorbitant. and it is in vain for the U S, to make apeace
with Tunis untilI all our agreements with &ers is fulfilled. as Tunis
is Tributary to Algiers & biased by its influence
relative to Sending the Maratime & Military Stores to AIgiers
which was agreed on by Treatie, you d
l Judge of Course when i t
can be. done. with prudence. or Safety,
Be convinced. of all possibly in the power of Dr Sir yr Most Obc
Servt
RICH^ OBRIEN
that was 10 yrP & 40 day! in Captivity
OF STATE
of the US. A To the SECRETARY

d

[NA.

SDA. CL, Algiers, Vol. 1, Part 11, Feb-Nov. 1796.1

Presumably to David Hnmphreye, U. S. Kinister to Lisbon, Portugal, and in
charge of negotiations with Barbary Powers,from James Leander Cathcart*,
Algiers

ALGIERSFeb? the 6th 1796
H o d SIR- Give me leave to inform you that on the evening of

the 28'? of Jan? the Spanish Packet arived here, which brought y.p
of the 14th of Deer informing us of your having dispatchd OBrien in
the Brig [Sophia] to London &g I immediately conjectured that this
transaction would take up more time than the Dey would allow for
Cornpleating our affairs, & consulted hfonsr Slijoldebrand on the subject, when u-e mutually agreed that the prudentest step to take would
be to inform his Excellency of the difficulty's which had arose in raising
the money in Lisbon & at the same time to make him a small present
in yr name, informing him that you had gven Yr assent to all Mr
Donaldsons transactions? but that the affairs of Europe were so embroil'd a t present you found i t difficult to raise so large a sum immediately, but that his Excell? might depend you were doing every
thing in.yr power to have the money forwarded as fast as possible,
this we Mrnagined was the only way we could adopt to gain time as
the Deys patience is nearly exhausted, & the enernles of our Country
are continuall~ltaking advantage of every delay in order to render
the Dey & Divan unfavourable to our cause & favourable to the
Portuguese who actually has agreed on Terms with the Dey for a
Peace & Redemption of their Captives, as the Dey's Broker has
infom'd me in confidence, & that Don Juan Garigo the private
Agent for Portugal has forwarded his dispatches with these in order
to have a person sent here from the Court of Portugal to Ratify said
agreement, whom he expects wiU be dispatched in a Frigate on the
Arival of said Dispatches -

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

133

Mt Donaldson said he could not think of making any more presents
to the Dey as he had no Orders for so doing & had actually exceeded
his Orders all ready, the consequence of which was that on the 299
a t 2 P M the Dey sent for me and interrogated me relative to the
News, Mr Donaldson had recq by the Packet, I inform'd his Excellency of the particulars painting every thing m the most favourable
light, but the present was wanting in order to strengthen the Dey's
beleif and to persuade him we were sincere which he seems much to
doubt, he accordingly discredited every thing I inform'd him of &
told me the Agents of the U S were trifling with him, & notwithstanding that I tryed every means practicable to persuade him to the cont r a y , he order'd me to inform M': Donaldson that he expected our
a f f m would be entirely compleated in one month from the arival
of the Packet, otherwise he should consider every thing we had
allready done to be void and would treat us as a set of Imposters,
that he would order all the Americans that are now exempt from
labour down to the Marine in their former stations & order M' Donaldson immediately out of the Country & would never admit of another
Negociator on the part of the U. States
I informed the Dev that it was im~ossibleour affairs could be settled
in one month from &.is date and big7dof him to grant a longer space
this he denied * * *
Since the 29!b of January I have solicited the favour & interference
of many of the Grandees of this Regency who has promised to use their
influence with the Dey in our favour which I hope will produce a good
effect, as his Excellency has since said that if the American Ambassador
at Lisbon could not have procured the whole sum at once, that had he
sent but one half or even a third of the Sum exacted he would be content as that would persuade him the Americans were sincere & intended to fullfill their agreement, but to his Sirprize five months had
elaps'd with out receiving the least assurance of our Treaty being
ratded nor even a line from the Ambassador empowr'd with the
management of Barbary affairs a t Lisbon This Sir is a true Statement of our affairs at pest & have no more to
add, but submitting all to yr mature deliberation I beg leave to Subscribe myself wi,th the greatest respect [*Attention is invited to a narrative of his experiences in "The Captives" by
James Leander Cathcart.]
[NA. SDA. Disp. Spain Vol. 3, 1795-1797.1

[7 February 17961
[NOTE - On 7 February 1796 David Humphreys, Lisbon, wrote to James
Leander Cathcart, Algiers, a lengthy account of conditions in the Mediterranean.
Many salient features of this fifteen page letter are covered in other letters and
resum& included in "Naval Documents". The above-mentioned account may
be found in State Department Dispatches, Spain, volume 3, in National Archives,
Washington, D. C.]

[lo February 17961
Appointment of Joel Barlow as U. 6. Agent, Algiers

Dayid Humphreys, Commissioner Plenipotentiary from the United
States of America to the Dey & Regency of Algiers:
To all to whom these Presents shall come, - Greeting.
Whereas a Provisional Treaty of Peace & Amity hath been concluded
between the United States of America and the Dey & Regency of

134

NAVAL OPERATION8 FROM lr85 TO 1801

Algiers, which ha& been trammittad to the Executive of the said
States; whereas i t hath not been possible to have received Instructions
from the said States since the beforementioned Instrument was forwarded to the Executive thereof; and whereas, in the mean time, i t
may be essentially necessary for the interests of the two Nations, that
some competent Person should be named, to act (on such indispensable
occasions as shalI occur) on behalf of the United States within the
Regency of &em, until a Consul or Agent shall be duly a pointed or
until the pleasure of the Government of the sELid United tates shall
be known:
Now therefore Know ye, that, reposing special trust & confidence
in the abilities and integrity of Joel Barlow, I have named him the said
Joel Barlow a temporary Agent to take charge of the interests of the
United States of America within the Regency of Algiers, hereby committing to him such power necessary for the purpose, as, in virtue of
my o m Appointment and Instructions from the Executive of the
United States, I may have a right to commit to him. Whereupon I
recommend to all Captain, Masters and Commnnders of Ships or other
Vessels armed or unarmed sailing under the Flag of the said States,
as well as to all others of their Citizens to acknowledge and consider
him the said Joel Barlow accordingly. And I do hereby pray and
request the most Illustrious and Most Excellent the Dey and Governors of the City and Kingdom of Algiers to permit the said Joel Barlow fully a d pewably to enjoy and exercise the said Agency, without
giving or suffering to be given unto him any molestation or trouble,
but on the contrary to afford him all proper countenance & assistance.
Given under my Hand and Seal, a t the City of Lisbon, this
L. S.
10'" day of February in the year of our Lord 1796: and
of the Independence of the United States the twentieth.
DAVIDHUMPHREYB.

E

[See note on letter to Secretary of State from Joel Barlow dated 4 May 1796.1
[NA. SDA. Disp. Spain, Vol. 3, 1795-1797.1

To the Captains, Mates and Seamen of the United States, in Algiers, from David
Humphreys, U. 6. Xhister to Lisbon, Portugal, and in charge of negotiations
mth Barbary Powers

LISBONFebY 16?b1796.
MYDEAR FELLOW-CITIZENS.The object of this letter, is, to assure
ou, that you are neither forgotten or neglected by our Country.
have written a letter, by this conveyance, to His xcellency the

fDey, stating truly the inevitable obstacles which haveI retarded the

completion of our Arrangements with the Regency, until this period;
and which may perhaps still protract the delay for some time to come.
I have also written explanatory letters, in a coplous manner, to Mess"
Barlow (who, I hope, will soon be in Algiers) Donaldson, Cathcart,
& @ - Impossibilitiw cannot be effected; but whatsoever is in its
nature practicable, will be done in your behalf.
Let me, therefore, my dear Countrymen, once more (and God
grant, it may be the laat time I may have occasion to do it) exhort
you to be of good courage, to exert all our fortitude, to have a little
more patience, to hope always for the est, and to be persuaded that
every
is doing, & shall be done, which the nature of the c h u m stances
admit,foryourrelief. * * *
[NA. SDA. Dm. Spain, V d 1795-1797.1

%

g

135

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

To Joel Barlow, U. S. Agent, Algiers, from David Humphreys, U. 8. Minister to
Lisbon, Portugal, and in charge of negotiations with Barbary Powers

LISBONFebT 16"P 1796
MY DEARSIR: I wrote to you on the l* instant, acknowledging
the receipt of your letter of the 23d of Dec' and advising you to remain
a t Alicant, until ou should hear farther from me. I now write to
ou by M! Rob: bontgomery, as I at that time intimated I should
Lave an opportunity of doing.
In the present very ill state of Mr Donaldson's health, I have
thought i t expedient for the promotion of the public Service, to name
you to ACT in the Regency of Algiers, in a Consular or other capacity
until the pleasure of Government shall be known, delegating by a
Commission of AGENCY
all the power which I might have a right to
delegate for the purpose. I have also made out new Powers of
Agency to you & Mr Donaldson, to act jointly or seperately, in the
negotiations with Tunis & Tripoli, as the circumstances may require.
Those Instruments are enclosed herewith, as also the Letters Patent
from the President of the United States, ap ointing me Commissioner
Plenipotentiary to those two States. ~ncyosedyou will also find, a
Copy of my original Instructions to Mr Donaldson on the subject of
the proposed negotiations with them: to the tenour of which attention
is stdl to be paid accordingly.
I hope the business will now be resumed under happy auspices, &
carried on under the favorable influence of the Government of the
French Republic. The reason given by M' Donaldson, Capt?
O'Brien & others, why that could not have been done a t Algiers, a t
the moment when the negotiation was concluded, is, that the French
Agent General for Barbary (Hercules) had not arrived a t that Place,
and that the actual Consul General, being aristocratically inclined,
was not very favorable to our interests, Or, at least, that he had done
things to rmse the demands of the Dey, which were already too high.
I have given these circumstances, with their authority, as the came
to me, to Mr Monroe, in order, that (if necessary) he might e able
to explain our conduct, so as to prevent unfavorable imputations, &
to demonstrate there was at least no intentional inconsistency in it.
You will find that parties prevail greatly in Algiers. - You will
have need of all your penetration - to see every thing - to watch
every body - and I am persuaded i t will require great prudence to
manaGe our affairs well, & to soothe the impatience of the Dey until
a remttance can be made to him.
I am sorry to learn by a Packet which has arrived this day, that
the Specie which was expected from England, & for which I had
sent CaptW9Brien,in a Brig belonging to the United States, cannot
be expected from thence. I apprehend the vessel will be obliged to
go to Hamburg for it. At all events, a delay of some months must
still (in all human probability) intervene, before any of the Money
can be lodged a t Algiers. I have written a letter to the Dey (in
answer to one from hun to me) stating facts, & placing the matter as
fairly as I was able, on its true grounds. For honesty, I hold, to be
the best polic . I have, a t the same time, written much more in
detail, to MI Jathcnrt, Christian Clerk to the Dey. - * * *
Mr Philip Sloan, who came from America with me as Interpreter
&" for the Barbary negotiations, bein indisposed to continue any
longer immediately connected with
Donaldaon, I have advised

g

d

136

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1786 TO 1801

him to attach himself in that capacity to you. I think you will find
him useful & intelligent in the performance of that duty. * * *
Mr Cathcart has written to me respecting tho Ransom of a Person
by the name of C a m 1 - I have always understood that it is a
Custom, in all Treaties with the Regency, to redeem one or more of
such additional Slaves, as shall be indicated b the Dey for the
p u r ~ s e . I have only to suggest, that Mr Don dson & you would
enqurre into the Customs, & govern yourselves on the occasion by
your best discretion.
M' Cathcart has dso written to me, that he has a vessel which
m @ ~ tbe obtained on reasonable terms to carry our Citizens from
era to America: - The same discretion is, however, to be cons ted in providing the means of sending the Captives, with the least
expence & in the best manner, to the United States.
P. S. The reasons why I have proposed you to the Dey, as Agent;
rather than Consul, are; because the appointment appeared to come
more naturally from the Powers with which I am myself invested;
because it will comprehend the same functions; and because, i t seems
probable, that the Dey may not expect any present wit11 this Nomination, as he might perhaps with that to a temporary Consulship.
My aaxious hope & earnest expectation, is, that Mr Donaldson &
you will be able to interest the French Agents or Consuls in Barbary,
so far in our behalf, and that the Nation may become in a manner
Guarrantee to our Treaties.
I think you will have occasion for almost infinite discernment, to
discover pretended friends from real Enemies. - I have every reason
to entertain a good opinion of the Messw Skjoldebrands. On the
contrary Bussara (Mr Montgomery's friend & Correspondent) is
represented as a dangerous foe, under the mask of friendship.
Pray endeavour to soothe & comfort our Citizens in Algiers, as
much as possible. They may with truth be assured, every thing is
doing, that can be done for them.
Adieu

fil

v

[NA. SDA. Disp. Spain, Vol. 3, 1795-1797.)

[I6 February 17961
To Hersan Beshaw, Dey of Algiers, from David Bumphreys, U. 6. Bfbbter to
Lisbon, Portugal,and in charge of negotiations with Barbary Powers

David Humphreys, Commissioner Plenipotentiary from the United
States of America, to the Dey & Regency of Algiers, to the Most
Excellent & Most Illustrious H&asan Bashaw, Dey of the City &
Regency of Algiers:
In reply to the enquiries made in your letter to me, dated the of
Jan" 1796, May it please your Excellency to be informed, that the
Credentials of Agency given to Joseph Donddson Junior, are of
genuine authorit as emanating from the Powers derived from the
Executive of the 6!!tsd States of America; that the provisional Treaty
of Peace & Amity concluded on the fifth day of September last, between the Dey & Regency of Algiem and the United States [ofl
America, hath received m recognition (so far as I was able to recognize it) and been forwar ed to the Executive of the said States became i t is necessary (according to our Constitution) that i t should
be ratified by the President, by and with the advice and consent of

'f

WARS WITH BRRBARY POWERS

137

the Senate, before it can become the Supreme law of the Land; that the
delay which hath occurred originated from inevitable circumstances,
beyond the foresight or controul of human recaution - as will be
more fully explained in a letter to your Exce ency's Christian Clerk;
and, finally, that all possible measures are now taking for accomplishing the Arrangements as soon as the circumstances will admit, in a
manner which i t is hoped will be satisfactory to your Excellency but still it is impossible to say, whethar a considerable time must not
ela se before the Money can possibly be collected - as neither gold
or ilver, to the amount in question, can be exported from the Place
wbere all has every assurance & reason to expect i t would have been
in readiness for us.
In the mean time, having heard of the Sickness of MT Joseph
Donaldson Junior, the present Agent at Algiers, I have thought it
expedient for the mutual interests of our two Nations to delegate
to Mr Joel Barlow all the Power of Agency which I am capable of
committing to him,in order that he ma (by the Permission of your
Execellency) be enabled to perform all t e Consular and other Public
Acts necessary to be performed for the Service of the United States,
in hers, until a Consul or Agent shall be duly appointed on the
part of the said United States, or until the pleasure of Government
shall be lmown.
I pray God to have your Excellency in his holy keeping; and to
crown your life with length of days, felicity & glory.
Written at the Cit of Lisbon
This 16" day of geby 1796
L. S.
DAVIDHUMPHREYB.

e

8

E

[NA. SDA. Disp. Spain Vol. 3, 1795-1797.1
To Secretary of State from Richard O'Brien, London, England

LONDON
the 16tb February 17'96,
D: SIR I have by several Conveyances taken the liberty of informing
you that I arrived in this city the 10" ultimo, in the State Brig
John Cranson master. I being employed in the Service of the
Coloniel Humphrey! in receiving in London, the funds, of the U
which was to be appropriated to the Algerine business.
I am sorrow to inform you that in London Gold or Silver Cannot
be procured. I therefore return to Lisbon in the States Brig. with a
credit from Sir Francis Baring, for the requisite Sum on Cadiz Our
only hopes is that Col Humphrey? by some means will be able to have
permision granted by the Spanish Court for said sum to be Shipt,
on board the States Brig [NA. SDA. CL, Algiers, Vol. I, Part 11, Feb.-Nov. 1796.1
To David Bumphreys, U. S. Minister to Lisbon, Portugal, and in charge of negotiations with Barbary Powers, from Joel Barlow, U. S. Agent, Algiers

NQ2.

ALICANTE
$6 Feb. 1706.
(COPY)
MY DEAR SIR In consequence of letters just recQfrom Algiers b
Mr J. Montgomery & M' Sloan (probably similar to what you
recieve by this conveyance) I have changed my determination relative

4

138

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1786 TO ;1!301

to waiting the arrival of the funds, and shall sail the £irst fair wind.
It is now cont
, & I may be detained here on that account till
another post s a come from Lisbon. which I s h o d hope may
bring farther advice from you, as we understand from Mr R. Mont-

gomery's letter of the 16" that an English Packet had arrived, tho'
the letters were not distributed when he closed his of that date.
The situation of our &air seems critical and darning, and as I
concieve i t to be the interest as welt as the intention of the U. S. to
conclude the business a t almost any rate, I shall not hesitate to make
use of dl the means in my power to liee the treaty in suspence till
we are furnished with the funds to f u d it. The necegsity for this
becomes more pressing, as it is probable that many American vessels
are on their way to these seas in consequence of the news of the peace,
which will fall into the hands of the AIgerines the moment the negotiations are broken off.
I t seems the reason why the Dey wishes to take advantage of our
delay is on account of terms proposed or to be proposed by Portugal.
Cannot you persuade that court to act in concert with us, or a t least
not to counteract us again in fhis troublesome business. If you percieve that the money is not to come on so that the business can be
concluded, and especially if you find that peace is to be made with
Portugal, I think you should spare no expence to warn the Americans
of the Danger, so as to prevent captures as much as possible.
[NA. 6DA. CL, Algiers, Jol. 1, Part 11, Feb.-Nov. 1796.1

T o U. 9. Chargti d'Affaires, Madrid. Spain, from David Hnmphreys, U. 6. lldinister
to Lisbon, Portugal, and in charge of negotiations with Barbary Powers

LIBEON
FebB
1796.
(Secret & confidential)
SIR. Although I have not the honour of a personal acquaintance
with you, I h d myself under the necessity of addressing you on a
subject, in which the interests of the U. S., rts well as the feeof
humanity, appear to me, to be nearly concerned. The object I have
in view, is, to solicit most earnestly, that you will be pleased to combine your advice, influence & exertions with those of Mess? Patrick
Joyes & Sons,in endeavouring to obtain from the Spanish Government
perplission to export four hundred thousand silver or hard Dollars whch are intended for the ransom of our Citizens in captivity a t
Algiers, and other objects immediately connected therewith. Not
doubting of our cheerful compliance, & praying to be informed of the
result as ear y as may be:

i"

[NA. SDA. Disp. Spain, Vol. 3, 1795-1797.1

To Thomaa Pinckney, U. 8. Minister to London, England, from David Bumphreys,
0.8. W t e r to Lisbon, Portugal, and in charge of negotistions with Barbsly
Powers

(Circular)

LIBBON
March gt!' [I 7961
DEARSIR As i t appears very doubtful, whether the pecuniary

ements on the part of the United States of h e r i c a , can posay
sibly e completed a t so early a period as to give satisfact~onto the
Dey & Regency of Blgiers; and thereby prevent the renewal of host%-

ties; I have thought it expedient for the interest of the public Service,
to address tlus letter to you, for the express purpose of requesting

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

139

that you will be pleased to give Notice 60 all Citizens of the United
States concerned (and to whom it shall be in your power to give such
Notice) that they may expose themselves to great danger by attempting to proceed up the Mediterranean, before they shall bedulynotified
on the part of the Government of the United States that there will be
no impropriety or hazard of being captured in so doing.
[NA. SDA. CL, Algiers, Vol. I, Part 11, Feb.-Nov. 1796.1
To the Congress of the United States from President George Washington

COMMUNICATED
TO CONGRESS,
MARCH15, 1796.
Gentlemen of the Senate and House of Representatives:
By the ninth section of the act, entitled "An act to provide a naval
armament," it is enacted "that, if a peace shall take place between
the United States and the Regency of Algiers, that no further proceedings be had under this act."
The peace which is here contemplated having taken place, i t is
incumbent upon the Executive to suspend all orders respecting the
building of the frigates, procuring materials for them, or preparing
materials already obtained, which may be done without intrenching
upon contracts or agreements made and entered into before this
event.
But, inasmuch as the loss which the public would incur might be
considerable from the dissi ation of workmen, from certain works
or operations being sudde y dropped or left unfinished, and from
the derangement in the whole system, consequent upon an immediate
suspension of all proceedings under it, I have, therefore, thought ~t
advisable, before taking such a step, to submit the subject to the
Senate and House of Representatives, that such measures may be
adopted in the premises as may best comport with the public interest.
G . WASHIN~TON.
UNITEDSTATES,
March 16th) 1796.

2

Mr. Bingham, from the committee to whom was referred the message of the President of the United States, of the 15th instant, made
the following report:
That it is the opinion of the committee i t will be expedient to
authorize the President of the United States to cause to be completed,
with all convenient expedition, two of the said frigatea of forty-four,
and one of thirty-six guns.
That a discretionary power be committed to the President of the
United States to cause the others to be finished, having a due regard
to the existing price of labor and materials.
That so much of the sum of six hundred and eighty-eight thousand
eight hundred and eighty-eight dollars and thirty-two cents, as, by
the act of June, 1794, was appropriated to pay the expenses to be
incurred by the act to provide a naval armement, remammg unexpended, as well as so much of the sum of e g h t t h o u m d dollars,
appropriated for a provisional e q u i p ~ e n tof g d y s , by the before
recited act, be ap mpriated for cariymg into effect the provisions of
the aforesaid reso ution.

f'

[Am. State Papers, Nav. Af., Vol. 1.1

140

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1786 TO 1801

To Secretary of State, Philadelphia, from Joel Barlow, U. 6. Agent, Algiers
NQ1
duplicate;
original by Paris
ALGIERS18'8 March 1796
SIB. * * * The Regency of Algiers, which contains from two to three
Millions of Inhabitants, is Governed, & has been for neare three centuries, by
about 12,000 Turks, this number has never exceeded fifteen Thousand, & is
generally above ten. Theee Turks are natives of some part of the Levant, and
are inlisted and brought here as Soldiers. They are generally ignorant & ferot~ous
adventurers, & many of them have been guilty of crimes for which they flee
their Country. It is a common saying in the Levant that no honest man goes
to Algiers. They all do duty and receive pay as Soldiers, their pay is very small
a t first, but it rises in proportion to the time they have been in service, & they
are all elegible to any Office in the Government, They rarely Marry. The laws
of the Regency discourage in several ways the Matrimony of the Turks. A
Married Turk receives nothing but his pay, He that is not married, in addition
to his pay, is lodged in the Barracks & fed - Besides, if he Marrys a Moorish
Woman or a Native of the Country, his Children are not Turks, and consequently
can hold no Office civil or Milatary, He cannot in general Marry a Turkish Woman,
for when he leaves his country he is too poor to bring a Wife with him, and a
Turkish single Woman rarely comes to Algiers to get a Husband. The Moors
have no arms of any kind and they are not suffer'd to learn the use of them.
It is a high crime for a Merchant to sell any Arm or Amunition to a Moor,
and the excessive rigor of this Milatary Government has accustomed them to
consider the Turks as a superior race of beings, not only as endowed with greater
force arising from the use of Arms, but as the favourites of the prophet & the
Lords of the Country. These are some, but not all the reasons, why a Country
so extensive & fertile, so broken with Mountains & naturally defensible, and
peopled by a strong, well made, active race of men, has been govern'd for so many
ages by a Handful1 of strangers. I mention these circumstances to show that
the Algerine Turks are not Patriots, 8: that they cannot be so from the Constitution of the corps. For it is not to be expected that a Man can have any Affection
for a Country where neither he nor his friends can have any Posterity, or if they
leave any, they must be sunk among the Miserable Vassals of the Country, w.ho
are despised & plunderd by thire proud rulers: & i t is difficult to conceive with
what contempt & injustice the Moors are treated by the Turks. This body then
being held togather by no other tie than that of self preservation, the proper
object of each individual is to enrich himself by Plunder, the poor Soldiers by
marauding among the Country People, & the Men in Office by commiting Piracies
upon all Nations who do not purchase their peace by paying large sums of Money
to every Officer in the State for their Private use, and Annual tributes, which go
into the Public Treasury. The Government was formdy an Aristocracy, a t
least in theory. The Dey was supposed to be chosen b the whole jbody of the
Turks, & every Soldier had an equal Vote. He was chief Gagistrate and President
of the Divan, which was a Council composed of 42 of the most ancient Officers in
the Army & frequently assembled to deliberate upon Peace & War & other great
matters of state. But the Government has now become a Sim le Monarchy.
The Divan has not been assembled for some Years, & the %ey is subject ta
no other check than what arises from the Necessity he is under of distributing
foreign presents, & sometimes his own Money, among the principal Officers, to
secure himself from Assasination and to prevent Mutinies. * * * It is necessary to observe that, as the peace-presents which every nation makes, & generally
to a great amount, go principally into the hands of the Dey and other great
Officers, and as the annual tributes only are destined wholy to the public treasury, it is the intrest of these men to break friendship with every nation ss often
aa possible. They are sure to be enriched by every Treaty, let the object of it
be what it may. They use no other precaution in this kind Of. Policy than that
of Allowing a Nation to enjoy a Peace long enough to feel the advantage of a
free Navigation in these seas, so far as to be willing to come forward again with
their peace Offering when the rupture happens, These breaches of peace are often
made upon the most frivolus & unjuat pretences that can &.imagined, & generally speaking, every Nation has ~ t sturn, The only except~onsare France &
England, whose great Naval strength Over Awes them in such a manner that
their peace has been less interrupted. But even these powem, though they
pretend not to pay tribute, expend a great deal of Money in Ooaaional presents.
If peace with America should now take place, i t will not probably last without

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS
Interuption Seven Years. They are now oing to War with Denmark, After
that it is probable they will take Venice or kweeden, or both, they will then try
Holland again & perhaps Spain, and our turn will be the next.
But the difficulties in treating with this regency a t present arise not only from
the Constitutind character of the Government, but likewise in a greet messure
from the personal character of the Dey, who is a Man Of a most ungovernable
temper, passionate, changeable & Unjust, to such a degree that there is no calculating his policy from one moment to another. During the reign of the last
Dey, who died in 1791 this man held some of the first O5cea in the State, and
had made himself vastly rich, particularly by the Spanish ace, which was the
richest treaty they had ever made. The Government of g a i n did not choose
to make known the erpence of this Treaty, but I am told that it coat, to make
i t and Maintain i t to this time, about 5 Millions of Dollars, of which this man
received about One Million a t the time of making it, besides a great proportion
of the presents since; especially since he has been Dey, His influence was so great
before he arrived a t his dignity that nothing could be done without him. This
peace which was the first that the Spaniards ever had with this Regency, was
concluded in 1786 - By a proper distribution of money among the chiefs of the
Turks, this Man procured his Nomination, or rather proclamation to the Deylick,
the Moment his predicessor expired. He then caused to be arrested and Banished
or put to death, the principal Officers of State, who had served under the old
Dey. He created a new set of Favourites, men who are mere cyphers in his
councill, not one of whom dares to offer an opinion contrary to his own. He
has not only Violated the Constitution by not suffering the Divan to assemble
dureing his reign, but his conduct in other respects has a strong tendency to
Vilify the Turks in the eyes of the natives of the Country. His principal favourites a t present are Jews. He likewise favours the Moorish Merchants, and
treats the Turks with unusual severity. This sort of policy, if continued for a
Number of Years cannot fail to break the charm on which the Turkish Authority
is founded in this country, and over set the Government altogather. But we
can hardly look for such an event, as this man is old and cannot last long. Besides we know the Turks are no strangers to the manner of getting rid of a master
when his t rany becomes insupportable, He is now going to War with the Danes
* * * h e r e follows a lengthy account of the reasons for said war, and depredations upon British and Dutch subjects by the Dey of Algiers.]&,.. &

*
* * *

*

*

*

*

*

*

It is com uted and believed that there is now in the Treaeury about

the Value of Thirty billions of Algerine Sequins (54 Millions Spanis[h] Doll,)
Their Naval force has been somewhat augmented, I belive within a few years,
but it is vastly inferior to what it has been a t some former periods within this
century. - The following are the lists for 1724 & 1796. I have seen no accurate
accounts for any intervcneing period.
1724
1796
1 Vessel of 52 Guns
1 Vessel1- - - - - _ - - - - 44 Guns
1 -------- 50
1 - - _ _ - - - - _ - - - - - _32
3 - - - - _ - _ -44
2 - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 24
1 - - - _ - - - - 40
3 - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 20
2 - - - - - - - - 38
1 - - - - - - _ - - - - - - - - - 18
4 - - - - - - _ - 32
1 - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 14
2 -------- 26
2 - - - - - - _ - - _ - - - - - - 12
2

22

---___._

- 16

2 ---- - - 3 -------1 -------2 --------

-

14
12
10

-

-

They have in addition some gun boats a t present,
but I beleive not more than usual, & they are
of very little consequence.

-

I t is not in my power a t present to give you any accurate Account of the state
of the Fortifycations in and about the town. I will only say that they have been
considerably augmented, since the two last attempts of the Spaniards to reduce
the place. As it is probable that the United States May now conclude a peace
with Algiers, I wiil finish this long letter by some reflections on the means of preserving it, I will begin by observing that our peace a t present will place us on a
footing very different in many respects from what it might have been, had we concluded it a t the time when Mr Lamb was sent here, or even at any time before the
captureg in 1793 We were then considered as a Nation of very little consequence

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1786 TO 1801

142

-

-

-

in a tributary view in this place. It was thought that we could not afford to pay
much, and that our Commerce would be so little in these seas that there would be
little chance of makeing American Fkizeu, so that a trifle would have aatisfyed
them a t first. And as very few American Veaaela would have had ocaaion to visit
the ports on this part of the Barbary coast, the same opinion might have been
continued for many years. I n that case it would have been best not t o have
entertained a Consul here, but to have put our rrffairs under the protection of
France, to whoae Consul we might have payd One or two Thousand D o h 8 s
Year which I belive would have coverd all expences of maintaining a peace for
some time. * * * It ia well known that the Algerine policy is extremely
capriooua. Tbere is one point only in which it is fixed, which is that the regency
must be a t War somewhere, and their little perpetual hoetilities with Malts,
Genoa, & such Btstes aa are consts;ntly on their guard, will not satidy them.
They must break out now and then with a Nstion accustomed to peace coneequently 05their guard. when one of those Nations makes or renews s peace it
increases the danger for the rest, for a new blow must be struck somewhere, & it
is the duty of a Consul to be perpetually on the watch, * * *

*

[NA.

*

*

*

*

*

*

SDA. CL, Algiers, Vol. 1, Part 11, Feb.-Nov. 1796.)

To David Hnmphreys, U. 8. Minister to Lisbon, Portugal, and in charge of negotiations with Barbary Powers, from Joel Barlow, U. 8. Agent, Algiers

M YDEAR SIR * * * there is no doubt in my mind 6ut that the
Treaty will be ratified. I do not know how much information on
Barbary affairs there may be lodged in the office of the Secreta of
State, or in the minds of those who have to decide this question. ?but
I think they cannot fail to have knowledge enough on the subject to
enable them to draw the following conclusions: - That if this treaty
is rejected there will still be 100 captives to redeem, which must be
done, if done a t all, at a much higher price, probably not less than
3000 dollars a head: - that the war breaking out anew at fr moment
when (under the idea that peace is concluded) many amencan ships
will be in these seas, probably 100 more of our citizens will fall into
their hands, to be redeemed at a like price, besides the loss of ships &
cargoes: - that the Portuguese will soon be a t peace if we are n?t,
& leave these pirates masters of the western ocean: - that attemptug
to protect our navigation by our frigates, even if they were ready,
would cost in one year near half a much as, the proposed peace, ant
that those three items put together would amount to a sum that would
pay for the peace, & maintain it, in all probability, for six years: - that
as it would be extremely inconvenient on every account to be at war
with a people of their character & so distant, we should h d it necessary
to sue again for a peace as soon as possible, and then the terms wdl be
augmented a t least 100 percent, besides the sacrifices above mentioned. For, as the English & Spaniards are known to be hostlle to our
interasta in this quarter, & the both enjoy great infiuence here,as the French, however friend y & well cbsposed towards us, are
unable to yield us any assistance till they have established their own
&airs a t home & reestablished them here, - and as the Dey will be
highly exasperated a t the failure of the negotiations, which he will
ascribe to bad faith & treachery on our part, i t will be vastly ~UEcdt,
if not impracticable, to renew them again during his reign.

T

*

*

*

*

*

*

*

The great officers of the regency are a11 engaged by their interest
in our favor, & I doubt not but they have used their influence to keep

143

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

up the patience of the Dey. But their influence is very mall. He is
a man of the most capricious & ungovernable temper imaginable. If
every thing that they & we can do wilt save the treaty, i t will be
saved, but I can scarcely say I have any hope.

*

[NA.

*

*

*

*

*

*

SDA. CL,Algiers, Vol I, Part 11, FebNov. 1796.1

To David Humphreys, U. S. Minister to Lisbon, Portugal, and in charge of negotiations with Burbary Powers, from Joel Barlow and Joseph Donaldson, Junior,
U. S. Agents, Algiers

Nq 4
COPY

9 A p d 1706
ALGXERS
SIRThe Dey has this moment given us to understand that he has
come to the following decision relative to our affair: - that in 8 days
we shall be sent away from this place, that h0 will then allow thirty
days & no more, before hi9 cruisers shall have orders to bring in
American ships, that if within that time the money should come to
pap the sums stipulated by M' Donddson, he will recieve it, & conclude the peace, otherwise it is war; and as he shall oonsider the treaty
as violated on our part he will be under no obligations to renew it.
The port is now shut, and has been for three weeks, so that we hire a
courier express to go to Tangier with a letter for our consul a t Gibraltar, desiring him to give notice as far as possible to the Americam,
& to forward this letter to you.
It is needless for us to add, for the purpose of convincing vou, that
we have done every thing in our power to ward off this fatal stroke
that has been long impending over t,his affair, and that now seems
inevitable. Indeed very little has been in our power to do, considering the ignorance in which we have been kept relative to the state of
the funds, & to your intentions as to fulfilling the conditions of the
treaty.
When we go from hence we shall endeavour, a t least one of us, to
get to Alicante. As we know not what may be in your power to do
yet to save the business, it may be useful to give you that opportunity
to address a letter to us under cover to our consul, which perhaps
you had better address to either of us.
[NA. SDA. CL, AIgiers, Vol. I, Part 11, Feb-Nov. 1796.1
To David Humphreys, U. S. Minister to Lisbon, Portugal, and in charge of negotiations with Barbary Powers, from Joel Barlow end Joseph Donaidson, Junior,
U. 6. Agents, Algiers

COPY
Nq 6

ALGIEBS
6 A p d 1796

SIBAfter finishing our dispatches on the 3e inst. to send by a

counier to Tangier we found that the port was to be opened b e diably. We therefore gave up that mode of conveyance for a more
direct & speedy one by way of Alicante. We have now what we hope
will be more agreeable news to announce to you. For two days past
we have been witnesses to a scene of as complete and poignant distress
as can be immagined, arising from the state of total despair in which
our captives found themselves involved, and we without the power of
admimstering the least comfort or hope. The threat which we men-

144

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM lY86 TO 1801

tioned in our last of sending us away had been reiterated with every

mark of a fixed & final decision. And the Dey went so far m to
declare that after the thirty days, if the money did not come, he

never would be a t peace with the Americans. Baccry the Jew, who
has as much art in this sort of management as any man we ever knew,
who has more influence w i t h the Dey than all the regency put
together, and who alone has been able to soothe his impatience on
t b subject for three months past, now seemed unable to make the
least impression. And the Dey finally forbade him, under pain of
his highest displeasure, to speak to him any more about the Americans.
His cruisers are now out, and for some days past he has been occupied
with his ncw war against the Danes. Three days ago the Danish
prizes began to come in, and i t was thought that this circumstance
might put him in good humour, so that the Jew might find a chance
to renew our subject in some shape or other. We instructed the Jew,
that if he could engage him in conversation on his cruisers & prizes he
might offer him a new American built ship of 20 guns, which should
sail very fast, to be presented to his daughter, on condition that he
would wait six months longer for our money. The Jew observed
that we had better say a, ship of 24 guns, to which we agreed. After
seeing him three or for times yesterday under pretences of other
business, without being able to touch upon this, he went this morning
and succeeded. The novelty of the proposition gained the Dey's
attention for a moment, & he consented to see us on the subject.
But he told the Jew to tell us it must be a ship of 36 guns [Gescent],
or he would not listen to the proposition. We were convinced that
we ought not to besrtate a moment. We accordingly went and consented to his demand, & he has agreed to let every thing remain as it
is for the term of three months from this day, but desired us to remembe dlowed on any account.
ber that not a single day beyond that \dl
We consider the business now as settled on this footing. And it is
the best ground we codd possibly place it upon. You still have it in
your power to say peace or no peace. You have an alternative, in
the other case you bad none, but war was inevitable, and there could
have been no hope of peace during the rei of this Dey.
The guns are to be eight poundcrs (engEh nines) 24 on the main
deck, 8 on the quarter & four on the forecastle. the 12 last may be
smaller. She ought to be built long in proportion & formed for
sailing fast, a circumstance particularly pleasing here. We think such
a vessel fitted for sea may be delivered in America for 45,000 dollars,
Then, as by the terms of the treaty we have to deliver a quantity of
long spars & other timber, this vessel d be n proper one to transport
a cargo of them to this place. And in this view a saving may be made
of about 10,000 dollars in freight.
In order to save the treaty thus far, which has been a subject of
infiniteanxiety and vexation, we found it necessary some time ago to
make an offer to the Jew of 10,000 sequmes (18,000 dollars) to be paid
eventually ifhe succeeded, & to be distributed by him at his discression
among such great oBcers of State as he thought necessary, and to keep
as much for himself as he could keep consistent with success. The
whole of this new arrangement will cost the U. S. about 53,000 dollars.
We expect to incur blame, because it is impossible to give you a comlete view of the circurnstsnces, but we are perfectly confident of
wted right.

ga*

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

145

With regard to the transfer of the funds to this place we believe i t
can be done with the least dBculty thro' Leghorn, that is to draw
from that place on London, Madrid or Lisbon, as shall be most advantageous, perhaps on d. Unless you can ship a part in specie from
Lisbon, which we believe would be the preferable mode for such a
sum as you can ship.
Mr Donaldson sails tomorrow for Leghorn, there-to wait your orders
on this head. There is no time to be lost. You wdl please to instruct
him as soon as possible, and let our measures from this time forward
be effectual. We are obliged to incur a considerable expence to get this letter to
Alicante. We hope it will reach you soon.
[NA. SDA.

CL, Algiers, Vol. I, Part 11, Feb-Nov. 1796.1

[lo April 17961

Specification of U. 8. Consular Present made to the Dey and other Ofecere of
the Regency of Algiers
[A list of many pages indicates the Consular Presents given to the Dey and hi8
relations and officers. They were principally: d i i o n d rings and other jewelry,
brocade robes of State, linen, damask, ca ts, jeweled snuff boxes, and cloth.
These amounted to a total of 12213 2/3%quins of Algiers, and 29560 Livre
of France or]
12213 213 Seq. are equal to ...........................
DoL- 21984.60
29560Liv.-at5.6.areequalto - - - - - - - - - - - - 5577.36
---,---

D o l a r s - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 27561.96

The Articles charged in livres are taken from those I brought from
Paris. Those charged in Sequins were purchased in Algiers I t will be noticed that this present has cost about 11,000 Dollars
more than an ordinary tribute of the kind. To show the reason of
this it is necessary to accompany these details with a few words of
explanation. Such cloth as is bought in England for about 18 Shilhgs
a yard is bought here for 3 Sequins a pique, which is about 25 s
for 25 inches, or 36 shillings a yard. Consuls established here usua y
order their cloths from England or France, in which case (allowing for
all charges) a saving is made of at least 40 per cent. The same may
be observed of the other articles that compose this tribute. Watches
and Jewelry are generally ordered from Geneva, from persons accustomed to furnish for Barbary, - Brocades & damasks from Lyons,
Linnen from Holland, kc.
I have mentioned in another place that no saving was made in the
articles I brought from Paris, even those that have been employed.
They were ill chosen for the purpose. I t was necessary to give a
richer object to produce the same effect as might have been produced
by the value of that object laid out with the Jews of Algiers.
But these observations are not sufficient to account for the extraordinary expence of the present. I t was an extraordinary occasion. It
was the first after a new peace, and on that account was expected to
be very rich. Besides, the Dey was extremely irritated a t the delay
of the funds, and while I was preparing the Articles he sent me word
that unless it was nearly double the value of an ordinary consular
present it should not be recieved.
Since the present war in Europe, which has deranged every thing,
an ordinary consular present has cost from 16 to 17 thousand dollars.

7

146

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1786 TO 1801

In times of peace, with good economy, i t may be made for 13 or 14
thousand: that is, provided these people do-not rise again in their
demands as to the number & value of the articles, as they have done
in the proportion of near one half since the Spanish peace.
ALGIERS
1 N O V1796
~
[NA. SDA. CL,Algiers, Vol. I, Part 11, Feb-Nov. 1796.1

NQ

To Secretary of State from Joel Barlow, U. S. Agent, Algiers

-. 8
-

ALGIERS
17 A p d 1796
SIR I take the liberty of inclosing herewith the copies of my dispatches forwarded a few days ago to the care of M hlonroe. Nothing
material has happened in our affair since the date of my last, except
that I have been forced to yield to the im atience of the Dey so far
as to make the consular present. I was ed to this necessity from
what past when I f i s t arrived. I thought it highly expedient a t that
time to have something new to offer which might prove a farther
guarantee of our sincerity in the business of the peace, at the same
time avoiding if possible any additional expence to the United States.
I therefore sent him word that I was ready to make the consular
resent although I was not consul, and it should be considered as
!eing made for the consul that should be named, as there had not yet
been time for any nomination to arrive from America. I knew that
an anticipation in this article would not affect the returning period of
this biennial tribute, for it must always be dated from the date of the
treaty. He was then in too great a rage to listen to any thing, and
continued so till the 5" of April, as I have stated in my former letter.
Dwing this interval I recieved from Mr Humphreys a new Commission as a sort of temporary consular agent. I n my great anxiety
lest the affair should be lost I was glad to seize hold of any thing
which might give us a chance of placing i t on more solid ground, and
I sent him word that I was now Consul, and asked whether he would
recieve the present. This he refused, and returned a menacing and
insulting answer; and as the messenger was stooping to kiss his hand
he struck him in the face. The messenger at the same time delivered
him a letter from M' Humphreys in answer to one he had mitten to
Lisbon. He took i t in his hand & threw it out the door with great,
fury, uttering many execrations and threats. It wns picked up &
brought back to us, where it still remains unopened.
Thus the matter rested as to the consular present, and as I was told
he had a bad memory I was in hopes he had forgot what had been said
on thst subject. But soon after M' Donaldson's departure he sent
fnendly message, though in some points rather humiliating.
He asaid e had never treated any nahion with so much lenity and forme
bearance as he had the Americans, and he meant always to do so as
long as they should deserve it by their good conduct. He believed
them a good people, though they had many enemies, but he would be
their friend, and he waa now ready to recieve the consular present. He
thought it best to make it now, although the peace was not concluded,
as it would tend to stop the mouths of a great many officers among
whom it was to be distributed, and who were constantly teasing him
to put an end to this business one way or the other. This last assertion
I am confident is not true. Those o&cers who have any iduence
with him I. believe have used it in our favor.

P

veT

147

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

I n this situation I could not refuse the present, and I thought it
imprudent, considering the extreme irritability of his mind, to attempt
a farther explanation with respect to the consul that might arrive;
especially as I considered that it might be easily arran ed so as to
avoid the risk of being obliged to renew the present be ore the end
of the two years.
Among the few ideas that are familiar to his mind (and it is impossible to force a new one into it) are those of Consul, vice Consul &
Secretnrg. Without disturbing the mechanism of his brain he can
concieve that the consul may be absent for aDy length of time, and the
business be carried on by his deputy or secretary. And he pays the
same respect to them as to the principal. This is often done. The
Dutch Consul has now been absent near a year, under the idea that he
is to return, and his secretary does the business. Therefore, to save
expence, there will be no inconvenience in his considering me as
consul, though absent, during the remainder of this term. When I
go from hence I can take leave as though I were to return, telling him
that I expect a vice consul here as soon as he can be appointed and
arrive, and pray him to recieve him as myself till my return. Our
country being so distant will be a motive for his agreeing to a long
absence. He cannot expect me to settle my affairs in America &
return here for a fured residence under a year. And before he would
grow uneasy the term of two years from the date of the treaty will
expire. I t has now but little more than sixteen months to nm.
For this purpose it will be necessary that the person arriving as
consul should announce himself as m deputy or secretary, and assume
no other character till near the c ose of the above term. If the
President and the person appointed should consent to this arrange
ment there will be no need that I should have any appointment or
commission. Indeed, so far as respects the Dey, commission &
exequatur I believe are out of the question. I thmk he never asks
for or delivers any papers in such cases. Common report that a man
is one thing or the other is enough for him. A consul's commission
here is his seal, and his exequatur is a Turk that the Dey gives him,
under the name of Drogoman, who attends bim on all occasions as hiS
protector, friend, m terpreter & messenger.
I t is perhaps needless to add that an arrangement like this cannot
n.ffect the interest of the person appointed or of the United States, as
it cannot be supposed that I have any idea of recieving any part of
the emoluments of the place, whatever they may be. I am sorry the
affair has got into this train, but it was really out of my power a t any
one time to prevent it, without neglecting what I thought to be my
duty in tying to rescue the whole from ruin.
To avoid any difficulty in case a commission should be asked for
(which is not commonly done) it would be well that the person appointed should have a commission as secretary or vice consul, to show
in case of need. If he should have been appointed and set out before
this letter reaches you, & if he comes b way of Lisbon, he may
recieve such a commission from Mr Hump eys, to whom I will send
a copy of this letter.
Thrteen Danish vessels are already sent in by the cruisers. I
ought to have mentioned to you before, to show the temper of this
government, that before the cruisers went out, the consul offered to
deliver here the 320 Turkr, without delay, the identical ones that were
taken, as far as they could be had, and others to make up the deficiency,

!

9

I

148

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1786 TO 1801

and to deposit ninety thousand dollars in the Treasury as a security
for the performance. But the Dey would not consent to any accornodation that would not give activity to his cruisers.
[NA. SDA. CL, Algiers, VoI. I, Part 11, Feb.-Nov. 1796.1
120 April 17961
To Becretary of State from Joel Barlow, U. 8. Agent, Algiers
N9 5

Submitted to the Secretary of State.
Estimate of advantages and expences of ma,intaining a peace with
Barbary. - For the United States.
Dollara

Money to be recieved for freights in and for the Mediterranean per
annum 1200,000 Dollars, of which one half clear profit ----------Augmentation of our commerce arising from the circumstance of our
being our own carriers, per an. 3,000,000dol. on which 15 per cent.
profit--,--------------------------.-------------------------

600,000
450,000

After peace is concluded with Algiers, Tunis & Tripoli, the
expence of making which I do not bring into this account
because i t is not yet known, i t will cost to maintain it, per
amurn,
for ALGIERS
In timber & different s t o m 12,000 Sequins- - - - - - - - - - - The prices a t which these &ores are estimated here,
when delivered as a tribute, is low,
not much
higher than they bear in America. We must therefore
add nearly the value of the freight
Say _---------Consular present made every two years, about 16000
dollars, of which per an
Consul's salary and other contingent charges- - - - - - - - - - -

Dollars

21,600

-

5 400
..-------------------------8 000

carried forward . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

5 000

40,000

carriedforward----------------------------------------for

1050,000

TUNIS

It is hoped that no annual tribute will be neceaeary. It will be beet to avoid it if posaible by

paying a larger sum a t first, though the contrary policy P best a t Algiers. But suppose
Annual tribute and dl charges thereon - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - Consul's salary & other contingent charges- - - - - - - - - - - - -

12,000
4 000

for TBIPOLI.
Perhaps it would be best to commit our affairshere
to the care of the French consul, who would
conduct them for a trifling gratification. Suppose
Consul's sslary and all expences for maintaining the
peace--------------------------------------------

4 000

60,OOo

Clesradvantage------------------------------

----------

990, mo

N. B. Morocco is not brought into this calc4ation because we
must be at peace there if we would use the Atlant~c,whether we use
the Mediterranses or not.

149

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

There is another way in which by a fair estimation we might balance
the above account of expence for a peace with Barbary. The Algerine
cruisers will. sometimes go out of the Straits, tho' they are not at
peace with Portugal, And American ships will sometimes venture in
though we are not at peace here. One ship a year taken by them would
amount to a sum equal to maintaining a peace. And they have taken
in this way enough to average one ship a year since the American war.
Suppose the ship to have ten persons on board to be redeemed,

23000
153$ per cent Customary duties - - - - - - - - - - - - . . - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 3565
value of the ship- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - . . - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -8000
e a r g o _ - - - - _ - _ - - - _ - _ - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 24000
expences of negotiating the redemption- - -- ------ - - - - - ----------1435

Another way in which I presume the account is balanced every year
that we are at war with Algiers is the advanced price of insurance
that the American Commerce pays. Besides, this brings foreign bottoms into competition with ours in our own commerce, and has an
effect to stint the growth of our navigation even in the Atlantic.
But an event to be anticipated with certainty, is that the Portuguese
will soon be at peace here if we are not. And then we may almost
take leave of the Atlantic. These cruisers will go to the Bay of
Biscay & to the English Channel, and the price of insurance on our
navigation will be so inhanced for all that part of Europe, that the
Americans must sell their ships. I believe the English government, if
we were a t war here, would pay for the Portuguese peace rather than
it should not be had. And I am not certain but that they could
afford to do it. The effect it would have to lessen our navigation and
increase their own would be such as to indemnify them in a few years.
I suppose this peace might be had for a million & a half of dollars,
and I suppose that the higher price of freight and additional number
that would come into their bottoms on this account would make a
profit to them of half a million a year. Perhaps the fear that the
French should participate in these advantages may prevent the
English from doing it, but nothing will prevent the Portuguese.

*

*

*

*

*

*

*

Louis XIV said if there was no Algiers he would build one; as it
would be the cheapest way of depriving the Italian States of their
natural right of navigating their own seas; a policy doubtless unworthy
of us, and only fit for a king. But as long as the Powers of Europe
will persist in this policy,.whether we will or not, we must either be
its victims or partake of ~ t advantages.
s
There is no doubt but we
ought to prefer the latter, -to maintain our peace as cheap as we can,
but by all means to be a t peace, - and be ready to renounce our portion of this unnaturaI exclusive privilege the moment the right can

150

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1786 TO 1801

be restored to all, & shared by those who are now injured by the
exclusion.
ALGIERS20 A p d 1796
INA. SDA. CL, Algiers, Vol. I, Part 11, Feb-Nov. 1796.1
120 April 17961
Act pertaining to the Navy

UNITED
STATESSTATUTES
AT LARGE.FOURTH
CONGRESS.SESS.I.
An Ad supplementary to an ad entitled "An act to provide a Naval

Armament ."
SECTION
1. Be it enacted by the Senate and Home of Representatives
of the Unaed States of America in Congress assembled, That the President of the United States be authorized to continue the construction
and equipment (with all convenient expedition) of two frigates of
forty-four [United States and Constitution], and one frigate of thirtysix guns [ComteUaticm&any thing in the act, entitled "An act to provide a naval armament," to the contrary notwithstanding.
SEC.2. And be it further enacted, That so much of t.he sum of six
hundred and eighty-eight thousand eight hundred and eighty-eight
dollars and eighty-two cents, which, by the act of June the ninth, one
thousand seven hundred and ninety-four, was appropriated (to defray the expenses to be incurred pursuant to the act to provide a naval
armament) as remains unexpended, as well ns the sum of eighty
thousand dollars which was appropriated for a provisional equipment
of gallies, by the before recited act, be appropriated for the said
purposes.
SEC.3. And be it further enacted, That the President of the United
States be, and he is hereby authorized, to cause to be sold, such part of
the
the perishable materials as may not be wanted for ~omplet~ing
three frigates, and to cause the surplus of the other materials to be
safely kept for the future use of the United States.
A p d 20,1796.
APPROVED,
[Statutes, Vol. I, p. 453-454.1
To John Blagge, Navy Agent, New Pork, #. Y.,from Secretary of War

[PHILADELPHIA]
War OJke April $0ih1796
SIR A Bill having passed bot,h Houses of Congress to build and
equip only three of the Frigates ordered by a former law: And i t is
probable the Frigate building at New York [President] may be one of
those that will be laid aside, you me hereby directed .to cause every
operation to be immediately suspended untill you receive further
instructions from this m c e - -- Should any Vessel at this time be
a t New York laden with live o ~ k or
, deck plank from Georgia, the
property of the public; or should any arrive before other orders are
received, you are directed to send such Vessels with their Cargoes to
Phiiadelphia without delay - - [NDA. Correspondence, when Navy was under War Department, 1190-1798.1

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

151

To Jacob Sheaffe, Navy Agent, Portsmouth, I.H.,from Secretary of War

[PHILADELPHIA]
War O@e April d8@ 1796 -

SIBA Bill having passed both Houses of Congress to build and
equip only three of the Frigates ordered by a former law: And as it is
probable the Frigate building at Portsmouth [Con ress] may be one
of those that will be laid aside: you are hereby direcfed to cause every
operation to be immediately suspended untiU you receive further
orders from this O5ce - Should any Vessel a t this time be at Portsmouth, laden with live
Oak from Georgia, the property of the Public, or should any arrive
before other orders are received, you are directed to send such Vessels
with their Cargoes to Boston without delay - [NDA. Correspondence, when Navy was under War Department, 1790-1798.1
To George Cleghorne, Naval Constructor, Boston, Mass., from Secretary of War

[PHILADELPHIA]
War Ofice April 2SrQ,1796 -

SIR The Congress having determined to build only three of the
Frigates, ordered by a former law: and as the Frigate at Boston is to
be one of those that are immediately to b e built and eqtiped: It is
therefore expected you will exert yourself to get that Ship cornpleated
with d l convenient speed: and for that purpose you are directed to
make use of the timber received by the Schooner Rachell which arrived
at Boston last December [NDA. Correspondence, when Navy was under War Department, 1790-1798.1
To William Pennock, Navy Agent, Norfolk, Pa., from Secretary of War

War Ogice A nl25tQ1 86

-

BR The Congress having passed a Bill to buzd and equip only
three of the Frigates ordered by a former law: and it being determined
by the President to lay aside the Frigate building at Norfolk - You will therefore make no mv'purchases on account of that
Frigate - - You are also r uested to desire M' William Herbert
to make out a full and partic ar return of all Articles received by
him for the public use (since Mr Shores discharge) and transmit the
same to this office with the utmost dispatch, that measurea may be
speedily taken to dispose of what may be deemed perishable, agreeable
to the Act of Congress - - -

3

[NDA. Correspondence,when Navy was under War Department, 1790-1798.1
To Secretary of State from David Eumphreys, U. S. Minister to Lisbon, Portugal
and in charge of negotiations with Barbary Powers

LISBON
April 26t9 1796
SIR,I had yesterday the honour of addressing a letter to you by

(NQ39.)

CaptW7Brien, stating the extremely perilous situation of our affaus
with respect to Algiers, and desiring to learn by your answer, as
expeditiously as possible, the explicit determination of our Government, on the stipulation made by Messr$ Barlow & Donaldson, for
presenting a frigate of 36 Guns to the Dey of Algiers. an oppollvnity of forwarding a Duplicate, I would not

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 17'85 TO 1801

152

offerin one additional remark, on the expediency, ,policy & necessity
of our astening the equipment of a naval force, arising from the actual
state of our &aira in the Empire of Morocco. - The remark is,
that, in m o inion, we ought always to have a small navd force in
readiness or a, to prevent the evils which might otherwise result
from an sudden Revolution, and particularly of naval circumstances,
in the B?mpire of Morocco - even if we were to pay no regard to the
other Barbary States.
That Emplre continues still divided, & it is impossible to decide in
what manner that division may result, & +ether each of the contending Parties may not ultimately remam m possession of some of
the Sea-Ports. In which case, both parties may have their Cruizers
a t Sea. Muley Solirnon at present retains the Provinces of the
North, & all the Harbours capable of containing armed vessels.
Muley Ishem possesses the Territory in the South, with some Ports
which receive merchant vessels; & a t which, a t present, a most
flourishing & lucrative trade is carried on. - Muley Soliman, is
reported, to be preparing another expedition against the City of
Morocco. But it is very doubtful whether he will succeed. - as
Muley Ishem (that of a feeble & unenterprising Character) being
strengthened by the Provinces under Ben Assar & other powerful
Bashaws, is tbought to have a land force much superior to that of
Muley Solirnan. On the other hand, the Generals attached to the
Party of Muley Ishem, are reported, to be meditating on Attack upon
Magador. Should this succeed, Cruizers will doubtless be fitted out
from thence to the annoyance of our vessels bound to Ports in allegiance to Muley Solirnon. - As his Cruizers now make Prizes of all
vessels they meet, destined to or from S d , or other Ports in possession of his Brother, Muley Ishem. Portuguese, Danish & Swedish
vessels have been thus captured. But fortunately for us, none
belonging to the United States - notwithstanding reports that some
hsd been captured a few days ago, and notwithstandmg our Citizens
owed by the prospect of uncommon ain) will persist in going to
+f6, in despite of every thing that c m e said or done to deter them
from it.
An Ambassador from Muley Ishem, lately arrived here in an American vessel from S a 5 - His object was to obtain from this Court the
protection of their fleet a t Gibraltar for vessels bound to the Territory
of Muley Ishem, to bring wheat from thence to Portugal. At t b s
moment, this Trade is an object of vast magnitude to the several
European Nations, which have not a supply of wheat in their own
Countries. The quantity of wheat exported (principally from that
part of Morocco which IS in the power of Muley Ishern) to Spain,
Portugal & England, within a year past, is incredible. But for this
resource, Portugal (in which wheat is now plentier & cheaper, than in
perhaps any other Country of Europe) would have experienced a
frunine - as it has been deprived, in a great measure, of its former
supplies from the upper part of the Mediterranean, from America &
from the North of Europe. The beforementioned Ambassador haa
proceeded from hence to Madrid, to solicit the naval protection of that
Government slso for that Trade.
I mention these circumstances to shew, by some sudden reverse of
affairs in Morocco, how much we may be exposed to have all our

%

1 !L

t

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

153

Commerce to the South of Europe ruined a t any Moment, unless
we shall have some small naval force in readiness to prevent it.
[NA.

SDA. Disp. Spain, Vol. 3, 1795-1797.1
List of stores for Dey of Algiers

[2 May 17961

The following is a list of the Stores commissioned for by the Dey
for the annual Present of the United States of America delivered to
Joel Barlow Consular Agent of said States at Algiers May the 2q 1796.
and forwarded by James Lear Cathcart. Nails
100 Algerine Quintals of Nails in length- -- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 13% Inch100
D o _ - - - D o - _ - - - - - - - - - - Do-------------------------- 12. Do
100
Do---- Do - - - - - -Do-----------------------------,-10. Do
100
Do _ - _ - Do _ _ _ _ - - _ _ _ -Do
- -- ~ - - - _ _ - _ - - _ - _ _ - - - - - - - - - -9.
- - Do
loo
Do - - - - Do - - - - - - - - - - - - Do. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7% Do
100
Do---- Do-..---------- Do--------------------------6. DO
100
Do - - - - Do - - - - - - - - - - - - Do. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5. Do

700. Algerine Quintals of Nails
-

Bomb She&
500 Bomb Shells------- 5 s 0 Inches Caliber. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
500
Do - - - - - 5%0
- - DO----DO--------------------------,
24
500
Do------_-----.. 6%
Do----Do----------------------34
500
DO,--,--------D o _ - - - D o - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 42

2000 Bomb Shells
-

Cables
4 Cables of 18 Inches- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - . . - - - - - - - - - - - -120
- - -fathom long
6
Do " 15. Do. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Do
6. Do " 14. Do. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Do
6. Do " 13. D o - - - - - - - - _ - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - _ _ _ _ Do
6. Do " 12. Do. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Do
6 Do " 11. Do. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Do
34 Cables

-

Rope

4 Coils of 10 Inch Rope
4 D o of 9 Do

4 Do of 8 Do

12 Coils of
-

Rope

Oars
1,000 Oars for large Cruisers or Frigates
500 Do smaller

1,500 oars.

-

Gunpowder
1,000 Algerine Quintals of Gunpowder

Planks.
Pine lanks from 22 to 24 picks long. and 6 inchea thick
oak L n k s
Do - -Do- - - - - - - _ - - ----Do
Pine boards of common length and 3 Inches thick
Pipe Staves
Canvas.
100 Bales of Canves
60 Quintal of Sheet lead
100 dozen lbng tar brushes
100 Quintals of white rope yarns
1,000
1,000
3,000
2,000

154

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1785 TO 1801

NB. - I redly think that for 2000 pipe staves was meant 20,000.
The overplus of the value of these stores above the annual present are
to be counted from one year to another or paid for in Cash as p:
Treaty.
JAS. LEA^ CATHCART
NB. One pick is 2418 inches - so that 22 picks make near 46
English feet in length.

-

[SDA. Dip. Cor., Inst. t o Min., Bk 5, 179&1800.]
To Secretary of State from Joel Barlow, U. S. Agent,* Algiers

ALGIERS4 May 1796
NQ6
SIR The Dey, who is the most restless and impatient man in the
world, has ordered M Cathcart to go to Philadelphia, to give such
information as may be useful to our Government in expediting the
collection & transportation of those articles wbicb were promised as a
art of the pence present. Mr Cathcart is one of our captives, and
pas been employed 8 s head Christian clerk to the regency. I told him
I could not think of subjecting the United States to any part of the
e ence of this journey; and he, to obtain his liberty sooner than he
ot erwise would, undertakes it at his own expence. I believe however
that the experience he has bad in this place will enable him to render
you great service, from the variety of details he mill be able to give
you in a business so new; as likewise (if you should think proper to
employ him) in collecting & transporting the articles required.

7'1

*

*

*

*

*

*

*

The Dey has often expressed a desire that the American Government woxdd be particularly punctual in bringing fonvard this tribute,
and in fulfilling dl its engagements here. And so far as the reason
he gives for it is founded in truth I give him credit for his sensibility
on the subject. He says that, as the peace was made in opposition
to so many enemies, and (in regard to its terms) against the opinion
of his officers, be considers it, as a favorite child of his own, and as such
he means to cherish it as long as he lives. But to assist him in supporting i t against the attacks that may await i t hereafter frqm those
quarters, he shall have need of this argument, that the Amencans are
more punctual and honest than other nations. His proposing to send
a person to America on this errand is a sort of proof of his sincerity.
But whether the reason he gives is altogether founded in truth or not,
I am confident the desire he ex-presses is perfectly conformable to our
policy. You will find it verg difficult to maintain peace here a t any
rate; but without a prompt and scrupulous compliance with engsgements, it is impossible. * * *
The Dey has handed me a note of the articles he expects for the
annual tribute. And as his expectations are law in this case, 1
enclose it to you with such remarks as occurred to me a t the time.
To hurry this part of our business is one of bis objects in Mr Cathcart's mission. Indeed it is time that this operation was begun, as
the first year will be nearly elapsed by the time he will arrive. I am
sorry it is not in my power to give you a just idea of the value that
wiU be set on these articles when delivered. After taking much
pains I am able to fix an estimate to a few articles only, and this not
to be strictly relied on. I t is enclosed. I think the price will be
rather above than below what is there stated. * * * The French

155

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

consul is about to be changed. The one who is to come will certainly
be instructed, & probably disposed, to render us every service in his
power. But that nation does not deal in this kind of tribute.

*

*

*

*

*

*

*

I am told that Mr Cathcart has hopes of obtaining the consulate
to this place. He has neither the talents nor the dignity of character
necessary for the purpose; though I sincerely wish that he might be
emplo ed in the business of the peace present & tribute, in which I
think {is intelligence & industry would enable him to render essential
service.
[*The headings throughout this volume identify Joel Barlow aa a U. 8.Agent,
even though he acted in a consular capacity. His status is fully explained in
letters dated 16 February and 17 April, 1796.1
[NA. SDA. CL, Algiers, Vol. I, Part 11, Feb-Nov. 1796.1
-

-

[5 May 17961
To President George Washington from the Dey of Algiers
VIZIRHASSAN
BASHAW
DEYOF THE CITYAND REGENCY
OF

UNTOGEORGEWASHINGTON
PRESIDENT
OF
OF AMERICA

THE

ALQIER
UNITEDSTATES

HEALTH PEACE AND PROSPERITY

Whereas Peace and Harmony has been settled between our two
Nations, through the Medium of the two Agents of the United States
Joseph Donaldson, and Joel Barlow, and as eight Months has elaps'd
without one article of their agreement being complied with we have
thou ht i t expedient to dispatch James Lea[n]der Cathcart formerly
our ghristian Secretary with a note of such articles as is required in
this Regency, likewise with a form of a Mediterranean Passport in
order that you may furnish your Consul here with such as fast as
possible. for further intelligence I refer you to your Consul resident
here and to the said James Lea[n]der Cathcart, and I pray whatever
they may inform you of to forward our Negotiations may be fully
credited and that said Cathcart may be dispatched with such part
of the Articles specefied in our Negotiation as are ready with all
possible expedition for which purpose we have granted said Cathcart
a Mediterranean Passport for one Year commencing the Date thereof
from the first of May in the Year of Your Lord one thousand seven
Hundred and ninety six
Done in the Deys Pallace by our Order and Seal'd with
the great Seal of this Regency the 26* day of the Luna
LS
of Carib in the Year of the Hegira 1210 which corre- LS
sponds with the 5" of May 1796
VIZIRHASSAN
BASHAW
Dey of the Cay & Regency of Algier
[NA. SDA. CL, Algiers, Vol. I, Part 11, Feb-Nov. 1796.1

18 May 17961
To James Leander Cathcart, Algiers, from Joel Barlow, U. S. Agent, Algiers

SIR AS the Dey has given ou liberty to leave this place with your
vessel, that you may go, (at east yourself in person) to Philadelphia,
to give such details of facts as may be useful to our Government in
expediting the collection and transportation of the peace presents &

i

156

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1786 TO 1801

annual tribute, I understand that, in consideration of obtaining your
liberty & putting your vessel in activity sooner than you otherwise
could do, you undertake to make the best of your way to Phiiadelphia a t our own expence. And I desire that you would proceed
by way of Esbon, deliver a packet that I send by you to our minister
them, & recieve his farther ~nstructionsfor America.
I understand likewise that you will touch at Alicante, and I desire
you to deliver a packet that I send by you to our consul there. And
m case you proceed through Spain by land he will procure you the
necessary passport &c On arriving at Philadelphia, I rely on your intelli ence & zed in
giving to the proper officers of Government an m p e statement of
facts relative to our interests in this place; and to show, from your
knowledge of the character of this government the expediency of as
prompt a compliance with our engagements here as the nature of
the case will admit.
ALGIERS
8 May 1796 -

k

[NA. SDA. CL, Algiers, Vol. I, Part 11, Feb-Nov. 1796.1
To Captain Thomas Ruxtun, U. 6. Navy, Baltimore, Md., from Secretary of War

I~HILADELPHIA]

W . 0.May lot+I796 SIR - Several of the Cannon destined for the Frigates, cast a t
Cecil Furnace having been proved, and Mr Hughes wish8 to have
them examined and received by the United States: i t may be proper
that you should see them and examine whether they are suitable or
fit for service - - - I have to request therefore that you will as soon as possible visit
Cecil Furnace, where you will find Mr DaCosta and in conjunction
with him examine and pass receipts to M' Hughes for such Cannon
as have stood proof, and are suitable for service - - - - The
Contract (which no doubt Mr Hughes will show you) stipulates for the
delivery of suitable Cannon, of certain descriptions: that is as I wnstrue it, such as are efficient,and in every respect fit for service - I inclose you, my instructions to Mr DaCosta for your informatinn - While on the spot you may take measures to have the Cannon
which may pass exambation transported to Baltimore, which will
enable you to give directions for the Constructing of their carriages Iam&c[Similar letter sent to Captain John Barry on 16 May 1796.1
[NDA. Correspondence, when Navy was under War Department, 1790-1798.1

[About 8 June 1796)
Estimate of cost of building frigate for the Dey of Algiers, by Naval Constructor
Joshua Humphreys, U. 6. Bavy
A Ship of War, to mount 24 nine pounders
and 12 six pounders

-

36 guna

157

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

completely built & rigged, fit for sea, the materials of the hull, live-oak mhr8
and cedar, will mat- ................................................................
64,000.
36 gum, nines & sixes, e s t i i t e d at.--..------.----------------------3,000.
g u n ,450.
1 r r e of powder2,000
15 tons of cannon ball--------------_----------------------------------------------,700
mmmers, spunges &c ------------------------.------------------,200

Dollars 70,350
Provisions
for men enough to navigate her only - say 30, for
4months --_..--_____.-..----..-....------...----------1000.
Wages 30 men, 4 months ............................. *- - - - - - - .4000.
--o&e lsbel ded5,000
NOTE- The estimate of the cost of the hull rigging &c. complete for sailing, is
given by Mr Humphreys, the Ship-Builder. He says the difference between white
oak & live oak & ceder, will be but about 2000 dollars - and the white oak, if
the ship be well built,may be rotten in 3 years.
[NA. SDA. CL, Algiers, Vol. I, Part 11, Feb.-Nov. 1796.1

-

)

[14 June 17961
To Joel Barlow, U. S. Agent, Algiers from Edward Band, owner of the Schooner
Elira

COPY

TUNIS
23 June 1796
I t is very disagreeable to me to be under the necessity of acquainting you with my unhappy situation. I sailed from Cette in the
Schooner Eliza, Ca t. Sam! Graves, belonging to me. Two days
after leaving that p ace, which was the 14th Instant, I was captured
by a Tunissian Row Galley and brought into this place. By the
advice of M' Famin I have presumed to write you craving your
assistance. Unfortunately I was taken one day previous to the
negotiation you had authorised him to make in behalf of the United
States. The Bey considers my vessel as a prize & all the people as
slaves. But by the interference of Mr Famin we are all exempted
from any laborious work, untill advice is recg from you.
I need not pretend to describe to you my situation, as I think you
can form an idea of it by what the prisoners have suffered in Al 'em.
Mf Famin this day informed me that the Bey has agreed to r ease
my vessel & liberate the people, provided the govern5 d l consent to
pay an additional sum of Ten thousand dollars, and will w&t untill
an answer is r e d from you. M' Famin has written to you by express,
by which conveyance you will recieve this. Knowing you have full
ower vested in you to make a treaty with the Bey of Tunis, I can't
gut think you d feel for me in my present situation, and use your
utmost endeavours to alleviate my sufTerings. And it is but a small
sum for the government to ay for the redemption of so many men
were on board the vessef I have now lost all I assessed, and
mthout your consent to this sum being paid we sha undergo the
greatest hardships.
I sailed from Gibraltar last January. I was there informed that
peace was made with all the Mahometan powers. I arrived at
Barcelona and disposed of my cargo. I took my cash and proceeded
for Cette. A violent gale of wind obliged me to put into Agde where
I was detained a few days. A number of men entered m vessel
in the night & robbed me of all my money ammounting to 8 t ousand

P

3

as

E

E

158

N A V B OPERATIONS FROM 1786 TO 1801

dollars. I tarried a t Cette near three months expecting to have
recg some indemnity from the French G O V-but
~
Mr Monroe a t length
informed me that it was not possible for the government to pay for
any depredations of that nature. With what money I r e d there I
purchased 19 pipes of Brandy, & sailed the 12 inst - for Malaga.
Thus I have given you a detail of my misfortunes. I hope you will
take this into consideration & extricate me from this great difficulty.
tQ

[See document dated 9 December 1797.1

[NA. SDA. CL, Algiers, Vol. 11, Jan.-Dee. 1797.1
[15 June 17961
Truce with Tunis, for six months, concluded by Joseph Etienne Famin, for Joel
Barlow, U. 6. Agent, Algiers
[Translation]

The motive of the writing of this document is as follows: On the 11th
of the month of Zu'lhijjah of this year 1210, answering to the 15th of
June [June 17, 1796, according to the chronological tables] according to the Greek calendar. The glory of the princes of the Christian
nation, the selected chief among the community of Jesus, Washington,
the present ruler of America-may his days end with blessingsbeing desirous and ~ 4 s h i i gto negociate a treaty of peace in order
to lay the foundations of friendship and to strengthen the sincere
amity with the frontier post of the Holy War, the victorious garrison
of Tunis the well-preserved, just as our friends the other christian
governments have done the same with our victorious garrison, has
confided the negociations of the said treaty to his consul Barlow,
residing in Algiers, and the said consul again has confided the negociations of the treaty to the French merchant Joseph Famin, residing
in Tunis the well-preserved. The said merchant has appeared in
my presence and has stated and declared in general his wish and desire
for a treaty between the American ruler and the Government of Tunis
the well-preserved. After it has been immediately communicated
and confirmed to the said merchant on what terms a treaty could be
agreed to, the said merchant has communicated the stipulations of
the treaty to the said consul, and the said consul has commun~cated
it to his government. Now until the answer comes and within a
limit of six months after the date of this document, security has been
given. Therefore if during the said period war vessels of our well
preserved garrison place meet at sea m t h ships of the said Americans
they shall not hinder them or molest them in any way, but they shall
be treated as friends, and immediately order has been given to our
officers to let them go their way. If American ships meet with ships
belonging to our well-preserved garrison place, i t has been agreed
between the two Governments, that they shall treat each other in a
friendly way. This convention has been written and sealed and given
into the hands of the said merchant, so that he may send it to its
proper place. Until the arrival of the answer this convention shall
be observed between the two governments; according to it both
parties shall act and it shall be oppowd in no way.
Salutations.

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

159

Written on the 11th of Zu'lhijjah and the 15th June of the year 1210.
TUGHRA
(name sign) OF HAMUDA,
commander (mir miran) of the
frontier post of the Holy V'ar,
Tunis the well preserved.
[Mention is made in American State Papers, Foreign Relations, I, 554, that
on 15 June 1796, a truce for six months with Tunis was concluded b y Joseph
Etienne Famin.
The foregoing translation of the document from the Turkish is b y Dr. J. H.
Kramers of Leiden, and was sent to Hunter Miller, OEce of the Historical Adviser,
Department of State, 30 January 1931, b y Dr. C. Snouck Hurgronje.]
INA. SDA. CL, Algiers, Vol. 11, Jan-Dec. 1797.1
To David Humphreys, U. S. Minister to Lisbon, Portugal, and in charge of
negotiations with Barbary Powers from Secretary of State

[PHILADELPHIA]
Department of State June 17. 1796.
SIR I expect Captain O'Brien will sail tomorrow for Lisbon. He
is appointed to the comnland of the Brig? Sophia belonging to the
United States. He will take with him more provisions than will be
wanted for the Brig's crew: the su lus will serve towards a supply
to our captive citizens, if fortunate y their redemption be effected.
The Brig? is deemed incompetent to bring the whole number to America: but she may perhaps suffice to cross the Mediterranean, to some
port or ports in Spain where they may find American vessels in which
they may take their passages home; and,the Brig? may bring the
remainder.
I n return for the sword and sash which the Dey presented to you,
the Articles mentioned in the inclosed invoice have been provlded
here. The golden tea-spoons you will be so good as to get a t Lisbon.
The golden coffee pot and salver are omitted for no such things exist
in the United States; which I hope may be admitted as an apology
for not furnishing them; and the rich and highly gilt china pots and
salvers which have been provided, are a handsome substitute. If
however the golden coffee pot and salver are by you deemed mdispensable, you will get them, if practicable, in Lisbon, or elsewhere in
Europe.
I am with great respect Sir, your ob. serv.
TIMOTHY
PICKERING.
Invoice of Articles provided a t Philadelphia as a resent to the
Dey of Algiers, in return for the sword and sash whic he presented
to ColQHumphreys.

7'

E

doll..

1 piece of Muslin embroidered with gold-l0lde @ 6. do17
1 iece
d9
d~
(19 & silk lOyQ8
4 dol?
1 i e t of Superb Cups h Saucerr kcc.consisting of six Cups six tlaucenr,)

one tea or Coffee pnt, one cream pot one sugar dish, and a salver..--1 Set of Ditto. consistin of two Cups, two Saucers, one tea or coffee pot,)
one cream pot, one %uWr dish and a salver. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

60.
40.
Isom

Dollar~300.
[NA. SDA. Dip. Cor., Inst. to Min., Bk. 3, June 1795-Jan. 1796.1

160

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1785 TO 1801

To Thomas Pinckney, U. 6. Xinister to London, England, from Joseph Donaldaon,
Junior, U. 8. Agent, Algiers

LEGHORN
Jum 20w 1786
SIR having at length received Col. Humphre s's instructions also
a letter of Credit for four Hundred thousand Do lars on this place for
the purpose of carrying into effect the stipulations on the Part of ye
United States with Algiers, nevertheless he is silent as to Effecting
Insurance against Sea risk. the circumstance and my incapscity to
decide whether it is the Practice of the Executive to take these matters
on itself or not, promotes the present epistle together the more direct
communication with London - which place I presume it wdl be
accomplished on the more Eligible terms provided ~t is deemed
, you will therefore be pleased to take Measures Accordingly
go into the Shipment of the Mony immideately but as I, a t
this moment can not tell you what Vessels or what Masters, the insurance must be effected, for the more security, at & from Leghorn to
Algiers on Mony in the Sum of three Hundred Sixty thousand Mexican
Dollars as interest may appear on any Vessel or Vessels. Master or
Masters as i t is not purposed to Embark i t in one bottom but several
as Circumstance may Concur to serve the interest of yf United States.
I purpose making a beginning pr the Venitian (Pollacca) Brig Dimnu
P r d e n z a Capt? Anthonio Calliich a good Vessel The Captain a
Man of Experience & the one which brought me here. I shall for the
Satisfaction of all concerned communicate to you the Names of Such
Vessels & Masters the Shipments may be made it being highly necessary that every material circumstance be made known as ~t pot only
fac~litatessuch matters but tends to reduce the rate of Premum you
or
is for a sum short of credit lodged
may not[e] my ~ r d e r ~ f insurance
that results from a dlsposltion of Mr Bacri to recelve his advances for
Peace presents here rather than at Algiers. The Measure Saves freight
and insurance
P. S Since the foregoing I have made an arrangement with Bacri
to receive his Bills for One Hundred thousend Dollars on Algiers,
therefore insurance for two Hundred and Sixty thousend Dollars only
will be Necessary and the Shipment pr the Dimna Providenza will be
will be from 80 M to One Hundred thousend & will depart in Eight
a ten days winds favoring

r'

n?Tz3

INA. SDA. CL, Algiers, Vol. I, Part 11,Feb-Nov. 1796.1
To Secretary of War from Secretary of State
DEPARTMENT
OF STATE,
J d y 8. 1796.

D' SIR,In answer to your enquiries relative to the dimensions of the
frigate for the Mediterranean Service, I have to inform you, that she
is to carry 36 guns, of which 24 are to be nine pounders, and the other
twelve six pounders. On these grounds I desired Mr Humphreys to
calculate the proper dimensions of the hulk, and to make a draught
of the same. The draught I presume M: Pox has completed, in whch
the dimensions must be accurately stated. Independently of which
however, M' Humphreys made the inclosed statement: but if it varies
from the draught (for i t was written you will see on the 2gth of June,
when the draught was only begun) the latter must be the guide. Her
masts, spars, sails and cordage may be calculated after Mr Fox's
return, as well as the anchors and all her other equipments. The

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

161

guns, powder & shot you will perceive by the inclosed letter & estima,te
of Mr Hodgdon, are on hand. The guns, however, ought to be
critically examined, and proved: they ought also, I thnk, to be uniform; and if those we have are not so, it may be best to cast a new set
at Cecil furnace, and to have them turned (to take off the most considerable roughnesses at least) while they are boring.
[LC. J. McH. P.,Vol. 3, 1794-1797.1
[8 July 17961
Certificate of Identification given Joseph Bogers on board the Fortune, by Joel
Barlow, U. S. Agent, Algiers

(C~PY)
Gertijicate.
TO ALL WHOM IT MAY CONCERN.
Know ye that Joseph Rogers, citizen of the United Sta.tesof America
and late mariner of the ship Minerva of Philadelphia commanded by
John MqShane, was ca,pturedwith the said ship &her crew on the 17" of
October 1793 and brought to Algiers in Barba,ry, where he has remained in captivity till this day, and is now redeemed by the said
United States.
In testimony whereof I Joel Barlow, Consul general of the United
States for the City & Kingdom of Algier, have granted this certificate.
Given under my hand & the seal of the consulate of the United
States at Algiers this 8'? day of July 1796
@
JOEL
BARLOW
(A like certificate was given to each of the other citizens liberated
on the same day .)
[NA. SDA. CL, Algiers, Vol. I, Part 11, Feb.-Nov. 1796.1
To M. Felichi, U. S. Consul, Leghorn, from Joel Barlow, U. S. Agent, Algiers

COPY

ALGIER12 Jdy 1796
SIRThis letter will be handed you by our people liberated from their
captivity in this place. I beg leave to recommend them to your
particular care for the best manner of getting them thro' as short a
quaranteen as possible, & sending them to their country.
If M Donaldson is still with you I will thank you to give him the
enclosed letter. If not, be pleased to open it & notice its contents as
far as possible, & give me early advice what sums of money he may
have shipped to this place, & what other measures are taken relative
to our affairs here [NA. SDA. CL, Algiers, Vol. I, Part 11, Feb-Nov. 1796.1
[Enclosure]

To Joseph Donaldson, Junior, U. S. Agent, Algiers, from Joel Barlow, U. 6. Agent,
Algiers

ALGIER12 J d y 1796

Leghorn
Dear SIR Notwithstanding I have had no letter from you since the
34' of May; and the time for our payment is expired, I have been able

162

NAVAI; OPERATIONS FROM 1785 TO 1801

not only to keep the peace, but to liberate our people. I have done
this by drawing bills on you for the amount of the ,redemption, of
which I give you the particulars in my letter of advlce of this day.
I draw at 34 mazoons for the Dollar of Leghorn, which is considered
as the par of exchange.
Lest you should have shipped the money for this place before the
arrival of this, I take from the Jews a guarantee against damages.
That is, if the biis are not accepted & paid in Leghorn, and if the
money ia here to pay them on their return, they are to be returned &
dischar ed here without Damages. But you will observe that this
cannot \e done unless the whole of the money is here for the price of
the peace as well as redemption.
I have arranged the buslness in this way for the following reasons.
1" i t is the only way in which I can get the people free & save the rest
of them from dying with the lague. 2d!y M Humphreys has informed me that you have a ere ' t lodged in Leghorn for 400,000 dol:
& in Lisbon for 200,000 more for which you can draw. And these
sums I believe are more than the whole amount. 3di7 the opportunity of drawing at par is a great advantage, as i t saves the risk of
transportation, &c. The people o to Leghorn in a ship of Baccr-y's. I t is the only way
in which I ca d get them from this place. There are 49 Neapolitans
on board, to be landed at Leghorn. I have settled the freight for
ours w far as that place for 1500 Spanish dollars. The provisions
remaining after the Neapolitans are discharged belong to the United
States. At that place you & Mr Felichi our Consul will take such
measures for the transportation of oyr people to America as shall be
most convenient. You can retain t h ship by making a. new bargain
with Soloman Baccry of Leghorn, part owner, if you cannot do better.
If the Americans leave the ship a t Leghorn, Capt. Smith is to take
the command of her for the Baccrys for a farther destination. John
Foss is to be mate. I would thank you, in this case, to assist them in
making their asrangement with Soloman.
I rely on you & our consul & Soloman to agree with the govt of the
place with respect to the quaranteen. The ship has nothing but the
passengers & their baggage. I t is supposed that if we retain the ship
you can put the Neapolitans in the Lazeret & let ours proceed immedi, If they take their passage in another ship, there mill be no need
a? t eir being detained for a long quaranteen in that place.
of
I have advanced the people a month's pay extraordinary, that is for
August, as many of t-hemwere entirely dest~tuteof money, and almost
naked. I t will be farther necessary to give them some clothes at
Leghorn. their arrival on our coast Must be in cold weather. -

1

f

[NA. SDA. CL, Algiers, Vol. I, Part 11, Feb-Nov. 1796.1
To Captein Samuel Calder, of the ship Fmfam, from Joel Barlow, U. 6. Agent,
Algiers

COPY

I~Ls~&.~'o~s.

ALGIERS18 July 1796
SIRYOUbeing hereby appointed master of the ship librfune for the
resent voyage from t h s place to Leghorn in Italy, and, in case it shall
Ee so ordered at that place, from thence to Philadelphia, and there to
land our fellow citizens redeemed with yourself from captivity in

163

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

Algiers, you will make sad the first fair wind and proceed as soon as
possible to the rt of Leghorn, deliver my letters to Mr Felichi our
consul in that p ace, in which are enclosed other letters for Mr Donaldson one of our Agents for Barbary affairs, and follow their directions,
or those of either of them, in proceeding to Philadelphia, in this or
an other ship that the may procure.
%our humanity as we as your duty wiu lead you to take all ossibls
care for the health & comfort of the passengers & crew as we as for
the navigation of the ship.
The subjects of the King of Naples who are on board are to be
landed a t Leghorn & delivered to the care of Soloman Baccry, merchant of that place. You will treat these persons during their sta in
the ship, with that friendship & respect which are due to your fe ow
creatures entrusted to your care. And both the Americans & Neapolitans, & all all other persons on board, are hereby strictly enjoined
to obey your orders in all things.
If, notwithstanding your care and attention, the plague should
break out on board the ship during the passage, unless youshould then
be nearer to Leghorn than to Algiers, I recommend your returning to
this place, to discharge the infected persons and to take farther arrangements. This article is however left to your sole discretion.

P"

f

B

I

[NA. SDA. CL, Algiers, Vol. 1, Part 11, Feb-Nov. 1796.1

[12 July 17961
Passport given by Joel Barlow, U. 8. Agent, blgiers, to ship Fotlune

copy
JOEL
BARLOW,
CONSULOF THE UNITEDSTATESOF AMERICA
IN
ALGIERS,
TO ALL TO WHOM THESE PRESENTS SHALL COME.
Know ye that the Ship Fortune, in the service of the United States
of America, commanded by Samuel Cdder citizen of said States, departs this day from the port of Algiers in Barbary bound to Leghorn,
having 137 persons on board, all in good health; though wq are bound
to Acknowledge that the plague has manifested itself in ths place for
about six weeks past, & that it still continues.
The whole population of the town is estimated at about sixty thousand souls, and the mortality at present amounts to between thirty &
forty persons each day.
I pray all governors and other o6cers and all persons whatever,
who may visit the said shp, to treat her & her passengers.& equip
age with friendshp & respect, and to-give them assistance m case of
need, as those of my nation would do m like cases.
Given under my hand, & the seal of the Consulate of the Unitsd
States of America in Algiers this 12 day of July 1796
JOEL
BARLOW
[NA. SDA. CL, Algiers, Vol. I, Part 11, Feb-Nov. 1796.1
PASSPORT

NQ.7

To Secretary of State from Joel Barlow, U. S. Agent, Algiers

ALGIER12 Jdy 1796
SIR I have the pleasure a t last to announce to you the hberation
of our people from Slavery in this place. To keep the eace after
the expqtion of the time limited for the payment, snffhdy to
redeem our citizens, without any money, has been a subject of more

164

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1785 TO 1801

difEculty & vexation than mill be imabgined by those who are unacquainted with the extremely capricious and savage character of the
Dey.

*

*

*

*

*

*

*

My being able to procure the liberation of the people at this time
has been owing to an accident. From some circumstances in the
commercial speculations in this place it has so happened that money
has been extremely scarce here for several months past. The Jew
house who serve as our Brokers, and who do the greater part of the
business of the place, hare had their funds for some time in the hands
of the French Government to the amount of half a million of dollars.
The operations of some other houses for a year past have centred
nearly in the same point. so that there was no money left except in
the public Treasury. Though I had so far gained the confidence of
the Jews that they declared t'o me that the would advance the money
to the amount of the Redemption if it courd be raised, yet I had little
faith in these professions, because I believed they said so under the
idea that the money could not be had in the town. The plague broke
out in the latter end of May, and very much increased my anxiety
for the fate of our people. Some time in June a new French Consul
arrived, and by some brilliant presents revived the influence of the
Republic with the Dey so far as to borrow from the public treasury
about 200,000 dollars, which he paid into this Jew House. I irnmediately insisted that they should prove the sincerity of their friendship
by lending me that sum and as much more as the redemption would
come to, for which I would give them my bills on Mr Donaldson at
Leghorn. The at first agreed to it, but afterwards raised difficulties
on account of t e risque of transportation at a time when the English
stop and examin all neutral ships. And as they wanted the money
here they said they must have the bills at about 3 per cent below the
usual exchange (that is, at 33 mazoons of Algiers for the piece of eight
rids of Leghorn. The usual exchange is 34: there being really no such
thing in this place as what we call a course of exchange.) I absolutely
refused to give the bills at a farthing below the usual exchange, as I
would not set such an example for American transactions here, though
I knew that the Dutch, the Danes & the Venitians had gone to 32 &
even to 31 in some of their late public payments with these same Jews.
It is finally settled at 34, and I take a guarantee against damages in
case the b i s come back under protest. I do this because I dont know
that Mc Donaldson has yet recieved the credit that MT Humphre s
informs me be has sent him; and if he has, he may have shipped t e
specie here before these bills will arrive.
This house has likewise become answerable to the Dey and Regency
for the remainder of the money we owe here as the price of the peace.
Without this the Dey would not agree to the Redemption.
I embark the people for Leghorn, because there is no vessel to be
had at this moment except one absolutely bound to that place; and I
cannot keep them here mthout the risque of losing many more of them
by the plague. Five have already died within a few weeks, and
another will probably die to day.
I beg leave to confirm what I mentioned in my letter b Mr Cathcart
intelligence
with respect to the other advantages of hie mission.
& zed in the cause will enable him to render great service in preparing

!i

I

ds

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

165

& expediting the presents. And i t is really time they were on their
way.
July 13. the people have sailed tbis morning. Joseph Rogers, the
person left behind with the plague, is dead.
[NA. SDA. CL, Algiers, Vol. I, Part 11, Feb-Nov. 1796.1

-

To Secretary of State from Joel Barlow, U. S. Agent, Algiers

ALGIERS
12 July lr96
SIR This will be presented to you by the remnant of our captive
citizens who have survived the pains and humiliation of slavery in
this place. After effecting their deliverance in the manner which I
state to you in my letter of this day, without funds or even any direct
intelligence that they afe soon to be expected, I have another task to
perform in which i t is unpossible to promise myself success; it is to
embark them without the infection of the plague.
Five of their fellow sufferers have died with that contagion within
a few weeks, and another who is attacked must be left behind. I t
rages with such violence in the town, that although they cannot embark without risk, yet it is much more dangerous for them to stay
longer here in any situation where it is possible for me to place them
in this most incommodious of all concievable abodes.
If they esca e infection we shall be much endebted to the attention
of Captain Ca der who commands the ship, and to the careful assistance of the other captains who inspect the embarkation, as well as to
the harmony & good understanding which prevail among all the crews.
When we reflect on the extravagant sums of money that this redemption will cost the United States, it affords at least some consolation to know that it is not expended on worthless 8: disorderly persons,
as is the case with some other nations who are driven, like us, to this
humiliation to the Barbary States. Our people have conducted themselves in general with a degree of patience and decorum which would
become a better condition than that of Slaves. And though after they
are landed in their country it would be useless to recommend them to
any additional favours from the government, yet I hope they will
recieve from merchants that encouragement in their professional industry which will enable them in some measure to repair their losses,
and from their fellow citizens in general that respect which is due to
the sufferings of honest men.
Several of them are probably rendred incapable of gaining their
living. One is in a state of total blindness; another is reduced nearly
to the same condition; two or three carry the marks of unmerciful
treatment, in ruptures produced b hard labour; and others have had
their constitutions injured by the p ague. Some of these are doubtless
objects of the charity of their countrymen; but whether this charity
should flow to them through the channel of the federal government,
is a question on which i t would be impertinent for me to offer an
opinion.
[NA. SDA. CL, Algiers, Vol. I, Part 11, Feb-Nov. 1796.1

P

T

To Secretary of War from President George Washington

MOUNT
VERNON
lgthJuly 1796
DEARSTRThe purport of your private letter, of the 7Gh instant
(that part of it I mean, which relates to the Frigate for the Regency of
Algiers) has surprised me exceedingly. Private

6 6

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1786 TO 1801

That no step yet, should have been taken to carry this measure into
orous execution; -and that it should be asked,near six weeks after
~t ad been resolved to comply with the Deys request, and an actual
stipulation of our Agent, or Agents there; by what Department it is
to be carried into effect & is, on account of the delay which has been
occasioned (if contrary to the Ideas which have been communicated
to the Dey, & Col? Humphreys) extremely unpleast
Disagreeable as t h s requisition was found in its reception, and more
so in the compliance with it ;yet, as there appeared no other alternative
but to comply, or submit to the depredations of the Barbary Corsairs
on our Citizens, and Commerce, the former was preferred: & I had
no doubt (after pressing as often, and as earnestly as I did before I left
Philadelphia, that all Matters requiring my opinions, or Acts, might
be laid before me) that every thing relative to this Frigate was in a
perfect train of Execution, weeably to whatever assurances had been
given, by Captain OBrian. If the Laws establishing the different Departments (I have them
not by ma) does not expressly, or by analogy, designate the one to
which the care of such business is entrusted, I must, no doubt, assign
it; - but where these speak, it is best for me to be silent. If the building of this Vessel could have been suspended until the
meeting of Congress, for the Agency of the Senate, - the answer to the
Dey might have been suspended also. - But to avert, if possible,
the disagreeable consequences of delay, a prom t decision was come
to; and Captq OBrian hurried off with the resuft. - This decision,
and the letters which he carried, ought to be resorted to; and the
measures accorded thereto, strictly. - Whether it will be best to
purchase a ship ready built, if one fit for the purpose can be had
(and such an one on the Stock, at Philadelphia was talked of); Whether to contract for khe building & Equipping of one (some of the
Materials be' found) if entire confidence can be placed in the Undertaker; - or w ether to furnish the Materials (in which case all that
can be spared from our own Frigates ought, unquestionably, to be
applied) and pay for the building; depends upon enquiries not within
my power a t this time, and place to make; & must therefore, be a
matter of investigation, & consultation among yourselves; -especially
with the Secretary of the Treasury, on the Means.
Before I conclude, let me, in a friendly way, impress the following
Maxims upon the Executive Officers. - In all important matters, to
deliberate materialy, but to execute prom tly & vigorously, - and
not to put thin off until the morrow whicg can be done, and require
to be done, to a .- Without an adherence to these rules, busmess
never will be we done, or done in an easy manner; but will always be
in arrears with one thing treading upon the heels of another With very great esteem and regard
I am, Dear Sir Your Mectc friend &c
G. WASHINGTON
JABAE~
M-ENEY Esqr
[LC. J. M.H. P.,Vol. 3, 1794-1797.1

-?

?

C

To Thomas Pinckney, U. 6. Minister t o London, England, from Joseph Donaldaon,
Junior, U. 8. Agent, Algiers
LEGEOBN
J d y ye 16'b 1786
SIRI wrote you under the gt'? Lnat to which beg leave to refer you
the present to make known to you I have this day drawn on Messr,

167

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

John & Francis Baring & Co? for the Sum of ten thousend Pounds
Sterling in Various Sums, Bills No 1 a 11 in favor of Soloman Coen
Bmri which be pleased to take proper care be not disgraced Things
here remain in the Same state the Ships that form the Blockade observe
the rule made note of in my letter of y q t * Inst: One of our Vessels
distined here has arrived at Genoa that had been sent into Corsica
by one of their Commissioned Pirates and I have reason to believe a
very proper Account (Otherwise improper) would been given of her
had she not been Addressed to an English house & one of the Concern
on the Spot thus you see a Change of Measures in concequence of the
late Treaty and Effective as to a fulfillment Commodore Nelson has
signified by letter to the Venitian Consul that he will not suffer any
Vessel to Enter or leave the port until1 it is in possession of its former
Master
A Tunizeen Privateer Contrary to the Truce made last November
has sent in one of our Vessels the Schooner Eliza - Sam: Graves of
Boston
[NA. SDA. CL, Algiers, Vol. I, Part 11, FebNov. 1796.1
To Secretary of State from David Humphreys, U. 6. Iinister to Lisbon, Portugal,
and in charge of negotiations with Barbary Powers

(NP 55.)
SIR,

*

LISBON
Jdy 18fp1796.

*

*

*

*

*

*

I have likewise this day seen a letter from the Swedish Consul at
Tangier (a good Man, & much our friend) informing the Consul of the
same Nation in this Place of the captures before announced to you, of
one vessel with English & another with American Colours, by the
Cruizers of Muley Solirnan; and advising to dissuade all Swedish
vessels from taking freights to any port of Morocco. Six Portuguese
have, in all, been taken. All the Captains pretend that they are
bound to Magadore, & produce papers according1 - but the Commanders of Muley Soliman's Cruizers are not to e duped by them.
The English Captain, lately taken, presented false papers, but the
Moors beat him until he brought forth the true. This fact comes from
the English Consul at Tangier. The Moors now consider themselves
as having a right to mistrust all Ship-papers, believing many of them
to be false. On board of the American vessel (captured by them) was
intercepted a letter of advice purporting, that three other Americans
& one or two Swedes, were to sail for Saffi. Of course, all pessels
under those Colours which may be encountered, by Muley Sollman's
Cruizers, on or near that Coast, will be detained, searched & probably
carried into his ports, whether they may have the most authentic
papers, or not. Nor does the evil end here, Retaliation, or rather
similar Conduct towards neutral fowers has begun to take place on the
other part. A Corsair has been fitted out from SafE (one of the ports
of Muley Ishem) expressly to cruize against & capture all vessels
bound to ports in allegiance to Muley Soliman - One English vessel
has been carried into Saffi -but it is said to have been released, on the
fact being made apparent, that i t was not bound to any port in Africa.
i
r
,to what vexation & hazard the vessels conYou will perceive, S
cerned in the commerce of the U. s.,passing before the ports of Morocco, even if not destined for any of them, will be exposed in conse-

z

168

NAVAZ; OPERATIONS FROM 1786 TO I801

quence of the civil war in that Country, & the inordinate desire of gain
in our own Countrymen, - & that what I foretold in my Nq 37, has
in part come to pass even sooner than I expected. There seems to be
no circumstance that indicates a speedy termination of the dispute for
Empire in Morocco. It remnins for the Government of the U. S. to
decide whether it will not be necessary to have some naval force-as
speedily as may be in readiness for Sea, unless we mean to relinqmsh
our Commerce to the South of Europe; or at least, to submit to have it
greatly harrassed & interrupted.
By the Courier of to-day we have only the confirmation of News of
the passing the Rhine by the Army under the Orders of Gen! Moreau.
Geni Jourdan had returned to the left bank of the Rhine. Gen!
Kleber was near the lines of Dusseldorf. Strong reinforcements were
marching from Holland & France to strengthen the Army at that
Place.
Buonaparte had removed his Head-Quarters from Tortona to
Bologne, in the Pope's territories - which he had taken with its
Garrison, Staff, Cardinal Legate, four Standards, & a great quantity of
Artillery
[NDA. SDA. Disp. Spain, Vol. 3, 179%1797.]

To Secretary of War from President George Washington
(Copy of letter given to DF Cohen of Baltimore February 1855.)
Private
h f o u n ~VERNON
220dJuly 1796
DEARSIRYour private letter of the 16th came to my hands at the
same time that your official one of the 18thdid
From what is there said, and appears by the enclosures, I am satisfied
no unnecessary delay respecting the Algerine frigate hns taken place.
From a former one and perhaps from a solicitude to execute promptly
whatever is entrusted to me, I had conceived Otherwise.
As I have Mr Liston here & the house full of other Company, I
shall only add that I am, what you will always find
Your sincere frd and a f f e c t a m a n t
(Signed) G WASHINGTON
JAMEB
M C HEsq
~ ~ ~ ~
Copied by Js Howard MCHenry
[LC. J. MaH. P., Vol. 3, 179k1797.1
127 July 17961
tNo~~.-TheSecretary of State submitted to the President of the United States
under date of 27 July 1796 a brief resume of conditions as communicated by David
Humphreys in various documents, most of which are included in "Naval Docu-

ments".]
[NA. BDA. Dom. L, Vol. 9, Oct. 1796Feb. 1797.1

To Forman Cheeseman, Naval Constructor, from Secretary of War

[PHILADELPHIA]
War O&e July 30,1796.
SIR I have received your letter of the 29t.h inst - informing me of
Mr Fox's departure for Boston.
I had written Mr Fox on the 25th, not expecting that he would have
left New York so suddenly; either to engage the yard at Corlaer's
hook, or to request you to secure it at a rent not exceeding two hundred
and seventy pounds New York currency per m u m .

PARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

169

You will be pleased therefore to engage it for the United States, at
the said rent; and to proceed to execute the orders you have received,
or may receive from Mr Fox, relative to assorting, piling, and securing
the timber.
I shall request Capt. Talbot to deliver the Navy-yard books into
your keeping.
[NDA. Correspondence, when Navy was under War Department, 1790-1798.1
To Edward Band, Tunis, owner of the Schooner Biza, from Joel Barlow, U. S.
Agent, Algiers

COPY
ALGIER2 Aug. 1796
SIR I recieved but a few days ago your letter of the 24 June, that
of the 12 July came about the same time. Your capture is a most
disastrous circumstance to the Umted States as well as to you. I t
will make a difference of at least 30,000 - Dollars in the price of the
peace that I was concluding with that Regency.
I have consented to the Agreement made by Mr Famin for the
Redemption, including the Schooner & the Brandy on board. I
should not have included these, were it not for the sake of facilitating
the negotiation with the Bey and to favour your return & that of the
crew to America.
I have likewise in view the probability of her being useful at Leghorn
to carry home our citizens lately redeemed from Slavery at Algiers.
The Schooner, with the Brandy kc, is now the property of the United
States.
By my Instructions to Capt. Graves, which accompany this, you
will see the destination of the Schooner on her leaving Tunis. I have
therein consulted your convenience as fur as is consistent with the
interest of the United States. And I congratulate you on the speedy
& easy redemption you have experienced.
I beg you would sign your name with the Captain & the crew at
the bottom of the two copies of that paper of iqstructions. Indeed
I make it a condition of your and their Redemption that you all sign
that paper as it is to serve me as a voucher for the Transaction, as
well as to ensure the destination I have pointed out to the Schooner,
and the engagement of the men to do the service of the voyage.
I rely on your zeal $ intelligence in assisting Capt Graves with your
best advice on all occasions, whether the schooner shall convey our
other people from Leghorn to Philadelphia, whether she shall take a
freight from Leghorn or from Malaga, or return to America as she
is. * * *
[NA. SDA. CL, Algiers, Vol. 11, Jan-Dee. 1797.1

[3 August 17961
To the Dey of Algiers from David Humphreys, U. S. Minister to Lisbon, Portugal,
and in charge of negotiations with Barbary Powera

>

(COPY

DAVIDHUMPHREYB
Co~nmlPlenipo: from the United States of
America, to the Most Excellent & Most Illustrious Hassan
Bashaw, Dey of the City & Regency of Algiers.
I n my letter to your Excellency, written a t Lisbon on the 2 9 day
of July 1796, I had the honour to ratify & confirm the engagement
entered into by the Agents of the United States to present a frigate

170

NAVAL OPERATIONS PBOM 1785 TO 1801

to your Excellency, on the part of the said United States. I have
now that of dispatching Captq OBrien to Algiers, with such farther
proofs of the sincerity of the friendship & good will of the United
States towards your Excellency, as the circumstances would allow.
We feel a confidence that these repeated demonstrations of the faithfulness of the Government & Citizens of the United States to their
engagements will baffle ail the falsehood & malice of their enemies,
and, when the truth comes to be known, tend to produce a stronger
dection on the side of your Excellency, your Divan & Subjects in
favour of the said Government & Citizens, than if such falsehood &
malice had never existed.
Will your Excellency deign to receive such a respectful token of my
sensibility, of the honour conferred upon me by your having presented
a Sword & Sash to me, as it has been within the limits of my humble
abilities to procure? The only reason why this, token of gratitude
bas been delayed until this time, was, because i t 1s not permitted for
Citizens of the United States to accept Presents from foreign Princes,
without the permission of their own Government. - Having now obtsined that permission, I hasten to offer (by the hand of the American
Consul) that grateful Tribute of respect to your Excellency . . .
which will be accompanied also by a letter from the President of the
United States, under his own Signature, and the Great Seal of the
said States.
May the All-Powerful Disposer of human Events render these
things acceptable to your Excellency! And may the Peace & Friendsb$ estabhshed between the Dey & Regency of Algiers, and the
Umted States of America continue as long
- as the Sun & Moon shall
endure!
I pray God to have the life of your Excellency in his hol keeping;
& to crown your days to the latest period with felicity & g ory.
Written a t the City of Lisbon this 3d day of AI@ 1796
IGAO. No. 21, 637.1

9

To Secretary of State from David Eumphreys, U. S, Minister to Lisbon, Portugal,
and h charge of negotiations with Barbary Powers

(NQ58.)

LISBON
At@ 6*?17'96
SXRIn my last dispatch to you, I mentioned a letter of the 219*of
June *ustthen received from Mc Donaldson; I now enclose that letter,
ss weh as a subse uent one from him of the 28*+of June (both marked
NP 1.) from thepatter, notwithstanding the information contained
in the former, you will find the verification of the apprehension expressed in my NP 36 that the arrival of the French Troops at Leghorn
would interrupt the completion of our pecuniary operations a t that
place. I have received a letter from Mr Harry Fonnereau, dated a t
Valencia, July 13" on the same subject, in which he says "You will in
such circumstances see the impossibility of my f i n i h g this operation,
tho' I have the satisfaction of saying that M' Bacri of Leghorn, to
whom I shewed our letter & Mess? Barings' in your favour, seeing
the confidence ?had in said Gentlemen, has promised himself to
finish the business, either by taking Mr Donddson's Bills on them, or
in some other manner that may answer the purpose, so that without
the F'rench should conduct themdves in such a manner as to hinder
alI commercial operations a t Leghorn, I flatter myself it will finish

WARS WITH BARBARY POWElES
well. - MF Bacri has also promised to represent this unlucky
delay, if i t should prove any, as also the former delays, in such a
manner to his brother a t Algiers, that he assures me no bad consequences can happen on that account."
In order to facilitate the farther operation a t Leghorn, I have
instantly written to Mr Donnldson, approving of his intentions
and to the Mess? B a r e Bt CQ,praying them to honour
~ ~ ' ~ b n k d s oBni'ss, or to e s t a b l ~ hsuch Credit in his favour on
Mr Parish of Hamburg as might be convenient .
. they
taking the precaution to inform M?Donaldson of the same. I request
you will be pleased to notice what M' Donaldson mentions on the
subject of appointing a Consul for Trieste: I suppose, of course, this
will become expedient when affairs in Italy shall become a little
more settled.
Captn O'Brien sailed yesterday for Algiers .
. .
with him the property of the U. S. alluded to in the enclosed Documents. A reference to these (including the Copies of Letters, Instruetions &$from NQ2 to NQ8 inclusive) will give you the most ample &
correct account in my power, of my proceedings since hm axrival
from America. After determthg to send on the Money from hence,
I lost no time in making enquiries at what premium an insurance
might be made on this property for the U. S. On learning it could
not be done much under Six pr Cent (& perhaps the whole amount
could not be covered a t that r ~ t by
e the Underwriters here) and on
taking inta consideration the favorableness of the season, the goodness
of the vessel, the ability of the Master, the protection of the Dey's
Passport, the President's Certificate of the vessel being in the Servlce
of Government, & other circumstances in favour of the security of
the voyage, I have been dissuaded from having an insurance made a t
so extravagant a price. I hope my arrangements hereupon (which
will now be before you) will meet the approbation of Government
. . As I have endeavoured to act for the best good of the
iublio interest, and could certainly have had no object in view but a
desire to perform the business in the best, cheapest & most expeditious
manner possible. In addition to the Provisions brought out in the
Sophia, Water Casks have been put on board a t this place. - I
forgot to mention that Capt? OBrien was delayed from sailing so soon
by one day, as he would otherwise have done, on account of a sad
accident which happened to his Chief Mate . . . who lost hie
hand by discharging an overloaded blunderbuss.
I have received several letters from our Consuls at difEerent ports,
relating instances of the usurpation of our flag by the Commf~ndersof
English Merchant vessels. I have advised them in former xnstances
to detain the false Papers dz send them to your Office. f have applauded their zeal and attempted to stimulate their vigilance. I have
even had occasion to complain to the Secretary of State for foreign
Affairs at this Court, against the conduct of the Governor of Madeira
for having improperly Interposed his authority on the subject; and I
have the pleasure to mform you that his conduct is disapproved of by
hie Court. I have lately given the same private advice of detaining
& forwarding the Papers, on the application of Mr Montgomery of
Alicante
. . who requested to know whether he should not
put the vessels so assuming our flag in arrestation for trial: referring
him, however, ta you for your ultimate decision.

. .

.

.

172

NAVAL OPEBATIONS FROM 1786 TO 1801

P. S. The rich Brazil Convoy has arrived. - it is said to consist
of about £6,000,000, Sterling in value. - Of which about £1,500,000,
for Government in gold. - Admiral Vandeput came in with the
Convoy.

*

*

*

*

*

*

*

[GAO. No. 21, 637.1

To Josiah Fox from Secretary of War

[PHILADELPHIA]

War Ofice September 1 . 1796.
SIR. I t being thought adviseable that the frigate, agreeably to
sketch A, in your instructions, should be built by contract, you will.
inform Mr Hacket thereof, and that the terms which he has offered
to build her on, have been communicated to the Secretary of the
, and approved of; Mr Hacket may therefore proceed to
make al preparatory arrangements for commencing the work without
a momentsdelay Mr Hacket is to be informed at the same time, that it wiU be
acquired as indespensible conditions in the Contract 1st. That the
Frigate be delivered complete, agreeable to Contract in ten months
from the date of the rece tion of this letter. - 2 - That the public
may furnish the timber, p ank,&%hich it has in store, proper for the
said Frigate at a valuation. 3. - That the timber be valued by two
disinterested, reputable, and well informed persons, who shall be on
oath, one to be chosen by Mr Sheafe, and the other by Mr Hacket. If
these should disagree, a third to be chosen by mutual consent, who is
also to act on oath. 4 - That the United States shall have a right
to appoint an Inspector of the work.
As soon as you obtain M' Hackets consent to these conditions, you
will ascertain from the most respectable Blacksmiths, on what terms
they will engage to furnish the Iron-work necessary for the Frigate,
whlch you will inform me of as soon as possible.
You will also proceed t? seperate agreeably to your instructions,
such Timber as may be smtable for the said Frigate.

Treasu='r

P

[NDA. Correspondence, when Navy was under War Department, 179CF1798.1

To Secretary of the Treasury from Secretary of War

I~HILADELPHIA]

War Ofice September 19. 1796.
SIE.There will be wanted for the Frigate destined for the Mediterranean, twenty four nine pounders, an& twelve six ounders, and for
the three Frigates now under construction forty twe ve pounders; it is
requested therefore that a Contract may be entered into for the delivery of this number of Cannon, on or before the 1st of April ensuing.
To obviate as much as possible disputes with the person who may
engage to furnish them, it may be proper that the Contract should
cornprize the followmg conditions:
1. That the Guns be cast in the solid and bored.
2. That the twenty four nine pounders and twelve six pounders
conform exactly in weight, bore, caliber, and length, to British Ship
Guns of the m e dimensions now in use.
3. That the forty twelve pounders be formed agreeably to the
dimensions laid down, in the annexed draught.

P

173

WARS WITH BARBARY POWEIZS

4. That the Guns after having been bored, and before undergoing
any proof, shall be examined by one or two persons to be appointed by
the President of the United States, in the presence of such other person
as shall be named by the owner of the wprks. That this examination
shall commence by a verification of the diameters of the different parts
and ascertainment, whether there are more internal and external cavities or defects than are specified in the annexed Table, exhibiting the
defects which are to be tolerated. That in all cases where the bore or
caliber is found to be less than the diameter prescribed; and the defects not greater than those tolerated; the Cannon shall be returned to
the boring machine to be enlarged; before being proved; and in all
cases where the defects are greater than those tolerated, the examination shall cease, and the Cannon be rejected.
5. That the instruments commonly employed to ascertain dimensions, and discover cavities or holes in the external and internal parts
of Guns shall be used on such occasions.
6. That the Touch-hole must end in the cannon, at the middle of
the rounding of the Angle at the bottom of the bore. That should any
holes be found in the Touch-hole, deeper than the twentieth of aninch,
the C a ~ o cannot
n
be admitted to proof, till the same shall have been
filled up with beaten iron.
7. That the Trunnions must be perpendicular to the vertical plane,
which is supposed to pass through the Touch-hole, and to cut the bore
into two equal parts. That the upper part of the Trunmon shall be
level with the center of the caliber, or bore, and that the usual relative
weight be preserved between the Breech, and Chace.
8. That the proof by powder shall be as follows. vizt Each Camon
shall be proved by two successive discharges. The weight of the
powder for the first discharge, shall be equal to two thirds of the
weight of the ball and for the second equal to half the weight of the
ball. The Cartridge shall be well rammed down with a wad over i t ;
two balls shall be placed over that with a wad of hay between them,
and a wad over, which shall be well rammed down; the balls to be
measured so as to allow a sdicient windage, and approved of by the
Officers who shall make the experiments, and the owner of the works,
or an person whom he may appoint for that purpose.
9. hat to ascertain the strength of the Trunnions the Cannon
must be placed on two pieces of wood having indentations large enough
to receive two thirds of the Trunnions, and with the hinder part a t a
sufficient distance from where the Trunnions lodge, so that the breech
may be inclined in any direction, but never so as to rest on the ground.
The proof by powder must be made on these pieces of wood.
10. Tbat the Cannon which shall have stood the proof by powder,
shall be raised from off the temporary carriage, and placed u on a
supporter, so that they may be f l e d with water. That sho d the
water on being compressed iilter through any part of the Crtnnon, it
cannot be received tho' it has stood proof.
11. That the Cannon which shall have stood the aforesaid examination and proofs, shall be subject nevertheless to be re-examned, and
should new holes be detected, or the ones tolerated found to have been
enlarged by the firing; all such Cannon must undergo a second,pmof:
but of one discharge only; when if the holes exhibit no further e . arge
ment, they shall be admitted, and receipted for, after bemg weighed.
12. That the weight of each Cannon received, shall be marked on
the left Trunnion.

6

J

174

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1785 TO 1801

As Cannon which have not undergone the above examination and
proofs, cannot be used by the United States without utting the
success of those military undertakings in which they may e engaged,
a t risk ;and as the principles and r ulations here lmd down, have been
the result of much experience, and ong adopted for the verification of
Cannon by the principal Nations in Europe; they may be considered
as guides that ought not to be departed from. I t is requested therefore, that the Contract shall be so formed, as to ensure a strict and
punctual compliance with each, and all of the above mentioned conditions.
P.S. The draught for the 12 pounders, which is in hand, will be
furnished in a few days.

g

"K

Dejects to be tolerated in Cannon for the use of the Marine of the
United States.
Tenth of
an Inch

more than the prescribed diameter.......................
1
Bore- - -- - - - less
than idem . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
''5
Depth of the interior holes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2%
a succession of little holes, one of which will be- - - - - - - - - - - 1%
n a direction towards the muzzle 2%
a direction parallel with the surUpon the
face. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
succession of little holes, one of
which will be- - - - - _ - - - - _ - - - - - _ - - - 2
Directed towards the muzzle_------- 2%
Exterior
a direction p a r a e l with the surholes--- --'Upon the J T ~ ~ B ~ , face-----------_---___-----------4%
Chace--, - - - - - - - A Continuation of little holes, one of
which will be....................
2
Upon the hind and under part of the Trunnions- - - - - - - - - - 4
A tenth of an Inch more will be tolerated upon the front
and upper part of the Trunnions
If they are in a direction towards the muzzle, and if they are
8/10,of an inch deep, the Cannon cannot be received.shall also be refused if the holea are 6/10,of an inch deep,
muzzle- - - I t and
are directed towards the muzzle.
Upon the diameter-- - more than- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - _ _ _ _ _ {less than ---..-.......--....-...-Upon the exterior position of the Orifice- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - ~ 1%
Upon that of the in- In front of the point where it ought
to be---- - - _ - - - - - - - - - _ - - - - - - - _ - _
2%
terior Orifice-- - - - _ Behind
the same - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 1%
The holes in the interior part of the Touch hole - those %
tenth of an inch deep.
[NDA. Correspondence, when Navy was under War Department, 1790-1708.1

1

- --

- -

To Secretary of the Treasury from Secret~ryof War

[PHILADELI.HIA]
War OfEce September 20. 1786
SIR, MI John Skillen of Boston has been mentioned to me by Mr
Rush, as a qualified Artist to undertake the carving of the head or
figure for the Frigate [Constitution]building at that Town. As it is
proper that this work should be immediately commenced, you will be
leased to give such orders ss may be necessary on the occasion.
$here is a drawing of the figure (a Hercules) now preparing which
I shall send forward to M' Skillen, as soon as finished.
[NDA. Correepondence, when Navy was under War Department, 1790-1798.1

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

175

To Secretary of the Ressnry from Eewekry of War
[PHILADELPHIA]

War O$ice September 27.1796.
SIR. I believe the best explanation relat~veto the proof by water,
will be, to give Mr Hughes a more detailed view of the mode in which
the experiment w i l l be directed to be made.
The object of the water proof is, to discover whether there are any
holes which penetrate through the sides of the Cannon: For this
purpose, the Examiners will be instructed, after the Cannon have
undergone the proof by powder, to place them upon-a thick piece of
Timber, so as they may be easily made to turn upon it. The Touchhole will be stopped with a wooden peg covered with tallow. The
Cannon will then be raised, and the chace surrounded with linnen,
so that any water which may fall down the sides, on filling the bore,
shall not be confounded with the drops that may a t e r through the
metal; and with the same view the water will be oured into the
e
aill bs
cavity by meam of the spout of a watering pot. ~ p water
then pressed upon by a rammer covered with thick cloth, so as to
fill exactly the muzzle of the Cannon. During this operation, the
exterior will be attentively watched to see whether any water passes
through the metal. If the least fiftration appears, the cannon will
be refused.
As to the dimensions of the twelve pounders &F the draughts are in
hand, and I expect w i l l be finished in a few days.
[NDA. Correspondence, when Navy was under War Depsrtment, 1790-1798.1

To Secretary of State from David Humphreys, U. S. Minieter to Lisbon, Portugal,
and in charge of negotiations with Barbary Powers

(N"0.)

LISBONOd! 6"P 1796.
This morning, Mr Clark, the Messenger announced in my last as

being expected from Alicante, put into my hand the Dispatches from
M? Barlow. Among them were two for you, which you will be
pleased to find enclosed. - Determined not to lose the earliest
occasion of transmitting them, I can only notice some of the most
interesting articles contained in those addressed to me. A m o q
which artr~cles,is Mr Barlow's correspondence with Mr Fa&. - m
consequence whereof a Truce for six months has been concluded with
Tunis (the Original & Translation [see 15 June 17961 are herewith
enclosed) and the Prisoners lately taken by a Tunisian Corsair in the
Schooner Eliza (previous to that Truce) redeemed. For it should
seem that the Bey had never heard of the Truce, which was pretended to have h e n made by his Agent (app~rmtlyat the instance
and under the sanction of the Dey) at Algiers. - This Schooner before
mentioned, Mr Barlow has put into the Service of the U. S. by having
sent her to Leghorn for the purpose of carrying our ransomed People
to America, if necessary. - The Instructions & Documents, relrttive
to this transaction, as well as to that of forwarding the said People
from Algiers, I hope to enclose to you by the next conveyance.
From Mr Barlow's not having heard anything of Captq O'Brien a t
the date of his last letter to me; and from the account he had received
of one American vessel of three Masts [ Betw of Boston] and another
of two, having been captured by a Corsair of Tripoli, I can not avoid
entertaining apprehens~onsthat the Brig Sophia may have been one of

176

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1786 TO 1801

them [*I: although I was induced fully to believe, by CaptW'Brien's
representation as well as from the nature of the circumstance, that
there could not possibly be any (not even the least) danger of such an
accident happening to s vessel, under the special Passport of the Dey,
covering property destined for himself & the Regency. The Dey's
Psssport was looked upon as being absolutely sacred w ~ t hall the Barbary Powers. I hope therefore my apprehensions may be groundless.
But I shall communicate them as soon as possible (before the return
of the Messenger) to Mr Barlow - and a t the same time, shall urge
him (if the fact should unfortunately prove so) to imprcss upon the
Dey the necessity of reclaiming his own property (I imagine he will
find no reluctance in doing it, or in resenting so gross an insult to
himself) and the impossibility of our attempting to send any Presents,
naval Stores &q destined for him, into the Mediterranean, unless we
can know with certainty that they will be protected by virtue of his
Passport, from every invasion or detention by any other of the
Barbary Powers.
I have just received letters from Mr Donaldson, the communication
of which must be postponed to another occasion.
P. S. From the good Character which M: Barlow has formerly received & given of Mr Joseph Famin; from the Zeal which he (Famin)
entered upon the business committed to him; from his apparent
intimacy with the chief Officer of the Bey, & his consequent influence
with the Bey himself, in obtaining a Truce without Present or promise
of gratuity; from the intelligence manifested in Famin's letter which
I propose transmitting to you in my next; and from the decided preponderance which the French Republic must have in the Councils of
all the Barbary Powers; I take the liberty to suggest, whether this
French Citizen might not be as proper a person as could be found for
Consul; in case a Consul should be appointed for Tunis - by limiting
Mr Donaldson's Consulate to Tripoli, as I heretofore intimated I
thought it would be indispensably necessary for us to have a Consul
in each of the four seperate Barbary States. [*One was the brig Sophia with $200,000 on board for Algiers in charge of
Richard O'Brien. After being detained in Tripoli Captain O'Brien arrived in
Algiers 1 October 1796.1
[NA. SDA. Disp. Spain, Vol. 3, 1795-1797.1
Abstract of cannon delivered by Samuel Hughes in behalf of the Cecil Company
for the Military Department, in pursuance of his contracts with the Treasury
Department, 28 June 1794 & 25 October 1796
.c

Kind of Quns

d

;
3

To Whom delioered

Weight

g

S n a s,
---------

'o

1801

Novr 34
"

8'

I'

'6

121-35 doll*pr Ton pr Con{atattract
of the 28tb June 1794
133% doll* l~ Contract of
1
1
a
z *'
{
the atb octr 1786.
ditto.-..--..
---------

Lewis Tousrrrd.. 1
ditto .-..-...2

----

6

"

13 ---- - - - -

50

17

"

17 ....

28

18

13

17

80.

17.

I.

6

1.

0

"

0.

12

"

12

177

IVARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

at 121-Hdollars fx Ton
i s - 6,187.40
at 123% dollars p8 ditto - - - - - - . . - - - - - - - . . . -' .'-8.997.60
--------Voucher NP4. 8bot u88d for proving omitted in I s s t Settlcment.--.----.---------.---------266.40

Dollars. 10,450.30

[GAO. No. 12,862.1
Abstract of cannon delivered by Samuel Hughes in behalf of the Cecil Company
in pursuance of his contract with the Treasury Department 25 October 1796
Kinds Guns

Weight

F

1-

T o whom delivered

.

d

0
*

'0

1797
Octr 53tb

F m r Da Costa.--

1763

Mar.

3I.

OCtr 16t4

----ditto .....---..
Joseph Elliott -.--.

...... 6354.06

at 133-54 dollrr Pr Toe

11. Expense of enlar~mgthe bore of 17 Nine and 10 S l r pounders also shot for proring......---. n6.M
Dollars.

6.W 65

[GAO. No. 12,531.1

[4 November 1796 and 10 June 17971
Tripoli-Treaty
"Treaties and other International Acts of the United States of
America", by Hunter Miller, Volume 2, is printed the Treaty between Tripoli
and the United States. The following is copied from the above publication:
"Treaty of Peace end Friendship, signed a t Tripoli November 4, 1796 (3
Jumada I, A. H.. 1211), and a t Algiers January 3, 1797 (4 Rajab, A. H. 1211).
Ori * n d in Arabic.
'8ubmitted to the Senate May 29, 1797. (Message of May 26, 179'7.) Resolution of advice and consent June 7, 1797. Ratified by the United States June
10, 1797. As to the ratification generally, see the notes. Proclaimed June 10,

NOTE.--^

1797."1
-----A

[Translation]

There is a firm and perpetual Peace and friendship between the United States
of America and the Bey and subjects of Tripoli of Barbary, made by the free consent of both parties, and guarsnteed by the most potent Dey & regency of Algiers.
If any goods belonging to any nation with which either of the parties is at war
shall be loaded on board of vessels belonging to the other party they shall pass
free, and no attempt ehall be made to take or detain them.

178

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1786 TO 1801

ARTICLE3.
If any citizens, subjects or effects belonging to eitther party shall be found on

board a prize vessel taken from an enemy by the other party, sueh citizens or
subjects shall bc set a t liberty, and the effects restored to the owners.

ARTICLE4.
Pro er passports are to be given to all vessels of both parties, by which they are
t o be fnown. And, coneidering the distance between the two countries, eighteen
months from the date of this treaty shall be allow-ed for pmcuring such passports.
During this interval the other papers belonging to such vessels shall be sufficient
for their protection.
ARTICLE5.
A citizen or subject of either party having bought a prize vessel condemned by
the other party or by any other nation, the certificate of condemnation and bill of
eale shall be a aufficient passport for such vessel for one year; this being s reasonable time for her to procure a proper passport.
ARTICLE6.
Vessels of either party putting into the ports of the other and having need of
provisaions or other supplies, they shall be furnished a t the market price. And if
any such vessel shall so put in from a di-ter
a t sra and have occasion to repair,
she shall be a t liberty to lend and reembark her cargo without paying any duties.
B u t in no case shall she be compelled to land her cargo.
ARTICLE7.
Should a vessel of either party be cast on the shore of the other, all proper
assistance shall be given to her and her people; no pillage shall be rtlloned; the
property sllaIl remain a t the disposition of the owners, and the crew protected and
succoured till they can be sent to their country.
ARTICLE8.
by an enemy within gun-shot of the
If s vessel of either party should be
forts of the other she shaH be dcfended as much as possible. If she be in port she
shall not be seized or attacked when it iu in the power of the other party to protect
her. And when she proceeds to sea no enemy shall be allowed to pursue her from
the same port within twenty four hours after her departure.
ARTICLE9.
The commerce between the United SLates and Tripoli,-the protection t o be
given to merchants, masters of vessels and seamen,-the reciprocal right of establiehing consuls in each country, and the privileges, immunities and jurisdictions to be enjoyed by such consuls, are declared to be on the same footing ~ i t h
those of the moat favoured nations respectively.
ARTICLE10.
The money and presents demanded by the Bey of Tripoli as a full and satisfactory consideration on hi part and on the part of his subjects for this treaty of
perpetual peace and friendship are acknowledged to have been recieved by him
previoua to his signing the same, according to a reciept which is hereto annexed,
except such part as is promised on the part of the United States to be delivered
and paid by them on the arrival of their Consul in Tripoly, of which part a note is
likewise hereto annexed. And no pretence of any periodical tribute or farther
payment is ever to be made by either party.
A R ~ C L 11.
E
As the government of the United States of America is not in any sense founded
on the Christian Religion,-aa i t has in itself no character of enmity against the
laws, religion or tranquility of Mu~seImen,-and as the said States never have
entered inta any war or s c t of hostility against any Mehomitan nation, i t is declirred by the partiea t h a t no pretext arising from religjous opinions aball ever
produce an interruption of the harmony existing between the two oountriee.
ARTICLE12.

In case of any dispute arising from a violation of any of the articles of this
treaty no appeal shall be made t o arms, nor shall war be declared on any pretext

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS
whatever. But if the Consul residing at the place where the dis ute shall happen
shell not be able to settle the same, an amicable referrence shef; be made to the
mutual friend of the parties, the Dey of Algiers, the parties hereby engaging to
abide by his decision. And he by virtue of hk ~ignatureto this tresty engages
for himself and successors to declare the justice of the case according to the true
interpretation of the treaty, and to m e all the means in hie power to enforce the
observance of the same.
Signed and sealed a t Tripoli of Barbary the 3g day of Jumad in the year of the
Hi era 1211--corresponding with the 4'4 day of Novr 1796 by
fussnF Basaaw MAHOMET
Bey
SOLIMAN
Kaya
MAMET- Treasurer
GALIL-Gent of the Troops
Au~~--Minialer
of Marine
MAHOMET-Cons of the city
Am-Chamberlain
MAMET-~~w~~u~~
ALLY-Chief of the Divan
Signed and sealed a t Algiers the 4 t h day of Argib I21 1-corresponding with the
3 6 day of January 1797 by
HASSAN
BABHAW
Dey
and by the Agent plenipotentiary of the United States of America
[The "Receipt"]

[Seal] JOELBARLOW

Praise be to God &o
The present writing done by our hand and delivered to the American Captain
OBrien makes known that he has delivered to us forty thousand Spanish dollars,thirteen watches of gold, silver & pinsbach,-five rings, of which three of diamonds, one of saphire and one with a watch in it,-one hundred & forty piques
of cloth, and four caftans of brocade,-and these on account of the peace concluded with the Americans.
Given a t Tripoli in Barbary the 20th day of Jumad 1211, corresponding with
the 21-t day of Novr 1796(Signed)
Bas~aw--Be?r
. JUSSUF
whom God Exalt The foregoing is a true copy of the reciept given by Jussuf Bashaw-Bey of
Tripoli(Signed) HASSAN
BASHAW-Dey of Algkra.
The foregoing is a literal translation of the writing in Arabic on the oppasite
[The "NoteJ']
On the arrival of a consul of the United States in Tripoli he is to deliver to
Jussuf Bashaw Beytwelve thousand Spanish dollars
five hawsers-8 Inch
three cables-10 Inch
twenty five barrels tar
twenty five
do pitch
ten
do rosin
five hundred pine boards
five hundred oak
do
ten mns& (without any measure mentioned, suppoae for vessels from 2 to
300 ton)
twelve yardp,
fifty bolts canvaa
four anchors
And these when delivered are to be in full of all demands on his part or on that
of his successors from the United States according sa it is expressed in the tenth
article of the following treaty. And no farther demand of tributes, presents or
payments shell ever be made.
Translated from the Arabic on the opposite page, which is signed & sealed by
Hassan Bashaw Dey of Algiers--the 4" ddey of Argib 1211--or the 30 day of
Janr 1797-byJOELBABLOW

180

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1786 TO f 801

[Approval of Humphreysl
To dl to whom theae pesenta shall come or be made known.
Whereu the Underwritten David Humphreys hath been duly appointed Commhioner Plenipotentiary by Letters Patent, under the Signature of the President
and Seal of the United States of America, dated the 30'b of March 1795, for negociating and conduding a Treety of Peace with the Moat Illust.~iousthe Baahaw,
Lords and Governors of the City L Kingdom of Tri oli; where- b y a Writing
under his Hand and Seal dated the 1 0 1 of February l if96, be &d (in conformity to
the authority committed t o me therefor) constitute and appoint Joel Barlow and
Joseph D o d d s o n Junior Agents jointly and aeperately in the business aforesaid;
whereas the annexed Treaty of Peace and Friendship was agreed upon, signed
and sealed a t Tripoli of Barbary on the 4'4 of November 1796, in virtue of the
Powers aforesaid and guaranteed by the Most potent Dey and Regency of Algiers;
and whereas the same was certified a t Algiers on the 34 of January 1797, with the
Signature and Seal of Hsssan Bashaw Dey, and of Joel Barlow one of the Agents
aforesaid, in the abeence of the other.
Now Know ye, that I David Humphreytr Commissioner PIenijmtentiary sfor+
aaid, do appmve and conclude the said Treaty, and every article and clause therein
contained, reserving the same neverthelees for the final Ratification of the President of the United S t a h of America, by and with the advice and consent of the
Senate of the said United States.
In teat~monywhereof I have signed the same with my Name and Seal, at the
City of Lisbon this 10th of February 1797.
[Seal] DAVID
HUYIPHREYS.
I('Traties,* * *Is, by Hunter Miller.]

Presents sent on concluding Peace with Tripoli

Presents sent by Capt- OBrien to Tripoli and delivered by him on
concluding the peace

NOV.4 - 1796 -

PURCEASED W ALGIERS.
9cp.

-

hl

1 Watch rich in diamonds- - - -- - - - - -- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 360
2 old watches - repeaters
with chains- - - -62---- - - - --- - - 124
1 8ilver d~---- - - - - - - - -- - - - -- double case-- - - - ---.
--- - - -- - -16
1 large diamond ring- - ---- ~olitaire----- - - - --- - --- --------- 360
1 d Q - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - in four a t o n e s - - - - - - - - - - - , - - - - - 94
1 de ----------------------many stones
72
1 M t s n - - - , - - - - - - t s n t s n - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -80
- - - -54
1 dv---------------------~----------------------------55
18
2 d Q. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
a 4 6 . 5 4-----------------------93
36
140 piques cloth - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 2%---------------------------- 315

-

-

- -

_-

-

-

----------+-------

-1570

PDRCHABED IN PAIUB.

36

LImar

- T o p s ----------------------------------432
1 do - gold - with a watch . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
480
1 Silver watch- - - -- - - - - - - --- - ----- - - - - - - - - -- - -104
I Pinaback - double came - chain &c ------------ - - - - 120
2 old watchee
---------------------_-_-------- 672
1 ---------::TI::T::
, - - - - - - - - - - - - - -360
---------2 dQ- repeaters - double cases--- ------------------- 1200
1 ring

8 Q

-

1 dQ
1 b* -

d~.-------------------------------------

dv ---- very elegant-------------------------

744

1248

5360

[NA. SDA. CL, wera, Vol. 11, Jan-Dec.

JOEL BARLOW
1797.1

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

181

[24 November 17961
David Humphrey's Werning against Citizens of the United States visiting Ports
not in allegiance to Emperor Muley Soliman

NOTIFICATION
The Underwritten Minister from the United States of America
Resident a t the Court of Lisbon, having lately received intimations
(on good authority) that His Majesty Muley Soliman, Emperor of
Morocco, has threatened to doclare war s g h t the United States of
America if their vessels shall continue to proceed to SafE or other ports
of Morroco not in dlegiance to him,takes occasion again to caution in
the most earnest manner all Citizens of the said United States e a i n s t
a proceeding so replete wit.h danger to themselves & their Country.
The Consul of the United States for Morocco has announced that he
cannot in future reclaim any Persons or Property, that may be captured, under a destination to or from Saf5 or other Porb of Morocco
not in allegiance to the Emperor Muley Soliman.
Given at LIBBON,
this 2dtQday of November 1796.
[NA. SDA.

Disp. Spain, Vol. 3, 1795-1797.1

[29 November 17961

Estimate by Naval Constructor Joshua Humphreys, U. 6. Navy, and Josiah Fox,
Naval Constructor, of cost of building and equipping a frigate of 36 gtms, and
navigating game to dlgiers
Carpenters bill for building the Hull, launching & cornpleating the same
together with a Compleat set of Masts & Pards, - - - - - - - - 45
-00
----_Joiners, Smiths, Plumbers, Boatbuilders, Carvers, Coopers, Blockmakers, Sailmskers, Riggers & Rigging, with Ship Chandlers bills- - - - 55. 00

PrTon----------_---_-----------------------------_-----Ship compleat of 538 Tons a t $100 pr Ton- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -- - - - Copper Sheathing- ------------------------------------------Cannon-------_--------------------------Copper Pintles and braces . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Powder, Shot, and other Military Stores.........................
40 Men including officers, for 5 Months together with their provisions-

$100.00

53,800.00
4,118.40
7,428. 69
1,200.00

13,551.00
8,589.00

[Bea Estimate 018 June 17W.l

[NA.

SDA. CL, Algiers, Vol. I, Part 11, Feb.-Nov. 1796.1

[30 November 17961
To Muley Soliman, Emperor of Morocco, from David Humphreys, U. S. Minister
to Lisbon, Portugal, and in charge of negotiations with Barbary Powers

(COPY
David Humphreys Minister Resident from the United States of
America at the Court of Lisbon, named Minister Plenipotentiary to
His Catholic Majesty, and char ed with the interests of the said
States in relation to the several arbary Powers - to His Imperial
Majesty Muley S o h - Emperor of Morocco, Fez, Mequinez, & d
the Garbe, &q &q &?.

%

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1785 TO 1801

182

May i t please your Imperial Majesty to be informed, that, upon
my receiving the very fmt information that some vessels, under the
flag of the U. S. of America, had been a t SafE or other Ports of Morocco
not under your allegiance, I immediately wrote circular letters to the
Consuls of the U. S. in the neighbouring Countries & Islands to warn
all Captains of vessels belonging to the said U S. against such a
proceeding. That warning has likewise on several occasions since
that period been repeated in the most solemn & urgent manner. And
I have no doubt that the Government of the U. S. will, as soon as it
may be In their power, take effectual measures to,prevent their Citizens from prosecutmg a commerc~alintercourse n t h the said Places.
I therefore address this letter to your Imperial Majesty, for the purpose of entreating that the conduct of any Individuals who may
presume, in despite of the beforementioned warning, to offend
against your Royal regulations, should not be considered in any
d ee as affecting the Government or Citizens at large of the afored U. S. of America.
In full confidence that your well known justice will not permit the
innocent to be involved in the punishment which can only be due to
the guilty; and in offering the strongest assurances that the Government of the U. S. will do every thing in their power to maintain &
erpetuate inviolably the peace & friendship so beneficially estrtblshed with your Royal Father (of glorious memory) & so happily
confirmed by our Imperial Majesty; I pray Almighty God to have
your precious L e in his holy keeping, and to crown i t with length of
days, felicity & glory.
Written a t the City of Lisbon, this 30t? day of November,
1796; and in the twenty first year of the Independence of
L. S.
the United States.

3
f!

[NA. SDA. Disp. Spain, Vol. 3, 1795-1797.1
To Joel Barlow, U. 15. Agent, Algiers, from Secretary of State

DEPARTMENT
OF STATE
PHILADELPHIA
December 3. 1796
SIRCaptain Cathcart's Barque, in which he came from Algiers, is
now loaded and ready to sail, with naval stores for that place. I t
would have been ve difficult a t this time to do more: but we expect
to load several vesse s in the ensuing spring: and with all practicable
diligence and expedition the stores necessary to fulfil our engagements
to the Dey will be procured and forwarded. Captain Cathcart will
remain here, and i t is proposed to employ him in this business; by
which means we hope the articles selected for the Dey will give him
satisfaction.

'3

Your NQ2 dated April 8') with its inclosures exhibits satisfactory
reasons for the agreement made by you and h'lr Donaldson on the 59
to furnish the Dey with a 36 gun frigate. The President, under the
circumstances of the case, did not hesltate to confirm our agreement.
The f ate [Crescani] is building a t Portsmouth, I&w Hampshire,
under t e direction of an excellent naval architect; and I trust she
will be ready to sail for Algiers (with masts and naval stores agreeable
to your suggestion) early in the next summer. But instead of forty

Ti

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

183

five thousand dollars, she will cost the United States, about ninety
thousand, by s Iate estimate; and probably this will eventually rise
to one hundred thousand.
This matter being in so good a train, and contracts made and making
for all the masts, spars, timber and naval stores, we have to lament
the multiplied disa pointments in the pecuni
ne ociations. * * *
your assuming tYle character of consul, a n Y m s h g the Consular
presents was certainly well timed. In a Country where principles
are unknown, or what is equal, have not the smallest influence, it has
been fortunate for the United States that their interests were at so
critical a period in the haads of a citizen who had intelhgence to
discern and confidence to seize the fittest moments to secure them.
As the periods of renewing the consular presents are computed from
the date of the treaty, there cannot as you observe, be any difference
in the expense, by your making the first under the circumstances you
have rnentloned. A suitable person for Consul at a place so important
as Algiers will hardly Be found until the emolument shall be increased;
and this it is hoped may be done nt the Session of Congress which is
next week to commence. The cautions you suggest as to the character
he should at first assume, that of Vice-Consul, or your Secretary, will
be attended to. These obsex-vations refer to your letter of April l T t @
In your letter of April lath and estimate of the 20* of advantages
and expenses of maintaining peace with Barbary, you have presented
an interesting and important view of the commerce of the Mediterranean, and the share we may reasonably hope to attain in it, if we
effect a peace with all the Barbary powers, and form commercial
relations with the Countries bordering on that sea. * * *
It is some time since I received a copy pf your ipstructions to Monsr
Famin f o negotiate a treaty of peace wth T u s ; and a letter from
Ms Monroe dated in September, which I received the 236 ult. covered
a communication from M. de la Croix, the French Minister for
foreign affairs, by which it appeared that a truce, or provisional
treaty, had been concluded with that Regency; the Citizen Herculais
adding to his information, that a complete peace would soon follow.
This peace will be the more valuable if obtained for the moderate
terms designated in your instructions to M. Famin: although you will
have seen, by letters you must since hwe received from Colq
Humphreys, that if indispensably necessary the terms might be
extended. I t will be fortunate indeed, if this important object is
accomplished agreeably to the h t instructions: for the extraordinary
expenses of the Algerine negociations, and the vast losses in various
exchanges t o convert our funds into Cash, may absorb all the savings
in the sums ultimately appropriated for the treaties with Tunis and
Tripoli.
Captain Cathcart has given me an open letter to the Dey of Algiers,
in which I observe nothing improper: if any parts of ~ t however,
,
should appear otherwise to you, they may be erased, or suppressed
in the inte retation, at your hscretion. He brought a letter from
the Dey ad ressed to the President of the United States, to which an
answer is now inched, which the President desires you to present to
the Dey in the fime and manner which you shall-deem necessary and
most accep-table. A copy of it for your information is inclosed.

'B

[NA. SDA. Dip. Cor., Inat. to Min., Bk. 3, June 1795-Jan. 1797.1

184

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1785 TO 1801
To Joel Berlow, U. 6. Agent, Algiers, from Secretary of State

DEPARTMENT
OF STATE
PHILADELPHIA
December 6'h 17'96
SIB An Act of Congress passed in the last Session required that
Mediterranean passports should be issued from the Custom Houses
on and after the &st of September last. The Collectors were accordingly supplied. Our treaty with the Dey and Regency of Algiers
requires that the vessels of the United States be furnished with passports within eighteen months from the date of the treaty; the indented
margins of our passports will therefore arrive timely, I trust, to supply
the Algerine Cruisers. I now transmit herewith one hundred of those
margins, with six entire passports, as specimens of their form. The
plate for striking them had been hished, and great numbers struck
and issued prior to Captain Cathcart's arrival with the forms you were
so kind as to send me. I also send herewith three quires of printed
certificates substantially agreeing with the forms used by the British
Consul at Algiers which you forwarded, and to which the margins are
annexed, for the use of the Cruisers; five quires of certificates for
Algerine prize vessels, and two quires relative to the health of the
Country. The one hundred margins of the passports will enable
you to suppl the cruisers of Tunis and Tripoli as well as those of
Algiers, sho d peace be accomplished with those powers.
Captain Cathcart thought i t would be pleasing to the Dey to see a
drawmg of the frigate building for him in the United States: I have
had one made, wbch you will find herewith.

13

P. S. You wiU of course give your receipt on the delivery of the
cargo at Algiers, to enable Captqathcart to receive here the stipulated
freight.
(NA. SDA. Dip. Cor., Inst. to Min., Bk 3, June 1795-Jan. 1796.1
Observ~tionsof Bichard O'Brien on negotiations for peace with Tunis*

9th o j December I796 in the CITYOF TUNIS
This day the AIgerine Vickel sent for me and informed me he

received letters and 50 passports from Algiers. I said I hoped he
would act with dignity moderation and precaution on a business of
so delicate a nature m which the honor of Algiers was so deeply
interested. He said he would - that he would in the morning go to
the Rabatta to where the Bey of Tunis resides - would see the
Bey - communicate the purport of the Deys letter and prepare the
wa for me to have a conference.
6 n the morning of the 10th - The algerine Vickel went to the
Palace and the V~ckelshortly sent for me. I requested Mr Famin
to go with me as he seemed much dissatisfied that the Vickel did not
also desire him to go on this business with me - He acquiesced
We went to the Bey's residence after walking there X an hour I a t
last saw the algerine VickelHe said he had been speaking to
some of his friends - that the Bashaw was busy in the Justice Hall,
& that he would embrace a favorable opp? of speaking to him - I
observed he being the representative of so potent a prince as the Dey
of Algiers he should not hesitate in doing his duty - He on t h
went to the Bashaw, met him going into another room & shewed

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

185

him the Bashaw of Algiers' orders and requests & determination
relative to the Bm. business. He returned to me & said that the

Bey seemed much affected as a person very .ybut choaked with
inward grief on the affairs of the Dey of &em giving the Americans
his passports & threats - I observed that the Viokel interpreted
to me that the Dey of Algiers' letter intimated that Tunis had demanded a greater Regala from the Americans than algiers did. that
it was in consequence of the Deys interference the Bashaw of Tunis
had deviated from his fixed demand of 50,000 dollars and demanded
the maritime & military stores - and says the Vickel you had
better agree to give a small regala than keep the affairs in this manner
unsettled - I said I had no such orders, That I should have an answer
& return to algiers and there report to Patroon Grandi That he knew
the orders were positive and could not be deviated from without
the Dey's approbation - The Vickel went to where the Bey was
& shortly after returned & said the Bashaw does not consider you
or MT Fa& sufEciently instructed to conclude this business without
a reference to algiers - I said on this that I or M' Famin was empowered to conclude on the original terms of 50,000 dollars but not
on the nofe of maritime & military stores - The Vickd said that
in his Opinion I had better return to algiers and state these particulars to the Dey - I said if nothin better could be done that I certainly wouId - The Bashaw ca ed for Mr Famin - had some
conversation with him - Famin told me that the Vickel was no
service on the business - says I he must obey his masters orders Will the Bey conclude on the terms which he first proposed & settled
with you? No says he, he will not. M: F m i n had a long conference
with the Sachataps to see if 8 or 10,000 dollars could not be substituted in the room of the Regda The result was that i t was impracticable - The Viokel took his leave of me for the present as
he said he could not be of any more service to me - that he would
go to his home, and commence his letters for Algiers, assuring me he
had & wodd do all in his power on this business and hoped it would
soon be accommodated. Mr Famh said it was no use for to stay
there any longer as the Bey said what signifies my talking on t h s
business - neither the Rice or Famin has owers to conclude with
me without a reference to Algiers - I said wodd conclude on the
original terms but not with them and the note of the Maritime and
mihtary stores. I was determined to have a conference or audience
with the Bey I accordingly entered the Justice Chamber where he
was - went and kissed his hand, and asked him if he would conclude
the peace He said on what terms? I said for 50,000 dollars - He
looked at me & remained silent - I said, will your Excellency admit
of something to be substituted in the room of the Regala - He
said you cannot conclude without a reference to dgiers. I asked
then if he had any commands for algiers? He said he wished me
well. I took my leave of him and returned & began to prepare for
Algiers. Mr Famin and I had a long reasomg conversation - He
was the Tunician - I was the Algerine. I went this evening to
the Algerine Vickel - gave him a letter to forward to Algiers for Mr
Barlow - desired if he had m y commands f?r dgiers to prepare
that I should sail Suddenly & said he might ather give me the 50
passports or return them by the Cour~erfor Algiers

G

P

186

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1786 TO 1801

N.B. Arrived this day a regusee vessel from Livorn, the Master
of said vessel informed me there were 5 sail of American Vessels in
Livorn - This news became public in Tunis 10. Dec. 1796
[*On 10 October Captain O'nrien left Algjem for Tunis, with letters and gifts
from the Dey to the Bey of Tunis.]

[NA. SDA. CL, Algiers, Vol. 11, Jan.-Dcc. 1797.1

To Secretary of State from David Humphreys, U. 5. linister to Lisbon, Portugal,
and in charge of negoaahonr with Barbary Powers
(N9

79.)

LISBONDeer 16'b 1706.
SIR I no sooner received authentic information that the Emperor
Muley Soliman had seriously threatened to declare war against the
United States, in case vessels under their flag should continue to
frequent the Ports of Saffi & Mazagan, & P than I caused the enclosed notification, NQ1. to be affixed in a public place at the Exchange;
I hastened likewise to address a letter to the Emperor Muley Soliman,
of which the enclosed N? 2. is a copz.; which I forwarded a few days
ago under cover to Mr Simpson a t ibraltar, with a letter to him of
which the enclosure Np 3. is a copy - and I cannot but flatter myself
that the precautions I have thus taken to avoid, if possible, the
disastrous consequences of a rupture with the Emperor, will meet
the approbation of Government
In the mean time, I am much distressed to learn that the Cruizers
of the Emperor have began to carry his threats into execution by
capturing & sending into Mogadore a vessel belonging to the United
States bound from Cadiz to Boston, as you %ill perceive by the
enclosures NQ84 & 5, which came to hand by this day's post. - I
do not expect however that the Captains of our vessels will be deterred from going to Saffi & Mazagan; as I am informed that several
of them upon seeing the before mentioned Notification, exp~essed
their contempt of the advice contained in it, and determinabon to
prosecute the trade. Insomuch that I am persuaded that no measure
which may be taken on this side of the Atlantic at present can put
a stop to it: or indeed any other measure except some positive act
of Government, & perhaps some armed vessels stationed in these
seas for carrying that act into effect, as well as for other purposes.
Government will of course decide how far it is right or expedient
that the conduct of Individual Citizens, tending to involve their
Nation in a war, should be tolerated or prevented. But apart from
this consideration you are alrendy in possession of my opinion of
the importance of our having t~ few frigates in these Seas on 311
occasions, and which o p h o n I cannot excuse myself from repeating
the more particularly under the present circumstances. - * * *
[NA. SDA. Dkp. Spain, Vol. 3, 1795-1797.1

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS
Presents to be given after concluding peace with TPnie

Presents sent by Capt - OBrien to Tunis - and delivered by him
to Mr Famin, to be employed at the conclusion of the peace - [28
August 17971
PDBCIUED

IN uamm

-

1 Ring-ruby-surrounded with diamonds
1 Gold snutl box withmusick 6ent hither by Moutgomcsy,and credited inmy acb with the 0.6...
200
2 Gold watchas--doublecase, with ehatns-+ ...................................................
124
2 dv
d?_----_--without chairs--32
-.
-._--_----..64
1 Bilver watch-double urse
I6
....~...---unununununununununununununununununununununununununununununununununununununununun-~--

.-------- .............................................................
--.-.--..--3--3--3--3--3--3--3--3--3--3--3

--3--3--3--3--3--3--3--3--3--3

493

Limca
-.--........----------------------------

PUBCnASED IN PARI8.

1 Ring-yellow brilliant and emerald
16%
1 Snuff box-Jasw sat in gold-..-----..---.------------------.----------4m
1 Cup & vase-of Jade------.----..---------------------------------24W
1 Gold watch--...-..------------------------------------------336

--.---.-...--

1 d9 ..-.
.-..
double -repater..
.---..------------ ------------- -- - - - - 648
1 d~---- ---- dv ..--- CQ-.-.
very elegant---.
...------ ----------------------- -- - - - - . 1080
.
.------rich in di~monds
4580
4 Bnuff boxes-tortoise shell .-.....---..---.-.----------------------------48
1 dV

----

dsdsdsdsdsdsdsdsdsdsdsdsdsdsdsds-dsdsdsdsds-dsdsdsdsdsdsdsdsdsdsdsdsdsds-dsdsdsdsdsdsdsdsdsdsdsdsdsdsdsdsds

11472

ALGIERS
Jan? 1797
[NA. SDA.

JOEL BARLOW

CL, Algiers, Vol. 11, Jan-Dec. 1797.1

To Josiah Parker, Chairman of Committee on Naval Equipments from Secretary of
War
[PHILADELPHIA]
W a r O&ce January 18'4 1707
SIR In Compliance with your letter of the 21.' Ulto. I have the Honor to submit
the enclosed Statements which exhibit as particular a view of the Material Objects
of your enquiries as could be Obtained without occasioning a delay that might
have counteracted your intentions The measures that have been taken to prepare the Rigging and Sails, and to
procure the necessary stores, and the advances made towards the final equipment
of the Frigates render it probable that they may be got ready for Sea in about
2 Months after being launched.
While on this subject permit me to observe, that if Congress perceive advantages in the Extension of their Marine, or think it expedient that early precautions
should be taken, to secure to the United States a lasting fund of live Oak for
future Use, it will be proper, that Authority should be given for the purpose, as
well
to purchase a Scite for a Navy Yard The probability is that an Article so important to Maritime Nations as live Oak
will be sought after with much avidity and that the land which is clothed with it
may pass into hands that may make its attainment hereafter more expensive if
not impracticable But whether it is aright that the United States should be the purchaser of such
lands is a question which no doubt you have examined - - -

-

Stdement of the progress made in B d d ~ n ga Frigate at Philadelphia to Carry
Forty Four Gun+
The Hull is all planked inside and out, and all the principal Decks are laid and
Caulked excepting a part of the Gun deck:
The Upper Deck Beams are in and a part of them Kneed: about half of the
Bottom is dubbed off and a coneiderable part Caulked: The Braces and Pintlea
for the Rother are all cast: The Knee of the Head together wlth the Flgure are
nearly ready: All other parts of the Hull is in such forwardness that it is expected she may be launched by the beginning of April next,provided the Winter
dws not prove severe -

188

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1785 TO 1801

The Rigging is all made and nearly fitted: The Yarns for the Cables are Spun:
The Anchors and Iron ballast on hand: and the Blocks, Deadeyes, Water Casks.
Boats, Lanthorns, and all the Tin work are provided. The other Materials are
in part procured and the Work in general progresses rapidly towards Completion - Statement of the progress made i n Building a Frigate at Boston to C a q Forty
Four Guns The whole of the Frame is raised and is ready for Planking: The Wales are
prepared and it is expected will be on and fastened this Month: The Keelsons
are in their places and bolted off. The Masts are now in hand: and the Boats
are building: All the Deadeyes for Lower and Topmast Shrouds are made and
Strapped: The Knees for all the Decks are procured as well as the Beams, Carlings, Ledges kc, Iron ballast suecient is in Store: and the necessary Materials
for Cornpleating the Hull are procured and received - - The Hemp for the
Cables Rigging &c. and Blocks are in the Hands of the Respective Tradesmen
manufactoring: and if the Winter should prove favourable there is no doubt
but this Ship may be Launched in July next - Statement of the progress made in Building a Frigate at Baltimore to Cany Thirty
Six GunsThe whole of the Frame is raised, The Wales, Black Strakcs: Flush, Quarter,
and Fore drifts on and dressed off: The Cieling, Clamps for Gun, Lower, and Orlop
decks are all in and dubbed off: The Beams are prepared and ready to be put into
their respective Stations: The Bottom is now planking, and the Knees are getting
ready for the decks: other parts of the Hull are progressing as f a ~ast the Workmen
can be employed to advantage, and from present Appearances this Ship may be
Launched in May next The Lower, Topmast, and Top gallant Shrouds with all their respective Stays
are fitted and ready to go over the M a t Heads. The other Rigging is also in great
forwardness The Boats are all built the Water Casks mostly made together with the Blocks,
Deadeyes, Hearts &c &c The Cannon for the Gundeck are all in the Navy Yard, trimmed, and are ready
for Mounting on the Carriages which are made Estimate of the Sums necessary to Compleat and Equip the Frigates United
Stales, and Cmtitution of 44 Guns and Colzstellation of 36 Guns To Compleat the Frigate building a t Philadelphia (United
St&ea)-----------------------------55.950.To Compleat the Frigate building a t Boston (Constitut i o n ) - - _ - _ - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 96.571.71
To Compleat the Frigate building a t Baltimore (ConsleZZation). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47. 375. 199.896.71
Salaries of 2 persons to have Charge of the Timber in the
Navy Yarda a t Norfolk and New York - - - - - _ - - - - - - - 1.000.Rent of Navy Yards a t New York & PortsmQ (N H)- - - - 1. 200. 202.096. 71
Ballance of Appropriation unexpended . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24. 133. 78
To be provided for to Compleat & equip the above Prigatee &c- - - - - $177. 962 93
An Estimate of the Expence for pay and Subsistance of the Captaina and Crews
of two 44 Guns, and one 36 Gun, Frigates - -

189

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS
Pay of the Oficers Seamen and Marines of Two Frigates of 44 Guns each
DR P.Mv

12 Months

2 Captains----------------------------------------.
75
1800
8 Lieutenants-------------------------------------40
3840
2 Lieutenants of M a r i n e s - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 26
624
2 Chaplains- - - _ - - - _ _ - - - - - - - - - - -40
- - - - - - - - - - .
960
2 Sailing Masters - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -40
960
2 Surgeons- - - - _ - _ - - - - - - - - - - - . . -50
- - - - - - - - - 1200
4 Surgeons Mates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
1440
2 Pursers-----------------------------------------40
960
2 Boatswains. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
--------18
432
2 Gunners-,--------------------------------------18
432
2 Sailmakers-_------------------------------------18
432
2 Carpenters- - - - - -- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 18
432
4 Boatswains Matee . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
624
13
624
4 Gunners Mates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2 Sailmakers Mates--- . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
312
13
16 Midshipmen ---- - - - - - - - - -- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 13
2496
13
624
4 Masters Mates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2 Capta~nsClerks. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
312
2 Cockswaine-------------------------------------13
312
2 Yeomen of the Gun room . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
312
13
22 Quarter Gunners. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3432
4 Carpenters M a t e s - - - - - - - _ - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 13
624
13
2 Amourers--------_-----------------------------312
2 Stewards----------_-----------------------------312
13
2 Coopers----------------------------------------312
13
13
2 Masters a t Arms-----_-__------------------------312
2 Cooks---_--------------------------------------312
13
39. 600
300 Seamen-----------------------------------------11
206 Midshipmen and ordinary Seamen- - - - - _ - __ - __ - _ - _ _ _
22. 248
9
10
.240
2 $erjeants---------------------------------------2 Corporals . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
240
2 Drummers--------------------------------------. 216
9
2 Fifers-------------------------------------------9
.216
9
100 M a r i n e s - - - - - - - - - - _ - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 10.800

.

98. 304. 4096 Dollam Per Month for each Frigate of 44 Guns -

Pay of the O f i e r s , Seamen and Marines for one Frigate of Thirty S u Guns Dm P h19

12 hf?

1 Captain - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 75
900
3 Lieutenants------------------------------40
1440
26
1 Lieutenant of Marines --------------- - - - - - - - 312
1 Surgeon----------------------------------50
600
30
1 Surgeons Mate . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
360
1 Sailing Master . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
480
1 Purser-----------------------------------40
480
18
1 Boatswain . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
216
18- - 216
1 Gunner - - - , - - - - - - - - - - - - ---------1 Sail Maker --,--------- ---- -- - ------- -18
216
18
216
1 Carpenter--------_---_-------------------8 Midshipmen . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
1248
13
2 Masters Mates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
312
1 Captains Clerk - - - - - - - - - - - - - - . . - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 13
156
2 Boatswaine Mates - - - - - - _ - _ - -__ - _ - - - - - - - _ - - 13
312
1 Cockswain
--------------13
156
1Sailmakers Mate
166
13

-

- --

,----,------------,----------

190

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1785 TO 1801

Pay of the Oficera, Seamen and Marines for one Frigate of Thirty Six Guns--Con.
D.c P M?

2 Gunners Mates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1 Yeoman of the Gun room - - - - - - - - - _ - - - -- - - - - 9 Quarter Gunners
2 Carpenters Mates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1A m o u r e r - - - - - - - - - - - - _ _ _ - - - - - - - - - - . - - - - - - - 1 Steward-----_-------------------------..--1 Cooper-----------------------------------1 Master at Arms - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -

12 Mq

13

312
156
1404
13
13
312
156
13
156
13
156
I3
13
156
156
13
I Cook . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
-11 17.160.130 Able Seamen and Midshipmen - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 0720.
90 Ordinary Seamen ----- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 9
120
1 S e r j e a n t - - - - - - - - _ - - - - _ _ - . - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 10
240
2 Corporals . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
9 . - -108
1 Drummer- - - - _ - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - --------108
9
1
40 Marines - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 9 - - - 108
-------.140. 820
3513 Dollars Per Month

13

-,.-------------------------

-

Subsisfanee - Rations per Day
Ds P M9

3 Captains - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - + - - - - - - - - 11 Lieutenants--- - - -- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 3 Lieutenants of Marines--- -- - - - - _ - - - - - - - - - - - 2 Cfiapkins-_-------------------------------

6

3
2

2

3 Surgeons------------.--------------------2
5 Surgeons Mates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
3 Sailing Masters - - - - - - - . - - - - - - - - - - - 2--------3 Pursers ------------ . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
3 Boahains-------------------------------2
6 Boatswains Mates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
3 Gunners----------------------------------2
6 Gunners Mates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
3 Sailmakers-_-_------_--------------------2
3 Sail makers Mates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
3 Carpenters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
6 Carpenters Mates--------------_-----------1
24 Midshipmen- - - - - - - - . . - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 2
6 Masters Ma& . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
3 Captains Clerks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
3 Cockswains------__-----------------------1
3 Yeomen of the Gun rooms --..---..-..---------1
31 Quarter Gunners - - - - - - - - _ - - - - - - - - - - -- - - - - - I
3 Amourers--------------------------------1
3 Stewards- -.. -------------..--------..-------1
3 Coopen--------_-------------------------1
3 Masters st A m s - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 1
3 Cooks------------------------------------1
726 Able Seamen, Midshipmen and Ordinary Seamen-----------------------------------1
3 Serjeants_--_--__-------------------------1
4 Corporals - - - - - - - - - - --- -- --- --- --- - -- -- .
I
3 Drummers. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
3 Flfea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1
140 Marines-- - --- - - --- --- - - ---- - - - -- - - - - - - - - - - j
Rations--------_-----------------------------

-

400770 Rations, at 20 Cents Per Ration is--.. - - - - - - - - - - - - -

191

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

Two Hundred and Twenty Thousand, nine hundred and Seventy Four
Dollars - WAB OFFICEDecernr 29" 1796 [NDA. Correspondence, when Navy was under War Department, 1790-1798.1

-

To David Humphreys, U. 6. Minister to Lisbon. Portugal, and in charge of negotiations with Barbary Powers, from Joel Barlow, U. 6. Agent. Algiers

ALGIERS12 Jan? 1797 My DEARSIRI have never since the 9 Oct - found an occasion to
send to Euro e. My communication which have accumulated very
much since t at time will now be handed you b Capt - OBrien.
By him I send the treaty concluded with ~ r i ~ o tI . beg leave to
refer to his verbal communications for the details on that affair.
And I believe you will be convinced that we have done as well as i t
was ossible under the circumstances.
d t h respect to Tunis, I enclose to you the copies of some of the
first letters that passed between Famin, OBrien & myself after the
Bey had manifested his obstinacy & bad faith on that subject. What
has passed since is little more than a continuation of the samepretentions on both sides - But there is very little doubt in my m n d but
the affair will soon be accommodated. You may be assured that the
present war which the Dey of Algiers has undertaken against Tunis
is wholly on account of our Treaty - He will succeed, and our peace
with Tunis as well as with Tripoli will be established on the most
solid foundation.
My accounts on the peace of Algiers are not yet closed. I have
kept back the payment of the 180,000 Dollars to the Dey himself for
a good reason. If I had pushed the Jews to finish it, I must have
given them bills on Leghorn for the whole amount, which would have
occasioned a great loss. And I was expecting for 4 months the
100,000 do1 - from Leghorn. These have at last arrived - about
111,000. - and as the Dey insists on having the whole of his sum
in Algerine Sequins, we are g e t t h them fabricated a t the mint.
And the accounts cannot be closed tdl this o eration is completed.
As soon as this [is1 finished I shall close t e business here; and if
the treaty of Tunis arrives by that time, d i c h I expect, I shall then
leave the country, & forward my accounts to you. * * *

%

i

*

[NA. SDA.

*

*

*

*

*

*

CL, Algiers, Vol. 11, Jan.-Dec. 1797.1

[12 January 17971
Memorandum of Richard O'Brien, Algiers

The Dey requests and requires the frigate [Crescent] as soon as
possible to be complete, her guns 12 pounders, Stores, powder and
ball Coppered, every thing complete and re uisite, prepared for Sea.
The Dey gives OBrien Commission for b d d i n g or purchasing two
or three complete corsaires for which he will pay for them on their
arrival a t Algiers. The Dey wants a complete Cruiser, Constructor
a single Man one of abilities and sobriety - Also wants a Master
Sail maker, a very ca able man. 25 Chests of tea of 4 different
qualities. 6 Quintal o loaf sugar refined. some elegant penknives,
some small Guilt thimbles, scissor cases &? calculated for the Queen

l'

192

NAVAL OPERATIOhTSFROM 1785 TO 1801

and daughter, a few shawls, with roses curiously wrought in them a few rosed China Cups &$ &q 20 lb. of h e Tea for the prime
Minister, the Hasnagee. Drafting pencils and sweeps for the Constructor Seddi Ali Mistrillia Pencils for Hadge Usef - Plank for
Hadge Omar & Hadge Hamita the Brother in laws of the Deys. a
few fineries also. Joseph Cowen Backries Commission - for Sundries
from Philadelphia with my Passports & q &q - a Few Crates of Plates
&F

&P

-

These brilliant Stones (twine) to be for a gold ring for the head
Cook and other of the great men - to be completed in Philadelphia
Passports &F received - These are remarks, Commissions &q for to attend to in America - by
ALGIERS
January 1797. OBRIEN.
[NA. SDA. CL, Algiers, Vol. 2, Jan.-Dec. 1797.1

[12 January 17971
Certiilcate concerning the Commission of the Dey of Algiers to Bichard O'Brien
to purchase Two Cruisers in America

I certify and attest that this paper written in the Turkish Language
is a Commission from the Dey of Algiers to Captain OBrien to purchase for him in America two new Cruisers a t the choice and taste of
the said OBrien, and to bring them to Algiers, and the Dey engages to
pay for the same on their arrival in this place.
ALGIERS12th Jan? 1797.
JOEL
BARLOW
DEPARTMENT
OF STATEt
o wit:
I hereby certify That the above is a true copy of the original certificate of Joel Barlow Esquire on the back of a paper written in the
Turkish Language, under the seal of Algiers.
29 DECEMBER
1797. GEQTAYLOR
J' Chief Clerk
[NA.

SDA. CL, Algiers, Vol. 2, Jan.-Dec. 1797.1

Report of Committee, to the United States Senate, concerning Appropriation for
Treaty with Algiers

REPORTED
TO THE SENATE,
JANUARY
16, 1797.
Mr. Marshall, from the committee to whom was referred the
President's message of the 9th inst. relative to our affairs with the
Dey and regency of Algiers, having considered the same, made the
following report:
That the further sum of two hundred and fifty-five thousand seven
hundred and fifty-nine dollars and three cents, being a balance of
nine hundred and ninety-two thousand four hundred and sixty-three
dollars and twenty-five cents, not et provided, will be necessary to
carry into effect the treaty with d@ers, agreeably to primary stipulations, including the frigate of thty-six guns, promised the Dey;
that, for the balance of the annuity granted by the said treaty, calculated for two years, a t one hundred and forty-four thousand two
hundred and forty-six dollars and sixty-three cents, the further sum
of ninety-six thousand two hundred and forty-six dollars and sixty-

@&I

193

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

three cents; that for the ton thousand sequins promised the Jew
broker by Mr. Donaldson, the sum of eighteen thousand dollars;
and that, for the expenses of the captives performing quarantine st
Marseilles, and transporting them to America, the sum of six thousand
dollars will also be necessary; making in the whole three hundred and
seventy-six thousand eight hundred and five dollars and sixty-six
cents, which sum, in the opinion of your committee, ought to be
appropriated out of some effective fund, for the purposes aforesaid.
[Am. State Papers, Foreign Rel., Vol. 1.1

To Secretary of the Treasury from Josiah Fox, Naval Constructor

[PHILADELPEIA]

War OfficeJanwry $8.lYQ7.
Sir - I inclose you a statement of the quantity of Canvass that
will be wanted for the Frigate building for the Dey of Algiers [Statement]
Estimate of the Quantity of Canvass necessary for Sails &c for the Frigate
Building for the Dey of Algiers -

,

I

I

Narnos of Soils

-

Mniosail.. -.
..-.
----- --------- -- -.- -.
-.
- - - -.
...
.-.-",oresail
-.
- - -.
..- - - -.
-.
.-.
- - - -.
-.
........-.
.
.
.
- .- - - - Mizeen .--.--..-._-------------------...--.--.--.--a
Maintomil ----.-----------------.-.-.--.-----.---1 Foretopsail---.--.-----.--.------.-..-.----------.-s p r i t d ------------------------.--.-..------.--.--o;;j Forestaysail--...--..-.---.-.---------.-.------.---Mainstsy.dl....-.
.- - - - - - - --- - - - - - -- - - -- - - - - - -- - -- i T Miccen staysall--.-.--...-----.---.-.-------.------2S Awnings....-..-..-.-----------------------.-.-.---Westn m d Qaarter Cloths..-.-_.-.-...----.....---Fore Main and MlzGen Top Cloths .----.--.-...-.-0
Masts and Rudder eogtd .--.---.---..
.-----.
.------66
W Indsails-.. -.
- --.
- - - - - - - -- - - - - - - - -.- - - -..-.- - - - - - 80

-zs

a

Yards

-

M i a n Topaail.--..-.---.-----------------------.-225

Maintopgallantsail---------- -- --- ---- .-.--------.
-89
77
ForetopgsllsnW- - ------ - --- - - - - - ---- -- ---- - ---&firzentopRsUsntssil------ - - - -- - -- - - -.
-- - - - - - - - - -8 r l W I topssil..--.--.-.--IIIII.I.I.IIII.IIIIIIIIIahtogmaststay sail--.-.-.--.---.----.-.---------$
,
f I
Foretopmaststay
sail
Middlestay d l .----.--.--.--.----------- --- --- ---za gQ MizcentopmaStStay Bail-----.-----_--------- .-----Mainto llslltstay saU ..---.--.----.--------------*, Lower
studding srrll.......--.--.-------------Lower Forestudding 8aii --.-------_--.
.-----.
-3 H&I Topmast studding sail...-------------------Foretopmnst studding sail.. .-.-----------.--.-----Malntopgallant studding salL
Foretopgallant studdlw saiI---------.-------------Jlbh -.-----..--.-..------------------------.-----Mnln Royal .-.------._----------------------------Fore Bowl .-.---.-..---.----------------.----.---Nbmn Royal---..-..---.-----------------.--------8panker.. ..--.------------ ------.--- --.
.-.
-.
- -- --

*

gB
4 of erreh or-

2}dared lyCan
tsJn O'bnen

3

F;Z
Q

-

-

.------.------~toto.toto..totototo.tototototo

me---

-

-

WAR OFFICEJ u n w y 28. I797
[NDA. Correspondence, when Navy was under War Department, 1790-1798.1

194

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1786 TO 1801

To Secretary of State from David Humphreys, U. 6. Minister to Lisbon, Portugal,
and in charge of negotiations with Barbary Powers

(NQ83.)
LISBON
91*.' 1797
SIR I hasten to inform you of the safe arrival of CaptWYBrien,in

a passage of five days, from Algiers. Altho) he is still in quarantine he
has communicated to me the agreeable & interesting intelligence, that
a Peace was concluded between the United States & the Bey of
Tripoli, on the 4" of Novr last. B e farther advises, that, as the Bey
of Tunis had refused to accede to the terms which had been insisted
upon by the Dey of Algiers, on behalf of the United States; the Dey
had taken upon himself the accomplishment of that pacification. I t
appears he had actually invaded the Tunisian territories, principally
to effect that object. M' Barlow seems to imagine that no other
Christian Nation possesses so much of the good will of the Dey at
present as the United States; and that there is a high degree of probability a peace will soon be concluded with Tunis.
P. S. I have some letters which I wish to transmit to you, but cannot prepare the Copies in time for this conveyance.
Admral Jervis has left this Port. - A Convoy arrived, on Sunday,
from England with nearly 2000 Emigrant troops, to serve in this
Country - & the day before yesterday Admiral Parker with five sail
of line of battle ships, to reinforce Admiral Jervis I t is believed (but not certainly known) that the Expedition from
Brest was destined against Ireland, & has miscarried - Seven Ships of
war had, by the last accounts from France, got back to Brest. Nothing material from any of the Armies.
FebT 1? 24"
P. S. I n a note this moment received from Captn O'Brien (still
in quarantine) be expresses an opinion that the Sophia will not be
able to sail for Philadelphia before the middle of this month - as she
wants cleaning &q He likewise intimates his idea of the expediency
of Mr Barlow's being prevailed upon to remain a t Algiers, until the
Maritime Stores &q shall be delivered there.
[NA. SDA. Diap. Spain Vol. 3, 1795-17971
To Joaiah Parker, Chairman of Committee on Naval Equipments from Secretary
of War

[PHILADELPHIA]
W. 0. February Pd1797 SIRI n reply to your letter of the 3OtP of January Ulto - I have
the Honor to subjoin, lm An estimate of the probable Cost of a Soits
for a Navy Yard, and the Buildings necessary thereto. Pda like estimate of the Sum that will be re uired to purchase live Oak and red
Cedar sufficient for a Frigate an a Ship of two Tier of Guns - and
3* an Estimate of a sum su posed competent to purchase a quantity
of Land sufficient to yield Eve Oak by succeeding growth equal to
the Current demands of the United States.

2

195

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS
No 1

NQ1 - A n Estimate of the probable Cost of a Scite for a Navy Yard,
and the Buildings necessary thereto -

Cost of 100 Acres of Land for a Navy Yard within 15 or 20 LPmiles of a Large City ---------- a t 53 dollars Per Acre-- 5,300. Wharfing say 500 feet front - - - - - - _ - - -..- -- -- - - - - - - 12.410. Mould loft with Stores under neath - - _ _ _ . - _ - -4.000.
- - -------Blacksmiths Shop-----,--- - - - - -- - - --- .- - - - - - - 1.000. Stores, Sail and Rigging Loft . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6.000. Sheds for Timber - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 3.000. Mast and Yard Shed----------..-----.---------------.500.Rope Makers S h e d _ - - _ - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 3.000.Stores for Hemp & Cordage. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2.000. Dollars

-- 37. 210

N? 2

N? 2. An Estimate of the Sum that may be required to purchase
Live Oak and Red Cedar, suffcient for a Frigate and Ship of two
Tier of Guns - - An annual supply of live Oak and Red Cedar sufficent for
a Frigate and Ship of two Tier of Guns will average
25,000 Cubical Feet; each a t 7-116 delivered- _ - - - - ---- _ _
(or 7 16)

D"

25.000.

N? 3

3'6

An Estimate of a Sum supposed competent to purchase quantity
of Land sufficient to yield live Oak by successive Growth equal1 to
the Current demands of the United States -

[NDA.

An Island (say on the River S; Mary) Containing about
16.000 Acres a t 4 dollars Per Acre ------------------ 64.000 Correspondence, when Navy was under War Department, 1790-17981

[5 February 17971
Protest of Michael Smith, master of the ship Fortme, Newburyport. Mass.

LEGHORN
the 16 March 1797

-

PERSONALLY
appeared before me Philip Filicchj Esq' Consul for the

U. S. of America in Leghorn Michael Smith of Newbury Port (State of Massachessetts) late
Master of the Shi Fortune Navigating under American Colours, who
being Sworn on t e Holy Evangelists, deposed that after his release
from Algers, he went to Marseilles, where he took charge of the aforemid Shlp Fortune, haveing a Passport from Stephen Cathalan Junr
Esqr Vice Consul of the U. S. of America at Marseilles, that he manned
the Said Ship with Fifteen hands all American Citizen released from
Algiers, & Saild for Bona (on the Coast of Barbary) the 17 November
1796 -in ballast to take a Load of wheat for Marseilles with clearance
for Genoa, that on the 5 Feb? being a t about 4 leagues from Marseilles
he was brought to by the English Frigates the Inconstand Commanded
by Cap? Fremantle & the Blanche Capn [space]; that Cap? Fremantle
took possession of the Ship Fortune, & carried her to Porto Ferrajo,
where he arrived the 15 Feb? DQthat Cap? Fremantle declared to him,
he would keep both Vessel & Cargoe, the Vessel because he knew her
to be an Enghsh Built Ship, & that no Document could be produced of
her haveing been legally condemned, & the Cargoe, because by the

g

196

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1786 TO 1801

course She was Steering when he Stopped her, & her proximity to
Marseilles, it appeared evident to him, She was not bound to Genoa,
as Specified in the Bills of Loading that after useless efforts to induce
Cap? Fremantle to give up the Vessel & Cargoe he was obliged to
send his Crew to Leghorn, & to go there himself, as CapP Fremantle
Would not Allow them either to remain on Board the Frgate, or Ship
Fortune, that he was refused the payement of the Freight because he
had no Charter party & no Freight was expressed in the Bllls of Loading, that Knowing of no Competent Office in Porto Ferrajo to enter a
Protest, he did i t at this Consulate on Arrival, that there being no
Admiralty Court at Porto Ferrajo, the Vessel & Cargoe Could not be
Condemned, but that CapWremantle delivered him a Certificate of
which the followeing is a faithful Copy. Inconstant a t Porto Ferrajo
March the Q'P 1797
This is to certify unto all whom i t may Concern, that the Ship
Fortune under American Colours was detained by H. M's Ships
Inconstant & Blanche, and as the Ship & Cargoe are of a Suspicious
Nature any Person haveing a Claim, may make it in the Admiralty
Court Given on Board the Said Ship (Signed) THO?
FRA?
FREMANTLE
-

*

*

*

*

*

*

*

Also John Foss of Newbury Port appeared before me, & being
Sworn on the Holy Evangelists declared, that he Shipt himself a t
Marseilles, on Board the aforesaid Ship Fortune in quality of first
Smith in
Mate, & confirmed the foregoing Declaration of Cap"!
every respect, protesting against all those i t may Concern for the
Wages due him, while he Served on Board the Aforesaid Ship with
the reserve made by Cap"!
Smith aforesaid Also John Edwards of Manchester (State of Massachusetts) Second
Mate of the Ship Fortune, who confirmed the above on Oath & made
the same Protest & Reserve nothing deviating therefrom ICHAEL SHITH
BEAL
Signed JOHN
Foss JOHN
EDWARDS
Faithfully extracted & copyed ver batim from the Register of the
American Consulate Leghorn 18. Augt 1797 -

P

PHILIP
FELICCLJ
United States

Consul for the
[NA. SDA. CL, Algiers, Vol. 11, Jan-Dec. 1797.1

of America
128 February 17971

Quasi-War, United States and France
[NOTE.See report of Secretary of State to the Fourth Congress of the United
States, setting forth the losses sustained by American citizens, by the capture of
their property by French armed vessels on the high seas; printed in "Naval
Documents, Quasi-War, United States and France", first volume (February 1797
to October 1798),pp. 1 to 4.1

WARS WlTH BARBARY POWERS
Act pertaining to the U. S. Eavy

197

[3 March 17971

UNITEDSTATES
STATUTES
AT LARGE. FOURTH
CONGRESS.SEBS.11
AN ACT AUTHORIZING
THE PRESIDENT
OF THE UNITEDSTATESTO
APPLYA FURTHER
SUMTO THE EXPENSE
OF NEGOTIATIONS
WITH
THE DEYAND REGENCY
OF ALGIERS.
SECTION
1. Be it enacted by the Sende a d House of Representatives
oj the United Bates oj America in Congress assembled, That the President of the United States be, and he is hereby authorized to apply a
sum, not exceeding two hundred and eighty thousand two hundred
and fifty-nine dollars and three cents, to the expenses which may have
been incurred in any negotiations with the Dey and Regency of
Algiers, beyond the sums heretofore appropriated; and that the said
sum of two hundred and eighty thousand two hundred and fifty-nine
dollars and three cents, be, and the same is hereby appropriated for
that purpose.
SEC.2 . And be itfurther enacted, That n further sum, not exceeding
ninety-six thousand two hundred and forty-six dollars and sixty-three
cents, be, and the same is hereby appropriated for discharging the two
first years' annuity to the Dey and Regency of Algiers, pursuant to
treaty, in addition to the sum appropriated for that purpose, by the
act of the sixth of May, one thousand seven hundred and ninety-six.
SEC.3. And be it jurther enacted, That the said several sums shall
be paid and discbarged out of any monies arising from the revenues
of the United States, beyond the appropriations heretofore charged
thereupon, to the end of the year one thousand seven hundred and
nine ty-seven.
March 3,1797.
APPROVED,
[Statutes Vol. I, p. 505-506.1

To Joel Barlow, U. S. Agent, Algiers, from Joseph lngraham

TRIPOLIA
March the 4 - 1797
SIR on the 16 of Feabery in the afternoon I had audition with the
Bashaw and told him my Collors was ready to hoist when Ever he
pleased he told me to hoist them on fridsy the 17 after 12 Oclock and
he would Sulute them with 21 guns I Left him well Pleased and after
I got home I Caused Curculer Letters to be wrote to the Consuls to

inform them, the incoused is a Copy and Each Consul honered me
with theirs a t the same time Exsept the french who sent his Jew
Brocker to inform me by word of mouth that he was sorry he Culd
not hoist his and that he had receved advice from the national assimbly
that all Communications between france and the united States was
sus ended and by that means he Could not think of hoisting his
Co ors which he was sorry for i t I sent my Compliments to him and
thankt him for his good intentions and since that we have not spock
togather all thoug before we uesd to be togather verry oftain he was
Every night in the Spanish hous waire I lrve but sence that time he
has not Corn theire I have met with him in severnl Places but he will
not speck to me Tuesday the 21th I gave a dinner to all the Consuls a
thing Custermerry in this Place but Culd not invite the french Consul
on account of the mesttge he was Pleas to send me Tuesday the 28 the
french Consul and F a r m met togather he sent his Complyments to

B

198

NAT7AL OPERATIONS FROM 1785 TO 1801

the Spanish Consul and was sorry he Culd not Come to the hous as
usal on account of his horbring that american as he though him to be
as greate an enimey to the french nation as the English the Spanish
Consul sent wourd back that his Doors was always open for him when
Ever he Pleas to C d since that time he has told the S Consul his
Letters was from the french Consul a t Tunis but he had Every reason
in the wourld to beleave i t was true if not a war between the two
nations that is all that has hapened between is sence I have ben hear
and all I hope will hapen tell such times I Can heare from you my
friends is much supprised a t your Long silance Even the Bashaw
thinks it strange you hare not wrote the Corear arives from Tunis
once a month he has ben informed of Cap$ OBrian arival in algiers
but nothing more a t Present from
your Most ObUtHum-rvant
[NA. SDA. CL, Algiers, Vol. 11, Jan-Dec. 1797.1

[5 March 17971
A Certificate of Gratitude to Pierre Eric Skjoldebrand, Charge dlAffaires, Sweden,
from Joel Barlow, U. 8. Agent, Algiers

COPY

I Joel Barlow, Agent and Consul General for the United States of

America for the city and Regency of Algiers, certify and attest to all
whom i t may concern, particularly to my much esteemed freind Mr
Pierre Eric Skjoldebrand, charge d'aff sires of his Majesty the King of
Sweden, that on my arrival in this place in the year 1796 for the
purpose of redeeming our prisioners and establishing a peace with this
Regency I was deeply affected with gratitude towards the said Mr
Skjoldebrand, as well as towards his brother Mr Mathias Skjoldebrand,
a t that time Consul general of his said Majesty in this place, for the
singular acts of humanity which they had exercised towards our said
prisoners in protecting them as far as possible against the severities
incident to their situation, and advancing them pecuniary succours,
before the American Government had made any provision for that
purpose, and before there could be any certainty that such provision
ever would be made or such advances reimbursed.
My sentiments of Gratitude could not but be farther increased
towards the said Mr P. E. Skjoldebrand by the following additional
proofs that all his conduct in this business had been perfectly diainterested: - when the American Government made provision for regular pensions to be paid monthly to the said prisoners, he was charged
with the payment & the distribution; for which service, continued for
several years, he refused to recieve any commission or compensation: the said Government afterwards offered him the Consulate General
of the United States for this Regency,
which he likewise declined
accepting.
I shall say nothing of his unmerited friendship to me as an individual; this public certificate not being a proper vehicle to convey the
feehngs of personal obhgation. The sensible heart can only treasure
them up, in hopes one day to find the means of expressing them in a
wa more suitable to the delicacy of their nature.
'$he rincipal objects of my mission being accomplished, and I
being a out to retire from this country, I thought it expedient, for
-

E

199

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

the honour of my government, that I should make another effort to
induce Mr Skjoldebrand to accept of some acknowledgement on the
part of my country for the services rendered to its citizens. I accordingly offered him a trifling present composed of such articles [valued
a t about $25001 as I thought it not inconsistent with the delicacy that
accompanies the most generous minds to accept. This again he has
absolutely refused; declaring that the consciousness of having followed
the dictates of humanity in what he had done for the Amencans was
a reward which he would not barter for any emolument whatever.
He has thus forced upon me the necessity of offering him this
certificate; which I do with the more regret, as it respects the only
object of my mission which I have not been able to accomplish according to my desire.
Given under my hand & the Seal of the Consulate of the
United States of America, at Algiers this 5+ day of March
1797 JOEL
BARLOW
[NA.

SDA. CL,

Algiers, Vol. 11, Jan-Dec. 1797.1

To U. S. Minister to Paris, France, from Joel Barlow, U. S. Agent, Algiers

COPY

ALGIERS
14 March 1787 To the Minister Pdenipotentiary
of the United States - at Paris
SIR One of the most unfortunate circumstances that have attended
our affairs in this lace has been the opposition and decided e h t y of
the French cons s, who, from the nation they represent, must be
supposed to enjoy an uncommon share of influence. The one who
was here when our peace was made did us all the mischief in his power,
as I took the liberty to expiain to you in my letter of the 24 May.
That man acted in this without orders from his government; and, as
I believe, against their intentions; as they were at that time friendly
to us. * * *
The present Consul of France, the famous Jean Bon St Andr6,
formerly one of the most fiery Satellites of Robespierre, has founded
his opposition on a different principle. When he first arrived he gave
me to understand that our treaty with England was likely to produce
a war with France: an opinion which seemed to afford him a good deal
of pleasure. I n his great zeal to do what he can to produce a rupture
it is probable that he will entertain his government with a relation,
after his manner, of a transaction which has taken place here within
a few days, and in which I concieved i t to be my duty to take a
decided part; as it affects one of the most important principles on which
all the treaties with Barbary are founded: I mean that of the FIag
covering the cargo. (I speak of the principle only as i t applies to
Barbary.) I t is well known that the nations who purchase peace
with Barbary are the carriers for those who remain a t war. And this
is one of the principal advantages purchached with the eace. These
States (contrary to those of Europe) consider it as the aw of nations
that the persons and property of enemies are sacred under the flag of
a friend. If by our folly they should be taught to adopt the contrary
principle, the carrying trade is a t an end. But this is not all: - every

3

P

200
-

ATAVN, OPERATIONS FROM 17'86 TO 1801

vessel would be searched for the property and subjects of Portugal,
Naples, Genoa &c, - and as they cannot read our apers, every
vessel must be brought into port, part of the cargo p aged, papers
destroyed in their eagerness to condemn, the vessel detained a long
time and reduced to the necessity of performing quarantine when she
arrives finally at her destination.

iE

*

*

*

*

*

*

*

But Jean Bon St Andre, who armed a privateer some time ago in
this place, gave her orders to take every neutral she could find; and,
wherever taken, to send them to this port to his tribunal. A few
days ago they began to come in. * * *
When the Dnne arrived she brought news of an American taken
the same day and likewise ordered to this place. The Swedish
consul and myself agreed to unite our influence with the Danish
consul in vindicating a principle so extremely delicate in Barba
that goods on board a neutral vessel under capture should not
discharged in this place. We therefore agreed - 19 - to use every
argument that can be used with a madman to engage the French
Consul to send the vessel back to Spain or Fmnce, under the responsibility of the Danish consul in case of recapture by the Enolish.
2d!y If we failed in this, to engage the Dey to order her off, alle&ng
that it was a question between his friends that he could not decide
and in which justice could not be d ~ n ehere. 3d!y If he would not
do this, to engage him to take no part in the affair nor suffer his
people to lend any aid on either side; - and then the Danish Consul
was to order the crew to carry the vessel to Marseilles by force, for
trial. And the prize master and four other French men who were on
board might remain on board, or leave the vessel, as they chose.The Sweed and myself agrced to do the same thing when vessels of
our nations should arrive under like circumstances.
We failed in the two first proposit.ions, and the way was prepared
for the third, the Dey declaring to us all that he would decide nothing,
nor suffer his people to act; as he did not like to disoblige his friends
either on the one side or the other. Thus the vindication of the
principle was left in the power of the Danish consul; - and he (in a
dishonorable manner in my opinion) agreed to give i t up, and wrote
an order for the captain to deliver the cargo to the French Consul.
Luckily the order was not delivered that night; and the next day we
were saved by the appearance of a Swedish vessel sent in by the same
privateer. * * * He [the Swede] convinced the De of the
necessity of shutting his port against all such vessels and o ordering
the Sweed immediately to sea; which was done, & the vessel has
sailed. The Dane is likewise ordered to sail; and no more are to be
allowed to enter the port. The American has not yet arrived, though
we are to expect many of them, as well as Danes & Sweeds, before
it can be known that they wdl not be recieved.
You will be pleased to observe that in this business we have paid
no attention to the nature of the cargoes, or what degree of evidence
or suspicion there may be that they might belong to the enemies of
France. The only point was the honour of the flag in Barbary, for
which we pay somuchmoney, * * *
As the representative of the United States in this place, I am
sensible that i t iR m duty to avoid all occasions of giv
unnecessary
umbrage to the be&erent Powers. I know likewise t at Jean Bon

i?

f

201

E7ARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

S%Andre will endeavour to point the resentment of his government
against the United States for the part I took in this business.

*

*

*

*

*

*

*

Our peace with Tunis is not yet concluded; owing, as I believe, to
the intrigues of the French consul in that place. But I think it will
soon be concluded.
[Postscript, March 151
I open my letter to inform you that orders are this day sent to all
the ports of the Regency to forbid the entrance of dl prizes whatever
that shall be sent in by foreign nations. And a courier has arrived
this day from Oran which brings news of a Swedish vessel sent to that
port by the English, supposed to bc loaded for French account,
which was not suffered to enter, but ordered to sea again immediately.

*

*

[NA. SDA.

*

*

*

*

*

CL, Algiers, Vol. 11, Jan-Dec. 1797.1

[8 April 17971
Circular to the Collectors of Revenue, Treasury Department

(CIRCULAR.)
TREASURY
DEPARTMENT,
A p d 8,1797.
To THE COLLECTORS
OF THE REVENUE
SIR, The depredations, to which the conlmerce of the United
States is a t present exposed, have given rise to a question, .which
being of general concern, is therefore made the subject of a clrcular
communicntion.
The question is, I.T7hether it be Lawful to arm the merchant vessels of
the United States for their protection and defence, while engaged i n
regular commerce.
I t is answered-that no doubt is entertained, that defence, by
means of military force against mere pirates and sea rovers, is lamfu1;-the arming of vessels, born fide engaged in trade to the EastIndies, is therefore on account of the danger from pirates to be permitted as heretofore, but as the arming of vessels destined for European or West-India commerce, raises a presumption, that i t is done
with hostile intentions against some one of the belligerent nations,
and ma cover collusive practices inconsistent with the Act of Congress
June, 1794, unless uuarded by provisions more effectual
than have been hitherto establshed; i t is directed that the sailing of
armed vessels, not bona jide destined to the East-Indies, be restrained,
until otherwise ordained by Congress.
Information has been received that some vessels are arming. by
strangers for the purpose of capturing the vessels of the Uruted
States. The utmost vigilance on the part of the Collectors to prevent the pro ress of this evil is enjoined; where there is reasonable
ground to befieve that vessels are equipped for the purpose of being
employed against the commerce of thls country, they are to be
arrested, and the circumstances stated to this Department.
I am very respsctfully, Sir,
Your obedient servant,
Jun.
OLIVERWOLCOTT,

09

[LC. "Connecticut Courant", 8 May, 1797.1

202

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1785 TO 1801
To Joel Barlow, U. S. Agent, Algiers, from Secretary of State

DEPARTMENT
OF STATE
Philadelphia May 13. 1797.
SIR The Swedish Ship Jupiter, Captain Olof Schale, having been
chartered by our Consul a t Marseilles to bring our citizens late Captives in Algiers to Philadelphia, and for a return voyage to Europe,
we have lottded her with Stores for Algiers, agreeably to the invoices
inclosed, one of which exhibits the articles and their quantities, and
the other their prime cost, with insurance and freight. This second
invoice is sent you to show how much the stores stipulated will exceed
the estimate formed by M' Donaldson when he agreed to the terms
of peace with the Dey. The most egregious error is yet to appear:
The enormous masts estimated by Mr Donaldson a t only thirty
dollars each, will cost probably five hundred, perhaps considerably
more, delivered a t Algiers. I t is only a large Ship which can furnish
room for them, and then only for a small number. They have been
cut, and partly floated down the Susquehannah; and wait another
fresh to get them to tide-water; and such a fresh a t this season is
uncertain. However, all practicable means will be used to fulfil our
engagements in this as well as every other particular. But even if
we get them to navigable water, on account of the difficulty and
heavy expense of transportation, we hope for ample indulgence in
point of time; and perhaps a favourable moment may be found to
obtain the Dey's consent to substitute masts of a much less size for
a part of them. The frigate building for the Dey we reckoned upon
as being able to transport some of the masts: but from the information I have lately received, i t is a t least doubtful. The Invoice of
prices will also enable you properly to dispose of those articles wich
are no part of the articles originally stipulated, but which were
necessav to accommodate the stowage of the stipulated Stores; and
considering the Oak and pine planks six inches thick cost more than
three time the price estimated by M: Donaldson, perhaps the thinner
planks may be accepted as substitutes. Besides the great difficulty
and expense in procuring the six inch plank, the freight of such long
heavy timber mill be enormous. Indeed if the whole list were revised,
it is possible you may obtain some favourable relaxation. All the
changes suggested are however submitted to your discretion. Nothing is to be done to hazard the good opinion of the Dey, or to excite
the most distant idea of trespassing on his distinguised benevolence
towards the United States.
I have attended to your memorandum of the 12'p of January. A
part of the tea and sugar is on board the Jupiter: the residue will be
sent by the frigate or some other vessel destmed for Algiers.
The pro osition of sending the Dey a complete Master Shi builder
will be we considered: Such men qualified to construct vessel's of war
are not numerous; and perhaps hardly one may be found who is "not
married".
I do not know any objection to the building or purchasing two complete Brigs (or a Brig and a large Schooner, which CaptWO'Brienthinks
more eligible) for the Dey, to be paid for on the delivery a t Algiers.
Captain O'Brien will h e c t the choice or construction of them.
Congress are to commence an extraordinary Session next Monday; and
I apprehend the subject must be laid before them, that they may make
the requisite appropriations of money.

h'

203

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

You say "the Dey requires the frigate as soon as possible". She is
to be launched on the 4'p of July next. Captp Newman (late a captive
in Algiers) writes me under date of May 19 that he has been a t Portsmouth to see her, and finds her as "complete a piece of workmanship
as he ever saw". But she will be incapable of carrying twelve pounders,
which you say the Dey has now desired. You will recollect that your
original agreement, accepted by the Dey, was for a frigate of 36 guns,
nine-pounders on the main deck. I n exact conformity to your orders,
I procured one of the ablest naval architects in the United States to
give me a draught of such a frigate and of her dimensions; agreeably
to which she has been constructed. To put twleve-pounde~supon her
would ruin her and disap oint the Dey's expectations. She must now
be finished on the origin Plan, and she will be "completed with guns
stores, powder, ball &r: and coppered".

3

*

*

*

*

*

*

*

The Treaty concluded with Tripoli I resume will be very satisfactory: it will next week be laid before tie Senate for their approbation. We hope the treaty with Tunis has been accom lished; although we have no later intelligence than yours by Captr ~ r i e n .

*

[NA.

*

*

*

*

*

B

*

SDA. Dip. Cor., Inst. to Min., Bk 4, Feb. 1797-Nov. 1798.1

To Samuel Hodgdon, Intendant of Military Storee from Secretary of War

[PHILADELPHIA]
War O#ce June 12. 1797
SIRI have inclosed you a statement of Military Stores requisite for
the Frigates - You will be pleased to inform me what part may be
drawn from the Stores of the United States and where they are
deposited. Military Stores wanted as pr requisition for the three Frigates
300 Musketts with Bayonets &c complete 100 d9 sent to Baltimore May 4.
1797 making 400 &and -

250 air Pistols
300 goarding Axes
550 Cutlasses
44 Blunderbum
300 Boarding Pikes with Staffs
120 Battle Lanthorns
24 signal
Do. NP 1
24 do
. . Do.. " 2
6 Doz: of Tin .DP
1% Doz: Dark . dQ
670 Barrels of Cannon Powder
10000 Round Shot for 24 ounders
1600 Chain and double Ifeaded shot - 24 ~ounders
2260 stools of Grape and Cannister shot --24 pounders
4600 Round shot for 12 ounders
720 double Headed & &in ahot for 12 pounders
900 stools of Grape and Cannister shot for 12 pounders
600 Hand granadoes
100 Rounds of Muskett & pistol Balls
12 8 aking Trum te
15 K n s of Sheet g d
18 Howitsem - eight inch or of 4 or 6 pounders
a mt of Implements for each Gun
30 Barrels Powder for Musketts 6.Pistols. [NDA. Correspondence, when Navy wea under War Department, 1795-1798.1

. . .. . . ..

.

204

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1786 TO 1801
[21 June 17971

Quasi-War, United States and France
[NOTE.-See letter to House of Representatives from President John A h .
enclosing report of Secretary of State, in which he summarizes 316 cases of depredations upon American ships; printed in "American State Papers, Foreign Relations", volume 11, pp. 28-63, and in "Naval Documents, Quasi-War, United
States and France", first volume, pp. 5-6.1

[I July 17971
Act Providing for Naval Armament
[NOTE.- In the first volume of "Naval Documents, Quasi-War with France"
(February 1797 to October 1798), paaes 7 to 9, is printed an Act providing a
Naval Armament, dated 1 July 1797.1
To Samuel Hodgdon, Intendant of Military Stores, from Secretary of War

[PHILADELPHIA]
War Ofice July 1,1797.
SIR YOUwill be pleased to take order to haye the undermentioned
Military Stores destined for the Naval service transported to the
following places - viz To Philadelphia for the Frigate United States
600 Round Shot for 24 pounders
To Baltimore for the Constellation
200 Hand grn~ladocs
5 Tons of Sheet Lead
2800 Round Shot for 24 pounders
To Boston for the Constitution
150 Musketts with Bayorlets Cartouch Boxes &c complete 200 Hand granadoes
5 Tons of Sheet Lead
24 Tin Lanthorns
3600 Round Shot for 24 pounders
[NDA. Correspondence, when Navy was under War Department, 1795-1798.1

To Captain Thomas Thompson, Portsmouth, I.E.,from Secretary of War

[PHILADELPHIA]
JV. 0. July 7'+ 1797 SIR, I t being necessary to fix on a Name for the Frigate intended
for the Dey of Algiers before she sails from Portsmouth: I have therefore concluded to call her the Crescent, which Name you will be
pleased to have inserted in her papers and other documents I have just received your favor of the 2gthUltp and I congratulate
you and M' Hackett on the safe Launching of the Frigate into her
proper element [NDA. Correspondence, when Navy was under War Department, 1790-1798.1

[19 July 17971
Certificate of Joel Barlow, U. 6. Agent, Algiers, as to amount due and payment
for loss of ship Foriunc

Whereas the United States of America are indebted to Naftali
Busnah, & Joseph Coen Bacri, the sum of fort thousand nine hundred
& eighty seven Spanish Dollars, for the va ue of the Ship Fortune,
lately commanded by Michael Smith & her Ca o of Wheat, taken
on her passage from Bona to Genoa in the mont of February last,
by the English & condemned by them.

P

5

205

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

I Joel Barlow Agent & Consul Generd, of the United States above
mentioned, for the City and Kingdom of 81 'em, declare that in case
the Consul General, or Charg6 d9AfTairs,of t e s QUnited States, sh&ll
not in the term of six months from this time, pay the s g sum, either
in Mone a t this Place, or Bills on Philadelphia, or on some otber
places; t en at the end of sc term of six months the Naftali Busnah
& Joseph Coen Bacri, are authorized to draw their Bills on the Government of the s$United States, payable in Philadelphia, in three months
after sight for the sQsum of 40987 Spanish Dollars.
SEAL Given under my hand & Seal in Algiers,
this 19'h day of July 1797
(signed) JOEL
BARLOW.

f?

c

*

*

*

*

*

*

*

[NA. SDA. CL, Algiers, Vol. 11, Jan-Dec. 1797.1
To George Claghorne, Naval Constructor, Boston, Mass., from Secretary of War

[PHILADELPHIA]
W. 0. July 2 P 1797 -

SIR I t being of importance to the United States that the Frigate
Constitution should be coppered on the Stocks before she is Launched

into the Water - you will therefore be pleased to cause the said Ship
to be coppered as high as light water mark as soon as the Bottom is
prepared, as it will prevent heaving down afterwards and a Consequent
heavy expence light draught of Water forward will be about 13.6
dq
aft
d
19.Q

[NDA. Comespondence, when Navy was under War Department, 1790-1798.1
To James Simpson, U. 8. Consul, Tangier, from Thomas Elphinatone

(COPY)

Hamadyad GIB: BAY
Auqcst 2Q1797
SIR I beg leave to clckno~~ledge
the receipt of yours & have to inform you that the Men pressed by the Hamadyads Boat calliig themselves American's have no protections - Joseph Anderson says he
was born a t Liverpool - and it is the Earl St Vincents orders to me
to press every man calling himself an American, unless he can produce
a protection countersigned by the British Minister or British Consuls
in America - Christopher Smith being ruptured and unfit for His
Majesty's Service, I discharged Yesterday - the other 3 as not
producing Protections will not be discharged
[NA. SDA. CL, Tangier, Vol. 1 , 1797-1803.1
To Auditor of the Treasury from Josiah Fox, Naval Constructor

[PHILADELPHIA]
War O$ce August 16" 1797 SIRThe following extract of a letter from Capt Thomas Thompson,
will show that Mr James Hacket has completed the Algerine Frigate,
named t.he Crescent agreeably to his Contract with the United States;
also the head and Galliries; and has provided such spare yards, and
Masts as were directed by Captain Thompson -

2%

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1785 TO 1801

Extract of a letter from Capt Thomas Thompson dated Portsmouth (N. H.) 1 August 1797 to the Set.' of War
SIR"1 have been waiting for the Carved-work only, to say the Frigate
Crescent is completly finished in every part by James Hackett agreeable
to his contract: also the Head and Galleries - He has also provided such
spare yards and Masts as are mentioned to him in his dimensions of Masts
and Yards (Boats Masts &c I shall provide and charge in my account)
inclosed you have his receipts for Treenails and some plank and Timber
from the Yard. I can assure you that nothing on his part haa been neglected, but has done every thing to make the Ship com lete a.3 possible in
doing of which, he will have but a very small sum left 8 r his Services"

Extract of orders to Capt Thomas Thompson from the Secretary
of War dated War Office 12 Jany. 1797 "It is expected, you will carefully examine all parts of the Hull and
Materials that nothing unsound or defective be used in any part thereof;
and that the Contracts entered into by Mr Hackett and Mess* Hills are
strictly adhered to"

I hereby Certify that the foregoing Extract of a letter from Capt
Thomas Thompson Superintendant of the Algerine Frigate Crescent
is an exact Copy from the Original letter on file in this Office. And
also that the Extract of orders to Captain Thompson from the Secretary of War is copied from the Marine Book page 212 JOSIAH
Fox
[NDA.

Correspondence, when Navy was under War Department, 1790-1798.1

To Secretary of State from Joel Barlow, former U. S. Agent, Algiers

LAZARET
OF MARSEILLES
18 Aug. 1797.
SIR, I beg leave to enclose herewith such of the letters recieved from
Capt - Ingraham as will serve to give you a general view of the state
of affairs a t Tripoli. * * * I have informed him that in conformity to his advice and the desire of the Bey I have paid to the
Bey's Agent in Algiers - 6000 - dol. in part of the 12,000 -promised
the Bey on account of the peace; and that I have desired Mr Clarke
& Mr Famin to send Capt - Ingraham such articles as he may want
for his own use, as well as some jewelry, cloth &c for presents to the
Brother of the Emperer of Morocco on his return from Mecca. The
Bey's agent a t Algiers was soon to return to Tripoli, and give Mr
Clark an occasion to send.

*

*

*

*

*

*

*

I have written several times to the Spanish Consul in Trjpoli,

to thank him for his friendship to Capt.- Ingraham & to our cause,
and to assure him that our government will not forget its obligations
to him. I beg leave to suggest the propriety of your addressing a
letter to him on this subject. He is a man well known & respected
in Algiers, where he was once a slave. The Dey has a particular
friendship for him.
Captam Ingraham's letters, and other accounts I have had in confirmation of them will naturally give rise to some very interesting
reflections: Firsf. The present Be of Tripoli (who is known to set every
rinciple of honor a t de ance more than any prince in Barbary) rs
Lmming ,owed, . His marine, which before he took Capt Sampson
last year consisted of only two small cruisers, is now almost equal to

B

207

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

that of Algiers. He appears to recieve such encouragement from
Constantinople that i t would not be strange if in a short time he
should set the Dey of Algiers a t defiance. Though i t is possible
that such a step might cost him his life, yet i t is possible that it might
not, and that one of his first objects would be to break our treaty
which is guaranteed by the Dey.
Secondly. The rupture with the Danes, & the manner in which i t
has been healed, affords a serious lesson. Ingraham says i t might have
been prevented a t first for - 6000 - dollars. I t has cost that
nation in the whole a t least half a million. Their commerce &
navigation in these seas have been interrupted by it for one year.
During this time they have maintained a squadron of two Frigates &
several other ships of war, sometimes blockading the port & sometimes trying to negotiate. And they have had five vessels taken.
Last March one of the frigates came f o Algiers to ask the Dey's
interference, in imitation of what he had done for the Americans.
After some hesitation, the Dey wrote a letter, which I was told was
a feeble one, and sent an Ambassador in the frigate. At the end of
two month's he returned without having accompljshed any thing. I t
was in consequence of the battle mentioned by Capt - Ingraham that
they purchased the peace for - 100,000-401. & a tribute of-14,000to be paid every 4 years. I t is probable that if our peace there had
been delayed a few months longer, so that the Danes had made theirs
first, & we had not been aided by the Dey, it would have cost us a t
least - 200,000 - Dollars.

*

*

*

*

*

*

*

Thirdly. Whatever may be the opinion formed a t a distance, I am

well convinced that Capt. Ingraham's apprehensions of a combination to exclude us from these seas is not without foundation. The
Danes, Venitians, & probably the Sweeds, have already suffered
greatly by our success. It is certain that the Spanish Consul in
Algiers had orders during the whole of last year to drive me from
that place if it could be done for - 50,000 - dollars. The sum was
not sufficient. I t was not more than ought to have been given to
the house of Ba,cry, besides a much greater bribe to the Dey. Mr
HerculJs told me, before he left Algiers, that the French never would
have suffered us to et a footing in Barbary, had they not supposed
that i t was to be un er their wing; but since they found we had done
it without their aid, and found too that our commercial relations were
likely to be strengthened with the English & weakened with them,
they certainly would force us out of Barbary very soon; and i t was
his opinion that they ought to do it. No person I suppose will doubt
but that the English will suffer by our success as much as any of
these nations, & that the d be disposed to do as much to prevent
it. They have hitherto one a great deal more.

8

e

*

B*

*

*

*

*

Fourthly. To oppose ourselves with success both to the intrigues
from Europe and the caprices of the Barbary Princes, it appears to
me that Americans of substantial talents, and salaries almost equal
to those of our plenipotentiaries in Europe, ought to be placed as consuls general in each regency. It seems ~ndispensablelikewise that
they should have a liberal credit for funds, to be applied on extraordinary occasions. And I beg leave to repeat what I once suggested,

NAVAI, OPERATIONS FROM 1786 TO 1801

208

that it would be expedient that the consuls general a t Tunis & Tri oli
should be instructed to communicate with the one a t Algiers, an to
be in some measure under his direction.

I

*

*

*

*

*

*

*

To what height is this Barbary system to be carried? And where
is it to end? [NA. SDA. CL,Algiers, Voi. I, Part 11, Feb-Nov. 1796.1
To Secretary of State from Joel Barlow, former U. S. Agent, Algiers

LAZARET
OF MARSEILLES
24 Aug. 1797
SIR This is to accompany the papers that I have been able to collect relative to the Ship Fortune and her cargo, of which it is probable
you may have had some account either from Mr Humphreys, Mr
Donaldson or Capt - Smith.
The facts, so far as i t comes within my power to relate them, are
these: - At the moment when I was enabled to liberate the American prisoners in Algiers the state of the plague rendered i t dangerous
for them to remain longer in the place; and there was no vessel on
which they could embark, but the ship Fortune belonging to the
house of Bacri, and bound to Leghorn with about 50 Neapolitans.
As the Algerines were a t war with Genoa & Tuscany, I thought it
might be inconvenient to the American passengers that the vessel
should go under the Algerine Flag. I therefore tool< a bill of sale of
the ship in [word mutilated] name, gave her the American Flag, and
appointed Capt - Calder to command her as far as Leghorn. When
I delivered him the Bill of Sale, I gave him an order in writing nearly
in the following words (as my haste prevented me from taking a copy
of it I quote it here from memory.) "Sir, I recieved this bill of sale
"of the Ship Fortune for no other purpose than to secure your passage
"against the enemies of Algiers. I do not & will not own any part of
"her, and she shall not stand in my name after the resent voyage.
"I intreat ou therefore not to suffer this bill of sa e to go out of
''your han s, but to burn i t the moment you arrive in port." I
wrote to the same effect to Mr Donaldson. The ship went to Marseilles instead of Leghorn. My order however for burning the bill of
sale was punctually complied with. How the ship came afterwards
to be put in the name of Mr Donaldson, I leave h ~ m& Mr Cathalan
& Capt - Smith to explain. Mr Cathalan's declaration will probably
be enclosed herewith.
About the first of March 1797 - news came to Algiers that the
ship Fortune, Capt - Smith, had been loaded in Bona for account of
the house of Bacri, destined for Genoa, and taken on her passage
near Marseilles by the English. As soon as I found occasion to send
(March 26) I wrote Mr Donaldson the letter of which the followin is
an extract: "You doubtless know that the Ship Fortune, comman! t ed
"by Capt - Smith, which I understand is in your name as ostensible
"proprietor, is taken by the English with a cargo of the Bacri's on
"board. You know how these things are managed here since the
"examples that the Danish Consul gave last year. It is very prob"able that the United States will have to pay for that cargo; though
"I
would not wish that Solomon should know that I have any such
16
apprehension. I treat i t here as a thin that I have not, & will
"not, have any thing to do with, and I te 1 the Jews that if they do

P

B

f

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

209

"not get it of the English Consul, or if they say one word to the
"Dey of forceing me to pay, I will expose more of their crimes than
"they are aware of. I t is possible that the fear of m vengeance will
"induce them to throw i t on the English. Nothing e se certainly will
"save US.
'[Ihope you understand better than I do the motive that induced
"you to cover that ship with your name, unless she belongs to you.
"And the Jews confess to me that she belongs to them."
The rule universally established in the Barbary States is that the
f l t g shall protect the cargo. * * *
In consequence of this rule, when any property of the Dey or his
subjects, having been shipped on board a vessel belonging to any of
his friends, is taken or turned from its destination, he require8 the
nation, whose vessel i t is, to pay the value of the property a t the port
of destination. On this principle the Danes & Sweeds have had a
number of cargoes to pay for to Algerine subjects during the present
war. And then they make their reclamations on the captors or their
governments. The Danish Consul told me late1 that the English
had already refunded all the money that he ha paid for property
taken by them, which has mounted to a t least - 200,000 - dol.
After these examples it was in vain for me to dispute the principle,
or its application to the American Flag. The only argument for
avoiding the payment was that the ship Fordune was not American
property! and ought not to have borne the Flag. It would be useless
to enter Into the details of the opposition that I made on this ground.
I t is well known that the house of Bacri are the Kings of Algiers,
and that i t is easier to oppose the Dey's interest than theirs. They
promised me at first that as to the cargo, they would recover from
the English Consul, and leave me out of the question; and as to the
value of the ship, she being in M': Donaldson's name, he must recover
from the English government, and pay that house. Though they did
not decieve me with this promise, or make me believe that they
meant to keep their word, yet it was out of my power to force them
to it.
It was unfortunnte for me that during the time of this dispute
the Dey had become exceedingly angry at the delay of our stofeships. He had been waiting with the impatience of a petulent chdd
all winter; and after the beginning of April it became impossible to
speak to him with safet on an subject. He had become so furious
that I went to him on t e 20 o May to try to soften him. I carried
in my hand a letter I had recieved from Mr Cathcart in Philadelphia
dated in novr informing me that the Polaca Independant was to sad
in a few da s Aftar reading and explaining the letter, & desiring
him to call &s clerk to verify the hand writing, I told h
i
m that the
vessel must either be lost a t sea or stopped by some of the belligerent
owers. Says he "You are a liar, & your government is a Liar; and
will put you in chains a t the M a m e , and declare war." Now I
beg all those whom it may concern, not to be offended at good Hassen
Bashaw for this sort of language. There is not a government, k g
or Consul that he has any thing to do with, but what has been saluted
wjth precisely the same expressions, as occasion has offered, during
hrs r e w . It has become the law of nations. As to his threat, it
has been too often repeated to excite much alarm.

T

1

,!i

f

y

210

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1786 TO 1801

Some time before this last ebullition of his wrath the Dey pronounced his decision relative to the ship Fortune and cargo, - that
the American consul should pay, & pay immediately. I was still in
hopes to avoid it,; but it has been impossible. All that I could do
was to obtain a delay from the Jews, and make them declare to the
Dey that the money was already paid, that he might give the certificate that you will find enclosed. I obtained likewise such other
papers as will, I hope, enable us to recover of the English government
the vdue of the cargo. As to the ship and the freight, I likewise
enclose such papers as I am able to obtain; and i t seems regular that
Mr Donaldson, who I understand is gone to America, should pursue
his claim on the English Government; or that you should pursue i t
in his name.

*
*
*
*
*
*
*
On the 19 July, the day I left Algiers, I gave the house of Bacri a
certificate to this effect: - that the United States are indebted to
them in the sum of - 40387-213 dol. as the value of the ship
Fortune & her cargo; that in case the American Agent does not pay

that sum in six months in Algiers, then they shall have a right to draw
at three months sight on the government for the same sum payable
in Philadelphia.
This busmess has given me in6nite pain in every stage of it. But
it was impossible for me,,in the disadvantageous situation in which I
was placed, to terminate it on more favorable terms. * * *
[NA. SDA.

CL, Algiers, Vol. 11, Jan.-Dec. 1797.1

[28 August 1797 and 10 January 18001
Tunis-Treaty
[NOTE.-In "Treaties and other International Acts of the United States of
America", by Hunter Miller, Volume 2, is printed the Treaty between Tunis and
the United States. The following i s copied from the above publication:
"Treaty of Peace and Friendship, signed a t Tunis August 28, 1797, and, with
alterations, March 26, 1799. Original in Turkish.
"Submitted to the Senate February 21, 1798. Resolution of advice and consent,
on condition, March 6, 1798. Resubmitted to the Senate December 13, 1799.
Resolution of advice and consent to altered Articles 11, 12, and 14, December 24,
1799. RBtified by the Unite: States January 10, 1800. As to the ratification
generally, see the notes. *
*,,I
[Translation]

God is infinite.
Under the auspices of the greatest, the most powerful of all the princes of the
Ottoman nation who reign upon the earth, our most glorious and most august
Emperor, who commands the two lands and the two seas, Selim Khan 1 the victorious, son of the Sultan Moustafa, whose realm may God prosper until the end
of ages, the support of kings, the seal of justice the Emperor of emperors.
The most illustrious and most magnificient hrince Hamuda Pasha, Bey, who
commands the Odgiak of Tunis, the abode of happiness; and the most honored
Ibrahirn Dey; and Suleiman, Agha of the Janizaries and chief of the Divan; and
all the elders of the Odgiak; and the most distinguished and honored President
of the Congress of the United States of America, the moat diitin ished among
those who profera the religion of the Meeaiah, of whom may the engbe happy.
We have concluded between us the present Treaty of Peace and Friendship,
all the articles of which have been framed by the intervention of Joseph Stephen
Famin, French merchant resident a t Tunis, Chargh d'Affaires of the United States
of America; which stipulations and conditions are comprised in twenty-three
articles, written and expressed in such manner as to leave no doubt of their contents, and in such way as not to be contravened.
1 Belim

111, lultan of Turkey from 1789 to 1807.

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS
ARTICLE1.
There shall be a perpetual and constant peace between the United States of
America and the magnificent Pasha, Bey of Tunis, and also a permanent friendship, which shall more and more increase.
ARTICLE2.
If a vessel of war of the two nations shall make prize of an enemy vessel in which
may be found effects, property, and subjects of the two contracting parties, the
whole shall be restored; the Bey shall restore the property and subjects of the
United States, aad the latter shall make a reciprocal restoration; i t being understood on both sides t h a t the just right to what is claimed shall be proved.
ARTICLE3.
Merchandise belonging to any nation which may be a t war with one of the
contracting parties, and loaded on board of the vessels of the other, shall p~
without molestation and without any attempt being made to capture or detain ~ t .
ARTICLE4.
On both sides sufficient passports shall be given t o vessels, that they may be
known and treated as friendly; and considering the distance between the two
countries, a term of eighteen months is given, within which term respect shall be
aid t o the said passports, without requiring the conge or document (which a t
h n i s is called testa), but after the said term the conge shall be presented.
ARTICLE5.
If the corsairs of Tunis shall meet a t sea with ships of war of the United States
having under their escort merchant vessels of their nation, they shall not be
searched or molested; and in such case the commanders shall be believed upon
their word, to exempt their ships from being visited and to avoid quarantine. The
American ships of war shall act, in like manner towards merchant vessels escorted
by the corsairs of Tunis.
ARTICLE6.
If a Tunisian corsair shall meet with an American merchant vessel and shall
visit it with her boat, she shall not exact anything, under pain of being severely
punished; and in like manner, if a vessel of war of the United States shall meet
with a Tunisian merchant vessel, she shall observe the same rule. In case a slave
shall take refuge on board of an American vessel of war, the Consul shall be required to cause him to be restored; and if any of their prisoners shall escape on
board of the Tunisian vessels, they shall be restored; but if any lave shall take
refuge in any American merchant vessel, and i t shall be proved that the vessel
has departed with the said slave, then he shall be returned, or his ransom shall be
paid.
ARTICLE7.
An American citizen having purchased a prize-vessel from our Odgiak, may sail
with our passport, which we will deliver for the term of one year, by force of which
our corsairs which may meet with her shall respect her; the Consul on his part shall
furnish her with a bill of sale; and considering the distance of the two countries,
this term shall suffice to obtain a passport in form. But after the expiration of
this term, if our corsairs shall meet with her without the passport of the United
States, she shall be stopped and declared good prize, as well the vessel as the cargo
and crew.
ARTICLE8.
If a vessel of one of the contracting parties shall be obliged to enter into a ort
of the other and may have need of provisions and other articles, they shalf be
granted to her without any difficulty, a t the price current a t the place; and if such
a vessel shall have suffered a t sea and shall have need of repairs, she shall be a t
liberty to unload and reload her cargo without being obliged to pay any duty;
and the captain shall only be obliged to pay the wages of those whom he shall
have employed in loading and unloading the merchandise.
If, by accident and by the per~nissionof God, a vessel of one of the co~ltracting
parties shall be cast by tempest upon the coasts of the other and shall be wrecked
or otherwise damaged, the commandant of the place shall render all pomible assistanae for its preservation, without allowing any person to make any opposition; and

212

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM I786 TO 1801

the proprietor of the effects shall pay the costs of salvage to those who may have
been employed.
ARTICLE10.
I n case a vessel of one of the contracting parties shall be attacked by an enemy
under the cannon of the forts of the other party, she shall be defended and protected ss much as possible; and when he shall set sail, no enemy shall be permitted
to pursue her from the same port, or any other neighboring port, for forty-eight
hours after her departure.
ARTICLE11.
When a vessel of war of the United States of America shall enter the port of
Tunis, and the Consul shall request that the castle may salute her, the number of
guns shnll be fired which he may request; and if the said Consul does not want a
salute, there shall be no question about it.
But in case he shall desire the salute, and the number of guns shall be fired
which he may have requested, they shall be counted and returned by the vessel
in aa many barrels of cannon powder.
The same shall be done with respect to the Tunisian corsairs when they shall
enter any port of the United States.
ABTICLE12.
When citizens of the United States shall come within the dependencies of Tunis
to carry on commerce there, the same respect shall be paid to them which the
merchants of other nations enjoy; and if they wish to eatabliah themselves within
our ports, no opposition shall be made thereto; and they shall be free to avail
themselves of such interpreters ns they may judge necessary, without any obstruction, in conformity with the usages of other nations; and if a Tunisian subject shall go to establish himself within the dependencies of the United States,
he shall be treated in like manner.
If any Tunisian subject shall freight an American vessel and load her with
merchandise, and shall afterwards want to unlade or ship them on board of
another vessel, we will not permit him until the matter is determined by a reference
of merchants, who shall decide upon the case; and after the decision, the determination shall be conformed to.
No captain shall be detained in port against his consent, except when our ports
are shut for the vessels of all other nations, which may take place with respect
to merchant vessela but not to those of war.
The subjects of the two contracting powers shall be under the protection of
the Prince and under the jurisdiction of the chief of the place where they may be,
and no othcr persons shall have authority over them. If the commandant of the
place does not conduct himself agreeably to justice, a representation of i t shall
be made to ufi.
I n case the Government shall have need of an American merchant vessel, i t
shall cause it to be freighted, and then a suitable freight shall be paid t o the
captain, agreeably to the intention of the Government, and the captain shall not
refuse it.
ARTICLE13.
If among the crews of merchant vessels of the United States, there shall be
found subjects of our enemiee, they shall not be made slaves, on condition that
they do not exceed a third of the crew; and when they do exceed a third, they
shall be made slaves. The present article only concerns the sailors, and not the
passengers, who shall not be in any manner molested.
ARTICLE14.
A Tunisian merchant who may go to America with a vessel of any nation
soever, loaded with merchandise which is the production of the kingdom of Tunis.
shall pay duty (small aa it is)like the merchants of other nations; and the American
merchants shall equally pay, for the merchandise of their country which they
may bring to Tunis under their flag, the same duty ss the Tunisism pay in
America.
But if an American merchant, or a merchant of any other nation, shall bring
American merchandise under any other flag, he shall pay six per cent duty.
I n like manner, if a foreign merchant shall bring the merchandise of his country
under the American fiag, he shall also pay six per cent.
8

Bee the note regardins Article 14.

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

213

AETICLE15.

It shall be free for the citizens of the United States to carry on what commerce

they please in the kingdom of Tunis, without any opposition, and they shall be
treated like the merchants of other nations; but they shall not carry on commerce
in wine, nor in prohibited articles; and if any one shall be detected in a contraband trade, he shall be punished according to the laws of the country. The
commandants of ports and castles shall take care that the captains and sailors
shall not load prohibited articles; but if this should happen, those who shall not
have contributed to the smuggling shall not be molested nor searched, no more
than shall the vessel and cargo; but only the offender, who shall be demanded
to be punished. No captain shall be obliged to receive merchandise on board of
his vesael, nor to unlade the same against his will, until the freight shall be paid.
ARTICLE16.
The merchant vessels of the United States which shall cast anchor in the road
of the Gouletta, or any other port of the Kingdom of Tunis, shall be obliged to
pay the same anchorage for entry and departure which French vessels pay, to
wit: Seventeen piasters and a half, money of Tunis, for entry, if they import
merchandise; and the same for departure, if they take away n cargo; but they
shall not be obliged to pay anchorage if they arrive in ballast and depart in the
same manner.
ARTICLE17.
Each of the contracting parties shall be s t liberty to establish a consul in the
dependencies of the other; and if such consul does not act in conformity with the
usages of the country, like others, the government of the place shall inform hie
Government of it, to the end that he may be changed and replaced; but he shall
enjoy, as well for himself as his family and suite, the protection of the government.
And he may import for his own use all his provisions and furniture without paying
any duty; and if he shall import merchandise (which i t shall be lawful for him to
do), he shall pay duty for it.
ARTICLE18.
If the subjects or citizens of either of the contracting parties, being within the
possessions of the other, contract debts or enter into obligations, neither the consul
nor the nation, nor any subjects or citizens thereof, shall be in any manner responsible, except they or the consul shall have previously become bound in writing;
and without this obligation in writing they cannot be called upon for indemnity
or satisfaction.
ARTICLE19.
In case of a citizen or subject of either of the contracting parties dying within
the possessions of the other, the consul or the vakil shall take possession of his
effects (if he does not leave a will), of which he shall make an inventory; and the
government of the place shall have nothing to do therewith. And if there shall
be no consul, the effects shall be deposited in the hands of a co~lfidentidperson
of the place, taking an inventory of the whole, that they may eventually be delivered to those to whom they of right belong.
The consul shall be the judge in all disputes between his fellow citizens or subjects, as also between all other persons who may be immediately under his protection; and in all cases wherein he shall require the assistance of the government
where he resides to sanction his decisions, i t shall be granted to him.

If a citizen or subject of one of the parties shall kill, wound, or strike a citiien
or subject of the other, justice shall be done according to the laws of the country
where the offense shall be committed. The consul shall be present a t the trial;
but if any offender shall escape, the consul shall be in no manner responsible for it.

If a dispute or lawsuit on commercial or other civil matters shall hrrppen, the
trial shall be had in the presence of the consul, or of a confidential person of his
choice, who shall represent him and endeavor to accommodate the diEerence
which may have happened between the citizens or subjects of the two natiom.

214

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1786 TO 1801
ARTICLE23.

If any dserence or dispute shall take place concerning the infraction of any
article of the present treaty on either side, peace and good harmony shall not be
interrupted until a friendly application shall have been made for satisfaction;
and resort shall not be had to arms therefor, except where such application shall
have been rejected; and if war be then declared, the term of one year shall be
allowed to the citizens or subjects of the contracting parties to arrange their
affairs and to withdraw themselves with their property.
The agreements and terms above concluded by the two contracting parties
shall be punctually observed with the will of the Most High. And for the maintenance and exact observance of the said agreements, we have caused their contents
to be here transcribed, in the present month of Rabia Elul, of the Hegira one
thousand two hundred and twelve, corresponding with the month of August of
the Christian year one thousand seven hundred and ninety-seven.
The BEY'S signature
[seal1
IBEAHIYDEY'Bsignature
[Seal]
The AGHASULEIMAN'S
signature
[hall
To all to whom these Presents shall come or be made known.
Whereas the Underwritten David Humphreys hath been duly appointed Commissioner Plenipotentiary by letters patent under the signature of the President
and seal of the United States of America, dated the 30'? day of March 1795, for
negotiating and concluding a Treaty of Amity and Commerce with the Most
Excellent & Illustrious Lord the Bey and Supreme Commander of the State of
Tunis; whereas in conformity to the necessary authority committed to him therefor,
he did constitute and appoint Joel Barlow an Agent in the business aforesaid;
and whereas the annexed Treaty was in consequence thereof agreed upon, in the
manner and a t the time therein mentioned, through the intervention of Joseph
Stephen Famin invested with full Powers for the said purpose.
Now, know ye, that I David Humphreys Commissioner Plenipotentiary aforesaid, do approve and conclude the said Treaty and every article and clause therein
contained, resewing the same nevertheless for the final Ratification of the President of the United States of America, by and with the advice and consent of the
Senate of the said United States. In Testimony whereof I have signed the same
with my name & affixed thereto my Seal, a t the City of Madrid this fourteenth
day of November 1797.
[Seal] DAVID HUMPHBEYB.
[Negotiations concerning alterations to Articles 11, 12 and 14 were concluded
by William Eaton and James L. Cathcart, 26 March 1799.1
["Treaties, * * *," by Hunter Miller.]
To Pierre Eric Skjoldebrand, Agent in behalf of the United States, and Joseph
C. Bacri and Company, from Secretary of State

[PHILADELPHIA]
Departmend of SSde Aug' 31. 1797.
GENTLEMEN
This letter I address to you by the advice of Capt"
Richard OJBrien, who understands that in the absence of MI Barlow,
you were so good as to accept an Agency in behalf of the United States.
The Ship Newport is laden with timber (including two large masts
and four yards) planks and staves for the Dey, on account of the
stipulations of the treaty of the United States with him. Some of the
articles are not precisely such as the treaty-agreement prescribed, but
were necessary to be put on board to fill up the Ship and make good
stowage. If not wanted by the Dey, and accepted towards our stipulations, you will sell the articles (not specifically stipulated) here
referred to for the k t advantage of the United States.

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

215

This is the third Ship laden with naval and other Stores for the Dey
pursuant to our agreement; and we shall continue to forward the
residue as fast as possible. The entire performance of our contract
may absolutely be relied on.
The freight which will be due to Captain Tew on the delivery of the
cargo of the Ship Newport a t Algiers, is eight thousand nine hundred
and thirty two dollars 88/100. He will want a part of this for port
charges a t Algiers, or elsewhere in the Mediterranean, - where he
may go for freight back to America. Such portion as he s h d require
I must intreat you to pay to him; to refund which I shall immediately
lodge a credit a t Lisbon, with the House of Messr"ohn Bulkeley and
son, on whom you will draw for the sum you shall advance, as above
mentioned to Captain Tew. The owner of the Ship, or his Agent here,
informs me that he has an expectation that Captain Tew will go to
St Ubes and take in a load of Salt. In this case, you will only have the
trouble to give to Captwew an order on the Messrg Bulkeleys for such
a sum as the Captain shall request. The bills you may have occasion
to draw on that House may be a t thirty days sight. The Agent of
the owner has entire confidence in Capt? Tew, and that he will demand
no more of his freight than will be requisite to fulfil his orders. The
whole sum I hope he will not want, as i t will be more convenient for
the United States to pay the freight in Philadelphia. If however he
demands the whole 8932 88/100 dollars, you will have the goodness to
pay and draw to that amount, in the manner already mentioned. If
any of the articles of the cargo should be sold, the proceeds will so
far enable you to pa on account of Captc Tew's freight. There may
have been the like s es of parts of the two former cargoes, the proceeds
of which may in like manner be applied. I wish to give you as little
trouble in this business and to ask for as small advances as possible.

J

[NA.

SDA.

Dip. Cor., Inet. to Min., Bk 4, Feb. 1797-Nov. 1798.1

To Francis Do Costa, from Secretary of State

TEENTON
September 6. 1797.
SIR, I received last evening your letter of the 2"g A fatality seems
to attend every thing relative to the affairs of the United States with
Algiers, to induce dangerous delays. I am wholly uninformed respecting the draught or model of the guns designed for the frigate going to
Algiers.. I t is so very im ortant to the public-interest to complete her
guns wlth the least possib e delay, I do not hesitate to authorize you to
make a new draught for the six pounders and to have them instant1
cast and bored. Excuse my desiring you to examine the matter we$
so as that the draught or model you furnish shall certaidy answer the
purpose. I think there were to be twelve six pounders and 24 nines.
It would be well if in the boring, the external surface could be
turned, a t least to take off the greater roughness. Please advise me of the progress and success of this business.

P

[NA. SDA.

Dom. L, Vol. 10, Mar. 1797-June 1798.1

To Secretary of State from Navel Constructor Joshua Humphreys, U,S. Navy

'HAVERFORD
TOWNSHIP,
HUMPHREYS
MILLBAT 'PBX
NINE MILE STONE ON THE HAVERFORD
ROAD
Sep: 26. I787
SIR I was in hopes of soon returning to the City and until yesterday
was very sanguine of having both Vessels compleated to sail before

216

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1786 TO 1801

the river closes this season, but the unfavourablereport of the Contagion
and the great number of deaths in the vicinity of the yard will prevent
for the present my return there, the number is much greater than in
the year 93, I know of no family that have escaped the Clerk of the
yard was taken sick in the counting house and is now dead.
M: Hutton is driving on the small Vessel very fast she will be all
compleatly timbered this week, and will begin to put on the plank
& wales, if he is fortunate enough to continue healthly she will be soon
compleated - The Stem & Stern of the Brigs will beraised tomorrow,
she will progress as fast as possible under the present calamity. I
have engaged the stuff for the gun carriages which will be cut immediately & piled up to season Mr Francis nor myself have a copy of M: Huttons proposals, it will
be necessary for one of us to be possessed of them in Order to Know,
a t what times M: Hutton is to receive his payments, Altho' I know
very near the sum and time yet I may be mistaken; I have drawn two
orders on Mr Francis for five hundred dollars each on accl of his f h t
payment, the first was paid before I left the City, the last I am not
advised of, but have no doubt of its being paid
I recieved a letter from Cap$ OBrien dated 11 Ins! at Baltimore,
wherein he states his being extreemly ill of a fever for ei ht days -Any
commands you may please to give will be immediate y sent to me If
they should be left a t the Buck Tavern Kept by M' Miller on the
turnpike road near the eight mile stone
I am with great Respect
JOSHUA
HUMPHREYB
Constructor of the U Slates Navy

f

[NA. SDA. CL, Algiers, Vol. 11, Jan-Dec. 1797.1
To David Hnmphreys, U. S. Minister to Madrid, Spain, from George Clark, U. S.
Charg6 d9Affaires, Algiers

ALGIERS
1" OdT 1797
SIR I had the honour of addressing ou on the 1 0 t b Ultq via Genoa
advising the arrival of the Swedish S 'p Jupiter from Phil9 & In&pendant from Cadiz both which Vessels are entirely discharged, but
as yet I have not been able to regulate with the Regency which of
those articles are to be placed to peace Presents & which to annual
Tribute, man of the articles whch composed the former Vessels'
cargo especia y the large Pine Plank, have proved of a very inferior
quality, this circumstance has caused the Dey to be very an
with
us dr given me much trouble to pacify him, this howeverThave
effectually done & passed the above mentioned Stores as good, but it
would be well you would mention to the Secretary of State that he
recommends the Purveyor to be more cautious for the future in the
choice of those articles he sends here, for should this happen another
time, we shall not escape so easily. The Inde endent had some Sail
Cloath, One White Rope & nine Bundles of f a m e damaged which
the Dey would not r m v e . This I shall make sale of for account of
the U. S. but as they are much injured I am affraid there will be a
great loss on them.
I received two Days ago a Courier from Mc Famin with the inclosed
Copy of our Treaty with Tunis & a letter directed for you, he informs
me that he has forwarded another Copy via Marseilles to Mr Barlow.
(signed) GEORGECLARCK

&

19

[NA. SDA. Disp. Spain, Vol. 4, 1797-1799.1

217

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

To David Humphreye, U. 6. Minister to Madrid, Spain, from Joseph Ingraham,
U. 6. Charge d'BfFairee, Tripoli

TRIPOLICt@of October 1797.
(COPY)
SIR, I have the pleasure to inform you that the affairs of the United
States in Tripoli is very favorable a t present, as I hold in friendship
the Bashaw and all the head men of this Regency. Our peace made
here by the Spanish consul is on a much better footing than any other
nation that is a t peace with the Barbary Powers. By this our government lays under every obligation to Consul Souza, and our consul,
whoever he is, that is sent out here, can keep our peace for many
years, if he takes great care not to disclose his mind to any other
consul in this place, for if he cannot keep his own secrets, depend on i t
there is no person here will keep them for him, and by that means he
will always be a t variance with the Bashaw, and more over it will cost
government 8 or 10,000 Dollars a year, if they wish to have their
consul respected in this place, and their flag respected a t sea, and not
to have their shipping robbed and stripped by the cruizers whenever
they meet with them. Our government must not trust to the Algerines to hold their peace with either Tunis or Tripoli. If they trust to
the Algerines, rely on it, on the death of this present Dey of Algiers
there will be a war with Tunis, and possibly with Tripoly, in consequence if such a thing takes place, the consuls of Tripoli & Tunis
must be empowered to sacrafice, perhaps 60 or 70,000 Dollars or even
100,000 - sooner than have our shipping captured and our seamen
made slaves of again, and have to seek for another peace, which will
never be as favorable nor on so good a footing as i t now is, besides
the loss of commerce for 5 or 6 years. The Bashaw told the Spanish
consul and me he never meant to make peace with one nation without
making war with another, and I believe he means to stand to his word,
for he has already made war with two nations since I've been here Danes and Swedes - ths Danes has made peace again after the loss
of six sail of shipping which was captured and brought in here safe,
their peace amounts to more than 100,000 Doll9 in money and presents,
besides their being obliged to pay 14,000 Dollars every three years.
They have captured six sail of Swedes already and sent them in here,
there are five cruizers a t sea, and how many more they will capture I
cannot say, there [were] eighty slaves brought in, and nine of them is
turn'd Turks already, they have come to no terms for a peace, altho
the consul is on the spot, till such times as the Bashaw finds what
success his other cruizers meets with. * * * This regency, when
I first arrived here was in a poor state, but now it is on the rise, growing
very powerful. $hey have frigates from 26 to 36 guns, besides a
number of galleys from 6 to 12 guns. They always keep more or less
ready for sea. The Bashaw has received some great presents from
the Grand Seigneur, 2 frigates, 1000 barrels of powder, cannon,
mortars, shot, shells, cordage, canvas, spars, pine and oak plank, and
a promise of as much more as the Bashaw stands in need of to raise
this regency to its former dignity which was the first state in Barbary
Our resent for this place according to the treaties of peace is much
take it
?ma er than was expected, but I hope our r r n m e n t
rnto consideration and send something more t an is put in the treaties
of peace. I t is much better to have the principal people to be our
friends than our enemies, and by giving a trifle to one, and a t d e to
another is the way to hold our ground good in Barbary. We have

lf

wh

218

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1786 TO 1801

no christian friends here, and in course we must hold our friendship
with the Turks. * * * I hnve been instructed by the Spanish
consul in every thing that is requisite relative to the management of
our affairs since I have been here, and have informed Mr Barlow by
every opportunity, which I make no doubt he has informed you of.
(Signed) JOSEPH
INGRAHAM,
charge dla$airs for the U. 5'. of America,
a4 Tripoli.
[NDA. SDA.

Disp. Spain, Vol. 4, 1797-1799.1

[About 4 October 17971
Ordnance and Military Stores for Algerine Frigate Crwcen~

Return of Ordnance & Military Stores shipped in good Order by
order of Samuel Hodgdon Esqz Superintendant of Military Stores by
George Fleming, on board the Sloop Federalist, John Gee, master
consigned to Mr Melancton Smith, Merchant a t New York, to be by
him forwarded to Portsmouth in New Hampshire, for the use of the
Frigate, building there for the Algerines. Vizt
nos

qrc

2 long 9 pounder Cannon, weight each about 26 2
2100, nine pounder round Shot.
800 Six pounder
dQ
d9
520 rounds of Grape Shot, for 9. pounders, & 200 rounds of Grape Shot for Six
pounders. All in 28 Boxes, marked U 6. * * * * * * * *
[Gross weight 6314 po;:ds
Tare
434

-

[NA.

"
Net weight of Grape Shot for 9 & 6 pounders.]
5880
SDA. CL, Algiers, Vol. 11, Jan.-Dec. 1797.1

To David Humphreys, U. S. Minister to Madrid, Spain, from Secretary of State

DEPARTMENT
OF STATETrenton October 31. 1797.
SIR By my letter of July 18" committed to Mr T. Bulkeley, and
which he has advised me was forwarded to you a t Madrid, you will
have seen that i t was intended to send from America all the money
necessary to complete our Barbary negociations. But the information
of the treaty with Tunis havlng been concluded, and that the price
of the treaty was to be paid in a short time, together with your knowledge of other known demands for Barbary affairs, induced you, to
prevent a subversion of all that had been done, to make eventual
provision of funds in Europe. By Mr King's letter of August 59
received on the 17'? instant, I find that he has secured with the Mess"
Barings, the credit you desired. This arrangement will produce some
embarrassment; as we shall not certainly know whether you will
or will not have been obliged to draw on that fund. Should the
monies not have been drawn, and the Dey's frigate reach Algiers
without taking the money from hence, the consequences might be
unpleasant. If you should have drawn the money from London,
and we send it to Algiers, expense and risk will attend the transfer.
Yet the precaution you took to insure the payment, if demanded,
before the money arrived from the United States, a pears to have been
exceedingly proper and prudent. When I meet tFte Secretary of the
m Philadelphia, next week, we shall consider what is most
advisab e on this subject. Perhaps the Dey's frigate may not depart
until further information shall enable us to decide with certainty.

-7

219

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

The failure of guns has alone caused a detention of the frigate beyond
the time of her being ready for sea which was indicated in a former
letter.
One of the two vessels building for the Dey a t Philadelphia I
suppose must be nearly ready to launch. Both would have been in
equal forwardness, if the yellow fever had not again visited Philadelphia; and particularly Southwark, where the two vessels were building.
The mortality waa principall in that quarter. This disease has
frequently of late been called t e plagzle; and as such it may be mentioned to the Dey, to account for the dela in the building his two
Cruiiers. I rely that one of the two d
l equipped and sent for
algiers before Christmas: perhaps in the beghung of December.
The two vessels are under the direction of our chief naval constructor,
and will be built with the best materials.

%

ill

*

*

*

*

*

*

*

I expect that Captxathcart, Consul for Tripoli, and Capt* William
Eaton (late of our Army) Consul for Tunis, will embark this fall for
their several Stations, and Captq O'Brien for Algiers.
[NA. SDA. Dip. Cor., Inst. to Min., Bk 4, Feb. 1797-Nov. 1798.1

[November 17971
Form of Shipping Paper for the Frigate Crescent for Dey of Algiers

UNITED STATES OF AMERICA
ARTICLESOF AGREEMENT
between the United States of North
America, and the OEcers, Seamen and Mariners on board the Frigate
Crescent in the service of the said United States, whereof TIMOTHY
NEWMAN,
Esq. is Commander, bound to the Kingdom of Algiers,
and there to be delivered up to the Dey and Regency for the fulfilment of Treaty Stipulations, and other special engagements entered
into between the two nations.
For and in consideration of the Monthly Wages set against our
res ective names and stations, do agree with the said Commander,
or
successor, to ship ourselves on board of the said Frigate and
perform a voyage from this Port to Algiers, there to be removed on
board such vessels as may be appointed to bring the crew back to the
United States. - D m g the whole time we promise to conduct
ourselves as good and faithful officers and seamen, to obey every lawful command of said Captain and our superior officers, and to do our
duty on board said F ' ate, her boats and any other vessel that we
may return in to the nited States, and conform ourselves to the
Laws of the United States, and to the Rules and Regulations for
Seamen in the American Navy, or any other Regulations specially
made for this present voyage.
We further agree that we will defend the said Frigate against all
pirates and enemies of the United States, that may attack, insult or
molest her on the high seas.
In consideration of which the United States, promises and en ages,
that all the officers and seamen shall be safely returned to the nited
States in vessels provided with every necessary for the return voyage
a t the ex ence of the United States, and continue the monthl pay
of the o!if cers and seamen until they are safely landed in the mted
States twenty-four hours; then to be discharged and paid the monthly
pay due to each officer and seaman.

9,

3

8
d

220

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1786 TO 1801

The United States further agrees, that should the crew be landed
in any port to the southward of Boston, that a reasonable sum s h d
be paid to each officer and seaman for his expence and travel to this
port of Portsmouth, over and above 1Js monthly wages, but if landed
at Boston, no travelling eqences to be allowed - and that in case of
wounds or siclmess, they shall be treated with the same care and
attention that officers and seamen are, serving in other ships of the
American Navy.
The United States will not hold themselves responsible for my act
committed on shore by any officer or seaman in a foreign county,
contrary to the laws of such countries.
Each officer and seaman shall receive one months pay before sailing
from this port, also wages due shall be paid up, provided they have
been on board a longer time than one month, when the Ship is paid
and ready for sailing.
Portsmouth, New-Hampshire, November, 17.97.
Time of
Entry,

Time of cornmencing Pay.

Meus, Names.

Stations.

Wapes per Wages ad- Witnessas to
Month.
vanced. their Signing.

---

[NA. SDA. CL,Algiers, Vol. 11, Jan-Dec. 1797.1
To David Humphreye, U. 5. Minister to Madrid, Spain, from Joseph Ingrahem,
U. S. Charge d'dffairea, Tripoli
TRIPOLI4F of November 1797.

DAVIDHUMPHREYS
Esquire
Minister lenepotentiaq f ~ o mthe U. S. of America,
to t h twrt o j Madrid.
SIR, Since my last of the 4*?of October, of which the inclosed is a
copy, there has many striking thugs turned up in Tripoly - such as
would not be credited only by them that is an eye witness to the same.
These people has got so haughty that they pay little or no respect to
either friend or foe. After making peace with the Danes, they took
the Swedes in hand, and has captured seven sail, but one having an
Algerine paasport was given up again, but not without the loss of 3
or 4000 dollars, besides the detention of the ship. They have also
captured an Imperial ship that had the governor of Smyrna's pass.
This ship and cmgo was condemn'd, the cargo sold, and the ship
made EL cruizer of. The ship and cargo worth 84,000 dollars. They
have also captured a Greek laden with wheat. she sailed under the
Grand Seigneur [space] the cargo was taken on suspicion that i t
belonged to a Neapolitan merchant, her papers being destroy'd and
having not*
to prove to the contrary the ship and people set a t
liberty. This IS the proceeding of the g o v e m e n t of Tnpoly. They
pay httle or no regard to any nation except the English French and
Spaniards and Americans, and its fear that induces them to pay m y
rmpect to them. How long they may be friends with the Americans
after their presenh is delivered, I cannot pretend to say unless they
keep a few frigates constant in these seas to keep them under subjeotlon: if they do that, it is possible to hold our peace for some
years, and not otherways. If our government cormders the small

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

221

presents that is given for a perpetual peace to what other nations haa
given, they cannot doubt the truth of what I write you now. Depend
on i t that these people is not to be bound under writings. On the
death of this present Bashaw of Tripoli there mill be great alterations
in the regency either for the better or worse and before they can be
brought to love or respect a christian, they must be first taught to
fear them: this is the only method that can be taken with the states
of Barbary by a nation that means to hold a perpetual peace and
friendship with them and without this method's taking place you cannot trust much to the [ms mutilated] and honor of a nation that
thinks of deceiving any christian that comes their way or they think
themselves in duty bound to spoil a christian if possible.[NA. SDA. Disp. Spain, Vol. 4, 1797-1799.1
To Josiah Fox, Naval Constructor, Philadelphia, Pa., from Edmund H. Qnincy

PORTSMOUTH
NEW HAM^ N02tI 6.17g7
DEARFRIEND My not hearing from you since the prevailing epedemic
in Philad* has made myself & wife quite uneasy; it was some releif, to
hear the public officers, were removed out of the City, as we presumed
you would of course follow: but your distress we fear has been great We sincerely sympathize with you & M" Fox, lament's the sorrowful
occasion - I hope this will meet you safe returned to Philad" with
your family - Our last accounts from thence are encourageing if
true & may God, in his providence, give you health, with every attendant blessin & avert every evil, from that devoted City - There has
been libera contributions made in this & the neighbouring towns, for
the releif of the poor & distressed inhabitants of your city: who could
not flee from the pestilence & we hope it will be received, as a mark of
brotherly affection and be blessed to their use & benefit - I, a little
expected a visit from you here, with your family; where I presume
you would have found a comfortable msylum: altho' your business
might have called you away, it would have been our cheif pleasure, to
ha.ve render'd the tarry of your family, as agreeable a.s possible You would be pleased I am sure to see the Frigate C r e s c e d , riding
a t anchor the pride of our river and the boast of our seamen; indeed,
she is a beautiful Ship & it is confidently asserted, the handsomest
vessel, in the United States - but of this you would be an able Judge
& in as much as you have largely contributed, towards the handsome
model, I thinlr you would feel great satisfaction in beholding the
completion of your wishes.
I had the pleasure to hear from you by Colq Hacket, who was much
pleased with the attention shewn him at Philad* I have nothing of importance to communicate to you of the state
of our Navy Yard - every possible attention is paid to the preservation of the Materids & every necessary precaution used for their
safety - I have deferred making a return of the articles delivered
for the Algerine Frigate, as ColQThompson has made requisitions,
from time, to time, of sundry small articles, that I have tho't ~tbest, to
keep it open, 'till the Ship was compleated & then make a return of
the whole - I shall now forward my Return very soon - Mr
Timothy Mountford who takes passage in a little Bri of Mr Jacob
Sheafe's for Philad-ill
hand you this - I have
o desired his
care of a barrel of Potatoes, which I am to beg your acceptance of, as
a smalb token of my remembrance of you - they were raised in my

7'

&

222

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1786 TO 1801

garden & I beleive are tolerably good - Mq Quincy unites with
me in our kind regards to MT FOX
& MI Sheafe & family desires their
best Respects - & beleive me to be my D' Freind * * *
[Peabody Museum No. 156.1

To Secretary of State from David Hnmphreys, U. S. lKinister to Madrid, Spain

MADRID
Novr idt@1797
120)
SIR I have the honour to transmit to you herewith the original
Treaty [28 August 17971 lately concluded between the United States
& Tunis, for the consideration of the Executive; & I cannot refrain
from recommending a t the same time to the favorable notice of
Government the persevering, intekgent & honorable conduct of M.
Joseph Stephen Famin, in the management of this tedious & difficult
negotiation.
On the great & interesting event of procuring a free Navigation in
the Mediterreneon for our enterprising Citizens, by the conclusion
of Treaties with all the Barbary Powers, I cannot suppress the
pleasure of offering my sincere felicitations, accompanied by my
ardent desires that adequate means may be taken for perpetuating
so distinguished an advantage, so happily calculated for the improvement & extension of our commerce.
(Nq

[NA. SDA. Diep. Spain, Vol. 4, 1797-1799.1

1 25 November 17971
Invoice of Sundries for the Frigate for Algiers

Invoice of Sundries S h i ~ don account of theunited States bv Tench
~ r & c i s ,Purv' on board ihe Brig; Abigail Josiah Smith Mr f6r Portsmouth N Hampshire to be embarked in the Frigate
for Algiers
-***6bales N&wm containing 100 i e ~each
s is 600 pieces@ 619 & permit 5
202
15 -----3 Bhim ~ o n r h o na~20 [?yC Box ...............................
--ii:ii6x--l
............................................... 3.16 -

1 I

1 dv Young Hyson Tea-

5 -..-..
9 boxes Sonchong Tea 320 Ib Neat @ 716............................. 120 1 qr Chest Imperial dv lGt3 lb N i @ 141. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ~74.4
~~
- ~~~~~~~~.~
1 r Chest Young Hyson dv 81 lb nc @ 11p............................. 45.11.3
1 %oxImperial ~ e..
s.......24 2/3 Ib................................... 20.12.fl
P
&i
t ................................................ 12.0
-9
280
19
1 barrel 12 lcaves dble n?Td Loaf S u ~ a r
Ib 02
108.10. 216 .................. 13.11.7
212.................. 58.14.4
6 dV
67 dV Single
dv -......642...
I s&
.
16.6
26

-

-

-

-

24 pieces Red Bandsnoes....................b1/3

I?]
................... 128.-

Porters@ bameIs &C ...............................IS....7.33
.

Errors Excepted Novr 25, 1797

.

,

--- .

for TENCH
FRANCIS
Pumr
W* GOVETT.

[NA. 8DA. CL, Algiers Vol. 11, Jan-Dec. 1797.1

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

223

To the Dey of Algiers, from Richard O'Brien

PHILADELPHIA,
December ,$*1787.

BIBMILLAH

MOSTEXCELLENT
Hassien Bashaw, Dey of the warlike city and
Kingdom of Algiers.
By the remarkable fast sailing schooner HamduUah Rice Montgomeq, I first ray God your Excellency and all our people is well.
The United tates of America has sent the fo owing vessels with
stores for Algiers
The Polacre in January last.
The large Swede ship in May Isst.
A large American ship in September last.
The accident happening to the guns destined for the frigate
[Crescent], which this government gives to Algiers, has retarded her
s a w . Please God said frigate will sail for Algiers in december. I
shall come to Algiers in said frigate, and will have some stores - all
under the firman of Algiers
There is building in this city on account of your Excellency 3
corsairs A Brig to mount on one deck 22 six-pounders
A Schooner to mount 20 g u n s 4 pounders
A schooner to mount 18 guns, 4 pounders.
The Brig will be cop er-bolted and spiked and copper-bottomed. These corsairs is the z e s t aver built in this count and preferable
to an ever built by any nation io Europe - will sayfaeter than any
vesse s, that ever was in the Mediterranean. These vessels please
God will sail for Algiers in March. The great sickness, which happened in t.his country, has retarded the AIgerine business: but the
Government of this country wishes to procure and send to Algiers
the best materials, which requires time to collect them. The United
States of America has heard with the greatest satisfaction your
making the Spaniards and French give up the Polacre and Swede
ship, which they intended to plunder and rob: we have thank God
heard of their arrival a t Algiers. The depredations and sea-robberies
of those nations in un'ustly capturing the American vessels has much
retarded the Algerine usiness: but God is great; - in him we confide,
and hope for your Excellency's lasting friendship.
N. B. At present a large ship is loading for Algiers and Tripolia
Brig is called the Hassien Bashuw
Schooner Lelah Eisha
Schooner Skjoldebrands

1

19

f

b

[NA. SDA.

CL, Algiers, Vol. 11, Jan-Dec. 1797.1

To George Clark, U. S. Agent, Algiers, from Secretary of State

[PHILADELPHIA]

De rtment of M e December 4. 1797.

SIRI inclose the invoice and bf lof Lading of the cargo of the United
States Schooner, named the HumduUah. The cargo is for the Dey and
Regency of Algiers, agreeably to the treaty sti ulations of the United
States of America with that power. You rilf),on the anival of the
Schooner, make the same known to the Dey, in the most proper man-

224

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1786 TO 1801

nw, and receive his orders for tshedelivery thereof. I enclose another
invoice of articles, among which are six shawls and forty four penknives
for the De of Algiers: the rest of the articles in this invoice you will
deliver to ose h Cowen Bacri & Co.
The frigate estined for the Dey will sail in the course of the present
month. Captain O'Brien will embmk in her Perhaps she may arrive
nearly as soon as the HamduUah.
As soon as the HamduUah shall be unladen, Cap$ Montgomery is to
clear and put her in good order, and then you will deliver her to the
Dey, as a vessel purchased for hi use, a t the expense of the United
States. Captain OBrien on his arrival will further explain the object
of this purchase and delivery.
Capt. OBrien has written a letter to the Dey, of which I enclose a
copy, to inform you of the progress made in building the vessels,
which the Dey gave Capt. OBrien orders to procure.
If an opportunity offers for the return of Capt. Montgomery and his
crew to the United States, you will embrace it. A direct conveyance
from Algiers to the United States is hardly to be expected: you will
therefore engage passages for the Captain and crew of the HamduUah
by the way of Alicante, or otherwise, as you shall judge most proper
and economical, unless Capt. OBrien should arrive soon after the
HarnduUah; in which case he w i l l do what is requisite.

a

B

[NA. SDA. Dip. Cor., Inst., to Min. Bk 4, Feb. 1797-Nov. 1798.1

To Andrew Montgomery, Master of the Schooner Humdullah, from Richard O'Brien

PHILADELPHIA
December the 4* 1797
SIR yon are appointed master of the united States Schooner,
HamduUah. destined from this port for Algiers. haveing with. youre
papers. The dey of Algiers passport. oure haveing. powder and
Many Valuable articles on board. you w& take the greatest.
care and
precaution
On yourc leaveing the Capes of the dclaware Keep a Sharp 1ook.out
and avoied. the track of corsairs and avoid Speaking of Vessels. take
a good Oppertunit in entering the Straits. and when Once within
Ceauta and Gibra ter, Keep tho Barbary Shore. until1 you Come
adj acent to Algiers. you will, then hoist yr american Colours aft. and
yr Algerine. flag at the h1"opmast head, and Enter the port of AIg" deliver. youre letters. and dispatches to the American Agent and lolow
his Orders. if you Should. be sometime in Algiers or that the Schooner
remains in Algiers. untill the arrival of the frigate. you will Consult.
with the American Agent. act with precaution. and policy. and with
every prudent Occonornie untill you return to America, for so doing.
this is my advice & instructions to you
RICH^ OBRIEN
by
Consul.for Algiers
If. you are taken by any nation write to the Dey - ~ n American
d
Agent. If. you. receive. any orders from tho Secretary of State
Obey them and disregard. these Orders

T

[NA. SDA. CL, Algiers, Vol. 11, Jan-Dec. 1797.1

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

225

[5 December 17971
To Andrew Montgomery, Master of Schooner Hamdullah, from Secretary of State

To Mr ANDREW MONTGOMERY,
Master of the Schooner called the
HamduUah, now riding at anchor in the Port of Philadelphia, &
destined for the City of Algiers
SIR, YOUwill proceed with t.he schooner HamduUah, under your
command, for Algiers. The quality of your cargo requires the utmost
care.
On your passage beware of rruisers, & avoid as much as possible,
speaking m t h any vessels. When you arrive at the Straits of the
Mediterranean, observe the direct.ions which Captain O'Brien has
given for your sailing thence to the port of Algiers. On your arrival
there, find Mr George Clark the agent of the United States, & deliver
the letter addressed to him. Follow his directions for the delivery of
your cargo, & afterwards of your Vessel. He will provide for the
return of ourself & crew to the United States.
If Mr &ark should not be a t Ngiers, enquire who is the American
ent there; & if yo11 find none, then open the letter addressed to Mr
8 a r k e & execute my orders therein contained If hi? Pierre Eric
Skjoldebrand should be at Algiers, request his advise & assistance &
ask also the advice & assistance of Mr Joseph Cowen Bacri to whom,
as you will see by one of the invoices, sundry arhicles of the cargo
to be delivered.
I n the absence of an American Agent at Ngiers, I shall rely on your
attention & foresight to take the most proper means of returning with
your crew to the United States, or otherwise disposing of them to
their satisfaction. I hope however that Cap3 O'Brien will arrive so
soon after you as to relieve you in this respect.
Given under my hand & Seal of Office, the 5:" day of December 1797,
T[IMOTHY]
~[ICKERING]
Se8 of Staft?
[NA. SDA. Dom. L, Vol. 10, Mar. 1797-June 1798.1

[9 December 17971
Petition to Congress for restoration of Schooner Eliza to former owners, Gorham
Parsons and Edward Band, Boston, Mass.

To the Honourable the Senate, and the Honourable the Houseof
Representatives in Congress assembled - Humbly shew Gorham
Parsons and Edward Rand of Boston and citizerls of the state of
Massachusetts, that in the month of October in the year of our Lord
One thousand seven hundred and ninety five, after intelligence had
been receiv'd from the American consul at Alicante, that a treaty had
been formed botween the United States and the Barbary Powers; they
sent their Schooner call'd the Elim Samuel Graves Master, and the
said Edward [Rand] Supercargo, on a voyage to Gibralter with
directions to proceed from thence to some of the Southern parts of
France for the purchase of Brandy, if information shoud be receiv'd
at Gibralter that the navigation wou'd not be interrupted by the
depredations of the Barbary Corsairs - That on the arrival of the
said Schooner a t Gibralter such information was received, and she
proceeded for Cette a French port in the h$edit<erranean,on her
passage by a gale of wind she was driven into Adge a French port in

226

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1785 TO 1801

the neighbourhood of Cette where Ten thousand dollars the property
of your petitioners and part of the cargo of the said Schooner was
taken away in the night time by certain Robbers whom your petitioners
have never been able to discover; that the Super cargo after tarrying
in vain for some time to discover the Robbers and to obtain redress,
purchas'd about sixteen pipes Brandy with the small remainder of the
cargo, and the said Schooner sailed from the port of Cette bound for
Malaga and on her passage was seized by a corsair from Tunis and
carried into that port three days before the expiration of a Truce
which had been agreed to by the Unit'ed States and the Bey and guaranteed by the Dey of Algiers; - That certain Stipulations having
since been agreed to between the United States and the Bey of Tunis,
the Master Super cargo and crew have in consequence thereof been
liberated, and the said Schooner and Brandy restored to the order of
the Consul of the United States then residing at Algiers - That the
Schooner after being rigged as a Brigantine a t Palermo, has returned
to Boston where she now is under the care of the said Parsons as Agent
of the Secretary of State, and the said Brandy has also been receiv'd
a t Boston by the Assignee of the said Secretary, but it has not yet been
decided whether the said Brigantine and Brandy shou'd be restor'd
to your petitioners or whether the United States shou'd retain i t for
their own use -Your petitioners wou'd submit to the consideration of
Congress whether by any laws recognized among nations their property
in the said Brigantine & Brandy has been divested? Whether as the
seizure was during the existence of the truce, it ought not to be deemed
such an infraction of a national compact; as will not vest a legal
property in the Spoliators? but if the legal property may be considered to have been acquired by the seizure yet your petitioners
would humbly suggest, that upon the restoration of the vessell and
cargo, it would not be consistent with the national honour to detain
the same from the original owners, that it cannot be supposed that
the United States would negotiate with the Be for the purchase of a
ressell and sixteen Pipes Brandy for their own enefit especially when
the same had been taken from their own citizens and made prize of
contrary to a truce stipulated between the two governments, That
if the idea of such trafic should be re'ected, no other rational idea
seems to present itself but a ransom or the benefit of the original
owners - how far this is supported by the equitable claims which
every citizen has upon its Sovereign for the protection of a lawful
commerce, when such protection can be grnnted without a public
injury, or for compensation for illegal capture where the compensa-tion
is in the possession of government and can be made by a restoration
of the captured property lour petitioners would request the consideration of Congress. - our petitioners would submit this furthar
consideration, that the same sum was probably paid to the Bey for
the liberation of the captives and the restoration of the property, as
must have been paid for the liberation of the captives only, as will
appear by comparing the sum paid to the Bey with the price paid for
the ransom of slaves only to the Dey of Algiers, as also by considering
that the vcssell and Brandy had the same not been restored wou'd
have been quite useless to the Tunisians. - your petitioners have
also understood that expences have been incurred in altering the said
Schooner into a Brigantine since her restoration, and that wages are
due to the seamen for navigating her to Boston, and also that the said

g

I

f

227

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

Brigantine has earnd a freight about equal to those expences, wherefore
your petitioners humbly pray that Congress would take the premises
lnto its wise consideration; and order the said Brigantine and Brandy
to be restored to the original owners, as some alleviation of thelr
misfortunes arrising from this disasterous voyage and as in duty
bound shall ever pray. GOREAM.
PARSONS
EDWARD
RANDby his
BOSTON
DECEMBER
gtP 1797.
Attorney G. PARSONS.
[See document dated 14 June 1796.1
[NA. SDA. CL, Algiers, Vol. 11, Jan-Dec. 1797.1

To Secretary of State from James Simpson, U. 6 . Consul, Tangier

N? 3.

TANGIER
16'@ December 1797. SIRI have the honor to advise my arrival at this place on the Evening of the 6%''Inst - the day following I landed, and was received by
the Governor His Excell? Alcayde Habu Ben Maleck, as Consul
General of the United States for this Empire, with marks of cordial
Friendship, under the usual complimentary Salute of 11 Guns. His Imperial Majesty Muley Soliman having sat out for Morocco,
the season of the year rendered it impossible for me to follow him there
immediately, accompanied by a su5cient number of Mules to carry,
and Guards to escort the Articles provided, to be presented His Imperial Majesty, in t-hename of the United States; for this reason and
having no lace of safety to secure the Articles of Present here, they
remain a t ibraltar, u n t d wanted. The Roads during the rainy season in this Country are render'd
almost impassable for Horsemen, but perfectly so for Cattle with
burthens, unless at a very great hazard of having every article so
transported, destroyed; - the Governor sensible of this, very readily
sent off a Horseman to Morocco at my arrival, with letters from me for
Muley Soliman and Sid Mohamet Ben Ottman, with an apology for
not waiting on His Majesty untill the Journey can be undertaken
with safety to the Articles compose the Present, which I have not a
doubt but will be well received. I have delayed doing myself the honor of malreing this Communication to you, untill OBcial advice should be received of Muley Solimans arrival a t Morocco, which happy event has this morning been
anounced by Salutes from the Garrison, the Governor having received
the intelligence last Night; - This Prince now Reigns sole Emperor
of his Father's Dominions; and the Country thro'out, is in a state of
the most perfect tranquility, which it is hoped under a Soveriegn of Solimans innate good qualitys, will continue; as a blessing to his People
and a Comfort to Christians they have for some years back been strangers to. -

8

*

*

*

*

*

*

*

Before my departure from Gibraltar, Mr Pintard gave orders to
the Master of his Brig Mary to land the Guns were on board of her,
which was done, and I returned the Vessels Rudder - the Master of
the Privateer brought the Brig to Gibraltar on suspicion of the Cargo
being Spanish property, was compelled by Sentence of the Vice Admiralty Court to pay Captain Gardener damages - in those were
comprehended demurrage up to the 6'P August notwithstanding Ship

228

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1786 TO 1801
-

& Cargo were liberated by decree bearing date 4'+ or 5" July, a t issue
of the Trial - Gardner (Master of the Mary) pleaded that as one of his
Ship papers had wrongfully been delivered to me by the Captor, he
could not receive the others without it - in my former letters on this
subject, I have told you the strong motives induced me to retain that
paper, and now I am here I can assure you, it was a happy circumstance I did, for some of the Consuls have told me, every part of
the busyness is well known on this side, and that my conduct was
watched. Mr Chiappi of Mogodor writes me, that by the Emperors order the
Brig Liberty and her Car o carried to SP Cruz by one of his Cruizers,
as mentioned in dispatch %? 1 (of Morocco communications) have been
confiscated as taken on a Contraband trade - the Master & Crew
have been liberated. - I am ve desirous of receiving Cutts of the
Mediterranean Passes, and hope shall, before any of the Cruizers
of this Country be fitted out, at present they are all laid up. The Consuls resident here are those of England - Spain - France,
Rolland - Denmark - Sweden - Portugal and Genoa - the latter
also acts for Ragusa, and did for Venice; they are all my old acquaintances, I have the satisfaction of being in habits of strict Friendship
with most of those Gentlemen, and intimately acquainted with the
whole. I have not failed to send to His Imperial Highness Muley Taib,
who who resids a t Fez, a handsome remembrance on the part of the
United States - we understand he goes to Command at Morocco, on
the Emperor's return to Mequinez. * * *

'P

[NA. SDA. CL, Tangier, Vol. 1, 1797-1803.1

[16 December 17971
Agreement between the Secretary of State, and Richard O'Brien, snd William R.
Prichett, Ship Joiner of Point Pleasant for work on the LJah Eisho

Articles of Agreement made the Sixteenth Day of December in the
Year of our Lord One Thousand Seven Hundred and Ninety Seven by
Timothy Pickering Secretary of State with Capt? Richard OBrien of
the one Part and William R. Prichett Ship Joiner of Point Pleasant
on the other part, WITNESSETH that he the said William R. Prichett
promises or cause to be done the Joiners Work for the Schooner now
on Stocks in M? Samuel Bowers's Ship Yard in a compleat Workmanship like manner - THAT is to say as follows to be finished in the
same way that the other Algerine Schooner is to be done, the Bottom
to be planed the Wales, the upper Works Quick Work the Plank Shear
lain, with a Molding on it, a String planed & Beaded on the lower
edge of the string, the Channels to be planed if re uested the upper
edge of the Wile to be beaded and black Streak'd, t e Quarter Pieces
to be Planed, with a Molding on the Stern to be lined, with false
Moldings for forming Cabin Windows, the Stern to be lined inside
the Clamps to be planed & Beaded, the Beams ditto the Nees to be
Worked Head Ledges & Comings the Cabin to be two bulk Heads &
two Births twelve feet apart to form the Cabin, Fore & aft pieces
Partners Karlings Bits & Water Ways all to be planed and beaded.
and shot Lockers to be p h e d the lower part of the Deck ditto.
William R. Pritchett to find the Boards. all tbrs work to be done to the
likeing of Mr Samuel Bowers. Timothy Pickering and Captain

B

229

WARS WITH BRRBARY POWERS

Richard OBrien on their part promise to pay unto William R. Prichett
the Sum of Four Hundred and Fifty DoUars for Cornpleating the said
Work:
Wm R. PBICHETT
Approved, by RICH@
OBRIEN
Approved, TIMOTHY
PICKEXING,
Secv of Slate
[NA.

SDA. CL, Algiers, Vol. 11, Jan-Dee. 1797.1

To Secretary of the Treasury from Secretary of State

[FHILADELPEIA]

Department of Stale Decr 20. 1797.
SIR By the best accounts I have received relative to our Barbary
llegociations it appears that me are indebted to the house of Bacri
a t Algiers in the sum of about fifty Thousand Dollars- 50,000
To the Dey of Algiers, for the forty thousand
Dollars he advanced for our peace with
40,000
Tripoli- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - To the Bey of Tunis for the
to have been negotiated with
of 7 1 - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - _ - - - - - - - - To the Bey of Tripoli, to be paid when the}
12, 000
Consul of the U. States presents himself- - - For presents promised or expected by some)
3, WO
influential Officers--- - - - - -- - - - - - - - - - - - - - For the sum "upwards of 60,0001'' for Tunis)
5, 000
we may Safely add- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -

I

170,000
Cap5 07Brien nlust provide for the return of
the crew of the Crescent frigate which he is to
deliver to the Dey of Algiers, & for the crew of
the Hamdvllai~Schoonor sent for Algiers with
Stores - for this object & unforeseen contingences, I think must be added Ten Thousand
Dollars - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - Total

10,000
180,000 Doh

ColQHumphreys writes from Madrid the 5" of September last, that

Mr Barlow had actually passed his bills upon him without Saying for
what sum; but I suppose for the sums referred to in Mr Bsrlow's
letter to him of the 236 of May last, of which an extract is enclosed.

Co1"umphreys
refers to two of bis letters to me covering some from
Mr Barlow which I conclude give the detads, but which have not come
to hand. But on the
of Sept' no bills had appeared when Col?
Humphreys wrote last summer to Mr King to procure a credit with
the Mess!" Baring's to enable him in that way to discharge Mr Barlow's draughts, the credit desired was from 170,000, to 200,000 dollars.
Hence the 180,000, the amount of my estimate in the preceeding
page, would seem to me as low as can be expehent.
As it is possible, perhaps probable, that the biUs may have been
paid in London, i t would seem prudent to lodge the money in E m e
as mentioned in conversation with you today, in a Situation to

k

230

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1786 TO 1801

commanded, with the least inconvenience, for London or Algiers, as
the case may require.
[NA. SDA. Dom. L, Vol. 10, Mar. 1797-June 1798.1
To Captain Timothy Rewman from Secretary of State

DEPARTMENT
OF STATE
PHILADELPHIA
Dee! 93. 1797.
SIR, I am glad that the time of your miling for Algiers is a t hand.
Cap O'Brien will leave this City the beginning of the ensuing week. This day I send orders to Boston for transporting to the frigate
one hundred & eighty thousand dollars, for which you will provide
a suitable birth, & give your receipt to the person who shall deliver
them. I t is possible & not improbable that the dollars may be landed
before you reach Algiers: the birth you give them should be chosen
with this view.
Their weight will be about four tons & a half. Capt O'Brien will
have orders on this Subject.
As far as possible I would have this affair of the money kept a secret.
[NA. SDA. Dom. L, Vol. 10, Mar. 1797-June 1798.1
To Secretary of State from Richard O'Brien

[PHILADELPHIA]
December the 23q 1707
SIR The 4 pounder, which is Cast a t the foundery. I have particularly observed, and think that 16, of that Size will do. for the Schooner,
building by Mr Bowers, Said Gun is 4% feet long,
The Schooner. buildmg by M' Hutton, Should, have Guns 5 feet
long, and the Six pounders for the Brig Should, be, 5% feet long, all
this I have explained to Mr Humphreyes, whom wrote to Mr De
Costa, on Said business and he informs me, he Cannot, make the draft,
or plan, without. he first. receives the orders of the purveyor, as this
Seems to retard the business. I think i t incumbent, on me to give
you this information So that youre Orders, will be the means of facilitating and removeing the Obstacles, herein Mentioned
NB. M! Humphrey! & M! De Costa Knows the necessity of the
Stern Chace Guns. to be longer then the battery Guns [NA. SDA. CL, Algiers, Vol. 11, Jan-Dec. 1797.1
[25 December 17971
To the Dey of Algiers, from President John Adams

[From] John Adams, President of the United States of America
BASHAW,
To His Excellency HASBAN
Dey of the B y and Kingdom of Algiers
Having received many proofs of the ability and fidelity of Richard
OIBrien, Esquire a citimn of the United States, and believin that his
intimate acquaintance with the manner of transacting pubEc affairs
a t Algiers may render him particularly useful to his country as well
as acceptable to your Excellency, I have selected, & by and with the
advice & consent of the Senate of the U. S. ap ointed him their
erefore I request
Consul General for the Kingdom of Algiers.
you to receive him as such, and to allow him all the privileges and
distinctions granted to the Consul of any other nation connected m t h

wg

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

231

you by the bond of peace and friendship. And as he is charged to
make i t his constant care to maintain the subsisting peace and friendship, I desire you favourably to view all his endeavours to that end,
& to give full credence to his assurances of the good faith of the U. S.
and of their sincere determination to fulfil all their engagements with
the Dey & Regency of Algiers. Many unfortunate circumstances
have retarded the performance of those engagements, which our
Consul General will explain to you; and some of them are so dBcult
to accomplish, still further time will be necessary for that purpose;
but any further delays will arise not from any indisposition to perform
our promises, but solely from the great obstacles which are in the way
of their execution. These circumstances, I doubt not your Excellency will duly estimate, whereby the harmony and good understanding so happily begun, may continue and be firmly established. To these expressions of Truth & Good Will, I have only to add my
prayers, That the Great God may long preserve your life, and crown
your days with felicit and honour.
Written a t Philade phia the 25th day of December one thousand
seven hundred and ninety seven.
J. A. [JOHNADAMS]
By the P. of the U S oj Am
T P. [TIMOTHY
PICRERING]
See?' of State
To the most Excellent and
most Illustrious HASSAN
BASHAW
Dey of the City and Regency of Algiers.

T

[Added in different writing]

Algiers to Tunis about 450 miles, by land, as the couriers travel -who
are about 10 days on the journey.
Tunis to Tripoli, about 450 miles D?
Algiers to Tunis, four or five days sail with a fair wind - Same from
Tunis to Tripoli. Current always setting eastward - except close
in with Algerine shore.
Algiers to Allcant, 24 hours sail (only about 180 miles)
Al 'ers to Gibraltar, about 4 days sail with a fair wind. N. B. Capt
b r i e n had an extraordinary run from Algiers to Lisbon, in 6 days.
[NA. SDA, CL, Algiers, Vol. 11, Jan-Dec. 1797.1

To Richard O'Brien, U. 6. Consul General, Algiers, from Secretary of State

DEPARTMENT
OF STATE,PHILAD+
Decr 2?gt.!'1797.
To RICHARD
OBRIENEsquire
Con& General o f the United States.for the Kingdom of Algiers.
Your intimate accrluaintance with the Government of Algiers, and
their principles of conduct towards Christian Nations, with your
practical knowledge of the means and mode of preserving peace,
render minute Instructions unnecessary. Indeed much must be left
to the discretion of a Christian Consul at Algiers, hence you will feel
the weight and importance of your office, and your high responsibility.
This responsibility is magnified by the addition[al] charge of s general
superintendance of the affairs of the United States in the Regencies
of Tunis and Tripoli. This is hereby committed to you. These
proofs of the high coddence reposed in you by your Country cannot

232

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1Y85 TO 1801

fail to enforce the corresponding duties of fidelity, vigilance, and zeal
to fulftl the great objects of your mission.
I. You well know the great dficulties in the way of executing the
stipulations of our Treaty with Al$ers; while you are sensible that
the good faith of the United States IS a sure pledge of their eventual
performance. You will, therefore, on all necessary occasions explain
these difficulties. Among the causes of delay may be mentioned 1'" The capture, detention, pillage and frequent condemnation of our
vessels by the belligerent powers.
2. The scarcity and excessive high prices of many of the stipulated stares.
3. The real and almost unsurmountablc obstacles in the way of procurjng
other articles, particularly the large masts, which were sought for in the
exterior country, several hundred miles from the sea - and their
transportation to Algiers will be a work of great difficulty; especially as
we have no vessels constructed for that service.
4. The fact that altho' we contended with the force of Great Britain and
successfully, in the establishment of our Independence, and had many
vessels of war on the Ocean; yet these were chiefly the property of
private Citizens, who with thc conclusion of the war, laid aside all
armed vessels, and the Government, loaded with heavy debts in the
war for their Independence have hitherto avoided the expensive e s t a b
Iishment of arsenals and dockyards: Hence the dcbys in procuring
cannon and building vessels of war. The forming of these establishmenta being reserved for the urgent occaeio~~
commenced or apparently
unavoidable.

11. The Crescent Frigate in which you are to embark, you will deliver
ko the Dey and Regency, for whom i t has been constructed and
equipped, confornlnbly to the stipulation of Mr Barlow. After the
Frigate had been so far advanced as not to admit of alteration, M'
Barlow sigrlified that she should be mounted with 12 instead [of] 9
pounders. My answer on this subject of which you will receive a
copy, I presume has satisfied the Dey. Captain Newman is instructed
to keep the Frigate in the best possible order to render her the more
acceptable.
111. The Schooner I-lamddEah, which has iatety sailed with Stores
for Algiers is also to be delirered to the Dey. A copy of the orders,
to the master, captain Montgomery, is inclosed for your information.
This Schooner has been purchased, and the Schooner Lelah Eisha is
now building here, for the Dey , in the expectation that they will not
only soothe him under the past delays & disappointments in the fulfilment of our stipulations, but serve as acceptable substitutes for the
stipulated, Masts, Yards, and heavy plnaks, which are so costly and
difficult to procure, and so exceedingly expensive to transport - the
former, when delivered a t Algiers will cost the United States perhaps
thirty times their estimated price in the stipulations. You will,
therefore, exert d l your talents to effect these object!.
And for your
full information concerning them, the copies of the onginal agrqement
and of the articles for the annual presents, and of the Invoices of
articles furnished in pursuance thereof, are herewith debvered to you.
We shdl be anxious to receive the details of your negotiations in this
business & their result.
IV. The Schooner Skjoldibrand, & Brigantine Hassan Bashaw now
building here on the s ecial Commission from the Dey, will be completed as soon as possigle. Had not the Yellow fever mterrupted the
work-men, both would have been ready to l a u n ~ ha t the first opening
of the Spring at farthest. As the cost of them ISto be reimbursed by

WARS WITH BARBMY POWERS

233

the Dey & Regency you will of course count on receiving the same on
the dehvery of the two vessels. This circumstance is noted as a resourse for any unforseen demands? and because we do not know the
precise state of our pecuniary affam a t Algiers and Tunis. As soon
as i t shall be practicable, after your arrival, you will transmit to fihe
Department of State the best information you can obtain concerxung
them.
V. The building of armed vessels for the Dey and Regency of Algiers.
the Government of the United States would willingly have avoided:
altho' the European Nations have long been in the practice: But the
critical situation of our affairs left us no alternative. In time to come,
however, we shall be well pleased if further engagements of the kind
could be avoided. If demands should be made, you will transmit
them, with full information of all the facts and circumstances which
may be requisite to enable the Government to judge of the necessity
or expediency of complying +th such demands, postponing any peremptory engagements, while i t can be done with safety.
VI. Considering the pre onderanco of the Dey of Algiers in t.he
Councils of Tnpoli, and
weight in those of Tunis; and that the
Consulate of Algiers is of superior importance, the establishments of
the three Consulates in those Eingdoms have reference to this state
of things. Our Councils a t Tunis and Tripoli, will, therefore, constantly correspond with our Consul General a t Algieis, and especially
in all cases of difEculty in relation to our peace with those powers,
and to tho property and persons of our citizens. All pecuniary demands from the two Eastern Regencies are to be communicated to our
Consul General at Algiers, and if they appear to him necessary to be
panted, and are so urgent as not to admit of delay - if also the sums
m question are not of very burthensome magnitude, and they can be
procured at the place where they are demanded or a t Algiers, they are
to be furnished accordingly by the orders or with the approbation of
the Consul General, he transmitting information of the affair, as soon
as practicable, to William Smith Esquire, the Minister of the United
States in Portugal. But if these demands are very extensive, or are
not so pressing as to require immediate decision, the Consul General
w4ll state them, with all the requisite circumstances, together w t h his
opinions, to our Minister a t Lisbon, and await his advice and direction.
The Consul General will, in like manner consuit with him in case of
any difficulties or unforeseen demands in his own Consulat a t Algiers.
And considering that Lisbon is not very remote, probably few affairs
of great moment will arise, in which he will not have time thus to
advise with that Minister.
The same course of proceeding is to be observed in the case of other
demands than those for money from the Barbary Regencies: and even
greater precaution seems requisite before such other demands are
admitted; because in their nature they are more embarra~smg~
or
eventually are likely to be more burthensome, than any pecmary
concessions.
If however the cases here considered admit of the delay, they are to
be transmitted to the Department of State, to receive the decision of
the Government.
I t is not easy to mark the utmost extent of the powers thus to be
exercised by the Consul General for Algiers. The nature of the
barbary Regencies often subjecting the M a i r s of peace and War to be

&

234

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1786 TO 1801

determined by the will of an individual. whose continuance in power
is itself precarious, such &airs cannot always be brought into previous
negotiation with the Christian Nation to be d e c t e d by the decision:
and hence the necessity of that discretionary power hereb vested in
our Consul General for Algiers. But the nature of the rust being
thus delicate and important, he will be impressed with the necessity
of deep and unremitting attention to the duties of his station, and of
adopting dl p a r t i 9 a r precautions, not only to perform those duties
with prudence, dibgence, and integrity, but to render those essential
qualities of his station manifest to his Government & fellow citizens.
In proportion as this great trust is liable to abuse should be the zeal
of the Trustee, to exhibit a fair, candid and upright execution, that
should place him beyond the reach of suspicion.
VII. Make up your accounts half yearly on the last day of June and
December, and where your pecunlay transactions admit of proofs,
take duplicate vouchers, one set of whch you will transmit half yearly
with your accounts to the Department of State.
VIII. The early salary of Four thousand dollars is the compensation for a your personal services and expences.
IX. Regularly once a month write to the Department of State, and
as much oftener as any business or event interesting to the Government shall occur. And every six Months transrmt by a safe conveyance a co y of your Journal m which you will note every transaction,
the know edge of which may be useful to our Government, whether i t
immediately respects ourselves or the other Christian Nations.
X. You will enquire and collect the best information in your power
concerning the commerce of the States of Algiers, Tunis and Tripoli,
and communicate the same to this Department specifying the articles
of commerce, their prices, with what nations now carned on, and your
ideas of the practib1lit-y of introducing our own cltizens tp a partlclpatlon therem, and the precantions necessary for rendering safe and
advantageous.
[NA. SDA. Dip. Cor., Inst. to Min., Bk 4, Feb. 1797-Nov. 1798.1

r'

9

l'

[29 December 17971
To Bichard O'Brien, U. 8. Consul oeneral, Algiers, from Secretary of State

Special Instructions to Richard 07Brien Esquire, Consul General
of the United States of America for the Kingdom of Algiers.
Not being possessed of certain information relative to the peace
reported to have been concluded with Tunis, nor of the precise state
of our pecuniary affairs depending a t Algiers, the Government could
only make an estimate of the sums requisite to discharge d demands
against us, grounded on the general information received from Mr
Barlow - He puB down the following round numbers, Viz.
ards of"---- - - - - - - -- - - - - - - - - -Dollm-- 80,000
For our Peace with Tunis,
To repay the Burn lent by tbt?gy of Algiers to -......-.---.-.------40.000
purchaae our peace with Tripoli - - - - - - - - _ _
To be paid to the Bey of Tripoli when our Consul .-------.-...-..-12.m
arrivee there pursuant to treaty - - - - - - - - - - - - - To reimburse the sums paid from time to time on account - - - - - - - - - - 50,OI-Jo
of the United Shtes, by the House of Bacri -------..----

}

}

)

235

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

1

To these may be added for the surplus above the sixty thousand
dollars required by Tunis-for the hire or purchase of a vessel
to bring home the crews of the Crescent Frigate and of the
Schooner HamduUah - and other contingencies------------

------

OoO

Amounting to-- 180,000

dollars, and this sum you will have under your care on board the
Frigate.
By the last intelligence from ColWumphreys, under the date of
September 5'." i t would appear that Mc Barlow had drawn bills on
him, say for 150,000 dollars, to answer which a credit had been obtained by Mr King on the House of John & Frencis Baring in London.
But at the date just mentioned no bills had been presented to ColQ
Humphreys. In this state of uncertainty it has been concluded most
ellegible for the frigate to touch at Gibralter, where i t is not improbable you may learn from our Consul whether the Bills of M Barlow
have or have not been paid. If you can ascertain that they still
remain a t Algiers, then you will proceed thither with the whole sum
in our hands, and there take them up. If, on the contrary, you
frng that the Bills have been remitted for payment in London, then
lodge at Gibraltar the 150,000 dollars, and write from thence to
C0l9 Humphreys a t Madrid - to William Smith Esqr our Minister
a t Lisbon, and to Rufus King Esqr our Minister in London, advising
them of the deposit. You will at the same time advise them of the
rate of exchange Gibraltar and London, and whether the whole or
what part of that sum can be there negotiated either on Government
account or by individuals. The object of giving advice in this matter
to our Minister in Lisbon, is only to multiply the chances of its reaching Mr King, that he may take the necessary measures to draw the
money from Gibralter to repay the Messr"arings.
You will desire
Mr Smith to communicste the advice accordingly. The money thus
deposited will perhaps be safest in the military chest under the orders
of the Commander in Chief of the Garrison and this would seem the
most expedient; because i t is probable that the Government may
pay Mc King in London, and apply the money you deposit a t Gibraltar for the payment of the troops or other purposes of the Garrison.
But if you can learn nothing certain c o n c e m g Mr Barlows bills, yet
seeing the chance is in favor of their having been remitted to London,
it appears advisable to make the Deposit of 150,000 dollars a t Gibraltar. You will then have with you thirty thousand dollars to
answer any pressing calls immediately on our arrival a t Algiers:
and if it should happen that Mr Barlow's b' s have remained there,
ou will then see how you can draw the money from Gibraltar to the
advantage, either by bills, or by sending a vessel for it. The
latter will be attended with some risk which you will duly estimate.
In your transactions at Gibraltar you will of course advise with
Mr Simpson, if there, or with his successor in the American Consulate,
John Gavino Esqr
You will probably find a t Gibraltar some vessels bound to the
United States by which you can write. We shall be anxious to hew
of your arrival at that place and how you have disposed of the money.
I[t] will be well to write a duplicate by way of Cadiz, under the care
of Mr Iznardi our Consul - and triplicate by way of England.
Twelve thouaand dollars of the money you will take on to Algiers are

5

kt

236

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1785 TO 1801

to be observed for Tripoli, for which our Consul will call on you, on

bis way to that City.

[NA. SDA. Dip. Cor., lnst. to Min., Bk 4, Feb. 1797-Nov. 1798.1
Captain Richard O'Brien's negotiations with Barbary Powers, 1796 and 1797
[NOTE.--Tbere are included in volume I1 of Consular Letters, Algiers, (State
Department records in National Archives, washingtun, D. C.) one hundred
and thirty-six pages (115-139 of script entitled "Captain O'Brien's Negotiations in Barbary 1796-1797". These notes are so voLuminou~sand 80 interspemed with tentative plans, suppositions, historical comment and mere
opinion, that they have been omitted from this vofume of "Naval Documents".]
To Rufus King, U. S. Xinister to London, England, from Secretary of State

DEPARTMENT
OF STATE,
PHILADELPHIA
J a n u a r y 1.1798.

D' SIR. Yesterday Captain Richard OJBrien, our Consul General

for Algiers, received all his dispatches, and to day was to take his
passage in a stago for Portsmoutih N . Hampshire, u-here he will forthwith embark in the Crescent frigate for Algiers. This frigate carries
thirty six nine and six pounders, and has been constructed for the
Dey and Regency, in fulfilment of our s t i ulations.
We are yet uninformed whether the b d drawn by Mc Barlow on
ColQHum hreys have been presented: they had not reached him on
the 5%of ptember - the date of his last letter from Madrid. In
this state of uncertainty, we have concluded to ship the money, to
pay those bills, in the Crescent frigate, which is to touch a t Gibraltar,
with the hope that our Consul there may be able to inform Captain
O'Brien whether the bills have or have not been presented and forwarded to London. If they have, ho is to leave there, in the guardinnship of the commanding officer of the garrison, one hundred and fifty
thousand dollars, subject to your orders, to reimburse Sir John &
Francis Bming & Co. ~vhoagreed with you to honor M' Barlow's
(or ColQ Humphrey's) b a s , should they be presented. If Cap$
O'Brien cannot get the requisite information at Gibraltar, then also
he is to leave the $150,000. subject to your orders, should the bills
bave been remitted to London, or to his own, if on reaching Algiers
he finds the bills there. I have desired him to write you b different
conveyances of his arrival at Gibraltar, and the deposit of t e money,
which consists wholly of Spanish milled dollars.
You will readily see why Gibraltar was preferred as the place of
deposit. If the Mls should have been sent to London, it was supposed that sum could easily and advantageously be negotiated with
the British Government, which must require large sums to supply
and pay the Garrison and ships of war which rendevous there, if it
could not be accomplished as well or better in the mercantile line: If the bills remained a t Algiers, Gibraltar being within four or five
days sail, the money could readily be transported thither; if it could
not be advantageously negotiated.

&

i

[MA. SDA. Dip, Cor., Inst. to Min.. Bk 4, Feb. 1707-Nov. 1798.1

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

237

[NJanuary 17981
Translation of a letter from His Imperial Majesty Muley aoliman, Emperor of
Morocco, to the Consuls resident at Tangier

(L. s.)

w

THERE
Is NO POWER
Oa STRENGTH
BUTFROM
GOD.
To the Assembly of Consuls at Tangier.
Now Know ye, that the Vessels which navigate under Our Flag,
and with Our Passports, are so permitted by Us for the Good of
Nations, the greater part of which are now engaged in War; and who
stand in need of many necessary articles, with wGcb they ought to
be furnished.
I t was for this Reason, and for the general Good that We authorized this Navigation.
We wished to abolish that Coasting Trade as you all know, but
your common Interest restrained Us.
For this Reason We desire, that Our Flag be respected, that i t be
violated by no one, that the Belligerent Powers do not attack i t
themselves, nor suffer that any violence be done thereto; as well in
regard to the Papers ns the Cargoes.
If any Subject of your Nations shall violate Our Flag, we will
have recourse to his respective Government.
I t has been represented to Us that the English Consul would not
give Papers to Our Vessels agreeably to the ancient custom of Consuls
residing in our dominions - We are ignorant of what can be his
motives.
In the mean Time when the Governor shall in consequence of Our
orders, send to any of your Houses, and demand such passports, We
desire that you do give them, and that ou will affirm & authenticate
that those we may give are certainly urs, and sealed with our r e d
Seal.

8

Given the Gt'' Shaban 1212. a t Morrocco. Of the Christian Aera 24'? Jany. 1798.

[NA. SDA. CL, Tangier, Vol. 1, 1797-1803.1
To Secretary of State from James Simpson, U. S. Consul, Tangier
N9

4.

TANGIER
25'h January 2798
SIR I beg leave to inclose with this, copy of NQ forwarded by way
of Cndiz, under cover to Mr Yznardy. I have had the satisfaction to receive a very Friendly letter from
Sid Mohamet Ben Ottman, in answer to that I wrote him on my
arrival in this Country - my delaying to go to Court during Winter,
has met His Majest.ys fullest approbation, and both him and Muley
Taib have given me proofs of their attention, in the very strong commands they have respectively laid on this Governor to do me every
service. I purpose shortly going over to Gibraltar, in order to bring the
Articles provided for the Present to the Emperor, for in these times

238

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1786 TO 1801

of danger even to so short a Navigation, I should not consider i t safe,
under any other persons charge. The Emperor continues a t Morocco, but we have hopes, he may
return to Fez about the Month of March - before then I hope I may
receive a letter for His klajesty from the Government of the United
States, as I am very much of oppinion he will look for one. I find the British Consul has left Algiers, in consequence of that
Regency demanding 60,000 dollars for the people killed, and injury
done their Frigate last Winter b a Ship of Lord St Vincents Squadron. - You will no doubt have {een advised that the Dey of Algiers
some time ago demanded a Frigate from Denmark and another from
Sweden - both Courts have positively refused complying. An English Squadron continues to Cruize off Cadiz, and a Frigate
of same Nation keeps constantly in the Entrance of the Straits,
doubtless with a view of watching the approach of the Squsdron of
French Ships said to be ordered to pass to the Westward. [NA. SDA. CL, Tangier Vol. 1, 1797-1803.1
To Secretary of State from James Simpson, U. 6. Consul, Tangier

COPYNo 5.
TANGIER
10fhFeb. 1798.
SIR I beg leave to inclose with this Copy of my last dispatch
forwarded by way of Lisbon.
The 31" t t ? I had the Honor to receive the Letter you wrote me
2 d Nov? last Year The Confirmation of Health being restored to the City of Philadelphia is most welcome, & I sincerely wish the Almighty may bless
some means for preventing another return of the dreadful calamit
Your Approbation of what I did in respect to Mr Pintard's k-ig
Mary, is extremely pleasing to me, and I beg you will accept my best
Thanks for your Kind intention of transmitting to me early, the
President's sentiments on the same subject. - The consciousness I
enjoy of the rectitude of my interference on that occasion; to prevent
a very probable public E d , makes me hope they will coincide with
yours. As I trust you will have received my former Advices, i t is not
necessary to say further in respect to the directions you transmitted
me in April last, to draw on Messr"aring of London.
For some Time past both Vessels of Gibraltar, and Spanish, have
enjoyed a free Trade in these seas, when provided with passports
from Muley Soliman - Some Portuguese, and Genoese Vessels
availed of these Passes to carry the Moorish Flag, but about two
Months ago the Algerine Cruizers under this pretext, captured all
Moorish Vessels they met - in consequence of which the Em eror
recalled his Passes, but by a subsequent order again gave them orce.
The British Cruizers have of late taken those Vessels they suspected
to be Spanish, and some have actually been condemned as such a t
Gibraltar. Muley Soliman having been informed of this, wrote a Letter 244
ult? to the Consuls here which was read, and delivered to us on
Monday last by the Governor - I inclose a Translation f o r c u r
Perusal - The English Consul continues to with-hold his cert c a b
to the Emperor's Passes, in consequence of which none have been
issued for some Months. -

P

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

239

I t is reported the ci-devant Venetian Fleet passed to the Westward
in the night of the 7th Instant, but we saw nothing of them here.
I obtained a Moorish Pass for a Brig of Mr Eben Parsons of Boston
laden with Bacalao, when laying a t Algeciras watched by some
French Cruizers - She hoisted the Moorish Fie, and under it
carried the Cargo to Cadiz - The necessity of the Measure, to save
the property of a Citizen of the United States, I trust will justify it.
[NA. SDA. CL, Tangier, Vol. 1, 1797-1803.1

[15 October 1796 to 16th February 17981
Statement of the account of Boatswain Augustin Serry

The UNITED
STATES
To Augustin S e q - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -D!
For his pay as Boatswain on board of the Brig Sophia, from
the 15thof October 1796 to the 16thof February 1798, being
16 Months at 20 dollars pr month- - - - - - - - - _- - - - - - - - - - - - 320.
Subsistence for the aforesaid period, being 490 days a t 2
Rations pr day is 980 Rations at 28 Cent.s pr Ration- - - - - - 274.40
Dollars. 594.40
Auditors O5ce
January 1 9th 1809
P. FERRALL

ComptrnOffice
Jan? 21. 1809
AND"ROSS
See Act of 1" July 1797 for pay & rations
[GAO. No. 21,222.1

To David Bumphreys, U. S. Minister to Madrid, Spain, from Richard O'Brien,
U. S. Consul General, Algiers

ALGIERSMarch la+
1798.
My DEARSIR, I sailed from Portsmoutb the Bthof January in the
Crescent frigate destined for Algiers. On the 17th of February we
arrived at Gibraltar, the governor of said place would not take the
money which I wished to deposit with him under his protection, as
the fact is, that the Military Chest was not sufficient to contain it, and
that if it was deposited any where else in Gibraltar, he did not think
it safe, and could not give me the requisite receipts we wanted agreeable to my orders. Finding that the money had not been paid to
the Dey and the Bacris, or to the Bey of Tunis, and hearing of unfavourable reports relative to our affairs with these States, I thought
it for the interest of the United States to proceed immediately for
Algiers. I nve the letters I had for you to Consul Simpson, whom
I met 1ued-y at Gibralter, and sailed from said place on the 20th,
arrived here on the 26tbhaving with us the United States schooner
fIamdullah. I immediately had a long conference with the Dey, and,
from being something dissatisfied he got well pleased, and I fully
explained all our difiiculties which retarded the Algerine business.
We discharged those stipulated articles wlvch were on board the
Crescent, Captain Newman, snd the schooner HamduUuh, Captain
Montgomery, so that this day the frigate and schooner was delivered

240

NAVAI; OPERATIONS FROM 1786 TO 1801

up to the Dey and Regency of Algiers. The crew of the frigate and
officers I have agreed for tbeir passage on board of a Boston ship.
The crew of the schooner goes in a ship for Charlestown. There is
three American vessels here which fled from the coast of Spain on
account of the French and 12 Spanish privateers. These vessels I
shall obtain the Deyls protection for. The Tunisean Government
was uneasy and t.hreatned us: I immediately dispatched a courier to
MonsrFamin and to the Bey, informing them of my arrival and with
the funds, and our friends the Jews here, the Bacris had sent a letter
of credit to advance the Bey of Tunis the sum requisite if immediately
necessaT. Also I have wrote to Tripoli the Bacris have advanced
here to the order of the Bashaw of Tripoli on our affairs Six thousand
dollars of the stipulated sum, so that I hope we shall shortly give full
security to our affairs in these States. I expect will sail from Philadelphia in April the three Corsairs on account of the Dey, and a large
store ship with timber. Then we shall have a full arrangement on
all our affairs. I t was a lucky circumstance both vessels arriving safe.
The officers and crews made great exertions. We had bad weather,
and, Thank God we and the one hundred and eighty thousand dollars
we had on board is arrived and all well.
I hope you will send a copy of this letter to our Minister in Portugal,
and by three conveyances to the Government of the U. S. I shall
write fully by these vessels, and by all other conveyances. The uncertainty of your receiving this letter prevents me of being more explicit. Hoping you and Mv Humphreys enjoys good health.
[NDA. Area 4, March 1, 1798, Copy of original in Yale University Library.]
Marine Force of Algiers 1 March 1798

Guns
36

One Ship of- . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
One do. o f - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - One do. o f - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - Xebeck of . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
----..---Xebeck of- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - Xebeck of-- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - Xebeck of - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - Xebeckof - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - Cutter o f - - - - - - - - - - _ - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - Schooner of.- -.- - - _ - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - Xebeck bulldlng of - - - - - - - - - - - -------Xebeckdo. of . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

24
22
24
24
22
12
12
18
12
20
12

Marine force guns- - _ - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 238

60 Gun boats.

yre OB [ ~ ' B R I E N ]

[SDA. CL, Algiers, Vol. 3, 1798.1
To David Enmphreys, U.S. Minister to Madrid, Spain, from Secret-

No I.

of State

[PHILADELPHIA]
Department r j State, March 3. 1798.
SIR, Your letter with the original of the treaty with Tunis came
safe to hand, and was laid before the Senate, who for some days have
had it under consideration. There are some exceptionable articles

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

241

which must be suspended for further negotiation; and with those
exceptions, I suppose the treaty will be ratified.
I n the 12'h article it is said that "The subjects of the two nations
shall be protected by the government or commandant of the places
where they may be, and not by the other authorities of the Country".This is not very intelligible to us, and if it would operate in the
United States, i t would go to vest the separate state-governments
with National concerns, to the exclusion of the general government.
In the same article it is stipulated that if the government of Tunis
shall have need of an American vessel for its service, the Cap: shall
not be allowed to refuse af suchfreight as the governmed s h d be pleased
to prescribe, however inadequate to the service to be performed. And
thus not only that government, but any resident merchants, of whatever nation, who by the well known means of procuring favours,
obtain a Governmental order for an American vessel, may practice
the most in'urious and galling oppression. The l g t QArticle of our
treaty with orocco forms a striking contrast.
But the most exceptionable article is the 14tQ,which would lay
prostrate our whole revenue system; i t is, beside, without reciprocity.
Citizens of the United States may, in our own vessels, carry the merchandize of our Country to Tunis and pay a duty of only three per
cent. But if our citizens transport their goods to Tunis under a foreign
flag, or if foreigners transport merchandize i n our vessels, from any
lace whatever (even from the U. S.) a duty of ten per ced must
ge poid. Whereas a Tunissian merchant may send the merchandize
of his country, under any Jlag, in to the United States, and pay no
more than three per cent duty. - Now you will find that in all our
commercial treaties (except that with spain) we have stipulated to
impose no higher duties or imposts than those which the most forward
nations are or shall be oblidged to pay.
Mr Barlow with his original instructions to Mr Fa&, sent the
project of a treaty with Tunis: of the Instructions I received a cop ;
but not of the project: but I think it impossible that M' Barlow shoufd
have proposed such unequal and inadmissible stipulations: nor can I
imagine that the Bey of Tunis interested himself in than [them]: but
they might quadrate with the mercantile views of the negotiator.
I t 1s presumable that by a new negotiation, thro' CapWYBrien,or
the Consul who is going to Tunis, these articles may be properly
altered and amended. - With the stipulations for money and stores,
altho' the latter will be found very burthensome, the President &
Senate will doubtless acquiesce. When the Senate shall have passed
upon the treaty I shall write you again upon the subject.
Captain O'Brien with the Crescent frigate are by this time, I hope
in Algiers, she sailed from Portsmouth with a fair wind on the 18'p of
January, with one hundred and eighty thousand dollars on board,
most of which he will leave a t Gibraltar, to answer our draughts on
the Messn Barings; unless our Consul there shou d have received
advice that you had drawn for only the 77,640 dollars of which you
have informed me, or other defkite sum. Upon receiving your letter
with this information, I wrote instantly to Par-tsmouth to land dollars
to that amount, seeing we could easily r e m t hence to the Mess?
Barings; but the Crescent had sailed the day before my letter arnved.

t

3

242

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1785 TO 1801

Your efforts to relieve our commerce in the ports of Spain against
ap ressive captures & condemnations are a t once so zealous and so
wei founded, it is to be hoped they will produce good effects. I sincerely regret the recall of such a Minister ss General Pefignan:
for though with the best dispositions towards us and neutrals .in
General, he could not confrod the Consular operations under supenor
orders; yet a French Ambassador with inclinat~onssimilar to those
of Consuls in General might have influence enough to aggravate the
sufferings of our captured citizens.
We hsve lately received such intelIigence from New-Orleans as
induces a confident belief that Governor Gayoso has received orders
to evacuate the posts of the Natchez and Walnut Hills, and to run the
boundary line. Besides a number of private letters, one of which I
have seen, and several of which have been published, I have a NewOrleans News-paper of the 15" of January in which is the following
passage. " M o k u r le Couwrneur de ceffe prowince a y a d recu, par
ce dernier Courier, les ordres de S. M . pour evaczLeT les Postes de Nogales
(Walnut Hills) & Natchez, a pris immddialemenb les dispositions convenubles pour l ' ~ ~ i ofaisand
n , partir k s avis nkessaires, p
i doivent
itre ct NatcRez."
The papers relative to the spanish spoliations on our commerce
which Mr Rutledge was.so long since deswed to send hither, have not
yet arrived: The Comrtussioners will soon stand still for want of them:
Pray have the goodness to enquire where they are, and, if not dispatched for America, to forward them without delay.
Not one line yet from our Envoys since they left Holland! We
have London News-papers to the fourth of January, with Paris intelligence to the 3 1st. of December.
[NA. SDA. Dip. Cor., Inst. to Min., Bk 4, Feb. 1797-Nov. 1798.1
To Secretary of State from Eichard O'Brien, U. 6. Consul General, Algiers
ALGIERS
March 6"p 1798

DT SIRSomy I am to inform you that M' Barlow has not left with
any one p e m n in Algiers an account of how our affairs were in the
regency of Algiers, Tunis, & Tripolia, or how our affairs were in the
Bockries hands but from the information I have from M Skjoldebrand
& by the account of the Bockries which I transmit you with these dispatches & ascertained with as much accuracy as is posibly in my
power * * *
As to the account of the cargoes of the 3 vessels that, has arrived
before the Ckscent & Hamddah I finde the marine receI s given for
them falls far short on Many of these Articles, particular y on things
of value so that from this circumstance it will be difficult to ascertain
the real state of our Stipulated Articles in Maratime & Military
Stores which have been received here the Oars taken out of the polacre
Cap! Robertson will be Oblidged to be made good by the U. S. who
must claim these Oars from Spain - the detention of said vessels
proved very prejudicial to the U. S. the canvas got wet was rotted the wet with detention damaged the cordage the Timber was Moulded
& in consiquence both Plank & Scantling were rejected So that I presume S ain shou'd make dl the losses good to the United States The wede Ships cargo did not on many Articles turn out agreable
to the envoice - the weight of the U S & Algiers is 19 or 20 Pr Ct
differenm here the balls are weighed & of course falls short. the timber

f

I

243

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

& plank were certainly of a bad Quality many peices of the Scantling
are now here and are rotten in many parts. By the Ship N e q o o r t Cap? Tew met a gale of wind and threw over
35 pieces of large timber a quantity of Scantling and staves the way
those Articles are taken an account of in m e r s & that they are
measured & weighed in the United States is much different & I am
sorry to see has [not] been attended too with that due attention that i t
ought to have been so that the account of the Clerk of the Algerine
Marine & those of the envoices sent from America differs much &
cannot be ascertained here suddenly or by this conveyance in time
not to occasion suspicion of our own ignorance on these affairs - I
shall have ascertained & the regency certificates given of all that is
received, both of the Stipulated Articles & those of what has come or
is to come on the annuel Stipulation I expect by the return of the
officers of 3 corsairs from this place that all those documents you will
receive & those requisite vouchers & statements The Oars which were taken out of the Polacre the Dey makes the
Spaniards pay for them at his own price but this does not assist us, i t
is to punish the Spaniards & to turn to his own Emolument The Consular presents & the presents of friendship as customary to
give every two years I am Oblidged to take from the Bockries these
presents will amount to nearly forty thousand dollars and it so hapning
that the Consular presents with 2 years presents is given a t one time
leaves me the o pertunity of keeping both within the limits of 40 thud
dollars you w& Observe that these presents used formerly to be
procured from France, England & Genevie but in those times it is
attended with the greatest difficulty. * * *

*

*

*

*

*

*

*

Monsr famin at Tunis I observe in his letter which I have seen here
& that is directed to Mr Barlow & M' Clark mentions for the peace 50
thousand Dollars for the Jackataba or Chamberlain of Tunis the sum
of 10 the dollars which has been paid - and the States presents which
he. gave or procured to give to the amount 10 th* dollars - Some of
t h s money he has drawn for as you will observe by the account
current the remaining sum I have not paid or ordered untill I see the
accounts & that they are examined and will evade this part all in my
power untill Consul Eaton arrives here & haveing no orders from you
on this business the 50 thousand dollars for Tunis goes by land from
here to day
relative to Tripolia - the Bashaw of Tripolias brother has arrived
here 3 days past as ambassador he is of great weight and enfluence &
on account of the detention of our Stipulated Articles for Tunis not
being there and to have him our friend I see the necesaty of
him one good goald watch 1 piece of Caftan a few yards of C oath 2
loaves of sugar & a few lbs Tea he departs Tripolia in a few days you
will see the money Capt Ingraham has drawn or expended by the
account current & within these few days has drawn for nearly one
thousand dollars, he is there married to a relations of. the British
Consuls - and sarry I am to say report says he has a wife m Connecticut
The Dey has said some months past that the Turkish Passports
shou'd only be good against the Barbary States As to the Christian
Nations he says he can put no confidence in as he does not know how
soon he will be a t war [NA. SDA, CL, Algiers, Vol. 3, Jan-Dec. 1798.1

Phg

244

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1786 TO 1801

To Joseph Etienne Famin, Chaw6 d'dflaires for the United States at Tunis, from
Bichard O'Brien, U. S. Consul General, Algiers

(COPY)

ALGIERSPbMarch 1798
SZRI send by the Deys Curriers and Carrivans of this day, fifty

Thousand S p m s h Milled Dollars, which is the sum in Money for h s
Excellency the Bashaw of Tunis, Agreeable to Our Treaty of Peace
with him. W-3 thank you to deliver it immediately, and forward on the rect
for the same [NA. SDA. CL, Algiers, Vol. 3, Jan-Dee. 1798.1

[27 March 1798
Act for an additional appropriation to provide and support a BavP Armament
NOTE.--^ the first volume of "Naval Documents, Quasi-War with France",
(February 1797 to October 1798), page 46 is printed a n Act for an additional
appropriation to provide and support a Kaval Armament.]

[2 April 17981
Brtract from a letter to Edward Livingston, Chairman of the Committee of Congress
appointed t o enquire into the expenditures of the money appropriated for the
Baval Armament, from Secretary of War, James McHenrg

EXPENDITURES
FOR NAVAL
ARMAMENT,
viz
Dola.

Cia.

b b o u for Constitution, of 1444 tons- - - - 110,759 94
Materials do- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - _ 75,286 68
Freight--- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 4,020 00
Fixtures-- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 17,008 64

Dub.

Cta.

207,075 26

Labour for the United States, of 1444 tons- 83,701 55
77,497 15
Materials . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Freight . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2,372 00
Fixtures - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 14,889 37
Labor for Constellation of 1145 tons - - - - - 112,777 24
Materials - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 85,987 74
Freight--- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 6,754 75
Fixtures - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -

15,964 10

Fixtures a t Portsmouth- - _ - - - - - - -- - - - - Labor- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - Materials- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - Freight------------------------------

2,066
9,603
12,570
155

68
18
54
00

Fixtures a t N. York- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - Labour- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - Materials- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - Freight- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -

5,073
13,197
16,063
3,748

16
12
77
58

178,460 07

221,483 83

24,395 40

_

38,082 63

Fixtures at Norfolk- -,
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 6,836 33
Labour - - - - - , - - - - - - - - - 9,895
- -16
----------Materials - ,- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 10,010 26
668 24
Freight - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - *27,410 00

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

245

General Expences for Copper &c- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - Cost of Timber in Georpa, for the above ships- - - - - Do. of Freight to different yards- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - To which add so much accounted for in the War Department being payments made by the Treasurer
of the U. States to Officersof the Navy - - - - - - - - - - -

178,340 18
124,918 37
114,013 12
33,500 00

t1,147,679 70

N. B. The United States was built in Philadelphia,
The Constitution in Boston, and
The Consteuabwn in Baltimore.
[*27,409.99; t1,147,678.86]
[LC. "The Daily AdvertiserJ',(N. Y.), 2 June 1800.1
To David Humphreys, U. S. Minister to Madrid, Spain, from Bichard O'Brien,
U. S. Consul General, Algiers

(COPY)

ALGIERB
April 12 1798.
ESTEEMED
SIR, Yours of the 21% ultimo I have received the gt&
instant yours of the 20tWebruary and 9'9 of March 21°C ultimo fo
Rufus King his of London the lgth February yours to Monsr Fsmin
and copy of his letter to you I have seriously perused these sundry
dispatches I forward to you by this conveyance and inclosed the
copy of the account current with the Bscris and another estimate
account and a copy of my letter to M' Barlow by the two conveyances
for America I sent copies of the account current to the Secretary of
State Mr Clark sailed from &em the 13t9 March by him I sent
copies of the account current and of dl dis atches whch I sent by
the other two vessels so that our Minister &r Smith a t Lisbon has
full information on this business (that is if he received the dispatches)
You will observe my dear Sir by the account current and my supposed
estimate & the copy of my letter to Mr Barlow that I have no money
of the 180 thousand dollars to spare except that i t would be to destroy
our affairs with Algiers Tunis and Tripoly there is you well know no
great way of reasoning with those people and we should always in
case of a storm have an anchor ready and when we have an extended
commerce in the Mediterranean depend a few frigates in commission
and stationed in Europe is necessary to ve security to commerce
and check any sudden war or our loss will e great. * * *

*

[NA. SDA.

*

*

*

P*

*

*

Disp. Spain, Vol. 4, 1797-1799.1

To David Humphreya, U.S. Minister to Madrid, Spain, from Secretary of State

Nq 3.

DEPARTMENT
OF STATE
Philadelphia April 1Fh 1798.
Dr SIR, I now enclose a copy of the act of the Senate relative to
the Tunissian Treaty. When the armed vessels preparing for the
De of Algiers shal sail, instructions will be given, probabl to Cap*
0'Jrien to negotiate with Tunis concerning the 14" Artic e, if any
others in which i t shall be deemed advisable to attempt an amendment.
These vessels will soon be ready for sea. One has been launched, a
second will be launched this day, and the third in two or three weeks.

3

246

NAVAL OP&?RATIONS FROM 1785 TO 1801

On the 4'!' of March, in the evening, arrived the h t dispatches
from our envoys since they arrived a t Paris; and in a day or two after,
the missing numbers, thus wmpleating the series from 1 to 5; and we
have none since. To a copy of those dispatches I now add a copy of
their instructions, which have since been printed by order of the
Senate. The publication of both appears to be producing its natural,
and proper effects indeed it was h g h time that we were roused from
that state of apathy into which a lucrati~ecommerce and a real love
of peace had lulled us. Doubtless the resentments of the American
people will rise in proportion to the long enduring patience with which
they have borne unmerited insults and injuries. I never despaired
of the commonwealth; and I have now no doubt of the requisite
union and spirit of our citizens. Congress are deliberating on the
necessary measures of defence, by sea and land.
The Senate have concurred in the appointment of Moses Young
Esqr to be Consul of the U. S. a t Madrid. Their resolve has just
been received: duplicate commissions will be made out and forwarded
without delay - one by this conveyance, ~f practicable.
We have no late news from the Mississippi: the journey by land
from the Natchez is usually performed in about forty days. Congress
have passed a law erecting a temporary government there, similar
to that for the territory northwest of the mver Ohio; with the excep
tion that slavery is not excluded. This exception will apply to the
slaves e-xisting there aria their discendants, $ to such as shall be
introduced by our own citizens imigrating with them for some of the
States.
Your latest letter received is that of the 14t@of January.
[NA. SDA. Dip. Cor., Inet. to Min., Bk 4, Feb. 1797-Nov. 1798.1

An Act to establish an Executive Department, to be denominated the Department
of the Navy

SECTION
1. Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representative8
of th United States of America in Congress assembled, Tbat there shall

be an executive department under the denomination of the Department of the Navy, the chief officer of which shall be called the Secretary of the Navy, whose duty it shall be to execute such orders as he
shall receive from the President of the United States, reIative to the
procurement of navaI stores and materials and the construction,
armament, equipment and emplo ment of vessels of war, as well as
all other matters connected wit the naval establishment of the
United States.
SEC.2. And be it urther enacted, That a principal clerk and euch
other clerk as he s all think necessary, shall be appointed by the
Secretary of the Navy, who shall be employed in such manner as he
shall deem most expedient. In case of vacancy in the office of t'he
secretqy, by removal or otherwise, it shail be the duty of the principal
clerk to take the charge and custody of all the books, records and
documents of the said o5ce.
SEC.3. And be itfurther enacted, That the Secretary of the Navy be
and he is hereby authorized and empowered, immediately dter be
shall be appointed and shall enter upon the duties of his office, to

K

l

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

247

take possession of all the records, books and documents and all other
matters and things appertaining to this department, which are now
deposited in the office of the Secretary a t War.
SEC.4. And be it further enaeted, That there shall be allowed to the
Secretary of the Navy an annual salary of three thousand dollars,
payable quarter yearly a t the treasury of the United States, and the
respective clerks in the office of the said department shall receive the
same compensations and be subject to the same regulations, as are
provided by an act, supplemental to the act, establishing the treasury
department, and for a further compensation to certain officers, in the
office of the other executive departments.
SEC.5. And be it further enacted, That so much of an act, entitled
"An act to establish an executive department, to be denominated the
department of war," as vests any of the powers contemplated by the
provisions of this act, in the Secretary for the department of War,
shall be re aled, from and after the period when the Secretary of the
Navy sha enter on the duties of his office.
APPROVED,
April 30,1798.

IP"

[Statute 11. Page 553.1

To William Smith, U. 6 . Minister to Lisbon, Portugal, from Richard O'Brien,
U. 8. Consul Gieneral, Algiers

COPY

ALGEIRS
April SO* 1798
WILLIAMSMITHEsq?
Minister Plenipotentiary
for the U. States of America
at Lisbon
Dr SIR, The bearer of these dispatches is Mr Joshua Blake of Boston,
who has been with me in this City, since I arrived from America, he
has a good knowledge of our affam, relative to Al@ers as Mf Blake
proceeds for Spain in order to return to America & Intends if possible
for Philadelphia, in consiquence he will deliver the original dispatches,
to the Secretary of State, I have entrusted him with these dispatches,
which is under a flyln cover & unsealed in, order if he reaches Spain,
to forward you & the cretary of State copies, this will be favoumble
in order to thrible the chance, of you & the Secreta
informed of the State of our affairs with this Regency, unis
Of state
& Tripoh,
be4
my supposed account or estimate of the affairs of the U. S. with the
Dey & Regency, & the House of Joseph Coen Bacri &C' & the money
acct current, & estimate of all our affairs.
The Dey continues unwell, & as far as I can learn & Judge, he will
shortly go to his long home, there are great parties formed here & I
believe there will be great commotions: The new Dey as customary
will demand to renew the peace, many valuable presents, in Maratime
& Military presents, & watches, rings, Cloths, Caftans, & perhaps if
his demands are not acquiesced with, we shall have war, however I
have great hopes, that m t h 3 corsairs & their cargoes, I shall make a
good arangement on our &airs with this Government. The 50 thousand Dollars for the Peace for Tunis which I sent by
land, has arrived at Tunis, Monsr Famin has drawn a Bill on me for
8000 Dollars which I have paid: You will observe that Monsr Famin
a t Tunis, made our Peace with that Government and I beleive under
promise of Mr Barlow, that if he succeeded, he shouJd be appointed

b

!f

248

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1786 TO 1801

-

Consul for the United States, or that Mz Barlow wou'd strongly recommend him to our Government, to be their Agent a t Tunis, M f
fi'amin succeeded in the Peace, & finally the Bey of Tunis & the Ministry, are much the friends of Mons? Famins & concluded he wou'd
be the American Consul, they having heared that the United States,
has appointed s Consul for Tunis. The Tunis Government, seems
dissatisfied, and are I beleive not willing to have any other Person
the Agent of the United States a t T m s but Monsf Pamin. The
Algerine Ambassador resident a t Tunis is expected daily a t Algiers,. &
is charged by the Government of Tunis, to explain & inferceed, wlth
this Government for Mons' Famin to remain the Agent a t Tunis,for
the United Slates: * * *
When Consul Eaton arrives in Algiers, I shall not forward him on
to Tunis, fearing under these circumstances it woud endanger our
whole affairs, & I shall let him remain with me untill that I receive,
your possitive orders & instructions how I shall act on this business,
& then I shall try & act accordingly.

*

*

*

*

*

[NA. SDA. CL, Algiers, Vol. 3, Jan-Dec. 1798.)

*

*

Expenses in connection with Treaties with the Mediterranean Powers
Dr John Bulkeley, & Son of Liebon, I n Accol Current with the United States, I n relation t o Treaties with the Mediterranean Powers. Cr

T o John & Prdnds Barlng & CP for amount of Sundry Ramlttancau from
By Joel Barlow -4 ent for Negotiat~nga Treaty with Algiers for amount
and draib on them, from Deesmr 21s 1 7 1 to May 1Bb 1'188, Pi Report
01 his drat& on bavid I3umphreys and for the payment of whlch they
ual t4-....---.-...-.-------------NQ21831 E21,472.7.10 Shrllng at
95,432. 85
glsced funds In the handa of Bantl D u Fremoul flls & CP of Leghorn in
" Joel Barlaw A n t lor ~ e g o t l a t %
r r e s t ~ with Alglen, for thls Bum
1797. Pr Account herewith..--.......--------.--------NQ1.--.
i?,CoO. ..
" eptemr
being m mnch #e credit as pald%yhim lor their -l
lo Aug, 1798
Joseph Donaldson Junr A ent for hre otiatlng Treatlea with the Med~lchard~ a l sldorat
s
~lplem.
.--..------.................... ------W.
ltemean
for the %urnof 81f8.4.3 Sterling drawn by you on
M- ~a&p"1?9
to reimburse Robert Mont omer the amount of a
bill drawn on him by said Donaldson, said to bejor ba%ncs due a n A m ,
of Ms Ageno r A m f NP2, equal to .--..-...---..---------------------614 21
" Treatles wltg the Medlterraaean powers for amount of the iollowlng
Buma. Pr Account NP3...--.
V1z
Ps ent to Robert Montgomery In Relmbunwment 8. Cathalans
d%ka on hlm lor expenses of and Bopplies to the Ceptlve~redeemed
at Algiers In 17WI.. -.
....-.
....-... -----------.----R 9.655.838.
Disbursements for the Public Brig Sophia at different
times In 1798 and 1797. .-.-...
.-....---...-...-.-----.1.838.542.
Compensation to R. OBrlen as Agent .-------......----137.800
Gold Spoons, Sweet Meats and plank sent to Algiers as
apmnt
219.730.
Commission and Bmkemge .........-------------------265.826.
80 much Supplied George Tllly a Cnptire redeemed at
Alders ..-.-p A w l NQ4 ..--.-...-.--.....---------44.119

-.-.

td

-.-.-

---...-.-..-

nnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnn

R* 12.650.845

R*12850.945 at BW RI pr dollar equal to. .---...-...--.-.
15.813.88

Dbbumments of Brl 8 0 hi0 In li95 and for which D
~ u m p h r e y drew
s
a % i ~ your ,avo, ,ern $ , of thst
r on John & Francis Baring di Cv for £435'9.8 Btering a t P a r e ual t o .....-.-.-..-..-.----.-----..
..-..1,936.48
Loss In the fgegotiatlon of hllls, Including charges of
drawing and redrawing --.--....-.--.-----------.---5,119.42.

%

$"

Dollars

lars..-------.-larslarslarslarslarslarslarslarslarslarslarslarslarslarslarslarslarslarslarslarslarslarslarslarslarslarslarslarslarslarslarslarslarslarslarslarslarslarslarslarslarslarslarslarslarslarslarslarslarslarslars

-85
85,482.

22,888. 58
--

Dollars .+.-...-....---.-----------.-.--------.-------.--------95,482. 86

Comptrr Office
Augt 3. 1809
AND. Ross

250

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1786 TO 1801
Explanation of account of John Bulkeley and Son

The whole Sum received by Mess? Bulkeley & Son from
Mess? Baring & C? as within Stated is £21.472.7.10
Sterling estimated at par is equal to- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - $95,432.85
For which they have accounted
Pr Account N? 1 £17.209.8.9
2
138.4.3
3. 3.676.7.10
4.
12. 17.4
disbursements of Sophia in 1795
Noaccount-*435.9.8
Sterling- - - - - 221.472.7. 10
And on account of the proceeds of these bills they are
credited for Payments to Barlow - - . _ - - - - - - - - - - - - - 72.000
- - - - - - - - 6 14.27
Donaldson- - -- -- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - For expenditures on accot of the Treaty - - - - - - 17.749. 16
90,363.43
Add payment to Hales _ - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -

5, 069.42
50.00

Leaves a Merence of this Sum, being Loses in
Exchange and Commission & Charges, in part,
on drawing and redrawing - - - - - - _ - - - - - -Dollars 5,119.42

* A bill for these disbursements was drawn by D. Humphreys Decr 224. 1795,
which being charged to Messr! Bulkeley it is but just that they obtain a corresponding Credit. No particular account of these or any other disbursements for
the Sophia are found among the papers, but there can be no doubt of their having
been regularly rendered [GAO. No. 21,663.1
To David Humphreys, U. S. Minister to Madrid, Spain, from Bichard O'Brien,
U. 8. Consul General, Algiers

COPY

ALGIERS21* May 1788
Dr SIBThere has of late some important Changes taken place in this
Regency. the Dey Hassan Bashaw early on the Morn5 of the 15'4 made
his exit, and immediately was succeeded by the Prime Minister at
present (Mustapha Dey) & a regular Sucession of Officers took place.
all in tranquility. All the Consuls paid their respects to the new Dey.
He r e d me well & renewed the treaty, & also the guarantee of the
Treaty of the U.S. with Tripoli - we all Nations at Peace here was
obhged to make presents to the Dey 8z Ministry, they will amount to
about 5 thousand or 5% thousand dollars, So I think we have On this
occasion come of[f] tolerably well; I expect daily to see the arrival of
the 3 expected Corsairs The Algerine Ambassador at Tunis has been here, I have laid in
with him Strongly, Relative to his aiding our affairs &c have Consul
Eaton Recg as American Consul at Tunis.
please to Communicate this intelligence to the Secretary of State.
[NA. SDA. D i i . Spain, Vol. 4,1797-1799.1

251

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

To Secretary of State from Captain Timothy Newman, who delivered the frigate
C r d to Algiets

BOSTONJune 7** 1798.
SIR,I can inform you of my safe Arrival a t this place, with my
Crew, I have but this moment got up to town from Nantaskett Roads,
where I left the Ship in which I came Passe
. (The Sarah Cap'
Hopkins) in order to forward your Dispatches y this Mornings Post,
The Crescent was very Joyfully Recieved and a very h e Ship. The
Post going out in a few minutes w i l l not admit of my being so Particular
as I could wish. Nothing very Particular turn'd up on our very long
passage of 90 days from Algiers, Except our f a h g in and Exchangemg a few Shott with a French Privateer Cutter near the Island of
Madeira, She fired several Shott a t us under English Colours, which
our being v e q certain she was French, we Returnd & roved to our
Satisfaction, it being calm and her Companion, (in sig t ) not being
able to come to her assistance proved favourable to us. The English
Consul at Madeira sent off Three Boats to our Assistance, and to
inform us they were Two French Privateers, In your dispatches from
Algeirs and Gibralter you will be informed of the disagreable State of
our Commerce in the Medeteranian, and the Necessity of some
force to protect i t
Not knowing wheither any Provision is made here for paying the
Crescents Porterage Bill, I am to se General Jackson (in one Hour) on
that subject, and shall give you Information.
As soon as the People are paid off shall proceed to Newbury, and
shall then send you on the Porterage Bill Receipts &ce
Haveing an ardent desire of Serveing my Country which a t great
E ence has Releived me from Slavery, and heareing their is a Number
of loops of War, prepairing to protect our Commerce, I would willingly devout the Remainder of my life in its Service, your Informing me
wheither those Vessells Commanders is appointed, and your Intrest in
ointing out to me the most proper method to make Application will
dcknowledgd with Gratitude, Should esteem it a favour if you will
write me a line.

Y?

f

T

&

[SDA. CL, Algiers, Vol. 3, 1798.1

To Secretary of State from James Simpson, U. 6. Consul, Tangier

TANGIER
&P June 1798.
NQ8.
SIR NQ5 was the last I had the honor of addressing you from this
Country - 6 & 7 were written a t Gibraltar, 24ch February & 17th
March. I have now to advise my return on Sunday last from Me uinez,
where I had the honor of meeting with His Imperial ~ a ~ e s t ~ % u l e ~
Soliman, and presenting m Commission as Consul of the United
States for this Empire; on w 'ch occasion His Majesty was pleased to
give me the strongest assurances of his resolution, on his part to maintain the Peace made with his Father. - The articles I presented to
His Majesty, were acceptable, some part so much so, that the day I
was about to leave Mequiniz, Sid Mohamet Ben Ottman, brought me
a message to say so from His Majesty, & to request I would obtain
some more, which he offer'd to pay for, but that I would not admit,
especialy as the expence will not be considerable. -

fi

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1785 TO 1801

252

As I do not consider the Channel of Cadiz, a perfect safe conveyance,
I am induced in this only to add, that I can safely say the affairsof
the United States at the Court of Morocco, is at this tune on the best
footing, as you will see when I come to detail particulars of my transactions with His Majesty and the Minister, which you will be leased
to acquaint His Excellency the President, with my respectfull ompliments.

8

*

*

[NA.

*

*

*

*

*

SDA. CL,Tangier, Vol. 1, 1797-1803.1

To Joseph Ingraham, U. 8. Chug6 d'bffaires, Tripoli, from Richard O'Brien,
U. 8. Consul General, Algiers

COPY

ALGIERIS
Ju& 1 . P 1798
Df SIR,1 have recd four of your Letters dated the 14tbof May Bt

two of the 29tb,- I thank you for the information they contain I have seriously observed their contents, & shall be observe, that you
being with me, in Tripoli, when the Peace was made, you know possitivdy what I agreed to, you have the Terms, sealed signed & certified,
by the Spanish Consul, the same from under my hand; next as the
Bashaw of Tripoli made n reference, & sent his Ambassadors, with me
to the Dey of Algiers, the Treaty made here by the Dey & Tripoline
Ambassadors & Mr Barlow; this Treat you have, & in sq Treaty
you will h d there is no Corsair Stip ated; it is true the Bashaw
wanted the Brig Sophia, but he did not get her, and I made him no
promise of any Corsair; the Spanish Consul & I thought that a small
Schooner of 8 or 10 Guns, wou'd not be amiss to the Bashaw, as it
wou'd soften & moilerate, his prtssions, which seemed some thing hurt
in making partly a forced Peace, this circumstance I mentioned fully
to Mr Barlow, he disapproved of it; I still thought it my duty, to
represent this business to Congress; this I did personally, & h d y
they did not approve, or disapprove-what I proposed, * * *
As to what the Rice IRaiz] of the Marine said of his having any
conversation with me relative to a Corsair, or relative to the Spanish
Consul, as god is my Judge not one word passed, on the subjects I
went to see him as customary, & took with me the Dr[a]goman &
Macaiah, & a Regala which cost 180 Sequins, he got this Lunchian, &
then declared how much he was & wou'd be, the friend of the Americans, it is his tricks & Jealousy, seeing Frigate & Schooner here for
Algiers, & the three expechd ones which we give in Lieu, of the vast
& heavy articles, which Mr Doddson, agreed to give at the making
of the Peace, & he being nettled to the soul,in not mth all his grandure,
in not being able once to see the face of Hassien Bashaw, now sir on
his leaving the port I & Macaiah went on bomd, & wished him adieu,
& had no, conversation with him, * * *
Mr Sim son writes me that the Corsairs for Algiers, were not
Launched efore the latter end of April, that the Winter in the U. S.
was so severe, that the Ca enters cou'd not work;this curcumstance
has detained them six ww% longer than waa calculated on; I daily
expect to see them in sight, $ considering the Spoilations on our commerce, the numerous privateers, the extent of Sea between Philade hia & Tripoli; the great danger a Merchmt Vessel wou'd run
so us. I think the U. S. has acted @kt, in not sendin the stipulated
Artides & the Consul for Tripoli forward, until1
Corsairs for
Algiers w i l l be ready, in order to come under their Convoy, this

d

\

P

$

occasions the detention of the Tripoli business, & all that is stipulated by Treaty will be brought, & Ibeleive no more;
I h o p Al Sei or Farfara, continues to give our affairs, his best assistance, he is a man of Talent & abilities & I trust
he will do us a the service in his power,- Bacri writes him by this conveyance; - when the Corsairs arrive here I shall
write youimmediately, * * *

ff

*

*

*

*

*

[NA. SDA. CL, Algiers, b l . 3, Jan-Dec.

*

*

*

*

*

*

*

1798.1

[12 July 17981
Report of the state of the cruiaera now fitting out by the Government of the United States for His Excellency the Dey of Algiers

Uull

I

.-.~ 1

Boats,

Masts &
Bpars

9

1

2
Bohooner

BKJOLDEBRAND

LELLA AIBHA

Rigging

Sails

Compleat ready
ll'aoted 50
Conlpleat, Stlip
for taking on
Tonsof Shot or
chandlers
coopers Block
board Stores
other heavy
Makers Stores
articles lor
& Cargo
& * a ready to
Ballast
take on board
do. do. do ... 40Tcns. do.

do. do. do.-.

Cornpleet & Standing compI
running ready
In their
places
for reeving

.Qrtillery

Pmvlsions

When ready
lor 66s

--

-

-

$2

Schooner

Eold

Compleat

13 pieces
mounted
9 do. not
proved

Ready
t o take
on
hoard

-==
I n twenty
Days

-do.do.do-..

do. do. do ... do ...-.... Compleat.

do.--.-.
Fifteen
days

-do. do. do.-.

SO Tons.

do.

[8DA. CL, Tripoli, Vol. 1, 1796-1799.1

do. do. do ... do. do. do .... do. do. do..-

>len
wanted
for immediate
Service

do...-.--.do..-.--..do..-... Ten days

Twenty

3
g
52

-

--Fifteen

40

--Tu-elve

36

-

254

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1786 TO 1801
[16 July 17981

An Act to make a further appropriation for additional Aavd Armament
of "Naval Documents, Quasi-war with Franoe",
(February 1797 to October 1798). page 211, is printed an Act to provide for building and equipping three ships not less than 32 guns.]

NOTE.-^ the first volume

Extract from letter to Secretary of State from James Simpson, U. S. Consul, Tangier

COPY
NQ9

TANGIER
17'P July 1798.
SIR * * * Sidy Mahommed Ben Ottman gave me every proof of
steady Friendship, and I hope I have succeeded in my endeavors to
secure a continuance of it.
I visited Fez at my departure from Meguinez, and had the satisfaction at my arrival there, to find a House, and an abundant daily
Supply of Provisions, provided for me by His Majest>y1sSpecial
Command.
Having thus detailed particulars for your Information, I shall only
detain you further to add, that His Imperial Majesty gave the strongest proofs of his wish to maintain Peace & good Friendship with the
United States. I a m happy to tell you there was not a Syllable said on the subject
of Military Stores.
The Portuguese Ambassador has just returned from renewing with
Muley Soliman, the Treaties between His Nation and Morocco, and
we have now here an Ambassador from Denmark on the same Business - Their Presents are very considerable - The former had
160 Mules, and 50 Camels - The latter employes 140 Mules We daily expect the Swedish Ambassador; that from Spain is named,
but is not expected, until the English Fleet leave their Station off
Cadiz.
Three Cruizers of 12 and 16 Guns are about to sail from Sallee We do not know if they have any particular destination, but their
Admiral takes with him an Interpreter for the English Language.
I beg to be favored with our Instructions on the Manner I am to
receive my Salary as Cons for this Empire.

J

[NA. SDA. CL, Tangier, Vol. 1, 1797-1803.)
To David Humphreys, U. 5. Minister to Madrid, Spain, from Joaeph Ingraham,
U. S. Charg6 d'Affaires, Tripoli

COPY

TRIPOLIJuly 1P 1798.
SIR, Twenty months has already passed without the least signs of
our presents coming forward which in due course gives the Bashaw
room to think that the United States are very backward in performing their engagements here in Tripoli, and more so as Mr O'Brien
has come out with the Presents to Algiers he promised as makin
Peace here that our government would send to this Regency a sm
Cruizer besides the other Presents this was promised before the
Bashaw the Spanish Consul and all the leading men of this Regency
but since his arrival in Algiers the Bashaw sent an Ambassador to
the Dey of Algiers this man saw M OIBrien and asked him what time
the Bashaw of Tripoli was to get his Presents He told the Ambassador

A

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

255

that the Presenb were ready as soon as the winter would permit them
to come forward He asked him if the Brig was to come at the same
time as the Cruizer was expected to be a Brig Mr O'Brien seemed
much surprized and replied that he knew nothing of any Brig or
Cruizer that was to be sent here and that if any such agreement was
made i t must be between the Bashaw and Spanish Consul that the
Bsshaw must look to His Catholic Majesty or Consul Resident a t
Tripoli to fulfill any such agreements This the Ambassador reported
on his return to Tripoli Such a reply made to the third man of this
Regency is very much against our affairs here If M' O'Brien thinks
that he can secure our Peace through the influence of Algiers in
Tripoli he is greatly deceived and if he has informed our Government
that he can he has led them into an error that will cost Government
some thousands of Dollars to extricate themseves out of it again
You may depend on i t that the Algerines have no influence over this
Regency whatever they may have over Tunis they must hold the
confidence of each Regency seperate they must give greater presents
to this Regency than what is appointed already if they wish to hold
their peace good in this place and not depend on the Presents that's
coming and Algiers to hold a perpetual peace in Tripoli be assured i t
never will be the case till such time as the United States keep a force
in these seas to keep these people under subjection and less than
three good frigates mil not answer and one to visit these ports every
3 or 4 months In Tunis they only wait for our Peace to break here
that they may do the same If our Government considers well who
they have to deal with they will not hesitate a moment to fit out a
few frigates for these seas to protect their commerce If not Government will too soon find the necessity they will have of doing it and
perhaps when too late Consider we have not Christians to deal with
but Turks If they are our friends it's by the force of money or the
force of arms Money is the surest at present. Proposals have
already been made by the Bey of Tunis to break our Peace here that
they may do the same.
[NA. SDA. Disp. Spain, Vol. 4, 1797-1799.1
To Richard O'Brien, U. 6. Conenl General,Algiers, from the Bashaw of Tripoli

Public Seal
Tripoli

It afforded me not a little pleasure, when I was informed of y o u
being appointed Consul General for Algiers; At the present I can
not but express my regrett a t the loss of my ever memorable Brother
the deceaqed Dey of A1 em; & the same love & friendship I always
entertained for him, sha 1 be the same with your present Dey; which
I request you will in my Name, make him acqursinted with. I am a t a loss to know the reason the American Nation, have eo
long neglected Tripoli, you know perfect1 well, (Consul OBrien) the
time that elapaed, without hearing from t em, since the conclusion of

f

h

256

N A V m OPERATIONS FROM 1786 TO 1801

our Peace; but I sincere1 hope they will not neglect me muchlonger.
The bearer Hadge d h o m e d ben Salirn is my Ambassador for
Algiers, and I request you will pay him, the six thousand Dollars,
that remained due to me, after the conclusion of the Peace; this I am
the more anxious for, as he is to bring me several Articles from
Algiers; The payment of this money I hope you will not neglect, &
shouJd the American Ship, arrive here in the intreem, I shall not
receive the 6000 Dollars, I order you to pay to my Ambassador.
By order of
HIS EXCELLENCY
Certifyed to be a true Copy,
TEE BASHAW
by Rg OBRIEN
OF TRIPOLI.

i

[NA. SDA. CL,Algiers, Vol. 3, Jan-Dec. 1798.1
To David Hnmphreya, U. 6. W s t e r to Madrid, Spain, from Richard O'Brien,
U. S. Consnl General, Algiers

COPY

ALGIERS
September the 18*

1798.

DEARSIR,Your esteemed favour of the 19th June I rec'd the 3 4

instant I am much obliged to you for your information but is sorry
that you and M: Smith did not receive my last letters I had expected
answers thereto The Spanish courrier remained in Spain two months
and I am much afraid these letters have miscarried indeed i t is the
fate of many in those extraordinary times.
I wrote you that I received letters from Tripolia informing me that
our &flairsin that quarter are something gloomy on account of the
detention of the stipulated stores and that the Bashaw of Tripolia
threatens much I have wrote by several conveyances to Tripolia and
have had no letters from thence since May.
The Potent Dey of Algiers is very uneasy and anxious to see the
expected corsairs.
The Bashaw and government of Tunis are interested very much to
have Mons: Famin to be the American Consul and indeed to remove
him contrary to that governments inclination would be n very expensive and difEculb an affair. When the corsairs arrive which I expect
daily I shall see what can be done on this business relative to Tunis.
Since my learing the U. S. what you have communicated to me as
an extract from the letter of the Secretary of State of the 13%of April
relative to the corsairs is the only account with certainty that I could
count on since my arrival in this country And during the time I have
been here I have considered myself or our affairs with Barbary like
unto a ship in a gale of wind trying if possible to keep within the
latitudes prescribed to me in my orders and be convinced my desr
Sir considering all circumstances I have done every thing that possibly
lay in my power and have warded off much difficulties and not untd
the arrival of the expected corsairs in Algiers shall I be able to have
an adjustment with the regency on our affairs depend we must act
with more energy.
The Bacris and Busnahs make many enquiries of me relative to
the price of the ship Fortune and car o, valued a t 40,987 Dollars I
have repeatedly stated this affair to t i e government of the U. S. and
have as yet no answer. I have wrote full to MT Smith by this
conveyance and by a safe channel via Gibra tar.
[NA. SDA. Dm. Bpain, Vol. 4, 1797-1799.1

1'

W A R S WITH BARBARY POWERS

257

To the Bashow of Tripoli from Richard O'Brien, U. 5. Coned Oenerd, Algiers

ALGIERS
.Z4* Septr 1798
Copy of an Answer to a letter from the Bashaw of Tripoli
BASHAWOF TRIPOLI
Your Excellency's letter, dated Tripoli the 7" Inst, I had the
honour of receiving the 22@of this date: I humbly thank your Excellency for your kind wishes, & the satisfaction you are pleased to express, on my being appointed the Agent for the U. States of America,
at Algiers. We condole with your Excellency on the exit of our mutual friend,
the late Dey of Algiers, who be convinced considered you, as an
adopted Son, The present Potent Dey of Algiers, Bobba hfustapha is much
pleased with your assurances of friendship & is fully sensible of your
high character, & good faith on all affairs, & declares to me that your
Excellency, will always find him your Sincere friend.
I have agreeable to your Excellencys desire, paid unto your Ambassador, Hadge Mahomed ben Salim thc 6000 Dollars, whcli remained
due to your Excellency, which was to fulfill theStipulation,asexpressed
in the Treaty with your Exell? & the U. S, of America
Relative to the detention of the Vessels destined for Algiers, I have
to inform your Excellency that the Winter in America has been so
severe, that no Carpenters work cou'd be done, which retarded the
business for Algiers and Tripoii, something more than was expected:
My last letters from the American Ambassador a t Madrid informs
me, that the Vessels were expected to sail, from America destined for
Algiers about the latter end of July, & that all the Stores Stipulated
for Tripoli by the Treaty, & with the Consul, wou'd come under
convoy, of those to Algiers, & wou'd proceed from this place, with
dispatch for Tripoli.
I n consi uence of this information, I expect shortly to see them
arrive a t dlgiers, the dangers of the Seas excepted.
Permit me to observe to your Excellency, that the Potent Dey of
Algiers & Ministry, depends much, on your Excellency, for information relative to the movements of the French a t Alexandria &, particularly, what is the State of Affairs at Constantinople.
[NA. SDA. CL, Algiers, Vol. 3, Jsri-Dec. 1798.1
To Tench Francis, U. 8. Purveyor, from Secretary of State

TRENTON,
Oct. 5. 1798.
SIR, I received your letter of the 3 g and dela ed an answer because
I was a t a loss to determine what o y h t to be one. However, I had
concluded to detain Mr Murrays ship, loading for Algiers, until the
three armed vessels bound thither were ready to convoy her. S i
I had come to this conclusion, this m o m g , Mr Murray fortunately
called upon me. I observed to him, that I o
ally expected h
ship would have been ready to take in her loading ong before she came
round to Philadelphia; and in t.hat case the three armed vessels would
hnve been also got ready and sailed before the yellow fever dercmged
all business; that this delay of bis Ship induced me to order the armed
vessels to receive no more men than were requisite to keep them in
port; and that now it was impracticable to man them: that probably

K

='Y

258

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1786 TO 1801

in two weeks such a change as to the fever might take place as would
enable us to proceed; and then as much dispatch as possible should be
given.
hlr Murray acquiesces willingly; and will give orders to delay manning his ship: he is equally anxious with us that she should go under
convoy. He is going to Mr Warder's (at Peele Hall) where perhaps
you may see him, and converse about the ships bringing back the
crews of the armed vessels.
P. S. Itwillbeimportant t o a m Alrhlurray'sShip: Isuppose the
ublic could loan some guns, M' Murray engaging for their value if
Post. Please to confer on this point with him. - [SDA. Dom. L, Vol. 11.1
TO Secretary of State from Bichard O'Brien, U. S. Consul General, Algiers

ALGIERSOctober the 1%" 1798.
SIR I have to inform you that on the 5thIns? was Sent into
this port by an Algerine Corsaire of 16 Guns the Brig May,
belonging to Philadelphia Joseph Isreal master, with a valuable
Cargo of wines which Cost. in St Lucar. in Spain 18 thousand
dollars. Consigned To James Yard Esqr of Philadelphia.
Said Brig had an American Register $ 9 Sea letter, and unfortunately no Meditteranian passport.
"This Vessel haveing no Meditteranian pass. by the Algerine
marine Laws and the Custom of this government. with all
nations the[y] are at peace with, is that, it, is by the meditteranian pass & the Colours that Said Vessel is known by the
s Barbary States to be A nation the[y] are at peace with. The
" fatal Consequence of haveing no Meditteranian pass is that the
master and Crew is liable to be made Slaves of, and the Vessel
5 5 and Cargo, declared a legal prize
i: "The latter part of the 4"h article of the treatie of the United
States with Algiers, runs thus, That Eighteen months Shall be
%F4 the term allowe for furnishing the Ships of the United States
with passports. As this Vessel Came in Sight I was V ~ T
2
Suspicious, by her appearance, that Said Vessel was an Amen$ can,
and therefore I went to the Marine, and had prepared
I should want
the Minds of. the
theire assistance, and when
of the port returned
on Shore after Visiting the
on Shore a letter
from the prize master, written by the Captain of the corsaire,
giveing an account of the manner of his taking Said Vessel and
his Motives for Sending her in. This acct or Circumstance
was Mentioned in My resence. I told the general of the
Marine that before I cou d Judge relative to this Vessel I must
first See her papers, and as the Capt aport must go and make
the Report to the Dey, I tryed to Bias him to make it as
favourable on my part as possible, as the news S read $9
Seemed that the general Cry wlts a good prize. - 8 n this I
requested that the ape= of Said Vessel would be brought on
Shore. The genera Sent Of. for Said papers, and I then found
her Register & Sea letter to be American and no Meditteranian
paw. The Register being indorsed & haveing allso a Bill of Sale
h

GE

f'

f'

WARS WITH BARBARY PO'Ct7ERS

259

of Said Brig. with a button Seal. The property transfered by
Mr P i t a r d to Capt Isreal and Robt Stevenson: of Philadelphia.
I declard that the bill of Sale was: A Pass. avant and Consular
Certificate. Tlus I seen the necessity of to Save the Crew.
The C a p h p o r t returned to the marine and told the general i t
was the dey4 orders that Said Crew of Said Brig Should be Sent
to the Slave prison, but I declaring that the Pass avant or
Consular Certrficete was given on account of this Vessel haveing
been taken and plundered both by the french and British, and
papers deranged, and her detention in Europe - that Said
Vessel was proceeding to America to Obtain A Meditteranian
pass. and aided in this report by the General,.the Capt aport
was Sent to the dey a t my request and with t b s Statement &?
requested that the Crew Should not be Sent to the Slave
prison. The dey permited she Should remain in my Custody
untill that. The board of admiralty Should determine on Sd
Crew - The master Crew and passengers was permited to
go to the American house, and the Brig Mary left and kept in
the posesion of the AIgerines. I was fully employed with the
Bocries, whose assistance depend has been very great to me on
this fiffaire, as well as on all Occasions relative to the affairs of
the U States.
"On the morning of the 6" of October I went to the Marine
The general of Marine and the board of Admiralty being met
with the general as the president. The[y] Contended that this
Vessel haveing no Meditteranian pass, that Vessel and Cargo
was a legal prize, that it was Customary for &ers to act so
with all nations, but I declareing s@Vessel to have been taken
and her papers plundered & her Pass avant or Consular Certificate and my promises of 2500 Doilars to be divided in the
usial way. Theb] declared that this altered the Case and
made this report of the pass avant to the Dey, and that theIyJ
hoped & that i t mas theire request that the Dey would for once
pardon this vessel the American peace being new &I: we as yet
not fully acquainted with the nature 8: Consequence of not
ilaveing a good Meditteranian pass - The Cap? aport went
t . the
~ dey and made no favourable report. The Dey desired
the admiralty to take Care that thek] were not Bribed. That
this vessel havein no Meditteranian pass. was a good prize,
and that, he Shou d take a few days to Consider fully on this
business. The Capt aport with the owners of the corsaire was
of One party against Clearing the Vessel. I, immediatly with
those of more powerfull influence dureing this interval I immediatly Commenced my plans aqainst the next decision, and
made out a strong Consular C e d c a t e whch would back &
Strengthen any thing I had Said or Could Say, relative to a
pass. avant, this I seen the necessity of - - I n order a t
all events to Save the Crew and passengers, the[re] being 21 &c
Knowing them to be worth a t least 42 Thousand dollars,
if Condemned The U. S. would have to redeem them & the invoice of the Cargo. I made out anew in the room of Eighteen
Thous$ I reduced it to 8, and by Miciah Bocries Calculation
to the do it was reduced to 3 Thous4 dlP On the h%orningof
the gtb o October, the board of admiralty met again when all

f

9

260

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1785 TO 1801
the pa ers was examined into, and other persons Called to read
& exp ain theire Contents, now, when the pass avant and
Consular Certificate WRS read, the[y] declared I had told them
the truth and exanined theire books to 150 years back, and in
SP Book of Marine laws and Customs on the like Occasions.
One leafe Condemns & the other Clears - & the[y] determined
the 2 9 time as the[y] did a t first and finally the dey declared
Said Vessel a Legal prize, but that, for my acct and his good
Opinion of the U S. he Cleared Said Vessel and Cargo, declareing that he favoured me on this Occasion but Could never
again &P - that any Vessel without a pass. would be Condemned, and that no Consular Certificates Should with him or
his people be Su£Ecient to Save either Vessel Or Cargo - and
for me to give this information to the United States
I have examined fully our passports, and find them defective
in Consequence. I Send you with these dispatches a Spanish
Meditteranian pass. which I think much Superior done than.
Those of the U S - our passes is too long & broad the great
Breadth the more liable to Error, and therefore, the Cut or
top which the barbary Corsairs has does not agree with that
nicety that is requisite and with the pass. which the hiercht
Vessels of the United States has in Consequence it is the
Custom here, and all nations at peace with those people has
Submited to it. That when the top does not exactly agree
with the bottom that the Cargo is Condernnd - and m Consequence of these very visable defects in the present American
passports many of our Vessels will be met with and unavoidably
theire Cargoes Condemned. This requires remidying immediatly and I Should propose Something Similar to the Spanish
pass. on better paper, or on Such parchment as would be thick
not liable to Shrink or extend, One part being damp the other
part perhaps folded & dry, would Occasion the top not agreeing
with the bottom, and in Consequence a due Cargo. government gives both top & bottom & if the[y] do not agree & in
Consequence the Merchants Suffer will the[y] not blame theire
government, which gave them the pass will the[y] not Sue BE9
recover damages from the government.
I inclose you an american pass & 2 tops or Cuts to Shew you
the defect and I point out the necessity of remedying it. The
NQ 1 on top and bottom of the American pass being kept
Close or on the line. The top is longer then the bottom by
1/10'!' of an inch and this defect will be the means of Confiscateing many A Cargo if not remedied As the french Spanish and British has taken and Condemned
& Sold So Many American Vessels the ] haveing of Course with
them theire Meditteranian pass. 0 Course many of those
Vessels has been resold to other nations & of Course the[y]
have many of our passports. Under this pretence we Claim
i t as a right to Change our passports on this plan which I
presume to Suggest to you Sir, takeing 18 Months for all
American Vessels to have the new pass. given out, and the
Same time, for the Old pass. to be good untill the Vessels
has rocured the new and as the[y] have the new the[y] need
not arry the Old, the tops of the new passes to Send to Algiers

P

?'

8

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

261

Tunis & Tripolia So that we might furnish the new passes.
and with them the old untill that all American Vessels has
got the new passes. which 7 think thek] Can have in the run of
18 Months or 2 ears, and from what I State and Sugest I
hope that I Sha 1 Short1 have yourc Ansr on these great
draw yourc most Serious attention
affairs - which I think
and prevent many Valuable american Cargoes from being
Condemned on account of a deficiency in the pass. many
instances of this nature I have known during my Captivity of
10 yq & 41 days.
I would propose a Ship under Sail with her American Ensign
aft to her top G't mast heads. The American Flry - the top
to Cut by the 1" reefe in the main top S d and to the 3* or
Close reefe in the fore topsail and by the Close reefe of the
Mizen topsail, with a Star on the Close reefed fore topsail
a half Moon on the 1" reefe of the Main topsail and a Star on
the head of the Mizen top Sail, all this to be done, very elegantly, well engraved and Cut with the greatest exactness.
Those Meditteranian passes when Once on this plan we might
then expect Safety and those passes Should not be doubled,
but rolled up and a tin Canister made to keep it in
this Meditterhan pass.
on Each of these
Sea letter on good paper, documents Should
Register on parchment.
be Stampt the arms
Role D-quipage
of the United States
& Each Sailor his protection None of yr buton Seals
and Real American Colours. Now. The public Seal
or its Stamp Should
Crews 2/3dq Americans
No fancy flags, enforce the be to all those documents
Laws &
I shall Observe that the Dey was not Satisfyed that this Brig
May was an American Vessel untill that I compared & Shewn
the Public Seal of my ConsuIrzr Commision which I Convinced
the Ministry was the S m ~ eand
, exactly alike unto the Public
Seal on the Brig Mary-a
letter and a Mr Abraham K.
Bracher had a Lieuts Commision in the New York Militia and
the Seal of New York thereto, Signed under the Seal John Jay This I knew & with persuasion I Could make the Algerines
know why because the[y] Could not read English & the Seal had
not the Stars or Eagle on it - for if those people Cannot read
the Christian print or writehg if the[y] See the Seal of the
United States, or tho anns thereof the ] know it, but the[yj
Cannot read the writeings, but the eal is expressive. I
presume if I have not fully described, that you very easil
perceive what I would wish to explain and point out, and Sha 1
Observe that d persons that Grants Certificates to any persons going to Europe Should have the Seal of the Umted
States, or its arras on the Seal - Supose the port of Norfolk,
Collectors Seal, the arms of the U. S. & the requisite writeings
on the Seal, I hope that those that might frequent the M e d i l
teranian will have the real American Colours - if thefy] have
those State flags, theb] will not do, with even good pass.

i

A

$

T

262

NATTAL OPERATIONS FROM 1786 TO 1801
The Algerines will not belive or know them to be Americans.
Why because theIy] have not American Colours & theIy] know
nothing about yr Stat.e Colours - TheIy] will declare the[y]
made a peace with one nation & one flag, not with 16 nations
&$ 16 flags - look out.
O'Brien will give you true Soundings

[SDA. CL, Algiers, Vol. 3, 1798.1
To Secretary of State from Richard O'Brien, U. S. Consul General, Algiers

ALGIERS.October the idt?. 1798.
SIR, The Bearer of. these dispatches. is Mr James Carr whom has
been with me Since my arrival in the frigate. he haveing untill this
date. acted as my Secretary. and finding. the Situation of American
affairs with. Algiers Tunis and Tripolia not to be. favourable. Particularly the deficiency of our parses for the Meditteraninn to be So.
defective which with many Other important affairs. contained in these
dispatches. which accompanies this. letter I have prevailed, on the
Said James C a n to. proceed in this Said Brig Mary. with Captain
Isreal. and to make the greatest Speed to Philadelphia and deliver to
you these dispatches. which I presume will draw youre most Serious
attention. in Consequence I have agreed with this Said James C a n .
on the part of the United States to give him at the Rate of 30. dollars
per Month. from this date. untill the delivery of These dispatches to
you which money I hope will be paid him by the United States.
As to tzheaffairs of the United States with This Regency you will.
be able to form. a true Idea. by the purport of the dispatches. depend
Sir we shall have war. declared against. us if those expected Corsairs.
and stores does not shortly arrive. which is for Algiers. and Tripolia or that. you. will. heare of my being put in Chains - depend if it was
Hassien. Bashaw. the late dey that. he would not. have patience.
untill. this time. war would have been the result. of extraordinary.
neglect. and. detention. or I should be necessiated. to make the promise
of a Corsaire. or Sacraficed a large Sum of Money and presents. Since I have been in this Country I have had. no one letter from ou
and all that. has been Communicated To me was in a letter. of he
16t@of June last. informing me of an extract. of a letter from
dated the 13'h of April. giveing an Account of One Corsaire launc ed
the 2+ to be that day & the 36 in. 3 weeks. and that M' Butlers Ship
being freighted. for Algiers. now Sir Say the[y] took at furthest June
and July, to fit, and load. to this date. the[y] would have 74 dayq to
come to Algiers. and in fact. God knows. what detains them.
I have as Much confidence in the dey. and present Ministry.
Relative to the United States. as I could ever expect. and belive that
if we did not neglect. those people. So Shamefully. as we have done.
that our peace was as secure. As if i t was Made with Any Nation.
I belive it and shall ever consider i t my duty. to write you with
Candoure and Truth. My Sentiments. and Ideas you have with these
dispatches. and if you. and the United States intends to Keep. youre
peace with. The Barbary Statas. These dispatches Should be attended to.
This summer the Algerines. has been Occupied takeing Greek
Vessels which is navigated with the Subjects of the Grand Signior.
under pretence. of deficient 9 in theire pass. and of. theire navigateing
to the West4 of Sicilly. and earrping grain to the french and Spaniards.

I

!I?

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

263

and That. those greek Vessels. is the property. of the Enemies of the
algerines Many of those greek Vessels. is fast Sailors. & 3. of them the
Algerines has made Corsairs of. which will. of Course. lesson the
Value of the expected Corsairs from Philadelphia. however. you may
depend. if the[y] arrive here dureing the time that I might be permited
to. remain in this Country. be assured. I shall do all posibly in my
power This government seems to threaten. the french with war and. the
losses. of the french in the Levant. & destruction of theire fleete. and
other Circumstances. Occasions algiers about this time to Treat the
french. with Much Contempt. So that Shortly. the french must Either.
bow to Algiers or the latter be more Moderate.
The Bntish. has no Consul. here he is expected. with Valuable
presents. in March. The new Dey. and late Victory. is in favoure of
British affairs with this re ency.
The Swedes. & deans. tands well with this government. The[y]
are punctual in giveing theire a ~ u atributes.
l
and Customary presents.
The Span+ 2 Munths past. was Much threatened. but as usial with
Money and presents. the[ ] Keep theire ground The Tunicians hns fu 50 Sail of Corsairs. The[y] have lately.
landed on the Island of St Pierre. adjacent to Sardignia. and has taken
of[f] 950. men women & Children. These unfortunate Captives is a t
Tunis Tnpolia - is much increased in Corsairs and Seems to be. a new
Algiers Those Barbery States, is attontive plundering and robing the
Christian nations whom Seems Occupied in new rojects. of Revolution.
I have mentioned to the Algerine Ministry. re ative to our prepareing
by land & Sea & the[ ] O b s e d we Should have done it years past.
For Many particu ars relative to Algerine affairs. I refer you to
Mr Cam. whom by this time has a good Idea of Algerine &sirs
[NA. SDA. CL,Algiers, Vol. 3, Jan-Dec. 1798.1

8

li"

f'

9

To Naval Constructor Joshua Humphreys, U. 6.Navy, from Secretary of State

DEPARTMENT
OF STATETRENTON
Oct. 22,1798.
SIR, I have concluded to send the Sophia to Al ers to bring home
the officers and crews of the three armed vesse s destined thither.
Capt. Geddes informs me that the Sophia is not calculated to be
mounted with the complement of cannon proportioned to her tonnage
on account of the height of her deck: but that she could take on board
a few carriage guns. Carronades would be best, if we could get them.
I beg you immediately to consult with Capt. Geddes and arm her in
such manner as you and he shall think best.
I understand that Captain Maley is read for sea, or can be ready
in two days. I have concluded that he s ould sail with the large
Store Ship, nnd convoy her to Algiers. The ship being a dull sailer,
by having the start of the other vessel by a fortmght, or ten days, she
may arrive about as soon as the other two armed vessels and the
Sophia. Captain Geddes says the Sophia wants a mainmast and perhaps some spars, and a pump. I shall rely on your providing these
t h n expeditiously.
Ifgatever is wanting to complete the armed brigantine and the
other Schooner I must desire you to have. rovided without delay.
write to him.
For whatever depends on Mr Francis you
If any difficulties present, inform me without delay.

f?

E

d

[8DA. Dom. L, Vol. 11.1

264

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1785 TO 1801

To Naval Constructor Joshua Humphreye, U. S. Navy, from Secretary of State

DEPARTMENT
OF STATETRENTON
Oct. 31,1798.
Mr JOSHUA
HUMPHREYS
a s t e r or Marcus Hook
SIR, Captain Robinson master of the Ship Hero, laden for Algiers
has just called on me. He is now on his way to his ship, which is
ready for Sea. I wrote you lately, desiring that Capt. Mnley's
schooner might sail with him as a convoy: and that the Sophia should
be prepared to go with the other two armed vessels to Algiers, to
bring back all their crews. I have not since heard from you.
Captain Robinson expressed a desire to have two or four of Maley's
guns, with amunition, put on board his ship; informing at the same
time that his owners refused to make any kind of provision for
8I'miIlg him.
I see but one objection to his request - that his ship is a dull sailer,
and might be taken, when Maley's Schooner might escape from a
superior force; whereby so many guns, adapted to the Schooner might
be lost. I would therefore prefer putting two, or even four other guns
on board the EIero, which might be taken out a t Algiers, and put into
the hold of the Sophia for ballast.
I will thank you for an immediate answer concerning the vessels
destined for Algiers.
[SDA. Dom. L, Vol. 11.1
To Tench Francis, U. 6. Purveyor, from Secretary of State

DEPARTMENT
OF STATETRENTON
10,1798.
SIR, The Schooner Lelah Eisha being Armed, and Captain Maley
being ordered to defend her and whatever she has under her convoy,
I thought it prudent that he should be furnished with a Commission
as a Naval officer in the service of the United States. I have accordingly made out one for him as a lieutenant in the Navy, and now
inclose it. You will have the goodness to get the War-Office seal
afied to it, before you send it to Maley. At the same time he should
be informed that the Commission is designed only for the present
voyage, and not to ground any claim for permanent employment.
Altho' his good conduct in his present undertaking will recommend
him to the further attention of the Government. All the papers now
transmitted herewith for him are noted below. I presume he will
have obtained a sea letter, Mediterranean passport, clearances and
other customary papers (Register excepted) from the Custom House.
I wish you to ascertain this, and see i t done, if not alreadyaccomplished.
You will write of course to Capt. OIBrien, and send him invoices of
all the articles on board, and copies of the invoice of the cargo of the
ship Hero, for which I inclose a passport, leaving a blank for you to
insert the master's name, which I have forgotten. If as 1 have suggested to Mr Humphreys, the Captain of the Hero puts guns on board
her, he will consider whether he had not better take out s commission,
a t the Custom House, to secure him against being treated as a pirate,
in case he fights and should be taken. I t will cost him but some triflin
fee; and I suppose he knows people enough in Philadelphia who wil
be his bondsmen for observing his instructions as commanding (L
private armed vessel.

7

[SDA. Dom. L, Vol. 11.1

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS
1.
2.
3.
4.

5.
7.

6.
d.

265

Enclosures in Letter of Secretarg of State to Tench Rancis,
dated Bovember 10, 1798
A Commission of lieutenant for Capt. Maley.
A passport from the Secretary of State.
A Pasport in the Turkish Language from the Dey of Algiers.
Instructions to Captain Mdey to fight Bc.
Private Instructions to ditta.
A letter to James Simpson Esq? Consul of the U. States for Morroeco, st
Tangier.
A letter to Captain O'Brien, Consul General a t Algiers.
A letter for John Gavino Esqr Consul of the U. States at Gibraltar.
IEndosure No. 21

Passport for the armed Schooner LeLh Eisha
To all who shall see these presents Greeting.
I Timothy Pickering, Secretary of State of the United States of America, do
hereby certif and make known That the armed Schooner Lelah Ekha whereof
lieutenant d l ~ i a r nMaley is Commander, has been bvilt in the United States
for the Dey of Algiers, pursuant to a Stipulation of Richard O'Br~enEsqr now
the American Consul General a t Algiers; and that the Stores on board of her are
also destined for the Dey of Algiers, in pursuance of existing Stipulations with
that power. The whole to confirm and secure the peace entered into between
the said United States and the Dey and Regency of Algiers. Wherefore in the
name of the President of the United States, I request all who may meet with
the said Schooner Lelah Eisha either a t sea or in port, to allow her to pass not
orily unmolested, but with every necessary aid, to enable her to reach her destined
port, the City of Algiers, in safety.
Given under my hand and the Seal of my Office a t Philadelphi, the tenth
TIMOTHY
PICXERING
day of November 1798.
[SDA. Dcm. L, Vol. 11.1
[Enclosure No. 31

Passport for the rrmed Schooner Leiah Eisha
This passport in the Turkish language, under the Seal of the Dey B Regency
of Algiers, I commit to lieutenant William hlaley, commander of the armed
schooner call the Lelah Eisha, which with her guns, tackle, apparel, furniture,
stores, boats, and goods on board her, being the property of the United States
of America, are destined for Algiers, there to be delivered to the Dey on account
of the Stipulations and agreements entered into between the United States & the
Dey and Regency of Algiers. This passport being furnished by that power to
protect the said schooner, her equipmenis, goods, and all persons & things on
hoard her, against all nations with whom the Dey and Regency are a t Peace, in
like manner as the passports from the Executive & CKEcers of the United States
are desi ned to protect them from molestation by any powers with whom the
United i t a m are a t peace.
In Witness whereof I have hereunto set my hand, and seal of office,
a t Philadelphia, the tenth day of November 1798.
o. s.

TIMOTHY
PICIIERINQ.

SEAL

Secretary of State of the
United States of -4mera'ca.

[NA. SDA. CL,Algiers VoI. 3, Jan.-Dec. 1198.1
[Snolasure No.41

Instructions to Lieutenant William Xaley, commander of the armed Schooner
called the Wah Elaha
You being appointed to the command of the armed Schooner above named,
are to proceed forthwith to the City of Algiers, and there deliver her with her
guns, tackle apparel and Stores to the Deg of Algiers, for whom she hm been
built, armed and equipped, accordirsg to the directions you s h d receive from
Richard O'Brien Esquire, the Consul General of the United States of America,
a t that City to whom as soon as poasibh you will make known your arrival.
As you have a crew competeut to the defence of the Lelah E i s b against ordinary cruisers, so you are to defend her accordingly against d l attacks but those

266

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1786 TO 1801

of superior force. You are therefore to prepare your officers and crew for such
defence and maintain the necessary order and dicipline among them for this
object as well as for the safe navigating of the Schooner to her destined port.
The Ship Hero, laden with timber and Stores on account of the United States,
to be delivered st Algiers pursuant to the Stipulations between that Regency
and the United States, I presume has not yet sailed, if so, you are to take her
under your convoy.
Besides the warlike and other equipments properly belonging to the Lelah
Eisha, there are certain Stores by way of Cargo, which are also for the Dey of
Algiers in pursuance of the stipulations above mentioned. The invoice of these
articles, as well as an inventory of every thing properly belonging to the Schooner,
you wiU take with you and deliver to Captain O'Bricn our Consul a t Algiers,
whose orders respecting the delivery of the whole you will strictly observe; or
in his absence, the orders of the person left there in charge of the officers of the
United States.
The orders for using your arms, you will observe point only to the defence of
the Schooner under your command, and the protection of the Ship Hero, under
your convoy. You are therefore not to give chase to or attempt to take any
vessel you may meet with. Nevertheless, should you meet a t sea with any
vessels of the United States, in the hands of French captors, you may retake them.
And you will understand that it is against the French Cruisers, that the orders
for defence are mainly intended. The Government of that nation having laid
aside all regard to the law of nations, and the most plain and acknowledged
principles of justice in the arrets and regulations it has made in regard to the
capture and condemnation of neutral vessels, and especially those of the United
States. But you will consider well the strength of such captured American
Vessel, and attempt nothing a t the risque of the Lelah Eisha or of the Ship Hero.
So likewise you may take under your protection any American vessels holding the
same course with you. I n case of a recapture you are not materially to deviate
from your proper course, nor eesentially diminish the force of your crew.
I t is expected that the other armed vessels and the Bdg Sophia will reach
Algiers nearly as soon as the Lelah Eisha, and that the crews of the whole will come
home in the Sophia.
Relying on your vigilance, bravery and prudence, I have only to wish you a
prosperous voyage to your destined port, and a safe return to your Country.
Given under my hand and the Seal of the Department of State a t Philadelphia
the Tenth day of November, 1798;
L.S.
TIMOTHY
PICKERING,
Secretary of Stale.
[SDA. Dom. L, Vol. 11.I
[Enclosure No. 61

Private instructions to Lieutenant William Maley, commander of the armed
Schooner U a h Eisha
If visited by a European vessel of War of Superior force, and your papers are
demanded, you will exhibit your sea-letter and the Special passport or certificate
under my hand and seal: If by any cruiser of the Barbary powers, you will exhibit
your Mediterranean passport, and the passport of the Dcy of Algiers in the
Turkish language and under the Dey's Seal. These ought to satisfy any vessel
of war which may visit you. If however other papers shall be required, you may
exhibit the inventory of the Schooner and her equipment,, the invoice of goods
and sbores on board her, your clearance and any other customary papers. If
you should have an engagement with any other armed vessel, and your right of
fighting should be questioned, you will show your Commission, and your instructions to fight and defend your vessel and convoy.
If not inconvenient to touch a t Gibraltar, you may do it and make known your
destination to our Consul, John Gavino Esqr If any unexpected change should
have taken place to render your going to Algiers improper or unsafe, he can
inform you: and in this case you will secure your vessel until you can get advice
from Captain Richard O'Brien our Consul a t Algiers, how to proceed; contriving
to let him know as soon as possible your situation. I n such case also you will get
Mr Gavino to write an account of it to Colq Humphre s our Minister a t Madrid,
and to William Smith Esqr our Minister a t Lisbon. &at they or either of them
shall finally advise, you are to do. But this caution is suggested only becauae it
is possible (for it is not probable) that there may be reasons to forbid you t o
proceed to Algiers.

WARS WITH BARBARY POWEIN

267

If you should fall in on the coast of Morrocco, off Tangier, you will there find
James Simpson Esqr American Consul, with whom you may in Like manner
advise and Consult.
But the chance of there being any objection to your proceeding directly to
Algiers is so very s d , and the danger 80 great of meeting with French privateera
near the Streights mouth, seeing they frequent the Spanish ports of Algeciras on
one hand and Ceuta on the other - if the wind should be favourable it will he hest
for you to push forward and go directly to Algiers.
The letters and packets addressed to Mr Simpson and Mr Gavino you will
contrive to convey to one or the other of those gentlemen, either going or returning:
but do not go out of your way to deliver them t o either, if you bring the letters and
packets home agsin.
Given a t Philadelphia the tenth day of Kovember 1798.
Ls.

[SDA. Dom. I,, Vol.

T I ~ ~ O TPICKEBING,
HY
Secretary of Slate.
11.1

[7 December 17981
Quasi-War, United States and France
[ N o ~ ~ . - s e eletter of 7 December 1798 from Secretary of the Navy to Captain
John Barry, U. S. Navy, setting forth the disposition of the naval forces of the
United States in the West I n d i a and viciy'ity, for protection against the depredstions of French armed vessels; printed in Naval Documents, Quasi-War, United
States and France", second volume (November, 1798 to March, 1799), pp. 70-72.1

[ll December 17983
Sea Letter for Brig Sophia

JOHN ADAMS,
President of the United Staties of America
To aU who shdl see these presents, GREETING:
BE IT KNOWN,
That leave and permission, are hereby given to
- - --,
- --- master or commander of the - ---- --,
called - - - - - - - - of
the burthen of 118 6/95 tons or thereabouts, lying a t present in the
port of ------ - - bound for - - - ----- and laden with ---------------to depart and proceed th his said - - - - - -,
- on his said voyage, such
- - - - - - having been visited, and the said - - - - - - - - ha-&g made oath
before the proper officer, that the said - - - - - - - - belongs to one or more
of the citizens of the United Stafes of America, and to him or them
only.
INWITNESS WHEREOF, I have m b s d e d my name to these Presents,
and a&ed the Seal of the Uniled State8 of America thereto, and caused
the same to be countersigned by - - - - - - - - a t - - - - - - - - the - - - - day of
- - - - - - in the Year o j our Lord Christ, one thousand seven hundred a d

_

-

nir~dy

By the PRESIDENT.
TIMOTHY
PICKERING
Secrefary of Stale

GEOLATIMER
Coal
MOST Serene, Serene, most Puissant, Puissant, High, Illustrious,
Noble, Honourable, Venerable, wise and prudent, Lords, Emperors,
Kings, Republics, Princes, Dukes, Earls, Baro~m,Lords, Burgomasters,
Schepens, Counsellors, as also Judges, Officers, Justiciaries and
Regents of all the good cities and places, whether Ecclesiastical or
Secular, who shall see these patents, or hear them read. We Clement
Biddle Notarg make known, that the master of Brig Sophia appearing

268

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1785 TO 1801

before us has declared upon oath, that the vessel, called the Sophia of
Philad* of the burthen of about 118 6/95 tons, which he a t present
navigates, is of the United States of America, and that no subjects of
the present belligerent powers have any part or portion therein, directly
nor indirectly, so may God Almighty help him. And, as we wish to
see the said msst'er prosper in his lawful affairs, our prayer is, to all
the before-mentioned, and to each of them separately, where the said
master shall anive, with his vessel and cargo, that they may please
to receive the said master, with goodness, and to trent him in a becoming manner, permitting him, upon the usual tolls and expences, in
passing and repassing, to pass, navigate, and frequent the ports,
passes and territories, to the end to transact his business, where, and
in what manner he shall judge proper: Whereof we shnll be willingly
indebted.
IN WITNESS and jor cause whereoj, we a& hereto tfie Seal of
Me Notary a t Philadelphia
this ll*?December 1798
CLEMENT
BIDDLE
Not? Pub
Sworn by Captain Henry Geddis to the Annexed Sea Letter a t
Philadelphia t'his 11* December 1798
CLEMENT
BIDDLE
SEAL
Not? Pub
[NA. SDA. CL, Algiers, Vol. 3, Jan.-Dec. 1798.1

[18 December 17981
Instructions to Bichard O'Brien, U. S. Consul General, Algiers; William Eaton,
U. S. Consul, Tunis; and James Leander Cathcart, U. S. Consul, Tripoli, from
Secretary of State

By the powers herewith delivered to you, from tho President of the
United States of America, you are authorized to confer, negotiate and
conclude with the Bey and Regencv of Tunis, on the alterations to
be made in the Treaty between the United States and that power as
arranged in the month of August 1707, by the Agency of Joseph
Etienne Famin who was employed by Joel Barlow Esqr Agent and
Consul General of the United Stat,es a t Algiers.
The important object of discussiorl arrises, out of the fourteenth
article of that Trenty of which the following is a translation.
"Article fourteenthJ'
"The citizens of the United States of America who shall trnnsport
"into the Kingdom of Tunis the Merchandize of their country, in
"the vessels of their nation, shall pay three per cent duty. Such
"as may be laden by such citizens under a foreign Flag coming from
"the United States, or elsewhere, shall pay ten per cent duty: Such
"as may be laden by foreigners on board of American vessels, coming
"from any place whatever, shall also pay ten per cent duty. If
"any Tunissian Merchant wishes to carry merchandize of his country,
"under any flag whatever, into the Unitcd States of America, and on
"his own account, he shall pay three per cent duty."
This article is subversive of our great revenue system: it is besides
without reciprocity. I t cannot be important to the Bey and Regency,
tho' ruinous to us.

?TyARS WITH BAIZBARY POIVERS

269

The revenues of the United States arise chiefly from duties on goods
imported. These duties generally exceed ten per cent. They are
imposed on our own merchants; and increased on the Merchants of
foreign nations. Our treaties with those nations stipulate that no
higher duties shell be paid by their subjects, than by those of the most
favoured nation. Consequently if this article in the Treaty with
Tunis should be ratified by the American Government, the duties
on all the goods imported into the United States by the subjects of
those foreign nations, must be reduced to three per cent. This would
necessarily involve the reduction of the duties imported in our own
vessels, or our whole na.cigation would sink under the unequal burthen.
This sacrifice then, it is impossible to make. m e should thereby
deprive ourselves of the means of supporting ciur own government, of
paying our public debts and even of fulfilling our engagements with
the Bey and other Barbary powers. T X l e no advantage would arise
to the Bey and his proper subjects; probably a few European and
Jewish Merchanfs settle[d] at Tunis would alone he benefitted.
For these reasons, the President cannot apprehend any d i c u l t y
in your obtaining the Bey's consent to abolish the fourteenth article
before mentioned. In its place may be substituted a stipulation
that the commerce of the United States with Tunis, nnd of Tunis
with the United States, shall be on the footing of the commerce of
the most favoured nations for the time being, respectively. At all
events the fourteenth article must be rejected, if war should be the
consequence. This evil, however, by every soothing and pursuasive
measure, you d l endeavour to prerent. Should it nevertheless be
insisted on, i t will evidently be for the purpose of extorting further
stipulations for the delivery of money or stores: but the dcmand must
be resisted. As the article is destitute of any reasonable foundation,
without a precedent in any treaty with any other Barbary Power,
and strikingly wanting in reciprocity, a submission to it wouid.be
dishonor[a]ble to the United States. If to prevent a war any t h n g
should be added to the very burthensome contract already made,
that addition should not have any reference to the fourteenth article,
but be stipulated at large, on the conclusion of the new article or
articles wbch you may negotiate.
The Senate have advised the ratification of the treaty, with the
exce tion of the fourteenth article alone: but the eleventh & twelfth
artic es are objectionable. I n firing salutes in the port8 of the two
powers reciprocally, to return gun for gun will be proper: but as the
Tunissian vessels of war would probably never enter the ports of the
United States, while the vessels of war of the latter were likely often
to enter the ports of Tunis, to sti ulate for the donation of a barrel
of powder for every gun which sht 1l be received for the salute, was to
authorize the Ievylng of R contribution.in a way not very honorable
on either side. I t will therefore be desvable to expunge thls stipulation; and to confine this article to mutual salutes, gun for gun: and
it will be very well to limit the number to jijteen, the federal salute.
The twentieth article of the treaty with algiers requires a mutud salute
of twenty one guns: and if there be any motive to induce the Bey of
Tunis to require a salute of more than fifteen guns, the number-may
be increased to twenty one. If nevertheless the Bey should perslst m
claiming a barrel of owder for every gun fired in his forts, for a salute
to a vessel of war o the United States then it will be of more conse-

7

?

270

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1785 TO 1801

quence to limit the number of guns to at least fifteen, and at most to
twenty one.
In the twelfth article i t is stipulated that the "subjects or citizens
"of the two nations shall be protected by the Government or Com"mandants of the places where they may be, and not by the other
"authorities of the Country." This is not very intelligible. Possibly
it may mean that the officers on the spot shall furnish such protection,
without obliging the United States in the Tunissian dominions, on the
subjects of Tunis in the United States to seek i t a t a distance, if the
seat of Government be distant: but if such protection be with-held
by subordinate officers, the persons needing protection ought to be
forbidden to resort for justice to the chief authority in each nation.
But the clause most exceptionable in this Article is that which permits the gouernment of Tunis to compel an American Captain to put
his vessel into its service, a t such freight as the Government itself
shall prescribe. They will put it in the power of any merchant resident a t Tunis who has the ear of the Bey or one of his chief officers to
command the service of American vessels for compensations wholly
inadequate and unreasonable. The fourteenth Article of the Treaty
with Algiers is proper and honorable. "Should the Dey want to
"freight any American Vessel that may be in the Regency or Turkey,
"said Vessel not being engaged, in consequence of the friendship sub"sisting between the two nations, he expects to have the preference
"given him, on his paying the same freight offered by any other nation."
The three Articles in question may be changed into the following
forms.
Article XI
'When a vessel of war of one of the parties shall enter a port of the
'other in which there is a fortification, she shall be saluted with fifteen
'Guns,which salute the vessel of war shall return gun for gun.'
Article XI1
The h i t part may stand as it is, as far as the word (in the English
translation) "which may extend to merchant vessels, but [not] to those
of war )'- After which, the Article may be thus continued - 'The
'subjects and citizens of the two nations, respectively, shall be pro'tected in the places where they may be by the officers of the Govern'ment, there existing; but on failure of such protection, and for redress
of every injury, the party may resort to the chief authority in each
'country, by whom adequate protection and complete justice shall be
'rendered.'
'In case the Government of Tunis shall have need of an American
'vessel for its service service vessel being within the Regency, (and
'not previously engaged), the government shall have the preference,
'on its paying the same freight as the Tunissinn Merchants usually
'pay for the same service; or at the like rate, if the service be without
'a customary precedent'. - The words in hooks [parentheses] (and
not previously engaged) if objected to, may be omitted.
Article XIV
'Allvessels belonging to the citizens and inhabitants of the United
'States shall be permitted to enter the dserent ports of the Kingdom
'of Tunis, and freely trade with the subjects and inhabitants thereof

271

m7ARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

'on paying the usual duties that are paid by all other nations a t peace
'with the Regency. In like manner a31 vessels belonging to the sub'jects and inhabitants of the Kingdom of Tunis shall be permitted to
'enter the different ports of the United States, mid free1 trade with
'the citizens and inhabitants thereof on paying the usua duties that
'are paid by all other nations at peace mth the United States.'
Or if preferred, the fourteenth article may be in the following form.
'The commerce of the citizens and inhabitants of the United States
'with the Kingdom of Tunis, and of the subjects and inhabitants of
'the Kingdom of Tunis with the United States shall be on the footing
'of the most favored nations for the time respectively.'
Some such form is indispensable: i t is impossible to place the commerce of the Tunisian subjects on a better footing than that of the
most favored nation; and there must be an exact reciprocity in the
stipulation.
A co y of the Act of the Senate on this subject is inclosed. By that
you wif see that m alteration in the fourteenth article only is essential: but you will aim a t the proposed alterations in the eleventh and
twelfth articles.
The Bey and chief officers of Tunis have probably an erroneous idea
of the cost of the naval and military stores stipulated to be delivered
a t Tunis by the United States. Subjoined is an estimate of their
probable cost, so far beyond their own estimate, that perhaps for the
amount of the latter in money, with the addition of some thousands
of doUars, they would release the United States from the obligation
to deliver those stores. Without intimating what will be the probable
cost to the United States to deliver the stores at Tunis, you may offer
the amount of the Tunisian estimates, viz, thirty five thousand dollars;
with the addition of twenty five thousand dollars; if that be not accepted you may add twenty ihousand dollars more; if this also should
be rejected, propose at once as your highest and final offer One Hundred fhousand dollars in lieu of the stores and all other demands for
the peace.
If the delivery of the stores be finally insisted, and the alteration of
the fourteenth article should be refused without an additional stipulation, you may go as far as five thousand dollars in rash, payable in
six or rat.her in nine months, or immediately, if it be indispensable, and
the sum can be procured on the credit of the United States. But this
sum should not be yielded without a struggle; because there is no
reasonable colour for demmding any thing. If more should be required, and the alternative must be immediately war, you may go as
far as Ten thousand dollars; if [that] does not satisfy, you must refer
the matter to your Government. I n the mean time and until we
know that the terms of the Treaty are finally settIed, agreeably to
those instructions, no part of the stores can be forwarded. Instead of
them the United States w-ill send a naval force into the Mediterranean
for the protection [of] their commerce. If instead of the regalia, or
present of naval and military stores stipulated to be delirered a t
Tunis, and which will be so extremely burthensome and diflicult to
accomplish, a cruizer not exceeding twenty two guns, six pounders
would be accepted, you may w e that such a c m e r shall be delivered, either one to be built for the purpose, or one already belonging
to the United States. But take care to obtain time enough for the fdb e n t of such a stipulation. All circumstances considered eighteen

Y

272

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1786 TO 1801

months should be allowed, if the Cruizer should be built, and half that
time if one already built should be found suitable for the seroioe of
the Bey. But there will be no unnecessary delay.
If after entering on the new negotiation, you find you cannot secure
the continunnce of peace, you must keep the negotiation pending as
long as possible and dispatch letters to algiers to the Consul General
O'Brien, if he is not present at Tunis, and to our Consuls in all the
ports of the hfideterranean Sea, and to our Ministers in Spain &
Portugal, stating that our war with Tunis is inevitable, or highly
probable; in order that American vessels may avoid entering that Sea,
until effectual measures shall be taken for their security. It will be
particularly important to send such letters to our Consul at Gibraltar, where so many American Vessels touch before they enter the
Mediterranean.

DEPARTMENT
OF STATE
Philad" 18 Decr 1 788
[NA. SDA. Dip. Cor., Inst. to Min., Bk 5, Dec. 1798-Sept. 1800.1

To William Eaton, U. S. Consul, Tunis, from Secretary of State

[PHILADELPHIA]
Department of Stale, December 60. 1798.
SIR,I n addition to the instructions for farther negotiations with
Tunis, some explanations may be useful; as well RS general observations on the conduct proper to be pursued by you in the exercise of the
office of Consul.
To account for the extraordinary stipulation in the 14" article of
the treaty, it is to be noted, That the negotiator, Mr Farnin, is a
French merchant residing at Tunis, and much in favor with one or
more of the influential officers of that government. Mr Barlow
asserts that neither t h s stipulation nor that of the eleventh article
nor the one the Iast paragraph in the twelfth was comprehended in the
k t project of the treaty transmitted to him by M? Famin in A ~ r i l
1798: and he can account for the insertion of the fourteenth article
only on the ground that hfr Famin, being a merchant, might expect to
derive great commercial advantages from the direct trade he might
carry on to the United States.
In order to favour his projects or perhaps entirely ignorant of the
consequenccs of the article, the Bey and his chef officers agreed to it.
I t is possible, however, that there might be a further view: The Bey
and his Chief either aware of the effects of the article, or informed by
M? Famin, might contrive this article as the instrument of obtaining
a new sacrifice to their avarice; expecting it would not be agreed to by
the United States; and that in order to get it e unged! an additional
sum of money would be offered. I t is farther to e cons~deredthat the
hostile measures and designs of France a ainst the United States were
well known to Mr Farnin before the conc usion of the treaty; and that
as M?Herculais the principal French A ent in Barbary who recommend
Mr Famin to M' Barlow, as well as a the other agents of that nation
a t Algiers, Tunis or Tripoli, wore thwarting the interest^ of the United
States, so M' Famin might be willing to join his countrymen, with the
like national view. R e and M: Wercdais, nevertheless, reproach each
other and perhaps very justly. The result of this ne otiation demonstrates that neither deserves the confidence of the f Jnited States.

?

F

B

*

*

*

*

*

*

*

273

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

It is to be remembered that as the policy of the Barbary Powers
constantly leads them to make war on some of the christian nations,
so the agents of these nations respectively endeavour to ward of[f] the
mischief; and thus are, in some sort, in a state of hostility among themselves. Whenever therefore the interests of the United States are in
question, you must chiefl rely on your own means to secure them.
Among the foreign Cons , however, there may be some whom your
experience of their candour may authorize you to confide in; and by a
friendly intercourse and mutual assistance the common interests of
the several nations you and they represent may be advanced. While
with such you will cultivate an acquaintance, you will endeavour to
live on terms of civility and good neighbourhood with all. * * *

d

*

*

*

*

*

*

*

[NA. SDA. Dip. Cor., Inst. to Min., Bk 5, Dec. 179SSept. 1800.1
To James Leander Cathcart, U. S. Consul, Tripoli, from Secretary of State

DEPARTMENT
OF STATE,
Philadelphia Decr d0.1?'98.
SIR,Your intimate acquaintance with Barbary affairs and with the
means of preserving eace with the Regencies of the Country, renders
it unnecessa to m tiply instructions. There are some pomts, however, on whic you have asked direction, and on which I will state the
President's opinion.
All the stores stipulated for Tripoli not admitting a transportation
thirther a t this time, you can only take from Algiers such of the articles
as are now on board the Ship Hero Capt. Robinson destined for that
ort, but which makeno part of thestipulated storesstill due to Algiers.
gou will even take them in larger quantities than those st.pulated, if
on enquiry a t Algiers you should be of opinion, that they will be
accepted a t Tripoli in lieu of others not forwarded.
A small consular present may be made to the Bey of Tripoli: the
articles and their quality to be determined by you and Captain O'Brien,
and taken with you from Algiers

3

T

*

*

*

*

*

*

*

I t is to be recollected, that the twelve thousand dollars to be paid
to the Bey of Tripoli, on the arrival of the American Consul, were to
be in full of all demands, the naval stores to be delivered a t the same
time excepted. In making up an additional Consular present, therefore, you must study to make it as little e ense as possible.
You know it was proposed to lade x e naval stores for Tripoli,
including the planks &c on board a ship selected for the purpose just
before the spreading of the yellow fever, which has so retarded and
deranged business, as to render it impra[c]ticable to embark those
articles till the ensuing sprin when they w3.I be forwarded.
Shoud the Bey of Tripoli fisix-e an armed vessel to be built for him
in the United States, even if he proposes to pay for her, you will as
much as possible discharge the request, and if you cannot evade it,
you may ropose to report it to your Government: But if you find our
peace d b e endangered without your agreeing to furnish an armed
vessel of ten or twelve pns, ou may give your consent; but stipulate
for time enough to dehver t e vesssl a t Tripoli; and considering the
great distance and numerous accidents to cause delays, eighteen
months may be not too much.

I

274

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1785 TO 1801

You know the opposing interests of the European nations in regard
to the Barbary states, and thence how little the sincere aid of their
Consuls is to be relied on: et you know that we experienced the
friendship of the Swedes a t giers, and the Spanis[h] Consul, Gerardo
Joseph de Souza a t Tripoli, has manifested by his acts such good will to
the United States as to merit the warmest acknowledgements from the
Government. He was very useful to Captain O'Brien in forming the
Treaty; and to Captain Ingraham he has been a father as well as friend.
The letter addressed to him you will be careful to deliver, with such
expressions of respect and gratitude as his friendly conduct merits.
Among the three regencies eastward of Morocco, the United States
have considered Algiers as the most important; and in consequence
have there established a Consul General; the Government intending
that the Consuls a t Tripoli and Tunis should regularly correspond
with him, state all difficulties and demands which occur, and on
all material points request his opinion and advices. This is not
an arrangement of the moment, but intended for a permanent
system: no personal considerations will therefore contravene it.
There will still be a wide field for the exercise of the talents of the
Consuls; and on the questions they suggest for the consideration and
advice of the Consul General a t Algiers, they may mark out a line of
conduct to be pursued and exhibit their reasons for preferring it to any
other: these i t must be presumed will have their just weight with the
Consul General, and the Consuls will receive the credit due to them
from the Government of the United States. For besides corresponding
with the Consul General, the Consuls of Tripoli and Tunis will maintain a constant communication with the Department of State. If no
special occurrence requires a letter: yet let it be a standing rule to
write once a month if it be only to say that all's well.

J

*
*
*
*
*
*
*
In the present state of things it seems desirable that American

vessels should avoid the Barbary ports: for either by the peremptory
powers, or tempted by offers of good freights, they may take on board
the persons or goods of their subjects, when if inevitable misfortunes
and losses ensue, the United States will be required to make indemnities - and a t exorbitant valuations. Such was the case of the Ship
Fortune, belonging to the Bacris a t Algiers. After having been ut
under the American flag to carry our captives from Algiers to J a r seilles, she was afterwards kept or placed anew under that flag for the
purposes of the Bacris alone; and when laden on their account, and
captured and condemned by the British, the Bacris demanded and
compelled M' Barlow to give his obligation to pay them 40,987 Dollars.

*

*

*

*

*

*

*

The office of Consul of the United States for one of the States of
Barbary is a trust of high importance. On your good conduct may
depend the peace of your country and the consequent extensive interests of your merchants. These will r e q w e your vigilant attention.
The abuses of which a Barbary Consulate is capable, renders the trust
reposed in our integrity and fidelity the more honorable. The
President reies on your acquitting yourself in a manner to prove that
this confidence was well deserved.

*

*

*

*

*

*

[NA. SDA. Dip. Cor., Inst. to Min., Bk 5, Dec. 1798-Sept. 1800.1

*

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

275

To James Leander Cothcart, U. 8. Consul, Tripoli, from Secretary of State

DEPARTMENT
OF STATE,
Philadelphia, Dec: 2Ot! 1798.
SIR,YOUwere so obliging as to propose several questions relative
to Barbary affairs. Without repeating them, I will answer them in
their order.
1. I t will neither be "necessary" nor expedient to solicit the Dey of
Algiers to use his influence with the Bey of Tunis, either to procure
a reception of Captain Eaton, notwithstanding any opposition by
Mr Famin, or to effect the requisite alteration of the Treaty he
negotiated in agrist 1797, with the Bey. The interposition of the late
Dey, Hassan Bashaw, served only to kindle the resentment of the
Bey of Tunis, $ to embarrass the negotiation & aggravate the terms
of the Treaty.
2. For answers to these I refer to the instructions addressed jointly
3) to C a n t Richard OIBrien, C a p t Eaton, t% yourself 118 December
4.
17981.
5. The Senate having, in their examination of the treaty arranged by
Mr Famin with Tunis, explicitly objected only to the fourteenth
article, and advised a new negotiation only on the account, i t would
not be expedient to form a new treaty, wh~chalso would probably be
more dficult than to procure an alteration in one or a few articles:
You will see, too, by the instructions before mentioned, that altho'
you are to endeavour to get altered the eleventh & twelfth articles of
the treaty, the alterations in the fourteenth are alone to be insisted
on. Besides, excepting these three articles, the treaty is well enough
6. My letter to Mr Famin (of which capt. Eaton will have a copy) and
the arguments which you and your colleagues are to use, according to
your instructions, together with the compensation for services whch
you are authorized to make him, it is expected will remove his o b j e ~ tions, & prevent his injuring our affairs: a t aU events, however, be is
not to be appointed our Consul. If in opposition to all these means
and arguments he should persist to demand the Consulate,he would
thereby demonstrate that he was unworthy of the trust.
7. It is the obvious interest of the United States to receive the good
offices of the Consuls of any nation who s h d manifest a sincere
disposition to serve us: and a t the present time, I believe no nation
whatever is better disposed to befriend us and to cultivate our good
will, than the British: and this spirit d l of course actuate their
Consuls & ministers. Their aid is not only to be accepted, but
requested, is found necessary: and the interposition of no other
national agents can be equally effected; for certainly the unpnrelleled
victory of Admiral Nelson, on the African coast, must be well h o w
in all the Barbary Regencies, whence must arrive the most elevated
ideas of their power; and to be the known friend of such a power, and
to receive its assistance t h o ' its public agents, cannot fail of promoting
our interests, if i t should not insure to us success. - As to the French,
whether we have an open and declared war with them or not, we are
to expect no aid from their Consuls. M! Barlow states, that from
first to last, the have been our determined enemies in Barbary.
Even his friend erculais, who recommended Mr Famin to negotiate
for us a t Tunis, has since avowed it to be the interest of France and
the duty of its agents, to oppose the interests of the United States

II

276

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1786 TO 1801

among the Barbary Powers. Herculais has also accused Mr Famin
as unfit to be trusted with our negotiation, and Farnin in his turn
accuses and reproaches Herculais: on both sides the reproaches may
be well founded.

I refer you to your separate instructions.
11
10. This is a subject for the consideration of the government, not

necessary now to be decided.
[NA. SDA. Dip. Cor., Inat. to Min., Bk 5, Dec. 1798-Sept. 1800.1

120 December 17981
Inatructions to Captain William Penrose, commander of the armed Schooner

Skjddebrand

You being appointed to the command of the armed Schooner
Skjoldebrand, are forthwith to proceed to the City of Algrers, and
there deliver her with her cargo, Stores and equipments, to Richard
O'Brien Esquire the Consul of the United States a t that City.
As you have a crew competent to the defence of the Schooner
ainst ordinary cruisers so you are to defend her accordingly agmnst
attacks but those of superior force. You are therefore to prepare
your officers and crew for such defence, and maintain the necessary
order and dicipline among them as well for this object as for the safe
navigating of the Schooner to her destined port.
The Brig Haman Bashuw and the Brigantine Sophia, also the
property of the United States, and armed for defence, are to sail
with 'you for &em.
You are to use all your endeavours to keep
company together, and for your mutual protection and defence.
These orders for using arms, you will observe point only to defence:
you are therefore not to give chase to or attempt to take any vessel
you may meet with. Nevertheless, Should you a t sea fall in with any
American vessels in the hands of French captors, you may retake
them. And you will understand that it is against the French Cruisers
that these orders for defence are mainly intended: the Government
of that nation having laid aside all regard to the law of Nations and
the most plain and acknowledged principles of justice, in the arrets
and regulations i t has made in regard to the capture and condemnation of neutral vessels, and especially those of the United States. I n
attempting a recapture of an American vessel, you will consider well
her Strength, and attempt nothing a t the risque of the Schooner
under your command, or of her consorts. You may also take under
your convoy any American vessel holding the same course and sailing
so well as not to retard your voyage. In case of making a recapture,
you are not materially to deviate from your proper course, nor essentially diminish the force of your crew. If ou chance to overtake the
Schooner Lehh E G h and her convoy the
Hero, au will endeavor
to keep company with them. and enter the
of &em together.
The United States brig9 S o hia is to be considered as the Commodore of this little fleet. ~ % Signals
e
to be observed a t sea have
doubtless been concerted between her commander, Capt. Gedde~,
Capt. Smith, and yourself, and also with Captain Maley of the

3

SLbbn,

-

277

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

Lehzh Eiahu and Captain Robinson of the Store Ship Hero, who have
sailed for Algiers, but whom you may chance to overtake.
DEPARTMENT
OF STATE,
Philadelphia Decr 20. 1798.
[SDA. Dom. L, Vol. 11.1

120 December 17981
Private instructions to Captain William Penrose, commander of the armed
Schooner S&Lkbmnd

If visited by an European vessel of War of Superior force, and
your papers are demanded, you will exhibit your Sea letter and
Commission from the President of the United States: If by any
Barbary Cruizer, you will exhibit your Mediterranean Passport, and
the passport of the Dey of Algiers m the Turkish language and under
the Dey's Seal. These ought to Satisfy any vessel of War. If,
however, other papers shall be required, you may exhibit the inventory of the Schooner and her equipments, the invoice of goods and
stores on board her, your clearance and any other customary papers.
If practicable, you will avoid all communications m t h Portuguese
armed vessels, because the Portuguese are a t War with Algiers; and
although not desirous to molest us, yet if their Shi s should meet any
of ours destined for Algiers, with contraband artic es (and the armed
vessels now destined for Algiers are eminently contraband) disagreeable consequences may follow. There can be no objection to your
speaking with an British armed vessels: because from them you
may expect friend y attentions, and if necessary, assistance.
If not inconven~entto touch at Gibraltar, you may do it, and
make known your destination to our Consul, John Gavino Esqr - If
any change should have taken place to render-your going to Algiers
improper or unsafe, he can inform you: p d m this c t y , you will
secure your vessel until you can get advice from Captarn O'Brien
a t Algiers, how to proceed; contriving to let him know, 8s soon as
possible, your Situation. In such case also you will get Mr Gavino
to write an account of it to ColQHumphreys, our Minister in Madrid,
and to William Smith Esqr our Minister in Lisbon. What they, or
either of them shall finally advise, you are to do. But this caution
is suggested only because it is possible (for i t is not probable) that
there may be reasons to forbid you to roceed to Algiers.
If you should fall in on the coast of I4orocco, off Tangier, you will
there find James Simpson Esqr American Consul with whom you
may in like m y e r advise and consult. But the chance of there
bein any objection to your proceedmg directly to Algiers is so
s m d , and the danger so great of meetmg with French rivateers
near the Streight's mouth, seeing they frequent the Spanis porbs of
Algesiras on one hand and Ceuta on the other - if the wind should
be favourable, i t will be best for you to push forward, and go directly
to Algiers.
TIMOTHY
PICKERINO.

P

i

l

DEPARTMENT
OF STATE

Philadelphia Decr 90. 1798.
[SDA. Dom. L. Vol. 11.1

278

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1786 TO 1801
[20 December 17981

Instructions to Captain John Smith, commander of the armed Brigantine
Hatsan Bashalo

You being appointed to the command of the Armed brigantine
Hassan Bashaw, are forthwith to proceed to the city of Algiers, and
there deliver her with her cargo Stores and equipments, to Richard
O'Brien Esquire the Consul of the United States a t that City.
As you have a crew competent to the defence of the brigantine
against ordinary cruizers, so you are to defend her accordingly against
all attacks but those of Superior force. You are therefore to prepare
your Officers and crew for such defence, and maintain the necessary
order and discipline among them as well for this object as for the safe
navigating of the Brigantine to her destined port.
The Schooner Skjoldebrand and the Brigantine Sophia also the
property of the United States, and armed for defence, are to sail with
you for Algiers. You are to use all your endeavours to keep company
together, and for your mutual protection and defence.
These orders for using arms, you will observe point only to defence:
You are therefore not to give chase to or attempt to take any vessel
you may meet with. Neverthless, should you a t Sea fall in with any
American vessels in the hands of French captors, you may retake them
and you will understand that i t is against the French cruisers that
these orders for defence are mainly intended: the government of that
nation having laid aside all regard to the law of nations and the most
plain and acknowledged principles of justice, in the arrets and regulations i t has made in regard to the capture and condemnation of
neutral vessels, and especially those of the United States. In attempting a recapture of an American vessel, you will consider well her
strength, and attempt nothing at the risque of the Brigantine under
your command, or of her consorts. You may also take under your
convoy any American vessel holding the same course and sailing so
well as not to retard your voyage. I n case of making a recapture,
you are not materially to deviate from your proper course, nor essentially diminish the force of your crew.
If you chance to overtake the Schooner Lelah Eisha and her convoy
the Ship Hero, you will endeavour to keep company with them, and
enter the port of Algiers together.
Captain Geddes of the Sophia is to be considered as the Commodore
of this little fleet. The Signals to be observed a t sea have doubtless
been concerted between you, Captain Geddes and Captain Penrose,
and also with Captain Maley of the Lelah Eisha, and Captain Robinson of the Store Ship Hero, who have sailed for Algiers, but whom you
may chance to overtake.
PICKERING.
TIMOTHY
DEPARTVENT
OF STATE
Deeember 20th1788
[SDA. Dom. L, Vol. 11.1

1

[20 December 17981
Private instructions to Captain John Smith, commander of the armed Brigantine
H w a n Baahmo

If visited by an European vessel of war of su erior force, and your
papers are demmded, you will exhibit your sea etter and cornmiseion
from the President of the United States. If by any Barbary cruiser,

I'

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS
- -

279

ou will exhibit your Mediterranean passport, and the passport of the
b e y of Algiers in the Turkish language and under the Deys Seal.
These ought to satisfy any vessel of war. If however other papers
shall be required, you may exhibit the inventory of the brigantine
and her equipments, the invoice of goods and stores on board her,
your clearance, and any other customary papers.
If practicable, you will avoid all communications with Portuguese
armed vessels; because the Portuguese are a t war with Algiers; and
altho' not desirous to molest us, yet if their Ships should meet any of
ours destined for Algiers with contraband articles (and the armed
vessels now destined for Algiers are eminently contraband) disagreeable consequences may follow. There can be no objection to your
speaking with an British armed vessels: because from them you
may expect frien y attentions, and if necessary, assistance.
If not inconvenient to touch a t Gibraltar, you may do it and make
known your destination to our Consul John Gavino Esqr - - If any
change should have taken place to render your going to Algiers improper or unsafe, he can inform you, and in this case you wdl secure
your vessel until you can get advice from Captain O'Brien a t Algiers,
how to proceed, contriving to let him know as soon as possible, your
situation. In such case also you will get M' Gavino to write an account of it to ColQHumphreys, our Minister in Madrid, and to William
Smith Esqr, our Minister in Lisbon. What they or either of them shall
finally advise, .-you are to do. But this caution is suggested only because it is possible (for it is not probable) that there may be reasons to
forbid you to proceed to Algiers.
If you should fall in, on the coast of Morocco, off Tangier you will
there f h d James Simpson Esq' American Consul, with whom you may
in like manner advise and consult.
But the chance of there being any objection to your proceeding
directly to Algiers is so small, and the danger so p e a t of meeting with
French privateers near the Streight's mouth, seemg they frequent the
Spanish ports of Algesiras on one hand and Ceuta on the other if the wind should be favourable, it will be best for you to push forTIMOTHY
PICKERING
ward, and go directly to Algiers.

d

DEPARTMENT
OF STATE,
P h M p h k Deer 20.1798.
[SDA. Dom. L, Vol. 11.1
[20 December 17981
To Captain Henry Geddes, commander of the armed Brigantine Sophia

You are hereby appointed to act as Commodore of the little fleet
destined for Algiers, consisting of your own Brigantine Sophia, - the
Hassan Bashaw brigantine commanded by Captain John S m t h and
the Schooner Skjoldebrand commanded by Captain William Penrose.
You will, if it has not already been done agree on the signals to be
observed on your voyage. If you fall in with the Schooner Lelah
Ekhu and Store Ship Hero, now on their voy e to Algiers, they are
to join the fleet; and the whole to use their en eavours to keep company, and enter the port of Algiers together. TIMOTHY
PICKERINQ.
DEPARTMENT
OF STATE
Phila. December 20. 1798

Yi

[SDA. Dom. L. Vol. 1I.]

280

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1785 TO 1801
[20 December 17981
To Captain Henry Geddes from President John A d a m

To Captain Henry Geddes, commander of armed brigantine Sophia.
The said brigantine and her cargo, which are the property of the
United States, you are to conduct to her destined ort, the City of
Algiers, and there deliver her eargo to Richard 8 ' ~ r i e nEsqr the
Consul General of the United States.
Being armed and manned for the protection of the brigantine and
her cargo, you are to defend the same against every attack and hostile
attempt to seize and take her: you are to preserve order and dicipline
on board your said brigantine, and your officers and men are to be
obedient to your command. For all which this is your Commission:
~
of
and in case of accident to yourself, it is to serve equally f o each
your officers who may succeed to the command of the said bngantine.
Given under my hand and the Seal of the United States, at
Philadel hia, the twentieth day of December, in the year of
our Lor 1798.

i'

BY THE PRESIDENT.

[SDA. CL,Algiers, Vol. 3, 1798.1
To Richard O'Brien, U. S. Coneul Qeneral, Algiers, from Secretaq of State

DEPARTMENT
OF STATE,
Philadelphia Decr d l . 1798.
SIR, After so long delay, the armed vessels destined for Algiers are
now departing. The schooner Lelah Eisha, Captain William Maley
commander, has indeed sailed, taking under her convo the ship
Hero, Captain Robinson, laden with timber and stores or Algiers.
The Hassan Bashaw, the Schooner Skjoldebrand, and the brigantine
Sophia, are now ready to sail, and it is expected will reach Algiers
as soon as the Lelah Ehha and the Hero.
I have received your letters of the 2 d , 6*P & 79' of March, with
sundry documents. From the state of our affairs a t Algiers and the
other two eastern regencies, it is unfortunate that the cash you took
with you was not lodged at Gibraltar: it is only to be lamented that
Barbaq proves such a devouring gulph. But no one demand appears
more provoking than that of the two Jews, Joseph Coen Bacn and
Niftal~Busna, for the estimated price of the Ship Fortune and Cargo,
being 40,987 dollars, undor pretence that she was an American bottom,
because a t their instance, or that of their partners a t Leghorn, American papers were given to her, to enable her to hoist the American
flag - for the interest not of the United States, but solely for the
Interest of the Jews. Had the Ship been really American, we could
not complsin of the demand for the value of her cargo, which, according to the usage in Barbary, that the flag shall be res onsible for the
cargo, we should not hesitate to pay. But after Mr I
!arlow'e efforts,
to parry this unreasonable claim, and after his giving bond for the
ayment, doubtless all further remonstrance d be fruitless. If,
b w e m r , Bacri a Busna will not relinquish or abate in this demand,
it is not too much to ask longer forbearance of payment. The cargo
of the So hia is intended to cancel a large part of their demand;
and this tfupment has exhausted the remainder of the vaat appmpri-

f

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

281

ations for Barbary affairs. An estimate is now before Congress for
additional grants; and in the ensuing Spring further progress will be
made in fulfilling our Barba engagements. If however the three
armed vessels destined for the ey and Regency reach algiers in safety
we earnestly hope you will with them, be able to cancel our most
burthensome stipulations with Algiers. As to the large masts m
particular, i t [is] barely possible that we should ever furnish them;
and as they are too big for any Algerine cruizers, others might be
substituted, if masts cannot wholl be dispensed with. So extremely
expensive have been and must <e the qttempts b procure them
that each mast, originally estimated a t Algiers to cost thirty dollars:
delivered there, will cost the United States from six to eight hundred.
Herewith you will receive invoices of the cargoes of the store ship
Hero, Captain Robinson, the brigantine Hassan Bashaw, Captain
Smith, the Schooner Skjoldebrand, Captain Penrose, and the schooner
Lehh Eisha, Captain Maley, all which cargoes are on account of our
stipulations with the Algerines, some articles excepted which were put
on board to fill up vacancies, and which i t was expected would pay
a freight to Algiers. Among these articles are some which may serve
for Tripoli, of which you and Captain Cathcart will make such a
selection as you shall think will be most acceptable, either directly in
discharge of the stipulations with that power, or as substitutes for
others still behind. I also inclose you the invoice of the cargo of the
United States brigantine Sophia, Captain Henry Geddes, containing
parts of the oods which Bacri & Busnah desired to have shipped on
account of %f r Clarke's bill in their favor for the 40,987 dollars which
Mr Barlow e aged to pay them for the Ship Fortune and Cargo.
You mentione in your letter of March 6 tQ that these goods must be
shipped on the account and risk of the United States: this has been
done: I consider them as the property of the United States: and conseht to charge Bacri & Busna with their
quently you will have a
amount a t the current who esale prices of the like goods a t Algiers.
They cannot make any reasonable objection to this. But before the
delivery of the articles to them you may select such small portions of
each as you and captains Eaton & Cathcart shall think important to
apply in presents a t Tunis & Tripoli.
The Schooner Maria, converted into a brig by Captain Graves,
returned to Boston, where when sold with some trifling cargo, she
scarcely defrayed the wages of the crew: The loss sustained in this
case having arisen from the fraud or folly of the American master we
must be content to bear.
Mr Donaldson's protested bill, now in the hands of the Bacris, for
£473.14. - Sterling must rest a little while, until the accounts of Mr
Donaldson, who has lately returned to the United States, can be
examined.
ect will be accomplished in a few weeks, when
I will immediately
This Iad ess you on the subject.
On the first of November last I received a letter from Mr George
Clarke, with his account of monies received and expended a t Algiers
while officiating as the Agent of the United States, under Mr Barlow's
appointment. A copy of that account I now enclose for your examination; and I beg you to report to me your oplnion upon its.varioua
items. Besides an a arent of economy m general, some arbcles are
extremely exceptiona e and others inadmissible. For these reasons,
I shall decline accepting his bill, whenever it arrives, for the balance

%

?

"P

\!'

282

NAP*& OPERATIONS FROM 1785 TO 1801

he has stated to be due to bim. This balance is not equal to the sums
which are evidently inadmissible in his account. My letter to him
stating my principal objections, is inclosed for your information.
I inclose the instructions directed by the President of the United
States to be given to you and to Captains Eaton & Cathcart, relative
to a new negotiation with Tunis. Those instructions are so full, I
need only refer you to them for your information of the President's
mind on the subjects to be discussed. If without any disadvantage
to our affairs in Algiers, you can go with the other two Consuls to
Tunis, the President will be well pleased in your doing it. Otherwise
you will consent and agree with them on the mode of proceeding
which shall appear most proper to insure success - T d
lmake only
one remark, that after considering yours and Mr Barlow's communications on Tunissian affairs, it appears very evidently, that the interference of the Dey of Algiers, to force a peace for the United States
with Tunis, did us much harm: it irritated the Bey, and aggravated
his demands.
I n the event of a successful negotiation with Tunis, a Consular
present may be necessary. So also may one be expedient for Tripoli.
You will advise with captain Eaton and Captain Cathcart on the
articles to compose these presents, and reduce them to as low a scde
as possible.
For the convenience of the Consuls at Tunis and Tripoli, in receiving
their salaries, and in emergences to prevent any injury to the United
States by delay, it will be expedient to establish a credit a t each of
those places, with some substantial House on which the Consuls may
draw. This matter you will well consider, and arrange with them in
such limits as shall appear to be best for the interest of the United
States.
The extraordinary emergences requiring instant disbursements of
money, the Consuls a t Tunis and Tripoli are as expeditiously as
possible to report to you: on all other occasions of consequence, they
are previously to request your advice and opinion. Those Consuls,
in their instructions, are mformed, that among the three regencies
eastward of Morocco, the Government has considered Algiers as the
most important; and in consequence have there established a Consul
General; it being intended that the Consuls at Tunis and Tripoli
should regularly correspond with him, state all di£Eiculties and demands which occur, and on all material points request his opinion and
advice ; and this is not an arrangement for the moment, but intended
as s permanent sys tern.
By a letter from Mr Ingraham, our temporary Agent at Tripoli,
communicated by Mr Barlow, i t appears that he had provided and
fitted up a House for the residence of our Consul. I t seems proper
that the like provision should be made at Tunis, in case the peace
should be confirmed.
The United States brigantine Sophia accompanies the other armed
vessels to Algiers, for two purposes: to transport the articles intended
to cancel a part of M Barlow's bond to Bacri & Busnah; and bring
home the crews of the Hassun Bmhaw, Skjokkbrand and Lelah E&b.
But it may ha pen that crews may be conveniently sent home in
American vesse s at Algiers coming to the United States; while it-may
be necessary to employ the Sophia in a vo a e to Tunis and Tnpofi,
with the Consuls. This is a matter on w 'c you w i l l consult with

f

I%

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

283

them. The Government is engaged to bring home those crews; i t is
important to secure the return of so many seamen; and the continuance of their wages until they are sent home, is an object not to be
overlooked. Let all circumstances be weighed, and the best interests
of the United States govern the decision. But at all events the c r e w
are to be provided with passages to the United States, and without
unreasonable delay.
I inclose several other papers besides those already mentioned, and
the whole are noted below.
[NA. SDA. Dip. Cor., Inst.

to Min., Bk

5, Dec.

179SSept. 1800.1

To Captain Henry Geddes of the Brigantine Sophia, from Secretary of State

DEPARTMENT
OF STATE
PHILADELPHIA
Decr dl. 1798
SIR, The United States armed Brigantine Sophia, under your command being laden on their account and destined for Algiers, you will
proceed thther and deliver your cargo to Richard O'Brien Esquire
the Consul General of the United States a t that place.
The armed Brigantine Hassan Bashaw and armed Schooner
Skjoldebrand being to sail a t the same time, you will endeavour to
keep company with them; and if you meet w t h any armed vessel,
and she attacks or attempts to capture either of your vessels, you
are to defend yourselves to the utmost of your power. Such attacks
or attempts you may expect only from the French cruisers, or cruisers
equipped in Spain under the influence or countenance of the French.
From British Cruisers you will apprehend no annoyance; on the
contrary, from them you may expect every friendly assistance, when
the shall know the character and destination of the Sophia.
!&he Brigantine Sophia is to be considered as the Commodore of
this little armament. The signals to be observed a t sea have doubtless been concerted between the Hassan Bashaw Captain Smith,
Ca tain Penrose of the Skjoldebrand, and yourself; and also with the
Eisha, Captain Mnley and Captain Robinson of the Ship Hero,
should you come up with them on our passage t.o Algiers.
In case of Separation, you will ma e the best of your way toAlgiers.
Should i t be perfectly convenient, you may touch a t Gibraltar, where
John Gavino, the American Consul will advise you of any dangers
respecting the further rosecution of your voyage, and especially if
any circumstances shou d forbid your proceeding thither, without information from Captain O'Brion: and in the mean time Mr Gavino
will have the goodness to write to our ministers at Madrid and Lisbon,
and ask their advise on the State of things. If you should fall in on the coast of Morocco, and i t should be convenient to touch a t Tangier, yon may do it: You will there find
James Simpson Esqr the American Consul for Morocco, who will
ive you any necessary advise and assistance. - But there is so
ettle -0,
t~ apprehend my d a c u l t y in going to Algiers, if on
your arrival a t the Streights the wind proves fair, i t will be best to
take advantage of it, to push thro' and roceed directly to Algiers.
The greatest danger to be apprehended rom hostile cruisers is conceived to be near the entrance of the Mediterranean Sea, as those
cruisers frequent the Spanish ports of Algesiras on one side, and
Ceuta on the other.

LJ&

I

P

P

284

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1785 TO 1801

The primary objects of sending the Sophia to Algiers are, to carry
her present cargo thither, and then to bring home the crews of the
Hassan Ba-zhaw, the Skjoldebrand, and U a h Ei~ha,
which three vessels are to be delivered and left a t that city. It may happen however,
that American vessels may be returning from Alpers to the United
States, in which the crews of those three armed vessels may be conveniently embarked; and that it may be important for you to proceed in the Sophia with the Consuls Eaton and Cathcart, to Tunis
and Tripoli. On this oint, the Consul General a t Algiers, Capt.
O'Brien, and the Consu s Eaton and Cathcart will consult, and determine as the best interests of the United States shall appear to require;
bearing in mind that the crews of the three Armed vessels must be
provided with passages to America; it has been promised to them;
and it is important that the promise should be performed, as well to
secure the future services of such a number of mariners, as in point
of economy, because !heir wages will go on until their return; unless
they ooluntarily come lnto some new agreement at Algiers.
If it should be determined that the Sophia should proceed to Tunis
eeable to you to continue in the
and Tripoli, I hope it will be
command of her: but if it sho d be inconvenient and you prefer
returning immediately to the United States, the Sophia may be transferred to the Command of one of the American Captains now going
to Algiers, whom Captain O'Brien shall select for that purpose.

P

r

[SDA. Dom. L. Vol. 11.1

[21 December 17981
Instrnctiona to John Shaw, Surgeon, from Secretary of State

SIR,You being appointed Surgeon for the Armed vessels, the
Brigantine Hassan Bashaw, the Schooner Skjoldebrand, and the
Brigantine Sophia, belonging to the United States and now about to
sail for Algiers, are to proceed with them thither, and to demean
yourself as becomes that character. As the Sophia accompanies the
other two, for the purpose of bringing home their crews, as well as
the crew of the Schooner Lelah Eisha, lately dispatched thither, you
will return with those crews conformably with the orders of Richard
O'Brien Esqz the American Consul a t &erg.
Y o u compensation
and allowance will be upon the footing of a Surgeon's mate in the
Navy of the United States.
Given under m Hand and the Seal of the Department of
State, a t Phi adelphia, this 21" Decr 1798.
TIMOTHY
PICKERING
L. S.
[SDA. Dom. L, Vol. 11.1

i

[21 December 17981
Endorsement on the Passport of the Dey of .Algiers, given by Captain Smith,
Master of the armed Brigantme HDUMBd410

"This passport in the Turkish language, under the Seal of the Dey
and Regency of Algiers I commit to Captain John Smith commander
of the Armed Brigantine called the Hasean Bashaw, which with her
tackle, apparel, furniture, Stores, boatw and goods on board her,
the property of the United States of America, are destined for
Algiers, there to be delivered to the Dey on account of the Stipulations

pw

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

285

and agreements entered into between the United States and the Dey
and Regenc of Algiers. This passport being furnished by that power
to protect t e said Brigantine, her equipments, goods and all persons
and things on board her against all nations with whom the Dey and
Regency are at peace, in like manner as the passports from the
Executive and m c e r s of the United States are designed to protect
them from molestation by any powers with whom the U. States are a t
peace."
In Witness whereof I have hereto Set my hand and seal of
Office a t Philadelphia the 21.' day of December 1798.
L.S.
TIMOTHY
PICKERING
Secretay of Stale.
A similar certificate was endorsed on the Dey of Algier's passport
given to Captain William Penrose, Commander of the Armed Schooner
SkjoZdebrand, and also upon another given to Lieutenant William
Maley, Master of the Armed Schooner LeZah Eisha, but the latter was
dated on the lot!' of Novs 1798.

g

[SDA. Dom. L. Vol. 11.1
To Captain John Smith from Secretary of State

[PHILADELPHIA]
Department of State Decr 22. 1798.

Captain JOHN
SMITH,
of the Hassan B a s h .
SIR,I am happy to inform you that every thing is now prepared for
the departure of the vessels bound to Algiers. Your Commission and
instructions will be handed you by Mess!! Eaton and Cathcart.
As the Sophia is to accompany the Hmsan B a s h and Skjoldebrand, and has the consuls on board; as Captain Geddes also is an old
Sea-commander; there is a propriety in his acting as Commodore for
the little fleet. The interest of the United States and your common
ease and safety require the utmost harmony and readmess, to give
assistance mutually.
[SDA. Dom. L. Vol. 11.1
To Tench Francis, U. S. Purveyor, from Secretary of State

[PHILADELPHIA]
Department of State Decr 22. 1798.
I request you to purchase immediately so many pieces of the best
su erfine cloths as can be stowed in such a large trunk as can be carried
beL n d a Stage waggon. Captain Cathcart will designate the colours.
They must be packed to-day, and be ready for moving to morrow
with Captains Eaton and Cathcart to the Sophia.
[PDA. Dom. L. Vol. 11.1
To Jamea Leander Cathcart, U. S. Consul, Tripoli, from Secretary of State

DEPARTMENT
OF STATE,
PHILADELPHIA
Dee: 8Jt@1798.
SIR,In my letter of the 20tQinstant, I omitted @de?ke what I wish
may receive our earliest attention - a communication to the Department of tate of the most correct information attainable, of the
naval force of Tripoli, the species of armed vessels, the number of
their guns and men; also the nations with whch that Regency is a t

8

286

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1785 TO 1801

War, the times in the year when those armed vessels usually put to
sea; their common cruizing ground, and their modes of attack. I t
will likewise be very desirable to obtain the most accurate information
of the several ports of Tripoli, the quality of their roads and the bars
as to the depth of water and exposure to winds, and the manner of
entering them with safety. As soon also as you can get correct information of their form of government; their military force, how many
regular troops, and their state of discipline, and their numbers and
condition of the militia, you will communicate the same.
If there be some months in the year when the navigation on the
Barbary coast is more dangerous than in others, you will note them
accordingly; and general course of the winds, and their violence and
moderation a t the different seasons.
In the estimate of the stores stipulated for Tunis, of which a copy
was given to Capt-aton,
instead of twelve hundred read twelve
thousand cannon ball: - They are supposed to weigh 60 tons which is
right.
As the cypher in words will be found less embarrassing than the one
in letters with a key word, it will in general be best to use the former,
as will between the three Consuls a t Algiers, Tunis and Tripoli, and
William Smith Esq: our Minister a t Lisbon as with the department
of State. But if there should be any thing to communicate among the
Consuls or to the department of State requiring impenetrable secrecy,
then use the letter cy her with the key agreed on.
Great care must e taken in writing in cyphers, to avoid errors,
which might have injurious consequences.
N. B. A copy of the above letter to Wm EATON
EsqS C d ~ O T
Tunis.

l

[NA. SDA.

Dip. Cor., Inst. to Min., Bk 5, Dec. 1798-Sept. 1800.1

124 and 29 December 17981
Quasi-War, United States and France
[ N o ~ ~ . - - s ereport
e
of Secretary of the Navy to Speaker of the House of Representatives, concerning vessels emplo ed in, and preparin for, the service of the
United States; printed in "Naval Socuments, ~uasi-$sr, United States and
France", second volume (November, 1798 to March, 1799), pp. 113 to 121, 24
December.
See also report of hcretary of the Navy to House of Representatives, dated 29
December, 1798, concerning the augmentation of the Navy to ensure protection to
the United Ststes; printed in the above-mentioned voiume, pp. 129 to 134.1
To David Hnmphreys, U. 8. lldinister to Madrid, Spain, from Richard O'Brien,
U. 8. Consul Oenerd, Algiers, to be forwarded to Secretary of State
ALG'~.
decembr 27*."to the 330 1798.

Dr SIR "On the 20" inst the grand Signiors ambassador arrived in
this City, with orders and letters to the dey and Regency to declare
war agamst france. On the Morning of the 21* the dey and Divan of
Algiers Ordered the french Consul and all the free french in Algiers to
the number of 18 in Chains The[y] are employed as Captives
"The De Sent orders to his Eastern general to Surprize and Send to
Algiers a the french that is in the factory of Le Calla, or the Bastion a
place the french has on this Coast for the Coral fishery -

E

287

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

"On the 25'P Sailed 6 Algerine Corsairs and is ordered by the Dey to
take all the french thely] meet with.
"The Tunician Government, in Obedience to the grand Signiors
Orders, Observed that the[y] would act as the Algerines would. The
dey has Sent Orders to Tunis to declare war and Secure the french.
The number of french a t Tunis is 250. The[y] will all be made Slaves
of, and of Course Tripolia will adopt the Same plan.
"The grand Signiors firman is forwarded to Morrocco, and backed
Strongly by the de 's influence. So that you may depend that all the
Barbe~yStates an Ottoman Empire is a t war with the terible Republic of France, whom if necessiated will find the want of Supplies from
Barbery .
"I have received a letter from Consul appleton, of Livorn dated the
14* of November, informing me that, in August last the Corsairs,
built in Philadelphia - and destined for Algiers, was ready for Sea,
and that the[y] would wait a month longer, to take under Convoy, a
large Ship with Stores for Algiers, but hly God what Can detain
them - My Con'ecture is that the yellow fever was not Cleare of
Philadelphia until the 1" of norembr and that the[y] would Sail about
the 15* now Sir I have no information relative to what Stores, or
Vessels might be prepared, or intended for Tunis. That Government
is Anxious for Some of the Stores, and has enquired of me if any is
expected out with or under Convoy of the Corsairs, and I could not
give them a definitive Ansr as I know not what might be Sent. I am
informed by Consul Appleton that I might. c6nsuls Eaton and Cathcart, I supose with the latter the Stores for Tripolia - will be Sent,
indeed the[y] are Anxiously expected.
"Captain Ingraham, the American Charge des affairs at Tripolia has
forwarded his accounts. The[y] are very exorbitant and expensive,
and he in my Opinion, has expended 5400 dollars - on repam for a
house, to my knowledge. he Should, and might have taken a temporary
house for 60 Mauboes a yeare * * *
relative to Tunis and Mr famin, he had without any intimation to me
procured presents for Tunis to the Amount of 18: or 20 thousand
dol'"e
had a bill paid in April as you will Observe of 8000 dollars
this without any intimation, or advice but informing me that he has
done it agreeable to his orders from Mr Barlow of Course. Sometime
ast, on this Occasion I find, that between him and a Brother of his in
hersielles, that he had Obtained this credit for these presents, and
that Said articles was not to be delivered to Mom' farnin until1 that
the Money was paid, but kept in Tunis until1 that I Should order the
money paid I have not ordered the bill to be paid, but as MT famin is
a french man, and all french will find themselves in a difficult Situation
a t Tunis - I supose his present port will protect him, but I have Considered this a favourable time to adopt a plan, and determination in
the Bacries, and has got this government to order the algerine agent,
a t Tunis to have an Eye on our affairs - that if any thing Should turn
u relative to M; famin, to take Charge of the American affairs - The
agerine agent I well know, and Can So fur Confide in him -

d

1

*

*

*

*

*

*

*

288

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1785 TO 1801

To Enquire and be well informed relative to Monsr famin if there was
no alternative for all the Motives I have heretofore explained, he
should be the American Consul, but I am affraid if my information
Can be depended on, that he is much in debt. This Consideration
and from what you Can pry into, what I write you on this business
and the favourable oppertunit of the french war with A& and
Tunis, and the hopes of daily eeing those expected Corsairs arrive
to give me the oppertunity of reinforceing My plans by haveing the
potent deyr influence. I Shall try, a t all events, and unship Mr
famin, from Being American Cons[ a t Tunis - takeing Care, if he is
unshiped that he might have the protection of an American, that he
can leave Tunis free, and let him proceed to the U. S. or france and
there Settle his accounts, which Should be well looked into.
"Allmy endeavours is to try to adopt plans of Occonomie, and to
Save extra demands on the United States, and as god is My Judge,
there is left no Stone unturned on my part on this task but Sir we
want Energie, make good our Stipulations with Algiers Tunis and
Tripolia. our peace with those States has Cost us large Sums of
Money, and by the robberies of the Contending nations, we Cannot
have our Colours free. So that we might derive Some profits if we
had our Colours free in the Meditteranian, be assured we Should have
a Cleare gain annually of 1% Millions of dollars, and if war and we had
to keep up Corsairs would Cost us 1X Millions and no profits.
You Can Easily Conceive how anxious I am to heare from you on all
these important affairs and be Convinced of the Sincere regard and
Esteem of Sir
youre Most Obt Servt
RICH@
OBRIEN
On the business of Tunis I am necessiated to act in the greatest
precaution, as I am fearful1 that Mr famin might mentain his influence,
and in Consequence be an inviterate Enemie to our a@ and as the
whole of the Stipulations for Tunis, not one article of them, in Maratime and Military Stores is Sent forward, and on this account, he
might Occasion the government of Tunis to declare our treatie Void,
or to make Some new demand on account of theire detention, and that
we engaged to Supply our Vessels with passes i n one yeare. The Tops
or Cuts of Dq for the Tunis Corsairs is not Sent forward, and there is
none to give I brought out 82 for the Corsairs of Algiers 50 of these
I Sent to Tripolia and 50 Old asses, which remained in the office
hese I Sent to Tunis to Monsr famin
from the time of Mr Barlow.
whom informed me that Tunis has 100 Sail of Corsairs, and that the
government, without these to s or Cuts has ven theire word that
American Vessels Shall pass nmolested unt that the[y] have news
from the U. S. which the[y] daily expect. Thus Sir you will perceive
the Situation of our affairs with the Barbery States. The fault is we
do not act with Punctuality or Energie and knowing these Circum-

8

d'

8

P

289

WARS U71TH BARBARY POWERS

stances I point Out to you the Shoals that is under the Lee of the
good Ship the CONGRESS.
Sir, I am Very respectfully
y oure most Obt Serv'
RICH*OBRIEN
To Coloniel HUMPHREY$
a t Madrid
the Minister Plenipotentiary for
the United States of America
to be perused by him and forwarded to the American Ambassador a t
Lisbon Whom will be pleased to fonvard these dispatches to the
Secretary of State of the U. S. To John Oavino, U. S. Consul, Gibraltar, from Richard O'Brien, U. S. Consul
General, Algiers

(COPY)

ALGIERSJanua y the lot?1799

D' SIR

*

*

*

*

*

*

*

In November last I purchased from this Regency a Polacre 3
Masts which I call the O'Brien - My Motive then ingurchasing
this vessel was to have her in readiness in order to carry the Crews
of the 3 expected Corsairs after their delivery in Algiers, to the United
States, but Sir, the pressing necessit and urgency of our affairs a t
present with Algiers, Tunis and Tripo y , necessitates me in a few days
to Send this said Polacre OBrien to Spain with my Dispatches by
the Dey's orders to the American Ambassador a t Madrid & to our
Ambassador a t Lisbon - and having in this place no Americans to
Navigate said Polacre, I am necessitated to take a Crew of Italians,
and as this vessel you will observe is employed on important business
relative to the affairs of the United States and considering the Friendship subsisting between the British Nation and the United States i t
is requested that said Polacre called the OBricn, will pass free and
unmolested - You will please communicate this request of mine in
behalf of the United States to His Excellenc General O'Hara and
to Lord St Vincent and to the Commander of inorca Should the Corsairs expected for Algiers touch a t Gibraltar, I
request you will exert yourself in facilitating all in your power their
approach for Algiers as they are very anxiously expected * * *
[NA. SDA. CL, Algiers, Vol. 4, Jan-Nov. 1799.1

9

%

To David Humphreys, U. 6. Minister to Madrid, Spain, from Richsrd O'Brien,
U. 6. Coned General, Algiers

COPY

ALGIERS
January SO: 1799.
SIR, The Dey of Algiers has desired me to write and
procure for him 20 brass Cannon, 24 pounders, calculated for batteries,
with their carriages complete, also worms, ladles and sponges, and
that the Dey will pay for them on their arrival a t Algiers, or account
for the stlm they should cost - and co~siderin the situation of the
affairs of the U. S. with Algiers, Tunis and ~ r i p o fIi complied with the
Dey's request, and 've you this information so that you might communicate it to the g r e t a r y of State. I would Sir, propose to you to
write on this business to our Ambassador a t London for bim to be
&TEEMED

290

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1785 TO 1801

charged Do procure said Guns in London, and by his influence with the
British Government these Guns can be procured immediately and
shipped in the armed Transports destined from England for Mahon,
and when once there we shall in Algiers adopt a plan for their arriving
safe in this city. I believe these Guns will cost a t least 20,000 Doll9 but
i t is presumed they
be procured good and as cheap as possible,
and that on this business, as well as on dl other &airs required you
will give me answers as soon and as fully as possibly in your power.
[ND. SDA. Disp. Spain, Vol. 4, 1797-1799.1

[23 January to March 17991
To Secretary of State from Richard O'Brien, U. S. Consul General. Algiers
SEAL
DISPATCH
NV 1
PARTICULARSRELATIVETO THE AFFAIRSO F THE UNITEDSTATESOF AMERICA
IN FEB?TO THE ENDOF MARCH
1799
AT ALGIERSCOMMENCING
On the 234 Jan? a t Meridian arrived in Algiers the United States Schooner the
Lelah Eisha, commanded by Captain Maley m 38 Days from Philadelphia, whom
sailed in company with the Ship Hero Captain Robertson, loaded by the United
States with stores for Algiers. That the 34 ni ht after we (they1 were a t Sea, the
Ship Hero separated in a severe gale of wind from Ca tain Maley's account of
uud Ship, I have my fears, that she haa foundered a t &a, or so distrraaed that
she haa put into port, or fallen into the hands of the French On the arrival of this vessel, destined for this governmc I acquainted the general
of the Marine & minister for foreign affairs that the Corsairs built in the United
States, on account of Algiers, that the other two I expected woud arrive in a few
days, the General assured me hc was well pleased, that he was always my friend,
but that I well knew Algiers, & the nature of its Governmt Yes thinks I, the
Dey's will in a great measure governs all affairs. On the 24'b commenced discharging the Leloh Eisha on this occasion the
French Consul, & the whole of the french legation, were employed, they were 18
in number, employed aa captives The General of Marine desired of me to be informed when I would deliver up to
the re ncy the Schooner, I answd that when she was discharged of the stores, &
when rwoud be assured by him, that it woud be on the terms for which said vessel,
with the other two was built - We then discussed the business. I informing him
of Hamen Bashaws request to me OBrien & Mr Barlow tlmt these vessels shoud
be built & equipt a t the particular request of the Government of Algiers & that
when they arrived from the U: States a t Algiers they shoud be paid for, I added
that the late Dey desired them in lieu of annuity, their am: to be deducted from our
annual payments I shewed the General of Marine Hassen Bashaw's order relative to these corsairs
& under the seal of the regency & he & I agreed, that by shewing i t to the Dey, it
woud only kindle his rage, & we agreed to adopt other plans that looked likely to
ensure tranquility NOTE- The present Dey Babba Mustapha was prime minister to the late Dey
& notwithstanding he cannot bear his name mentioned, or any thing relative to
him, but what it kindles his anger, it will be obsefved the present Dey, originally
was a common Soldier but promoted by the influence of the late Dey Hassen
Bashaw On the morning of the 26 Jan? the Dey sent for the American Dragoman, &
desired him to acquaint me that the American corsair^ in port with the two expected ones, he woud only accept of as free g i f t s from the U: 8:as tokens of the
Americans friendship to the Dey & regency. - I answered that the Consul for the
U: S: always did aasure the Dey & regency of the friendship of the U: 8: that we
had it not in our power to give such extraordinary tokens of friendship as the Dey
requested he well knowing these Corsairs were sent here a t the particular request
of the Algerine government to be paid for & accounted for out of the annuity
The Dey anewered if I coud not give them to him gatis, that he coud not admit
them to be rec4 as deducting from our annual Stipulations, & that I of course knew
best what was for the interests of my Country -

A MEDITERRANEAN PASSPORT.

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

291

I answered that I coud not give them gratis, that I had no orders, & never need
expect any on this business, in giving these vessels as free gifts, that the honor of
Algiers was a t stake, on this affair which I received in a very delicate light. - That
the present Dey waa announced to the world aa one of the most righteous Kinga that the 3 Coraairs woud be in his power but that the world woud judge on the
circumetance, This was after prayers on Frida which is Turks Sunday The Dey declared by his faith & honor arr a &u88elman, that the Consul of the
U. S. had arrived to trick him relative to obliging the regenc to take the corsairs
for payments in Money or to be accounted for in lieu of the gtipulations annually
That we had promised those Corsaim to the late Dey when the agent of the U. 8.
seen the necessity of securing the American peace & for the friendship of the Dey
relative to the other Barbary states, That he was present with the late Dey when
the agent of the U. S. made this promise, & that if I woud not acquiesae & give
them to him we might try a long time & make another peace - This was communicated to me secretly from a real friend On the evening of the 25* the Dey sent his own Dragoman to me with this
interrogation, did not the U. S. ive the Frigate to Hassen Bashaw as a free
from the Governm* of the U. S. under this consideration is not the present
to be as much noticed, respected & honor'd as the late Dey who had such large
Sums of Money from the U. S., & intimating that he had renewed the peace & kept
it, & only recd a few trifling presents
I answered that the U. S. gave the frigate to the Dey & regency as a stipulation
for the peace, that the Hamdullah was a commission business, & was paid for,
that the money we gave for the peace & the frigate with every thing else, was a t
present in the power of the present Dey, he being by the almighty will a t the head
of this Governmt - which OBrien must observe is an iron bound republic That I did not want to take any money from the public treasury. that the
United States were in arrears in their annual stipulations, & that i t woud be found
in viewing the business in its true light by balancing one circumstance against the
other, that finally these 3 comirs woud be found under the discussion or arrangement, as gratis, I have carried no funds from Algiers to have these vessels built,
& that we on this point entirely depended on the honor of the Dey & Ministry of
this regency Next the Dey sent for me & asked me if it was known in the U. S. that Hassen
Bashaw was mort, & thab he was on the throne, & If I had any letter for him
from the Governm; of the U. S., I observed on his coming to the throne I announced the happy circumstance to the Governm* of the U. S. by several conveyances that I built on his friendship, that in consequence the U. S. had full
confidence in what I assured them on his part, & observed from the favorable
reception he gave me on his coming to the throne, that it made the most favorable
impression on me, that the Govt of the U. S. in sending these corsairs fully demonstrated the confidence they had in the Dey & minktry of Algiers, & that we
were of the opinion of the Algerines, that friendship did not consist in words but
in deeds, to be judged of by many other circumstances, & that I hoped by the Deye
seriously viewing this business in its true light, i t woud have the consideration
that was necessary from a great & wiye prince - on this he said he woud consider The schooner Lelah Eisha had her American colors, aft & Jack forward, & 8s a
usual compliment to the City, the Algerine flag a t the main - The Dey sent to
me & the same time to the Gent of Marine, & desired that the red flag, woud be
hawled down as I woud not give him these vessels as a free gift On this I went to the Marine & ordered the flag to be hawled down, & the same
time ordered Capt. Maley to hoist his American pendant & fire a gun - after this
all Algiers declared that the Dey intended to make war with the Americans This occasioned my letters to Consuls Appleton & Montgomery, dated the 26*
Jan7 1799 On the arrival of the Lelah Eisha, or any vessel it is customary to enquire what
news The Dey sent to me, I answered, that said vessel was attacked off Tariffa by
French & Spanish Gun boats, that the Gut was swarming with sea pirates, that
the whole sea pork of the U: S. was during the summer visited by the plague,
that we were making great preparations against the French That the King of En land had requested of the U. S. to make a n alliance for
100 years, that it took t%e U. S. 8 days to consider on the answer to be returned,
& that the U. S. answered, they woud take one yerrr to consider of it - & to return
a definitive answer to this important business -

gi

HARD SQUALLS
Saturday the 26* Jan?. This morning the Genl of Marine informed me that
he had with the prime minister prevailed on the Dey to let, the American affairs

292

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1786 TO 1801

rest a whiie untill the arrival of the other two corsairs I told the general 1 wes
fully convinced of his & the prime Ministers intercession relative to the american
affairs - That he well knew I was the Agent of the U: S: not sent here to lavish
away, their interests, & sacrifice my own character which I held in as high estimation 8s my life - That if the Dey insisted on those vessels fo be given gratis,
that I woud never acquiesce in it - that if they were to be detained by force
this was a different sffair - that the U. S. woud sooner lose the Ship in ballast,
than with a valuable cargo, he desired I woud explain I observed that the U. 8. never did any injury to the Algerines or the other
Barbwy States, that we gave a great sum for the peace & ransom that we gave
the Frigate & consulary presents that we had brot to Algiers 8 cargo's & 5 corsairs,
that those 3 corsairs were valuable that we R-antedthem much ourselves, that me
were preparing for defence, that we had 40 Sail of corsairs a t sea, that many more
were building that notwithstanding we were faithful to our engagements, & that
we woud aooner lose our peace a t this time - than a t some other period that the
Medettiranean has been a burying ground for our commerce, that I coud assure
him that the Americans were a brave people, that I shoud be sorry, the result
of our affairs woud be war, but that he well knew the govt of Algiers woud be in
the fault That the fact was that we did not want the peace if we coud fully rely
on this governmj in strictly observing the treaty we made, that the peace coud be
no object under any other consideration
This was my explanation to lose the Ship in ballast not with a cargo when the
U. S. woud have 2, or 300 mercht vessels in the Medettiranesn after this the
general observed I had much reason in my argument & that he hoped we would
pescably settle At this time o w affairs remained something quiet, & be convinced I was fully
occupied, tacking & sounding all parties & Classes Our best friend of the Jew party is Micish Bacri h e unfortunately during these
squalls & since is every unwell, & on the exit of the late Dey, Miciahs influence
declined whilst Kapthali Busnah one of the parties of the House, sprung up with
the present Dey, & said Busnach is as much in the favor of the present Dey, af~
Miciah was of the late Dey - So that I had on hard terms to purchase the influence of Kapthali Busnah, & in fact they or no one else, will do any service except
they are well rewarded for it, it is my Dear Sir the nature of this extraordinary
government On monday the 4* Few, a t Meridian arrived the U. S. Schooner the Skalderbrand in 29 Days from the Delaware. The wind was fresh I went on hoard, &
crouded said vessel in a croud of Sail. They Dey and ministry were well pleased
a t her fast Sailing Cspt: Penrose informed me that he parted Company with Capt. Smith of the
Hassen Bashaw on the O'P & also that he parted with the Sophia - that the
weather was very Severe, Capt : Penrose was fired a t off TarBa by the French &
Spanish Gun boats, & eeen an American Ship taken by them The Minister of the Marine informed me that i t was the Deys request to know
what each of the Schooners had cost, I answered that they esiled in a hurry, &
that the documents on this business woud come with the Brig or with the expected
Consuls
He next desired to be informed, what was the am+of all 3 with the
Store ship expected, I said I coud not well guess, that on the arrival of the other
v
d he shoud be particuIarly informed On the 8 9 e b T arrived in Algiers the U: S: Brig the Hassen h h a w Capt:
John Smith in 32 days from Philad*, this brig is the most beautiful & most compleat vessel ever seen by OBrien It being Turks Sunday & on this v d 8 coming in Bight, & arrivin oE the
City under sail, OBrien on board, fired a full salute. - The whole 8ity was
viewing said vessel, & finally the concourse of people, that wes asembled on this
occasion, were more than I ever Been on the arrival of any veasel in this Country 99 This morning the Dey desired I woud acquaint him what waa the separate
price of each of these corsairs, I said that this accf wsa not sent by any of them,
se the rivers, were closing with ice, & that the Sophia with the Consul8 woud
bring the whole dispatches I shall observe that it was very prejudicid t o the interests of the U. 8. a t this
crisis of the buainese, that the separate price of each of these vessels, wae not
horn, the ricea shoud be forwarded by each veseel & if an accident happened
the Sophia, had no Cape or bead land to go by in order to know t h a s prim.
i t woud be of nome service, but OBrien would not be lost, even that he had no
corn m, it wan enough for me to find out, the North Btar, the i n t e d of the
u.€f&tatn&ltssrbyit-

-

-

?

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS
The whole maratime class of the Algerines were captivated with those vessels
& observed generally that after they had traversed the boisterous ocean they
had arrived in Algiers, without carrying away a rope yarn, these three corsairs
arrived in perfect order & from their maneuvering in sight of all Algiers, the
regularity & that all essential maratime order, amazed the Algerines, & from this
snmple of American construction, Officers & Men, comprising the Crews of these
vessels, the Algerines are convinced that we have abilities & resources in the
United States to be a very active & stubborn enemy in case war was to be the
result or reward of all our endeavors to cultivate peace This evening the Dey sent hi^ purveyor or Jew Broker Napthali Busnach to
inquire secretly of me what the 3 Corsairs cost, it was vexatious & incredible to
the Dey to be informed that I coud not give him the requisite information on this
business, & the Dey seemed determined in having the Brig Hassen Bashaw to
himself, & woud not renounce the idea of, but what the U. S. gave the Frigate
to the late Dey, & that he woud have the Brig or finally he woud not be content,
& if we had a peace it woud be on a sandy foundation - & without doubt the
Dey being displeased his marine officers woud see under what pretence, they
woud send in American vessels in order to try to make a plea or pretence for
condemning them - & the Dey not being sstisfyed, woud be of the condemning
party - however under these & many other important considerations, I had to
consider what plan I had to adopt to content the Dey & Ministry Gain their friendship in order to give strength & security to our affairs, &
from fully viewing our affairs relative to Algiers, Tunis & Tripoli, many of our
Merchant Vessels in the Medettiranean, I found there would be a necessity to
sscrafice one of them vessels, which was the Brig for the Obdurate Dey - The
same time to see the necessity to see on what terms I shoud manage the other
important affairs, indeed a t this period of the business, I shoud have been happy
to have had the advice of the U. S. Governm*, how in the name of God I shoud
act & timid, fearing that I coud not well see my way in piloting our affairs, out
from amongst the shoals, & alarmed that I might, if once, acquiesce in giving the
Brig, that by the same rule I woud give the 2 schooners, no, one person Knew, or
had hardly any idea of what was my opinion on these affairs I t had been ur ed by the ministry a t least by a part of them in the run of this
businem, that as! had no orders to give the Dey these Corsairs, to write & bring
the Dey an answer, but during the time woud not this governm* use these corsairs
as their own & if the answer from the U. S. was no woud not this governm* keep
them, so well knowing the consequence - I prayed to the Almighty to direct
me for the best
On Saturday the Qt? FebT a t 1 P M arrived the U. S. Brig Sophia, Commodore
Geddis in 33 days from the Delaware having on board Consuls Eaton & Cathcart, I r e d the dispatches of the Secv of State, & escorted the eastern Bashaws on
Shore, introduced them to the minister of the Marine, & proceeded up to the
old & dismal American house & attended strictly to my official duty
At 7 P M went to the Minister of Marine's house & presented to him the
following prices of the 3 corsairs, my mind had got a start from reading the
presidents measage to congress of June the 21* 1798 it certainly had that effect
on me, that I raised my voice & considered myself as the representative of a
great, free, powerful, & independent nation, & I viewed the U. S. a t war with
Algiers & then a t peace, & be convinced i t was not much of a balance from
either -

-

-

Ddlt

Ddh

Brig Hassen Bashaw - - - - - - - - - 39,848 Brig- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 49,000
Schooner SkbMebrand - - - _ _ - _ _
21,088 Schooner- - - - - - - - - - - - - 28,000
~ e L hish ha - - - - - - - - 17,941 2 do - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 21,000
do
Philad* Price - - - - - - - - - 78,877

OBriem Price- - - 98,000
78,877

Difference- - - - - - 19, 123 Dollam
.* I had a full discussion with the prime Minister & he understanding
me, I found he was ignorant of the terms of our treaty & then I was determined
to see how far I coud work on him, also on the sec? & general of Marine - I
Informed them that I well knew our stipulations - that on making the peace
we agreed to give the amount of 40,000 Doll? to the treas? & to the am$of 60,000
Doll* in rnaratime & military stores, that after I had returned from Tunis &
Tripoli the late Dey finding the regency much in want of corssim, requeeted of
me to have Corsairs built in the U. 8. in lieu of the Stores -

* *

294

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1785 TO 1801

I observed that the U. S. also gave the Frigate [Crescent] to the Algerines that
said vessel cost the U. S. 150,000 Dollars, & that plainly there was no nation the
Algerines got so much by, as they did by the Americans, that Algiers might see the
necessity on that day she woud be a t war with Denmark, Sweden & Holland, that
she woud have no supplies from the Baltic, & that they had the U. S. for their
friends, observing the U. S. Government, had the greatest Confidence in the
Algerine Government & hoped on this occasion we shoud fully experience a
demonstration of their friendship & equity Finding my scheme likely to t.ake place, that the late Dey was no more, & no
evidence against me but the jews, I went to the Bacri's & Busnah's & by degrees
broc them into my views - The necessity was that I shoud in douseurs sacrifice
the whole of the Sophia's Cargo, between the Jews & the Ministry, & as a preliminary to this scheme promised the Jews the goods which were on board the
Sophia a t the first cost, this there was the greatest necessity of as Miciah Bacri
& Busnah knew the stipulation, & as they had a half promise on this business
during the painful detention of the Corsairs, for their influence in pacifying the
Dey, who almost got out of patience on account of their detention, & not to reduce
me to the necessity of more important Sacrifices - as this plan or scheme wau
fully established and determined on, on my part & that - I had the whole influence of the ministry I was determined a t all events to make no great sacrafice to
the Dey, who thought to scare me, but sir I must declare to you that my friend
was so far made up on this business, that even the result, shoud be war, it coud
not well be avoided sooner than indulge them in so great an imposition, particularly it being an affair from first to last in which I was so particularly interested,
& that I knew so much of in all its diffl channels & stages 16Q Feb? a courier arriving from Alicant with dispatches from William Smith
Es r our Minister a t Lisbon, the Dey immediately sent to me to know if I had
rec3 orders to give him the Corsairs gratis, I said that as I told him from first to
laqt, that I woud only on the t e r n for which they were originally stipulated for &
not giving the Dey time to reflect - I sent my Dragoman to the Dey & desired
that I would r uest to be immediately admitted to an audience this was in the
afternoon w h e a knew the Prime Minister & Minister of the Marine woud be in
company with the Dey 1 observed that we did not wish to draw any money from the trecrsury, that if
the Dey woud put the 2 Schooners a t 36.000 sequins he might have the Brig
gratis - as a present from the U. S. That the Portuguese ambassador in Philad* had offered for these 3 Corsairs
the sum of 120,000 Dollars if Delivered in Lisbon, that I knew this to be a fact,
that I was so much the friend of Algiers, that I coud assure the Dey it was the
policy of the Christian Nations to do every possibility to reduce the Marine of
Algiers, that the U. S. found a pleasure particularly a t present in encreasing the
strength of Algiers in order to crush the French, who had turned the robbers &
persecutors of the Musselmen & of the Neutral Nations NOTE. what are these 3 corsairs employed in, I say, in these Seas, to look out,
take, sink, burn & destroy, French Corsairs that is robbing & pirating Americans,
so that from this circumstance it will be the means of our commerce having lees
obstructio~lsin this quarter HARD GALES, OBRIEN, OFTEN BROUGHT UNDER BARE POLES

16'P FebT a t 3% P M Conference with the Dey continued, I observed, that the
Dey woud recollect that the Maratime & Military stores, stipulated for the Peace
was 60,000 Dollars, that we had on the 2 years & 3 years annuity, brot 10 Cargoes,
that the Brig he woud have to himself, provided that he woud allow me 3 years
annuity for the 2 schooners, the Dey & ministry suddenly observed i t was too
much, the Dey said I might either have allowed 30,000 Sequ~nsfor the 2 Schooners,
& under this consideration he woud have the Brig to himself - or that he never
woud be the friend of the Americans, I immediately finding I carried the oint of
8. to
the treatie Stipulation for, W.000 Doll* gave the Brig in t h t name of the
the Dey in the presence of all the Ministry. On this occasion they all congratulated the Dey - The Dey & Ministry obsrved that i t wa9 only this day that the
Americans made and secured their peace, that we might fully depend on the great
friendship of Algiers, that he really was never angry with me, but could not help
considerink;I had it in my power to let the 2 Schwncr. go at 30,000 Dollq. 1
observed t t even ss the business was settled, that I was afraid of my head with
the American Govenunt & hoped if requisite the Dey & Ministry would give me
a certificate, which woud in some respecta plead an excuse for me relative to my
Conduct, on this occasion, Aye Says the Dey, we shoud have a new consul here
one that did not so well know the place as you do -

b.

295

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

On the 18Q delivered up to the regency the 3 Corsairs which gave to the whole
inhabitants great satisfaction, from the 3 Corsairs was first discharged their proviaiom on board of the Sophia & the Polacre called the Dey purchased by OBrien to
carry the crews of the Hassen Bashaw & Lelah Eisha to the U. S., said Polacre will
be commanded by Capt: Smith a very active Man - [See 10 January 17991
On the 21.r I went into the palace to setble the accounts & in calling over the list
of articles sent by the U. S. agreeable to the InvQ& bills of Lading sent by the
Purveyor 1found not more than 2/34. of the articles were taken notice of. The
receipts of the Secv in the Palace did not agree with those procured by Mr Clarke
from the Marine i t was certainly a great neglect or omission on his part, & there
was no alternative on mine but to settle the accounts, agreeable to the articles or
receipts for the car oes as they were in this Governm* books in the palace, under
this consideration
had no alternative but to make the best of i t as you a-ill
observe by the military & maratime store account current as settled by me with
this regency The Cargoes of the Independant, Jupiter & Newport, there was no Marine Turk
receipt, for Mr Clarke shamefully neglected, the duty he shoud attend to, & to
answer our affairs & his own made presents of part of these cargoes to the Dey &
ministry, for repairs they were making to their houses, in town and country, &
relative to the Ship Newporl Capt: Tew lying so long in Algiers without being discharged, I beleive it wss owing to a private understanding between Tew & Clarke,
such Sir has been their conduct Finding I had gained my object in settling the peace business a t 60,000 Doll* &
that the whole of the Stores sent, only turned out 66,000 Doll* I was determined
to obtain the Deys certificate, which he gave me under the seal of the regency,
certifying that I had on the part of the U. S. settled the whole of the peace business, & another certificate, that our annual Stipulations were paid for 2 years &
9 Mo9 Finding I had gained this point, I declared that our peace was in a great measure declared null or void by Hassen Bashaw, & that in consequence by a new
Settlement, by the Dey & Mr Bar!ow, that it was only reckoned from the time
Mr Barlow landed which was the 4th March 1796 This Argument I mentioned with all my force, & finally the Prime Minister
declared that I had much reasoning in the argument & that he would look more
into the business, 2 of the Secys shewed some seeming reluctance in acquiescing,
as I suppose from this circumstance thc[yl knew better, but one of the Busnah e
& Bacri's wss called in - and if I can gain this point, they must again be bribed
or paid, as is the usual way, they are to be compensated for the services they render
On this circumstance of the treaty being dated, 4'8
the affairs of any nation
March 1796, respecting our annuitys, I cannot say any thing on this point with
certainty - As since the morning of the 226 I again visited the prime Minister
with some friends & presents & he was of the opinion, that by right the treaty
shoud take its date from the 4* March 1796 -

5

-

*

*

*

*

*

*

*

[NA. SDA. CL, Algiers, Vol. 4, Jan-Nov. 1799.1
To Timothy Williams, Yerchnnt, Boston, Mass., in charge of settling the affairs
of brigantine Eliza, formerly schooner Mwh, from SecretPry of State

[PHILADELPHIA]

Departmenl of State January 95th 1799
DEARSIRAs you have been charged with the final settlement of
the affairs of the brigantine Elizu, fornierly the Schooner Maria,
Captain Graves, I trouble you to obtain and communicate to me,
information of Captain Graves - where he is, and whether he has
an property.
$he united States have been obli ed to pay eleven thousand dollars
for a cargo he took on board a t $unis, belonging to some Algerine
and Tunisian merchants, but which he embezzled. He also caused s
great expense by repairs at Cadiz, thro' the American Consul.
The sooner you can favour me with the information the better
[SDA. Dom. L. Vol. 11.1

296

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1786 TO 1801
[28 January 17991

To Secretory of State from Richard O'Brien, U. S. Consul General, Algiers

No. 17.
Ten days after S i h t
Please pay this my third bill, first & Second not paid, unto William
Maley, or Order, the sum of five hundred & Seventy eight dollars,
for Value received of him as herein Sett forth This is to Certify, that the under Written Consul for the United
States, has received of Captain William Maley, one thousand, two
hundred & twenty lbs, of loaf Sugar, for which, I have agreed to give
him this bill on the Secretary of State, for the Sum of five hundred &
Seventy eight dollars, said sugar in Algiers being worth the said
Sum, and that the said sugar has been given by me to the dey &
Ministry, to Answer the ARairs of the United States, with the Regency
of Algiers - * * *
[NA. SDA. CL, Algiers, Vol. 4, Jan-Nov. 1799.1
[About 9 February 17991
To Secretary of State from Joseph Ingraham, U. S. Charge d'Affaires, Tripoli

DEARSIR I take the liberty to inform you of the measures that
has been taken by the Bashnw of Tripoli with the different nations,
that he has made war & peace with during my residence in that reagency. Likewise. relative to the mode of Conducting the affairs of
the united States with the different States of Barbary.
first its necessary that our Peace should be held separately with each
reagency, and the consul resident there, and not depend on one reagency to hold our peace with the others. Seccondly, that the g o d of the
united Stats should keep two good frigats in the mediterranean, and
one constantly on a Cruise to Convoy and protect our Shiping, from
the many insults they are daly & ourly exposed to, and visit the
differant Ports of Barbary every 2 or three months a t least, to keep
these reagencys under some subjection which cannot be dun otherways, and a small arm'd vessel to be Constant going & returning,
with dispatches, too and from the united States to the Commander of
these frigats, he likewise ought to have power given him to make
up any Breach of friendship that may happen between our Consul
resident in either of these reagencys which ~snot in the power of a
Consul to do, and even to Sacrifise 20 or 30000 dollars sooner than
risk a war, & our Shipin Captured and our Citizens made Slaves of
again, which will suerly e the case, no Consul in barbary ought to
be invested with more Power than the other, when that's the case tho
Different reagencys Plays into Each other's hands, to draw Preasents
and money from them, our Consuls in barbary having a sufficient
Salary to maintain them, ought to be Strictly forbiden not to Enter
into any line of Commerce what ever, that being the first Step taken
by the Heads of these reagencys to declare war with the Dlfferant
nations.
Relative to our Peace with Tripoli; and under the arantee of
the Dey of algier, I would not have our govt place too muc Confidence
in, least they should be deceivyd,I have eve reeon to beleave i t wiU
not Stand good long, as the Bclehaw and t'ge Head People of that
reagency is dimontented with there Presenb, as well ae in Tunis.

%

r

297

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

The Bashnw bid me inform our Minister a t Madrid, and Captain
O'Brien if the Presents and Brig did not arrive soon, he well knew
what Steps to take fiting out of twenty Cruisers, and Capture one
american ship, would pay him very Handsumly for his Trouble,
which he was determned to put into Execution, and had actually given
orders for fiting out five sail, that he would lett them know that Joseph
Bashaw Commanded in Tripoli; that he was under no restrant or
fear of the Dey of Algiers, and only respected him as a nabouring
Prince, that the motive for his making so favourable a Pence with the
united States, was oing to the long friendship that had Subsisted
between him and the former Dey, that he did not know how the
Presant Dey Could undertake to guarantee his Peace, without first
Consulting him, on this Important Point.
The Pride of the Bashaw is Such, and being urged on by His o m
Subjects as well as the Consuls of other nations, he will not Hisitate
one moment, to fit out his Cruisers take the Consul's Passport and
Capture our Shiping, the same he has dun by other nations during
my residence there, a t the same time the Consul may Suppose him to
be his greatest friend * * *

*

*

*

*

*

*

*

many nations has alredy been dupte by these artfull people and we
cannot expect to receive more favour then them. if our govt keep a few
Ships in the Mediterranean and show them we are not backward in
Protecting our Traid there, i t ma put a Stop to there fowl proceeding
hereafter. this is the time wile 1Europ is Ingaged in a worse war to
Establish our Commerce in that Sea, when a general Peace takes place
Exertion will be made to rute our Consuls out of Barbary by
the ifFerant nations in Europ and depend on it they will succeed
without the greatest precaution is taken in time to prevent it.
The greatest C r d t y s has been used During my time to force the
Christians to turn Turks two Deans and nine Sweds fell a Sacrifise to
there Barbarity's and obliged to renounce there religion, if in so small
a number they force so many what will be the Consequence of our
youth's in case we have 20 or 30 sail Capturd.
The Bashaw has told me in Public that he never would make Peace
with one nation till he had made up his mind to make war with another
at that time his Intentions was against the Americans concerning the
Brig promised to him a t the making the Peace - - - -

9

[Received 26 September 1799. This letter is printed in full in "Naval Documents, Quasi-war with France", fourth volume, pp 231-233 under date received.]
[SDA, Misc L. Jul-Dec-1799.1
To David Humphreys, U. 6. Minister to Madrid, Spain, from B. W. McDonogh,
British C o n s l , Tripoli

TRIPOLIIN BARBARY
StPfeb. 1799.
COPY
SIR, The bearer Capt. Ingraham, will naturally explain to Your
Excellenc the purport of his leaving Tri oli; however as I am partly
concerneiwith his mission to Your Exce ency I think it a art of my
duty to transmit a true statement of every occurrence of wfla t passed
relative to your affairs between His Excellency the Bashaw and me.
Having on a former occasion by the re uest of CaptpO'Brien the American affairs trusted to my care, what I ave done to his knowledge and

S

B

298

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1785 TO 1801

to the rest of the American sub'ects then captives in this State, I
flatter myself I have not been ess zealous on this occasion. His
Excellency the Bashaw sent for me the 29%of last month by one of
his Raises, I immediately waited on his Excellency to know his commands, and to my utter astonishment informed me that he gave orders
to his cruizers (who had then five, to sail by the first fair wind) to make
reprizds on all American vessels, and re uested that I would acquaint
captain Ingraham with his intentions: reply'd that I wg obey His
Ex"?' orders but hoped that he wd countermand his orders until I
informed Mr Ingraham what was best to be done on this trying occasion. I accordingly went to the American House and communicated to M? Ingraham what had passed, we agreed (as I was charged
with the message from His Ex?) to call next day and know his Ex'*
final determination whether he wished that the American Charge
d'affaire would remain or go. Next morning we waited on His EX?
and when we were announced he requested to see the American Consul
and me, without any attendance. I informed him that I delivered his
message to M' Ingraham, he thanked me very politely, & told us his
motives for declaring war with the American States. "That he thought
himself not treated like a Sovere' , being so long ne lected by the
y informed from giers that his
United States, that he was credib'$
cruisers dare not presume to molest the Commerce of America without
the consent of the Algerines, but now that he was determined to let
them and all Europe know what the Bashaw of Tripoli could do, and
that he wm not to be intimidated by any power or state."
Those were his words in the presence of Mr Ingraham myself and the
American Broker, who I requested to be present. After His Excr
had finished, I expostulated with him, and made him understand that
in these troublesome times business could not be done with that facility
as in peaceable times, and that he must not attribute such ideas to any
neglect on their part, likewise that he must consider the distance from
America to Tripoli. He condescendingly replied that he would leave
the affair solely to me, knowing my fnendshi for him, as well as my
former services for the Americans, but that e thought i t necessary
that Mr Ingraham would go to Spain by a vessel of his own, and lay
this matter before Your Exc? hoping by such a step matters may the
sooner be accommodated. Mr Ingraham is constrained for the benefit
of his nation to depart in a few days, and leaves me here charged with
his affairs.
(signed) B. W. DONOGH.

f

7

d

t

[NA. SDA. Disp. Spain, Vol. 4, 1797-1799.1
To Secretary of State from Jamee Leander Cathcort, U. 8. Consul,Tripoli

ALGIERSFeb? 16" 1799 MY DEAB SIB I take this opportunity of informing you that we
arived here on the 9+ inst where we found the three arm'd vessels
wbich had arived before us? The Lela Aksha arived on the 23'4 of
Jan? the Skjobbrand on the 4'b of Feb? the Hassan Bashaw on the
8" & the Sophia on the gt? do - I am sorry to inform you that the
ship Hero has not arived nor baa she been heard of by her Consort
since the gr4 day of their departure from the Capes The arm'd Vessels are now discharging & will be rec4 by this Regency
a t an advantageous valuation 'tho not yet ascertain'd ~tis presumed
it will amount considerably above their first cost, which sum wdl be

299

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

placed to the credit of the United States & receiv'd in lieu of the same
value in stores as pr stipulation
You will be inform'd before the receipt of this that Algiers & Tunis
has declared against the great Republic, i t was occasioned by the
Grand Segnior sending a Chaoux in character of Ambassador from
the Port to said Regency's with a positive order so to do - The
Ambassador arived here on the 19" of last december & war was
declared on the 2lm?do. the whole French legation were immediately
put in chains & sent to the severest labour where they remaind forty
six days, they are now permited to remain in their houses to wait the
result of Buonapartes expedition who a t present is fortified a t Grand
Cairo & possesses fifteen of the principal villages in Egypt, this is the
current report of this City Mr Eaton & myself will proceed to Tunis in the Sophia in about eight
days from this date, I anticipate a happy conclusion with that Regency
for a much smaller sum than our instructions limits us .to From Tunis I shall write to Tripoli in order to be informd if their
will be a probability of prevailing on the Bey to accept a moderate
sum in cash, say to the amount of the value of the stores in lieu
thereof, if it should be found practicable I will proceed direct to Tripoli if not I will return to Algiers & wait the arival of the stores which
ought to be immediately dispatched, if not already on their passage
Should we have settled with the Bey of Tripoli for cash the stores d
be accepted by the Algerines in part payment of our annual stipulations
From the crews of the arm'd vessel we intend reinforcin the Sophia
with 15 men the remainder will return in a Polacre [Dey] elonging to
Mr OBrien which you may expect nearly as soon as you will receive
this I am sorry to inform you that Mr Ingraham seems to be unworthy
the confidence reposed m him by the Executive; his acct? w i l l prove
my conjecture not to be without foundation, the amount of them
from the 21" of Feb? 1797 unto Augt 1': 1798 is 8974X Mahaboobs
eaqual to Spanish dollars 131 15 - 53 cents - his acct current has
been forwarded to Mr Smith a t Lisbon by Mr OBrien last december &
I will send you a copy of it by the vessel that will take the crews of
the arm'd vessels home You will observe that this is wrote in haste, indeed every thing in
this Regency is done precipitate1 - for example a Sweedish Frigate
arived here yesterday with Matt ias Skjoldebrand Esqr his Sweedish
Majesty's Consul General on board, on his first visit to the Dey his
Excel? made the following modest request, that the Consul would
Turkish Embassador to Constantinople this
grant & to avoid farther importunity on
proper to dispatch his Brother m t h her toda
opportunity I send this under cover to

%

E

3

of the United States are entirely exhausted

I am h a ~ g gto have i t in my power to inform you that their credit is

fully esta sh'd by the arival of the arm'd vessels & that we shall not
be a t any inconvenience in procuring the necessary funds for carrying
into effect our negotiations with Tunis & Tripoli Mr Eaton nor myself has not yet paid our respects to the Dey nor
]lave we went through the necessary ceremonial of visiting the grandees,
it was thought expedient to postpone the performance of t h etdquette

300

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1785 TO 1801

unGll the Cruisers are deliverd to the Algerines & our acet?arranged
which wiU be done on the 17" or 18* instant
The rupture between France & Tunis will without doubt favour
the interests of the United States at the latter place & I think in the
resent state of affairs we need be under no apprehension from Mr
gamin as hiis influence has depreciated considerably and is of little
JAMESLEA' CATHCART
moment a t present [SDA. CL, Tripoli, Vol. 1, Part 1, Nov. 1798-Dec. 1793.1
Extract of a letter from Captain William Penrose, Master of the achooner S&!&brartd
(one of Algerine fleet) concerning his voyage

ALGIERS,
February 17, '88.

"I have met with an opportunity of informing you of my arrival
at this port, by a Swedish frigate, which put in here last night. I

had a very good passage from the Delaware, though a very wet one,
being perfectly under water d the time. ?Ve made the run m 30 days,
which was ten days less than capt. Maley, five days less than capt.
Smith, and six days less than capt. Geddes; and was fortunata
enough to fall in with no cruisers that we were afraid of. In the
Streights of Gibraltar, 6 large gun boats rowed off to us in a calm,
under French and Spanish colors, but after firing a few shot they
thought it prudent to retire. They then went and attacked two
large ships and a schooner, about 6 miIes from us - we were then
laying becalmed: one of the ships and the schooner they took, but
the other ship got clear, which proved to be the Five Brothers, capt.
Philips, of and from Boston, bound to Leghorn, carrying 12 six pounders and 40 men. Capt. Phdips informed me that the ship which had
struck was from Boston also, bound to Leghorn, mountrng 16 guns,
but could not learn the captain's name. The schooner which was
captured, was the Experiment, capt. Bender, of and from Philadelhia bound to Gibraltar. The Algerine fleet which sailed from
!hiladelphia,
are all safe arrived, except the ship Hero, eapt.
Robinson."
[LC, Baltimore "Federal Gazette & Baltimore Daily Advertiser" 18 June,
1799.1
Marine Force of Algiers
MARINE FORCE OF ALGIERS, OR A LIST O F ALQERINE COBBAIRS ON
FEBRUARY T H E 20* 1799

1 Corvette french built. Old in port- -of- - --- --- - - - - - - - - - - - 1 Corvetfe Levant built. old in port--of - - ..- _ - - - - - - - - ..- - - - - 1 frigate the Crescent at Sea--------- of-- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 1 Corvette Mahone built at Sea- - - - - of --------....---------1 Cuttcr Old B priee taken from the Venitians-..- - - - - - - - - -

26 Guns

22 Guns.

36 Gum 18 Guns.
- - 18 Guns in port.
1 &Jciabecke Old Spanish built in port-,--------- - - - - - - - - - - 24 Gum.
Moorish or A1 erine built a t Sea-- - - - - - - - - - - - - 26 Guns
Ib
1
1
I)p- - - - - - _ - - - - - - -_----- DQ_ - - - - _ - - - - - - - - 26 Guns
1 half Gailey with Sails k Sweeps in port - - - ---- --- .
- - - - - - - - 4 Guns
1 Carling Gease or Xebeck -------------------------------- 14 Gum
1 Large greek polacre at Sea-- - ---- -- -- - - - - - - - - - ..- - --- - - 26 Gum.
1 Greek polacre Do. .at Sea. -of.. ....- .- - - .- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 22 Gum
1 Brig T e Hasien Bashaw at &a of- --..------.--- - - - - - - - - 22 Guns
1 Schooner the Skjoldebrand of - - --, -,
---- -,- - - - - , 20 Guns
1 Ditto the M h EJieiho- -of--,- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -- - - - - - -- - - 18 Guns.
1 Ditto of the Hamduilah of-- ---- - - - - - - - - - -- -- - - - - .-14 Gun8
__-

b?

-

-

-- ---

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

301

1 Xebeck Particular of--, . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8 Guns
1 Xebeck building & ready to launch of _ - - - - - - _._
_ - -._ -_ - - - 26 Guns
65 Gunboats j.c; may be Considered in tolerable repaire 18 Corsairs Mounting- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - _ - - T o t a l ,366 Guns

Remarked by Riche OBrien
NB Those 7 a t Sea sailed the 2 3 g Ultimo. I daily expect to see
the[y] will send in some of those new pirates To the SECRETARY,
OF STATE,
Philadelphia [NA. SDA. CL, Algiers, Vol. 4, Jan.-Nov. 1799.)
To Secretary of State, from William Eaton, U. 8. Consul, Tunis, and Richard
O'Brien, U. S. Consul General, Algiers

ALGIERS
22d Feb. 1799 SIR, On the tenth instant I had the honor to communicate information of the arrival, in this port, of the Brigantine Hassan Bashuw the Schooners Skjoldebrand and Lal& Eisha, and the United States
brig Sophia; also CapP Maley's report of his having parted with the
Ship Heroe on the American coast. Of this Ship we have yet no
account - She must be either captured, gotten into some port in
distress, or lost a t Sea On the 18'? the Officers, appointed by the Dey for the purpose,
took formal possession of the vessels; and this morning Consul Gen.
OBrien informed me that he had just now concluded a Settlement of
all accounts between the Dey and the United States, which he desired
me to sketch in the following cypher [Translation of coded message]
T?le whole of o w sti
ion for naval and military stores I have edirely
done away and pa' our stipzllated a n n d tribute with this regup
to two years and one half from the date ofthe treaty.
He has been assiduously employed in the business since the arrival
of the vessel: particulars will be reserved for a more certain conveyance I can state nothing with certainty on the affairs of Tunis - Mr
Famin has formed flattering expectations of the consulate, and has
artfully secured the friendship of the Bashaw and principal officers of
the government by having procured, a t the expense of 19 or 20
thousand dollars, and distributed among them the customary presents.
The Bashaw has declared that he will receive no other consul from the
United States - and did, in fact, discriminate him from the general
mancipation which involved his countrymen on the declaration of
War - Whether this res ect was paid to the Oidizen Famin, or to the
American Agent is prob ematical - But the same argument, which
established him, will undoubtedly induce his friends to transfer their
attachment - The Sapatapa must be gained by this inducement The Sophia, being reinforced with the crew of the Skjoldebrand, will
roceed to Tunis in a few days with Mr Cathcart and myself - It
as been thou h t most proper to wait here until after an adjustment of
our &airs wit[ this Regency, in order to avail ourselves of thef.iendZy
interposition of the Dey and his ministers - or, in the language of
Ca t OBrien "To get out an anchor to windward."
h e crew8 of the Hossan Bashaw and the Ldz Eiafa will return to
America in a polacre, purchased by the Agent of the United States, in
this place.

p

f'

t'

302

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1786 TO 1801

Mr Ingraham has exhibited an account current against the United
States commencing Feb. 1,1797 up to Aug. 1,1798, exclusive of Salary,
amounting to the enormous sum of twelve thowand one hundred &
fifteen 531100 dollars - and he has conducted the business in such a
manner that it will be difficult, if not impossible, for the United States
to evade payment.
The french are said to have taken possession of Naples - Buonaparte has established himself in Grand Cairo, planted his generals in
the government of the principal provinces of Egypt, and reinforced his
army with Arabs and Christians. Is i t not possible that he will turn
his eye towards the treasures of Al 'em, (The ublic treasury of Algiers
is supposed to contain eighty d f o n of do1 am!) and the empire of
Morocco -project the conquest of the Barbary States * * *

f

*

*

*

*

*

*

*

[Signed by Eaton and OIBrien.]
[SDA

CL, Tripoli, Vol. 1, 17961799.1

[22 February 17991
Account Current of the United States, with the Dey & Regency of Algiers

[Here follows an itemized list, amounting to:] 66,096 Dollars
Price of two vessels---- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -- -30,000 Sequins or-- 54,000 Dollv
24,000 Sequins is equal to 2 years annuity - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 43,200 "
LO, 800
6,096

Doll* 16,896 equal to
9836 Sequins in advance to the Algerine Government on the third year of Annuitys 224 February 1799, commencing from the treaty with Algiers [NA. SDA. CL, Algiers, Vol. 4, Jan-Nov. 1799.1

RICHQOBRIEN
122 February 17993

Accounts of sundry cargoes, shipped by the United States for Algiers
Dollar8

B r i g I n & p e n d a n t - - _ - . - - - - - . - . - . - . - - - - _ - _ - _ - - - _ _ _ . _ - - _ _ - . . _40,268
Jupikr - - - - - _ _ _ - _ _ . _ . . _ - . _ . _ . _22,863
_....._
A : e w p o r t - - - - - - - _ - _ - _ - _ - _ _ - . - - _ . _ _ _ _ - _ - _ _ _ _ - _ _ _ - - _9,455
----H a m d u U a h - - - - - - - - - - - _ _ - _ . _ - - - - - - - _ - - - - - - - - - _ _ - - - - - -4,493
Crescent
Supposed_-- - - - _ _ _ _ _ - - _ - - - _ - - _ _ _ _ _ - _ - _7,000
-_-Lelph E i s h a - - - , - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -6,307
-----SkjoMebrand___
_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ __ .
_ __
_ _ -._ ___ _ _ _ _
9,962
Hassan Bashaw. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4,255
Price of the Schooner SkjoMebrand-,----- -----------------

-

-

104,593
39,029

WARS WITH BARBARY POWEBS

303

An estimate of the probable w s t of the Algerine Treaty -

Storea Stipulated for the peace, ilupposed am$, - - - - - - -124,000
---_---F r e i g h t - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 60.00
2 years annuity, suppoaed amount
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 160,000
16
1 "
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 70,000

414,000
143,622

Price of the [Hassan] Bashaw & Cargo of the Sophia- - - - _ - - - _- -

270,378
55,847
214,531
40, 000

Dollars $254,531
Saved to the U. States

It will be observed that the value of the cargoes
brol to A1 'ers onIy amounted in this place to
66,000 Do1 9 & that these were rated 25 pl Cent
above the customary price - 229 Feba 1799 --

=!

SEAL

RICE* OBRIEN

[NA. SDA. CL, Algiers, Vol. 4, Jan-Nov. 1799.1
To Robert Goodloe Harper, Chairman, Committee of Ways and Means, from Secretary of State

[Philadelphia]

DEPARTMENT
OF STATE
F e h r y 8 9 I799

SIR.Herewith I sent ou a statement of the expenditures relative
to our treaties with the lediterranean Powers, and of monies drawn
out of the Treasury for the purpose, from which i t will appear that
the following sums remain to be provided for - Viz

1

Dolls.

Balance due Tench Francis Purveyor, Pr his act*- - - _ - - 28,421.22
due ditto for sundry purchases for the Algerine Brig? and
two schooners pr ditto - - - - - _
_ -- --- -.- - - - - - - - - - - - - 10,000 due ditto for advances to Mr Poxall Cannon founder
pr d Q - - - - - - - - - _ _ - _ - - - _ - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - _ -25,886.88
--------due ditto for sundry articles received by ditto from the
Public Military & Naval stores to be replaced pr
D~ll*
d i t t o - _ - - - - - _ - - - - - - - _ - - - - - - - _ - - - _ - - - - - - - - - . - - - - 12 983.20
77,291.30
Also for this sum due the House of Bacri & C9 Algiers- - 40. 987 From which deduct the Cargo of the Sophia now on her
way to Algiers- _ - _ _ _ _ _. -. -. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16,968. 93
24. 018. 7
For the fulfilment of our stipulstions with Algiers ss
per Estimate (besides the freight) - - - - - - ------------ - - - - - _ _ - - 73.072
Freight of such bulky articles a t bast 50 pr Cent-- - - - - - - - - - - - _-- 36,536
DoUars 210. 917.37
From which deduct the cost of the three armed vessels built for
Algiers, now probably arrived there, to be paid for by the Dey- 68,674. 15
To be provided for - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - Doils. 142.243.22
100

304

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1786 TO 1801

By it i t is hoped that our Consul General will be able, if those
armed vessels arrive safely, to cancel the demands for the large masts

and other cumbrous and very expensive articles and reduce the
claims of Algiers more than the amount of the cost of the vessels.
I should observe that the number of l a ~ maats
e
remaining to be
furnished is set a t 39 only. This is certa~nlyan error in the Purveyors statement; for I have heard of but three or four yet sent;
but others of a smaller size have been forwarded, and these have
been deducted from the original stipulation as if of the stipulated
size.
I should further observe, that mone only haa yet been paid to
Tunis: the furnishing of the stipulate stores (wh~chd
l cost upwards of a hundred thousand dollars) has been suspended, until an
essential alteration in one article of the treaty shall be effected, and
on which our consuls are instructed to negotiate with that power.
If they succeed, they are to endeavour to substitute something less
burthensome than masts and timber & other maritime stores.
I n the original estimate presented during the present session, my
object in pro osing an appropriation of 100,000 doll* - was not to
provide for a i that must eventually be furnished: but to discharge
some balances of debts incurred, and to enable the Purveyor to
forward some additional supplies. By the foregoing statement i t
appears that my estimate was too low; and that i t will be expedient
to make i t up to about 140,000 doll' or 150,000 dollars, the latter in
preference, seeing that in the course of the present year the value of
10,000 dollars, may probably be necessary for Tripoli. Expecting
too, a favourable conclusion of the further negociation with Tunis,
it would seem expedient to provide a t least for a partial fulfilment
of the original stipulations, - say to the amount of 50,000 dollars,
which would build one or two armed vessels (according to their size)
and cancel the demand of upwards of 100,000 dollars. But if instead
of armed vessels the new stipulation should be for rnon-ey, this can
hardly be expected to fall below the original stipulation for masts,
timber, and maritime and military stores. And considering that
nine months will elapse before the next meeting of Congress, it would
be safest to provide for such a conclusion of the negociation - say
100,000 dollars. A state of former appropriations and payments and estimate of the
sum wanting to discharge claims relative to the St Croix bounda
accompanies the documents relative to the Barbary affairs heremix
presented.

d

[SDA. Dom. L, Vol. 11.1

[25 February 17991
An Act for the sngmentation of the Navy
[NOTE.- In the second volume of "Naval Documents, Quasi-War with
France" (November 1798 to March 1799), pages 399 and 400 is printed an Act
providing for additional naval armament of six 74 gun ships, six sloops of war not
exceeding 18 guns, and for employing revenue cutters. It also provides for
increasing the force of other ships in the service.]

305

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

[26 February 17991
NQ 19..

Estimated Value of the Stores for Tripoli

-

3 Cables of 10 inches-- . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . - - - - - - - - - - 500 doliars
5 hausers of 8 inches
400
25 Barrels of Tar. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
125
25 Barrels of pitch-----_^---_------------------------ 125
10 Barrels of Rosin . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
600 pine boards - - - . . - - - - - - - - - - - - - _ - - - - . . _ - - - - - - - - - - - - -.-,
- - - -500
-600 o s k - d i t t o - - - - - - - - - - t t o t t o t t o - t t o t t o t t o t t1000
ottotto----ttott
10 M a s t s - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - L - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 1000
12 Yards. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
360
60 Bolts of Canvass- - - - - - - --..----- -- -- -- - - - - - _---- - _ - - - - - - - - 400
4 Anchors-----------_--------------------200
-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

_

-

-

-

-

T

s

T

s

-

-

-

-

T

s

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

dollars 4680

-

OBriens Estimate
Proposed in lieu of the above Regaiia to offer a cash payment
Vim,I*$ propose this sum in dollars . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

4660

2dIfthisfailofEffectgoasfar8s - - - - - - - - - - . - - - - - - -8000
---------3* for the Service of Farfaro--- . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1000
4 Consular presents to the great Men - - - - - - - - _ - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 3000

dollars - 12,000

Opinion of RQOBRIEN
Algierz Febv 26'h 1799
[NA. SDA. CL, Algiers, Vol. 4, Jan.-Nov. 1799.1
To William Smith, U. 6.W a t e r to Lisbon, Portqgal, from Richard O'Brien, U. S.
Consul General, A l ~ e r e

ALGIERS
the 28%
February 1799
DEARSIR we have finally settled our affairs with this regency, I
say - Considering all Circumstances favourable, no more Stores is
to be sent to Algiers, untill you will hear from me, which will be after
the return of the Sophia from Tunis Consuls Eaton & Cathcart will proceed in two days for tunis the
Dey & Ministry & Boclcerie's will Write to tunis in Order to have
famin unshiped & Consul Eaton Established in his post, After this is
done Enton w i l l Commence on all requisite affairs agreeable to his
Orders At tunis a Vessel is to be freighted immediately to carry Consul
Ctlthcart to Tripoli, he will have a stron letter of introduction &
friendship from the Dey to the Bashaw o Tripoli, & the Bockeries
assures me they w i l l advance the Necessary Sums, if we can on Good
terms, make cash payments, at tunis & 'I'fipoli, in Lieu of our StipuIations; We have no Account of the Ship Hero Please to forward Copies of this letter to the Secretary of State -

b;

[NA. SDA. CL, Algiers, Vol. 4, Jan.-Nov. 1799.1
Xarine Force of Algiers 28 February 1799

1 French Sloop of War of 20 nines & Six fours- - - - - - - - - - _ _ - - - - - - - _ - - - - 26
22
1 Turkish DQof 18 eights & four foure- ---..---------..----..--_---_---..
1 American Frigate of 24 ninee & 12 Sixes- - - - - _ - - - - - - - - - _ - - - _ - - - _ - - - -36
18- - - - 1 Mahonese Ship of 18 foura & Sixes- - - - , - - - - - - - 18
1 Venitian Cutter of 18 double fortified Sixes-,,,,- - - - ..,,
, ,, --,
,

-

--

-

306
-

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1785 TO 1801
-

-

1 Xebeck built a t Algiers of 20 ei hta & four fours- - - - - - - - - - - - --------.. 24
1 DP DQof 26 eights sixes fours-- - - - -.---.-- _- .
. -_ _ - _ - - - _ 26
1 Do
DQof 26 Dv
DQ DQ. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
1 Half G a l l e y - - - . _ _ - - - - - . - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - . - - - - - - - - - . - - - 1
1 Guerlinnoghiccia Grecian prize of 14 fours- - - - - _ - - - ..- - --.
_ - - - - - - -..- 14
1 large Polacca of 26 4* & sixes a prize- - - - - - - - - - - - _- - - _ -- - _ -- - - - - - - - 26
1 DQ of 22
DQ------_----____-_-.-------22
1 DQ of 20
D Q - - - - - - - - - - - - . _ - . _ - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 20
1 American Brig of 22 double fortified Sixes- - - - -.
----------- --------22
1
D? Schooner of 20
DP fours..-- . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
1
DQ
DQ of 18 Single
DQ- - - - - - - - - - - . - - . _ . - -18
--.-.
1
DQ
DQ of 14 5 & 4 pounders _ _ _ _ - - _ . - - - . -14- - - 1 Xebeck private property of 8 4 pounders-- - - - - - - - - - ..- ..- - - -_ ._ _ - - - - 8
26
1 DQ 8 building of 26 8~sixes & fours- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - . - - --- - - - - - About 60 Gunboats with a brase 24 pounder each- - - - - - - - - _ - - - _ - - - - - - 60
About 12 Boats with Mortars of difft Siees -

Guns
Mortars
Slaves

447
12
1051

The Algerines are continually a building Gunboats but the[yJ rot
nearly as fast as they are built for want of csre being taken of them

The number of Slaves belonging to the Regency of diflt nations are-----948
10
Besidea ten french Citizens of the french Legation -,----------.----And 93 DP which were brought from La Calla a french Garrlson near
. - - - - - - - -93- Bona & made Slaves of on the 23rd ins+-- - - - 1051

Yesterda the Jews prevd'd on the Dey to permit eighteen of the
principle C aracters that was brought from La Calla to retire to the
french consuls house the rest remains at hmd labour N B Their are about 120 Chistian Slaves the property of private
Citizens of this infernal Regency
(This is the whole Marine force of this Regency which makes all
Christian Nations become tributary to them, oh! humiliating reflection. J. L. C.)

i

-

[SDA.

CL, Tripoli, Vol. 1, Part I, Nov. 1796-Dec. 1799.1

Journal of James L. Catheart, U. S. Consul. Tripoli, 28 February t o 13 April 1799
Journal of Negotiation & ratification of the Treaty between the United State8 of
America and the Regency of Tripoli in Barbary - I b e i v e d via the Brig
Sophia]
Algiers thursday the 2 8 t h of FebT 2799 I r e d a letter from the Dey of Al 'em
directed to the Bashaw of Tripoli by David Bacri 29th do I recg letten for e o n
Farfaro who I am inform'd ie a person of great influence in Tripoh I likewise
recQ presents from said Bacri ss pr my receipt forwarded to the Secretary of State
in my dispatch No 1 Tunis March 18th 99 I recd a packet from Mr Famin which was left here by Mr
Ingraham, directed to Mr OBrien copy's of which I have likewise forwarded to
the Secretary of State in dispatch KQ1during my stay a t Tunis I r e d two thousand Algerine Sequins from Soloman Azulai for the use of the U S a t Tripoli
I likewise recl a letter from the Bey of Tunia to the Bashaw of Tripoli which
informd him that the Regency of Algiers Q; Tunis had conc1ud.d t h e ~ raffairs
amicably with the U S of America hoping the Bashaw of Tripoll would d o the
same as in the present state of affairs i t waa more to the interest of the Barbary
StafRs to be at Peace than a t War with America The letter from the Dey of
Algers was only complimentsry I l i k e m e rec4 a letter from the Vlkl! of Alglenr
for the Baehaw & a packet from the Tripolie Ambaseador a t Tunls ~ ~a cheat
t h
and sundry other articles for him with a Tripoline sailor passenger

-

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS
April 19' I left Tunis & embark'd on board the Sophia we did not sail untill the
next day the wind being contrary Tripoli Friday the 5th of April 1799 At 3 P M came to an anchor in the Bay of
Tripoli we having an Algerine flaga t the fore top gall+mast head & our own colours
aft as customary - the Captain of the Ports boat came on board & asked from
whence we came & what was our business - we inform'd him the American
Consul was on board who had letters from the President of the U S of America
the Dey of Algiers & Bey of Tunis to hie Excellency the Bashaw of Tripoli At 3%P M, Mr Bryan M~Donoghcame on board in a boat with American colours
flying - I gave him all the private letters I had on board he being charged with
the British Sweedish & American sffairs the Consuls of said nations being absent
on businem Mr M~Donoghinform'd me that it was customary for the Consul or charge des
affaires of all nations a t Peace with Tripoli to inform the Bashaw when a vessel
of their Nation arived & get permission for the officers to land that he would
perform this ceremony, & would inform us when the Bey would give us an audience - At 25 minutes before six he came on board with a Chaoux & inform'd
that he was sorry to inform me that the Bashaw had determined not to receive
me as consul of the U S of America, as I had not brought the stores & brig promised by Captn OBrien when our peace was first agreed on here two years ago that
the Americans had not fulfiII1d thcir contract & that he did not consider himself
obliged to fulfill his that he had waited untill the consul arived in hopes that he
would have brought the stores with him, but aa it was not the case he would
wait no longer that he re uested I would send the letters from the Dey of Algiers
and Bey of Tunis to him he would answer them immediately & we might depart
when we pleased, that he would allow forty days from our departure before he
would order his cruisers to capture American vessels - that a t the expiration of
that period he would order the American fiag to be haul'd down & would make
known to the whole world that the Bashaw of Tripoli is an independent Prince
and would be respected as such in spight of the Dey of Algiers Bey of Tunis or
even the grand Signore I gave the lettens to the Chaoux and desired him to inform the Bashaw that I
had a letter from the President of the U S of America for him which I could not
trust to any person to deliver, I therefore requested he would give me an audience
and let me hear from himself his determination as I never put im licit faith in
me88agea - Mr MqDonogh inform'd me that I might depend the gashaw would
insist to have the Brig as Ca tn OBrien absolutely promised her to him in the
presense of Messre de Souza Farfaro and Mr M~Donoghdeclares that he has
heard them tell Ingraham so repeatedly - I informd Mr MFD that I never had
heard of any such promise that I was prepared the Bashawx demQ for the stores
by paying him an equivalent in cash but to give him the Brig was out of the
question entirely At 7 P M - The Chaoux came onboard & inform'd me the Baahaw would be
glad to see me two hours after day light - I requested him to inform the Bashaw
I would come on shore as soon as the Fortifications saluted the Brig as customry he said their would be no difficulty about that ceremony provided we would
promise to return the salute I told him the Bashaw might depend we would He then said the Bashaw requested we would send him the letters chest & other
articles which we rec? from his Vikil a t Tunis as the psssenger inform'd him we
had such things on board - I requested Capls Geddes to let him have the chest
promising to send the rest of the things on shore in the morning I gave him five
letters for the Bashaw from dift people in Tunis Saturday April 6th 1799 - We having waited untill 8 oClock & no salute being
fired from the fortifications Cap'n Geddes & myself went on shore & was stopt
a t the mold head by the h i s of the marine who in a very impolite manner sent to
inform us that the Bashaw had order'd that we should not be perm~tedto land &
that we must go on board again and remain untill the English Doctor went on
board that the Bashaw was now asleep & could not be disturbed At 10 A M Mr
MqDonogh came onboard & inform'd me what is contain'd in his report - N Q 1
of the enclosures 1 express'd a desire to see the Bashaw myself he said i t was
jmpossible unless I promised him the Brig, I inform'd him that I was not authorwed to do any such thing even should war be the consequence - He said I might
come on shore if I thought pro r & speak to the Rais of the Marine - I embraced
the offer & went on shore - pwas receiv'd with a great deal of hauteyr, by the.
Rais of the Marine who ask'd me where the stores were that was promdd to the
Bashaw two y a m ago - I inform'd him that they were ship'd on board a vessel

$

308

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1785 TO 1801

[Hero] which had eaild from the U S eighteen days before us that I had mison t o
suppose she was either lost, or taken that the stores for Tunia were likewise on
board of her & that the Bey had politely promised to wait nine or ten months
longer for them on his being inforrnJd by our consul of the misfortune? Yes said
the Rais & on your giving him twenty or thirty thousand dolls for his condescension - I declared that he never hinted to us, that he wish'd us to give him one
dollar and that I really believ'd that if we had offer'd him a pecuniary reward
that he would have been highly sffronted & was better pleas'd with our acknowledgment, which he consider'd quite sufficient es ecially as we were now engaged
in the same cause namely a war with France? Padded that I hoped the Bashaw
of TripoLi would a t least act with as much politeness. The Rais lauch'd & said the Bey of Tunis was the first moor that ever he had
heard of that would be affronted with a christin for offering him money, & added
he I suppose your friend the Dey of Algiers would likewise be affronted a t your
offering him money but I was in Algiers when a Frigate [Crescent] arrived from
America of 36 Guns loaded with guns & ammunition & the Dey was so far from
not receiving her that he seem'd very well pleas'd I inform'd him the Frigate
was sent in lieu of cash for the redemption of our captives which had been re
deerll'd upon credit above a year before, dont say any more interrupted the Rais
I know as well about your peace with Algiers as you do yourself, I was in Algiers
some months & if the Americans has friends there, so has the Bashaw of Tripoli,
have you any new proposals to make to the Bashaw? I answer'd I had not, he
then insisted to know what the consular presents consisted of I informd Mr
M~Donoghwho took a note of about two thirds of them & carried i t to his
Excellency - during his stay I was kept a prisoner in his appartment a t the
Marine
In about half an hour the Rais return'd from the Castle with Mr M~Donogh&
infomd me of the Bashaws terms see NQ 1 of the enclosures - the Rais added
that I had reel instructions from the lying dog OBrien who had informd him when
he was a t Algiers that he was Consul for Tunis & Tripoli likewise, and aa the
Bashaw of Tripoli & Bey of Tunis were dependent upon Algiers so were the Consuls there dependent upon him & could do nothing without him - I told him thnt
it was impossible that OBrien could be so weak, that I did not believe he had
ever said any such thing & wish'd him a good morning - What answer shall I
give the Bashaw added he - tell him said I that h
i
s proposals are beyond all
bounds, that I imagine he does not wish to be a t Peace with the United States,
that he supposes we have some rich ships in the Mediterranean - but you may
inform him that in consequence of our being a t war with France, that our ships
are all to well arm'd to be captured by any of his Cruisers & that I am very sorry
that his making such exorbitant demands upon us will oblige us to turn the very
arms against him which are now turn'd against our common enemy the French
Well said he? I am order'd by the Bashaw to inform you that you may wait for
the answers to the letters from the Dey of Algiers & Bey of Tunis if you think
proper, if not you may kt it alone that he is an Independent Prince & not to be
intimidated by Algiers Tunis nor even the Grand Signore, that if we wish t o be a t
Peace with him we must pay him for it & that he commands in his Kingdom as
well as the Dey of Algiers does in his - While I was on shore I sent n man (by
stealth) to inform Farfaro that I had letters of importance for him from the Bacries
& Bushnaes a t Algiem? he sent me word that he requested me to send them b
M IMvDonogh ta him b. to take care that none of the moon should see them,
beg'd for Godsake that I would not mention his name as it would be ruinous t o
him as well as detrimental to the affairs of the United States I requested the doctor to come on board to dine with me & wrote the followjng
letter to the Bashaw & sent i t by him accompanied with the one from the President
he having very politely offerd to explain them to his Excellency I requested Capts Penrose to go on shore with M T M~Donogh& wait for an
answer from the Bey who waa out on horseback viewing hi fortifications- he
delivered the letters to Farfan, and told C a p t ~Penrose that he would wme on
board in the morning To his Excellency the Barhaw af Mpotl & c
Most fUwtrious Rince
Being fnform'd by your Ex? BaLu of the marina and M?MvDonogh Amdcsn ch& dm affair83
that you would not receive me 8s ConW of the U 8 of Ameriar anbas I would agm to f a 1 the
promise made by their Agent Cape OBrian -I now beg leave toinform yr E x ~ d k n c ythat the Governthat m y Promise of the B* had ever bean made
ment of the U 8 of America was never ~ u a i n M
& therefore I have red no ordm relative to her Thet the stom which ww stlplllatsd by Reaty

-

309

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

were ship'd from the Unlted States on b a d the Ship Hero which 1fear is either lost or t n h by the
French, that in lleu of Whfcb, 1am authoriced to pay his Exmlleney nn equivalent in cash accmdinn
to a Just valuation to be made by impartit? people but if your Exdlency prefers having the stor&
I promlse you they shall be ddiver'd here m four months from this date -

the U 8 of America for ever and on my being r e d dr recocnieed as Consul of the U 6 I Momise to
deliver a handsome consular present to-his Err and chief o&ears By the lettsr from.the Pre61dent of the U 9 of America your Excellency will bo informed of my rank
and accordingly give me credence, & give me leave to observe that if any misunderstanding exists
Latween the former Agents of the U S and your Ex? it cannot be deem'd a suf~eienruruso for your
E u to declare war oaa;tnst a nation that never was at war with You and who hss sent an Aneni the
vart distance of six ihoussnd miles to endeavour to cultivate fiam & harmony between Tour two
nations raspactively & that without your Ex? even giving him an audience - this is an act which
I believe L unprecadented even In the annals of Barbary
Should your Exr not think proper to agree to the above lerms you will please to write to the Resident
of the U 8 your ultimate determination explaining to him your refsons lor not receiving the Consul
sent by him - I should likewise he hapvy to receive your Exeallencys answers to the Letters from
the Dey of Algiers and Bey of Tuntr which I pledge myself to havn forwarded immediately - The
U 8 Brig Sophia will sail tomorrow at twelve oClock & until2 her return from America it is hoped
your Excellency will saspend any furiher declaration of hostlfitles against the U 8 of America
Should your Exmllency wisb to detain the Brig a few hours will make no great dUTtwena,
I remain most Illustrious Prinm
your Exmllencys
most Hum* and Ohm*Berv)
JAXES LEA^ CATHCABT
C o w l for the U S of A m d a
at tlk Badhawltc of ltipoli
U 8 Brig Sophia Bay of Tripall Aprtl 6* l7W

-

-

-

Sunday 7 t h [April] At meridian rec4 a letter from Mr MqDonogh which hformd
me that he had obtaind leave of audience from the Bashaw for me I went on
shore & waited upon his Excellency a t 1 P M in company with Mr MqD when I
ted nearly to the m e purport as I had done before to the %is of the
anne - the whole bone of contention was the brig which I refused him without
hesitation, he was very much enraged against Capos OBrien and made use of every
invective & term of reproach he could think of he then swore by God & his
Phrophet that OBrien had promised him the brig that had i t not been for that,
that he would not have concluded the Treaty with the U S, that he would have
her or her equivalent in cash that OBrien had reported that he was dependent
on the Algerines that he would now let the world see that he was not, that OBrien
would not be always a t Algiers that all his Cruisers had orders to bring him to
Tripoli if ever they found him onboard a neutral vessel & again swore that if ever
he was found that he would have him hung like a dog onboard of the vessel that
brought him in After an hours bravado & huckstering he told me that his ultimate terms were the Brig to be deliver'd to him immediately or the sum of eighteen thousand dollars
on the spot in her lieu and for the stores which you say are lost or taken 25000
dollars payable in a few weeks, and a consular present equal to the Danes and
Sweeds
I told his Excellency that I imagined he did not wish to prolong the
Peace, that his demands were ss exorbitant as unjust & that I could not treat
with him until1 he was in a better humour, I then wish'd him a good morning
He said he would give me twenty four hours to consider of i t & that from the morning of the next day the term of forty days should commence hefore he would
order his cruisers to capture american vessels On my return from the Castle T rec4 a letter from Farfan, enclosure NQ2 informing
me that he was sorry he could render me no assistance whatever Monday 8 t h [April] I requested Mr McDonogh to carry the following letter to
the castle & explain to the Bashaw its contents which he accordingly did & in
return brought me a note in Arabic which I sent to Farfaro to translate The
terms contain'd therein I rejected with disdain see NP 3 of the enclosures -

"2-

-

Hts Excellency the Bashaw of Tripoll&q Bra- I having verbally communicated to your Excallency my reawns for not complying wlth your
demands on the United States, a repitition now becomes unnwessm I therefore beg leave to inform
you that I have dellberatad on the nature of the promlse you say Cap*. OBrien made you of tbe Brig
Sophia and havi taken the advice of Cape (Geddas who now commands her) I now promme your
Excallency that a d brig .-hall be deliver'd to yon In nine months from the time of her departure from
this port the dangers of &hesea & enemy a m ted and that the stores which are stipulafed by treaty
shall be 6ro ht forward at the same time or P[ your Excsllency would prefer the value of said stares
in cash- I
glve yon flve thousand dollars thfs day in lieu thereof-enclosed I send your Excellency
a valuation of sald stores by Mr MqDonogh which you may depend is just an[d] equitable, he having

3
2

310

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1786 TO 1801

no Inter& whatever In being partial to one party mom than mother

- Should your Ereslleney

accspt of the above terms in full of all demands from the U 8 1 will ddiver your E x d e w y the Consnlar presents whieh 1 inform'd you I had on board if not you will please to answer the letters to his
Exoelleney the President of the U 8 & their Exosllency's the Dey of Alglers 4 Bey of Tun&, and if
your Excellency doas not wish that 1 should remain hem 1 will pro& to Tunis & send the Brig to
Americs with your answer to the Presidents letter & untifl her return it is hardly probable your Ex7
will eommenca hostility's against the United Sta? when you recollect that you have already r e d
from them to the ~alueof Surty thousand dokafs m
v d presents & that their agent now offers
to become responsiblefor the rest of Caprn Ollrlens stlpulntrons & even more as your Excellency well
lmows that the SopAia when here before was neither arm'd nor sheath'd she now mounts twelve guns
6r two swivels six of which are iron the rasl brass, she has been lately sheath'd and is every way wm-

+

pleatly fltted for a Cruiser This Is a very advantageous offer for yr Excallency & will serve to oonvince you how much the U 8
wishes to continue the harmony which has subsfstcd between the two nations since the conclnsion of
the Treaty and which as an individual you may depend I shall take every means to cultivate mn&ant with the hanw & inhrsst 01 the nation I represent
I am with TBSpect
Your Excallancy's
most Obp' Bervt
JlMX.8 LEA1 CA~BCAET
flnutrl o/&
U 8 ~ / A W i c t r?t
~ E N E YOEDDES

Tripeti

Commander of UCU S brig Sophia

Chsncery of the U 8 of America at Tripoli
April 816 1789

I then wrote a short statement of our affair8 & presented it to Capta Geddes
requesting his advice & opinion on the subject before I would come t o a conclusion - The Doctor informd Cap''+ Geddes that the Bashaw desired to see
him alone in the evening - I advised him to go by all means but to be very
circumspect in his answers t o the Bashaw? he went about 4 P M and after a

great deal of invective against OBrien & other frivolous questions which Capt'+
Geddes will inform you, the Bashaw informd him that if we would promise him
the Brig & the stores stipulated by treaty in a reasonable time and give him 13,000
dollam for the detention of said vesml & stores he would be content - Cap'"
Geddes informd him that he had nothing to do with the negotiation that if he
thought proper he might apply to me, but that he could tell him before hand
thst my instructions were limited & thst I dare not advance one dollar more
than I was order'd Well then answer'd the Bashaw you may tell him I have orderd the answers to
be wrote to the letters he brought for me I will send them in the morning when
he may go about his business - In the evening the Rais of the Marine came to
the house with two letters from the Bashaw one for the Dey of Algiers & the
other for the Bey of Tunis I ask'd him for the answer to the Presidents letter he
eaid i t was not ready but I should have it in the morning, and askd me what he
should inform the Bey I infom'd him he might say that I was sorry our negociation wse a t an end as his terms were so unreasonable that I would talk no more
on the subject as it would only be wasting time - for farther particulars see Mq
McDonoghs declaration & advice to me enclosure N Q4 - I t is something remarkable tiat the letters were seald in three diffr places so that it was impossible to
open them, this is contrary to the custom of Mussulmen who always sends their
letters open
Tuesday 9th IApril] - Fadaro's brother came to me this morning & inform'd me
t h s t the Bashaw had sent for the Governor of the Jews & ask'd him if the American
Consul had been a t Farfaro's house or if Farfaro had visited him the Governor
mid he was certain we had not seen each other take care they do not said the
Bashaw for if they do I know how to dispose of you and Farfaro, the Rais of the
marine a i d that he had placed spies on both our actions and if we visited each
other he would report us to his ExcellencyThe whole of this day we waited for sn answer to the Presidents letter, C a p ' ~
Geddes eent me his answer to mine of yesterday evening euclasure NQ5 This day C a p t d e d d e s and myeelf circulated a report that the Americans had a
number of vessels of war in the Mediterranean to protect their commerce against
the depredations of the French - we likewise reported that the Sophia would
immediately proceed to Malta on business of the U S - the reason we propagated
this story was because the Tripolines has five Cruisew now a t Sea, & they would
naturally euppo~ethat we would give information to the Portuguese squadron
thst acts in conjunction with AdrniraI Kelson
Finding i t necessary to come to some resolution & not having it in my power to
ask the opinion of our Consul a t Algiers I wrote a note to Capcn Geddes on the
subject and recQ his answer NQ6 of the enclosures

-

-

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS
9 P M The Rais of the Marine came from the Bashaw and brought an answer
( a d ' d up in three places) to the Presidents letter, I ssk'd him in what Language
i t was wrote he a n d in Italian, I then ask'd for a copy of the letter, he said the
Bashaw never gave copy's of his letters to any one, that the Prince of America
was the only person he wanted to know what was contain'd in it, Mr M~Donogh
said he would go by himself to the Castle and hear what the Bashaw bad to say
and a t the same time inform him that we would come and take leave of him in
the morning - previous to this I had authorized Mr M~Donoghto offer the Bashaw
in full of all demands for Brig & stores - eightsen thousand dollars, this was
done and refused by the Bsshaw, but his Excellency said if we would agree to
give him ten thousand dollars on the spot & romise h i the Brig in Nine months
from her departure he would be content MFDtold him he would endeavour
to persuade the Consul to agree to these proposals but that he was affraid it
would be out of his power
Wednesday loth April 1799 Mr M~Donoghwent to the Pallsee to give the
Bashaw an answer from me - I advised him to try & persuade the Bashaw to
accept cash in lieu of the Brig my particular reason for so doing was? because I
am convinced that if we give a cruiser to the Bashaw of Tripoli we would be
inevitably obliged to give a t least as large a one to the Bey of Tunis At 10 A M, Mr MP Donogh came from the pallace and gave us joy saying he had
agreed in the name of the Consul of the United States on the following tern Vizt That we should pay the Bashaw ten thousand dollars immediately for the
stores and detention - and eight thous4 dollam for the Brig as soon as possible?
that said sum shoud be consider'd in full of all demands from the United Stateg
of America, the Consular present excepted - this I agreed to immediately &
I assure you to many encomiums cannot be pass'd on the conduct of Mr MqDonogh
during the whole of this negociation to whoom the U S are certainly much indebted as Captn Geddea will inform you more particularly on his amval in
America At 5 p m I went to the Castle with the consular present and deliverd it to the
Bashaw - I now saw Leon Farfaro for the first time, who promised the Bashaw
the he would be responsible for the residue of the money I only having three
thousand Mauboobs in cash which I deliver'd with the presents - while we were
in the Castle the Flag of the U S was saluted with 21 Guns - the Bashaw orderd
his colouw to be hoisted on all the fortifications the different christian consuls
paid the U S the same compliment - the Sophia return'd the same number of
Guns and thus ended this ceremony While the Bashaw was looking over the presents he ask'd me if the United States
had sent the two pieces of holland as a sample I told him it was to dear to give
much away a t a time - he then said I must give him two more comq gold watches
I told him I would if I could purchase them here - I very fortunately had Kept
back a number of things belonging to the presents expecting a second demand I therefore gave him the two watchea without puting the U S to any farther
expense In the evening he sent his Compliments to me & beg'd it as a very particular
favor that I would let him have two of the brigs brass Guns as they would be
very serviceable to him for field pieces and that he would give the Brig two iron
guns in their place - I told the messenger I would consult Capt@Geddes & send
him an answer in the morning - A few moments afterwards one of the Chaougeg
came with an order from the Bey to receive a handsome present for proclaimi
the Peace, the Bashaw not having consider'd himself a t Peace with the U%
before now & that 'this awaite or present had not been paid before by any of
the former Agents - I told Farfaro to give him ten dollars, he said that he must
have one hundred a t least Not long afterwards he sent for some nun I had none
but sent him eight bottles of Cordials which I had purchased a t Tunis for my own
use I forgot to mention that the Bashaw desired me to take a house of his own which
was unoccupied - I inform'd him that I had not seen it, but that I would give
him an answer in a few days - I have since found that it is an old house entirely
out of repair & that he wants me to take it in order that he may ask me to repair
it a t the e nse of the United States I have therefore requested Mr MpDonogh
to inform
Bashaw that I would much rather live in the house where I now
a m - & if their is no other alternative sooner than displease the Bsshaw I will

8r

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1786 TO 1801

312

take it and psy the annual rent which is one hundred Mauboobs a year & remain
in the h o w which I now occupy, which will be much better than to repair it
which would cost a t least five thousand dollars Thursdsy 11* [April] It is customary when ever a peace t a k a place t o give the
Bashsw from three to five barrela of powder this I knew could not be procured
here, I therefore thought proper to give the Bsshaw the two bra= cannon in lieu
of the powder & not to receive the iron guns which he promis'd in their place.
supposing they would be good for very Little
5 P M Capt~Geddes Mr MqDonogh & myself waited on the Baahaw & was rec*
in a quite diffc manner from what we were before
after some common phce
convemtion drinking coffee &q he said he would write other letteni to the Prince
of America the Dey of Algiers & Bey of Tunis & desired I would eend him the
lettera he h8d sent before aayin he had wrote them in a passion that we were
now a t Peace and if the United '5tat.a of America were disposed to acknowledge
him to be a free & Independent Prince he was likewise disposed to do them every
favor in his power - I could not thank him for my soul - we retired and on our
turning round from the Audience seven guns were fired from the Cestle the
colours hoisted aa yesterday
the Sophia returnd the salute and thus en& our
negociation with this Regency -

-

-

-

JAMES LEAFCATHCART

Tripoli in Barbary
April l @ 1799
We whose namea are here unto annexed do Solemnly atteat and dechre that the
above is a true statement of M I Csthcarts negociation with the Bashaw of
Tripoli -

B. Me DONOOH
HENRYGEDDES

Expences attending this negociation with Tripoli
Dollar8
Promised to the Bashaw in lieu of the stores .---....--.......-----10,ooO
& gratification for their detention--- --,Promised to do, in lieu of the Bri Sophia

1

rhiehCapt.OBrienpmmkedthe%ahaw./----------------------8'm0

Contiogentcy's - about- --- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - ..- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - ..- Consular presents including the cloth- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -

1,500
4
.
m

Whole amm* including every expence- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - $23,500

JAMES LEA! CATHCART
Tripoli in Barbary
April the 13,. 1799
[SDA. CL, Tripoli, Vol. 1, Part 1, Nov. 1796-Dee. 1798.1

(1 March 17991

NQ21.

Presentr for Tripoli

Presents from Algiers by the Consul for Tripolie, to Viz

3 Caftens of B r o c e i d - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 348
1 Gold watch diamonded & Chane--.....................
300
2 Gold RepSg watches- - - - - - ---- @I160 dr - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 300
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 180
4 Gold plain ditto---- - _ - - - - - -- - @I45
1 0 Silver ditto ---,
- - - -,- - -- - - - - - @/I8 - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 180
1 G o l d s n d B o x - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 110
2 Gold C h a n ~ - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - @ / 5 0 - - 100
--8 Silver gilt snuB boxes --------- @ / I 0 - - - - - - - - --------..--- 80
3 Pieces of Holland------------- 8/30- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - . . 90
1 Brilliant diamond Ring solitaire- - - - - - -- - - - - - - -- - - - - - - - - 600
I1
@/300------ - - - - - - - - _- - - - 600
2 ditto- Smell
"
6 dozr Handkerchiefs------_----@7 prdozr------------- 42

_

-

2930 Dour

313

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

ALQIERB
March 1* 1799
Rec'J of Mess-oseph
Cohen Bacri & CQthe articles contained in
the above acct amounting in the whole to two thousand nine hundred
& thirty spanish dollars to be distributed if requisite to the Bashaw
& Grandees of Tripoli on acct of the United States of America
JAMES
LEA!CATH~ABT
C o d & Agent for the U S of America
$2930 dollars
at Tripoli in Barbary
[NA. SDA. CL, Algiers, Vol. 4, Jan-Nov. 1799.1
To David Humphreys, U. 8. Minister to Madrid, Spain, from Joseph Ingrahom,
former U. 6. Charge d'Affaires, Tripoli

CARTHAGENA
18thMarch 1799.
COPY
SIR,Yours of the 15"htimo came safe to hand, wherein I am happy
to learn that Mr Cathcart with the presents is gone on to Tripoli, had
I been informed of that before, this disagreeable
been put a stop to and I still remained in Tripoli, but
last letter of Septr 25* 1798 wherein he desires me to inform the
Bashaw that he was daily in expectations of the arrival of the Consul
and Presents, as they were to leave America the last of July, which I
did, but the not arriving as soon as was expected, and the Bashaw
hearing of t e great Presents that were delivered at Tunis the 20*
of January on hoisting the flag of the U. S. the first time, the Bashaw
thought himself greatly offended and neglected by our government,
and gave immediate orders to fit out his Cruisers to make reprisals on
American vessels. This w'J have taken place had it not been for the
influence of Mr MoDonogh who was formerly charged with our affairs
by Captain O'Brien. This gentleman expostulated with the Bashaw
and got him to recal his orders, if in case I would consent to come
with his letter and deliver it to Your Excellency. I proposed writing
to A1 'em: this he would not listen to, and told me in presence of
Mr & ~ o n o h, that as the Dey commanded in Algiers,. so he commanded in 7! ripoli. The Bashaw likewise ordered me to lnform Your
Excellency that Captain O'Brien on making the Peace, promised him
a Brig, supposed to be the Sophia; that now, if the U. S. wished a
perpetual Peace with him he expected a Ship coppered, of 28 or 30
guns to be sent to him, as he had waited so long for the Presents.
I forward you the Bashaw's letter, as well as that of Mr MFDonogh

K

[NA. SDA. Disp. Spain, Vol. 4, 1797-1799.1

[20 March 17991
To Secretary of State from Richard O'Brien, U. S. Consul General, Algiers

NQ25
Supposed debts of the United States, in the N e g o t i a t i o n ~ d i n g
or to be incured, Relative to our affairs with Algiers, unis &
Tripoli Estlmate of OBrien for to do away the Maratime & Military Stores
Stipulated by Treaty for Tunis. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
dollars
debts of the United States at Tunis by Farnins Statement- - - - - - - Supposed debts of Tripoli- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - Tripoli Regalia, Stipulated Stores, Valued by OBrien, at------ - - - In 4 Months, Regalia in 2 Yeam Presents
debts of the loss of the Ship Fortune & Cargo--at- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - For extmrdinary'a for 1799- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - dollars ALGIERSthe 20" Match 1799
[NA. SDA. CL, Algiere, Vol. 4, Jan-Nov. 1799.1

36000
15000
6000

12000
12000

47987

141987

314

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1786 TO 1801

To Richard O'Brien, U. S. Consul General, Algiers, from Jocleph Ingroham, former
U. S. Charge d'dffeires, Tripoli

CARTHENGENA
23 March 1799
DEARSIR Before this Coms to hand I make no doubt but You
will be inform'd of the Circomstance & Cause of my leaving Tripoli.
boath by Mr Mqdonogh's & my letters by the way of Tunis, it was not
tell too days before my Quarantine was out that I was aquanted
with Mr Cathcart arival in algiers or any Exspectations of his Coming
Soon. I try'd to the utmost of my Powar with His Excellenc
retard my departure and let me remain in Tripoli till the asival o[ tthe
o
Consul or we had Sum news from algiers this he would not listen to,
I Pre osed writing to You this he refused & in Short His Excellency
woul not Consent to any t
but my Immediate Departure for
Spain in one of vessals with his etter for our Minister at madrid, or
Immediate war that his Cruisers was ready for Sea & he had already
given orders to make reprisals on our Shiping that he was dertermed
on one or the other, and in Short left it to be determed in a short time
the Ste Ihave taken was adviseable boath by Mr Mqdonogh & Farfarwhich am sorry for as I had no other dependence then the Independent & Meading with Mr Cathcort for a Settlement, but Since my arival
here Mr Montgomerry informs me that She was unfortently Captured
& Condemed by the french loded with wine & Brandy which has now
left me in a verry unpleasent Sittevation
I have Sent His Excellency Letter on to madred and wait Mr
Humphreys's answar to be forwarded on by Marad Raice who is now
in the Port of Carthergena - waiting for the Same, I beleave His E:
has wrote for a Brig on my Leaving him he told me if the united
States wished a Prepeatule Peace with him they must send him a
Ship Coppered of 28 or 30 guns

d"

9

f

[NA.

SDA.

CL, Algiers, Vol. 4, Jan.-Nov. 1799.1

Consnlar Present, made at Tunis, 96 March 1799 and promised by the United
States
To the
60
Bashaw & Son 2 pieces linen . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . - - - - - - - - - - - - 2 caftans b r o c k a d e - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - . - - 232
1 diamond set watch and chain- - - - _ - _ - - _ - - - - - - - 1650
1 gold snufF box set in diamonds - - - __ - - - - - - - - - - - 1500
1 diamond ring, solitaire- - - - - - _ -_ _ -- - - - - - - - - - - 600
3592
1 piece linen- - - - - - - - - _ - - - - -- _ -__
_ __
_-_ _ .__ .- 30
Sshiptapa.
2 caftans brockade- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 232
1 gold repeating
- - - - 460
. . watch and chain - - - - - - - _ - __ --_
1 ring sohtaire- - - - - - - - - __ _ - - - _ -- - _ - _- - - -- .575
6 handkerchiefs. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
Veckil of
1 Caftan b r o c k a d e - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 118 1309
1 gold watch and chain- - - - - - _- _ .._
..
.----130
ug*
I ring, solitaire- - - - - - - - - . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
550
4 handkerchiefs. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
1 bag c o f f e e - - - - - - - - - - _ _ - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - . - - - - - 40
1 ditto pepper- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 40
8loaves s u g a r - - - - - - - - - _ - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 50
1 piece holland- - - - - _ - - - - _- - - _ _ _ - - _ _ _- _- -__ _ - - 30
964
Mustapha
1 gold repetition watch . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
150
Hodea
1 ring, solatsire. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
270
1 caftan brockade-----_-----tantantantantantantantantan
116
636
Bash Cusac
1 gold watch and chain. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Guarda Golph 1 ditto- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - Promised Prinl Set?
1 ditto----------____-----------.-----------[8DA. CL, Tunis, Vol. 1, July 1797-Dec. 1800.1

-

I

315

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

[April 17991
Concerning Defences of Algiers and Tunis

Copy from the Regester in the U S Chancery a t Tunis Ap. 1799
Qwlit~..

aUm.

Swivels.

10 - - - - - - - - - - - - - Galley,, ,- -- 16 -- -- - - - - -- - - - Barque------ 22 - - - - - - - - - - - - - Barque ------ 10 -------------Xebeck ------ 22 - - - - - - - - - - - - - Corvet------ 22 - - - - - - - - - - - - - Barque------ 14 - - - 12 - - - Barque--- -- - 18 - - - 4 ---Xebeck---,-14 ---10 - - - Xebeck ------ 14 - - - 4 ---Tartana- - - - 8 ---4 ---Galley- - - - - - 10 - - - - - - - - - - - - - Xebeck ------ 10 - - - 4 ---Galley - - - - - -

NPmen.

70.
140.
125.
50.
150.
170.
60.

110.
60.
60.
40
70
50

To whom belonging.

Prom aotuncc sailing

The Sahibtaba- - - - - The Goulette
11
Proprietor8- _ - _ - _
_Maht Galloulee,--Sfacs
Idem ------------Government- - - - - - - The Goulette
11
The Sahibtaba----66
Agi - - - - - - - - _ - - - - _ Mahl Caiasci- - ---- Monsstier
Hameida Bent - - - - - Goulette.
Maht Galloulee----- S f y ~ .
Idem- - - - - - - - - - - - Hameida Bent - - - _ - Goulette
Maht Galloule- - - - - Sfacs '6

This copy is forwarded to shew the average strength of the Tunissien
cruisers The guns are from four to nine pounders - I n the ports of
Farena, Byzerte, Sfacs and Susa are an hundred and twenty cruisers:
but not in general so large as the above. Neither time nor opportunity has yet enabled me to procure an exact list of the marine strength
of Tunis. I t is much superior to Algiers. The vessels are better
reserved and managed, and the men are much more enterprising.
Eor the time of their cruising and cruising ground reference must be
had to Captain OBriens 'ournal, which is accurate. Their manner of
attack is uniformly boar ing. I t is however owing more to the weekness and timidity of the enemy they engage than to their own superior
valor or management that they make such progress in their mischief.
I have seen nothing yet, neither in Algers nor Tunis but what apears contemptible when contrasted with the force which a warlike
European, or even American might oppose to it. he whole marine
of both kingdoms would hardly give a relish to a british squadron and would not furnish a breakfast to such force as the Umted States
could without much inconvenience fit out, provided we were a t
peace with France. Algiers is as vulnerable by land as sea. The
city is defended in its rear by an enormous stone castle about 30 feet
high, standing on an elevated site which overlooks the town. About
one mile west of this is an eminence which commands the castle.
There is nothing formidable to the gaining of these heights by a
coup de main. The troops may be landed in a bay one mlle and an
half northwest of the city without annoyance; and in one night effect
the object. A battery of a few guns on the western eminence would
reduce the Castle at discretion: Or the latter may be carried by an
escalade, there being no ditch, pickets nor abatis to prevent it. From
these two positions veneeance may be poured u on the city and water
batteries below as irreslstably and as effectu y as the torrent upon
Sodom and Gomorrow, and with as much justice The world have been astonished and alarmed a t the failure of the
great expeditions formed against Algiers. But if the world were to
see the conduct of those expeditions its astonishment and alarm would
cease [?I together. Orileys assault was fitted to the genius of indolent
Spaniards. He landed in a bay, and encamped in a plain commanded
on all sides by high grownd - and he suffered his retreat to be cut
off from the sea - I n this situation he delayed the attack till the
moors from the country collected and came upon him in clouds -

d

alf

316

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1786 TO 1801
-

- -

Nor did he fight judiciously when attacked. The french bombardment was bought off - And the number of shells which the Admiral
had orders to throw into the city were in fact thrown one mile on its
fight, and are now many of them lyin in the same place entire - a
proof that they were not charged. Al!f the bstterie. of m e r s are in
a ruined conhtion: the gun carriages almost uniformly rotten; and
garrisoned by undisciplined, half-starved turks, who divote much
more time to their pipes and prayers than to their arms and police.
I t was impossible to get the exact number of guns mounted on alt
their batteries I intruded myself into every fort of importance: but
it was dangerous to make any surveys with accuracy from the extreme jealousy of the Mahometans. I t was very obvious however
that their guns like their carriages were in a neglected situation: I
could discover but one single apron among perhaps one hundred and
seventy guns. The iron guns appear never to have been scaled and the brass are with very few exceptions two thin for use Tunis is less vulnerable because more inaccessible. Not a un can
be brought by water to bear within twelve milmiles of it; and nobanding
can be effected within fifteen miles of it. But if once a proached it
has nothing like defence. Its waUs are very low; wit out ditches
and tumbling to the ground in many places. I t has many commanding eminences, untenanted, within reach of i t - and no defence.
But should the United States ever again have occasion to treat
with this government and redeem captives (and the thing is not impossible for they will have war with somebody) Byzerte oBers hostages
to secure a reciprocal treaty. This cit about, thirty five miles from
Tunis, contains twelve thousand so s, principally moors, and of
course without arms. The defence consists of t h e e batteries, or
castles, of free stone: one a t the N. W. angle of the city walls, the
other two opposite to each other a t the entrance of the mole; the
whole mounting about sixty cannon. The walls which are also of
free stone are about thirty feet hgh, six feet deep - and have para ets
and loopholes a t top for musketry; but they are without ditches. %he
castle a t the N. W. angle commands the town and other forts. This
is easy of access by landing troops on the west point of Cape Blanco
(where Scipio Afncanus is said to have disembarked his army to
march to Carthage) about six miles distant, under cover of darkness,
and proceeding in a right line and without obstruction to its walls.
An escalade mlght be effected with ladders without loss; for the castle
has no garrison, and is only watched by an old pensioner, who eve
night with perfect confidence and security commits his trust, wit
his W U ~ ,to the guardianship of Mahomet. The parapets of the wall
are now to be manned, and the garrison secured a t the mole, which
consists only of seventy men commanded by a turk from Tunis. The
whole city are couped a t once without a possibility of escape or resistsnce, for there is not one stand of arms amon the citizens nor
other defensive weapon, and may be forced on oard the vessels
before the least succour could be given from any quarter. These
hostages in America would give the command of terms; for being
principally moors i t would produce a general insurrection in the
c o u n q if they should not be redeemed a t any price. Eight regular
battaltons could effect this enterprise. I t would be more feasible
and more productive than an attempt to retaliate insults upon their
cruisere, which may be viewed as the wolves of the forests, it is almost impoesible to catch them, and when caught they m worth

E

9

T

f

317

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

nothing. We have heard much of the irresistible intrepidity of the
turkish military here. It is all hyperbola. Here is nothing like an
organized military. The camp, as their force is termed, is an awkm r d squad of insolent turks, whose only feats of valor consist in
swa ering once a year into the country among the wretched, defense ess moors to gather taxes. They have neither tactics nor
discipline. There is not a bayonet in Barbary.
Not much should be feared nor expected from a people whose
principal ministers, principal merchants and principal generals consume day after day in the same company smoking tobacco and
playin a t chess - While the citizens and soldiers are sauntering in
rags, sleeping under walls, or praying away their lives under the
shrines of depart,ed saints - Such IS the military, and such the
industry of Barbary - Yet to the shame of humanity they dictate
terms to powerful nations!!!
NB. The Sahibtaba is the proper mode of spelling ye title which I
have spelt Sahiptappa.

7

[NA.

SDA.

CL, Algiers, Vol. 4, 3an.-Nov. 1199.1

12 April 17991
To kcretary of State from Richard OIBrien, U. 8. Consul General, Algiers

NQ28 -

WANTEDFOR

THE

REGENCY
-

I

The guns, Cariages,
10 barreis of tin in sheets, 4 different Sizes
200 long handled tar Brushes britchens t a c k l e s ,
worms, Spunges & dI
200 long handled paint d Qlarge 200 DQ
DQ DQ D ~ s i z eless belonging
thereto
100 Small
dQ
d~ must be returned to
30 Sheets of Lead the Regency, s t the
return of the Polscre
4 0 or 50 barrels of lamb black 100 Barrels of Pitch $ Tar, if requisite in the hole as ballast

WANTED
FOR

THE

DEY-

-

600 Wt of line l o d Su r
600 dollars worth of g h & a n y boards 300 dollars worth of Ebony boards (is there such a thing)
100 dollars worth of black W n u t boards Tamarins & Sweatmeats, W. India produce - 200 dollars worth
6 pieces of fine India Muslins, fitting for Turbans 20 d o z ~of Madrass handkerchiefs, Different Qualities & Colours dv 10 pieces of the finest dimity 4 pieces of the finest Linen 100 best, English Penknives, of different Qualities
30 pieces of large damwk, fine, for Napkins,
20 piecea, of India Silks, with & without flowers, of different Qualities
ARTICLES,REQUISITE

TO BE SSNT TO ALGIERS, WITE DISPATCH ON
THE UNITEDSTATEB-

ACCOUNTOF

Dollsra
Coffee green of Martinic & St domingo, amount in bags - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 20,000
Sugar in boxes & Barrels, I?', 24, 34 & 4 Quality d~----------------- a~ooo
Pepper in b a g s - - - - . . - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 810oO
Conchineal to the Amount of - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - . . - - - - - - - - - -8,000
-Pimento in b a g e - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 2,000
600
Rum Jamaica, in bottles to the Amount of ------------------------- .
Cottons Ordinary, of dserent Qualities (I believe india)-- - - - - - - - - - - - - 16, 000
5,000
Cloves in butts, to the Amount of -------------..-------.-----------NankeensAmount o f - - - - - _ - - _ - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 2,000
Irish Linnens, Amount I*', 24, 34, 4th & 55p Quality -----.._-----__-------2, om
China, in Coffee & Tea Setts, dishes, bowles, & plates, of
1, ooo
Red, Green, & Blue, flowered or fash~oned-- - - - , - - - - -

318

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1786 TO 1801

Tin in Sheetsas pr P a t t e r n - _ - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -

Dollars
2,

Horn or Ising Glass for Lanthorns amount of -------...----------,--Cinnamon, as pr Sample to the Amount of Note NP 1- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 1,000
Salmon Pickle d in Barrels & half Barrels - Amount of--- - - - - - - - - - - - - 1,000
Amount in dollars

-

77,200

Note of NQ 1 amount of 1000 dollars-- . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1, CmJ
Note of NQ2 to the Amount of - - - - - - _ - _ - - - - - _ - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 1,500
Note of NQ3 to the Amount of . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3,000
Note of NQ4 to the amount of . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1,500
Note of NP 5 as pr Samples, of amount- - - . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3, 000
Chintzes, Variety? to the amount of..-- - - . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1,000
Muslins, Ordinary, in pieces of different Qualities-- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 2,000
Crates of Liverpool ware Amount of.. - - - - - - - . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . - - 1, 000
Ginger best Quality to the Amount of - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -__- - - - - - - - - - - - 1,OOo
Handkerchiefs, Coloured, of Cotton, different Qualities-- - - - - - - - - - - - - - 1, 500
NQ6. of this Fustick wood, amount of- - - - . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2,000
15 Barrels of Smoak'd herrings 75 Barrels of Piclile'd herrings dollp 95,700
To the SECRETARY
OF STATEOF THE UNITEDSTATES.
ALGIERSApril the @
, 1799.
by RICHARD
OBRIENCOPY.
It will be necessary the Polacre to mount 16, Six pounders & 40 Men, and to
be loaded with these Articles with the greatest dispatch, it will be a plan and
the means of Saveing heavy Sums being expended or demanded. of the U, S
[NA. SDA. CL, Algiers, Vol. 4, Jan.-Nov. 1799.1
To Richard O'Brien, U. 8. Consul General, Algiers, from William Baton,
U. 8 . Consul, Tunis

TUNISdthOf A p d 1799 SIR, Inclosed herewith I send you a copy of our Negotiation from
which you will learn, that the principal object of our Government,
on alteration in the 14" article, is obtained: also a copy of the note
of the articles demanded by the bey, as a present for himself on the
occasion of hoisting the flag;He says it is the same which he received
from spain on the like occasion and what he resolved to have from
United States, I resisted the demand, till he ordered me to accede
to i t or prepare to leave the Kingdom; I t has been all along understood that he should receive a present, but I am suspicious our
cidevant agent has projected this demand for the sole pu-rpose of
improving a refusal as an apology from procuring my exp+won from
the Country with a view of recovering his place; I have mdeed no
reason to cherish this opinion from any thing discover'd m his treatment personally; this is obliging, friendly and officiously good natured but every body of respectability here seem to agree in-pronouncing him a perfidious scoundrel; possibly the one half of t h s is meant
as complimentary to my feelings, & so i t is illy timed: for I have no
concerne from influence let his projects be what they will - His
disappointment is manifest, nor is i t unexpected; I t would indeed
be a singular circumstance if he were not so, and i t is natural to
suppose this disappointment may produce dispositions t? embarrass
me: hitherto however I have experienced nothing senous of this
nature, except i t be this demand, nor am I certain that this. suspicion
is fairly founded, whatever may be the truth of the fact, situated as
he is, he is rather to be considered an object of Comrmserahon than
alarm, I believe him embarrassed in his circumstances, I know him

NQ8

319

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

extreemly mortified in loosing the consulate, & think he deserves
Consideration - after every other effort had failed to procure
passage for the Consul - for Tripoli, I have thought it necessary to
dispatch the brig with him he accordingly embarked the 1F inst for
that place, and the morning followin$ doubled cape bon with n fair
wind, the Vickele of Algiers and s i p o r Azulia, made great exertion
to procure a Vessel, and both pronounced it impossible; neutral
Vessels cannot be prevailed on to tauch a t that port, for fear of the
treachery of the bey, who, as I have before stated, is suspected of a
Coalition with Buonaparte, this might also be used as an argument
against risking the brig: but the emergency of our affairs there,
require the immediate agency of the Consul: the utmost which can
be sacrificed by the brigs going there, bears no proportion to the loss
which might be sustained in consequence of delaying to prevent a
WAR, I have advised Captain Geddess not to come to anchor in the
harbour of Tripoli, and Ordered him, in case the Bashaw should
demand the brig, to resist the demand by all the means in his power, I cannot but hope this measure will be productive of good, as soon
as I shall have adjusted the accounts of the United States with Mr
Famin, and the Contingencies of the Negotiation you will be furnished with my report

*

*

*

*

*

*

*

We want from Algiers 3 Gold watches and Chains one of them a
repeater, moderate price, two of them on the Christian Construction
for the Bashcasal, Gorda Golps & principal secretary I also pray
you to send me some tea, and charge in ncct
Certified to be a true Copy by,
RIC& OBRIENP, S, 5. of April
I have received of Sigr Solomon Azulia - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - $28,000 -

this morning I closed a final settlement with Mr Farnin, and
have his receipt in full, I have paid him, the balance of his
Accr Current - - - - - - - - - - - - - -*
$14,960. 70/100
4,000
Two years salary, as pr your advice-- - - - Two yesre house rent @ 500------------- 1,000
19,960.70/1M)
.

L

-

-

-

Add expenditures Secret aervlce- - --_
-_.
- - - - - - - - - - -- - - - - - paid Azulis pr your advice- - - - - - - __ _ - - - - " provisions for the brig--- - - - - - - - - - - "
Consul Cathcart, advance salary..--- Incidential Charges. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Outfit--------------------------------

4010 400 -

383.98/100
250 892. 52

5 936.50

2000

2 000.
27,895.20
103.80
$28,000

Balance-------_-_----------------------------------

-

In the incidential charges is this sum for Subsistance during

my detention, after my arrival in Philadelphia and supplies for

the Voyage. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

382.52 Cta

I have taken on myself all payments of a public nature since leaving
Philadelphia Certified to be a true Copy by
RICHQOBRIEN
[NA. SDA. CL, Algiers, Vol. 4, Jan.-Nov. 1799.1

320

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1786 TO 1801

To Secretary of State from Bichard O'Brien, U. S. Consul General, Algiers
N-6.
ALGIERSApril the @'! I700 DEARSIR, YOUwill observe that the letter I had from Consul
Eaton was dated the 21'' of March, but Bockeris & Busnahs had a
letter from thier friend Solomon Azuli, Eatons Banquire a t Tunis,
this letter was dated 5 days after Eatons, and Mentioned that the
Artieles, which were in the Treaty, & objected too by the Senate,
would be alter'd, agreeable to the request, or as Consul Eaton thought
proper to have them & that the whole business in Tunis, relative to
the affairs of the United States, would be settled on the plan proposed,
if so, the government of Tunis will accept of Cash payments, m lieu
of the Maratime & Military Stores, I am not too sanguine on this
business, as I have not this Officially from Eaton, but I shall know
by the return of the Sophia, which I expect here the first Easterly
winds and with the first spurt of said Winds, the polacre will sad
from here - destined for Philadelphia Consul Cathcart still remains a t Tunis, I have advised him to
proceed and for Eaton to push him on for Tripoli, as there is a Necessity of his being there on many important Considerations -

*

*

*

*

*

*

*

I mill now observe to you my D? Sir, & I pray God that you or the
United States, will never loose sight of it, or of this National Object,
that is the great and urgent Necessity of keeping up a Marine force
the frigates, sloops of war, brigs & Schooners, for it is my Candid &
Sincere Opinion that there is the greatest necessity for this Marine,
that there is no great dependance to be put in any of those Barbary
or Christian States, we might have an extended Commerce, a sudden
WAR, out starts the Corsairs, in comes 60 Sail of Americans, and all
this might be prevented, by our having a fleet of Corsairs Armed and
prepare'd, & ready to act on any suddpn emergencies, those people
would know, & should see, that we had some ships of force, to defend
and protect our Just Rights, & without Corsairs, we have no business
of an extended Commerce, or Occupying these out posts, the deans,
Swedes, British and infact all nat~onsthat has Commerce in the
Mediteranian and Seas Adjacent, has at all timcs, frigates & Corsairs,
ready to afford i t the Necessary protection, and now and then one or
two of the United States, frigates, might call in or off Algiers and
Tunis, & towards Italia, it would shew them the United States had
if Necessiated some C o r s k to protect their Commerce OBrien, Eaton & Cathcart might be compare'd unto 3 light houses
erected on 3 dangerous shoals, said light houses erected to prevent
Valuable commerce runing thereon; said light houses has been erected,
a t a Vast expence to the Commerce of the United States, to prevent
Merchant Ships runing thereon, i t will cost the United States some
money to keep said light houses in Repair, to keep the requisite lamps
burning and other Necessary expences, * * *

*

*

*

*

*

*

1

The time is favourable for the United States peace with Constantineo le, and might be made easly through the Channel of Algiers, If
I hat-fpowers; The algerine General of the Marine goes for Constantinople, and fearing, that the turkish Corsairs might fall in with Americas Vessels, he has promised me to sound Soften and Meliorate, and
use hie influence, on our affairs, if it should be Necessary in any

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

321

respect - There will allways be Veering and hauling business of 30 or
40 thousand dollars, between the United States, and &erst
OBrien got Manied the 25" of March, if there is a possibhty You
will permit, Mr Walcott and M' Francis, to peruse these dispatches;
I beg my best respects to them and be Convinced my Dear Sir,

* * *

[NA. SDA. CL, Algiers, Vol. 4, Jan-Nov. 1799.1

A List of Captives in Algiers 8
Genovisa---------- 109
Napolitana-------- 92
Venimnia- - - - - - - - - 76
English-----------8
Ragusees- - - - - - - - - 3
Portuguese- - - - - - - - 37
Imperialia- - - - - - - - 62
Malteeae- - - - - - - - - 39
Piedmonteese- - - - - - 29
Corsicans-------_-- 19

R I C OBRIEN
~

April 1799

Sardinians- - - - - - - - 4
Tuscans- - - - - - - - - - 2
Francaisa de Oran-- 63
d? from le Calla- - - 91
Spaniards_--------- 12
Romans----------4
Greeks- _ - - - - - _ - - - - 376

-

total - - - - - - - - 1026 belonging to Govt

To this account should be added 300 more who are slaves to particulars, as also 250 French daily expected, supposed to be emigrants
from Leghorn Bed and taken by the Algerines.
(Signed) RIcBP O'BRIEN
[NA. SDA. Disp. Spain, Vol. 4, 1797-1709.1
To Richard

O'Brien, U. S. Consul General, Algiers, from William Eaton, U. 6.
Consul, Tunis

TUNIS1ot4 ~f A ~1708
I NO9
DEARSIR, On the 4t9 inst, I forwarded you the result of our negotiation On the 6'Qthe prime Minister - Mustapha Eogea, returned his
present to me, from a resentment he felt on account of its being less,
than the Sapatapa's, who he says is the second Minister, and demanded the balance On the 7'h a demand came from the Admiral, for a gold headed
cane, a gold watch and Chain, and twelve picks of cloth, which is said
to be Customary, & which it will be difiicult to evade This morning a demand came from the Aga of the Goulette for the
customary present on the occasion of the h t Vessel of War comeing
to anchor in the Ba ,In answer to this I have said I d
lmake him a
present of a copy o the Treaty -.
But what is more extraordinary is a demand of Mr. Famins brought
forward Yesterday, for the sum of one thousapd nine hundred and
eighteen dollars 21/100, on account, of r e p m alterations, paper
hangings, &c for the house, including nine months additional houserent, and a few articles of furniture I have not answer'd this demand,
nor will I, without being compelled, this afternoon is appointed for
the Adjustment a Combmation of beggars and thieves! I would as
soon contract to satisfy the grave, the b a ~ e nwomb, and the devouring fire, as to Content these scoundrels mth presents the revenue of
our Country would be inadequate to it; the prime hilinister must be
silenced, with the smaller Rascals, I w i l l hold a parley and play them
off, if possible

t'

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1786 TO 1801

322

I have made an endorsement on the two receipts which Signior
Azulia has on haad, which explains its self Mr Cathcarts packet was omitted in my last through forgetfuilness --[Signed by W. Eaton.]
Certified to be a true Copy
OBRIEN
by RICHQ
[NA.

SDA. CL, Algiers, Vol. 4, Jan.-Nov. 1799.1

To Richard O'Brien, U. 6 . Consul General, Algiers, from James Leander Cathcart,
8. S. Consul, Tripoli

TRIPOLI
IN BARTApril 13" 1799
SIR,When I was a t Algiers, you gave me to understand, that I
would have no di%cultv whatever to encounter a t Tripoli, on my
arrival here I found i t Otherwise; I have however surmounted them
all by the help of our friend Doct' McDonogh who I am sorry you have
so much neglected; I am now happy to inform you, that the United
States of America is in perfect harmony with this Regency (if I may
be allow'd the term) the particulars of our negotiation you will be
informed of by Captweddes, as I do not think proper to detain the
brig longer than I can avoid, otherwise I would give you a detail of
the Negotiation, which you must now request of the Secretary of
State I have been informed from Indubitable authority that you promised
the Brig Sophia to the Bashaw of Tripoli, and CaptQGeddes mformed
me that you told him, you had made the Bashaw a Kind of a promise
by the way, of G r e ~ i n gthe way, now Sir you h o w that such promises
must be f u m e d , I therefore was Oblidged to redeem your promise by
Giving the Bashaw 8,000 dollars, in lieu of said Vessel, and for the
Stores, and his condescension in waiting so long for them, 1000 110,0001,
the Contingent expences will be about 1500 which in all makes
19,000 [19,500], Consular presents exccpted out of which I have
saved one diamond ring one repeating watch, four Silver ditto, two
snuff Boxes, one piece of holland and two dozen of handkerchiefs Farfara has become responsable for said Sum which is to be aid
immediately, I therefore request you will honour said Farfaraysgills
upon sight, to the amount of 17,000 dollars, the two thousand Algerine
Sequins, which I received from Azulia, I have given to the Bashaw, in
part payment, Farfara has not made out his accounts yet, when he
does, I will forward them onto you, MT Ingraham has not left one single document in this Office, he
has taken even the treaty away with h m ,I am Credibly informed that
he has not spent above fifty dollars on the house I now live in and as
for his public dinners, there is no body here to eat them M' Eaton and myself has found by experience that the interferance
of the dey of AQyers with either of the other regencies has been
detrimental to the affairs of the United States, our Government must
therefore drop the Idea of Soliciting his mediation, & endeavour to
Cultivate the friendship of the reigning Princes for the time being, as
both here and a t Tunis they are determined to be respected as independant princes -

*

*

*

Certified to be a true Copy
by RICH@
OBRIEN

*

*

*

*

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

323

I never Sa 'd to Mr Cathcart that I herd Mr OBrian Say he had
prornis'd the srig Sophia to the Bashaw of Tripoli
HENRYGADDES
[NA. SDA. CL, Algiers, Vol. 4, Jan.-Nov. 1799.1

[15 April 17991
Quasi-War, United States and France
[NOTE.--& letter of 15 April 1799 from 8ecretary of the Navy to Ca tain
Thomas Truxtun, U. S. Navy, sumrnarizinp; the dieposition of the United
naval forces, and the progress made in creating protection to American commerce
against French privateers; printed in "Naval Documents, Quasi-War, United
States and France", third volume (April to July, 1799) pp. 49-51.]

Eft*

[15 April 17991
To President John Adams from the Bashaw of Tripoli

[Translationfrom the Italian]
To His Excellency JOHN
ADAMS,
President of the
United States of America &C &C &c.
(seal)
By the arrival of your Consul, James Cathcart, We have received
your kind Letter dated the 21s' of December last, the contents of
which have been duly attended to. In answer we have now to inform
you that we have been much surprised to see the said Consul arrive
without bringing with him, after a two years expectation the present
of ammunition agreed upon a t the conclusion of the last Peace, - as
well as the Brig which was promised us by Captain O'Brien. This
your negligence with regard to us, had in such a manner offended us,
that we were resolved not to receive the said Consul; But our Doctor
B. M. Donogh has made us so great intreaties to prevail upon us to
enter into a negotiation with the said Consul respecting the points
alluded to, that with a View to gratify his desire and to preserve unaltered the friendship which subsists between us, we have agreed to do
i t ; And after some controversy on the subject, we have agreed to
receive the inconsiderable sum of ten thousand Pezzi duri[*](a coin)
in the place of the Present of ammunition, and that of Eight thousand
Penzi duri as a substitute for the Brig aforesaid; Whereby we have
consumated the Peace which shall, on our side, be inviolate provided
you are 'CVilhg to treat us as you do the two other Rqencies, without
any difference being made between us. - Which ~sthe whole of
what we have, a t present, to say to you, wishing you a t the same time
the most unlimited prosperity.
Done a t Tripoli of Barbary,
this 15th of April 1799.
The above was written by command of his Excellency Yusuf
Caramanli, Basha of Tripoli who afExed his seal a t the top of it.

*

[ hard dollars.]

[SDA. CL, Tripoli, Vol. 1, Part I, Nov. 1796-Dec. 1799.1

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1786 TO 1801

324

[23 April 17991
To Secretary of State from Richsrd O'Brien, U,8. Consul General, Algiers

On the Mornin of the 22e of april I received this informat.ion, [*]
which I immediat y Communicated to the general of the marine. and
requested - he would fully acquaint The Dey - and Sent on the
same business - to the prime minister. The result is that the dey
declares again. that the United States. treatie with Tripolia is fully
under his gaurentee. and has forcibly wrote t o the Bashax of tripolia
on this business declareing that as to the Maratime and milztary
stores stipulated by the U.S. for Tripolia - that the Dey is in all
respects. responsable, this letter goes by a direct conveyance for Tunis
& is to be forwarded from thence by the Algerine Agent. by a Special
Currier for Tripolia. more is not in the power of The Subscriber Algiers - April The 23q799

7

[*See Letter to Richard O'Brien from Joseph Ingrahsm dated 23 March 1799.1
[NA. SDA. CL, Algiers, Vol. 4, Jan-Nov. 1799.1

[about 30 April 17991
Effects granted to Tunis by United States

Note of the effects granted to the regency of Tunis by the peace
with the United States of America.
26 cannon, 12 pounders.
14 ditto, 8 DQ
40 carriages.
12000 cannon bells of 24, 18, 12, 8 & 6 pounds.
250 quintals of gun powder. Understood quintals a t the Palace
50
d~
priming powder.
20 Keeb of 52 feet length.
500 Knees of oak.
200 forked knees of DQ
x 5omasts
300 ash oars, of 34 feet length.
a 800 oak planks for sheathing, 434 Inches thick & 32 feet long.
b 5000 pine DP,4 Inches thick & 18 feet long.
c 300 pieces of scantling, 14 inches square and 40 feet long.
10 cables of 14 Inches.
10 ditto
12 DQ
15 haw~ersof 6, 7, & 8 Inches, - and 120 fathom in length.
600 quintals wrought iron.
200 barrels of pitch.
200 ditto
roain
200 ditto tar.
40 quintals match rope.
t 200 quintals cordage, of 1, 2, 3, 4, & 5 inches.
(Regala supposed to amount in dollars - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -- .
- Peace cost in m o n e y - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - Peace p r e s e n t s - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - CousuL presenk ------ -- - - - - - - - - - - - - -- - - ---- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - Lack atsppa or secret service-- - - - _ - - - - - - - - -- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - .-

Total amount in doilaw- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -

35,000
50,000

12,000
4,000
6, WO

- 107,000)

x In Captain O'Briens list of s t o m as originally Etfpdatcd,,the60 masts had not nny prascribed dimensions.
a. In ditto these planks wew to be only 2% to 3 inches th~ck,& 12 to 16 feet long.
b. In dftdthase pine planks were to be only 3 inches thlck 12 broard d. 12 to I6 f. long.
c. In ditto the ranging timber was to bepine, 9,10, I1 & 12 inches square, without any prescribed length.
t Theae 100 quintals of cordage are an entire addition.

-

T. PI~KERINQ.
[SDA. CL, Tunis, Vol. 1, July 1707-Dec. 1800.1

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

325

To David Hnmphreys, U. 8. Minister t o Msdrid. Spain, from Bichard O'Brien, U. 8.
Consul General, Algiers

COPY
ALGIERSMay Ph1799
Dear SIR- Your esteemed favors of the 15t@of March I rec'd the
22"c of April and a letter dated March 24'@from Cap. Ingraham, then
at Carthagena which was the first information I had on that &air,
but it was what I daily expected owing to the detention of the stipulated
articles, the peace being made 2%years on this affair of Tnpoly I
apply'd to the Dey he wrote immediately with all his force Mr Cathcart sailed in the Sophia the 1" of April from Tunis. He had a strong
letter from the Dey telling the Bashaw Algiers was responsable on
American affairs and had some presents and cash from here which
with his powers from the government of the U. S. I suppose he has
studied and arranged our affairs as I have information from Tunis
that the Sophia returned there from Tripoly the l B t @of April but my
letters from Consul Eaton is of the 16Q by the Dey's influence Eaton
is in his post Famin is unshipped and remains a poignant enemy to
the interests of the U. S. I perceive by Consul Eaton's statement to
me that since he has been in Tunis he has paid 32 thousand dollars
The presents he carried from here was upwards of 6000 Dollars and
i t seems the Bey demands presents of friendship of nearly 41,000
Dollars. The three articles which prevented the Senate from ratifying
the treaty with Tunis was so modiiied or agreed to by the Bey A few
days afterwards he retracted and that part of the busmess is unfinished
Consul Eaton made the Bey an offer in lieu of the maritime and
military stores and all demands 50,000 Dollars. The Bey rejected i t
and added, as viz. "Consult your government I give them six months
to give me an answer and to send the presents If they come in that
time well if not take down your flag and go home" Under all those
considerations I intend to send the Sophia to Lisbon with the whole
dispatches and statements of our affairs to Mr Smith and with bills
for him to pay those debts incurred I have no money but what we
get on cre&t from the Jews they must be paid Also there is 24,000
Dollars relative to the ship Fortune I n fact Sir these are all unavoidable expences incurred in making our peace and fulfilling some parts
of our negotiations and they must be either paid or there must be an
end to our affairs I t will be in my opinion a question with the U. S.
Is it our interest to be on those terms at peace or war with the Barbary
States If peace pay those bills and expect others If War h t
send forward your corsairs withdraw your commerce and be prepared
for maintaining a young Marine in Europe for periods of years. On
the 22" of february I had a full settlement of our affairs with this
regency The whole peace stipulation is settled and 2 years and 9
months of our annuity Depend I have saved on this business to the
U. S. full 150 fathom of cable The 1/3$9 of the cargoes of the Independent Jupiter and Newport was not receipts for so that on account
of the ignorance or neglect of Mr Clark this was a dead loss to the U. S.
and I had no alternative but to give the brig corsair to the Dey He
said the U. S. gave the frigate & great sums to the late one Cap. Smith
in the U. S. Polacre the Dey sailed the 25Q of April having eight guns 9
pounders with 60 men The crew of the late Hassan Bashuw and b l a h
Eisha I ex ect by this time he is well advanced on his passage to Philadelphia $he Sophia is reinforced with the officers and crew of the Skjoldebrand and has 58 men I expect her here daily The Hero Captain
Robertson we have no account of and I suppose said vessel is foundered.

326

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1786 TO 1801

On the 236 of March sailed seven sail of Algerine corsairs to this
date none has returned * * *

*

*

*

*

*

*

*

Disp. Spain, Vol. 4, 1797-1799.1

[NA. SDA.

To Secretary of State from William Eaton, U. S. Consul, !J!unis

TUNIS1. June 1799
SIR,On the fourth ulimo the United States' brig, Sophk, departed
this port with dispatches for the department of State, the substance
of which was, The treaty with alterations - The consent of the
Bey for six months forbessence in expectation of the regalia of maritime
and military stores - this demand for a present in jewels - and his
request for a cruiser - Also a copy of my journal during the negociation - Nothing of immediate moment has transpired since her
denartore
--r - - - -

I am collecting information with a view of answering the enquiries
of the additional instructions of Dec. 24. which will be commumcated
in the report of next month - Should this arrive before the Sophia
i t may apprise our government of the necessity of immedde exertion
to send forward the stipulated regalia as the only mean of preserving
the peace I forward to Captain OBrien a general statement of my account
of payments for the United States up to the day of the Sophia's
departure, accompanied with a triplicate of Citizen Famin's receipt
m full; a copy of which he is desired to forward, through a safe medium,
to the Secretary of the United States [SDA. CL, Tunis, Vol. 1, July 1797-Dec. 1800.1
To Secretary of State from ~Grn
Eaton, U. S. Consul, Tunis

SIR,

*

*

*

*

*

*

*

Muslins, stuffs, 6ne cloths, iron, coffee, sugar, pepper, and spices of all kinds,
bleached wax candles, cochined, dried fish, and lumber, are articles of importation much wanted and which would command great prices in caah, a t leaat three
hundred per cent more than in America. - But no adventures should be made
hither by merchants of the United States until a full confidence in the integrity
of our government ehall be established and the twelfth article of the treaty,
which admits merchantmeu being pressed into tho service of the BcyLique, shell
be altered or expunged - and perhaps it may not be improper to advise the
public of this caution. - If a commercial intercourse with thia kingdom should
ever become a sufficient object to the citizens of the United States to induce a
disposition to alter that article, i t is probable i t may be done without &fficulty,
provided a good underatanding shall be obtained with the Bey.
Tunis - Cruirres in each month from 1790 to 1799
-

--

Months

0

.

--

--

.

6.

2.

N. B. The whole amber of muken Including half gslUes mounting swtvels and patererm only an
betwesn an hundred and twmty and an hundred snd thirty. None of theirgunsarcaed l!4DolurdS.

327

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

The foregoing list and annexed echedule exhibit in a summary view the mast
correct information attainable of the naval force of Tunis, the species of armed
vessels, the number of their guns and men, and the times of the year they go to
sea, also the increase of the navy the last ten years. * * * But twenty
cruisers have gone out this year ae will be seen by the schedule. These are not
carried out in my columns of total numbers because of preserving the monthly
proportion of cruises.

*

*

*

*

*

*

*

The cruising ground of the corsairs of this Kingdom haa heretofore been in the
vicinity of Corsica. Sardinia, and Sicily, on the coast of Genoa, Tuscany, Naples,
Calabria, and in the entrance of the Adriatic Sea,- and even as far up as Venice.
But these coasts, havin fallen under the protection of the belligerent powers,
now d o r d no game. t h e i r mode of attack is uniformly boarding. For this
their vessels are peculiarly constructed. Their long latteen yards drop on board
the enemy and afford a safe and easy conveyance for the men who man them for
this purpose. But being always crouded with men, they throw them in from all
points of the rigging and from all quarters of the decks, having their sabres grasped
between their teeth and their loaded pistols in their belts, that they may have the
free use of their hands in scaling the gunnels or netting of their enemy. I n this
mode of attack they are very active and very desperate. Taught by revelation
that war with the Christians will guarantee the salvation of their souls, and
finding so great secular advantages in the observance of this religious duty their
inducements to desperate fighting are very powerful. Proper defence against
them are high nettings with chains sufficiently strong to prevent their being
cut away - buskshot plentifully adminietred from musquets or blunderbusses and lances. But it is always best to keep them a t distance that advantage may
be taken of their ignorance a t manoeuvre. -

*

*

*

*

*

*

*

Among the other miscellany of this letter the aggressions of these pirates which
have lately happened, and some reflexions on the atfairs which intimately concern
our nation I hope may not be considered wholly impertinent.

*

*

*

*

*

*

(Triplicate)
On the eighth of September last five Tunisian corsairs, carrying nine hundred
and ninety men, landed in the grey of the morning upon the island of St Peters in
the dependence of Sardinia, captured and brought prisoners to Tunis seven
hundred women and children and two hundred and twenty men. The description
given me by the British consul of the barbarous and brutal conduct practised upon
these unfortunate defencelees wretches would shock a savage. The able bodied
men of the island being a t their vintages in the country these people fell a feeble
sacrifice to the merciless assailants. Decrepit age, delicate youth, and helpless
infancy were tumbled head-long from their beds, precipitated down flights of
stairs, shoved out of street windows, driven naked in an undistinguished croud,
without respect to sex or circumstance, through the streets, and crammed promiscuously into the filthy hold of one of their cruisers; in this manner bro't across the
sea, and in this wretched plight goaded with thongs thro' the streets of the city
by their relentless captors; driven to the common auction square, and consigned
to slavery. - The King of Sardinia, distressed 8s he has been on the other hand
by the crimes of the republic, has not hitherto found the ability to redeem them
a t the enormous sum of six hundred and forty thousand dollars, which the Bey
demanded. He hae lately appointed an aged and respectable Count Porcile,
who hss been four times before an ambassador to this court, and who is now
here to negociate the terms of their redemption. He has a t length prevailed on
the Bey to accept the sum of two hundred and seventy thousand dollars, but the
tefms of payment are not yet agreed upon. There is however a prospect of their
release.
The old, the infirm, and the infants, who were unfit for slaves have been obliged
to shift for themselves. They could not find subsistence. Charity dealt her
sparing morsel to them. - They have suffered much; but the consuls severally
contributed something to their relief. I received a letter from the Sardinian
Secretary of State, and another from the Consul General appointed to be charged
with the affairs of all nations who have not a consul established in that Kingdom,
solliciting the good offices of the American Consul in this sffair: the latter seemed
to claim as an obligation, intimating that he had often rendered disinterested
services to Americans in Sardinia. - I gave one hundred dollars.

328

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1786 TO 1801

When war was declared against France the consul and all his countrymen were
confined in close prison and their property sequestered, notwithstanding a treaty
stipulation that the consul and others of his nation should be allowed one year
after declaration of war to adjust their affairs and depart the Kingdom. * * *
I am a t this moment convinced that i t was with a view of finding pretext for a
war that the bey and his minister laboured with so much perseverance to dragoon
or manoeuvre me into a promise of a regalia of jewela and a cruiser. I t is my
decided opinion that except something shall appear for us before the first of February the die will be cast against us and a sweep made among our merchantmen.
I wish my alarm may prove the child of timidity, but since, from arguments
already given, i t has taken possession of my belief, I cannot forbear my importunity on a subject of so much importance. We owe our peace a t this moment to
to the victory of Lord Nelson.
I submitted my opinion by Captain Geddes that a small cruiser of 18 or 20
guns would be well given. I am still of that opinion in case a force be not sent
out. I have before said that there is no access to these courts without paving the
way with gold or cannon balls. Humanity condemns the policy of putting arms
into the hands of these madmen, but we are not singular in this policy. Besides.
considering the intrigues of our rivals here we ought perhaps to feel no remorse on
this score other than what the danger of those arms being turned against ourselves
should produce. I have also advanced my opinion tllst a respectable armed force
in this sea would be among the best precautions against a predatory war. How
often is the Maxim repeated in America, "To preserve peace be prepared for
war?" But how should $his preparation be productive of its object if the world
are ignorant of it7 * * *
Were I to dictate measures to the United States they would read thus.
"Send
out the stipulated regalia; for being stipulated it is become a debt, - accompany
i t with a respectable force and under our guns make the tender on the legal
principles of a tender, that if refused they should annul the obligation. After this
act of justice is performed, if the President should think proper to offer something
conciliatory, something 'to turn away wrath' let it be done gratuitously, and in
such a manner as not only to confer an obligation, but to impose a sense of it
also. Pray let nobody suspect I am for war: Otherwise. - These measures I
do believe necessary precautions against so serious an evil. - But they will
be attended with expenses.

-

*

*

*

*

*

*

*

The Brest and Cadiz fleets are in this sea, The former consisting of nineteen
ships of the line and eleven frigates; the latter of twenty four ships of the line
and [space] frigates. The English are said to have fifty one ships of the line here
watching their motions.

*

*

*

*

*

*

*

[The deletions cover material of a general nature, giving a brief history of the
political, geographical and commercial conditions of Tunis and other countries.1
[SDA. CL, Tunis, Vol. 1, July 1797-Dec. 1800.1

[24 June 17991
To William Smith, U. S. e s t e r to Lisbon, Portugal, from William Baton, U. S.
Consul, T d r

(Duplicate)
SIR

*

TUNIS,18th July 1799.

*

*

*

*

*

*

I have earnestly insisted on the necessity of showing a force in this
sea. - The arguments advanced in favour of the measure accompany this in two letters to Colonel Pickering. If they should coincide
with conclusions you may form from the premises it is ho ed they will
have your support. The atience and submission with w ch we have
suiTered spoliation and ro bery from Algiers have incouraged the insolence and avarice of Tunis. The consequent demands of the Bey I
consider as inadmissible as they are unjust. I t would be degrading
to the United States to yield to them. I have 'ven him no reason to
expect i t so far as it respects the demand of j e ~ c % but
; on the contrary

g

li

329

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

have assured him that my government would reject the demand. We
must a t some period dare begin to resist demands of this nature. Why should farther sacrifices be made before we try the experiment of
resistance? Humility invites insult. The greater our concessions
the more accumulated will be the demands upon us. Nothing can be
more absurd than to expect by presents to satisfy the demands of
these marauding and beggarly courts, who have no sense of gratitude,
no sentiments of honour, no respect for justice, no restraint from fear,
and whose avarice is as insatiable as death, - * * * But what
is still more extraordinary and still worse, we have r e d been stupid
enough to engage the friendly mediation of Algiers to o tain a peace
with Tunis, and have sollicited the guarantee of the former for the
goad faith of the latter! This is placing money in the hands of one
highwayman to keep i t out of the hands of his companion, and taking
one horsejockey to guarantee the word and honour of another. The
consequence is we are plundered and disgraced without securing our
object, while our agents have shared the booty. These arrangements
were brought about by a brace of Frenchmen and their Hebrew coadjutors who have been allied and sharers with the regency in the
produce of their agency. * * *
I am more and more convinced that the mode of our negociation
with these regencies must be so reformed as to remove the impressions
that weakness and fear have dictated the measures to which we have
hitherto yielded.
Already have the United States expended more than one hundred
thousand dollars in their nerrociations with Tunis. without securim a
eace. - The stipulated Ggalia and extraordiiry demands of &e
gey, if complied with, will amount to little short of two hundred thousand more. Without this compliance we are threatened with war. - I
do not believe we are much more safe at Algiers. For the least delinquency the government of the United States will be arrainged a t the
tribunal of the otent Dey, and ammerced in damages a frigate or a
74. - One ha'! f of these expenses the United States may place to the
account of French agency. My predecessor here is a slave, and a base
one because a voluntary one, besides being a swindler and a Frenchman.

g

But to return to the subject. America must shew a force in this
sea. National interest, honour, safety demand it. The appearance
of a few frigates would produce what the whole revenue of a country
would not. They would produce impressions of terror and respect.
Without force we are neither safe nor respectable here. Does not
good policy dictate this caution agalnst aggression before we shall be
compelled to the measure to chastise outrage? * * *

Let the government of the United States at least send one ship of war to
convoy out the regalia to Tunis that these people may be persuaded thd
defense grows in our country.
N. B. The original of this duplicate was forward through the
American house a t Algiers on the 2 4 ult accompanying dispatches to
the department of State - of wh~chthe inclosed are copies [SDA. CL, Tunis, Vol. 1. July 1797-Deo. 1800.1

330

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1786 TO 1801
To William Eaton, U. 8. Consul, Tunis, f'rom Captain Henry Qeddee

LISBON2 P June 1799.

DEARSIRI take the first Opportunit of informing you I Aniv'd

here the 18" and of Course was put into duarters but b the Exertions
of U Buckley was Cleared on the 21" when I waited dpon Lt' Smith,
who proposes my Sailing in the Course of 4 or 6 Days for Philadelphia.
he Read to me a Letter From You in which You Mention my having
your Dispatches on board and Your wish of his Seeing them. I n
Consequence of which I have handed to him all your DispeQxcept
that Directed immediately for Me. as to news we have none. The
Day we Got Pratick a Small fleet of Americans Sail'd two of which was
for Phil" wrote to the SecrY by them I also had an Oppt? of writing
by Gibralter which I Embraced
I Sail'd From Algiers on the 2gtP Ult. on the 2 Inst fell in with a
British Convoy Under the Liropa Comt Stephenson who politely took
me Under his protection and Requested F woud keep a head of the
Fleet. he gave me the Gen! Instructions also private ones. on the
4" the Philadelphia Ship Belvedere CapWrankford Joyn'd us he was
from Alicante to Stop a t Gibraltar Some time. in his Vesell was
Mr and Mrq Lngraham the Late Charge Du Maires a t Tripoli on the
5'b the Fleet Came in in Tituan Bay when M' Ingraham Came Alongside but Could not Come On board. He Did not tell me he was going
for Philadelphia but from his being on board the Belvedere I suppose he
is -

*

*

*

*

*

*

*

[Notes on back of letter]

The Sophia leaves Lisbon July 10 - arrives in America Sept. 10
3 mFgrequired for fitting out and 3 moafor passage - Returns may be
had from America March 10. Possibly by the 10. Jan7 next.
Henry Geddes Captain U. S. N. Commanded the 20-Gun Perm,
State Cruiser Congress in 1781; in which he fought and captured the
British 16-Gun Sloop of W a r Savage.
[HS of Pa., NDA photostat.]
To Secretary of State from James L. Cathcart, U. 6. Consul, Tripoli

Duplicate

TRIPOLI
IN BAR?
July 9''' 1'789
Dr SIR * * * [Comments regarding marriage of Richard

O'Brien omitted.]
By the dispatches entrusted to the care of Cap* Geddes & the
enclosed accl cur; (a) you d l be inform'd that in lieu of the brig &
stores promised to this Regency I agreed to pap cash 18,000 dollars &
that the contingent expences ammount,ed to 1500 more the whole
making the sum of 19,500 dollars - to discharge the above sum I have
paid cash 2000 Algerine Sequins drawn by me at Tunis equal hore to
3500 dollars - On the 10" of May I gave Sigr: Leon Farfaro a bi
upon M: Eaton at Tunis payable 50 days after sight to the order of
said Farfaro for 10,000 dollars & two upon Mr OBrien for 3000 each
payable 15 days after sight - Mr Eaton in his of the 4" of June
rnforms me that he will make provision for the ayment of the above
when it becomes due & at A1 'ers there is no dou t but Mr OBnen will
do the same - When said dls (which I have been so fortunate as to
negotiate a t their full value) are paid this Regency will have no claim

t

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

331

whatever on the United States of America, some small presents
excepted which custom has made a rule for all nations to pay which are
a t peace with them -

*

*

*

*

Should these Pirates capture any of our vessels on any pretense
whatever & that I should find it impossible to clear them by fair
means? pray Sir how ought I to act, ought I to submit to the insult
offer'd our flag as the Sweeds have done & wait the determination of
government, or ought I to bribe as the Danes have done & by that
means encourage those villains to commit greater depredations on our
commerce - Was I to follow the dictates of my own reason I would
leave the country immediately & advise our government to send two
of our largest Frigates with four boats capable of carrying a 12 pounder
in their bow each, besides the ships boats which is a sufficient force to
send against these poltroons - I would join them at Tunis or some
other rendezvous & on my arrival in the Bay of Tripoli I would make
a formal demand of all the property plunder'd from the United States
with every loss occasioned by the alteration of the voyage detention
&F and 20 or 30,000 dollars as a fine for their presumpt~on,if this was
not acceded to immediately I would destroy every Cruizer in their Port
which might be done with the greatest ease by the above force?
Their being ten in number mounting from 10 to 32 Guns each &
defended by two fortifications which could not bring above seven guns
to bear upon any object to seaward - If we put up with the first
insult ou may depend Sir we will be continually exposed to a repetition o them? a t any rate our commerce in the Mediterranean will
never be upon a respectable footing unless our Ships of War occasionally makes their appearance in those seas - I t is now time Sir to
consider what ste s ought to be taken in case of necessity for when the
evil happens it wfl be to late to ask advice; I have wrote to Mr OBrien
on the subject & shall act as may advise untill I have the honor of
hearing from ou which I pra may be soonComodore onald Campbe in the Alphonso a Portuguese Ship of
64 Guns arrived here May 6" & remain'd untill the 20" in which time
he took the Tripoline Admiral & burn'd another Cruiser of 18 Guns
he then concluded a Peace for Portugal with this Regency, their
treaty to be as favorable in every respect as the existing Treaty with
Great Britain - I have sent copy's of the whole proceeding to
Messr* OBrien & Eaton who I have requested to forward copy's to
you $ Mr Smith (b) Enclosed you will receive the terms on which the peace between
Portugal & this Regency was concluded & you will please to reflect
that this was effected by one 64 Gun ship only - I shall endeavor
to forward to you copys of my Journal & acct@curt every six months
if opportunity serves & shall constantly correspond with Messrq
OBnen & Eaton who will transmit to you copy's of my letters as it
sometimes happens that a vessel does not sail from here for Europe
in six months I have r e d a visit from the Bashaw & Grandees which has put me
to a small expense, I have likewise deliver'd presents to him in conse uence of the circumcision of his Son A1 to the value of about 700
do am, the articles which composed sai presents the value of 65
dollars excepted I had saved from the Consular presents which I got
a t Algiers -

9

6

1

8

CI

332

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1785 TO 1801

This letter goes Via I ca & Alicant that it may arrive soon & find
you enjoying as good he th cts I wish you is the sincere prayer of
JAMESLEA?CATRCART

3

*

*

*

*

*

*

*

[SDA. CL, Tripoli Vol. 1, Part I, Nov. 1796-Dec. 1799.1

To Secretary of State from William Eaton, U. 8. Consul, Tunia
Jzlly 16th 1799.

SIR,

*

*

*

*

*

*

*

Interest was making with the governor of Porto Farina and the
Sappatappa to influence the Bey mto the measure, and the prospect
was considered not wholly desperate though not flattering. I had
assured the Sappatappa that if he would procure a final settlement
and discharge of all demands for any sum short of ninety thousand
dollars he should be entitled to receive ten thousand dollars promptly
in consideration of his good offices. - He seemed much inclined to
the argument.
On the 28': ult. he gave a dinner a t his garden, Present, the English
and Imperial consuls, the Portuguese and Sicilian ambassadors and
the american agent, besides several principal Turks. I n the morning
of this day I took the opportunity to obtain hi decided opinion relative to the cash substrtute. He gave it that the project was not
feasible; said that the Bey had purchased and was purchasing a11 the
ammunition he could procure: that he had sent vessels to Trieste,
Mahon, and Spain for maritime and military stores, such as he expected from America, without being able to procure them. That he
was sending to Gibraltar and England with the same views. That the
delinquency of the United States had occasioned great disappointment,
p&rt.icularlyso a t the present crisis. It had operated to retard and
indeed to defeat plrtns of national defence and enterprize the entire
execution of which de ended on these munitions of war. He was
authorised again to dec are that no sum of money would be considered
an equivalent to that regalia. He hoped, if the timber could not be
procured immediately, for I told him i t was yet growing on the sources
of our rivers, that the guns, ammunition, pitch, tar, rosin, cordage,
and such other articles as are to be found in our magames, would be
forwarded without delay.
It is worthy of remark here that while we were a t dinner a body
of Turks came armed to the garden, and even into the court-yard,
md demanded money, alledging that fh gwe~nment having made
peme with every body had reduced them to famine; but they were
resolved not to starve! This circumstance confirms the opinion heretofore advanced that they must be let loose upon some body.
On the 29" the Portuguese and Sicilian Embassadors embarked
for their respective courts; the former having concluded a peace with
thie regenc for three years, the latter during the present war m
Europe.
raised a new spectre of alarm to my vieion. What
now is to block the corsairs within the straits? What now shall hinder
them from cruising from the cape of Good Hope to the O r h e islands?
England is in a kind of alliance with them - and France wi not op-

P

l%s

5

WARS WITH BARBARY POWEIZS

333

pose their outrage against Americans. I resolved therefore once more
to see the Bey and ush if possible the project of a cash payment.
Accordingly on the gurth of July I waited on him a t his palace and
requested him to state what sum of money would satisfy his claims and
cancel all his demands? He laconically answered "No sum whatever, you need not think more of it". He observed that, his minister
had communicated to him my proposals on this subject and had received his instructions to give me a conclusive and h a 1 answer to
them; which he presumed had been done. I said the minister had
made the communication, but as he was daily lessening the number of
his enemies and of course diminishing the necessity of these munitions of war, I hoped he would consider the impediments which
might retard their anival and would prolong the time. He said i t
would be early enough to enter upon this subject after the given time
shall have expired.
I now consider that my ultimatum, agreably to instructions, has
been proposed in a manner best calculated to insure success, but finally
rejected. It remains with the exertions of the United States to preserve the peace. Everything conspires to confirm my suspicion that
the regency does not wish it, and that the commerce of the United
States is marked out as the victim of Tunisian piracy. I thought I
had exhausted the subject of this suspiction in my last letter; but new
evidence appears to support it.
[SDA. CL, Tunis, Vol. 1, July 1797-Dec. 1800.1

[16 August 17991
Coins of Tripoii in Barbary with their comparstive value in the money of the

United States

I

Gold Coins
1
1
1
1

old Tripoline Sequin is equal to- _ - - - - - - - - - - - -- - - - - - - - - - .
Mahaboob of Tripoli Cairo or Tunis- - - --._
-_
._ _ _ - - - - - - .
Venitian Sequin- - - - - _ _ _ _ - _ _ - . - - - - - - - - - - - - - . ~ - - - - - - - Algerinc S e q u i n _ - - _ - _ - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - Silver miz'd with alloy

-

1 Yus&~k_-----__--_----~------------------------------

_

I Gersh------ - - - - - .- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 1 Bu K u l a e i n e - - - - - - - _ . _ _ - - - - - - . - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -

Hal€%Bu K u m s i n e - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 1 Para- - - - - - - - - - _ - _ - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - . - - - - -

Piastres are small bits of Copper of difft shapes with a small stamp
on each Amt@are generally Kept in Mahaboobs & piastres - one dollar is
equal to 200 paras or - 800 piastres in exchange, but them that has
dollars sells them privately for 960 piastres I L ~the inhabitants are
glad to exchange the Bashaws bme metal for silver or gold 8 piastres
or reales makes 1/100 therefore divide an of the above sums by eight
& i t will reduce i t to hundredths of a do1 ar or one Cent pieces

9

[SDA. CL, Tripoli, Vol., 1 Part I, Nov. 1796-Dec. 1799.1

334

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1786 TO 1801

To John Gavino, U. S. Consul, Oibraltar, from Richard O'Brien, U. S. Consul
General, Algiers

(Duplicate Copy)
ALGEIRthe 16t@Augt 1799
Dr SIR I have to inform you that on the 8'Q Znst [*] was sent into
this Port by an Algereen Cruiser the American Brig Babba Cedi Tho?
Clifton Master with a Cargo of Wine from Valencia said to be destind
for Philadelphia, said Brig had a Turkish Pass panted by the late
Dey for one Year and on Examining said Pass, it was found to be out
of date one year, and Ten Months therefore the Regency Condemnd
said Cargo as a Legal Prize to the Captors. The Crew five in Number
being foreigners and belonging to Nations at War with Algeirs were
made Slaves of, The Brig and Master Cleard. On the 15'h Ins! the
Regency gave up those five Captives as a particular favour to the
United States. All American Vessels should have The Mediterenem Pass, real
American Collours and two thirds of the Crew should be Citizens of
the United States. As it is supposed, Sundry American Vessels has
Algereen Turkish Passes - T h is to inform them that said Passes
is out of date that the[y] will not be respected, by the Present De of
Algeirs, and if the[y] have not the American Mediterranean Pass t eir
Cargos will be Condemnd. (Circular)

E

[*See letter to Michael Morphy under date of S October 1799, in "Naval Documents Quasi-war with France" fourth volume.]

[NA. SDA. CL, Algiers, Vol. 4, Jan-Nov. 1799.1

[9 September 17991
Quasi-War, United States and France
[ N o ~ ~ . - - s eletter
e
of 9 September 1799 from Secretary of the Navy to Captain
Richard V. Morris, U. S. Navy, setting forth the urgent need of concentrating
large naval forces in the West Indiee for operations against French privateers;
printed in "Naval Documents, Quasi-War, United States and France", fourth
volume (August to December, 1799), pp. 170-172.1

To Secretary of State, from William Smith, U. S. Minister to Lisbon, Portugal

(Private)
LISBON,
Sep. fZt2c 1799
DEARSIR While Lord Elgin was here I saw him frequently & we
contracted an intimacy which will be of good service to me personally
& to the U. S. also, shog I go to Const?: He goes as Ambr Extr? &
from the recent services of Eng* which have saved Syria & perhaps
the Ott. Emp. his Influence will be very great; of course his private
friendship for me will not fail to be extrem? advantag9 Having understood that the Insurgq frigate was to c l i z e towards
Gibraltar, he expressed a wish she might sail when he did & keep
company thus far, as a greater security; I was not a little flatter'd, as
you may suppose, by this intimation, but still did not venture to
suggest any thing on the subject to Cap$ Murray, least he might be
influenced to alter his arrangemts; but as the two Bulkeleys were at
my house when Lg E. expressed the wish, I desir'd Mr B. the father to
write to Cap' M. & inform him of what had passed; this had the
desir'd effect, for Cap. M. immedy assented & waited for the Phaeton
f ' ate, of which Cap$ Momis her commr was apprized, & they both
s ed together a few days ago. - When LC E.heard an Am. frigate

9

335

W;4RS WITH BARBARY POWEBS

had just arriv'J he suppos'd she was come for me,

& expressed his
disappoin? that I was not to accompany him. I was much pleased with our frigate & her Crew; she is in fine order,
well re dated, well manned & does us great credit. We ave nothing new since my last; no accor from London later
than the 2'4, we have Paris papers to the same dste, which mention
their havi recover'd Coire in the Grisom, but little credit is due to it.
Fauchet & Adet are said to be sent aa Commissr"
S$ Domingo &
Victor Eughes to Cayenne, not as Pnkoner, but as Commisss - new
Commr*we also mentg for Guadaloupe. In a french paper they have
Knighted the Presid( & called him Sir John Adam. - Ancons &
Tortona are said to have fallen; Genoa capitulated. The Russians
are axrivd in Swissd -

%

[Mass. HS. Pickering Papers, Vol. 25.1
To Secretary of Sbate from William Eaton, U. 6. Consul, Tunis

TUNISG* Od. 1799
SIR,The Bey of Tunis still holds an imperious tone - I can add

little on this subject to the communications already forwarded but a
confirmation that nothing 4 secure our peace here but implicit concessions to aU the demands of the regency or formidable resistance Having resolved to know whether any relaxation of the Bey's claims
could, by any means, be obtained, I waited on him in his palace
yesterday and proposed that he should recieve, in lieu of the jewels
demanded, the amount of ten thousand dollars in such rtrticles as he
should chuse to commission for from England - He answered, that
he was not a merchant, he knew nothing of #he value o j the regalia, they
were the usawe; and he s h o w 2 neither abate not commute.
The fact is, the regalia has been stipulated by the proper
the United States, and the Government have no alternative ut Of
to
ratify the act or go to war - The first of January is declared to be the
ultimate moment of forbearance for the maritime and military
regalia: The jewels three months later - This being the situation of
affajrs here I have thought prudent to communicate the annexed
CAUTION
(A) to the different Consuls in the Mediterranean: * * *

Tt

*

*

*

*

*

*

*

On the fourteenth of Se tember a squrtdron of seven comaires sailed
, carrying in one hundred and fifty eight guns and one
thousand ve hundred & forty men, the property of the regency, under
in

cornpay

a pretext of convoying a few merchant vessels to Spain; real destination unknown; conjecture sa s into the Atlantic.
A few days previous to t e arrival of Don Roderigo De Pinto a t
Tunis,the Portuguese Ambassador, the ships of her M. F. M'y had
captured a Regusee laden with merchandize from Smyrna consigned to
roprietors in Tunis - The Bey did not recIaim this cargo of the
bortugese, because, he said, aceordin to the law of nations, i t was a
good prize; and i t would be dishonors le in him to ask it as a favor of
an enemy - But on the cargo being condemned and sold, the Bey
demands indemnity of the Republic of Regusa; and has ordered theu
Char@ des Maires to inform that government $hat except this ind e m t y be made within three months he will send out his cruisers to
make re risals - Although be admits the general principle that Free
botoms mt makefree goo&, he fbds no diffreulty in making the neutral responsible for goods of his subject& thus legally captured and

fi

%

dd

336

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1786 TO 1801

condemned - His argument is, Regusa cannot resist it. The same
thing might happen to an American.

*

*

*

*

*

*

*

Circular. A.
CAUTIONagainst Barbary Pirates The Bashaw of the kingdom of Tunis having limited the period of his forbearance with the United States for the delivery of the regalia, stipulated by treaty,
to the first of January next and having menaced us with war in case of a failure
of said delivery, I t results from my duty to communicate ss well to tho owners
and master's of American vessels, which navigate the Mediterranean as to the
government of the United States this state of affairs, that suitable precautions
may be used to save their property from Capture and our citizens from Slavery
in case that any thing should operate to impede, beyond the limited period, the
discharge of said stipulated obligation - I t is also to be noted that the kingdom
of Tunis has a truce with Her Most Faithful Majesty, the Queen of Portugal,
during the present war in Europe, which admits the corsairs of the former into
the Atlantic -

WILLIAMEATON
C o w l & Agent

of the United States of America

To - - - - - - - &c
[SDA. CL, Tunis, Vol. 1, July 1797-Dec. 1800.1

Kingdom of Tunis
6. Od. 1799

-

[I 1 November 17991
Quasi-War, United States and France
NOTE.-&^ letter of 11 November 1799 from Secretary of the Navy to Captain
Thomas Truxtun, U. S. Navy, in the U. S. frigate ConsleUdion, concerning orders
to join the U. S. squadron on Guadeloupe Station, and setting forth conditions
in the West Indies and vicinity; printed in "Naval Documents, Quaei-War,
United States and France", fourth volume (August to December, 1799). pp.

377-380.1

To Secretary of the Mavp from Secretary of State

[PHILADELPHIA]
DEPARTMENT
OF STATE
Nod 29. 1799.
Dr SIRI inclose lists of the stores and articles called for by our

Consuls a t Algiers and Tunis for those regencies respectively.
I propose that the ship Hero laden last year with lumber for Algiers,
including a number of masts, should now go to Tunis, where her cargo
with the substitutions and additions will better apply: she is now
loading a t New York.
I propose that the U States brig Sophia now in Philadelphia,
should take in 500 barrels of powder and other articles for Algiers to
be found in the inclosed list.
The residue of the articles must be provided in the course of the
winter, to be shipped in the Spring. This residue cannot be ascertained until the Hero & Sophia are loaded: But the invoice of the
Hero's original cargo, now inclosed, will give you u pretty just idea of
the bulkey articles which will remain to be transported. The lumber
can be procured in New Hampshire & Maine; a t least the articles
required for Tunis, Colg Thompson of Portsmouth has offered to
procure; and he will do the business faithfully & punctually.
[Maw. HS. Pickering Papers, Vol. 12.1

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

337

[4 December 17991
Quasi-War, United States and France
[ N o ~ ~ . - s e eletter of 4 December 1799 from Charles W. Goldsborough of the
Nev Department, to Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Navy, giving the number of
U. vessels in commission; printed in "Naval Documents, Quasi-War, United
Btatea and France", fourth volume (August to December, 1799), pp. 48.3-484.1

&

To Secretary of Sate from William Eaton, U. 8. Consul, Tunis

TUNIS64 Dec. 1799 SIR, With infinite satisfaction I have the honor to inform you that
within a few days our affairs have assumed a new and promising
aspect* - Since the departure of Doctor Shaw for America on the
17* Oct. I have paid court to the vanity and avarice (prsdominent
passions) of the Sapatapa: and have a t length persuaded him, what is
undoubtedly true, that he would find his red interest more secure in a
commercial intercourse than in a war with the United States; and that
Americans would be his safest carriers to Spain, where he has opened
an extensive commerce, the ships of all other nations being interrupted either by the belligerent powers of Europe or by the Corsaires
of Algiers - I observed to him that the con&tions of these advantages were known to him; that I had during the short time of my
residence here received propositions from the American Consuls of
Leghorn and Barcelona to introduce a trade here, and also applications from two American Masters of vessels to get them freight here:
in reply to which I had stated to them the articles of our treaty.
Since which I had heard no more on the subject - I t was only
necessary to inform my Countrymen that they were not equally
respected here with other nations to determine them against coming
here let the considerations of individual profit be what they would He now experienced the truth of what I eight months ago declared to
him That an American merchantman would never enter a port of
Tunis, except compelled, until they should be informed that the terms
of our treaty were more favorable The Sapatapa acknowledged a propriety in my observations
expressed an earnest desire to employ Americans as carriers to Spain,
and intimated his opinion, that if the regalia arrived m season, there
would then be no impediment to an arrangement of our affairs more
satisfactorily - He promised to open the subject to the Bey, and
to give i t his support - He entered very candidly into a detail of
the causes which had embarrassed our negociations here, N-hich shall
appear a t large on my journal but which may be reduced here to two
words French intrigue and Jewish inJideEity 7
I saw the Bey this morning, and have h~ promise of forebearance
sixty days - in the mean tune, it is hoped, we may have arrivals
from America - Famin has tried to insinuate that the Government
of the United States have no serious intentions of f u l f l h g their
engagements with Tunis - He has not succeeded - That slave
has been a thorn in m side - But he has now no influence a t
court. The Bey's fami y Physician informed me, a few days since
a t dinner with me, that the extm.ordinary demand for jewels was
actually projected by him, (Fnmin) and stipulated after my arrival
in T u s - That the Sapatapa heasitated to introduce it as i t had
not been stated in any of his former communications and that Famin

1

338

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1786 TO 1801

told him not to hessitate - he (Famin) could find document to
support the demand - I have uniformly treated this jremh pirute
with polite attention, taking care to keep the commanding grounds,
till I have finally defeated dl his projects of mischief - And, if
nothing interfere with my present arrangements, have now a flattering
prospect of ultimately terminating our affairs with this regency more
favorably to the interests of the United States and more conformably
to the instructions of the Government.
*Three thine have operated to produce this change of projects at Court.
1 Doc. Shaw'e departure for America. 2 My assuring the Bey of a prospect of
an accommodstion between the United States and the French Republic, and
conwquently an American armed force in this ses. 3 A conviction on the mind
of the Sapatapa that if he make war with U. S. he may as probably loose as
win - and that by cultivating harmony he may avail himself of American enterprize to aid his commercial views
all other botoms being precarious [SDA. CL, Tunis, Vol. 1, July 1797-Dec. 1800.1

-

To David Hnmpbreyn, U. S. Minister to Madrid, Spain, from James L. Cathcart,
U. S. Consul, Tripoli
TRIPOLI
IN BAR?
Decr I,$'! 1799
Dr SIR Want of opportunity join'd to an indifferent state of
health, & I may add want of matter worthy yrattention has occasioned
my not renewing the comes ndence I was formerly honor'd with
when in captivity, give me eave a t presnt to solicit a continuance
of that honor, & to transmit for your perusal the most prominent
transactions of this government since my arrival here, wbich since
the adjustment of our afiairs with this Regency for the Sum of 18,000
dollars to the Bashaw for the stipulated stores, detention, & the Brig
Sophia, which it seems had either been promised to him by our Agents
or he had forged the demand, as you have already been inforrn'd by
the Bashaws letter transmitted to you by Mr Ingraharn, there has
nothing worthy notice taken place smce except Comodore Campbells
expedition against this place & the depredations commited by the
Cruisers of this Regency upon the commerce of Nations with whom
they are at Peace & who has paid them considerable sums to insure
the continuance of their friendship. I have transmited a detailed
acct of said expedition & every other political transaction of this
Regency a t difTerent times to Mr OBrien which I presume he has
already informd you of I therefore shall not tire your patience with a
long repetition On my arrival a t Tripoli on the 5" of April I was refused permission
to land & was infom'd that the Bashaw would not receive me as
Consul from the United States as I had not brought the Stipulated
Stores & had positively refused him the Brig which he declared was
promised him by M? OBrien, Mr Bryan MgDonogh who was charged
with our affairs by Ingraham was the messenger employ'd on this
occasion by both parties and in every respect espous'd the cause of
the Bashaw, he was piqued that neither our government nor OBrien
had taken any notice of him for the services he had render'd them &
the crew of the Ship Betsy when here. I therefore thought i t adviseable to secure his interest by a douceur which had the desired effect
as he afterwards proved very usefull to us here & facilitated the
negotiation as much as lay in his power, a t the same time I have
resson to believe that he occasioned the first obstacle & by his influence persuaded the Bsshaw not to give me an audience in order

P"

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

339

that I should be necessitated to employ him by that means founding
a plea for a reward he en'oys the entire confidence of the Bashaw &
in tbddition to the medict i assistance he renders hii family, he is his
Excellencys project maker by which means he has amass'd six or
seven thousand dollars in a few years in short Sir he is the Famin of
Tripoli, and altho' it is necessary to treat him with politeness it would
be very improper to entrust the affairs of the United States again to
his guidance as he is certainly le trds humble s e d e u r des eve-nemeds,
& would plead pro, or con, or both, for money his venality is remark'd
by all the Consuls here, & what is very extraordinary he is a t once
both caress'd and despised. On the 6* Mr McDonogh came on board & gave me the Bashaws
demand in writing the substance of which was that if Mr Cathcart
did not promise the Bashaw the brig or fiftty thousand dollars in lieu
of her the Stores Stipulated by treaty & Consular presents that he
would not receive him as Consul from the United States of America
but would declare war against said states in forty days from this
date After a good deal of menacing & huckstering on the part of the
Bashaws Agents, & opposition to his unreasonable demands on mine
I obtain'd an audience on the 7'p when the Bashaw confirm'd what
I was before inform'd by his emissaries, & added a great many invectives against OBrien for denying that he had promised him the
brig & said that he was neither dependent on Alpers or the Grand
Senior and that by declaring war against the United States of America
he would let the world see that he was an Independent Prince and
would be respected as such, I combated his insinuations & unjust
demands but with little success, finding it impossible to treat with
him verbally, I retired & wrote him a letter where in I remonstrated
on the impropriety of his conduct to a Nation that had never injured
him or his subjects, but on the contrary had already paid him a considerable sum to insure his friendship & whose Agent was now prepared to fulfil every Stipulation of the Treaty subsisting between the
two nations, that the Stores were ship'd for Tripoli before I left
America & their not arriving in time was owing to some accident over
which human foresight had no control? that never theless I had no
objections to pay his ExcelYan equivalent in cash for them, provided
he would c o n h e his demand within the bounds of reason and equity the Doctor ex lain'd my letter to the Bashaw who answer'd it in
Arabic a trans ation of which in Italian is as follows -

f'

Primporto del Brich . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
D u r i 18,, 000 Simile peril ~ g a l o _ _ _ _ _ _ ~ - - - - - - - - - ~ - - - ~ - 25,,000
- - - - -- Pezze duri- - 43, ,000

Deve pagare di questa somma 13,000 duri prontamente e li restante
30,000 duri li diamo il respiro di mesi sei de contare dalla data della
presente - Passato il detto termine e non portando la sudetta somma
sara rotta la Pace, e volendo partire il Console potra partire, ma si
resta Sara schiavo, non avendo noi accordsta del peripdo a1 primo
incaricato, e accordato a1 presente Console il termine dl !el mese, che per
riguardo del dottore I'nglese per compiacere il suo deslderio - L S -

340

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1786 TO 1801

Of this sum 13,000 dollars shall be paid promptly and for the
balance of 30,000 dollars we grant a respite of six months counting
from the date of the present. If upon the expiration of the said time
the aforementioned sum is not forthcoming, the Peace shall be broken,
and should the Consul want to leave, he can leave, but if he remains
he shall be a slave. We did not grant time to the first agent and we
have granted to the present Consul a period of six months only out of
s
consideration for the Italian doctor and in compliance with h ~ wish.]
The above proposal I instantly rejected with disdain & returnd to
the Bashaw by the Doctor with the contempt such an unreasonable
demand merited - On the 8'? the Minister of Marine was employ'd
by the Bashaw to negociate with me - this evening I requested him
to inform the Bashaw that I could not comply with his demand that
i t was of no service whatever for us to talk any farther on the subject,
that I was sorry his conduct towards the Umted States would oblige
them to turn the arms against him, which were now employ'd against
our common enemy the French, for he might depend the United
States would never put up with so palpable an imposition - I father
requested him to inform the Bashaw that I would do myself the
honor to wait on him in the morning to hear his ultimatum & if he
did not alter his opinion by that time, that I would sail in the brig
for Tunis & Algiers the first fair wind On the loth the interest of the Minister of Marine & M' Donogh
being previously purchased I agreed to pay his Excellency in full of
all demands from the United States, the sum of ten thousand dollars
for the Stores & eight thousand for the Brig Sophia which I have every
reason to believe was promised to him by Mr OBrien -the contingent
expences amounted to 1500 dollars & the Consular presents which
I procured a t Philadelphia & Algiers cost about 4000 more the whole
amounting to the sum of 23,000 Dollars The Flag of the United States
was saluted with 21 Guns & they ended our Negotiation - I
immediately paid the Bashaw 3500 dollars in cash whch I had drawn
a t Tunis, & gave Bills on Tunis & Algiers for the rest which were duly
honor'd, & I am happy to inform you that nothing has happen'd
since to disturb the harmony subsisting between the United States
& this Regency -

*

*

*

*

[SDA. CL, Tripoli, Vol. 1, 1796-1799.1

Marine Force of Tripoli, 14 December 1799
One old Ship of 32 Guns English bottom but rep4 in the Levant was made
a present by the British to the Emperor of Morocco who made her a
present to the Grand Signior who presented her to the Bashaw of
T r r l i - . . . . . . - . - . . . . - . - . - . - . - - - . - . 32
-.-The etsy an American prize copper'd by the Spaniards mounts 28 nines
& sixes commanded by an Infamous Scotch renegade formerly call'd
Peter Lisle but now Morad Raiz . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . - - - - - - - - - - - 28
An English built Ship taken under imperial Colours without a psssport
copper'd by the spaniards mounts 16 nines & sixes- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 16
16
A Guerlinoguichi taken from the greek8 of Mores mounts --------------A P o k taken from the Maltese - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 16
A Xebeque taken from the Napolitantl- . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
A do
taken from the Genoese in ue &ern. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
A Polacca brig taken under irnperiaPc~oumwithout a passport mounts a t
12
resent only Six guns but sometimes mounts. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
A
~ a 1ey
1 of 22 Oars & ~ u n- s- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 1
One Gun boat with one 24 pounder in the bow . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Xalf

Whole Marine Force of Tripoli-Guns,

- - ,,-- - - - -- - -

-,---

- - - - ---

145

341

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

Caliber fours Sixes & nines badly mounted and worse Man'd Not
one of the aforesaid Cruisers were built for vessels of War nor do the
sail even tolerable Not one of their Commanders Morad Raiz exceptd
is capable of navigating one of them to Minorca nor do they h o w
how, either to stay a s h p or back & fill her in a narrow fair way Their
crews are numerous, thirty or forty of each are call'd sailors these are
such as have been fishermen or have been out in their veasels three or
four Cnrises the rest of the crew is composed of inferior moors &
arabs who are no better than live lumber on their decks and only
serve to pull & haul The Tri lines never ventures near a vessel of equal force if they
can possib y avoid it, their mode of attack is first to fire a whole
broadside & discharge their musquetry into their enemy, they then set
up an hideous howl & lay you along side if you let them & board you
with as many men as they can, some arm'd with attagans [yataghans]
& pistols some only with attagans, & some with common knives? if
you beat them of[f] the first onset, they seldom return to a second
charge and two broadsides well directed will insure you a compleat
victory, Captq Barry & Truxton with the Fr' ates under their command is a sufficient force to take or sink the w ole Marine of Tripoli
should they fall in with their whole Fleet together, but to destroy
them in port it would be necessary to have four boats capable of
carrying a twelve pounder in each of their bows besides the ships
boats to send into the harbour to cut the vessels out or to burn them
as their is not water enough for large vessels to come into the harbour
without running a great risque - each Frigate should likewise have
an eighteen or twenty inch mortar on board to pla during the mecution which would drive the people from the F'ort$voations & City &
ensure the success of the expedition with the boats, how I should
glory to be employ'd on this service if ever their should be occasion JAMES
LEA' CATHCART
TRIPOLI
Decr 14:h 1799
NB. Since my arrival here the cruisers are continually kept a t
Sea their are three out now - of course their seamen will improve in
manu~vringtheir vessels HonbieDAVID
HUMPHREYB
Esq? &q & q &q

P"

7

[SDA. CL, Tripoli, Vol. 1, Part I, Nov. 1796-Dec. 1799.1

To Gecretup of State from William Eaton, U. 6. Consul, Tunir

TUNIS16. Dec. 1799 SIB, On the 6. instant I had the honor to inform you of the more
favorable prospect of our &airs 7 I now confirm that information The principal cause of which IS the interest which the Sapatapa
views in his future employment of American bottoms to carry for
him to Spain - all others of neutral powers being in danger from the
Algerines. This circumstance promises an issue of our n ociations
corresponding with the wishes of our government, provided t e regalis
arrive before a ne ociation for a peace be set on foot in Europe in
which case we sha have to combat the whole commercial influence
of France. -

'%

\

8

*

*

*

*

[SDA. CL, Tunis,Vol. 1, July 1797-Dec. 1800.1

C

*

342

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1786 TO 1801
To William Eaton, U. 6. Consul, Tunis, from Secretary of State

NQ3.

DEPARTMENT
OF STATE
Philad* Jany 11% 1800
SIR, The Brig Sophia arrived with your dispatches the latter end
of August, when the yellow fever had again obliged the public officers
to remove from this city. New York was visited with the same disease a t the same time; and the inhabitants of both cities generally
removed into the country; whereby business was suspended. We
returned hither the beginning of November. Congress assembled in
december, when the treaty 117 August 17971 between the United
States and Tunis was laid before the Senate, with the alterations in
the 11%12%and 14'Q articles to which you and Mr Cathcart agreed.
The Senate having given its advice and consent, the treaty has now
been duly ratified by the President. One of the originals received
from you is herewith returned, with the ratification in due form.
The other destined by you to be returned, will be sent by the next
safe conveyance. - A large ship is loading a t New York with naval
and military stores for Tunis; and the Agent informed me that she
will be ready to sail the first week in February. The residue of the
stipulated stores will be forwarded as fast as they can be provided:
but some are of a nature d S c u l t to procure, and it will take time to
furnish them. They are not articles which are to be found on hand,
like common merchandise, in our sea opt towns; the timber and
planks especially, being of prescribed L e n s i o n s , must be cut and
prepared for the particular service. However, that the Bey might
receive an evidence that the United States will fulfill their stipulations, the large ship above mentioned has been directed to be loaded
with such of the stores required as the City of New York could furnish; the lumber of dimensions as near as possible to those prescribed.
Until the SophiaJ$ arrival, nothing could be done: because i t was
hoped and ex ected that the Bey would consent to substitute money
for stores.
burthen of the latter is enormous. By a calculation
made of their bulk, it appears that they will probably occupy the
space of a t least fifteen thousand barrels. Regularly, none could
have been provided, until the treaty was finally ratified; and this
could not take place until the Senate assembled in december.
Under these circumstances, the Bey will see the impossibility of
sending forward the regalia of maritime and military stores within the
period which he proposed: and unless he is at all events determined to
make war upon us, he will wait such a length of time as will render the
providing and transporting of them practicable. He should also
consider the danger we run of capture by some of the belhgerent
powers; seeing the stores are contraband of war. From that cause
alone, half of them may miscarry.
Your letters of June l q t and 15@were received the lGth of October.
the latter strongly enforces the necessity of forwarding the stores
expeditiously: but it is hoped your apprehensions are too lively, that
war will be the consequence of some delay. A s the Bey would accept
no gt~bstitufefor the stores, he will hardly forfeit them by war rather
than wait a few months longer. I enclose a copy of C a p t W Brien's
list of stores, and of that which you forwarded. Comparing them,
you will see the latter to be materially more burthensome, by the addition of ten tons of cordage, and the greatly increased dimensions of the
planks and timber.

TE~

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS
The importance of sending a naval force into the Mediterranean, to
shew to the Barbary powers our capacity to defend our commerce,
and to annoy them, has repeatedly been urged; and probably the
period is near a t hand when this measure will be practicable. At the
same time its efficacy may be questioned. The Danes and Swedes
have long possessed a naval force vastly superior to what we can exhibit: yet the regencies have often broken their peace with them; and
after a display of frigates and some fighting (as in the case of the Danea
late1 with Tripoli) both of those nations have yielded to the humuliating Lmands of Algiers, Tunis and Tripoli. Whence this contempt of
those two maritime powers? Have these never been in earnest in
joining battle m t h the Corsairs? Or have they wanted spirit or conduct? - The late spirited example of Portugal, when a single ship
of the line destroyed two Tripolitan Corsairs and reduced the Bey to
the very novel condition of purchasing peace of a Christian Power is
encouraging; and should our dserences with France be settled by our
Envoys now a t Paris, and either of the Regencies break their peace
with us, our whole naval force may be sent against them: and consistsmaller ships, brigs and Schooners, no fleet would be
for service on the coast of Barbary: and by their
according to the enclosed list, you will see they
are sufficient to destroy the Corsairs of any one, or of all the three
regencies together. - For you know from the proofs given by
American seamen in our revolution war, that they are not sur awed
in skill and bravery by the seamen of any nation on earth. Anlaltho
it would be neither decent nor prudent for you to boast of our naval
force; yet if the Bey should unfortunately manifest a hostile temper
you can contrive without a direct communication from yourself,
unless he should enquire to let him know the extent and quality of the
naval force we can send into the Mediterranean. He knows and fears
the prowess of the English: and he may be informed that we are their
descendants ;and ship to ship and man to man, are in no thing inferior. Your expressions are, that the Bey requests a cruizer of 18 or 20
guns, and demands a present of jewels. Neither was stipulated or
expected by the United States. - The former we could certainly
furnish, because of our own manufacture. The jewels can only be
obtained in Europe - a t present in England - the amount
enormous.
Your details of the commerce of Tunis are interesting. It would
give employment to all her naval armament, if converted from corsairs
to merchant vessels. And is it not possible to give to a Prince so
enlightned as the present Bey, such ideas of the advantages of a
peaceful commerce as to induce him to attempt the change? Besides,
as the government is hereditary in his family, he will feel an interest
in it, which can have no operation in the military elective regencies.
I n his letter to the President, the Bey e resses his desire that a
solid and lucrative commerce ma be estab hed between us. Our
enterprising merchants would rea dy commence it, were the assured
of protection, and that monopolies of the exports of L s kmgdom
would not prevent their obtaining return car oes. If, for instance,
the 250,000 hides, which you state to be annua y exported by a company, with exclusive privileges, and which the subjects are compelled
to sell to them, a t eleven cents each (amount 27,500 dollars) were not
under a monopoly, they might be exchanged with American mer-

H

"E,

7l

344

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1786 TO 1801

chants for commoditiesl pfobabl of the value of 250,000 dollars. Or

suppose they gave T m s ~ a sugjects
n
only 25 cents and the Bey 12%
cents for each hide, his subjects would receive $125,000, and his
revenue, instead of ten or fifteen thousand dollars, would on this single
article be increased to upwards of $60,000. - Are these monopohes
irrevocably fixed? It is not presumeable. And cannot a man of the
Bey's good sense, and so ea er after gain be easily e htened on the
subject; and will he not fee himself under strong and asting obligations to the Consul and nation who shall place him in a condition so
advantageous to himself and his subjects? If these ideas are not
the freedom with which he converses with you, will enable
you to close them.

9

f

[SDA. Dip. Cor., Inst. to Min., 179%1800.]

[15 January 18001
T o the Bey of Tunis from Resident John Adams

The PRESIDENT
OF THE UNITED
STATESOF AMERICA
To HAMOWDA
PACHA,
BEYOF TUNIS,
the well guarded city & abode of
felicity.
I have received your letter of the thirtieth of April 1799, answering
to the 25th of the Moon Kaada, of the year of the Kegira 1213. and
express to you my thanks for the attentions shown to my deputies
Wdliam Eaton & James Leander Cathcart, who were charged to
arrange anew with you some articles of the treaty of peace & friendship between us. I t gives me pleasure also that you have received
Mt Eaton for the Consul of the United States, and assured to him all
the honours, distinctions & prerogatives which the Consuls of other
nations enjoy. I persuade myself that by his wise & discreet deportment he will shew himself alike worthy of your regards & of my confidence.
Nothing could be more grateful to me than the expression of your
desire, that in consequence of these final arrangements a commerce
solid and lucrative m q h t be established; - and that Almighty God
would cause to reign between our respective nations, a peace firm &
durable.
With respect to the time within which you required that the stipulated stores should be delivered, I have charged Mr Eaton to explain
to you the impossibility of a compliance: and will here only observe
that of the six months proposed, four had elapsed when your letter
and the Consuls dispatches arrived: And then a pestilence raging in
some of our principal cities by causing the inhabitants to flee into the
country & suspending business, rendered delays unavoidable. But
you may rest a~suredthat the en agements I have made with you on
behalf of the United States,
be performed with perfect good
faith; & all the stipulated naval & military stores be delivered with as
much dispatch as the great distance of the U States and the time
necessary to procure thf stores render practicable. Your clear and
eminent discernment w ~ l lsee the reasonableness of these observations, and your regard to justice w i l l give them their due weight.
With sentiments of high considerahon
I remain your good friend.
Done a t Philadelphia tbe 15th day of January 1800, and of the
Independence of the United States the twenty fourth year.
[BDA. CL,Tunis, Vol. 1, July 1797-Dec. 1800.1

d

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

345

To Jamer Leander Cathcart, U. S. Conrul, Tripoli, from Secretary of State

DEPARTMENT
OF STATE

Philad' Jany 16'P 1800
SIR,By the Sophia, which arrived here the latter end of August, I
received your dispatches. Your negotiation with the Bey of Tripoli
has been conducted in a manner very satisfactory to the President.
The services of Doctor MQDonoghhave been so useful, I have written
him a letter (herewith transmitted) expressing the President's acknowledgements, approving the compensations made to him by you,
and bespeaking his future good offices, should any occasion call for
them.
It is not surprising that Tunis & Tripoli should feel hurt by any
claim of pre-eminence by &em: and from the indignant manner in
which they repel this claim, i t is manifestly impolitic to hold i t up to
view, even if i t exists - (a point at least doubtful -) because its
existence will operate its full effect in our favour, so long as i t shall be
known that we stand well with Algiers. And i t will not be &,
when a fair opportunity shall offer to intimate to the Bey of Tripoli,
that the United States are disposed to treat him with the like respect
and friendship as they do the Chiefs of the two other Regencies.
This seems to be what he expects by this expression in his letter to the
President - "We have consummated the peace, which shall on our
part be unalterable; provided you are willing to treat us as you do
the two other Regencies, without any difference being made between
us." The letter previously adverts to the &culties in the way of
your negotiation, and his resolution not to receive you: But that Dr
MqDonogh's entreaties prevailed; and so, in order to gratify his desire,
and to preserve unaltered the subsisting friendship, the Bey -reed to
accept the s m d sums of ten thousand dollars in lieu of the shpulated
stores, and eight thousand dollars as a substitute for the brig Sophia,
promised by Captain 0 Brien. - I should send you a copy of the
Bey's letter, it the answer of the Rais to you "that the Bey never gave
copies of his letters to any one," did not excite an apprehension that
if i t were laown, i t might give offence: and yet, without a formal
copy, i t seemed proper that you should be acquainted with the
substance of its contents.
Agreeably to your request, Mr Woodsides has received two hundred
dollars on your account, to procure you some supplies, which I expect
he will send in the ship Hero, now nearly loaded, and which is to sail
for Tunis the first week in February. * * * The Sophia carries
this letter: she is loaded with a valuable cargo of stores & merchandize
for Algiers. In the Spring other vessels mth ample c ow, to fulfil
our engagements with Alpers and Tunis will be forwar ed. - The
yellow fever has again visited Philadelphia & New-York, and obliged
the bulk of the inhabitants, as well as the pubhc offices to remove.
This retarded every measure to be taken relative to the states of
Barbary. We did not return 'till the beginning of Noyember.
The merchdize before mentioned, wth the quantxties yet to be
sent to Algiers, is destined to form an exchange for the monies borrowed there to defray the expenses of negotiatiqns with Tunis &
Tripoli, and for charges and obligations incurred m Algiers. It appesrs probable that some of our armed vessels will visit the
Mediterranean in the ensuing spring or summer. I inclose a list of

9

346

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1786 TO 1801

our growing fleet; besides which, materials for building six seventy
fours are aollecting.
[SDA. Dip. Cor., Inst. to Min. 17981800.]

To Richard O'Brien, U. S. Consul General, Algiers, from Secretary of State

DEPARTMENT
OF STATE
Philad* Jan? 16&."1800
SIR, On the llthof July I received your dispatches by the Polacre
Dey, Captain Smith. Soon after, I desired Mr Humphreys and
another naval architect to examine the vessel, for the purpose of
putting her in tho order which you desired. They examined, and
reported their opinion that the expense of such alterations and repairs
would be much greater than the whole value of the vessel when
completed; and that she was not calculated for such an armed vessel
as you designed to make her. No other suitable vessel immediately
presented: and in August, the yellow fever again prevailing, ob ed
the inhabitants to flee to the country, and suspended business. %he
fever prevailed in like manner, and produced similar effects, in New
York. After this, there was a prospect that one of the public armed
ships, which was taken out of the service, would supply the place of
the Polacre; but upon further enquiry, this vessel also was deemed
inehgible: and the season being then far advanced, i t was concluded
to load the Sophia once more for A1 'ers; and she is now ready to sail,
with a valuable cargo, as by the inc osed invoice and bill of lading. As you mentioned that 500 barrels of powder must be sent, I directed
their being put on board: but the room left for them being insufficient,
only 360 have been shipped. And I think this not unfortunate; that
so necessary a commodity may not be wholly hazarded in a single
bottom. The residue will be shipped in the Spring, with the other
articles contained in your lists; except a few not to be found in the
United States; or not in the quantities required. - Of the spikes of
the specified dimensions, several tons are made, and the several
quantities will in due time be completed.
The delay which takes place in forwarding the stores and goods
you commissioned, wherewith to discharge our debts to the Jews,
will I trust produce no very great inconvenience: Every just claim,
every stipulation, will be provlded for by the shipment in the Spring.
The twenty brass twenty-four pound cannon desired by the Dey,
cannot be procured in the United States, nor probably elsewhere during the present war. But if iron guns of that size, and of the neatest
and best kind, will answer as a substitute, we can furnish them. Our
iron is of a su erior quality, and our founderies now very perfect. The
guns will be 'ght, as well as strong and smooth. If the 24 pounders
are wanted for gallies, they perhaps need not be more than seven feet
long, and weigh about thirty six hundred; perhaps less. By ad*
to
thew length, their weight will necessarily be increased: but if e q h t
feet and a half long, they need not exceed forty hundred weight:
whereas the usual weight of iron 24 pounders is 48 to 50 hundred.
In fact, for every kind of real service, in ships and garrisons, iron guns
of strong metal, and light, are, in the opinion of good judges, superior
to brass. I have said thus much to obviate the common prejudice in
favour of brass guns; seeing we have it not in our power to furnish
them. -

P

I

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

347

--

I inclose the copy of a paper delivered b Captain Cathcart, in
May 1796 to Mr Barlow, as exhibiting a list ofthe articles required by
the Dey of Algiers for our annuity of maritime and military stores.
But the quantities of the several articles are enormous; and instead of
twelve thousand sequins (21,600 dollars) would cost the United States
three or four times that sum. This was not contemplated when the
treaty with Algiers was ratified. I t is true, the treaty provides that
if the value of the stores annually delivered exceed the twelve thousand sequins, the surplus is to be paid for: But the prices of these
commodities, as estimated a t Algiers, bear no proportion to the sums
they cost the United States, and consequently any surplus adds to our
loss. - By your settlement in February last with the present Dey,
you got rid of the burthensome peace presents, and of the annuity for
two years and nine months: and it is hoped you will, a t least on the
arrival of the next cargo of goods and stores, be able to bring the
annual present within the bounds of moderation. Perhaps the list
inclosed, dictated by the former Dey in his wrath, may not be known
by his successor; or if known, be admitted to be unreasonable. I n
such an event, you will send a list of the reduced articles for the annuity, defining the sizes, as well as uantities, with great precision;
and adding the res ective prices a t giers. - Cutting the oak and
pine planks of one ength, breadth and thickness, wastes a great deal
of timber, and they make bad stowage in a vessel. As the Dey has
cruisers of various sizes, an assortment of planks, varying in all their
dimensions, would be better adapted to his service than the huge
planks hitherto re uired, and more practicable and less expensive for
is very true, if a plank 15 or 18 inches broad will
us to procure. be rated no higher than one of 12 inches, we had better cut off the
surplus timber, to lessen the freight. But as the Algerines allow a
better price for thick than thin planks, so may they distinguish between
broad and narrow ones.
I t would be convenient to receive from you a correct table of Algerine weights and measures compared with those of the United States.
I t is proper that you should know the history of the ship Hero,
which sailed hence more than a year ago laden with planks, masts and
naval stores for Algiers. - In a few days after her departure, springing a leak, she bore away for the West Indies, and arrived a t Jamaica,
where she was obliged to unload and repair. In the Spring, she sailed
thence to proceed on her original voyage: again became leaky; and
so put back to New-York. There she was again unloaded, and underwent a thorough repair. But in the autumn, when ready to load the
third time, i t was found that a great part of her lumber was ruined.
The large oak planks in particular were so decayed as to be fit only for
fuel: and on this account it is fortunate that she returned from Jamaica
to the United States. - This extraordinary circumstance must be
ascribed to the large quantity of the timber on board, shipped, much
of it, while full of sap, heating and fermenting for a time m the hot
climate of the West Indies.
The oak planks and some other parts of the timber being thus
damaged, or ruined, and other portions being, in consequence of your
settlement, no longer required for Algiers, while they would answer
well for our engagements with Tunis; it was judged best to complete
the Hero's cargo with additional lumber (such as could be found a t
New York nearest the requisite dimensions) and other suitable stores,

P

It

3

348

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1786 TO 1801

for Tunis. She is now nearly loaded; and the Agent informs me, will
be ready to sail the first week in February. - The residue of the
stores for Tunis w i l l be provided and shipped as soon as possible.
A plate has been cut for the new passports, such aa you recommended, of but about hdf the present breadth a t the head; and the
parts necessary for the Consuls will be forwarded in the Spring. One entire new passport is inclosed for our inspection. After a series of misfortunes, Mr oseph Donaldson arrived a t
Philadelphia. The ship and cargo with which he sailed from Leghorn,
was seized and condemned by the French a t Cayenne. He went to
Prtmce, hoping to recover the value; but was disappointed. I n the
last summer he sailed again for Europe, where he still is. When he
returns, the bills he drew on London m favor of the Jews, and which
you sent me, w i l l be presented, and payment obtained if practicable.
[SDA. Dip. Cor., Inst. to Min.,1798-1800.1

f

To Captain John Smith, commanding the Sophia, from Secretary of State

DEPARTMENT
OF STATE,
Philadelphia JanY 17. 1800.
SIR,The brigantine Sophia under your command, being loaded on
account of the United States and bound to Algiers, you are to proceed
to sea immediately. On your arrival a t Algiers, deliver the cargo to
Richard O'Brien Esq' Consul General of the United States. Should
he deem it necessary, to send you in the brig to Tunis, you are to
proceed thither accordingly. Otherwise he will send the packet for
Consul Eaton by land. And if the packet be dispatched immediately
on your arrival a t Algiers, an answer may be received from MI Eaton
whrle you are unloadmg and preparing the brig for your return to the
U. S t a h : It will be important that you bring back an answer from
Mr Eaton.
[Mese. HS. Piekering Papers, Vol. 13.1
To William Eaton, U. S. Consul, Tunis,from Becretpry of State

(I??

34.)

DEPARTMENT
OF STATE
Philad* Jany 1Yrn 1800

SIP, I have reserved for a separate letter the President's determination on the subject of the present of jewels demanded by the Bey of
Tunis. In his letter to the President, of which I inclose a copy, you
will see that he persists in his claim; but not in terms so deolsive as
in his conversations with you. Perhaps i t may yet be parried; or a t
least reduced to one half the amount. Since you wrote, you may
have ascertained what other powers, ae well as Spain, have g v e n on
similar occasions. I am aware that the delay is unfavourable: but if
he waits the arrival of the Hero, with her valuable cargo of n a v d and
military stores - an earnest besides that the residue will come - I
hope he will be softened; and that you will either do away this
claim, or reduce it to a small value, m some few of the most conspicuous articles in his list. - You will well consider how this &air
may be best conducted; and act as you shall think most advantageous
for the interest of the United States. I t will not do to bee ourpeace
with Tunis for the value of this present. You suppose the estrmate
to be extravagant: doubtless the articles are set a t the Jew prices;
and that for a much less sum they may be procured in England. If

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

349

therefore you are com elled to give the present, secure time enough
to get them from Eng and. Some articles must probably be manufactured for the purpose; and the whole may require a year to be
procured. I n the mean time, as he wants something to be seen, a few
articles most showy may be provided a t Tunis. If he objects to the
proposed delay ;you can answer, that the President felt a confidence,
that, on further reflection upon all circumstances in relation to the
United States, he would relinquish the claim; and therefore did not
give orders to provide the Present.
I su pose the Bey understands French; and therefore, with a copy
of the resident's letter to him in English, I send you a French translation of it, to be presented or not as you judge proper.
[SDA. Dip. Cor.,Inst. to Min., 179&1800.]

P

g.

[26 January 18001
To William Eaton, U. 6. Consul, Tunis, from Secretary of State

(N9 4)

DEPARTMENT
OF STATE
PhiladWeby 12. 1800

SIR, The brig Sophia left the c a p s of the Delaware for Algiers, on
the 26 of January, and I expect wdl arrive by the last of the present
month. Duplicates of my &patches by her accompany this letter.
I now inclose an invoice and bill of lading of the cargo of the ship
Hero, Captain Robinson, destined for T m s , where her arrival will
I trust put a good face on our affairs. - The other stores for Tunis
will be shipped as early in the Spring as it will be possible to procure
them. I hope they may bo under convoy. [SDA. Dip. Cor., Inst. to Min., 1798-1800.1
To Secretary of State from Richard O'Brien, U. 8. Consul General, Algiers

ALGIERS
MARCHThe lZth 1800
3
The two years presents becoming due in Sept last I was called on by
the regenc to make Said Customary presents it was Very grivious
to me.
Smith haveing no orders or funds. had protested The bill
I drew on him relative to the Ship Fortune and Cargo agreeable to
Settlement. i t amounted to. 25387 dollars. we were a t this time much
in debt. to the Bacris. The Cloth Linnens $9 which I wrote for by
Mr Carr, was not sent. Money was wanted on our affairs a t Tupls
and Tripolia. bills drawn on me. and The Bacris for instance haverng
600 Thousg dollars in the power of the french 300. Thsg due them by
the Spaniard@about 75 thousg dollars due them by Sweden for Spoilations. allso on the same business due to thorn by denmark about 55
Thousg dollars and by ex Venitia. about 45 thsg The debts of the
U. S. a t that Time ou know by the dispatches of Cap1 Smith and
Smith protested. The Bacris were Obliged to
Geddes my bill on
borrow 150 Thsa dollars from the Regency I had no Money and in a
manner no credit. There was no alternative. The 2 Years presents
of friendship was to be made I tacked and manuvered in Vam and
had no alternative but to borrow from the dey 12 Thsg dollars. but
this could not procure me Cloth. which was a main article to content
400 officers of the regency The Bacris had none and none was foebe
rocured but from the dey, whom sent me 600 Piques s o m e h g
b o r e than 400 yards. and would insist on 10 dollars er Pique. however with a great deal of disputes threatenings and exations, he let
N9

d

dr

4'

350

NAVAX OPERATIONS FROM 1786 TO 1801

me have The Cloth a t 5 dollars. per Pique, he insisted it was The best
in The world, but Sir when I came to prove The deyQassurance, the
first class of The officers of The regency would not accept of it I. had
to procure better or leave Them the enemies of The United S t a h .
In fact I had much difEculties. The watches diamonds Linnens
Muslins Caftans Brocade &g I had to Obtain a t war prices from
sundry Jews. This alltogether. made The two years present Amount.
to 16566 dollars I think If I had the Cloth Linnens and some of The
articles. from the united States. That the two. Years presents.
would not amount to more then 12 Thsq dollars. but by my being
taken in such a squall or Gale of wind I had no Alternative but to act
for the best, and afterward-elate to you The damages

*

*

*

*

*

*

*

War with trance consul in chains all the french in Barbary slaves
diEculties with denmark. Threatens the consul with chains the
Nation with war. The consul fled and the Swede for giveing explanations on dean affairswas nearly looseing his head - The dey struck
a t him with a Sword. but mised him, The Swede out Studing Sails
and was off. from the Potent deyr presence until the gale was lald
The Spanish consul 33 days in Chains on ace5 of The non arrival of
the Brig Bashaw taken by the french fleet said to be in company with
The Spaniards. however by 50 Thous9 dollars expended in presents
to the dey Ministry and directory. The Consul out of Chains The
King of Spain is to send The Bashaw whom is daily expected. and the
Crew is to be procured by Spain from frame. and to be Sent to Alg'e in
One Yeare -

*

*

*

*

*

*

*

[NA. SDA. CL, Algiers, Vol. 5, March-Dec. 1800.1

113 March 18001
Extract from Letter to secretary of State from Richard O'Brien, U. 8. Consul
General, Algiers

*
* * * * When the Spanish Consul was put in Chains
by the deyr orders. The Swede dean and American Consuls a reed
to give as a present. to the head Turkish Priest or Bishop of dgiers
To The amount of 1200 dollars a t the rate of 400 dollars each of The
3 Consuls. for the Bishop to fbd out a part of The Koran which required Musselmen not to persicute Christians a t peace .with them.
This was to cleare The Spanish Consul of Chains and to e v e Security
to ourselves on the like Occasions. This present we gave without the
least information to the Spanish Consul or to The Jew d i r e c t o ~ . As
the safety of ourselves. and The Turk Bishop was so much concerned.
we have consulted. together fo know who i to be Charged with. this
Sum. and is of Opinion that we should. Secretly commu~llcate:~t to
our. respective governments. and if Theb] have a mifld to pay ~t well
or to make a merit of it in doing This service to S p m or by our governments. representing The business. to the Spanlsh Court. or rmnlster
or by giveing us orders to a c q u h t The Spanisb Consul and recover
The Sum, haveing so fur detailed to you Sir I wait your deceslon on
the business.
+

*

*

*

*

Algiers The 13# March 1800
SDA. CL, Algiers, Vol. 6, March-Dec.

[NA.

*

1800.1

*

*

351

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

To Becrettuy of Shte from Bichard O'Brien, U. S. Conenl General, Algiers

ALG"March The 17* [ I 8001
Dr SIRThe frigate Crescent is begining to have the dry rot. i t is
Ve Visiable to me but I am in hopes. that this ear she will be run
on hore. or taken by The Portugeese if so i t w$ be rendering The
united States. a service and saveing Much difficulties
Confidential
[NA. SDA. CL, Algiers, Vol. 5, March-Dec. 1800.1

B

To William Smith, U. S. Minister to Lisbon, Portugal, from Secretary of State

NQ 18.

DEPARTMENT OF STATE

Philad"farch

22. 1800

DEARSIR, I have received your letters in a complete series as far

as N"0, dated the 14Q of November last, and none later.
Unless Portugal would permit a commercial intercourse with her
American Colony, the Brtlzils, a treaty would seem to be of no great
moment: and your communications clearly indicate that she will
avoid m treaty whatever. - The time however will rapidly advmce, w en she will thinli the United States entitled to more respect
than her conduct now supposes. - I trust the information to be
derived from the Chevalier de Freire will give that court juster ideas
of the importance of this country: and the statements of its own
minister will be duly appreciated.
I have informed you of the sailing of a large ship (the Hero) with a
valuable cargo for Tunis: She was detained a t New York a month
longer than I expected, sailing the beginning of February instead of
January. - The Sophia departed in January with a cargo of gunpowder and merchandize for Algiers, the latter to raise a small supply
of money. - The residue of the stores stipulated for Tunis are preparing to be shipped this Spring, and another vessel with goods &c.
will in about a month sail for Algiers. - I wrote fully to 0 Brien
and Eaton, explainin the causes of the delays which had taken place:
and I persuade myse f if the Hero and Sophia fortunately reach thew
destination, that all will be well. If however, 0 Brien shall have
renewed a pressing call for mon you will have answered his draughts
on the arrangements made by !&r King with the House of Baring, in
London, or Messre Bulkele 's in Lisbon, as you found one or the other
most advantageous. - f t will be desireable, considering the capricious characters of the Barbary Governments, that you should
always exercise your discretion in judging and acting upon thew demands, thro' our Consuls.
The expectation long since formed and so of+n repeated, of two of
?ur fr@ates visiting the European seas and entenng the Medterranean,
is agam disap ointed. - One stout frigate of 44 guns (the Philaddphia, Capt becatur Senior) now nearly ready for sea was destined
for that cruise, with another ship of the same size fitting a t Norfolk:
But the ConsteUution, Truxtun, m a severe en agement of five hours
with the French frigate V-eweance of 54 guns, ost his maimpast, and
wrqs otherwise so much damaged, as to be under the necessity (after
gomg down to Jamalca and not finding the requisite materials) of
returning home to refit: she may be daily expected. - This obliges
Decatur to sail for the Station left by Truxtun, to command the
cruisers in the vicinity of Guadaloupe. - And the Congress frigate,

i

f

f

352

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1786 TO I801

Captain Sever, has lately got back dismasted totally; which may
require the Cheasapeak (the frigate a t Norfolk) to take her place. The Congretw (of the same force with the Constdatwn) was bound,
with the Essez frigate, to the East Indies, to protect our rich commerce in those seas.
I n about a week after their departure, early
m January, in a gale of wind, the Congress lost her masts. - The
Essez it is hoped escaped and proceeded. - But the latter is only of
32 guns, and the heaviest, 12 pounders.

-

*

*

*

*

*

*

*

(SDA. Dip. Cor., In&. to Min., Bk 6 , 1798-1800.1

[3 April 1800]
To Secretarg of State from James Gimpson, U. 6. Consul, Tangier

NQ25. - MOUNT
WABHINGTON
NEAR TANGIER
7* June 1800
SIRN Q24 (29'8 last Month) was sent as this by way of Lisbon.
I have now to advise, that yesterday I received a letter dttted
Mogodor 219%Uft? from Captain Judah P~ddock,late of the Ship
O m g o of Hudson - State of New York, informing the loss of that
Vessel 36 April near Cape Nun, when on a Voyage from Cork for the
Cape de Verd Islands to load Salt for New York; the Crew he says,
consisting in fourteen persons got safe on shore, but were immediately after seized by the Arabs, who after striping them of every thing
they had saved from the Wreck, conducted the Master and nine of
the Men one hundred & fifty Miles inland, where they were sold to
other Arabs; four of the Seamen he says were left at the Wreck, and
two Negroes remained at the place where they ware sold, probably
from choice: - Captain Paddock and the seven others have been
brought to Mogodor by the people who bought them, in order to
obtam a Ransom for them as usual. M! Joseph Chiappe having been expelled this Country on the 15Q
May by order of His Imperial Majesty enbarked for Lisbon, but
my Friend MF William Court very obligingly gave Captain Paddock
and the people, a t their arrival a t Mogodor, that assistance they
so much stood in need of, by providing them with Cloaths, and
su pl*
money for their maintenance, which I have requested he
continue to do, until1 their Redemption can be eEected. Neither Captain Paddock or Mr Court say whether the Arabs
had st the date of their letters, demanded any specific sum of money
for these unfortunate people, - from their silence on the subject I
should suppose not. - I t is indeed a very fortunate circumstance,
that so many of them have so speedily, been brought to a place
where they may be considered in safety, for whilst they remarn in
the internor of the Country, their situation is shocking beyond
description. I have entreated Mr Court to exert his best endeavours to prevail
on the Arabs, to bring u the four Men were left at the Wreck, and
I beg you will be assur!,e I shall do every thing else in my power to
procure the releaae of the whole the soonest possible, and a t the least
expence circumstances will admit of - In different instances of
similar Shipwrecks of k t e ymm, the English gt Spaniards have both
found i t very tedious and expensive to get the Crews out of the hands
of the Arabs, and many of their people have actually perished in the
Corntry.

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

-

353
-

-

-

The Emperor is again a t Fez, with the late Governor of Abda in
Irons, I have written His Majesty on the subject of Captain Paddock
and his Crew, that he may give the necessary orders for their being
permitted to embark when redeemed, but in accomplishing that part
of the busyness, he can give me no assistance. - At foot you will
find noted a detail of the Oswegos Crew for your information, and such
other use as you may please to make of it.
The health of Tangier continues bad, -the Mortality in last Month
was two hundred & sixty seven, - for some days past i t has been
still greater in proportion, for from Tuesday morning 'till last night
they h ~ v ebuned seventy nine persons: - the advices from the
Southward on this subject contlnue very satisfactory. Crew of Ship O m g o . Judah Paddock - Mastef
I
Daniel Huasey
i
;
John Clark
$
Timothy Wilbur
'8,
Samuel Johnson
Negroes John Bryan
Jack & Martin. - remained
Gorhsm Paddock
+1
with the Arabs in the inter, OJ
Henry Hallwd
rior of the Country. John Hill
a 1
Samuel Brown Hans
VNson
e bE

2

la
2s

[NA. SDA. CL, Tangier, Vol. 1, 1797-1803.1

[3 April 1800]
Quasi-War, United States and France

NOTE.-&^ letter from Secretary of the Navy to Captain Stephen Decatur,
(senior), U. S. Navy, of 3 April 1800, giving details of compmition and operations
of the U. S. squadron on Guadeioupe Station, and vicinity, and ordering the
U. S. Frigate Phzladelphia to join that squadron; printed in "Naval Documente,
Quasi-War, United States and France", third volume (April to July, 1799),
pp. 377 to 379.1
To Thomas Appleton, U. S. Consul, Leghorn, from William Eaton, IT. S. Consul,

Tunis
CONSULATE
OF THE UNITED
STATEB,
TUNIB,April 10,1800.
Sir - Having at length amicably adjusted the affairs of the United
States with the Bey and Regency of Tunis, I desire you wodd communicate this agreeable intelligence to the masters of American vessels, who may come within the Iirmts of your Consulate.
The principal Minister of the Bey, ha.s pledged himself that the
last clause of the 12th article of our treaty with this Regency, inserted
by Joseph Etienne Famin shall hare the same effect with respect to
American merchant vessels as the custom of all other nations at peace
with Tunis,has established with thew respect to their own, and no
other. - There is therefore no danger to be apprehended from American vessels visiting this coast. Perfect health prevails heje.
[LC, "New Hampshire Gazette" (Portsmouth, N. H.), 22 July 1800.1

354

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1786 TO 1801
To the Secretary of State, from Willinm Eaton, U. 8. Consul, Tunic

TUNIS
14. April 1800 SIR,The Heroe anchored in the Bay of Tunis day before yesterday - Yesterday I r e d her letters - and to day communicated
such as concerned him to the Bey - Keels and knees are wanted I told the Bey this transport of the government saild with convoy
till she was ou2 of danger. The latitude this hraise will bear may
exculpate me from misrepresentation - I to d him also that the

P

stores, now shipping for Tunis a t New York, would Sail with a S q d ron - One apology must fit both cases - Hope i t will occur that
all the beneficence of the Jehovah of the Jews would never have
rendered h i respectable among that horde of Savages, if he had not
thundered from Mount Sinai! And that the government of the
United States will send the residue of the Regalia with something
Masculine.
My next will be more in detail - My present concern is to discharge the Heroeine (or she never would have relied upon her means
of defence) within the lay days [SDA.

CL, Tunis, Vol. 1, 3797-1800.J

T o Gibbs &

Charming, Navy Agents, Bewport, 8. I., from Secretary of the Navy

[PHILADELPHIA]

Navy Department 26th April 1800
GENTLEMEN,
Presuming the G[eorge] Washington must now be
nearly ready for sea, I have to request that you will be pleased to
send her round to this place as soon as may be to be employed in
carrying a cargo to Algiers - Lieut Jacobs, or the next senlor officer
in case of his indisposition, will command her, until her arrival
here - He will have orders to engage as many men as are necessary
to navigate her to this place, for the trip only, or for 12 mont,hs as
most wnt-enient for which purpose be pleased to furnish the money You will have put on board 40 Bbls Beef, 40 d-ork,
20,000 lbs
Cheese, 25 Ct Wt Fish - A remittance of 5000 Dry is ordered Pray hurry off the Ship P S - A Letter for Lt Jacobs, or the Commanding Officer of the
G Washington is directed to your care - Be pleased to have it
delivered - Your letter of the 18th is just received [NDA. GLB, Vol. 3, 1794-1800.1

To David Humphreys, U. S. Minister to Hadrid, Spain, from Secretary of State

(NQ19.)

[PHILADELPHIA]

Department of State May Yt@ 1800
DEARSIR,I have felt much anxiety on account of the delays
which have taken place in the Barbary affairs: but nevertheless I
have reason to believe that all will be well. Letters from Consul
Eaton at Tunis to Feb? lo$received three or four days since, warrant
the expectation. - You wiIi be informed that the Sophia, with a
very valuable cargo, sailed in January [26] for Aleem, and a large
ship [Hero] with timber and naval stores for Tums in Februa
was assured she would be read to sail early in January. - By t ese
vessels I write fully to Cons s 0 Brien & Eaton. - Instead of a
common ship intended for Algiers this Spring, with merchanQze for
re-establishing our funds there, one of our frigates is getting ready to

.9

P:'

355

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

take in timber and naval and military stores, as well as merchandize. This frigate was originally an East Indiaman, a burthensome vessel
of seven or eight hundred tons. She will of course leave on shore
some of her guns and men: but she will remain well armed and
manned. Her cargo will all be ready by the time she comes round
here from Newport, which will be in ten days or two weeks. Other timber, plank, naval and military stores are reparing for
Tunis, and will shortly be ready for loading. - The tim er and plank
were growing in the woods when we received the definitive arrangements, last autumn, with that regency.
You will have the goodness to communicate this information to
the Consuls Eaton & 0 Brien, by the earliest opportunities. - I
have given the like information, and made the same request to
Mr Smith.

f

*

*

*

*

*

*

*

[SDA. Dip. Cor., Inst. to Min., Bk 6, 1798-1800.1
To James Leander Cathcart, U. S. Consul, Tripoli, from Secretary of State

DEPARTMENT
OF STATE
Philadelphia May 1800.
SIB, On the 12th instant were received your letters bearing date
Decr 27.30. & 31. & the first of January last.
Altho' i t would be very desirable that the Tripoline cruisers should
be restrained within the limits which you state, in respect to the boarding of American vessels to examine their passports - viz. that two
men only should enter the vessel; yet you have doubtless acted prudently in submitting to the alteration in your passport required by
Morad Raiz, altho' by the 9'p art,icle of our treaty our commerce is to
be on the footing of that of the most favoured nations - say the
British and Spanish, whose treaties contain that limitation. But
similar stipulations are constantly inserted in the treaties of the
Christian nations of Europe - and never observed by those which
are a t war.
The pretences on which, as you represent them, the Tripoline
cruisers capture and condemn the vessels and cargoes of nations with
which they are a t peace, demonstrate the extreme precariousness of
any existing treaty; and th&tnothing can give effectual and permanent
security to our commerce, but a marine force adequate to the destruction of those cruisers: and from your description of theu number and
qualities, any two of our frigates, with two smaller vessels, would
without, much difficulty, demolish their whole force. Should the
pending negociation with France produce peace between her and the
United States, it will be in the power of the U. States to send-bto the
Mediterranean a naval force sufficient to combat and destroy the
marine of all the Barbary Powers: and should the necessity of the
measure occur, it is to be hoped there will be no hesitation in doing it.
The efficacy and even economy of such a measure have been incontrovertibly proved by Commodore Campbell, with his single ship of the
line, in reducing the Bey of Tripoli to absolute submission; not only
to make peace, but, what is perhaps without example, to r c h e it of
a Christian Power - and that power possessing so sm a marine ss
Portugal.
The bills you mention that you had drawn payable to the order of
Captain Eaton, have never been presented here.

I

356

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1785 TO 1801

The letters and papers which have before now been received from
you, are noted below. Your communications are very acceptable, and
do you credit.
[NA. SDA. CL, Algicm, Vol. 5, March-Dec. 1800.1
To Secretary of State from Richard O'Brien, U, S. Consul General, Algiers

ALGIERS
The 16th May 1800
EBTEEMED
SIR On the morning of The 8'? Ins* The Sophia left
Algiers. on the 11" Ins? I received. a letter from Consul Eaton in-

forming me that The ship Hero arrived a t Tunis The l Z t h of April.
This has saved our affairs with that Regency
On the 4'P of may The corsairs of Tunis Captured two dean Brigs.
and to all appearance hostilities has commenced. by Tunis on the dean
commerce. we have had a ntrrrow Escape on our affairs. which if not
attended to war will be The result of detention and neglect. Consul
Eaton has drawn on me for 3 Thous'J dollars. and i t is with difficulty I
can prevail on the banquirs to advance this sum our debts to them is
great being equal to 112 fathoms, The Stores for the Regency. goods
and Cash should be Sent - if not. we ctrmot expect to preserve. our
affairs long. my source of experiments to aid our affairs is all but,
exausted. and The requisite is much wanted.
The Brig Bashaw on her pasage from Cadiz for Algiers was Captured
by The portugeese. I belive arrived s t Lisbon the 9" of April. The
dey has threatened Spain with War. The Consul with Chains - but
I belive This affaire will be Setled with Cash - &V, we have many
Vessels in The meditteranian. I belive The french expedition to the
Levant is finished TheIy] are on theire return Capitulated, &c.
The winds has been westerly ever since That Cap$ Smith Sailed [NA. SDA. CL, Algiere, Vol. 5, March-Dec. 1800.1
To Secretary of State from James L. Cathcart, U. 8. Consul, Tripoli

TRIPOLI
May 2rt@1800
SIRSince the dnte of the enclosed dispatch I heard nothing from the
Bashaw untill the evening of the 25" inst when Siddi Mohammed
Daguize sent me the original in arabic of which the enclosed is a literal
translation. The only conclusion which can be drawn from the
Bashaws proceedings is that he wants a present, & if he does not get
one, he will forge pretences to commit depredations on the property
of our fellow Citizens; His letter to the President will be the means of
keeping him quiet untill he receives an answer provided no unnecessary
delay is made, as he will expect to reap a benefit therefrom? should
government think roper to make him a present, i t will have the desired effect probab y for one year; but not longer, I therefore can see
no alternative but to station some of our Frigates in the Mediterranean, othenvise we will be continually subject to the same insults which
the Imperials Danes Sweeds & Ragusians have already suffer'd, & will
still continue to suffer, if they do not keep a sufficient Naval force in
this Sea to protect their trade; notwithstanding the Danes & Sweeds
have promis'd to pay this Regency fifteen thousand do1l"ench every
three years either in cash or Navd etores st the option of the BashawIt would no doubt be s desir&bleobject for government to be infom'd whether cash or stores would be most acceptable & what might
be the ammount of the Bsshaws expectations, but I think it would be

!
'

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

357

n very imprudent question for me to ask, lest he should extend them
beyond the probability of their being complied with, i t is therefore in
my opinion much better to let it remain as it is a t the option of the
President, for the truth is, both cash & stores by way of present,
would be equally acceptable for the value of which by conjecture I
refer you to my letter in Cypher.
Farfara informs me that the Bashaw expects to receive an answer
from the President himself, as he always receives the same token of
respect from the chiefs of eve Nation with whom he corresponds?
he likewise has hinted that d ' t o he had i t not in his power to be of
any service to the United States on my arrival at Tripoli, that he
has i t now, & will always use his influence in favor of the United
States, the fact is he has i t in his power to do us much harm, & it is
prudent to be on the best terms with him, for which flfaut l'argent.
I have filed the original letter from the B a b w in this office in
order to have i t to produce if necessary, I will endeavor to procure a
copy, but a bark sails to day for Tunis which obliges me to close my
dispatches immediately presuming that they may arrive in time to
be forwarded by the Ship Hero -

T

[SDA. CL, Tripoli, Vol. 1, Part 11, Jan. 1800-May 1801.1

[16 June 1800J
Certificate of William Eaton, U. S. Consul, Tunis

I certify that the Ship Heroe has delivered her cargo at Tunis
according to contract; nnd that there is due from the United States
to her owners and concern 5 demurrage for twenty days, @ Gfty
dollars per day, as per certificate of contract endorsed on her bills of
lading TUNIS,lBtb June 1800 Dols. 1000 The pieces of oak plank delivered by the Heroe are jive hundred &
seventy six
the Shot twelve thousand and sixty - Every thing else
as in the bill of lading and invoice Pieces oak plank.. - - - - - - -570
Shot - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 12060
-

-

[SDA. CL, Tunis, Vol. 1, 1797-1800.1
To Secretary of State from William Eaton, U. S. Consul, Tunis

TUNIS2
s JURR1800 SIR, I cannot forbear adding this note though the subject be not
immediately within my sphere Yesterday I red letters from Mr Cathcart dated 25. & 27" May
intimating tl demand made on the U States by the Pacha of Tripoli
for a Regalia equivdent to that of the Bey of Tunis; and accompanying n letter for the department of State, which, it is presumed, contams the demand alluded to.
If further testimony be necessary to inforce n conviction of the
correctness of the conclusion, so often reiterated, that no profusion
of generosity can satisfy these begging thieves we shall. undoubtedly
have that testimony - The Bey of Tunis holds to hw claim for a
m i s e r - I refused to commurucate his message - He gave me
to understand that I would be ordered out of his kingdom - I
intimated to him in return my sense of the Honor he would do me

358

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1786

1SBf

--

-

by such a measure
I will not yield to the claim. Let him send
me away - He dare not make war upon us if the U States use

their proper means to deter him. Without the use of these means
we are considered tributaries - and shall be treated as such Again, I say, our affairs in Barbary have been badly managed Our negotiators have been French Agents, Apostate Amerieaw and
Slam! I dont mean a criminal reflection by this last term - I
have seen a man who exhibited no extraordinmy symptoms of fear
in moving to a battle n-ho trembled in passing a grave yard for fear
of ghosts - & I have seen a man, who, I believe, would not shrink
a t the thunder of a Broadside of a man of war, tremble at the Nod of
a Turban - In the first instance the impressions were made by the
Nurse - In the latter by the Basfinado & chains - All of us,
who have seen Barbary, agree in this point That nothing bzll terror
d l check the insolewe of these demands on our generosity! What has
been done to effect it? What is doing to effect it? Nobody here,
acquainted with our concessions, could be persuaded that we are the
same Americans who, twenty years ago, braved the resentment of
Great Britain, if that fact were not recorded. There is, indeed, no
nation so much humiliated in matt.ers of tribute -And i t is a burlesque
upon every thing manly or political to see nations pouring into the
ports of these kingdoms, which have not of their own produce a single
article of naval material, stores and builders to construct navies to be
employed as pirates against themselves - In this list of hlconsentents
the U States at present have the honor to stand a t the head - Our
whole system of Negociatim must be changed - There is no devinstion in this prediction: But it will be found as true as divinity P d o n , I pray you, Sir, this rhapsody - No American can be cool
and suffer as I do - And say to the Govt of the U. States they must
either send a show of force to the Tunis - or a Slave!
The example of Portugal a t Tripoli, is it not worthy of imitation!
I intend to reconnoilre the ground there this summer.
Cap1 Robinson waits - this note is not official - nor yet decent!
(Msse. ES. Pickering Papers Vol. 42.1
To Secretary of State from William Eaton, U. 6. Consul, Tunis

1 NO 22 Duplicate

SIR

*

*

TUNISthe 24p June 1800

*

*

*

*

*

Consul Cathcart is undoubt[ed]ly correct when he states that two of
our Frigates and four of our Gun boats would bring the Bashaw of
Tripolia to terms, but the propriety of his opinion that it would be
best to make him a voluntary present may be questioned if Malta
should revert to its ancient form of Government, what would it avail
us what benefit have we ever experienced from its Constitutional
hatred to Musselmen
Genoa has received a new master sufficiently majesterial i t is
presumed to protect her from Barbary insolence this deprives them
of another considerable resource, all their Booty in the mediteranian is
falling into custody of abler freebooters, the must take it then in
foreign markets it IS not less the interest of a commercial Europe to
point them to america than it is theirs to take that direction, we must
either bribe their avarice or chastise their audacity, veing only
increases their avidity for more we have then the only a ternative to

lT

f

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERfJ

359

yield unconditional accord to their elaims or sbrengthen ourselves up
a little and look them out of Countenance, this position a t some period
must be taken, does the present moment forbid it or shall we wait a
little lo er till we have reinforced their navy by our naval and military rega 'a until1 they become formidable to us, when we are unlading
those regalias in their harbours are we not shedding the Blood of our
Countrymen, it is devoutly hoped that the U. S may have the honour,
very easil obtained of setting the first example amongst the tributaries of cTtastizeing the insolence of those lords. If Tripolia persists does not Tripolia invite the experiment and is
not the occasion a good one shew him two or three of our strongest
best built Frigates set life and death before him leave to him the choice,
if he prefers the later give it him, there is nothing impracticable in
the thing the turks are a contemptiable military and at sea lubbem, I
have by accident been three days and two nights in one of their
corsairs a t sea our seamen of the north may give them cent per cent
in numbers odds and meet them on any Ground of war - barely
except boarding. - I t would be well on their return or passage out
that the Frigates visit Tunis I will invite the Sapatapa and a brace
of the Be s Governors to dine in the Commodore, I will point to his
Guns an say see there our execdive power Commissioned to Keep
treaties do these sentiments look hostile they are the only sure
Guarentee of Peace, all rational nature may be adduced to evidence
it, and France besides, it is more strikeingly true in a country where
all respect is denied to every thing but arms. - Consistently with
those sentiments, Therefore the Questions submitted by Consul
Catchart to the Consul Geni OBrian and on which the Opinion of
this Consulate is demanded have received the following answers. QUESTION
I'! Wheather it would not be the Interest of the United
States to make the Bashaw a present to content him at least till
some of our Frigates come into the Mediteranian if in the W a t i v e
to what amount ought the present be made, that is supposing there is
no alternative. ANSWER I should not have intruded my Counsel in any matters
relative to your administration had you not desired it. - The Bashaw of Tripolia has given written documents as evidence of his entire
satisfaction in the presents he has received from the United States as
the condition of a perpetual Peace
Whence then arrises his claims i t is not su%cient that he asserts
a right to be placed on a footing with the other regencies, he may be
Informed that i t is owing to the treachery of french agents, that the
latter have been so liberally paid were this otherwise his claim is
nevertheless inadmissiable being barred by his own Voluntary act, a
Demand therefore of this Last is a t least an infringement upon the
Treatie.
But i t is to be doubted, wheather any extention of the Presidents
Instructions may be construed to a discretion of giveing or even
stipulating additional presents it is a latitude which seems not to
have been intended even in Cases more Imperious than the present it
is a happy Circumstance for us and ought to satisfy the Bashaw that
we are thus Circumscribed - that the Bashaw has condecended to
beg a present will not Warrant us the discretion of giveing To revert to your figure to Captain OBrian that we are sentinah of
an advanced Plquet it is our duty to give an alarm on an Enemies

5

d'

360

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1786 TO 1801

approach, but by no means to concede one inch of ground which we
are stationed to defend from these premises my opinion may be easily
infered that the Bashaw of Tripola must wait the Answer of the
President of the United States to his demands. and my opinion also
be as easiIy infered that the President will highly approve of your
Conduct in the mode you have adopted to resist or a t least to delay
his claims until1 such answers be received [QUESTIOK]
23"hould
any of our Vessels be sent in here on any
pretence whatever and their Cargoes condemned how would you
advise me to act after such a violation of our treatie, shall I refuse the
Corsairs of Tripola america Passports or shall I issue them as if
Nothing had happened [ANSWER]Should any eveut of this Kind happen which does not
from any thing to be geathered from your Communications seem
immediately to menace us impelious Circumstances must be yielded
to and the possible provision made for the crews untill the result of
the Government be Known but passports being evidence of the good
understarnding subsisting between the Government of the United
States and the Bashaw of Tripola cannot in truth nor propriety be
granted after that good understanding shall be interrupted besides
thk concession would furnish the Enemie a decoy t o entrap our
Merchantmen and even our Vessels of War a t the same time that it
would shield the Corsairs against reprisals from our ships of war which
might be detacthed on this very duty.
Pasports therefore cannot be given or granted after an overact of
infraction of the Treatie on the part of the Bashaw of Tripolia or his
subjects [QUESTION]
3r.ddo you immagine that the Dey of algiers would send
four or five of his corsairs to demand any american Vessels that might
be captured, and if he would would it not cost the United States more
to fee him than to content the Basham of Tripoh
[ANSWER]
I am of opinion that if the Dey of Algiers would take the
above step that he would succeed but all the letters in the world would
a t most produce only an evil answer mixed with lies and absu~dities If
the United States must see an advocate with his Excellency the
Basbaw of Tripolia and my advice were to infiuence their choice they
would prefer a jrench man to an algerine or a J e w If Joseph Bashaw
the son of a li Bashaw choose to proceed to outrage the President of
the United States, and not Patroon Grandi is to be resorted to for
measures of Indemnity. no doubt redress would be as shure or
secure at his suit as that of our good friend the Dey of algiers the
Quarintee of the latter not with standing I dont Know how those conclusions in answer to Mr Cathcarts
questions may correspond with the feeling and discration of government If thely] betra some A1 Kalia it is become [because] the
intemperance of this C imate fources it. - The Plague is becomeing
every Day more serious our hopes is in the approaching heat of
summer the last spring and present month of June have been unusually
Cold and humid no precautions whatever are used among the ordinary
Moores to prevent the malady Communicating, Ask a mahomitan
the cause of his neglect what says he, do you suppose I have lost
confidence in God AUmighty (NA. BDA. CL,Algiers, Vol. 5, March-Dec. 1800.1

9

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

361

To Israel Whelen, U. 15. Purveyor, from Ebenezer Stevens, New York, N. Y.

ISRAEL
WHEELAN
Esq:

NEWYORK24 June. 1800 -

SIR Agreeable to Instructions I have r e d from the HonWharles
Lee Esqr late Secfl State [ad interim], to Charter a Ship, & purchase a
Cargo, to be sent to Tunis, I have effected said business, and in consequence thereof have this day drawn on you in favor of Mess?
Blackwell & MsFarlam for the sum of three thousand four hundred &
fift dollars at twenty days sight, as p: tenor of said draft, which I
wil thank you to Honor The purchase I made of Imn from them mas to have been Cash
payment, i t has been nearly 30 days. since I agreed to take it - & my
not having any funds in my hands - is the occasion of settling with
them in this mode The Ship which is charterd for this object is called the Ann Maria,
burthen about 500 Tons, she is now making some repairs and hope to
have her away in all next month. - I wrote M: Lee on the subject of
a remittance, which I hope he will shortly cause to be made, as he
advised me it should be done I beg leave to refer you to that GentlQr Timo Pickering E s ~ :for
particulars on the Subject of this Shipment, and with a tender of my
services in effecting the desired object. Cargo of Ship Ann Maria 300 pP Scantling, 9. to 14 In: 40 feet & upwards in length
5000 Pine Plank 4 In: thiclc, 14 to 18 feet long 300 Ash oars - 34. feet. long 600 Quintals Swedish Iron.
the residue in Pipe Staves - to make Stowage -

T

[Schuylkill Arsenal.]

.

To Captain William Bainbridge, U. S. Navy, Philadelphia, Pa., from Secretary of
the Navy

[WASHINGTON,
D. C.]
Nay Depl25 June 1800
I am honored with your letter of the 21 ins, advising of the arrival
of the Geo Washington, & containing a list of her crew.
This Vessel is to go to Algiers with a Cargo - but not a full cargo,
for she may have an opportunity of performing other Service, besides
cclrr ing a Cargo to Algiers, But if she was to take a full crew, there
woufd be no room for any thing on board, except the men, & the
necessary provisions - You must therefore make arrangements for
encreasing the present crew, to just 130 Persons, including the commander and every soul on board - You must cause an estimate to
be made of the Provisions necessary for 130 souls for six months and apply to Cap$ Gill for the difference between that quantity, &
what you have already on board. If he has not enough of any particular article on hand - he must apply to George Harrison Esqr Navy
Agent, who will procure the deficiency. I t must be understood, that
you are to leave Port with this quantity, and of course, you must
before sailing re lace what mny be consumed in Port. To prevent
confusion, i t w d be best at once to apply for 7 months supply of
every thing but Salt meat - the men should be fed on fresh whde they
remain in Port - & Ms Harrison will take arrangements for having
them so supplied.

362

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROh4 1786 TO 1801

The Cargo, which will I beleive consist of some plank, some cables
and a few canon, & some valuable European goods, is under the direction of the Secp of State, who will give his orders to have it delivered
as soon aa possible - This is a bad season to remain a t Phila? & I
am therefore extremely anxious for the dispatch of the ship - Every
thing depending on you, f have no doubt, will be done & you must
ur e others to activity.
gee that your powder is in good order, & if i t is not so, exchange
i t with Cap; Gill - & that you have a proper quantity of the different
kinds of shot on board One hundred rounds, not of each kind, but of all kinds, but the
greater proportion round ball, will be sufficient.
If you are not detained for the cargo, I shall expect you will be ready
to sail in one Fortnight a t latest from the receipt of this.
You seem to have so many Seamen, Landsmen & Boys, that you
will want few or no Marines. I presume i t will be best to make up
your deficiency of men, with able seamen; but remember, that you
are only to have 130 souls on board
[NDA, OSW, Vol. 4, 1800-1801.1
To George Harrison, Navy Agent, PhiIadelphir, Pa., from Secretary of the Navy

[WASHINGTON,
D. C.]
Navy Dept 26* June 1800 SIRThe Qeorge Tt7mhington being under orders to cam a cargo
to Algiers will want provisions and other stores, as we in Port,
as for her voyage, which I have directed Capt. Gill to supply a t once
on the requisitions of Capt. Bainbridge. If articles are called for,
which Capt. Gill has not in store, you will be pleased to purchase
the deficiency on his application -

Lr

[NDA. GLB, Vol. 3, 179%1800.]
To Richard O'Brien, U. S. Consul General, Algiers, from William Eaton, U. S.
Consul, Tunis

TUNIS689 June 1800
DEARSIR,Since I closed my letter of this morning the Danish

flagstaff has been cut down - And war declared by the Bey of Tunis
against the King of Denmark - Upwards of seventy people, the
equipage of seven Vessels condemn'd to slavery, and the Consul
confined to his house
[NYPL, Emmet Col. 4 W 3 . NDA photostat.]
To Israel Whelen, TJ. 6. Purveyor, from Secretary of the Navy

(COPY1

~ A S H I N Q T O N ,D.

C.3

Navy Department. 9 J d y 1800.

SIR,The Secretary of State having his hands full of important
business, has obtained my promise to Correspond with you, on the
subject of the Qewge Wshington's Cargo It is absolutely impossible to understand from the Documents to
be found a t this place, the whole of the Algerine Subject. A list of
Articles to the amount of 95,700 dolltlrs was given by Col. Pickerkg
to Mr Francis, to be shipped in the Sophia this list you have, and rt
must be ascertained by you, for i t cannot be done here, what of these
articles where shipped m the Sophia, and what remains now to be

-.. .

- .- . .

..

363

WARS WITH BARBABY POWERS

shipped in the George Washington - The articles so remaining or
as many of them as can readily be procured, as well as what remains
to be shipped of the articles "Wanted for the Regency" & the articles
"Wanted for the Dey" you will be pleased to have procured & shipped
on board the Ueorge R7arhington, with all possible expedition. The
Treasury Department is not yet so arranged as to admit easily the
remittance of Mone - I presume you can as readily procure
the whole of the artic es wanted, and as cheap, a t 20 or 30 days credit,
as for money I t is not meant that the Qeorge l17ashington shall be loaded as deep
as a Merchant Shi - she must be in a condition to fight. you will
please to consult 8 a p8 Bainbridge, and if you find the whole, & also
the Plank, and 7 or 9 Pound Guns, too much for the Ship to carry,
ou can leave out of the articles to be purchased, those which are
east Valuable Doctr Gillaspie can give the information of what is meant by Note
numbered from 1 to 6 - If he cannot, no person can, please to consult him on the subject -

9

3

[Skuylkill Arsenal.]

[12 July 18001
Quasi-Wer, United States and France
[No=.--See letter of 12 July 1800, to President John Adams from Secretary
of the Navy, setting forth the dis osition of various ships of war along the coast
of the United States and on the est Indies stations; printed in "Naval Documents, Qumi-War, United States and France", sixth volume (June to November,
1800), pp. 137-138.1

b

To Israel Whelen, U. 6. Purveyor, from Samuel Bodgdon, Intendant of Military
Stores

PHILADEZPHIA
,219'July I800
SIR- Enclosed you have a memorandum received this morning
from Captain Smith - I think in [ifl you have latitude given in
your p[ur]chases for the Mediteranian Pirates i t may be useful Captam Smith is afraid the Dey will rage when he sees a Fri ate
loaded with Goods arrive to pay the debts due the Jews - and o
a
small Brig is forwarded to discharge his demands - A Peace offenng
he supposes will be necessary to keep him in temper, and the list
enclosed contains the articles that our Consul OBrien thinks most
like1 to answer the pur ose - Anot.her Vessel Captain Smith
thin should be loaded wit a portion of the timber under Commission
for the Deys use, and Wed up with such Military stores, and other
articles as stand on indents forwarded by CapWOBen -

3

g

L

[Schuylkill Arsenal.]
To Secretary of State from William Eaton, U. S. Consul, Tunis

TUNIS21. July 1800 DzLplicate.
SIR, The morning next succeeding the departure of his Danish
Majesty's Consul General the Danish Masters of vessels then captured, came in a bod and desired me to redeem their vessels. I t was
understood they cou d open a credit on Leghorn. I according1 went
to the Minister and proposed, in m own name, to purchase the anish
vessels (they had been then plun ered) and made an offer. He demanded time to deliberate - Interim the Danish Captains discovered apprehensions of danger in pursuing the project - My word

9

B

5

364

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1785 TO 1801

was passed; and my only hope rested in refusal of my bid on the
part of the Government. Fa& overbid me. Government, by their
Agent, reported his bid: To which f replied that I considered the
business now a t an end on my part because I was fixed in my firat;
bid. The next day I departed for Bizerte; but had been onl twelve
hours there when a message arrived expressing the Astonis ment of
governme?zt at my departure because their Agent had recieved orders fo
close with my ofler. I returned immediately -finished the bargain and fixed on the mode of payment - I now reported the business
to the Danish Capt'ains; but they failed altogether: so that I find
myself in possessiqn of 14 vessels, purchased on credit -in a situation
by no means eligrble - * * * I have very little alliance on the
owners or concern to redeem them - and shall therefore use such
measures to recover my credit and cash advanced as the nature of
the affair suggests. The brig Pearle I am resolved to employ in
my own sel-vlce - and for this purpose desire the necessary papers
may be granted me - I have commissioned ill' Harris to transact the
bu [siness]
I shall make no hesitation to account to his Danish Majesty's
Agent on any; principles of law or equity -* - - - I shall take care
not to commit my own interest in the afFsr If the President grant my request of returning to America next
spring I calculate returning m the Brig - She is an excellent vessel
of about 200 tons - and, I believe, worth more money than I am to
give for the whole
Nothing was more distant from my ideas, on entering into this
negotiation, than a peculation - I am precipitated into it - Situated as the business is it must be considered fair and honorable - all
the Consuls here have passed their opinions upon it, in this light

f

*

*

*

*

*

[Mass. ES. Pickering Papers, Vol. 26.1
To John Quincy Adams, U. 8. Minister to Berlin, Germany, from Secretary of State

JOHNQ . ADAMSEsq:

DEPARTMENT
OF STATE
Washington July 24th 1800

SIR,The duplicate of your K*160 and the first of 161 and 162 were
received on the 29q of June
The proposition made by the minister of Sweden for employing in
the Mediterranean a number of frigates, in concert between the
United States, Sweden and Denmark for the purpose of protecting
their commerce, has been laid before the President.
He is far from being pleased with the state of our affairs with the
Barbary powers; but he conceives that the engagements of the United
States, tho' unreasonab1 burthensome, ought to be performed. He
is not satisfied that in t i e existing state of those engagements, good
faith will permit us to unite with other powers, in appointmg, in concert
with them, convoys for their and our trade. There is indeed cause to
apprehend that the Barbary powers or so* of them, will break their
treaties with us, and recommence hostilitm on our commerce. In
such an event the United States will be a t perfect libert , and will be
well disposed, to make any reasonable arrangements wit Sweden and
Denmark for the purposes mentioned in the note of the Swedish
Minister.

H

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

365

You will please S
i
r tq make a respectful communication to Baron
D. Engemtrom c o n f o m g to these principles.

Untll the differences between the United States and fiance shall be
so far accommodated as that actual hostilities shall cease between
them, to station American frigates in the Mediterranean would be a
hazard, to which our infant navy ought not perhaps to be exposed.
I am Sir, &c. &c.
J. MARSHALL.
[SDA. Dip. Cor., Inst. to Min. Bk 5, 179&1800.]

To Bichard O'Brien, U. 6. Consul General, Algierr, from Secretary of State

DEPARTMENT
OF STATE
Washington Jdg 29% 1800
SIB, The George Washington sails immediately for Algiers with a
cargo according to the invoice a n Q i l l of lading inclosed. The cargo
I hope will reach you in good order and in time for the purposes of our
government .
The Sophia Capt Smith has arrived and has brought letters from
yourself and from Consul Eaton. Another vessel for the Mediterranean will I hope sail in a short time with such further articles as
may be necessary.
I find it diflicult from the papers in this department to ascertain
the precise state of our accounts uith the Barb
powers. I shall be
much obliged to you and to Consuls Eaton & athcart to make out
a perfect and complete stabment if you have it in your power to do
so, showing the claims of the different regencies and the produce and
application of every cargo which has arrived, and exhibiting also with
precision the present state of their demands.
I t is very much to be wished that a sum in specie could be fixed on
for the annuities instead of the specific articles now called for. It
would simplify the accounts and greatly ease the United States. The
sum of thrrty thousand dollars which you mention, would certainly
be more desrreable than the present annuity to Algiers. It is very
much the wish of our government to preserve its peace with the
Mediterranean powers and to perform all its engagements but the
burthensome caprices of the Barbary Sovereigns cannot always be
submitted to. I t will very much tend to secure the preservation of
peace and the punctuality of the payment to commute the annuity
to a sum in specie.
I will mention to the President who is now in Mtwsachusetts the
proposition for sending to Algiers a man to make powder.
I am Sir,&c kc.

??

J. MARBHALL.

ISDA. Dip. Cor., Inst. to Min., Bk 5, 1798-1800.)
To Captain William Bainbridgs, U. 6. Irrvy, from Secretary of the Bavy

[WASHINGTON,
D. C.]
Navy DeplJ1 July 1800
Master Commandant WILLIAM
BAINBRIDQE
Esq;
of the QP Washington care of Mess's Riddle & Bird,
New Castle, Delaware,
SIR! You will receive herewith a Pass port from the Set? of State -a
letter for Allen MGLane, from whom ou will get a.Meditemanean Pass,
and a letter from the Secretary o State to Rich* O'Brien, Consul
General of the United States, at Algiers.

9

366

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1785 TO 1801

You will proceed with the @ Washington, without delay, to Algiers - where you will deliver the cargo taken on board a t Phila*, to
the order of Rich$ OBrien, the Consul General.
I t may be proper for you to touch a t Gibraltar, Tangiers or C/ad'nto learn whether any of the Barbary powers, are committing hostilities
against the Vessels of the U: States. This is not expected to be the
case, but i t is possible, and by being informed, you will be guarded.
Should i t be the case, i t will become your duty to give to American
Vessels, & Citizens, all the protection in your power, on your passage
to Algiers as well as on your return - but your cargo belng valuable,
it will be proper that you should not go much out of your way, until
that is delivered. The Dey of Algiers, no doubt continues Friendly
to the U States.
You should on your arrival before Algiers, send an Officer on shore
with the letter to M: OBrien, whose advice you will follow on the subject of saluting the city, and every other matter, not degrading to
yourself, or the flag of the U: States. By our Treaty with Algiers, they are to salute our Vessels of war
with 22 guns, which is to be returned with the same number of Guns.
I t is said to be a custom, to give them a barrel of Common Powder for
every gun they lire. M' OBrien, can inform you, on this subject.
It might be well for you to receive from the Delaware a t New CastEle,
22 barrels Powder, for this purpose, in case they should be required.
If you can see Cap: Smith of the Brig Sophia, he will be able to
give you useful information respecting Algiers.
While you lay before that city, keep up the strictest discipline, &
the most Warlike appearance to make the best impressions of our
discipline & power - and try to keep up a good understanding between
the Citizens and your Officers & Crew.
The danger of the Plague & other reasons, however, should induce
you to get away from that place, as soon as possible - You will learn
in the Mediterranean whether on your return, it is Peace or War,
between America & France, & act accordingly - Your crew is too
small to admit of your remaining in the Mediterranean -after passing
Gibraltar, direct your course for N. York, you will arrive a t a season
when you can not get to Phila+;but if the War continues with France,
which you must presume, if you do not hear, from good authority,
the Contrary! you may spend as much time as your Provisions d l
admit, in cmsmg about Cayenne, Curricoa & the Havanna Lest you should not have the General Instructions, for your conduct on a cruise - they are now enclosed - also an act respecting the
Slave Trade, the object being to annihilate that Trade, & an act,
respecting Salvage.
[NDA. OSW Vol. 4, lfiOo-1801.]
To Israel Whelen, U. 6. Purveyor, from Ebenezer Stevens, New York, H. Y.

NEWYORK8 Aug: 1800
SIRI have received your respects of 7 tQ Inst and am happy to o k r v e
that the business of settling the Cargo A C Cof~ Ship Ann Maria, is
placed in your hands
The necessary requests, respecting Insurance on this & the [George]
Washingtons Cargo, I will make thm day, and will inform you of the
result by to morrows mail -

367

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

I have received a letter from the Seer? State relative to this Shipment In consequence of your instructions, to settle my drafts, I have this
day drawn on you in favor Sam! Hodgdon Esq' a t ten days sight for
Ten thousand Dollars on account of this Shipment, which I am much
in want of, and u d l thank: you to Honor i t
The Ship will be loaded in all next week, and every attention shall
be paid in forwarding the papers, in due season The Ann Maria, is a fine substantial Ship burthen 486 tons, Danish
built, sails with a sea letter, has undergone a thorough repair and is in
complete order for Sea, has a good Commander, and will be well
manned Cargo Lumber & Iron - The Risk from New York to
Tunis The name of the Captain, is - Coffin [Schuylkill Arsenal.]
Extract from log of U. S. S . Ceorge Wtuhingfon, Captain William Beinbridge, U. 6.
Navy, commanding, Friday, 8 August 1800

Commences with moderate Breezes and fair weather a t 12 Midnight
Weighed anchor and made sail for sea- At 1 A M dischared Pilot, At
2 do the Light of cape Henlopen Bore W by N Distance 3 Leagues from which I Talre my Depature it Lying,in the Latitude of 38.46
Lon. 75' 5' At 4 A M Unbent the cables and Stowed the Anchors all hands
variously employed in scraping the Gun Deck washing &c
At 9 A M spoke the British Sloop of War Pheasant Bound on a
cruise Latter part fair weather and fresh Breezes
Distance pr Log - 68
[It is believed Midshipman Benjamin Page, U. S. Navy, kept this log.]
[H. E. Huntington L&AG.]
Expenses incident to sale of brig .Sophia

A U G11
~ t@ 1800
Dr The United States
To SHANNON
& POALK
To advertising Bri Sophia for Public Sale a t the
Coffee house phifad? in four papers 5 Times
Room expence
To Cornrns' on 5550 dollars (thc Sum she sold for) @1/2 pr) 2Z 75
Cent----------------------------------------------$36.75

E[rrors] E[xcepted]

SHANNON
& POALK
Received 25" Augt 1800 of Israel Whelen Thirty six dollars seventy
five Cents in full of the above bill for which we have Signed duplicate
receipts $36.75
SHANNON
& POALK
[Schuylkill Arsenal.]

368

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1786 TO 1801
Marine force of Tripoli 14 August 1800

-

One old ship of 32 Guns, English bottom, but repaired in the Levant,
she haa never been to sea since my arrival here, and must go through
a thorough re air, before she is fit for service ........................
The Betsy a n L i c a n prize coppered by the Spaniards mounting 28
ninesandsixes,,,,-,,,-,,-,,-,---,,-----,,,,,,,-,-------,,
2 Polacres of three masts and mounting eighteen guns each- - ------ ---- - One Xebeque taken from the Neapolitans laat cruise, and now mounts
------------------------------eighteen guns-----------------One Polacre taken from the Neapolitans, a t present is a transport but
sometimes mounts 10 Guna . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
One Neapolitan Polacre a prize belonging to the Bashaw capable of
mounting eighteen guns-----------------------------------------One quarter Gally mounting 4 Guns- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - _ - _ _ One ditto mounting 2 Guns & 4 Swivels of 22 oars each-- - - - - - - - - - - - - -2 Spalonards or open boats rowing 20 oars and mounting 4 Swivels each- - 2 Gun boats hauled on shore . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1
1
1

11 Sail of Cruisers the whole Navy of Tripoli-,,

36
la

lo
l8
4

2
2

150

,
,
,
--,,-,--, - - -

The whole marine force of Tripoli consists of eleven sail of Cruisers
small and large and two Gun boats, mounting 150 Guns, from which
if we deduct their guns and those of the old Frigate the actual force
capable of putting to sea is only ten sail of vessels mounting 112 Guns,
[See document of 14 December 1799, last two paragraphs.]

*

*

*

TRIPOLI
Augt ldtQ 1800.

*

*

*

*

JAMES
LEA:CATHCART

[SDA. CL, Tripoli, Vol. 1, Part 11, Jan. 1 8 W M a y 1801.1
To Secretary of State from James Simpson, U. S. Consul, Tangier

Nq 27. [Mount Washington near Tangier]
COPY
16th Aug'11~61800
SIR At the hour of departure, of our Post Boat for Tariffa, I
receive by Express from Mogodore, advice of Capt Paddock and
five of the Seamen of the Oswego, having sailed from that Port for
Lisbon on the 2@Ins; - one Man was left because he was ill of a
Fever & Ague; the other being an Irishman, declined accompanying
Captq Paddock; and put himself under protection of the Britlsh Vice
Consul a t Mogodore. - With this I have the honour to transmit
the Account MessrWourt & C-end mo of their disbursements on
this occasion up to the 2'J Inst, amounting to one thousand three
hundred twenty two dollars & three tenths, comprehending passage
money & provisions, calculated to be sufficient for the Voyage, and
during the Quarant.ine a t Lisbon. - These charges run high, but
such is the case with all matters, especially of a Public Nature, happening in this Country. I have still more & more to regret, that all the Crew of the Oswego,
did not reach Mogodore a t the same time; of the four who remained
a t the wreck, we have only yet heard of one, - John Hill, - who (by
a letter from himself) appears unfortunately to have fallen into the
hands of a Jew a t Illea, a Town considerably beyond the limits of
Muley Solimans acknowledged Sovereignty, who demands one hundred and sixty dollars being paid there for his release, which cannot
be complied with, for there can be no security of the mone reaching,
was it to be sent. - It is certainly much to be regrete4 that any
Citizen of the United States should for a day labour under the hard-

369

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

ships these people are doubtless exposed to, but I am equaly well
persuaded that yielding to exhorbitant terms of redemption readily,
IS but to expose us to endless encreased demands; and that every
Christian falling in the power of those rapacious wretches a t a future
time, would experience additional cruel treatment, and certain detention, with the view of enhancing the sum of their redemption. I have much satisfaction in acquainting you that the P l v u e since
the end of last Month, has v e v material abated in all thrs part of
the Country, and that in Tanger the da& Deaths are reduced to a
few persons. [NA. SDA.

CL, Tangier, Vol. 1, 1797-1803.1

Extracts from log of U. S. S. Gcorgc Washington, Captain William Bainbridgs,
U. 15. Navy, commanding
Saturday, 16 August 1800
Commences Light winda all sail set in chaw of a Ship & a Schooner Under
our Lee Bearinn N E the S h i ~when first discovered from our Main ~ Q DGallant
Mast Cross tre& - had her lore top Maat Launched & top Gallant housed Got
her top Mast up Made all sail & Left us the Schooner Made sail showed & American Colours both of them had the Appearance of French Cruiaem - Owing
to our ships sailing dull were not able to speak them At 9 P M took in Royals Steering and top Gallant Sails Long Obsv 52.46 Lat Obv 40' 5'
Distance Pr Log 163
Tuesday,96 August 1800
Commences first Light Breezes and pleasant
a t 4 P M cleared ship for action and exercised the Great guns and small arms At 7 P M spoke the Brigg South Carolina - Moses Andrew Master from
Hamburg bound to Charlestwon out 16 days - Informed us she waa chased by
a ship and a schooner a t sun down, but soon Lost sight of them
Middle part Light Breezes and pleasant - a t 6 A M saw two sail Bearing S E
and a Brinn t.o the Northward
Latter K r t Fresh Breezes hands employed on various Jobbs - Ends pleaaant
Long Obv 32.16 Lat Obs 38'56.
[H. E. Huntington L&AG.]
To W i a m Eaton, U. S. Consul. Tunia, from Secretary of State

[WASHINGTON,
D. C.]
Department o j State, Augt SOq 1800
SIR, The Anna Maria sails immediately for Tunis with a cargo
which I hope will reach you in good order. I send you a co y of the
invoice, bill of lading and charter party. Your letters by r Shaw
and by the Hero have been received. The President has, but with
very much reluctance consented to direct the purchase of the jewels.
The exorbitant and unwarrantable demands of the Barbary powers sit
very uneasy on us and are submitted to with difficulty. For the jewels
merely we are unwilling to go to war, and thus lose the benefit of the
heavy expenses already incurred. But this system of heavy exaction
must not be continued. You must persevere in your endeavours so
long as you may safely do so, to avoid entirely or diminish this demand.
I t may be that Mr [Rufus] King may find more difliculty or delay in
obtaining the jewels, and on that account as well as others i t is probably most adviseable to suspend any actual promise on this subject
as long as possible.
The residue of the stores will be prepared and expedited as soon as
can be done.

!h

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1786 TO 1801

370

I t is the wish of the President that you should keep M' King informed
of the state of our affairs with the Barbary Powers.
I have directed your bill for the six thousand dollars received from
M': Robeason to be paid.
[SDA. Dip. Cor., Inst. to Min., Bk. 6, 1798-1800.1
Extracts from log of U. 8. 8. Gmrgc Wushington. Captain William Bainbridge,
U. 8. Navy, commanding
Saturday, 6 September 1800
First part squally with rain all sail set a t 1 P M took in Royals & Steering
Sails a t 2 do pleasant made all sail - a t 6 do saw cape St Vincents Bearing E by
S % S Dis 10 Leagues Saw a Brig in the Offing Standing to the S Wd a t 9 do saw
8 sail ahead - made all sail & gave chase fired six shot But could not Bring them
too they run within the Land soon Lost sight.
Middle part pleasant weather a t Midnight the Cape Bore N by E Distance 6
or 7 Leagues
a t 5 A M Several Large Ships in Sight - people employed in washing their
clothes a t 7 do a Large Ship gave chase to us hauled our wind as pr Log made
sail - She fired a gun to Leeward and Hoisted the English Ensign - answerd
her and Hoisted the American Ensign - she fird a shot to Windward to Bring
us too made all sail - she fired another Meridian Cape St Marys Bore N E by E DL ten or eleven Leagues Ends
moderate
Ifit Ohv 36.34
Sunday, 7 Sepkmber 1800
First part moderate & Fair a Large ship of War in chase of us a t 1 P M passed
fired a shot close
a Danish Brig from Ostend Bound to Malsaa a t 2 do the s h i ~
on board of Gs, hove too a t half past 2 do spoke her She Beihg the British ship
of war Dragon of 74 Gune Capt Campbell - a t 10 do handed top Gallant Sails
up Coursesee in Gibb & reeft Top sails Middle part Fresh gales - a t 2 A M saw the Land Bearing E 6 E hove too
a t 4 do Bent the cables a t half past 4 Dq Bore up for Cape Spartel a t 7 do came
past i t Fresh gales with rain sent down top Gallant Yards - a t half past 8 do
came to anchor in the Bay of Gibraler with the Best Bower in Twelve Fathoms
Water a Boat came along side from shore who Informed the Capt that it was
Inposible for any one to come on shore and for him to hoist the Yellow Flag for
Ends with fresh gales & plenty of rain Quarantine
Monday, 8 September 1800
Begins with Fresh gales & rain - Lying a t anchor in the Harbour of Gibralter
two English frigates h y i n g in Distress Having parted their cables & Drifting
in Shore fired Several Guns & hoisted the English Ensign Union down Launched
her top Masts & Got out her Boats & towed her off
Middle Part moderate Breezes and fair
At 4 A M sent up top Gallant yds a t 7 do weighed anchor and made sail a t 8
Do Gibralter bore N N E about 2 Leagues Distance - a t past 7 do Spoke a
hands employed in scraping
Danish Brig from Elseneur Bound t o Malaga
Decks
a t 10 do Gibralter Bore W N W current Sitting to the Es'Q
Ends moderate all sail Set Wednesday, 1 7 September 1800
Pleasant under all sail Algiers in sight - a t 4 P M off the Harbour of Algeirs
the American Consul came on board with the Capt of the port who Pilated us
into the Harbour of Algeirs Moored ship and got every thing Snug - Algiers
is in Latitude 36.49 N Long 2.19 E
Thursday, 18 September 1800
Commences with Light winds and pleasant weather employed in getting ready
to Deliver the Cargo the American & English consul visited our ship.
Ends Light winds & Fair weather great plenty of fine fruit such as Grapes,
Green Figs, Oranges, Almonds, pomegranates & Prickly Pears
Friday, 19 September 1800
Commences with Light winds and Fair weather employed in Discharging our
Cargo Discharged 135 bags of Coffee 70 DOof pepper 11 Large Bales of Nankeem
15 small Do
Ends pleasant
[H. E. Huntington LBcAG.1

-

-

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

371

To Secretary of State from Richard O'Brien, U. S. Consul General, Algiers

ALGIERS
the 20* Sept 1800
ESTEEMED
SIROn the 17" Inst arrived here the U S Ship [George]
Washington Cap* Bainbridge, when I had the honour of receiveing
y" of the 2ga July. We me upwards. of 110 thss dollars in debt. to
the Bacris & Busnach. of Algiers. we are. nearly 2 years in Arrears
in our annuities to the regency - I am sorrow to h d that few articles is sent on the Annuities and. no Cash to pay our debts. we should
be More punctual. if not we shall experience dif6culties. you had
full statem$ of our affairs in The last dispatches you recQfrom Cap*
Smith. Copies of the dispatches of last year you shall have. again
by the first Conveyance. but one Cargo of our stipulations to Tunis
is forwarded & Tripolia demands an extra present. our Barbary
affairs requires great attention the[y] have been much neglected. I
hope the other articles as pr the Sophia wrote for this & last yr will
be attended to.
The dey has. demanded that the Ship [George] Washington should
carry the presents of the Regency to Constantionople, I have tryed
all in My power to evade this. but. I am affraid I shall be obliged to
give way to prevent extraorha difficulties
We shall want 400 yd"of h e C 0th of 4 Colours for our 2 y" present
in Sep*next it should be sent with speed

7

[NA. SDA.

CL, Algiers, Vol. 5, March-Dec. 1800.1

Extracts from log of U. S. 6. Goorge Washington, Captain William Bainbridge,
U. S. Navy, commanding
Saturday, 20 September 1800
Commences with Fresh Breezes and Fair weather poeple employed Washing
Cloathes &C
Discharged 2 Cables 16 Casks & 16 Quarter Casks of Powder
got down top Gallant Masts Ends pleasant
Monday, 3.9 September 1800
Commences Li h t winds and Fair. Discharged 8 Crates of Ware 14 bbl of
sugar 3 Boxes of fea 36 of GlasY 3 of China 31 of sugar 260 bags & 8 Large Casks
of Coffee Ends Moderate & Fair.
[H. E. Huntington L&AG.]

[23 September 1800j
Marine Force of Algiers

Statement of the Marine force of Algiers agreably to Cap$ Bainbridge's Letter of 23 Septr 1800.
Men
I*&American Frigate Crescent- - - - - - - - - - - - - - 34 guns, 9 & 6 pounders - - - - 306
2d Polacre Negro, Greek built - - - - - - - - - - - - - 24 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
240
3. Zebeck, Qrande Algerine built - - - - - - - - - - - 34. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
306
4.
5.

6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.
12.
13.
14.
15.

DQ 24
Algerine built - - - - - - - - - - - 30 ----------------------..
270
DQ 3
DQ
DO- , - - - -24
-. _
. . . . .. .. . .. . ._
.........
216
DQ 4
DQ
DP--------_-.._ 2 4 - - - - - - - _ - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 216
Brig Bmhaw, Phila* built _ - - - - - - - - _ _ - - - 22--6 pounders- - - - - - - _ - - - 196
Polacre Greek built . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
200
Schooner Skolderbrand Phila* built - - - - - - 20- -4 pounders.. - - - - - - - - - - 150
DP Lelah Erisha
Dc DQ- - - - - - - _ 18--3- - - - - - - - - - -130
---__DQ Hamderlah B a l t ~
DQ---_---- 1 0 - - 3 - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 70
100
Xebeck, Latine Sails Spanish built ------- 14. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
70
Small Cruiser------------__------------- l o - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - Do
DQ . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8-----------------------60
A row galley Latino sails - - , - - - -4. . ._
. . . .. . .. . ._
. . . .. . .. . ..
40

372

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1785 TO 1801

60 Gun & Mortar boats, carrying 18 & 24 Pounders.
A Frigate on the Stocks 44 guns, 12 pounders, 360 men. This
Frigate is a handsome & complete built shp.
Their commerce is about 200 coasters burthen 15 Tons - The
Turks, within the regency, are about 12,000, all of whom are Soldiers.
I t is supposed, they are able to raise 60,000 Militia Arabs. The
Treasury within the Walls of Algiers, is estimated worth 70 millions
of Dollars. [NA.

SDA.

CL, Algiers, Vol. 1, Part 11, Feb-Nov. 1796.1

Extracts from log of U. S, S, Caorgc Washington. Captain William Bainbridge,
U. 8. Navy, commanding
Tuesday, W September 1800
Commences pleasant
Discharged 13 HHd of sugar 38 boxes of sugar 7% bbl of Herring 15 Crates of
Ware 26 bbl of sugar 82 bags of Coffee 14 of pepper 6 Boxes of Cassia & 65 small
Boxes of China 1 bbl of Sal Almoniac Some hands employed painting the Ship
Ends pleasant
Wednesday, 24 September 1800
Commences pleasant with Light winds
Delivered 5 Bbl of Sugar 6 Boxes of DO9 Casks of Coffee 1 bag Do17 Oak plank
14 pine DO30 Maho any DO52 Do Boards 1 Inch 45 Do half Inch Walnut boards
I02 Walnut I Inch
6 planks of Do 2700 pipe staves 1 small Kigg dr 6 m a l l
Boxes for the Dey [H. E. Huntington L&AG.]

50

[25 September 18001
Protest of James Carpenter, Master, and Ebenezer Smith, Hate, of the American
Bderchant Brig Cderine of Mew York, captured by Tripolitan Polacre Tripolino

Know all Men by these Presents that before me James Leander
Cathcart Consul of the United States of America for the Kingdom &
Port of Tripoli personally appeared James Carpenter lMaster &
Ebenezer Smith Mate of the American Brig Catherine of Newyork
who being by me duly sworn did Depose & say - That they saild
in said Brig Catherine from the Port of New York on the 26" of July
last laden with Sugar Coffee Pimento Beef Logwood & Whalebone
bound for the Port of Leghorn that on the twenty fifth day of September last being about 7 or 8 Leagues south of the Island of Majorca
they were brought too by the Polacre Shi Tripolino of Eighteen Guns
of & belonging to Tripoli Commanded by aiz Amor Shelli who orderd
said Master on board with his papers went himself onboard and took
possession of said Brig took out of said Brig Cargo & Necessaries to
the Amount of above 200 dollars robbed the Master & Mariners &
said Master on board said Ship manned the said Brig Cathdeta-%& rought her into the Port of Tripoli where they arrived on
erine
the 15" ins! that on the 17" ins? the wind blowing heavy from the
North$ with a large swell the best bower Cable of said Brig parted &
said Brig & Cargo were exposed to great danger as with great difliculty
an Anchor was procured from the shore - That the said Brig
Catherine has been detained from proceeding to her destined Port &
both Vessel & Cargo have been & still continue subject to eat Loss
& Peril wherefore the said James Car enter for himself an in behalf
of his owners & all concern'd in sai Brig Catherine her Car o and
apparel does solemnly protest against the said Raie Amor ~ h &and
against the said Polacre Ship Tripolinoher tackle & a pare1 and against
the aid Owners and all concernd in said Ship for alf' damage that has

PC

2

B

PLAN OF THE

A- EMPEROR'S FORT
B - SHORE B A T T E R Y

FOWIFICATIONS OF ALGIERS

C - MOSQUC
D - N O R T H GATE.
E - POWDER MAGAZINE
F STRONG FORT

CIRCA 1816

-

G - OPEN STORAGE OF SHOT
H DITCH AROUND THE T O W N
I - STRONGLY FORTIFIED

-

M- DEY'SHOUSE
..
N MARKET P L A C E
0 WORKS AROUND THE MOLE
P LIGHTHOUSE FORT, SEPARATED
FROM MOLE BY NARROW BRIDGE
Q - STRONG BATTERY
R PIER FROM TOWN T O L1GHTHOUSE
S CAPT. OF THE PORT OR ADMIRALTY HOUSE

-

-

-

9

8

8

3L

1P

10

nf Y d .

.l&

1

100

PO0

=7

373

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

or may happen to said Brig Catherine her Cargo & apparel from said
detention reserving the Liberty of hereafter makmg any further
Protests that may be necessary on said Voyage -

*

*

*

*

*

*

*

Done at the Chancery of the United States of America in the City
of Tripoli in Barbary this 22* day of October in the Year of our Lord
one thousand eight hundred 1800 & in the 25'h year of the Independence of the United States of America.

0

Sign'd JAMESLEANDER
CATHCART

COPY

[SDA. CL, Tripoli, Vol. 1, Part 11, Jan. 1 8 W M a y 1801.1
Extracts from log of U. 6. 6. Gorge Wmhinglon, Captain William Bainbridge,
U. S. Navy, commanding
Thursday, 26 September 1800
Light winds & plessant. Discharged 37 Oak plank 11 pine DOand a Quantity
of Fustic - got up top Gallant masts - Ends moderate & Fair 2 Vessels a i l e d
for Gibralter - Ends pleasant Friday, 26 September 1800
Commences moderate gales and Fair got up a Quantity of Bread to sun - Unbent the sails to Black the Yards Discharged 43 Oak plank 1 pine Do 1922 pipe
staves - a Swedish Brigg arrived
Sunday, 98 September 1800
Commences Light winds & Fair Discharged 33 Boxes of Sugar 35 bbl of Fish
78 Casks of Coffee 2 Barrels of Cloves 6 Boxes of Tin 15 Casks of nails 34 Oak
plank a quantit of Fustick 1 Cask of Sal Almoniac Ends pleasant
Monday, 29 dptember 1800
Commences with Light Winds & pleasant Discharged a8 follows 119 Casks of
nails 12 Walnut plank 1 bbl of Flour 1663 pipe Staves. employed tarring the
Rigging &c Sail maker repairing the Sails took on board one Lighter of Ballast
Filled 6 Casks of Water Ends pleasant
Tuesday, SO September 1800
Light winds & Fair
Discharged 6 Casks of Coffee 4 Boxes of Sugar 1 Box of horn[?] one of Ising
glass 28 Boxes of Tin 35 bbl of Fish 6 Bundles of Nankeen took on board one Load
of Ballast Ends pleasant
[H. E. Huntington L&AG.]

[30 September 18001
Quasi-War, United States and France
[NOTE.--See terms of the treaty between United Statea and France; printed in
"Naval Documents, Quasi-War, United States and France", sixth volume (June
to November, 1800), pp. 393-409.1
Extracts from log of U. S. S. George Wwhingfon,. Captain William Bainbridge,
U. S. Navy, commsnhng
Wednesday, I Oetober 1800
Light winds & pleasant
Discharged 8 Cannon 16 Rammars 17 Tacles & 6 Bmchings took on board 2
lighters of Ballast Ends pleasant
Thursday, I October 1800
Freah Breezes & Fair weather employed in getting water & sand Ballast received
a present of 3 Oxen 9 sheep & several bags of Bread * * *
[H. E. Huntington L&AG.]

374

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1785 TO 1801
Oars for Algiers shipped in Sloop Amib

PORTBMOUTH
N. H. Octo. dth1800

INVOICE
of Oars for Algierene Service, shipped on board the Sloop
Amity, Moses Woodward, Master, for Philadelphia, by Thomas
Thompson, on the proper account & risk of the Untied States, consigned to [Israel] Wheelen, Esquire, Purveyor of Supplies there. Viz,
246 Spruce Oars. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

34 feet Long

7

160 Ash ditto . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

32 ditto

--

276 Ash.
246 Spruce.

-

522 Total.

Errors Excepted.
[Schuylkill Arsenal.]

[6 October 18001
To Captain William Bainbridge, U. 8. Navy, from Richard O'Brien, U. S. Consul
General, Algiers

SIR I n May last the Bashaw of Tripolia declared that if united
States did not give him an extra present, that he would no longer remain Satisfyed with the united states this circumstance has been
made known to The ambasador of the united states a t Lisbon by
Consuls Cathcart Euton and OBrien. and I am convinced that if The
Government of the United States does not send said Bashaw of
Tripolia a present before March next that the Corsairs of Tripolia will
have orders to send in all The americans the[y] meet and a pretence
will not be wanting to Condemn Vessels and Cargoes The minister of tho marines of Algiers declared to me a few day4
past in The name of The re ency. that if The united States did not send
forward Shortly The artic es as Commissioned for on the annuities.
that Algiers would not remain friends with The united states. that we
were much in arrears. and did not pay attention to our stipulations.
that this would be the last remonstrance of The regency on this
subject. - a t Tunis only one Cargo of our whole peace stipulation is
arrived and if The united states does not afford or attend strictly to
Theire Barbarry affairs - we shall experience The misfortunes and
s ilations which the deans and swedes has experienced This year a t
E
i
s and Tripolia and of which you are by me fully informed of and as explained in my official dispatch to The Secretary of State. -a t
Al 'ers 1%years in arrears in the annuities a t least 40 - or 50 th*Q
do ars in debt to Bacris and Busnachc under these considerations I
have to request of you Sir in The name of The u s that you will proceed
to the u s and that the government thereof. will be informed of the
critical and dangerous situation of theire affairs a t Algiers Tunis and
Tripolia And as The Portugees is trying to Obtain a peace with Algiers as
TheIy] have setled their trestie a t Tripolia and a truce a t Tunis The

7

f?

375

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

peace of portugal with this regency would be an inducement to this
regency to make war with the united states - as there would not be a
pretence wanting on acct of our arrears. and that there would be no
maratime power a t war with Algiers which would prevent the Corsairs
of Alg" frequenting the western Ocean as the[y] did in 1785 and 1793
Then Sir what would be the fatal Consequence and Alarm to The
united States
ALGIERS
October The 61" 1800
WILLIAM
BAINBRID~E
Esq' Commander of The
United States Ship G Washington of 32 Guns
in The port of Algiers [NA. SDA.

CL, Algiers, Vol. 5, March-Dee. 1800.1

To gichard O'Brien, U. S. Consul Qeneral, Algiers, from Captain William
Bainbridge, U. 6. Ravy
ALGIERS
9 Od. 1800
NQ4

SIR I have r e d your letter of this day stating the arbitrary demand
of the Dey of Algiers As this business was in agitation some days past my orders then
being made known to the despotic dey & every possible argument
made use of both by you & my self pointing out the impossibility of
such a Compliance on our part, those reasons stated to him, & the
arrival of a British 24 Gun ship, who has offered to carry his ambassador & presents I was in hopes woud have releived Me from the truly
unpleasant situation I h d myself in Bound by the orders of my government on one hand & viewing ~e
loss of property & slavery of our Citizens on the other brings me in a
delemma, that none can express but those who feels i t I now reply as I have verbally done to you that I cannot accede to
this demand voluntarily, your long experience of the governm? of
this regency leaves you a more competent judge than I possibly can [be]
of the event that woud occur if the ship under my Command did not
proceed as demanded, you will be pleased to state your o inion fully &
make the requisition in behalf of the U. S. for the compP,'ance of said
demand - Sir I cannot help observing that the event of this day
UNITEDSTATESmakes me ponder on the words INDEPENDANT
[ N A . SDA. CL, Algiers, Vol. 5, March-Dec. 1800.)
-

-

To Captain William Bainbridge, U. S. Navy, from Richard O'Brien, U. S. Consul
Genera, Algiers

NQ2

ALG?the St+ of October 1800
SIR Your letter directed to me of this date f have received and well
considered its Contents and shall observe Sir that from the day the
U. S. Ship under your Command arrived in this port & to this day.
It has been generally suposed that the regency would insist that The
Ship under your Command should proceed to the Levrrnt on the business or Mission of this regency On the 18F ultimo. when you went with me to pay your res ects to
the de after a little Algerine Ceremonie The dey said he wo d want
this Stip as a favour from the U S to Carry his Ambasador and
presents to Constantionople and return on the business to Algiers I
observed to the dey that. you the Captain or I the Consul had no o r d m
or powers which in m y respects would Justify us in cbcqukdmg to his

9

376

NAVAI; OPERATIONS FROM 1786 TO 1801

demand. that without the orders of the U S. we could not do any
such thing. that we haveing no orders we could make no responsibility that. you could not. protect his property against the Portugeese
or Neapolitans. that your orders was to return to the United States
and you could only defend your ship against french Corsairs - agreeable to the orders of your government. That. the dey did not seem
satisfy'd with these explanations That shortly after I repeated nearly
The Same objections on this business. to the Algerine Prime minister
On the 26''' Ultimo The dey sent for me and the British Consul. and
asked me if I was still determined. not to acquise in Makeing responsibility & Carrying his Ambasador & Presents. I again repeated. all
the arguments. which I made Use of on the 18''' Ultimo & added as
this Vessel was a government One $9 we haveing no fixed Peace or
treatie with the Italian States or with The Grand Signior that this
Ship of the U S & Crew would. be in a Very singular Prediciament. in
going to Constantionople on the business. of the Regency we haveing
no Ambasador or Consul at these places. The dey Ans* Pasionatly
that these were all excuses that other nations had rendered Algiers the
like favours. but that if The British Consul. would promise faithfully
that a British Ship of war would come and go to the levant on this
Mission That under this Consideration he would. let the american
Ship return to her Count . The British Consul John Falcons Esqr
promised and assured the ey. in My presence that as Lord Keith had
promised to Send a ship of war on this business that. said Ship might
be daily expected. The dey observed he would wait A few dayes.
before he would fully determine. to See if The British Ship would
anive The dey. remained undetermined until the 3q ins: when
arrived at Algiers from Mahon a British Ship of war of 24 Guns. Sent
by the orders of Lord Keith intentionally to Carry the ambassdor
and presents of Algiers to Constantionople - This business Seemed
finished & Setled. in order that the British Shi of war would proceed
on the business. but from the 4''' ins5 to this ate. The dey Ministry
& Sundry Persons of influence. started Many difliculties relative to
the Mission of the regency going in the British Ship and finally
Objected. to go - when this Morning the dey Came to town from hls
Country Seat, and at. 10 A M Sent for me. and told me without Any
alternative. That the U S Ship Should do him The favour to Carry his
Ambasador & presents to Constantionople. that if this favour or
demand was not Complyed with, that he no longer holds to his friendship with the united States, On My declareing that the[y] I or the
Captain of The U S. Ship had no orders. and Could not Justify, ourselves to our government to, acquise. The dey got Very angry and
declared that. he considered every thing we did say or Could say - to
be excuses. not to do him The favour he required - and that if This
favour was not acquised to. he Knew. what to do. that other nations
frequently did it. and he Could see no reason or Motive which should
prevent me, on the part of the United States acquiseing to This
request, I again repeated to the dey that I, or the Captain could make
no responsibility on the part of the U S - That we Could not think
his property Safe under the American flag from. The Capture of his
Enemies - That the Ship Sailed DzlU or heavy - that it was war
time. a thousand Wculties would happen. The dey hastily observed
that Qbd was great. That. all was on his head. that all diilticulties
would be surmounted. I again declared that. I or the Captain had no
orders. which would in any respects Justify ourselves. to acquise -

7

i)

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

377

The dey said he would Justify Us & that the Ship Should go perforce,
and that we had no alternative but to do him this favour. that his
Mind & his Ministry? was Soured against the British. and on this acc;
rejected the British ship - And that On this account. he would
insist that this request should. be acquised to The dey said he would send his Bag to the marine to be hoisted a t
the mast head of The american Ship. I answered that I was Very
sorrow on account of his determination & withdrew - went and
explained to the prime Minister all that had pased or was said on this
business - between the dey and me. The Prime Minister Observed.
that the deyg mind was so positively fixed & determined on this affair
that there would be no alternative but to Comply - to prevent
greater evils. reminding me of Severd Precipitat acts of this regency.
to the Consuls of other Nations, & theire affairs - that, he had tryed
to prevent the dey from Sending the American Ship, that it had no
Effect.
At Meridian or 12 OClock. you and I were Sent for to the Marine where we made use of dl those arguments. wbich is heretofore detailed
That the General of the Marine. declared. that there was no Alternative but to Comply - after our retireing 112 an hour The general of
The Marine sent to the Consular house to acquaint you and me that
it was the deyr orders. that the flag of A& Should be hoisted to the
MP top GI! Mast head of the american Ship - That we answered.
that all was perforce that we were in theire power. and the regency of
course. might do as the[y] had A m i d - Shortly after. we determined, to see the dey. and Sent the American Drogerman to acquaint
the dey That the Consul of The U S. & Comidant of The U S. Ship
demanded an audience at 2 P M we. were in the presence of the
dey and Stated aU those difficulties and all our former Objections
(no orders no responsibility) could be made. The dey Observed. that
there was no alternative but to Comply that in doing him this favour
that. he would never forget it on the part of the US. and that when
he did *God would forget him. that he would write the government of
the U S on this business. of his rnalieing this demand and assured
Captain Bainbridge & Me that. the U S would be highly pleased at the
Agreeconduct of the Consul & Captain in obligeing The dey &
able to the request he made to us. in the name of our Country - we
Observed to the dey that this was a forced business. that under tbis
Idea. and for The Safety of his presents, i t would be better that his
flag should be hoisted a t the fore T. G. M. hq then the Main - the dey
declared that he did not well know on this business. but that Those at
the Marine knew the Custom he belived at the main - On this we
went to the Marine. told the General of Marine. that if This U S.
Ship should hall down her Pendant & hoist the algerine flag at The
Main. that. said ship agreeable to our laws was out of Commission
and would not be Considered as a Public Ship of the U S - that the
Algerine flag would. be the same thing a t the fore as a t the main
but to U S it made a great difference that by Christian laws the Ship
would be considered as an Algerine property & not as a Ship of The
U S - that we made this remonstrance & Observation to prevent
difficulties on this explanation the General of the Marine got into a
great pasion - Swore the proposition & Idea we made. was evasive
that the ships of war of Spazn & jrance & other nations, had acquised
to hoist the erine flag a t the main, that it was by the flag being
hoisted there at the Misim was Known and a n m o u d at Algiers

%

378

NA'C7AL OPERATIONS FROM 1785 TO 1801

and Consfantionople - I explained to. Captain Bainbridge that it
was the custom as I have seen & known that the french & spanish
ships of war. going on the Like Mision. hoisted, at Algiers. & Constantionople The Algerine turk flag at the Main. that at Sea he wore
his Pendant & was. his own Master. Captain Bainbridge Observed.
it being a forced business that. if he had a right to acquise to one point.
that there was no alternative & by the Same rule to acquise to the
other. The General of the Marine & Officers of Ditto. said that.
if there was not a compliance. on this business agreeable to Customf
of all Nations. heretofore, that there no longer existed friendship
between This regency & the United States. I observed that I was
Sorrow that the U S. had so Much reason to know Algiers and that
Algiers had no reason to Know the UNITEDSTATES.
Went on board. The turk flag, was hoisted a t the Main of The
U S Ship - and was Saluted with 7 Guns As Cwtornary
Painful is the detail but it is a narrative of facts.
*That his Ambassador at Constantionople. would do. you every
requisite Service and d o r d you every Supply &"
[NA. SDA.

CL, Algiers, Vol. 5, March-Dec. 1800.1

Extract from log of U. S. 8. George W(uhin#ton Captain William Bainbridge,
U. S. Bavy, commanding, Thursday, 0 October 1800
commences with Light winds and Fair weather This day we were big with
Expectation of returning to the Land of Liberty - had every thing prepared
for the voyage. a t this Instant of Anticipated pleasure we receive a pos[i]tive
command from a Dispoctic Dey of Algiers that we must be the porters of savage
Tygers & more Savage Algerines Ambassadors in Compliment to the Grand
Seignior a t Constantinople. A t 2 P M the Capt. Consul & the Deys executive
Juncto [Junta] came on board. the pendant of the United States was struck and
the Algerine Flag hoisted a t the Main top Gallant royal mast head. 7 guns were
fired in compliment. some tears fell a t this Instance of national Humility the
Compliment waa answered from the Castle. sailed a French armed Ketch
[H. E. Huntington L&AG.]

To Secretary of the Bavy from Captain William Bainbridge, U. S. Navy

ALGIERS,
10th Oct. 1800.
SIR, I wrote you on the 25th ult. informing that the arbitrary
Dey of Algiers had made a demand, that the United States ship
George Washington under my command, should carry his presents to
the Grand Signior at Constantino le.
By my letter of the 25th you d s e e the responsibility this Regency
considers the United States at on this embassy, although forced into
it by the power of the Regency. Every effort that was possible to
suggest, has been attempted by Consul O'Brien and myself to obviate
my going.
An English ship of war arrived here and offered to ca
the embassy ; but her they wollld not accept, supposing they woul be under
some obligations to the British.
The light that this Regency looks on the United States is exactly
this: you pay me tribute, by that you become my slaves, and them
I have a right to order as I please. Did the United States know the
easy access of this barbarous coast called Barba , the weakness of
thelr garrisons, and the effeminacy of their peop e, I am sure they
would not be long tributary to so pitiful a race of infidels.
Inclosed you have the letter of Richard O'Brien, Esq. Consul
General, of the 9th of October, to me on the business of this embassy;

"B

7

WARS WITH BARBARY POWEES

379

my answer, and fiis reply, by which you will see that I have no choice
in acting, but am governed by the tyrosts here.
Consul O'Brien and myself had a very warm dispute with the Dey
and Minister of Marine, (which was very near causing a declaration
of war) respecting hoisting the mission flag; the Consul and myself
insisted that if the Dev forced us to go, to wear our own flags, or if i t
was meant as a compliment to the Minister of Marine to hoist it a t
the fore-topmast head; but no arguments would avail, their despotic
will must be complied with: the Minister of Marine, came on board
with his admiral, and several Algerine captains, who went into the
main-top, and hauled down the American pennant, and hoisted
the Algerine mission flag.
Had we 10 or 12 frigates and sloops in those seas, I am well convinced in my own mind that we should not experience those mortifying degradations that must be cutting to every American who possesses
an independent spirit.
This forced crulse compelled by the Dey, will cost 14 or 16 thor~sand
dollars in expenses for pay and provisions, and after effected will
have no tendency to promote the interest of the United States with
this Regency; it is not in the nature of those people to regard any
favors done to them by a Christian nation.
I hope Sir, you will consider the very unpieasant situation that I
was fixed in, having no alternative but compliance or war,-the fears
of slavery for myself and 131 under my command, was the least
alarming to me; but a valuable commerce in those seas, that would
fall a sacrifice to the pirates of this port on account of our not having
cruisers ad'rrcent to protect it.
I sincerdy hope on my return from the Levant that I shall see some
of our frigates off Algiers; it is my candid opinion that in no part of
the world there is more need to shew them than in the Mediterranean
sea.
It is the opinion of Consul O'Brien, should any accident happen to
the Washington, against the interest of Algiers, by whatever cause it
may be, the Algerine cruisers will immediately capture our vessels,
unless they are prevented by our cruisers being in these seas. I
candidly believe, on the safety of the embassy in the ship under my
command, hangs the preservation of our peace with Barbary.
WM. BAINBRIDGE.
Hon. BENJAMIN
STODDART,
Secretary of Navy.
[LC."Poulrton's American Daily Adv." (Phila.), 25 April 1801.1

[lo October 18001
To William Smith, U. S. Minister to Lisbon, Portugal, from Captain WilIiam
Bainbridge, U. S. Navy

SIR from the Reasons that are stated on the Situation of the United
States El$&irs with this Regency. and the singular prftdicament that
I h d myself in I see no Alternative] but my going, m t h the Ambassador and Presents,
WmBAINBRIDGE
W* SMITH
Es
Minister lenipotentiary
for the Unded S r d e s Lisbon
(NA. SDA. CL,Algiers, Vol. 5, March-Dec. 1800.1

$

380

NAVAjl; OPERATIONS FROM 1786 TO 1801

To Captain William Bainbridge, U. S. Navy, from Richard O'Brien, U. 6. Comnl
General, Algiere

ALG'?T ~ lo'?
M of October 1800
SIR I have Stated to you a narrative of facts. relative to the dey
and regency demanding. perforce that The U S. Ship George Washingbm
under your Command in the port. (and in the power. of a faahless
people) - Should proceed to Constantionople with the Ambasador
and presents of This regency and return to Algiers.
The Consequence of a positive rqfissal would be war made immediatly
by This regency on the United States. the S h p under your Command
would be detained. and detention & Slavery would be the fate of
yourself officers and crew The Vessels property and Citizens of The
united States would be Captured & Condemned in this City of bondage. The innocent would Suffer - not for the guilty, but for those
that had no orders to Act to preveni this Calamity. but of Viewing
The evih Chuse the least. by acquising to the forced demand by Sir
proceeding with the ship under your Command to Constantionople
with the Ambasador & presents of Algiers. & returning. you will
first extricate yourself officers Crew and ship of [from] Algiers. you
will by This Means Save the Peace of The United States. it is what
all other nations at peace with this regency. has done a t times as s
favour to Algiers. and is what Occasionally must be done by those
that intends to keep theire Pence. i t is Customary & Circumstanced
as the United States is, at resent. in Arrears. in debt no funds $9 in
fact no Credit. there is no afternative in My opinion but to Acquise and, in So doing, I am convinced you are (considering d difficulties)
acting for the best. for the present interests of the United States
I shall observe to you Sir that. The U S. made theire peace in Sept.
1795 - that The Regency got impatient on acct of the Cash stipulations not comeing forward a t this time Mr Bmlow & Donddson
thought proper without orders to Stipulate a 34 Gun frigate to preserve our affairs. The government of The U S ap roved their
e U S. had
Conduct and made good The stipulation. a t this time
not paid the Cash for the peace. or had not Sent f o n d The Stores
Stipulated, it is true our Citizens 100 were as yet in Algiers but the
number is greater a t present in the power of a despotic government
bound by no treatie or equity. dumb to reason and fully deterrmned
to renounce his friendship with the United States under all these
Circumstances. and evils which should happen in Case of a positive
refusal to the demand of the dey & Regency I have to demand of you
in the name of The U S, that you will consider thespurport of this
letter. and I think you will see the necessity of acqulseing to do-the
forced favour required of you & hCby The dey & regency of Algiers.

NQ3

-

&

SEAL.

Witness my hand & Seal of office
a t Algiers The 10Y of October 1800
RICH^ OBRIEN

[NA. SDA. CL, Algiers, Vol. 5, March-Dec. 1W.I

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

381

Bxtracte from log of 0. 6. 6. Gorge Washington. Cap& William Bainbridge,
U. S. Navy, commanding
Friday, 10 Odober 1800
Begina dark & Gloomy. early the GovermentaI Pontoon came along side for
the Ballsst Broke up the Hole delivered one Load of Ballast. the Termigant
Sloop of War sailed
Saturday, 11 Odober 1800
moderate weather & Cloudy employed fitting our Decks for the Wild Beasts 2 Swedish Bri ga arrived
Sunday, I I 8ctober 1800
employed Discharging balast Carpenter employed putting up partitions for the
pmngera
Took on Board 7 Cannon
Monday, 13 October 1800
Light winds dc Fair weather took on board 33 Cannon & some Baggage
Ticeaday, 14 Odober 1800
Fresh gales & Cloudy weather employed in Taking in water. Trunks &C
Ends DQweather
[H.E. Huntington L&AG.I
Extract from a letter from an officer on board the U. 6 . S. George Wushington,
Captain WilIiam Bsinbridge, U. 6. Navy commanding

ALGIERS,
October 14, 1800.
"I am sorry to inform you, that we are to set sail ffom hence

to-morrow, for Constantinople, which wiil of course detam us from
our country a t least nine months.-We are going to carry presents
from the Dey of &ers to the Grand Seignior. We are to take
with us 20 gentlemen, 100 negro Turks, 60 Turkish women, 2 lions,
2 tygers, 4 horses, 200 sheep, besides jewels and money. The Dey
ins&,ed on our going; and we had only to choose between compliance
and slavery. They have hoisted the red Jlag at our maintop gallantmast head."
It is said that our Consul had to enter into a security on the art
of the United States of 800,000 dollars, for the safe dellvery a t A n stantinople, of the cargo of the George Wmhingdon.
[LC. "Poulaon's Daily Adv." (Phila.), 20 December 1800.1

117 October 18001
Paasport for the U. 6. Ship

George Washington. signed by Richard O'Brien, U. 6.
Consul General, Algiers

By Richard OBI-ien agent and Consul General of The United States
of America for the city and Kingdom of Algiers - to all to whom
these presents shall come
h o w ye that. The united States Ship The George Washington of
32 Guns William Bainbridge Esqr Commander departs this day from
the port of Algiers - destined for Constantionople on the service
and affairsof the united States & Algiers - haveing on board as passengers The ambasador. and his Suit. of his highness - The dey
of Algiers - & sundry blackmen women and children - m d presents
of this regency for the Sublime port and I pray all Kings princes Governors - and Commanders. and all persons whatsoever. to allow The
said United States Ship The George Washington. and her Equipage and
all pasengers &q on board The said ship freely to pass without hindrance or Molestation. and to grant. them assistance. in Case of need
as those of My Nation would do in like Cases

382

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1786 TO 1801

Given under my hand and Seal of Office of The United States of
America a t Algiers This 17" day of October 1800
(Sed of The Consulate of The United States a t Alp)
RICH*OBRIEN
[NA. SDA. CL, Algiern, Vol. 5, March-Dee. 1800.1

To Charlea Lee, Secretary of State Pro tempo?, from James L, Csthcsrt, U. 6.
Consul, Tripoh
TRIPOLI
IN BAR?Ocfr 18th 1800

CHARLES
LEE Esq?
Secretary of State Protempore
SIRGive me leave to inform you that on the 15'5 ins* arrived a
Tripline Cruiser of 18 Guns commanded by Raiz Amor Shelli in
company with the brig Catharine James Carpenter Master belonging
to Minturn & Champlin of & from New York with a cargo of Sugar
Coffee Pimento Beef Whalebone & Logwood valued at 50,000 dollars
bound to Leghorn which was clear'd the same day after a great deal
of trouble &z had permission to sail the first fair wind - On the
evening of the same day Ciddi Mohammed Daguize who a t present
acts as Minister of Forelgn Affairs, sent for me, and inform'd me that
the Bashaw desired him to let me know that he had deliver'd up this
vessel & cargo in consequence of his having wrote to the President of
the United States that he would wait his answer before he would take
any measures whatever against the U S as he was in great expectation that the President would prefer giving h i a sti ulated sum
annually to making him arbitrary resents which probab y would not
content him & the President wo d not be able to determine what
sum would be necessary to maintain our Peace - I answer'd that
the Bashaw having now a valuable prize within his grasp was in my
opinion a very improper tima for Negotiation as an Agent leas acquainted with the Barbary States would probably be intimidated to
act in a manner very unjustifiable & to make agreements which would
never be rhtified by the government under whom he acts; that nevertheless I found it my duty to request him to inform the Bashaw, that
if be had form'd the most distant ides that ever the government of
the U S would pay him an annuity he might erase i t from his memory,
for that not only the President & government of the U S but the meanest of our Citizens would expend their last dollar and lose their last
drop of blood before they would consent to become tributary to the
Regency of Tripoli; That I would wait upon his Excel? in the morning & inform him verbally what I had now requested him to communicate in my name; we discoursed for above two hours during
which time the purport of my dispatches of lwt May was discuss'd
and produced the same effect as I absolutely refused to enter into any
negoclation whatever untill I receiv'd the Presidents answer to the
Bashaws letter accompanied with fresh instructions On the 16thI waited on the Bashawnincompany with Capt"arpenter to demand satisfaction for the Insult our flag had suffer'd in
having one of our vessels brought in here without any visible cause
her papers & passport being in perfect order & likewise to demand
restitution of property plunder'd from the brig, "The Bashaw answer'd
that he had not given any orders to th.6 Raiz. to bring @ American
vessels that he had broke him & disrmss'd hun from his service &
then gave orders to the Minister of the Marine to have overy arficle
that was plunder'd from the Brig return'd -

3

P

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS
The Bashaw then commenced thus! Consul their is no Nation I
wish lpore to be a t Peace with than yours: but all Nations pay me &
so must the Americans; I answer'd we have already paid you all we
owe you & are nothing in arrears, He answerd that for the Peace we
had paid him it was true, but to maintain the Peace we had given
him nothing, I obse1-v'd trhat the terms of our Treaty were to pay
him the stipulated stores cash &t in full of all demands for ever BE
then repeated nearly to the same effect as is contain'd in my dispatch
of the 12''' of M a y which to avoid repition I forbear inserting The Bashaw then observ'd that we had given a great deal to Algiers
& Tunis & that the Portu uese Captain had inform'd him that when
he pass'd Algiers the midd e of last month that he had seen an American Frigate m the Bay which he supposed had brought more presents
to the Dey; why do they ne lect me in their donations, let them give
me a stipulated sum annua y & I will be reasonable as to the ammount - In answer to the first I replied that it was true that one
of our Frigates was a t Algiers being one of a Squadron of three 44
Gun ships & some smaller vessels which were appointed to protect
our commerce in the Mediterranean, but whether they had presents
on board for the Regency of Algiers or not I could not inform him,
that some of them would have been a t Tripoli before now had I nof
inform'd them that they had better stay away untill the spring
upon acct of the badness of this road which renders i t very unsafe
a t this season" And in answer to his proposal of an annuity I replied
with some warmth exactly what I had requested Daguize to inform
him of in my name yesterday evening - Well then replied the
Bashaw let your government give me a sum of money & I will be
content - but paid I will be one way or other, "I now desire you to
inform your government that I will wait Six months for an Answer
to my letter to the President, that if i t does not arrive in that period
and ~f i t was not satisfactory if i t did arrive "tbat I will declare war
in form against the United States, inform your government said
he how I have serv'd the Sweeds who concluded their treaty since
yours let them know that the French English & Spanish have always
sent me presents from time to time to preserve their Peace & that
if they do not do the same I will order my Cruisers to bring their vessels
in whenever they can find them, he then turn'd to Daguize and told
him to explain to Captcq Carpenter what he had inform'd me (they
both speaking french) and added that he did not wish to make it a
private affair between the Consul and him and desired him to make
it publick as be wish'd the whole world to know it. He then told
Daguize to tell the Ca
that he hoped the United States would
neglect him as six or ei&t vessels of the value of his would ammount
to a much larger sum than ever he expected to get from the United
States for remaining a t Peace; besides says he I have a great desire
to have some Captains like you here to learn me to speak english I answer'd that it was absolutely impossible for to receive answers
to the letters which he desired me to write by CapQ Carpenter in six
months as it would be nearly that time before he would get home
upon acct of the winter Season & tbat I expected his Excellency
would wait untill the answers arrived let that period be long or short
& observ'd that none but those who held a correspondence with the
devil could determine whether he would be content with the Presidents
answer or not as neither the President nor myself knew what would
content him I therefore requested him to inform me explicitly what

7

B

3%

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1785 TO 1801

was his expectations To the first he answer'd I will not only wait
for answers from your President but I will now detain the Brig &
write to him again; but I expect when he sends his answers that the[y]
will be such as will empower you to conclude with me immediately if
they are not I will capture your vessels - And as you have frequently inform'd me that your instructions does not authorize you
to give me a dollar I will therefore not inform you what I expect
untdl you are empower'd to negociate with me; but you may inform
your President that if he is disposed to pay me for my friendship I
will be moderate in my demands.
The Bashaw then rose from his seat & went out of the room leaving
me to make what comment I thought proper upon his extraordinary
conduct.
On the 17" Ciddi Mohammed Daguize sent for me & inform'd
me that the Bashaw had changed his mind & will not write to the
President as he says he has wrote already and that i t is not compatible
with his honor & dignity (which the Lord confound) to write again
before he receiv's an answer to his last The Brig having arted one of her cables in a gale of wind I had a
great deal of troub e to procure her an Anchor in the height of the
gale I was obliged to carry i t on board myself a t nine oClock a t night
and being very anxious for her departure will only take time to
observe that if the Presidents answer t.o the Bashaw and my instructions are not accompanied by two of our largest Frigates I probably
may be reduced to the humibating necessity of agreeing to terms vfry
repugnant to my feelings in order to prevent our Citizens from belng
brought into a captivity the horrors of which is easier to imagine
than describe If on the contra.ry a force sufficient is sent to enable us to act
with energy and to repel the Bashaws unjust claims with the indignation they merit our flag will in future be as much respected as the
British & French are if not we will be continually exposed to the
unwarrantable depredations of these Pirates whose insolence is incorrigible & who values existing treaty's no longer than the[y] are subservient to their interests This is the period that our national character ought to be establish'd with t h s Regency a well timed energy will without doubt
intimidate both the rest Bashaw & his successors from daring to
insult our Flag -whge too gre8t.a condescension will seem to indicate
that he may commit depredat~onsupon our commerce with impunity Whatever manner the wisdom of government adopts to settle this
affair i t is absolutely necessary to make the greatest dispatch & I
request that m instructions may be as explicit as the nature of the
oegociation d a d m i t -

P

*

*

*

*

*

*

*

[SDA. CL, Tripoli, Vol. 1, Part 11, Jan. 1800-May 1801.1
To William Eaton, U. S. Consul, Tunis, from Bichard O'Brien, U.8. Consul General,
Algiers

ALGIERS
the 19'h of October 1800
SIR I wrote you & forwarded you letters announceing the arrival of
'ere the 17q Sept. on the 9q Inst said
the [George] Watthingtm a t
Ship was ready for Sea & wo d sail on the 10') for the U. S. but the

y

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

385

dey. in a great fury declared to me that if mid Ship did not proceed
with his ambasador & regalia for Constantinople that he no longer held
to his friendship with the U. S. we had no alternative but to acquise
lacquiesce] or war would be the result and I a m Convinced Detention
to the Ship & Crew, besides every other loss, from a sudden surprize.
It is a forced business - the Ship is under Sail & is to return here god
b o w s when I supose in 5 months - I would make no responrribihty,
but Sir if any accident happens depend on the $rst news Said Potent
dey will send out his Corsairs - and take all Americans in order to
repay himself -.
The ship is the Peace of the U S with Alg" - I
have ha.d a Severe Squall
On the 14*b Ins* arrived the Ship Brmtw cap$ Brown from Livorn
in 10 dayes - The dey will insist said Ship will proceed to Rhodes to
Bring him a Cargo of Turks - Observe said Ship has 1056 Cases of
Oyle & Soap on board - The dey told me that if Said Ship did not
go he would oblige her per force - no pay no Consideration for the
Cargo - nothing to be Considered but the dey? own Despotic will I expect a Successor in the next vessel & the U S. will give the outfit
to me if I will ask it the 2 d time 1 am too heart sick & tired of Barbary
to be tern ted to stay any longer even the out fit should be - 20
ThousWo lars - at least af tor the Washingtonreturns I s h d certainly
leave this Country whether the U S sends a Consul or not
Crew of the Wehington. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ambasador & smt- ,- - --- - - - - - - - - - -. - - - _ - - - - - - - - - negro men women & children- _ - - - - _ - - - - - - - - - - - - - -100
4 horses 150 Sheep 25 horned Cattle. 4 lions 4 tygare. 4 antilopes
12 Pmets. funds & Regalia Amt. nearly one d o n of dol!"
have
Sir, 6 weeks past been very sickly. The child has been twice Very
unwell, and in fact never more imtated than I have been. We want
6 frigates in this Sea. to wait the event of the Washington making the
voyage Safe or not.
I wrote you a few lines yesterday & inclosed to you a letter from
Capt. Bainbridge - I hope you hare the Anna Ma& with you to
Condole you. The British 24 Gun Ship was rejected being small &
would not return to AT,ar9 There number is as yet 250 in Slavery.
Theb] haveing Malta I think will m&e them att.end faBarbary
- Yr letter for the Swede and dian I delivered to them I procured a loan of 8 tho'! dollars from the Regency for the U7ashington, as funds for Stumbul

P

[SDA. CL, Tunis, Vol. 1, 1791-1800.1

119 October 18001
Account of William Brown, commanding the ship Brutw, concerning the voyage
to Constantinople, of the U. S. S. George Washington,, Cap& William Bainbridge, U. S. Bnvy, commanding. Mao dlgerine Spobetions

SALEM,
Dec. 11.
On Thursday arrived a t this port, the shi Brutw, William Brown,
commander, in 34 days from Gibraltm, and orty from Algiers. Cspt.
Brown informs - that the United States frigate George Washington,
capt. Bainbridge, sailed for Constantinople the 19th October, having
on board the Ageripe general of marine, and suite, with presents, kc,
for the Grand Seigmor. The Dey of Algiers by force cmpeUed captain

P

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1 785 TO 1801

386

Bainbridge to perform this service, and threatened in case of refusal
war to the United States, and slavery to the officers and crew of the
George U-ushingtm. The Dey also ins'ited, that the ship Brutus
captain Brown, should unlade and go t o the isle of Rhodes, for a cargo
of Turks - no pay or freight to be dowed - but the voyage to be
considered as a favor granted b the United States. Through the
influence of the American ~ o n s Mr.
d O'Brien, and the ship's being
private property, and having a perishable cargo on board, she was
excused from this service. Captain B. embraced this favorable moment, fearing a further requisition, and quit Algiers, October 25.
Capt. B. brought dispatches to the Secretary of State, containing the
particulars of this extraordinary affair. Mr. O'Brien, the Consul,
and capt. Bainbridge had remonstrated, but were obliged to comply,
to prevent a more serious difficulty. Two days out from Algiers,
captain Brown was brought to by the British brig Carmelia; the Lieutenant of which informed that she was bound for Egypt, with &patches from Lord Keith; and that his lordship, with the fleet and
transports under his command, was destined for Egypt. On arriving
at Gibraltar no one was permitted to land from the B&u.s, because
she was from the Barbary coast - but an American, a resident there,
came along side, and informed, That the French marched into Leghorn
on the 10th of October, agreeably to the stipulation of the treaty with
the Emperor; that the inhabitants were much exasperated a t the
measure, and that i t had excited considerable commotion in that
unfortunate city.
The day the BWus arrived at Gibraltar, an American ship, owned
by Murray and Mumford, of New York, sailed, and was captured
by some Spanish gun boats in a few hours - she had previously been
boarded by the same boats, and cautioned against entering Gibraltar,
it being declared in a state of blockade by hls catholic majesty. She
however did enter and sell her cargo of flour; she was carried to Algesiras, and would probably be condemned. The gentleman also
informed, that the plague a t Cadiz continued its ravages, and that i t
had spread into the interior of Spain; that i t was at Malaga; and that
in consequence the English at Gibraltar were very strict in their quaran tine regulations.
The next day captah B, took advantage of the convoy of two frigates, which had under their protection 38 transports, most of them
full of troops, bound for Lisbon - before they got through the Gut,
a westerly wind s p m g up, which obliged the whole fleet to put into
the ba of Tutean, on the Barbary coast - found there, seven sail
of the h e , and 46 transports with more troops. Next day was joined
by Lord Keith, with four more sail of the line, and a number of frigates.
The fleet all that day and night were busily employed in watering,
not b e i i able to procure a supply at Gibraltar owing to the dry season,
Next day sailed with part of the fleet for Lisbon, leaving Lord Keith
with the residue, and most all the troops, a t Tutean Bay, from whence
it was conjectured that he was to sail for Egypt.
Captain Brown left
the fleet that night.
While at Algiers capt. B. procured the following information:
Skdch of Algerine Spoliations fm the last two years.
27 Sail Neapolitans, Sicilians and Maltese, having British Passports
from Lord Keith; vessels and cargoes condemned; crews, 215 condemned to slavery, claimed by the English, and not given up.

3

- -

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS
--

-

387

--

17 Sail of Greeks - vessels, cargoes and crews condemned - the
Greeks employed as Slaves, and after a service of 15 months given up
to the Grand S e i o r .
18 Sail of Imperialists, valued at one million of dollars - vessels
and cargoes condemned - crews given up to the Grand Seignior.
At Tunis,they have taken 11 Danish vessels, valued a t six hundred
thousand dollars.
At TripoIi they have captured 24 sail of S w e d ~ .
A Danish frigate by mistake chased an Algerine Corsair ashore near
Tunis - for which the Danish Government will have to pay to t.he
Dey Eighty Thousand and to his Ministers Twenty Thousand dollars!
Three hundred and sixty-eight Frenchmen were made slaves in
July last a t Algiers, but were released a t the conclusion of the Peace
with France.
The Spanish Consul was 35 days in chains on account of the French
taking the brig Barshaw. Spain returned the brig and crew to Algiers,
accompanied with resents to the amount of 60,000 dollars - which
released the poor 8onsul
Look out! United st%& of America! or you will share the fate of the
Swedes a t Tripoli: - the Danes a t Tunis - and of many other Nations at Algiers.
The United States should immediately have six stout frigates in
the Mediterranean, to keep Roguers in awe. Should any accident happen to the George Washington, in her passage to or from Constantinople
the government of the U. States will be obliged to reimburse the Dey
all damages he may sustain thereby, or his most Potent Majesty
will order his corsairs to c a ~ t u r eAmerican vessels.
Among the presents seni to the Grand Seignor were one hundred
black slaves, 50 of them females -lyons, tygers, leopards, ostritches,
kc. &c. valued a t several millions of dollars. Captain Bainbridge was
obliged to hoist the Standard of Algiers a t his main-top-gallant-mastheast, instead of the American Pendant!
Tbe George Washington sailed on the 19th of October, upon her new
voyage, and may return to this country possibly in Jd next. She
had carried out to the dlgerine Government large suppges of stares,
which were received on acco~mtof the annual stipulated payments
from the United States. The English had offered a frigate for this
purpose, but the Dey did not like to trust them, for fear they would
secure the treasure to themselves, as there had been a serious misunderstanding with them. - Several Danish vessels were forcibly
taken into possession, and ordered for the Isle of Rbodes upon a simlar business with the Washington. The English Consul was a t first refused a reception a t Algiers, but
was finally permitted to remain there.
Notwithstanding the treatment Capt. Bainbridge received from the
Dey, the American Consul, and flag is more respected there than m y
of the European nations. The Algerines observed to capt. Bainbndge,
that he ought to consider i t a great mark of the dey's favour, to go
upon his Majesty's special business to the Grand Se~gnior- adding,
that i t was an honour he would confer on very few others. There &re
about 2,300 European slaves in Algiers - some of them from the
first families in Europe. The place appears very strong, but 6 or 8
Seventy-fours could batter it to pieces.

388

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1786 TO 1801

Mr. O'Brien had written home to the American government, requesting that another Consul might be sent out to supercede him.
[LC. "Poulson's Daily Adv" (Phila.), 19 December 1800.1
Extracts from log of U. S. S. &rge Washin#ion, Captain William Bainbridge,
U. 8. Navy, commanding
Monday, 20 October 1800
Commences Pleaaant with Light Breezes from the Eastward a t Meridian Got
under way fired a signal Gun for sailing which Was returned by 8 from the Fort
Shotted which the Turks only do on Extraordinary Occasions. the Prime Minister
& Gen'l of Marines came on board a t 2 P M made sail a t 6 P M the Light of Algeirs
bore S by W Cape Metafore bore E by N from which I Take my depature bound
to Constantinople with a Cargo to Deliver to the Grand Seignior - Latter part
moderate & fair with a smooth Sea - Distance run 79 miles Long in 2.47
Course made good N 18' E
Tuesday, 21 October 1800
Commences pleasant under all sail a t half past 3 P M, saw a strange sail Bearing
North Gave chase she Tacked ship & run from us - a t 8 P M took in fore and
Mizen top Gallant sails a t 9 d* took in Main - Middle part Pleasant a t 3 A M
Tacked ship - Ends with Light winds and Fair weather, Put the crew on half
Allowance of Rum
Course made good S 64 E Long in 3.35 Distance run 41 miles
[H. E. Huntington L&AG.]
To Secretary of State from Richard O'Brien, U. S. Consul General, Algiers

ALGIERS
the 9 9 of October 1800
SIR AS The U. S Ship G Washington, Captain Bainbrid e has proceeded perforce in fact to save the peace of the U S with Afgiers - to
prevent Captivity. and detention to the ship officers and crew. and
prevent. the suden pretence of a suden war and pillage &q Slavery. to
the citizens of The U S I calculate that if said ship goes and comes safe
in 5 munths. it will cost. The U S 40 thousand dollars. this in comparison to what. our losses might be if war, left me no time to hestitate in
the choice of The evils and di6culties which presented fully in View
in surveying both sides of The cape or coast. and how we should stand
on both tacks I found There was no Alternative but to proceed
I have made or promised no responsibility. as is Customary with
all other nations the dey and regency I am convinced. that if an accident should happen to the [George] Washington in being Captured by
any nation or by being drove on shore that as soon as this news. would
reach Algiers. that the[y] would immediatly send out theire Corsairsand send in all american Vessels The[y] should meet with in order
to repay themselves for the amount of Algerine property on board
The [George] Washington. we submited to i t in the affaire of The
ship Fortune and if The amount in reality was 600 Thsq dollars the
regency would take to the amount. of one million of dollars it is theire
custom. is not it a hard case we to risque The ship and crew of the
U S and Algiers to force said ship and if any accident. to be liable
to those difficulties and calamities I have described under these
considerations. and the determination of Tripolia of may and The
10" and 15'? of Sept last. to take Americans if he does not get an
extraordinary present therefore Sir to prevent. those threatened
calamities. I think you will see the necesity. of immediatl ordering
a fleet of six of our best and fastest sailing frigates. into this ea. under
the command of such an active man as Comodore Truxton. with such
orders positive as the government will see the neceaity of giveing
relative to our affairs with Barbary The Italian States & & &Q how

g

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

389

necesary is dispatch and Energie on this business. as will naturally
occur to you V~ewingThe affairs of The United States in this Sea &+
and in case of an accident. of The [George] Washington The dey and
regenc g influence is so great. over Tunis and T r i p o h that the[y] would
have t e orders of this regency to send in all american Vessels Thely]
should meet with, to repay this regency for The amount. lost. and
for forceing The United States Ship to go with the ambasador and
presents of this regency I hope our affairs with france is friendly adjusted so that our
corsairs. will act as theIy] ought to do if requisite against the Barbary
States. and after The[y] get a good Scourgeing when a t war in peace
The[y] will not forget The nation (U S) that gave it them All nations
in a manner has scquised to every over act of Barbary it cannot long
remain in this Situation the treetie is the deya despotic will. Can
we be a nation of Independant freemen and Suffer Those indignities.
even that we e u h t kee our peace for 150 thousand. dollars annually
opinion war will cost us 2 - or 3 Millions
with Barbary still in
of dollars per annum - but it should be prefered to degradation
and a state of Vttsalage to The Scruff. of Asia $ aflriu~
Copy to Coloniel Humphreyes - Algiers the 28" October with
the following request.
SIR This letter you will lease to peruse and forward Copies thereof
to The 8. of State & to hfr Smith - I hsve to request of you Sir
in the name of the U S that you will use yr influence a t Madrid or
Elsewhere to give the requisite aid to the [George] Washington officers
and crew at Constantionople I need not Press this request on Mr
Smith - he sees the necesity from the purport of This dispatch
Nq 6. as allso forwarded to the S. of State RS yet I have no accf of
The Anna Maria arriveing a t Tunis The Shi Brutus Cspt Brown
Sailed from Algiers the 26'? Ins-estined for alem. I hope i t will
answer a better purpose then going with the deye Nephew to Rhodes
for a Cargo of Turks by The Bmctus I have wrote Very fully to the
Secretary of State The 4 algerine Corsairs is a t Tunis the[y] have
taken 3 Neopolitan Vessels - Crews 42 - & we are Suspicious the
Portugeese has taken an Algerine Schooner.
Ra OBRIEN
WILLIAMSMITH
ESqr
Ambasador for The Unided States
a.t Lisbon

E

dy

-

d

[NA. SDA. CL, Algiers, Vol. 5, March-Dec. 1800.1
To Israel Whelen, U. S. Purveyor, from Richard O'llrien, U. 6. Consnl General,
Algiers

ALGIERS
the 23'J OJOdober 1800
expected that Captain Bainbrid e. would be the
B e m r of those dispatches and as he was thoroug y informed of all
particular &airs on Barbary that. he would communicate the same
to you but Sir. the dey on the 9'p Ins4 declared that if the [George]
Washington did not proceed to Constantionople with his Ambasador
and resents. that he no longer held to his friendship with the U S &
in I&Opinion. would detain the U. S. Ship [George] Waahinglon and
crew & send out his corsairs & take all the Americans the[y] Could
meet with. Viewing the dficulties & Judgeing of the Calamities there

MY Dr SIR. I

8

390

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1786 TO 1801

was no alternative but to acquise to the deya forced demand. and on

the 19'P Inst the U S ship under the Command of Cap+Bainbridge mild
for Constantionople - [See letter to William Eaton 19 October 1800.1

*

*

ISRAIEL
WHELAN,
Esq'
Purveyor - of the U S
NB I borrow$ 8 thsd dollars. from the dey - for the [George]

Washington -

[NA. SDA. CL, Algiers, Vol. 3, Jan-Dec. 1798.1

To Richard O'Brien, U. I.Consul General, Algiers, from James Leander Cathcart,
U. 6. Consul, Tripoli

TRIPOLIAOctober the 25'? 1800
SIR I n about 20 days from the date of this you will receive two
packetts which will inform you of The State of our affairs here
Sate a t present that the Brig Catharine of new york bound to
Leghorn was brought in here by a tripoline corsair with a cargo
valued a t 50,000 dollars on the 15" Ins! and was cleared in consequence of the Bashaw of Tripolia haveing wrote to the president The Bashaw publickly declared. That he would wait but 6 munths
longer for Answers from america. that if The[y] did not arrive in
that Period he would declare war against the united States and if
the[y] were not satisfactory when the[y] did arrive That he would
do the same - after much perswasion he has promised to wait. untill
he receives answers from the president. Let that period be long or
short. but not one hour longer should the[y] not be satisfactory. by
this Publick declaration The Bashaw has annulled the whole of our
treaty especially The lot? and 12*?articles in the first of which is
specifyed. that no pretence of any periodical tribute or farther payment whatever is to be made by either party &o in The 12'? article
is specif ed. that in Case of any dispute arriseing from a voilation of
any of t e articles of the treaty no appeal shall be made to arms. but
if The consul resident shall not be able to Settle the same an amiacable
reference shall be made to the mutial friend of both partys. The
dey of Algiers - The parties hereby engageing to abide by his
decision - read the 10%and 12'-"articles I therefore have now to inform you that I cannot settle this dispute
and that I do hereby make That amicable reference as Stipulated by
treaty leaveing i t a t the discretion of the Consul General of the
united States a t Algiers to act as may be most likely to romote
The interests of The united States. and requesting him to uspend
his Operations untill he receives The abovementioned packeth.
which will give him every usefull information.
Copy which Coloniel Humphreyes will please to forward to The
department of State & to Mr Smith
rec@& forwarded The 19" december 1800 by OBrien
I have no account of the Anna Maria arriveing a t Tunis. I heard
from Consul Eaton the 23@of november - was the date of his letter

E

i$

[NA. SDA. CL, Algiers Vol. 5, March-Dec. 1800.1

WAflS WITH BARBARY POWERS
--

-

--

Extract~from log of U. 6. S. Gorp Wcnhinlton, Captain William Bainbridge,
U ,8. Navy, commanding
Sunday,96 Odober 1800
Commences Fresh gales with rain a t P M hawled up the Fore sail a t 9 DQSaw
the Land Levair bearing E S E hawled by the wind to the West a t 10 D QSaw the
Isle Maritriona a head could not weather i t Vered Ship as pr Log Middle part
squally At 4 A M Vered ship as pr log a t 5 do made sail sent up top GaUant Ysrds 6G
set the mils set stay sails - Meridian Ende pleasant - Meritme N N W distance
8 Leagues from which I Take my depature
Monday, 87 October 1800
Firat part pleaeant under all a i l a t 3 P M bore new tyee for the topssil yards
a t 4 do handed all Stay sails & stowed them - Middle part Pleasant a t 6 A M
Made the Ieland of Malta Bearing S E by S Distance 8 Leagues - a t 8 do Mslta
Bore S by W Distance 7 Leagues - a t Meridian Sicily bore N E b N
Ends pleasant Tuesday,88 Odober 1800
Firat part pleamnt Under dl mil a t 3 P M Cleansed the ship fore and Aft at
sun set Observed her Magnetic Amplitude 16' West a t the same time the lstsnd
of Sicily Bore N E by E Distance 6 or 7 Leagues a t 8 P M took in roysh and stay
eails - At 12 Midnight Light air and pleasant At 1 A M Lett fall the fore and
Main sail hauled out the Main top Mast and Mizen Stay Saii At Meridian the S E int of Sicily Bore N B E Distanc 8 Leagues the Mountain
of Aetm bore N b E ?&E DiRtance 30 Leagues
Latitude 36' - 21'
[H. E. Huntington LCAG.]

[29 October 18001
Protest of James L. Cathcart, U. 6. Consul, Tripoli
To ALL WHOMIT DOTE OR MAY CONCERN
KNOWYE BY THEBEPRESENTS
that I James Lea' Cathcart Agent & Consul
for the United Staters of America in and for the City & Regency of Tripoli in
Barbary, finding just cause to complain of the conduct of Jusef Baahaw supreme
Commandant of mid City & Regency of Tripoli & his Ministers - towards the
Government & Citizens of the said U. S. of America and conceiving it my duty to
protest against said conduct Now know ye That I Do hereby Protest against said
Jueef Bashaw supreme Commandant of mid City & Regency and against his
Ministem & Counsellors, in behalf of the Government of said U S of America,
myself & fellow Citizens, for the followin reasons. To Wit FIRST:
Be i t known that an the I?*? of i u g u & 1799 said Jusef Bashaw supreme
Commandant of the Regency of Tripoli a t the instigation of Morad Raiz Admiral
of the Cruisers of this Regency, refused to receive the printed Passports iesued by
the Consul of the U S of America in this Regency in obedience to his orders from
government, thereby claiming a superiority or preference to the Regency's of
Algiers & Tunis he being duly infom'd that the a i d Psssports were accepted in
the same form by the Chiefs of the mid Regency's; And in order, as ia my firm belief
to have a pretext to send the Merchant vessels belonging to the Citizem of the
U 8,into this Port for examination said Admiral Morad having publickly declared
thst he would go to Sea with the v e w k under hie command without any Pasaport
from this O&ce if the[y] were not modiied to his likeing and worded similar to
the Passports of the British, And the mid Jusef Baghaw on application being made
by the wid Consul of the U S refuseing to exert his authority is s clear & sufficient
evidence that he was accessary to the insolent demand of said Morad or more
properly speaking that mid Morad acted if not by his orders a t least with his
tacit consent thereby forcing the mid Consul of the U S to deviate from hie
instructions and to submit from imperious neceesity to a humiliation incompatible
with the honor & dignity of the Nation he hss the honor to represent.
SECOND:Be it known That in the month of October 1799 said James Lear
Cathcart Consul for the U, S, of America in this Regency having recQ several bales
of CIoth to dispose of, that Baid Jusef Bashaw sent the Broker Leon Farfara to
the Consular home requesting said Consul to give him the.preference in the Bale of
said Cloth promising to pa for the m e like any other ~ndividualand as cloths
I knowing how be had lerv'd the late Venitian
were sold of the u m e
& Swedish Consuls on s similar occasion, sent Baid Leon Fsrfara to inform him
that the cloth was not mine and that I expected to be paid immediately in order

392

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1'386 TO 1801

to be enabled to make a remitance to my correspondent which he the said Bashaw
promised to do; I therefore confideing in his promise which I was taught to believe
was sacred to all true Mussulmen & more especially to a Prince of the August
family of Caramanly did deliver unto him Sundry pieces of cloth to the value of
Five thousand seven hundred & eighty Seven Yuslichs current coin of this Regenc
which a t that time was worth Spanish dollars two thousand three hundred
fourteen & 80 cents, two Yuslichs & one half being then equal to one dollar silver
but a t prest, the coin of this Regency having depreciated owing to the great quantity of alloy mix'd in the coinage a dollar passes for three Yuslichs which makes a
difference of one fifth part or 20
That I have repeatedly demanded the above
sum & have always been put o f l io;m
:
time to time with promises until the 2F
da of September 1800 when some Oil belonging to said Bashaw being selling a t
pubick vendue I sent my Drogornan to purchase a barrel for the use of my house
value about eighteen doll* which the Hasmadar refused to give unto him unless
I eent themoney to pay for it first; I sent the Drogoman immediately to the Bashaw
to know the reason who repeated the same words saying the Oil was not his but
belonged to the Crew of the Cruisers that if I wanted Oil that I must first send the
Caah; I immediately sent for Farfara who had acted as Broker in the sale of the
Cloth & desired him to demand a positive answer from the Bashaw whether he
intended t o pay me or not, that I was resolved to be kept no longer in suspense &
offer'd t o b k e the money a t the present value which is only 1929 dollars in full
of all demands; the Bashaw sent the same answer, which he had sent above fifty
times before; that he would pay me but that a t present i t was not convenient and
desired Leon Farfara t o inform me that if I had a mind I might take one of the
Swedish prizes for my money which I declined knowing that he having a quantity
of prize and other goods on hand for exportation, that he would probably force me
to take a cargo of a i d goods to Leghorn or else where, thereby exposing the U, S
to become responeible for said goods or their value should any accident happen to
mid vessel in the same manner as the claim originated upon Sweden which was
the firat & principal cause of the present war; I therefore have deem'd i t more
expedient to entirely lose the fore mentioned sum than t o run a risque which
probably might envolve my Country in a War And as i t appears from the above detail that said Bashaw never intends to pay
me the above sum in cash according to agreement notwithstanding I have his
receipt or promiseary note under the great seal of this Regency and I having
waited above one year for the payment of the said sum without eflect, I therefore
debit the U S the a i d sum in my Ace, current leaving the government of said
U S to make the said claim a National claim; no individual being bound to be
responsible for the arbitrary acts of the chiefs of the Barbary States, a t the same
time making myself responsible to the U S for said sum or any part thereof which
may be recover'd from said Jusef Bashaw hereafter THIRD:Be i t known That in the months of May September & October 1800,
That the said Jusef Bashaw supreme Commandant of the said Regency of Tripoli
having made certain demands upon the United States in direct violation of the
109 Article of the Treaty existing between the U S of America & the Regency of
Tripoli, which the Consul of the U S resident here found incompatible with the
honor & inter& of the Nation he re resents to comply with, That said Jusef
Baahaw in direct violation of the 12'9 Article of the said existing Treaty Did
ublickly declare that he would only wait untill he receives answers from the
reeident of the U S of America which if not satisfactory that he would then
declare War against said United States as is more full explain'd in my dispatches
to government copy's of which were forwarded to our 8onsuls a t Algiera and Tunis;
Article of said treaty that the
And whereat3 it is particularly specified in the
Money & presents demanded by the Bey or Bsshaw of Tripoli is a full and satisfactory consideration on his part & on the part of his Subjects for a i d treaty of perpetual Peace & Friendship & that no pretence of any Periodical tribute or farther
payment is ever to be made by either party, And said Bashaw of Tripoli havin
acknowledged the receipt of the money & presents stipulated by said Treaty;
find myself justifiable both to God and my Country in having refused to comply
with the mid Bashaws unjust demands u n said United States of America
And whereas it is stipulated in the IF! K i c l e of the foresaid Treaty that in case
any diepute arising from a violation of any of the articles of eaid Treaty no a p
shall be made to arms nor shall War be declared on any pretence whatever:
if the Consul residing a t the place where the dispute shall happen, shall not be
able to settle the same an amicable reference shall be made to the mutual Friend
of both parties the Dey of Algiers; the parties thereby engageing to abide by his
decision; And He by virture of his signature to the said Treaty having engaged for
himself & his eucceesors to declare the justice of the case according to the true

g

f

E:

-

-

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS
-

-

-

-

interpretation of the said treaty and to use all the meam in his power to enforce
the observance of the same.
Now KNOW ALL MEN BY THESE PRESENTS, That I Jamee Lear Cathcart Conaul
for the U S of America in said Regency of Tripoli Do protest and Declare that the
demands made by the Bashaw of Tripoli upon the United S t a h of America are of
such a nature that I cannot settle the dispute arising therefrom ; and that I conceive
that I should not only be deviating from my official duty but likewise acting aa an
accomplice and in conjunction with a i d bashaw of Tripoli to treat our good
friends the Dey and Divan of Algiera with indignity and disrespect was I to refrain
from making the foresaid amicable reference; I therefore in Virtue of these Presents
Do make the foresaid amicable reference transmiting the whole to the Consul genl
of the U S of America a t Algiers who is posseas'd of every information relative to
the state of our affairs in this Regency having rec4 duplicates of my diapatches for
the governement of the U S a t the same time leaving it a t the discretion of the
Consul genl of the U S a t Algiers for the time being to take such measures as he in
his judgment may think most likely to promote the interests of the U S and to
maintain the peace of our Country with this Regency upon honorable and equitable
terms
FOURTH: BE IT KNOWN that on the 25"f
September 1800 that &bizAmor
Shelli commander of a Tripoline Cruiser of 18 Guns captured the American brig
Catharine James Carpenter Master of & from Newyork & bound to Leghorn
valued a t 50,000 dollars or thereabouts, that said veasel was kept in possession of
the subjects of Tripoli untill the 15% of October in the evening and was then
deliver'd up to the Consul of the U S in consequence of the Bashaw of Tripoli
having wrote a letter to the President of the U S the purport of which being dready
known needs no repetition, and that said vessel was exposed to much loss & peril
as appears by the Master of said Brig his Protest already forwarded to our Consul
genl a t Algiers & that said brig was plunder'd of effects valued by mid Master
James Carpenter a t 397 hard dollars whereof was recover'd to the value of 180
dollars the value of 217 dolt being irrecoverably lost; notwithstanding the Bashaw
had given positive orders to Hamet Raiz or Minister of the Marine to cause every
article that could be found to be restored to their lawfull owner: Yet said Raiz
of the Marine did not comply with the Bashaws orders (& he being the Bashaws
Brother in b w it waa out of my power to compel him) but on the contrary prevaricated from day to day from the 16'h to the 219 of October with an intent no doubt
to share the spoils with the foresaid Raiz Amor Shellie and on the night of the 219
ins! sent Ibram Farfara to inform me that if the Brig did not aail by day light in the
morning that the Port would be embargoed & gave me to understand that if I did
not promise to pay him anchorage for said brig that she would be detain'd untill the
embargo should be taken off this demand I absolutely refused to comply wlth On the 22* a t day light I order'd the Brig t o get under way & could not get the
Pilot to go onboard untill said Ibrnm Farfara paid the e i z of the Marine five
dollars & 75 cents Anchorage which notwithstanding ~t belng an unjust demand I
complied with sooner than have the Brig detain'd one day longer
I therefore for the fore said reasons & for each of the aforementioned arbitrary
acts Do Protest against the foresaid Jusef Bashaw supreme Commandant of the
Regency of Tripoli in Barbary and against his Ministers & C o u n d o r s - but
more especially against said Mornd Raiz Admirbl of the Cruisers of this Regency
for being the cause of my altering the National Passports of the United States
of America & against said Hamet, Raia or Minister of the Marine for the ressons
before mentioned as well as for falsely imiduously & slanderously ssserting in
my presence 6: in the presence of Ca
Carpenter that the Consul genl of the
U S Rich4 OBrien it the Broker or E k k e r of a i d U f3 Micaiah Cohen B ~ r i
had inform'd him when he was last a t Algeirs that the government of the U S
had done paid to the house of Bacri & CQone hundred thouaand dollars for their
influence thereby irritateing the said Jusef Bashaw against the government &
Citizens of the said U S of America as the said Jusef Bsahsw seemingly gave
credit to the falsehood of mid Hamet Raiz & emphatically said that the Government of the United States had treated an Algerine Jew better & with more
liberality than they had the said Beshaw of Tripoli notwithstandin I gave the
direct lie without ceremony or hesitation to said Hamet & told the 8sshaw that
I wonder'd how he could give credit to EO barefaced a falsehood for even had the
U S given the above mentioned sum the party concern'd would be the last people
in the world to divul e the aame it not comporting either with their honor or
interest eapeciay to Bamet U i z who was not only an Enemy to tbe U. S but
likewise to his ExceIlency the Baahaw of Tripoli he having by his false ~nsinuations
endeavor'd to persuade the Bashaw to annul the Treaty of Peace 8: Amity a t
present subsisting between the mid tT S & this Regency to the prejudice of his

-

-

394

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1785 TO 1801

character honor & dignity whom word & signature I had always supposed ta
have been inviolably sacred: and that aaid Jusef Bashaw in answer to the above
said you say that Hamet Rail; lies and I eay he tells truth, thereby discrediting
11 I had said & giveing full credit to the imposition of said Hemet, Raiz or Minister
of the Marine
NOWKNOW ALL MEN That for the reasons afore assign'd that I James Leaf
Cathcart Agent & Consul for the U S of America in the Regency of Tripoli having
h e w n sufficient cause to enter this Protest against the aaid J u d Brrshaw aupreme
Commandant of the Regency of Tripoli his afore mentioned Minister & Counsellors; That I do by these presents most solemnly Proteet against the conduct of
said Jusef Bashaw his aforeasid Ministers & Counsellors as being unjust & in
direct violation of the lot? and 129 Articles of the existing Treaty between the
U, S, of America & the said Regency of Tripoli; And I James Lear Cathcart
Do further declare that the dispute arising from the violation of wid T m t y is
of such a nature that I cannot adjust the said before I receive express instructions
from the President of the United States of America or until1 our good Friends
the Dey B Divan of Algiers shall decide upon the judice of the case accordin
to the true interpretation of the existing Treaty between the U S of America
this Regency: And that I do hereby make an Amicable reference to our good
Friends the Dey and Divan of the Regency of Algiers prorniseing in the name of
the United States of America to abide by their decision agreeable to the true
meaning of the stipulation contain'd in the 12+ Article of the treaty of Peace
& city concluded between said U S of America & the Regency of Tripo1i.b~
the intervention of the late Hassan Bashaw Dey of Algiers and under the mmediate Guaranty of said Regency, the said Treaty having been duly ratifted by
the reigning Dey of Algiers Mustapha Baahaw whom God preserve
Now I James Lear Cathcart Agent C Consul of the U S of America conceiving
it my duty so to do, Do now transmit this said protest to the Chancery of the
United States at Tunis in order that it may be there duly reg~ster'd & from
thence forwarded to the Consul general of the U S of America a t Algiera in order
to prevent as much as depends upon me any appeal being made to arms leaving
the conducting of the whole affair entirely a t the discretion of the Consul genl of
the U S of America for the time being ss before mentioned not doubting but he
will take such measures as he in his judgment may think most likely to romote
the interests of the U S of America and to maintain the Peace of our &untry
with this Regency upon honorable and equitable terms In Testimony of the above I have hereunto subscribed my name
and affix'd the Seal of my Office a t the Chancery of the United States
[SEAL]
of America in the City of Tripoli in Barbary this 29y day of October
in the year of our Lord one thousand eight hundred 1800 - And
in the 25'P year of the Independence of the United States of America
JAMES LEA^ CATECAET
[SDA. CL, Tripoli, Vol. 1, Part 11, Jan. 1800-May 1801.1

-

-

d:

-

-

Extract from log of U. 6. S. George Warhingh. Captdn William Bainbridge,
U. 23. Navy, commanding, Wednesday, 29 October 1600
First part pleasant Under all sail By the Wind a t half paat 2 P M Picked up
a t h t t s e n Yard and sail with part of the Mast hands variously employed a t
5 Oclock 20" the Castle on the S E point of the Island of Sicily bore as pr Compag
N 3 W Distance 6 or 7 Leagues a t 6 P M took in Stay sails a t 10 Do Saw s Brigg
ahead standing towards us Give her a Shott she Tacked to the Westward we
gave her six shot-she made Algerine Signals we answerd tacked ship and h o d
on our coume Secured the Guns At 6 A M saw s Brig Bearing S W standing to the Westwvd
Latter part Light Winds Course made good N 80 E Distance 89 miles
[H. E. Huntington L&AG.]

TO Charles Lee, Secretary of State pro tempore, from Jamea L. C a t h c ~ t ,U.

6.

Conad, Tripoli

TRIPOLI
IN BARBARY
NoOtF 1'* 1800
SIR By the dispatches which I have had the honor to forward to
the Department of State since last April you will be inform'd that
the Bashaw of Tripoli has annul'd the 10'P and 12" Articles of the

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

395

Treaty between the United S t a h and this Regency I therefore on
the 29'." of October protested again~this conduct & forwarded the
protest to Consul gent OBrien a t &em in order that he might make
an Amicable reference to the most poted Dey of Algiers who I hope
on this occasion will not prove himself to be impotent for I assure
you I doubt very much whether ever he will interfere in o w favor
or not & in my opinion he ought not to be too much relied on. It
would be of no use to send you a copy of the protest & Reference at
present even had I time to copy it, as their is no knowing what effect
~twill have upon our affairs, I therefore have requested M: OBrien to
Register the said in the Chancery of the U S a-t Algiers & to forward
i t to the Department of State via Lisbon when he naturally will
inform you of the result In the present state of our affairs I could not find myself justifiable
in doing otherwise for in the 10* Article of the Treaty it is particularly
specified that the Money & presents demanded by the Bey or Bashaw
of Tripoli is a full and satisfactory consideration on his part & on the
part of his subjects for said treaty of erpetual peace & Friendship &
that no pretense of any periodical tri ute or farther payment is ever
to be made by either party & said Bashaw of Tripoli having acknowledged the receipt of the money and presents stipulated by Treaty I
found it highly improper to comply with any demands upon the U S
of America, And in the 12" article of the foresaid treaty i t is stipulated
that in case of any dispute arising from a violation of any of the
Articles of the said treaty, that no appeal shall be made to n m s nor
shall War be declared on any pretence whatever; But if the Consul
residing a t the place where the dispute shall happen, shall not be able
to settle the same an Amicable reference shall be made to the friend of
both parties the Dey of Algiers the parties thereby engaging to abide
by his decision & he by virtue of his signature to the said treaty having
engaged for himself and his successors to declare the justice of the
csse according to the true interpretation of the said treaty & to use all
the means in his power to enforce the observance of the same & said
treaty being ratified by the present Dey of Algiers it was my inevitable
duty to act as I have done, i t being entirely out of m power to settle
the dispute arising from the violation of the said Artic es of our Treaty,
it amounting to nothin less than making the U S of America tributary
to Tripoli which can e done by none but the government of the
United States; I have nevertheless submitted the whole to the decision
of the Consul gen !of the U S a t Algiers & left the manner of conducting
the reference entirely a t his discretion & hope that he will act in such
a manner as will promote the honor and interest pf our Country Should no reference be made to the Dey of Alfgers by us in the first
instance the United States would have been reduced to the following
humiliating & very embarrassing situation The Bashaw of Tripoli declares that he will capture our vessels if
we do not comply with his unjust demands, it is natural to suppose
that the Citizens of the United States w i l l defend themselves and not
pusillanimously surrender the vesels & cargoes entrusted to their
care without a struggle, The Government of the U S will probably
think proper to Chastize his arrogance & destroy his Cruisers where
ever the[y] shall be found, "Then would the Bashaw of Tripoli meanly
seek a subterfuge by making s reference to Algiers &tho he has disavow'd & in a great measure annul'd the whole of the Treaty aud how

g

T

%

396

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1786 TO 1801

do we know that if no reference is made by us, but our good Friend
the most Potent Dey of Algiers will insist upon our indemnifying the
Bashaw of Tripoli for the Cruisers which may be destroy'd by the
United States and in case of refusal declare War against us in virtue
of the stipulation contain'd in the 129b article of said treaty which
positively says no appeal shall be made to arms and al'tho this proceeding would be in every respect unjust, as the Bashaw of Tripoli is
the Agressor & not the President of the United States, nevertheless I
say it is possible and things of as dark a nature have already taken
place In my dispatches of last May I inform'd the Secretary of State
that probably 10,000 dollars would satisfy the Bashaw, at present
his ideas are much enlarged in consequence of his having captured
fourteen sail of Sweeds as you will be inform'd by the enclosed list
and if a force is not sent sufficient to intimidate him to compliance
thrice that sum will not be sufficient, as he has determined to establish
the following system from which he is resolved not to swerve unless
by force of Arms His revenues not being equal to his expenditures he is determined
to be at War either with the Danes Swedes or U S alternately to which
is to be added the Batavian Republic when a general eace takes place
in Europe He is now at war with the Swedes from w om he demands
to the amrnt of dollars 260 thousand for Peace & the ransom of 131
of their prisoners which he expects to conclude about March or April.
the United States are destined to be the next victim and that it has
been premeditated since before the departure of the Sophia will
evidently appear by the purport of my dispatches of April 1799 & the
Secretary of States answer to them dated the 15thof Jan? 1800 * * *
Thus Sir have I given you a particular acct of the Bashaws intentions, which points out the necessity of sending a sufficient force into
this Sea to repel the Bashaws demand in the first instance if not Sir
we will be subject to the above mentioned impositions & others will
ate of the same nature every two or three years which probably
be the means of conducting as many of our fellow Citizens into
as their are now unfortunate Sweeds and ultimately the
States will be obliged to take the measure I recommend to
them to take a t present become tributary to Tripoli and consequently
to Tunis or renounce the whole trade of the Mediterranean I t occurs to me that the reason why the Bashaw would not inform
me what were his expectations, is in order that he may have an opportunit to make an exorbitant demand upon us, even should he wait
un the Presidents answer arrives if unaccom anied with force, and
to declare War t r t us if I find it impossib e to comply with his
demands; I there ore conceive it my duty to alarm our commerce &
put them upon their guard, and being convinced that I have done
thing in my power to evade the impending danger; I leave the
res t to the will of the most high and should anything happen hereafter over which human rudence or foresight could have had no controd; I trust that I shafbe justifiable both to God and my Country
in having taken the above measures which at least will lessen the
Calamity if not entirely remove it The said plan of the Bashaws o erations may be depended on, &
have already been forwarded to t e Courts of Sweden Denmark &
Holland by their representatives and is the production of the same
villainous project maker that was the occasion of the demand upon

1

SY

td

P

T

"3

E

397

WARS WITH BARBABY POWERS

the Danes, as I have h e a d y inform'd the Secretary of State in mine
of the 14+ of Augt which was forwarded via Leehorn, coad'uted by
the infamous Peter Lisle (alias) Morad Raiz Admwal of the 'hiPoline
Squadron [SDA. CL, Tripoli, Vol. 1, Part 11, Jan. 18WMsy 1801.1
To Secretary of State from William Eaton, U. S. Consul, Tunis

Nq 30. Duplicate.

Tuars Nov. 1" 1800.

SIR,on the 13" ult. a corsaire of 22 g m s and 130 men, p~opertyof
the Bey's prime minister, received my passport, uith a destmation, as
was supposed, against Sweedes; but was in port until the arrival of a
sweedish frigate with regalia on the 22g From appearances I ap rehend his destination is changed against Americans. The Bey snBhis
minister were very particular in demanding of the chivalier Tornquin, sweedish Ambassador and Commander of their naval force in
the Mediterranean, whether he had fallen in with Ameriam; their
courses; whether armed; how manned; what size? kc. &c. Sundry
corsaires are now fitting out. A combination of circumstances s q gest the suspicion that their game is A ~ & M ! We are a t t h s
moment the only delinquents; every other tributary nation having
w i t h the space of six months laid their humiliations a t the feet of
this Bey. A detail of which shall hereafter be given: it is foreign to
the purpose of this letter. Our delays of payment of our peace stipulations are extremely unfavorable: they put too much to hazard.
The commerce of the United States in the Mediterranean, Mr Appleton a t Leghorn says, is nearly equal to that of all other carrying
nations.

*

*

*

*

*

*

*

I was at the palace this morning and yesterday. Says the Bey "What am I to deduce from all your assurances of punctuaIity on the
part of your Government?" I answered. Your Excellency will
have the goodness to believe that when the information of our definite
arrangements was recieved in the United States the stores which we
have stipulated as the condition of peace with you were growing on
our mountains, at the sources of our rivers - "Am I to suppose
then" said He "that your guns and your powder, cornprized in that
stipulation were growin on your mountains? You find no dif6culty
in discharging pour obfigations with Algiers. Do you suppose me
less able than Algiers to compel the punctual observance of treaties?"
By no means, s a d I, if we have been more attentive to Algiers than
to you it is not because we consider you less respectable but more just
than Al@ers. "We must make an end of compliment" said he, "It
would p v e me pain to affront you: but facts justify the conclusion
that if you suppose me just you study to amuse my justice. Denmark
may furnish you a cautaon against such s reliance." I suppose, said I,
our Ex?can have no doubt that the residue of our peace presents
ave long since been a t sea; but the winds have been many days
against us - "They have been against us three years" said he. Your
Ex? will recollect they were very favorable last sprin "Not so
favorable as I had been flattered to believe they would f a v e been."
said he. What shall be done? I asked, shall we make war upon the
elements! "You can choose your measures" said he "and you need
not be surprized if I reserve to myself the srtme previlege." Permit
me, said I, to demand an explanation of this infendre. "Events will

E

398

NAVAL OPERATIOArS FROM 1786 TO 1801

-

explain it." said he - I observed, If this manner of evasion cover a
menace I ought to know it for my government in giving passports
to your cruisers. "In this" said he, "you will use your own discretion.
If you give them it is an evidence that you are a t peace with me. If
you refuse them I have nothing serious to apprehend from it." Cutting reply; to which I made no rejoinder - I could draw not
direct from him. I do not know whether to sound an alarm or st'
to say AU is well! But, I venture to repeat, if something do not
appear soon to my relief I shall shortly be compelled, instead of
ordinary communications, to make my monthly reports of American
slaves.

3

*

*

*

*

*

*

*

I cannot but subjoin, it is the dictate of duty inforced by the
constant dread I suffer of seeing our seamen slaves here, that except

Government reform their mode of intercourse with the Barbary
Regencies i t is not in the resourses of all the Agents who ever were or
ever can be sent here to evade the solemn consequences of a predatory
war from these licensed pirates Eztrads from postscripts presumably added to this letter
Nov. 10 [I8001
Is it not somewhat humiliating that the k t United States ship of
war which ever entered the Mediterranean should be pressed into the
service of a pirate? I am this moment informed, though not officially
that the George Washington has recieved a destination from "Patron
Grandi" to Constantinople - A prodigious distortion of treaty
grant - And, if true, I should suppose, would require strong reasons
to justify it - What may not be his danger in an empire where the
United States are not known - ?

Nm. 11
I reclaim this packet to insert an extract of a letter this moment
recieved from M' OBrien, as follows - verbatim. [Here was quoted
letter to William Eaton, U. S. Consul, Tunis, from Richard O'Brien,
U. S. Consul General, Algiers, dated 19 October 1800, with the fol-

lowing notation made by William Eaton:]
Genius of My Country! How art thou prostrate! Hast thou not
yet one son whose soul revolts, whose nerves convulse, blood vessels
burst, and heart indignant swells a t thoughts of such debasement!
Shade of Washington! Behold thy orphan'd sword hang on a
slave - A voluntary slave, and serve a prate!
I never thought to find a corner of t h s slanderous world where
baseness and American were wedded - But here we are the by
word of derision; quoted as precedents of baseness - even by a Dane!
Shall Tunis also lift his thievish arm, smite our scarred cheek, then
bid us kiss the rod! This is the price of peace! But if we will have
peace a t such a price, recall me, and send a slave, accustomed to
abasement, to represent the nation - And furnish ships of war, and
funds and slaves to his support, and Our immortal shame History shall tell that The United States first volunteer'd a shi
war, eqmpt, a carrier for a pirate - I t is written - Nothing ut
blood can blot the impression out - Frankly I own, I would have lost
the peace, and been empaled myself rather than yielded this concession - Will nothing rouse my country".
ISDA. CL,Tunis, Vol. 1, July 1797-Dec. 1800.1

%"

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS
Extracts from log of U. 6. 6. Caa*

Washington,. Captain William Bainbridge,

U. a. Navy, commanding

Saturday, 1 November 1800

Commences pieasant with a smooth Sea - Hands variously employed in
Ships Duty a t 8 P M Set Fore & Main top Gallant Saib Stay Sails and Steering
Sails Middle part Light win& & leasant - At 8 A M Down Jolly Boat L Tried
the Current Finding it Setting S E one Xnott P r Hour Latter part d9 Weather
hands employed in washing thier clothing &C - Course made good S 70 E
DirJtsnce 50 milee
Sunday,t November 1800
Commences Light winds and pleasant with a smooth aea a t 3 P M msde the
Land Bearing E N E Distance 16 Leagues a t 11 dp saw the Ishnd of Morea
Bearing N N E Distance 5 or 6 Leagues a t half past 5 A M Tacked Ship Headed
8s r Log a t 6 do the Island of Zand Bore N by E the Island of Sa hrsia bore
N by E Cape Bapeiraa Bore S E b E Distance 7 or 8 Leaguea a t 7 M Tacked
ship Headed as r Log Half past 7 do saw a Ship and two Briggs standing out
horn the Land
irea Towards us called all hands To clear ship for Mtion At the Meridian g p e Sapeirsa Bore Dis 7 or 8 Leagues
Ends plemant Bree~eaand Fair weather
Mondny, 3 Nouember 1800
First pleasant Under all mil a t 2 P M Tacked Ship Readed as pr Log a t 5 dr
the Idand of Sapiensa Bore S E by E Cape Sapiensa S 27 E and the Ialand of
phirdono S 17 E a t 5 P M took one reef in Each Top sail a t 8 d9 handed top
Gallant Sails - a t 12 Midnight Double reff the topsails Sent down top G Yards
Heavy Bqudls a t A M Vered ship as pr Log a t 6 D9 Vered ship as r Log - a t
Meridian The Island of Sapiensa bore S by E 5 E the Island of 8aphria bore
S S E 5 E and the Island of Lipodina bore S E ?4 E Ends with Light winds and
Squally Tuesday, 4 Noyember 1800
Commences with Fresh Breezes and Squally At 2 P M Tacked ship as pr Log
a t 5 DPthe point of Modom S E by S T i S Bore Dist 6 Leagues a t 6 do a Shift
of wind as pr Log Got up top G. Yds & set the SaiIs Middle part d~ Weather
at 8 A M Set Steering Sails & Royals a t Meridian Cape Metaphor bore S E by E
the Southernmost part of Europe Ends pleasant Thursday,6 November 1800
Gentle galea 6c Pleassnt a t M paat 2 P M Brought too & spoke a schooner from
Smyrna bound to Trieste who Informed us that the Hassan Baphaw was a t Rhodee
with four mil of the Line besides frigates a t 6 P M handed top Gallant sails took
two reefs in each to sails up Courses a t 10 DP hove too under the top Sails to
the Windward of gill0 Fired a gun Lighted the top L ~ n t h o r na t 2 A M bore
away for the Land a t 3 d~ Brought too gain a t half past 4 d~ bore away for the
Land Hoisted the Algerine Flagg Fired several guns for a PiIot a t 8 d~ Abreast
of Millo Harbour took on board a Pilot Hauled to the IVorthward a t Meridian
Thermo bore E and Zia, N 9 Islands in sight Friday, 7 November 1800
h h galea and Hazy at 1 P M Let the reefs out of the top sail^ set t o Gallant
mils royak & stay sails a t 2 dr set steering sails a t 5 d~ took in royals g d e e r i n g
Sails handed top Gallant Sails and took one reef in each top sail a t Sun Set in
Between the Islands Loro and Andro a t 8 P M the wind came Fresh
fromp888a%
the orthward handed the Mainsail double reeft the top sails - Middle
the
part fresh with flaws &C Sent down top .Gallant Yds a t 3 A M made sail a t 4
do sent up top Gallant Yda - at Meridlan the N E p a n t Oporia bore E N E
Bcio N W N South point of Seio S S E and Negropont S W f5 W
Ends with f m h Breeeee and a head sea Sunday, 9 November 1800
Cornmenoes with pkaeant weather & a amooth ses at sun set the Island Tenedos
bore E 314 N of Imbja N by E and Mount Athos N 55' W sounded from 6 P M
till 5 A M in the Morning every 15 Minutes had 45.50 do 10 Fathom of Water
made and shortend sail accordingly a t 9 A M hove too of Tenedos Took on board
a Pilot for Conatantinople a t 3 past D do Made all sail a t Meridian pasaing Between
the Castles at the Entrance of the Hellespont - Saluted with 8 urn returned with
6 from the Castles - they have the Outward a
n n c e of %eing very strong
Having 8 Teir of guns, the Lower Teir on the K t e m edge - Strong cmm~t
against us
Monday, 10 November 1800
Reanant with fresh Breezes At 3 P M entered the Streits of the Dardenella
M u t e d the csetles with 3 guns was answered with two At 7 A M Abreast of the

b

e

1

&

400

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1786 TO 1801

- -

Island of Marmora with a good Btrong Breeze At Meridian Mount Olympus
bore S E by S whose top is covered with eternal snow -the Spires of Constantinople
in sight, the City Beautifully situated on the sides of 7 Hills gently ascending from
the sea making a most Beautifull appearance from the Sea Ends Pleasant Tuesday,11 November 1800
Commences First pleasant with a smooth sea running up the Dadanells in
sight of the city - a t 9 P M Came too with the Best Bower in 17 Fathoms Water
off the South part of the City - a t 7 A M Weighed anchor and made sail a t I1 do
Came to anchor in the Harbour of Constantinople opposite the Grand Seigiors
Barracks in 27 Fathoms of Water - out all Boats Deliverd 4 Horses and
Sundry articles of Baggage belonging to the Algerines Ends with light winds and Fair
Wednesday, 18 November 1800
Commences with Light airs and pleasant - At 8 A M sent up top Gallant Yds the crew employed in discharging the goods of the passengers Sent on shore 2 lions 3 Tigers 5 Antelopes 2 Ostriches & 20 Parrots - At 3 P M
the General of Marines Went on Shore Saluted him with 7 Guns also a Large
number of Algerines - At 4 P M Cap$ Bainbridge went on shore Sunt set sent down top Gallant Yds Ends Pleasant
Thursday. 19 November I800
Light Winds and Pleasant. -Breaks of day all hands employed in washing decks
At 8 A M sent up top Gallant Y ~-Q2 P M Unbent the top saits 3 dq All hands
employed in scraping the Gun and Birth Deck - the ships Crews Grog Stopped
on account of Buying Liquor along side At 2 P M the Capt came on board Hoisted in the Barge &c
Friday, 14 November 1800
Cloudy Wind to the Northward and Eastward - washing Decks At 8 A M
Sent up top Gallant Y ~AtQ9 d? Employed in Scraping Decks Discharging Baggage
Belonging to the Algerines
Meridian Pleasant
Sun Set sent down top Gallant Yds in Boats &C Ends Pleasant
[H. E. Huntington L&AG.]
To Secretary of State from William Eaton, U. S. Consul, Tunis

TUNIS16. Nov. 1800.
SIR,Since sending off my dispatches yesterday I have recieved
information from Tripoli through a correct channel but not official,
that an American vessel, laden with sugar and coffee, has been carried
in by the corsaires of that regency; but has been released, and taken
her departure for Leghorn. And that the Bashaw has demanded of
our Consul, Mr Cathcart, as a condition of continuing pacific, an
a n n d tribute; and has granted siz months for an answer I had a long interview a t the palace this morning The Bey has
promised to wait one month for the arrival of the Anna Mariu. And,
I believe, I have gained the minister. There is therefore a reasonable
prospect that my projects will succeed to divert the expedition now
fitting out. No great reliance however can be laced upon assurances
which a diamond ring or a snufF-box may invaEdate [SDA. CL, Tunis, Vol. 1, July 1797-Dec. 1800.1
Extract from log of U. S. S. Gwrge Wmhingfon, Captain William Bainbridge, U. 6.
Navy, commanding, Saturday, 16 November 1800
First part cloudy a t day Break called all hands washed decks & a t 8 A M
sent up top gallant yds - a t 9 d~ weighed anchor and run up the Harbour about
a mile came too with the Best Bower in 20 Fathoms of Water Moored ship A t 3 P M Turkish 50 gun ship running past us carried away our Flying gibb
Boom unriggd the stump and got i t on deck sun set sent down top Gallant
y&* * *

[H. E. Huntington L&AG.]

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

401

To Secretary of the Navy from Captain William Beinbridge, U. 8. Navy

On board the U. S. SHIPof WAR
George T47ashington in the Port
of Constantinople 17 Novr 1800.
SIR I arrived here, on the 11 Inst, after a Passage of 23 days, we
came to anchor a t the lower end of the City of Constante 10 oClock
a t Night; in the morns: our Colours were hoisted a t the Mizzen, &
the Mission flag a t the Main. Shortly after three officers successively, came from the Grand Signior, to know what Ship we were, &
what Colours were them we had hoisted, Answered American frigate
& Colours. They said they knew no such place as America, we then
told them the new World, by that name they had some distant ideas
of us. after these enquiries we got under Weigh & came in the Harbour
of Constantinople, in entering of which I saluted the Grand S i o r s
Palace with 21 Guns.
The Captain of the Port came on board & brought us to anchor,
since which peiiod we have been discharging the Algerine Cargo C?
have this moment finished.
I cannot at present give the least information respecting my departure from this place; for the Algerine Ambassador will not have
his audience with the Grand Signior until1 the Captain Bashaw arrives from Egypt, whom I am told may be expected in 20 days; This
being a forced voyage at the risque of our Peace with AIgiers, you
must suppose that many humiliating occurrences will happen. I
shall endeavour as much as lies in my power, consistently to preserve
the Peace, but should a demand be made by their Ambassador, of the
Frigate's remaining 5 or 6 Months in this place, I shall consider myself justifiable in not complying to so long a time, a refusal may be
attended with threatnings of War which I candidly believe will never
be put in execution, would 6 of our Frigates appear before Algiers.
A list of their whole Marine force, I had the honor of enclosing you,
from that place, you there can see the pitiful force of the All powerjd
Algiers, to which is to be added, they have but only two Ports on
their whole Coast.
Believe me Sir, my information of that Country is so correct, that
I do not hesitate in saying, that 6 or 8 frigates in the Mediterranean
Sea, would give us more permanent security, than any Treaty that
can be made with the States of Barbary.
I brought letters of recommendation from the Consuls a t Algiers,
to the different Ambassadors here: I have waited on two of them,
the Earl of Elgin, the English Ambasr who received me politely, but
made no offers of public services, the other was the Baron de Huslech
the Danish Ambr who was polite & has offered his services to the
U. S. flag in the most friendly terms.
As yet I have met with no difficulty - In this Government almost
every public Concern is transacted thro' the Captain Bashaw who is
absent; I shall endeavour to make the flag of the U. S. appear as respectable as my present situation can admit. & also shall obtain epem useful
information for my government that my weak Capacity d l allow.
I have to assure you that my services are entmely devoted to the
will & interest of my Country.
Nov 19 yesterday Lord Elgin offered his services to the U. S. flag in
this Port in a friendly Manner [NA. SDA. Disp. Spain, Vol. 5, 1799-1806.1
(2'? COPY

402
-

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1786 TO 1801

To William Kirkpatrick, U. 8. Consul, Malaga, Spain, from Prederic
U. 6. Consul, Genoa

B. Welloaton,

GENOA
Decf 8th 1800

COPY

SIRI have the pleasure to c o n h my last of the l q t Inst. in which

I mentioned to you that the Port of Leghorn was Blocknded as appeared by the report of two Americans Vessels which had sailed from
this Place in Ballast, and were returned here after having been turned
off by an English Ship of War, likewise two Danish Ships that were
bound for that Port met with the same fate & were come to *this
Place. I have now further to acquaint you that I have just received
a Letter from Th: Appleton Esqr of Leghorn by which he informs me
that on the 4 Inst. the English Commander sent him official Information that the Port was Blockaded, and an order to all neutral vessels
to quit the Place in 8 days or they wiU not be suffered to sail, he
then sent a Flag onboard to obtain a Prolongation of that Term, but
received for answer that he acted from Superior orders, but that
Lord Keith is expected hourly in the Roads with General Abercrombie
and the Fleet - I shall Leave you to draw your own conclusions
as to the object of this expedition, & shall observe that notwithstanding all this, our Port remain still open & should it be otherwise shall
take the earliest opportunity to lnform you of it, & remain very
Sincerely
[SDA. CL.. Malaga, Vol. 1, 1793-1814.1
To Secretary of State from William Eaton, U. 6. Consd, Tunis

NQ31. Duplicate.

TUNIS8. Dec. 1800
SIR, On the 25. ult. after having dispatched duplicates of my
letters from 1* to 16'P it was intimated to me that there was an
American ship in the road of Porto-farina. Instantly I sent off an
express to enquire for facts. On the 27'.h recd a note from Cap+Co&,
of the Anna Maria, informing me that he had been ten dnys in the
road without being able to communicate with the shore by reason of
the weather which was extremely bad. On the 28" I asked a boat
of the Bey to board her, which he said should be ready on the 30".
Accordingly, on the 30, I embarked at Tunis, in an open boat, and
arrived on board, ten leagues, at eight in the evening of the same day.
On the morning following Dec. 1st had the honor of recieving your
letter of 3OthAugust covenng an invoice and bill of the ship's lading Yesterday I returned to Tunis. Such part of the cargo as was between
decks was chiefly discharged before I left the ship. The quality of the
articles are acknowledged to be good; but i t is objected that the
plank and the oars are too shod - and the Government affect to be
dissatisfied that the keels, guns and powder are not come forward. I
believe the facts to be - the Government is dissatisfied that any thing
hm come f o r w a ~ d . If this opinion require evidence I consider i t
sufEcient to state that the United States are the on1 nation which
have at this moment a rich ungwtrded commerce in the editerrmean,
and that the Barbary regencies are Pirdes. I take to myself the merit
of having once more a t least suspended an expedition, which was
prepared for us. But we are yet defecient, and I am not without
apprehension that this deficiency will be resorted as a pretext for

h

surprizing our marchantmen - in which case they might do us
incalculable mischief. These are considerations which, it is supposed, should compel exertions to fulfil our obligations with this
regency.

*

*

at

*

*

*

*

P. S. Dec. 10. This moment pass through this office to the Consul
Gen. at Alg* Communications from My Cathcrtrt * * *.
[SDA. CL., Tunis, Vol. 1, JuIy1797-Dec.1800.1
To Secretary of State from William Baton, U, S. Consul, Tunis

Nq 32.
SIR,

*

TUNISDec. 90. 1800.

*

*

*

*

*

*

A few days ago t.he Sapatapa sent a message to inform me that
The Beylique had need of thR American ship to go to MarseiUes. I
answered him that she was for charter. Three days were consumed
on the subject. I put him in mind of his promise of lo* of April last.
He resorted to the example of the [George] Wmhington a t Algiers and talked of force. I informed him that the affair of the Washington
had been mis-stated a t Tunis; that he was originally destined to
Consbntinople, after having delivered his cargo a t Algiers, to open
the door of negociation with the Sublime Porte; and that i t was considered a fortunate circumstance a t that instant that the Dey of
AJgiers had an Embassy to the Porte. Had this been otherwise, i t
is most probable, our Agent at Algiers would have asked i t as a favor
of the Dey to have assisted the project by sending some one of his
distinguished officers of government to introduce the American messenger As to force, if he thought suitable to exert i t in detaining the
ship to be loaded in his ports i t would be d s o necessary to use the
same means to conduct her to the port of destination; otherwise, put
what he would on board, I would order her to America, and leave the
event to be settled between my government and his. This position
I maintained in decided, though not irritating, language until a t
length he came to oEer a freight of four thousand dollars, and perquisites to the Captain, for the voyage. To these terms I thought
better to consent than to hazard the consequence of refusd, treaty
being dtogether in favor of the minister and accordingly made my
report to Captain Coffin, who says he should have five thousand
dollars at least for the voyage. I have not concluded the terms with
him; b u t am inclined to think he will finally accept those
eed with
the Sapatapa: If, otherwise, the U. S. should make a s m sacrifice
they have the satisfactory reflection that no dishonorable concessions
have been yielded to this government. I t is presumed the convention
with France, copy of which I have seen, will remove all legal impediments to this voyage, and annul the bonds of Captain C o 5 not to
enter a port of France: If not the constraint of thm Prince will have
the same effect. * * *

3

*

*

*

*

*

*

*

P. S. 28. Dec. The Ann Maria is discharged, I am informed, and
taking in balast at Porto farina to come to Tunis.
fSDA. CL,Tunis, Vol. 1, July 1797-Dec.1800.j

404

NAVAL OPERATlONS FROM 1786 TO 1801
130 December 18001

Quasi-War, United States and France
[ N o ~ ~ . - s eletter
e
of 30 December 1800 from Secretsry of the Navy to Cs tain
John Barry. U. S. Navy or the OEcer commanding the U. S. squadron a t St. Ritts,
concerning treaty between the United States and France; printed in "Naval
Documents, Quasi-War, United States and France", seventh volume (December
1800 to December, 1801), pp. 55-56.]
Extracts from log of

U. S. S. Goorgc Wushington, Captain William Bainbridge, U. 6.

Navy,cammanding
Tuesday, 80 Decenaber 1 SO0
First pert Pleasant
8 oclck sent up top Gallant Yds
Loosed the fore
topsail & fired a gun as a signal for sailing a t 10 weighed anchor got under way
fired a Salute of 21 guns $ 7 for the Grand Seignior answerd by Seven from the
Fort opposite the Seraglio - Made all sail Fresh Breezes and pleasant
Wdreesdsy, 81 December 1800
Commences with fresh Breezes and pleasant Under all sail running down the
Marmora Sea - a Russian Ship under our convoy A t 2 P M cape S+ Stephano Bore N N E Distance 6 miles
Midnight Light winds and pleasant
4 Oclocli wind ahead Tacked ship
Readed N N W
7 d~ Tacked to the Southward
8 oclock Abreast of the
Island Marmora - wind Fair Ends pleasant
Thursday, 1 January 1801
Commences F g r with Light Breezea - a ship ahead - Russian ship in Company - Headed W 5 Wind at S E a t 5 Tacked ship 9 Tacked Light winds &
variable - Meridian Pleasant
9 A M Light winds with Rain
11 Steered W
by S w-ind Fair opposite the tom of Gallipola 4 ship in Sight Beafing up 12
head W S W Ends pleasant Friday, 9 January -1801
Pleasant with Fresh Breezes Besting beating down the Mermora Sea
At 3
came to anchor in 25 F a t h o m water with the Best Bower Abreast the town of
Lapsaki 5 Squally with rain Midnight clear and pleasant
A t 1 weighed
Anchor and Stood down the Striets - a t 10 came to anchor a t the DardaneUs
Sent the Jolly Boat on board the Russian Ship for the Capt who came on board
Ends Squally with rain
[H. E. Huntington LQAG.]

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

13 January 18011
Circular letter to the U. S. Agents and Consuls in Europe from James Leandar
Catbcart, U. S. Consul, Tripoli

To the Agents and Consuls of the United States of America residing
in the different Ports of France, Spain, Portugal, Italy, the Barbary
States and British Garrisons in the Mediterranean and to all others
whom it doth or may concern.
GENTLEMEN,
I had the honor to inform you in my circular of the
12': of November 1800, that certain unjust demands having been
made by the Bashaw of Tripoli upon the United States of America
which I found it my duty to repel; that said Bashaw had publickly
snnounced in an official manner that he would declare War a ainst
the United States of America in six months to commence from t e 224
day of October 1800, if his demands which he purposely, made in an
evasive and indeterminate manner, were not complied with. I
further informed you that i t would be unsafe for our Merchant
Vessels to trade in the Mediterranean or it's vicinity after the 22q
day of March 1801, as these faithless People generally commit depredations before the time or Period allowed is expired. I likewise
informed you that I did not conclude in virtue of his promise that our
Vessels m g h t remain in the Mediterranean until1 the month of March,

I

W a S WITH BARBARY POWERS

405

but in consequence of this Regency being a t war with Sweden and the
Season of the Year.
I have now therefore to observe that a treaty of Peace and Amdy
having been concluded between his Majesty of Sweden and this
Regenc on this day the 3e of January 1801, i t is now no longer safe
for the erchant Vessels of said Un. St. of America to remain in these
seas or it's vicinity as the Swedes have made the following conditions
in consequence of their having 131 of their subjects in bondage, Viz.
They have agreed to pay Drs. 250,000 including all expences for
peace and the ransom of their captives, and 20,000 DoUars annually
m consequence of their being permitted to load here 3000 Tons of
Salt annually, and as I have every reason to suppose the same terms
will be demanded from the Un. St. of America m d that our fellow
citizens will be captured in order to ensure our compliance with the
aaid degrading, humiliating and dishonorable terms; I find i t my duty
to request you to take such measures as will most effectually prevent
any of our Vessels from trading on this Sea until1 you are advised
officially by me or either of our consuls at Algiers or Tunis that this
disagreable affair is terminated which from it's nature will require
much time as it extends to making the United States tributary to
Tripoli and must first be authorised by a particular act of the Legislature. I therefore request the above mentioned Agents and Consuls of the Un. St. of America and all others whom it doth or ma
concern to communicate the contents of this circular Letter to a 1
Merchants and Maslers of Vessels belonging to the United States, in
order that they may withdraw their property immediately from these
Seas and that our Mariners ma fly the impending danger. I likewise request them to make the etter circular and to transmit copies
of i t along the respective coasts of their residence and likewise to the
Department of State and wherever they may imagine that it will be
most likely to mswer the desired effect, as I have from hence but few
opportunities.
In testimony of the absolute necessity of using the &foresaid
precaution before i t should be too late, I hereunto subscribe
my name and a& the seal of my Office.
Done a t the Chancery of the United States of America a t
Tripoli in Barbary this 36 day of January 1801, and of the
Independance of the United States of America the 2Eitb
(signed) JAMESL. CATHCART.

t

f'

9

* * * * *

INA. SDA. Disp. Spain, Vol. 5. 1794-1806.1
Extract from Log of U. 6 . S. Gwrge Wushington, Captain W i a m Bainbridge, U. 8 .
Navy, commanding, Saturday, 3 January 1801
Fresh Breezes and Rain 2 P M the purser went on shore to purchase Bread
& wood - 4 the Bread came ofl Midnight Pleasant with Light Breezes - 10
A M Got under way half psst 10 passed the Castles of the Dardanella & entered
the Hellmpont Meridiin Light Breezes and Plesssnt [H. E. Huntington L&AG.l
To Secretary of State from Jamea L. Cathcart, ?J. 5. Consul, Tripoli

TBIPOLI
IN BART
JanT 4*> 1801
NP 1 dupIicate
SIRBy my dispatches of the 18'p of October and first of November
1800 you have been inform'd of the state of our affairs with this
Regency 8 of the steps which I have taken to evade the impending

406

N A V a OPERATIONS FROM 1786 TO 1801

dan er, I confirm the contents of said dispatches which are now public y declared in consequence of the h v a l of his Swedish Majesty's
Frigate Thetis on the 24'b of December - On the 2"g ins-eutenant
Colonel Tornquist his Swedish Majesty's Envoy extraordinary concluded a peace between the Kingdom of Sweden and this Regency
upon the following terms, Videlicet

d

Dollars

To be paid for the Peace & ransom of 131 Captives- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 240,000 Contingent expences at leaat ------------------------------------ 10,000
250,000

Colonel Tornquist has engaged that the Kingdom of Sweden shall
pay unto the Regency of Tnpoli asnually the sum of 20,000 dollars in
cash in consequence of having permission to load fifteen ships of 200
tons burthen each a t Suarez generally pronounced Zoara, the Bashaw
gives the salt gratis the Swedes are to pay the expences of embarking
the said which will not be t d i n g The particulars of the agreement were that in consequence of the
above concessions, that the Bashaw would permit the Captives to
embark immediately & that the Ambassador should pawn his honor
that the cash should be brought here in six months or in less if possible that the Consul Mr Bohrstrom was to remain here & to exercise
the duty's of his Office as formerly, & with his household to enjoy
the same immunities as before the Wax commenced
On the 2"9 ins$ in the evening the Banners of Sweden were hoisted
by the Bashaws request upon the Danish house and a temporary fla
staff was prepared in order that the customary salute should be fire
next day - When a eace takes place with any nation i t is customary for the ditE3 Consu s to congratulate the Bashaw upon the event;
you may judge with what a grace I perform'd a ceremony so repugn ~ to tmy feelings, but it was necessary; I accordingly waited upon
his Excellency in company with the Danish Consul Swedish ex-ConBUI Mr Bohrstrom and others, after congratulation perfumation fumition & drinking of Coffee & Sherbet were over commenced the folf?w[ingl litigation "I hare concluded a peace with the Swedes (commenced the Bashaw) & I am certain the King of Sweden is sensible
that I was forced to declare war against his nation contrary to my
inclination, for had my demands been satisfied in the first instance, I
should not have captured their Ships & enslaved their people; some
nations added he (meaning the United States) have used me very
ill, the[y] look upon me as nothing, they have recourse to Algiers for
all things; I should be glad to know whch is thought most of a t Constantinople; I could easily have solved that doubt, by saying that the
Dey of Algiers had lately sent presents to the Grand Segnior to the
arnrnount of a million of dollars which were owerful arguments in
his favor; but as the conversation was generaf I did not concieve it
incumbent on me to answer his prologue any more than the rest of
the company; in fact I could say nothing but what I have communicated already - "The Bashaw observing my silence directed his discourse to me & ask'd me if I understood the Arabic & Turkish languages I answer'd that 1 had a trifling knowledge of them,
them so miserably that I never made an7 use of them,
his Excellency & ministers all spoke Itahan, "pray says
what was the present De of Algiera in the re= of Mohammed
Bashaw, I answer'd that e was a person very much respected in

3

P

Z

WARS WITH BARBARY POWEBS

407

Consequence of his being the cousin of H a s a n Bashaw, but had no
post whatever? and pray what was Hman Bashaw a t that time,
"first he was Vikelharche of the Marine & afterwards was made prime
Minister & treasurer in Algiers he wlas stiled the Hasnagi - The
Bashaw turn'd up his nose with visible signs of contempt and was
going to proceed when a person inform'd him that a piece of timber
was not to be found in the whole Regency large enough to make a
fiag st& for the Swedes, unless the[y] took one of the Cruisers spars,
"it is a, diflicult thing says t h Son of Aly B&w
to get to get a flag
staff put up when i t once comes down, when the American flag st&
comes down i t will take a great deal of grease (meaning money) to
get it up again;the danish flag staff is broke I hear & wants mending
with a new one, he smiled a ghastly grin and said after all what is
twenty thousand dollars a year for a Christian nation to pay that has
such vast resources "had I enough to live on, I would not trouble
myself with Cruisers, d'tho my subjects wishes War, because it is to
their advantage? how many Raizes (added he) have I that knows the
way to the great sea. Admiral Morad answer'd about twenty," their
not being I believe one capable but himself without his accompanying
them shews that the Bashaw & his Officerspays no great regard to
truth) well replied his Excellency I will find them vessels," in Tripoli
Consul we are all hungry, &c if we are not provided for we soon get
sick & peevish - As the Bashaw spoke in metaphors, I answer'd
him in the same manner by saying that when the Chief Physician
prescribed the medicine I should have no objection to administer the
dose, but untill then T muid say nothing upon the subject, "take care
answer'd the Bashaw that the medicine does not come to late, & if i t
comes in time that i t will not be strong enough Thus ended this audience, I should not be so minute in defailing
the circumstances was it not necessary in order that government
should be enabled to draw the fight conclusion from such materials
as I have in my power to furnish them with, which from the above
tls well as every other observation which I have been able to make,
seems to me to be exactly what I have already communicated to the
Department of State in mine of the 18'b of October and 1%of November already forwarded in Quadruplicates, with this addition that the
Bashaw having now establish'd a permanent annuity which has been
his grand scheme ever since he usurp'd the throne of Tripoli, that i t
places us next upon the list of depredations & gives some colour to his
demands, as it IS a known maxim in the Barbary States that when
one nation makes a concession the others must likewise or repel the
demand by force of Arms, which cannot so well be done when a
number of our fellow Citizens are in capeivit ; under this conviction
I have alarm'd our commerce, & d our severafConsuls in Europe does
their duty b next mwch we shad not have a vessel in the mediterranean, sensib e that this is the only ma to lessen the calamity, for
much better is i t for us to lose our tra e in the medjterranean for a
few months than to have our vessels captvred &.Cltizens enslaved
which would work the same effect besides ~mpedemgthe operations
of Government & probably would in some measure be the means of
forceing us to comply with the humiliating and degrading terms which
Sweden has already in consequence of having one hundred $ thirty
one of her subjects in slavery The Danes are exactly in the same situation as the United States
except this difference; the Bashaw has demanded from Denmark an

f

1

408

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1785 TO 1801

annuity of 20,000 dollars & from the United States he has made no
specific demand, indeed he could not as I repel'd the idea of our
becomeing tributary with indignation, but a t present his ernissarys &
every other person of intelligence in Tripoli knows that on those terms
alone Sweden Denmark America & Holland will be able to maintain
their peace with this Regency Comodore Koefoed who commands a danish squadron in this sea in
consequence of the truce expiring between Denmark & Tunis I believe
in Februaq, is expected here very soon, if he acts with energy i t will
give security to us I hope until1 measures are adopted by government,
but if Denmark concludes upon the same terms that Sweden has, the
same week our flag staff comes down, unless the Dey of Algiers interferes with uncommon energy, N-hich from the tenor of Mr OBriens
communications I have not the least reason to expect, but before
anything can be effected here I imagine i t will be necessary to ask
permission from the most Potent Dey of Algiers in consequence of
the stipulation contain'd in the 12th article of our Treaty with this
Regency as is more fully explain'd in my former communications: I
a m convinced that this step is necessary, notwithstanding the Dey of
Algiers has never interfered in favor of the United States since my
arrival a t Tripoli, * * * * * *
The Bashaw has evidently betray'd his real character in the above
negotiation, & has given s a c i e n t proof of his cowardice, "this will
poult out the expediency of sending a suf6cient force into the mediterranean with the greatest dispatch in order to prevent the U S from
sharing the same fate as the Danes a t Tunis & Swedes a t Tripoli "I have effected every thing possible to be done by an individual to
preseme my Countrys peace upon honorable & equitable terms & to
this instant has not made one concession; but what can remonstrance
avail where their is no justice to be obtain'd but by force of arms &
no friendship exists but what is ins ired by hopes of gain. I shall
endeavor to temporize with the Bas aw & if possible gain time until
I receive instructions from government which if not accompanied
with force will only prepare the way for exorbitant demands, which
the Bashaw expects will be equal to what is given by Sweden, & if
we pay this Regency 20,000 dollars pr annum this year, you may
depend that the next we will be obliged to pay Tunis 30,000 & Algiers
40,000 a t least, notwithtanding the stipulataon for 3000 Tons of salt
annually being made merely as a blind in order to prevent the other
Regency's from increasing their demands upon Sweden, but I am in
doubt whether i t will answer the desired effect -

g

*

*

*

*

*

*

*

Before I conclude, I am under the necessity of observing that my
situation is peculiarly disagreeable; I have not onl the peace of my
nation to maintain but the influence & intrigues o the whole Sanhedrim of Algiers & Tripoli also to counteract, unsupported by government, not having receiv'd but one letter from the Department of
State in two years, neither have I heard from our minister a t Lisbon
since the 8'4 of last April, add to this that my instructions are merely
answers to some questions which I ask'd before m departure and
are couch'd in such terms as will not authorize my ta ing one decisive
measure unless first approved by a man who has done nothin (this
two years past) but wnte nonsense dictated by the perfidious ews at
Algiers, & who has not taken one step to enforce our treaty by that

?

f

f

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

409

Regency since my arrival a t Tripoli, the whole of his communications
being s complicated chaos of contradiction misrepresentation ignorance & duplicity mixt together with rocks shoals anchors cables masts
rigging & a thousand other absurdities which would puzzle La
Lewis or any one else to understand; the only article in which he as
been consistant is in demonstrating a desire of throwing the whole
of our affairs both a t Tunis & Tripoh into the hands of the pusillanimous jews as they are a t Algiers & of writing unintelligible metaphors
no more to the purpose than the proverbs of the inimitable Cervantes
de Saavedras auxiliary Hero Sancho Panca were I request you Sir to take my situation into serious consideration,
& to represent our &airs with this Regency to the President &
government in such a manner that more attention may be paid to
them than has been heretofore, that the existing abuses may be
reform'd as soon as circumstances will admit, or that otherwise the
President will please to appoint some person more adequate to the
task imposed upon me than I am; for I find that I cannot under
existing circumstances remain longer here, unless I should be base
enough to become the Agent of the Bashaw of Tripoli & his friends
in Algiers, and theirby betray the honor & interest of my Country &
act in a menner inconsistant with the dignity anuex'd to my character
as the representative of a free independent & magnanimous nation;
& unless very great alterations indeed are made in our arrangements
as i t is impossible to serve both God and Mammon On the 26'? of December Citizen Billon ratified the Truce concluded
on the 26" of November between the French Republic and this
Regency, the terms differs from the terms obtaiu'd a t Algiers & Tunis
but very little "the Bashaw is very much affraid of the French in
consequence of the eastern provinces of this Regency (Bengasse &
Derna) being ve much disaffected, & he is apprehensive that they
would join the x e n c h of Alexandria should they contemplate the
conquest of this Regency, "if our treaty with France is founded on
the Basis of our treaty of 1778 the puting in execution the 8* article
would be of great service to our interests here; for so long as the french
holds Alexandria it is the interest of the Bashaw of Tripoli to make
every reasonable concession to that Republic, otherwise his eastern
provinces are irrecoverably lost to him & his successors" Government will determine upon the propriety of the measure - * * * * * *
The original of which this is a duplicate was enclosed by his Danish
Ma'estys Consul genl here to their Agent a t Malta to be forwarded
to huro e & from thence to America by the f i s t conveyance, this
goes enc osed to Mr Eaton a t Tunis.

T'

P

[SDA. CL, Tripoli, Vol. 1, Part 11, Jan. 1600-May 1801.1
Extracte from log of U. S. S.

Washintton, Captain William Bainbridge, U.S.
Navy, commanding

Ceorge

Sunday, 4 January 1801
First part Fresh Breezes from the E N E at half past 1 P M ast the town of
Tenedos opposite which stood famous Tmy. Leaving Mount fda on the West
where the Gods Assembled to veiw the Battle & Mount Athos in the East formerly a Burning Mountain - where the Gods when they came down from Heaven
to veiw the Battle took a resting spell - from thence to the small Island of
Lemnos, where they fed there Horses of Nectar and Ambrosio - the Island
where Vulcan Lit when he fell from Heaven and Established his forge - 2 P M
took in Steering Saib & royals 4 P M took in top Gallant sails - took a reef in
Each top sail sent down top Gallant Yds

410

NAV~OPE=2ZATIONSFROM1786TOI801

At 5 P M cape Baba Bore E by S % S Dist 4 Leagues At hrtlf past 6 P M
shook one reef Out of fore and Main top Sail - 7 sent u Main top Gallant Yd
and set the sails A t 4 A M the Island of Sciro Bore W
by N 8 Leagues Dmtan* - 6 A M set steering sails saw a sail Under our Lee Saw the Island of Andrea on our Larboard and Cape Doro on our Starboard
Bow
At 8 A M sent up fore top Gallant Yd and set the sail - 10 ast the Island of
Negropont wbich is joined to the Main by a Bridge 20 miles
- Meridian
Abreast of Zia East side 3 miles Long - Termia on our Larboard Bow Bore
S S W 2 Leagues distance - Andria 4 Leagues Dis Bore N E 10 Islands in sight
Fresh Breezes and pleasant Mmdcry, 6 January 1801
First part Fresh gales under all sail a t 2 P[M]Bove too under the Lee of the
I d e of Thermis Landed the pilot a t 3 P M the Boat returnd made all sail - at
$4 past 4 P M the Isle of Falconira Bore S W ?4 W - the S W end of Serpho
Bore S E - and Antimillo S by W a t 7 took in fore top Gallant Studding Ssils
at half past 9 the Isle of Falconira Bore N W by W 3 h a g Distance - Midnight pleasant * * *
[H. E. Huntington LCAG.]

E

kg

-

To James Leander Cathcart, U.6. Consul, Tripoli, from Captain Wi3liam Bainbridga,
U. S. Navy

On board the United States Frigate George Washington,

off the Ialand of Malta, 10" January 1801
SIR This will be handed you by a Chous[e], of the Captain Bashaws,
of the Turkish Empire, whom I brought from Constantinople and
am now landing him rtt Malta, from whence he is to proceed to Tripoli
with the orders of the Grand Signior, to make a demand on the Bey
of Tripoli, for his compliance to matters of Magnitude, & I beleive of
great importance t o the Commerce in the Medettiranean Sea, The
Tunisian Ship with presents for t.he Ottoman Porte, immediately on
her arrival there, was not suffered to hoist her Colors, the presents
refused by the Porte to be accepted of, the Ship stripped & hauled in
dock,
I am now bound to Algiers with one of the Suit of the Algerine
Ambassador who carries orders to the Dey of Algiers similar to those
for the Bey of Tripoli
The flag of the United States, under my command was treated with
the greatest respect, in Cons!antinople & was taken under the immediate protection of the Captam Bashaw, who is a person of the greatest
influence, in the Turkish Empire Any little attention that you may ay to the ChousIe], the bearer
of this, no doubt woud please the
3.r h o I assure you ia very
friendly to the Americans -

8

[Haverford College, Hsverford, Pa. NDA photostat.]

To Wiltiam Smith, U. S. Minister to Lisbon, Portugal, from Richard O'Brien, U. 8.
Consul General, Algiers

ALGIERB
The 10fpJanuary 1801
SIR This day the dey of algiers sent for me and told me that he had
done the americans a great favour and service relative to Tripolia.
that his letter. would have the desired Effect. and that he request$ I
should give him a present I told him that. he had for ot. that he ot
the Brig Baahaw. that the U S Ship was on a service or the dey t a t
would cost the U S 60 thousand dollars. the dey got Very angry
said it was a trifle. aU for such a great and Commercial a nation as

NQ3

f

%

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

411

the a m e r i m s That I should know what the Tunicians did to the
deans and allso what the tripolines did and lately to the Swedes. and
that as he wrote a good letter. he would require something for it.
if not he would never interfere in favour of the americans with Tripolia
or Tunis - and that he knew what to write to Tripolia. I said I was
sorrow to hear this from the dey. That he well knew as an agent I
had not i t allway9 in My power to give that I had no funds and that
I could but rocure for him a small present. which I intended to
send to tripo .a. if The dey would not write. but would give it to
him. aye seyes the dey that is right go bring it -

E

It were as Viz

- 2 pieces of Muslin -------2 pieces of Handkerchief--12 pique8 of Cloth--------2 caftans-------- - - - - - - -- -

dohrr

70 - \
30 ~a",r~~~"
54 - Mpolia to tske Ameriin
230 - order to be benefited. by the
2 pieces of Holland? linnen- 54 - 1 f ~ & ~ h ~ ~ ~ for
- Bmentod
40 lb lode sugar----------- 20 ater Viewing our Efforts
you
wilt
Judge
if
it
isneoessary
1 Sack of Coffee-- - - - - - - - - 45 - to alarm our Commerce on
acei of Trlpob.
Am+ in dolra-----,-----503 - 1

NEkzy

Sayes the dey no ring no watch I said I had none that this was all
then say# the dey let i t be So This satisfies m letter to Tripolia On consideration the present to the dey t ough trifieing will convince him that he has Got. payment. for his letter. i t will exclude
greater claims or pretensions for his services on our affairs with
Tripolia i t will prevent the agents. of Tripolia a t Algiers. poisoning
the deyg mind against the americans and it w i l l I hope make the dey
forget. the Malicious lys of the Bashaw of Tripolia against Consul
Cathcart.
The Busnachs & Bacris influence in this regency. is Very great
the[y] are the directory The[y] can give us war when the[y] think
proper. The[yJ Made the french peace in Spite of the firmans of The
Grand Signior Thejy] keep the dey in hot water with the British
This is french influence The Bey of Tunis does not love the Jews.
The[y] are here planning against him to aid Azulia at Tunis a Levite.
Theb] have the Jew farfaro at Tripolia - in fact the[y] rise the
winds and calm the Seas - I had no letter by the Anna Maria Government much neglects their barbary affairs - war Sir will be the
result in spite of every effort we can Make - our stipulations and
annuities should be made good we should have consular funds - not
to be dependant on those leeches and extortioners the Jews - we
want much a fleet of Corsairs in this Sea [NA. SDA. CL,Algiers, Vol. 6, Jan. 1801-Dec. 1803.1

i

Extract from log of U. S. S. George Washingion, Captain William Bainbridge, U. S.
Navy, commanding, Sunday, 11 January 1801
First art Light winds and pleasant under all sail 5P
the 6. E int of Sicily Bore N % W Dis 7 Leagues - 10 P M took in
fore I% Mizen to Ellant mils - Middle pleaaant
7 A M made L a l t a bearing S W by W mont Etna bearing N N E Distancb]
127 miles - hoisted out the Barge Landed 4 Turks with their Baggage the third
Leiu~lwent on shore with them Latter part pleasant standing in for the Land Long in 14.14 Lat Obsvr 36' 4'
[H. E. Huntington L&AG.]

I8

,",~

412

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1786

TO

1801

[12 January 18011
Quaai-War, United States and France
[NoTE.-S~~report of Secretary of the Navy to the Sixth Congress of the
United States,dated 12 January 1801, setting forth the policy and disposition of
the U. S. Navy a t the end of the war with France; printed in "Naval Documents,
Quasi-War, United States and France", seventh volume (December, 1800 to
December, 1801), pp. 80-84.)

Extracts from log of U. S. S. Geartc Washington, Captain William Bainbridpe, U.6.
Navy, commanding
ikfonday, 16 .?albuary 1801
First part pleasant lying too for the Boat - past 2 wore ship to the Northward - % psst 3 Tacked ship and made a i l for the Land - Set Spanker &
Flying Jibb
At 5 the Bar e returned got her in and made sail to the Northward Middle art 8alm At 6 A %tthe Harbour of Malta bore S W by S 5 Leagues Distance
7 A M Set royals and Steering Sails fore & Aft - Saw Mount Etna.
Meridian Moderate Breezes and pleasant the Island of Goao Bore S W f / , S
the West End saw a mil Standing to South? k East?
Lat Obsv 36.17
Wednesday, 14 January 1801
Pleaant under all mil
At Sun Set the I s h d Mssitimo Bore N 13 East the Idand Pantilarim 12 West
same time Observed the suns and found the variation to be 19 Westerd At 5
past 5 bore away W by N
Middle part pleasant
at half past 12 P M saw Cape Bon Bearing S S W 4r, W Die 6 Leagues the
Eastern oint of the Bay of Tunis
6 Set goy& & Steering Sails 8 Saw the Quills Bearin about East
Meridan plesaaot Cape Boo Bore S S E Ide Imbria 8 8 W
Lat Ob 37.20
Thursday, 16 January 1801
First part pleaaant under all sail. a Brigg in sight Beating to Windward She
made Signals we could not Understand She kept away and stood into the Bay
of Tunis 3; past 5 P M Cape Fsrie bore S S W # W distance 5 Leagues
7 took in Royals and top Gallant sails 11 squally with rain took in Steering
ssils
6 A M took one reef in each top sail
9 sent down top GaIlant Yds
At 10
set Mizen top sail
Meridian More Moderate sent up Main top Gallant Yd and set the sail
Lat Obserd 37.56
[H. E. Huntington LdcAG.1

-

To John Gavino, U. S. Consul, Gibraltar, from Richard O'Brien, U. 8. Conlrd
General, Algiers

COPY
ALGIERB
2l.t JanT 1801
SIR The [George] Washingion is in Sight of Algier. I think she
making so quick a Vo age that she is hpatched on account of the
Claims of the Grand Signor for the Greeks, Imperials, and British,
and under this consideration I have my fears smd Ship will be sent
again by this Regency for Con?tantinopla - God forbid I have sent Presents to Tnpolia to the amot of 4000 Dollars &
ordered Mr Cethcart to have mone a t Command. The De has
strong on our &airs.
ore sir not in the power o your

J

9

Copy of this Letter please to forward to the Honble Secretary of
Sttlte & MT Slllith [BDA. CL, Gibrsltar, Vol. 2, 1796-1804.1

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

413

Extract from log of U. S, S. Gorge Wathingl~n,Captain William Bainbridge, U. 8.
Navy, commanding
Wcdneclday, 31 January 1801
First part pleasant under all sail Standing in for Algeirs 4 P M made the Harbour
5 shortned sail reef to sails set the Courses sent down top gallant Yda - 11
Wore shi headed E by ~ ' s ~ u a ll ~9 A M a boat came along side from the city
a t 11P
E&metW with the Beat Bower in 25 Fathoms Water muddy Bottom the
Light Houae Bore N W by W Distance 2 Leagues - Cap$ O'Brion the American
Conaul came on board - Peace with France No news from America - the
Crescent frigate and the Brig Haasan Baushaw Laying in the Harbour
Ends Pleaeant with ~ i ~ h t s r e e s e a
Thursday, $3 January 1801
Comrnencee pleasant the Wind at N W Laying a t anchor in the Bay of Algeirs
Discharging the Baggage of the Passengers
Bun set sent down top Gallant yds
Midnight Pleaaant
Sun rise sent up
" Ditto
"
Meridian Plesaant a ship of 74 guns and a frigate Standing into the Bay Shewing Danish Colours - Capt Bainbridge went on shore
Saturday, 34 January 1801
Commences Fresh Breezes & Pleasant Lying a t anchor in the Bay of Algeirs
Midnight P k a n t
Day Break F m h gales with rain in plenty 6 o[c]lock weighed anchor and
stood into the Harbour of algeim the wind came out of Nd & Wd Could not ly in
Beating in at Meridian came too with the Best Bower
Sunday, 26 Janwrty 1801
Commences with rain & Squally
1 P M Hoisted out the Barge & Cutter Moord Ship Midnight Squally Hoisting out the Turks Baggage & Breaking up the Hold - to get a t the guns - s
Li hter came along side & Rec* 20 Water Casks biridian Pleasant
Monday, 26 January 1801
Commences Pleasant
2 P M Clearing away the Wood to get a t the guns
6 P M Called all hands to Clear the Hold
4 A M releived them got the Hold Clear 6 A M Be an to hoist out the guns Hoisted out 24, - F[r]eah Breezes & Rain
Meridian fileasant - Cleard ship
Tuesday, 87 January 1801
Comences with Freah Breezes & Rain Taking in Ballast - 2 P M the Algerinea
eent a Present of 4 Bullocks 10 Sheep with Freah Bread & greens Afternoon Leveling the Ballast & Stowing the Hold
Midnight F m h gales with rain 1 P M Commenced with Heavy gales & rain
Lowerd down the fore & Main Yd derick &C Parted our Stream Cable out Astern
& Swung round our Jibb Boom over the Rocks, & got a cable from &ore - 12
hove the 8hi to her Moorings & Moored with a New Stream. Meridian fbaeant
[H. E. Huntington L&AG.]

8

To Secretary of State from Richard O'Brien, U. S. Consul General, Algiers

ALGIERS
The %Yth January 1801
Triplicate
SIR,on the 219"Inst arrived a t Algiers in 23 day? from Constantionople. The U S Shi the G[eorge] Washington. william Bainbridge
he Grand Signior. has detained the Algerine
Esqr Commander.
Ambasador. Suit and presents. until1 that the regency of Algiers
complies with all his demands. and will have full submision to his
orders - The Grand Si ior requests that the dey will declare war
against france give up d!? those captives wbich had British recommendations. res ect the British and Grant them Supplies to give up a{ the imperials and exvenitians. to give up all those
that were and is the Subjects of the Allies of the Grand Signior. to pay
for tbeuspoilations on the Greeks and Imperials. The Sum demanded
on tbis:accl is two Millions four hundred thousand Manbo'is. Equal to.

#

414

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1785 TO I801

Three millions two hundred and forty thsd dollars. These demands.
threw the dey and ministry. into the Greatest. confusion and The dey
has given up 240 Neapolitans Sicillians $9 malteese. all of which were
captured with British recommendations.
A l b . Algiers has liberated. 160. Imperials and Venitians. and has
collected from the treasury one million of manbois - which he intends.
sending in a dean [Danish] ship to the Grand Signior Algiers has declared war against france. and ordered every french subject to depart
from the regency. the dey intended, to put them all in chaina. but has
done right in sending them out of this Country. - The french mbasador. and all of his nation here has requested. in the name of france.
The favour of me and Capt Bainbridge to give them a passage in the
[George] Washington for Spain - we considering the friendship. subsisting. a t present. between. the U S andframe has acquised to Grant
the request. hopeing i t will meet the approbation of the U S, further
we are induced to do this act of Humanity. to The french as i t would do
away The Idea and intention of The Regency. in Sending The [George)
Washington a 24 Voyage to. Constanbonople - as I and Captain
Bainbridge. had our fears That it was the intention of the dey to do
so - what might be the consequence of a refusal to an Irritated dey
and regency you can easily conceive, and was Very Sensibly. felt by
me and Captain Bainbridge. if refused war and detention to ship and
crew if said ship would be forced to proceed. The Patience of The
officers and crew would be exhausted. and would of course with regalia
presents &P return to the U S for be convinced Sir The[y] have suffered
every humiliation on the voyage. The[y] have so gloriously terminated.
I cannot. help declareing to you that the voyage of The [George]
Washington. has saved our peace and has been the means of upseting
the political existance of This re ency.
On the 25* Ins$when I and !t 'aptain Bainbridge were in a private
audience with the dey. he had the meanness to ask us to write in his
favour to Capt Bashaw and asked me what he should do. That he
would do Justice. for the wrongs he did But that those done by
to do with I answered that. God
Hasien Bashaw. he had not
took Hasien Bashnw. out of T e world. for doing wrong. and put
Bobba Mustapha of algien in his stead to do right. that my advlce.
was to compIy with the Grand Siggor? request. to liberate the slaves
do with the french. as the Grand SigniorQequeste~but it would be to
his honour to let the french depart. to send some mone to write good
letters. and promise respect and friendship that all t s would reinstate him in the Esteem of The Grand Signior. The dey seemed much
humbled as will be described more fully to you. by Capt Bainbridge
whose good conduct on this Voyage must Entitle him to the Esteem
of america and of your particular attention The Grand Signior has taken the same determination relative to
Tunis and Tri lia as he has with Algiers and I Make no doubt. but
his orders will e particular1 complyed with
The presents and funds wLch were sent by the [George]Wa~dbi~qtcm
Certainly amounted to 1% millions of dollars. a Swede with the deyf
Nephew arrived a t Sm
a with 500 Thousand. dollars. this was by
orders of the Captain ashaw deposited in the treasury of the Grand
Signior a t Smymia - another Swede with the algerine prime ministers
Nephew with a t least 400 ThsQdollars run on Shore a t the Island of
Candia this Money &so. hss fallen into the p&on
of The Grand
S i o r , add to this that the 100 turks whch went in the [Cfeorge]

9

&

f'

d-

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

415

Washington. and is detained a t Constantionople were Chiefly the most
rich and h t men of this Regency. these considerations must induce
this Regency to acquise to the demands of the Grand Signior - but
one of Greater Magnitude is that Lord Keith with the British fleet
and 21 thous? troopes is a t the Island of Rhodes. The Captain
Bashaw - and fleet with 30 thousand turbs will shortly leave Constantionople to Join Lord Keith. 20 - or 30 Thousand Turks is at
Jaffa - or Joppa these united. will rondevouse a t Rhodes. and a.11
proceed and make an attack on alexandria. ;to such great forces the
french would be obliged to capitulate after t h dl would Visit Algers
and Tunis. rob and plunder and destroy those Governments. and leave
tributary Bashaw? in Each place subservant to. the orders. and influence of the Grand Signior This consideration has struck this
regency. with Terror. and obliged Them to acquise, Such Sir is My
Ideas If the Grand Signior Keeps his station. The more he finds that
Algiers hes given way The more ho will expect. The Grc S i o r
has not much money. i t is an article he much wants. Algiers has
every thing he could wish for, and of course after a.U this. all
treaties of the Christian powers should be first made with the Grand
Signior. and under his gaurentee if not. we are at the mercy and
ca rice of every Petty Pirate of Barbary - and the Grand Signior
not admit. The 3 Eastern States of Barbary to be a t peace with
any nation but agreeable to his interest and orders - france will never
again seek a peace with these 3 piratical States. when the[y] conclude
with the Grand Signior. Theb] will oblige him to make and gaurentee.
for algiers Tunis and Tripolia - under these considerations we have
no time to loose in sending an ambasador to Constantionople. (The
dey requires it) and we should with him send tm7o of our largest
frigates in Gra.nd Order. it will give the Eastern world an Idea of
what might be expected in a few years from the Western world and
you will see fully the necesity. and faire prospects. by The important
communications and information which Caps Bainbridge wdl give
you - a peace once made with the Grand Signior is a peace of duration and Stability. and of great political and Commercial advanteges
to the United States. i t will not be on so Capricious a plan as our
peace with the Barbary States. which is as much to be depended on
as The winds in the Variable Lattitudes. The same time as the
lar e nations or ships breaks the ice we can foilow with Ease. This
I B ould suppose would be our policy. The same time the dey will
make a haw1 to repay him. for his present losses- I hope we shall not
be the Victim: we are nearly 2 5 years in arrears no funds has a valuable
and ungaurded Commerce in this Sea - we are.Threatened by all
Barbary. Therefore we should act with E n e w e make good our
stipulations and annuities hare Consular funds. not to be depending
on those Merc.enary Jews - and shew force in this sea if not we will
certainly experience difEculties. for all particulars I refer you to
Captain Bainbridge and to the dispatches which you will receive by
this Conveyance
PS This stroke which will Occasion. the destruction of the political
existance of algiers Tunis and tripolia. the Christian world is indebted.
for this to tbe spirited. and political conduct of Lord Keith The Earl
of Elgin and John Falcon Esq' the British Cons! Genl a t algiers These
medittsraniw Philosophers Knew when to drive the Harpoon into

%

416

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1786 TO 1801

the VitalQf the 3 headed Beast. The have extricated by this stroke
of policy all those unfortunate men w om were taken in consequence
of Being in anv respects. employed. by the British in this sea. saved
their Beaten ahy! Subjects from bondage - They have allso rooted
out french influence and agents. from the 3 pirate states This will
occasion the french small corsairs to disarm and no supplies for
france or her allies from Barbary. The Levite directory ~snow a t
the mercy of British influence, a British influence firman might allso
Occccsion Barbary to be at m r with Spain no dificulf a$air
Algiers The. 2c february. This morning Sailed. two Xebecks for
mahon - haveing on board The 240 men which were given up by
this Regency to the British Consul Generl Falcon
Allso sailed a purchased Ship with 160 Imperials and Venitians
which were given up by algiers a t the request of the Grand Signior
Sailed The dean Ship on the Algerine Mision with Money and Suppllcations for Constantionople Sailed The Imperial Brig with the ambasador of the Grand Signior
for Tripolia On the 3Ot! J a n u a v sailed the U S. Ship C[eorge] W[ashington.]with
all the french which were in this Regency for Barcalonia Allicant vr
Carthagena - on the night of the 30%arrived in this port the Bng
Mindon of Boston Joseph Tiddrel master in ballast. put in on acct of
Severe weather was destined on this coast to load Grain the dey wanted
ta send her on a Voyage I told him the[y] were in distress. that this
would add to i t Got provisions for said Vessel and Sailed the l* Inst
destined for Oran - There is at Oran a large American ship from
Lisbon. freighted by an Italian $ Algerine house there -Bentaleb Said
ship will load with wheat I suppose Algerine property if an acddent
we shall have 2+ Ship Fortune affair. Cannot those calamities be
prevented. on yr part -

g

INA. SDA. CL, AIgiers, Vol. 6, Jsn. 1801-Dec. 1803.1
To Lieutenant David Phipps, U.8. Navy, from Captain Edward Preble, U. S. l e v y
PORTLAND
Jan? QOtP 1801.

SIR I suppose ere this the carpenters & caulkers have finished
what work was laid out for them. I wish you to have the Barricade
on the fore part of the Quarter-Deck the same as the Adams & New
York were so as to compose a good Breast work Rith a netting on the
top for Hammocks the same as the quarters call on the Master
Builder he knows how I wish it finished, you will please to direct as
many more Irons for the Quarter deck netting as will place one between
every two now up, as they we too far apart at present - l t will be
well to have the forward and After ones stouter than the others and
good braces to them to prerent their giving way when setting up the
Ridge-Ropes. The iron standards for the gangways I wish ma
lengthened so as to be breast high, and as they are too far a p ~ r t ave
be
more made and place one between every two, as soon as the ship is
compleatly Rigged, she must be painted outside & inside - except
the Cabbm. I wish you to take a look a t the new Boab that are
13uilding & see that they are faithfully built & well finished & painted,
& two compleat setts of Oars made for them. I shall write you again
in a few da s. I wish you to give Mr Gurley leave of absence for a
few d ~ y w
e en Mr Scalland [Scallon] joins the ship

B

i

ILC.

Edward Preble Papers, Vol. 3, 180(tl801.]

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

417

Extracts from log of U. 8. 6. George Warlifngton, Captain William Bainbridge, U. 6.
Navy, commanding
Saturday, 31 Janwrw 1801.
At 1 P M the French Consul 5 Ladies & Thirty gentlemen came on boardbound for Alicant Weighd Anchor & made sail At 5 the Light House of Algein Bore S W by S Dis 5 Leagues 8 bore S W S got up fore main & Mizen top G yd.
Cape Matifor Bore S by E f j E
Thursday, 6 February 1801
Commences with Light winds & variable
2 P M Called all hands overhauled a range of the Best Bower Cable
6 the Wind Came out a t the S El stood in for the Bay of Alicant
8 A M Came too with the Best Bower in 11 Fathoms Water in the Bav of Alicant
Meridian the American & French Consul Came off - got Permit to Land the
passengers
[H. E. Huntington L&AG.j
To any Commander of U. S. Ship of W w from Secretary of the Navy

[WASHINGTON,
D. C.]
Navy Dept 6'fi Feby 1801

COMMANDER
OF A SHIPOF WAR
~eturningto the United States
You will receive & bring to the United States on your return home
any specie which the Agent of Mr James Purviance may send on board
of your Ship -

To

ANY

[NDA.

OSW, Vol. 4, 1800-1801.1

Extracts from log of U. 9. 6. Gmrr Wpthingfon, Captain William Bainbridge, U. S.
Navy, commanding
F r i d a ~6, February 1801
Commences pleasantAt 4 P M Landed the French Consul & other passengers - with part of Their
Effects received American papers up to the first of December Account of the
Capture of a French Corvette by the Boston frigate - Peace with France Nothing New - Middle pleasant Sunday, 8 February 1801
First art pleasant Laying a t anchor in Alicant Bay a t 5 P M weighed anchor
Stood o8f1 the Bay a t 9 P M the wind hauled round to the Westward hove
About and Stood into the Bay again arid anchored in seventeen Fathoms of Water
Midnight Calm & Fair ~t 6 A M Weighed anchor Hoisted Signals for the two American Briggs to get
under way and Stand out of the Bay - Bound with us thro the Straits Commanded by Ca t Rich & Lovett stood out o t t h e Bay under three top Sails
Meridian Cape Palla? Bore S 10%W * * *
Monday, 9 February 1801
Pleasant under our three top sails Waiting for the Anierican Briggs Bound
thro the Straits under our protection 4 P M saw a Large Polacre Ship in with the Land - Standing N. E saw
fleet of twent odd sail of Ships & Briggs a t anchor in the Bay of [space] after
sal[u]ting[l] & d e s 61 Danes
Sun Set Cape P d a s Bore S 36 W and the Island of Grosey S 42 West - half
past 5 made the Signal & Tacked Ship as r Logg Shortned and made sail Occ*
sionally for the Brigga - a t 6 A M Cape %a& Bore W K S 4 Leagues Dis
At 7 Lowerd down the Jolly Boat & Sent her on board the Briggs- Rack4
the Mizen top sail
Meridian Cnlm the S E point Cape Pallas Bore W N W
Tuesday, 10 February 1801
~ i p pt ~ r Pleasant
t
under top sails & Foresail Standing in for Cape Pallas
the two Brig@ in Company. at 5 P M tacked Ship as pr Log Cape Psllss Bore
N E Dls 5 mlles. a t Sun sett Cape Pallas Bore N 12 W and Cape Fuga N 70

418

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1786 TO 1801

3 do Tacked [ship] 4 do Tacked ship Headed as pr Log Saw a Strange sail in
theSW8 A M took the Brigg Franklin [in] tow set royals & steering sails
10 P M Past 2 Swedish Briggs & a Bark the Island Abreast of the Harbour of
Carthagena
Bore N by E Distance 5 or 6 Leagues - Lst Obsd 37O15'
Wednesday, 11 February 1801
Commences Pleasant the Brigg Franklin in tow
2 P M saw a Brigg in with the Land Bearing W S W 4 P M took in steering saiIs
At Sun Set Cape De Gatt Bore S W by W
a t 10 Cast off the Hawser from the Brigg Franklin Middle art p l a n t
8 ~ ~poke4 the' Schooner Betsey 40 Days from Boston Bound to Alicant
At Meridian Cape De Gatt Bore N W - h t Obsvd 36.40 N
Friday, 13 February 1801
Commences Squally with Rain and Light Breezes the Brigg [FrankEin] Still in
tow a t 1 P M Apes Hill bore W. by S. a t 3 d~ W by N

*

*

At 6 P M Cast off the tow Line from the Brigg 8 Wore Ship

*

*

*

*

*

- Middle

part

SguaUsr

At 3 A M wore Ship handed Mizen top sail
4 d* Handed fore top sail Close reeft Main top Sail - 5 A M Wore Ship
At Meridian the rock of Gibralter Bore W by N Spoke the British frigate
Pheobe of 36 guns Cruising in the Gutt - No News
M d y , 16 February 1801
Commences with Fresh gales attended with squalls of rain - At 1 P M the
Brigg Franklin Capt Rich made s signal to speak us Bore away and spoke
him - st 4 d* Close Reeft Fore sail & Top sails strong Gales - At 6 f M Apes
HU Bore N 3 W Dark & Squally - Shortned sail
s t 8 wore shi - st 11 wore ship - Middle part more Moderate
At 4 A M. &avy gales took in fore top sail Brailed up Mizen & Mizen stay
sail - a t 9 dp More Moderate the rock of Gibralter Bore West
At half past 11 dq wore ship Meridian the rock of Gibralter Bore W 3 N and Apes Hi11 W. S. W.
W. this Being the Fourth day Beating off the rock of Gibrater
Tuesday, 17 February 1801
Commences with atrong gales with squalls of rain
at half Past 3 P M the rock of Gibralter Bore W by N % N and Apes Hill
West - at 5 d~ Apes Hill Bore W N Distance 8 or 9 Leagues -

*

*

*

a'

*

*

*

strong gales with Heavy Showem of rain - Spoke the Brigg Franklin Capt
Rich who Bore away for Malaga
En& with Heaveg Squalls of Rain - this day on an AIlowance of 3 qut.9 Water
[E. E. Huntington L&AG.I

To Israel Wbelen, U. 6. Purveyor, from Ebenezer Stevens, N e w York, A. Y.

NEW YORK1Yt-h FebrY 1801
SIRAgreeable to your request (Some time since,) I have found a
Ship, that d l suit you for freighting a Cargo, to A k e r s
She is called the Thomas, belonging to Thr Jenkins Esqr of Hudson,
burthen 370 Tons - full built, with Lumber, ports, and is suitable
far taking long Spars - he is willing she should go round to Philadelphia, provided a reasonable compensation be made, You will please to inform me what kind of Cargo is proposed b be
sent, and the rate of freight, you will give - as early as possible - I
would obsen-e that freights are brisk, and if not concluded on soon,
the Ship may be taken up,
I have commenced loadin the #and Turk, for Tunis, and have
rocured fourteen 9 pound annon with their Carriages, which will
pe sent, in addition to Cargo, proposed to be sent, agreeable ta Memorandum tranaolitted you

d

-

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

419

Should you conclude to take the Thonaas erhaps there may some
artides be purchased here, to go on board, r k h w i l l serve ta ballast
her, before She goes round - of this you will please to advise me
[Sehuylkill h n a l . 1
To the Secretory of atate, from Robert Montgomery, U. 6. Agent, Ucente

ALICANTE
1P FebT I801
SIRI had the honour of addressing you under date of 26 July last
and since have been deprived of your favours Inclosed you will please find a List of Arrivals here since the f h t of
July, last till the first of January of this year, there are several arrivals
since that period, which, of course, will appear in the next List.
On the 5 Inst the F ' ate, G. Washington Cap; Bainbridge arrived
here from Algeh, he de 'vered me several Letters for Mr Smith and
Mr Humphreys, which the latter has advised receipt of, and promised
to forward to Mr Smith with safety all those to fus address Cap' Bainbridge brought here the Commissary and whole Commercial Relation of the French Republic a t flgeirs, in number about
forty. The Commissary and some of the pmcrpals have been to my
House to thank me in a fbrmal manner for the civility & humanity
received from Caps Bainbridge and the American officers a t large My reply was that humanity was due to our Enemies, and that it
was a psrticular pleasure to Americans to render every good office to
their friends This new War declared by Algeirs can only be terminated by
negotiations a t the Port, tho the French are making every effort to
bnng round the Algeirm again to their party
[SDA. CL,Aiicante, Vol. 1, 1788-1834.1

5

To Secretary of State from John hvino, U. S. Consul, Gibraltar

(Duplicate)
N Q60
GIBRALTAR
19+feb~w;cry1801
SIR Having none of your regarded favours to reply to I beg leave to
inclose you Co ys of my last Dispatches N Q58 & 59, also duplicate
Copy of c o n s 3 OBrions J~etterof 5 UltQ- likewise of my disburse
for the last Year on account of Government I now inclose you Copy of Lord Kieths Proclamation in Italian
dated at Malta lothDecember last sent me by his directions from the
Health M i c e , it is signiffig the Blocade of the Ports of Alexandria
Rosetta and Damiata in Egipt by the British forces. - Consul
Wallaston of Genoa dso lnforms me under 1" December last, that
His Lordship had likewise declared Leghorn in a state of Blocade Orders came from England for a Provisional Embargo to be laid
on all Swedish and Danish Ships their Cargos and property of their
Subjects, on1 five Vessels were in this Port. On the 8*
seven Ships the line a large Store Shi and two frigates
went past this to the East, they spoke the american rig James Stuart
in the Gutt, who came in here and the Commander reported that they
were French, and told him was 7 days from Brest bound for Naples,
were crowded with Men, but could not decern if were Troops On the 10 Ins?arrived Rear Ad! Sir John B. Warren with 3 British
S d the Line and 3 frigates from oE Cadiz having d v e d information
b the Galpian Polaera of the french s uadron having enferd the
Jeditemmean, tbeg brought with them even ~ o~f detaind
i l ~.nes
a

%s+

'k

9

i

420

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1786 TO 1801

& Swedes; they daily bring in others, two fri ates were imediately
wnt up to Lord Kieth, the remainder took in Frovisions & mild the
12" Inst for Tituan Bay to Water.
P S. 21"
Yesterday the [United] States frigate Qeorge Wmhington
Cap1B h b r i g e put in here by Contrary Winds, is from Constantinople,
Algeir & Alicante bound home, for the occurrences of those places
I beg leave to referr to Cap* Baimbrige. - Ad! Nelson in the St
Joseph is expected from England to Command in the Mediterranean [SDA. CL, Gibraltar, Vol. 2, 17961804.1

--

[I9 February 18011

To Supreme Commandant, Tripoli, from James Leander Cathcart, U. S. Consul,
Tripoli

COPY
James Leander Cathcart Consul for the United States of America
in the regency of Tripolia unto his Exelency Jusef Bashaw supreme
Commandant of the regency of Tripolia in Barbary - Health,
Peace, & Prosperity
Your Exelency having communicated verbally to me your intention
of declareing War against the United States on the 9" & 16 inst, that
immediately you had resolv'd to take the necessary measures for so
doing, if thew Consul did not give you assurances, that the said
States would enter into seperate negotiations, & agree to the following
demands, without soliciting the interferance of the Dey of Algiers;
whose Guarantee of the subsisting treaty between the United States
of America, & this Regency your Exelency declar'd to be null & void,
& your Exelency having authenticated said declaration by the most
solemn Oaths & imprecations, which since having been reechoed by
your Commissioner Cidi Hammet Daguize, & Broker Leon Farfara,
gives me reason to think your Exelency is sinceere.
That your Exelencys likewise demands the sum of dollars 225,000,
as the price of said seperate peace, and an anuity of twenty thousand
to perpetuate the same.
Your Exelency likewise declard, that if the President of the U S
of America was dispos'd to treat with vou, without the interfeerance
of Algiers, that you would become moderate in your demands, .but
not till then. I haveing explaind to your Exelency the impossibility
of my countenancing any such demands against said Stabs, or entering
into any discussion whatever respecting them, much less agreeing
thereto, a repitition a t present is unnescesary, nevertheless I deem it
expedient once more to inform your Exelenc , that the alteration in
the treaty can be made by none but the resident of the United
States, by & with the consent of the Senate, & that the demand for
Cash for which your Exelency has not been able to assign any reason,
must be authorm'd by an act of the whole Legislative body of Our
Country the result therefore depends upon them alone, & will take
much time to determine. That nevertheless to evade as much as
depended upon the consequences of a destructive Wa?, the 1ssue.of
which to booth parties being uncertain, I would enter lnto a negoclation with your Exelency, to procure time for you to state your demands
to the President of the U S of America, & to receive answers from
him. which from the great distance between Our Country, & the time
an affair of such im ortance would take in discuss~on,elghteen
Months waa absolub y necessary. Your Exelency answer'd that

J

P

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

421

rovided I would pay you for that time, you would write to the
$resident of the United States L wait s sufficient time for his answer
to arive.
After various discussions on the 16P Ins*the following arrangement
obtain'd the consent of both parties, viz your Exelenc did romise to
state your demands to his Exelency the President of t e U of America, by Letter, & to Wait the term of eighteen months from the date
thereof for his answer, in consequence of your receiving from the
Consul of the United States of America a t Tripolia, the sum of 20,000
dollars in bills upon Algiers a Tischera, of two thousand dollars for
Cloth, purchas'd from me but not paid for, & presents which Had
Mahammet Lasore brought from Algiers; which last agreement I o
agree to fulfill, but no other whatever
I do further declare that on his Exelency the Bsshaw's sending me
his Letters in Quadruplicates, & promiseing to give me a rec't for the
articles I shall deliver to him, specify'g that he will make no further
demands upon the United States during the Limmited period of
eighteen months, that I will immediately deliver to him the above
mentioned bills, Tischera & presents.
In testimony of the above, I have hereunto subscribed my name &
affixed the Consular Seal of the United States of America, This 19'p
day of Feb? in the ear of Our Lord 1801 & of the independence of
the United States o y ~ m e r i e athe 25
Signd by JAMES
LEANDER
CATHCART
Certified to be a true copy by OBrien
rejected by the Bashaw
RICHARD
OBRIENEsqC Algiers

!I s"

P

[NA. SDA. CL, Algiers, Vol. 6, Jan. 1801-Dec. 1803.1

[21 February 18011
Circular letter to U. S. Agents and Consuls from James Leander Cathcart,
U. 6. Consul, TripoLi

CIRCULAR
(Duplicate Copy)
To the Agents and Consuls of the U. States of America in the different
Ports of France, Spain Portugal & Italy, the Barbary States and
British Garrisons in the Mediterranean and all others whom it
doth or may Concern. GENTLEMENI had the pleasure to inform you in my Circular
Letters of Novr 1800 and Jan7 1801 of the State of our affairs with this
Regency, I have now to add that all hopes of accomodation has subsided, I therefore request ou to detain all Merchant Vessels Navegating under the Flag of the States in Port and by no me- to permit
any of them to Sail unless under Convo as I am convinced that the
Bashaw of Tripoli will commence ~ o s t g st against the U. States of
America in less than Sixty Days from t e date hereof, and I am
persuaded he has made his demands upon the U. States for no other
reason than to have an unjust Excuse for Capturing our Vessels and
Inslavin our fellow Citizens, the[yj being of such a nature that none
but the $resident of the U. S. by and with the Consent of the Senate
can agree to, and I having offered him the Sum of 30.000 Doll@merely
to state his demands, and to waite untill answers arrive from the
President which he has refused to accept, a s&cient Proof that his
Intentions are as I have stated them, and Dictates the necessity of

6.

K

422

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1786 TO 1801

taking every precaution in order to prevent our Veasels from falling
into his harids I request you Gent? to make this Letter publick & to transmit a
Copy to the department of state Chancery of the U. S. of America
a t Tripoli in Barbary feb? 2 let 1801
JOHN
GAVINO
Esqr
C o d of the U. S. of America - Gbz
[Also sent to all American merchant vessels.]
[NA. SDA. CL, Algiers Vol. 6, Jan. 1801-Dec. 1803.1

Extracts from log of U. 8. S, Ceorge W d f n g h , Captain William Bainbridge, U. 8.
Bavy, commanding
Saturday, dl February 1801
Commences Pleasant under reefd top m i l s & Couwes Standing for the Bay of
lGibrater
At 4 P M came too with the Best Bower in 11 Fathoms Water Middle part pleassnt
8 A M Fired a Salute of 15 guns - was amwerd by the Batteries Latter part pleasant Bent a new main top sail Saturday, 28 February 1801
Commences pleasant
Still Laying a t anchor in Gibralter Short peek
8 A M weighed & stood down the Gut with t h e following vessels in Company
the Brig Eliza Cap Shearman of and for Philsdelphia the Brigg Cyru of
Baston 8ap%Daggat the Brigg Sea Nymph Capt Babcock for New York and a
Brig for Norfolk which we are to Convoy threw the Gutt
At Meridian Cape Tarifa Bore N 60 West Cape Spsrtel South 80 West the town
on the Spanish Shore N 60 West
Sunday,1 March 1801
[En route from Gibraltar to America]
Commences with Gentle Galee and fair under short sail for the Convoy to keep
UP At 3 P M the town of Tangers Bore 8 28 W
a t d~ [3 P MI Parted with 3 of Bri s the Eliza still kept Company with us
At 1 P M Cape Spartel Bore S 300% Dis. 334 Leagues
a t 6 d? [P M] Cape Spartel Bore East Distance 4% Leagues, from which I take
my depature it Lying in the Lattitude of 35.48 N & Longitude 5.48 West Middle part Pleasant under all sail 11 A M Unbent the Sheet & Stream Cable
Meridian Light Breezea & Pleaaant under all Sail
[H. E. Huntington L&AG.]

[3 March 18011
Peace gstablishment Act
[NOTE.-I~ the seventh volume of "Naval Documents, Quasi-War with France"
(December 1800 to December 1801), pages 134 to 138, are printed the Act providing for a naval peace eetablishment, dated 3 March 1801, and a list of officers
retained in the U. S. Navy after the paseage of the Peace Egtablishment Act.]
Extrrct from log of U. 8. 8. George W d f n g h , Captain William Bainbridge, U. 8.
Navy, commanding, Sunday, 8 March 1801
Commences with Light winds & Fair weather. Under all sail
5 P M the Middle of the Island of Palma Bore 6 by W W Diet 6 Leagues
A t 6 do the Middle of the Island of P a l m Bore S 18 W Dis 6 League. - from
which I take my Depature Midnight Freah Breezes & Clear
11 A M all hands to Mueter
Enda
thtObs28.11
[H. E. Huntington L&AG.]

WARS WITH BARBARY POWEBS

423

To I~raelWhelen, U. 8. Purveyor, Philadelphia, Pa., from Ebenezer Stevem,
Hew York, B. P.

NEW YORKMarch l f P 1801.
Sra Yesterday the Ship Grand Turk finished her lading and tomorrow shall forward on Invoices, &o to the Seer State for his signature
and a letter f b m the President for the Captain, and copies of the
invoice in a few days shall be sent to you. I have sent in applications
to the different officers here to be inforrn'd of the premium for your
overnment - The Ship is American built, 4 years old, 370 Tons
Furthen, has been put in complete repair in this City. she is cammanded b Cap! Lauton - her cargo & half her freight to be insured
the am, o which by to morrow's mail shall inform you P. S. since writing the above the Ship I have been inforrn'd has
been insured here for 6 pr Ct

9

[&huylkill Arsenal.]

[Between 13 and 23 March 18011
Suggestions and comments concerning United Statea Ships of War, by whom not
indicated, but presumably by someone in the ofice of Secretary of the Bavy

I t will probably be some time before it may be determined where
the six Frigates to be kept in constant service, shall be employed.
The Chesa eak[e]
The Genl reene
The Jnq Adums dZ
The E'ssex - three of the 13 frigates to be retained - are now
in the ports of the U States, & without Crews of course laying a t fittle
Expense - nothing seems to be necessary to be done for the present,
with res ect to these Ships, but to let them remain as they are.
But tge Frigates Preddonf & CmteUatiOn are also in port - and
with full Crews on board. The Crews of both Vessels have several
Months to serve. Mr Stoddert takes the Liberty of suggesting, that
they shall be immediately discharged - I t wjll save considerable
expense - and some uneasiness on board, for nothing is more dkagreeable to a Sailor than to be kept long on board of Ship in port.
If it should be determined hereafter, that either or both these
frigates should be employed, there will be no difficulty in procuring
Crews for them, without expense, for the Men receive no bounty (The advances made being always deducted out of their pay -) &
without d e l ~ y . The Men are so fond of the Public Service, that
there is never any difficulty in getting any Number wanted. By this
Arrangement too - The Ships should they be ordered on dlstant
service, will have crews havin 12 Months to serve - We can only
enlist for 12 Months - ~houfdthey be sent to the Mediterranean
with the present crews, the Mens time will be out, so as to oblige the
return of the Ships in a little time after arriving there. As to the
Ships to be sold - some are already in port - as fast as others arrive
they can be stripped of their Men, & remain in port a t little expense,
until a sale is ordered. But the Connedicul one of these Ships ~snow
st New London, with a full crew on board prepared to sail for
Batavia - She might turn over her Crew gt Promions to the Gem1
&eene a shi to be retained - and the Genl # e m if necessary might
proceed to 3!f atavia - or the crew might be discharged, if it should
not be thought necessary to send a Ship to Batavia - and the princi-

d

4%

NAV&

OPERATIONS FROM 1786 TO 1801

pal object in sending one, seems to be, to get the Treaty, sent to the
Isle of France.
There are yet several Vessels in the West Indies - They have no
orders to return - perhaps will be a t a Loss how to act - The
Herald at Boston is prepared for a Voyage in all res ects, but with
Men - & she has Men enough for this service - ould i t not be
proper to send her first to the Windward Islands, & to return by St
Dorningo and the Havanna, with orders for all our Vessels to return
to the United States.
Mar. 23. 1801. Agreed with Mr Stoddart that he shall send the
Herald immediately to call home all our Vessels discharge the crew
of the Connecticut,as we have an opportunity of sending a Copy of the
Convention by Mr Lewis (former Consul) going from N. York in his
own Ship. Discharge the Me11 of the President, in order that others.
if wanted may be engaged for 12 Months.
13 FRIGATES
TO BE KEPT IN SERVICE.
The United States - at St I(ittls to return in April.
The President - a t Norfolk with her crew on board.
The Constitution - a t St Domingo - return uncertain.
Chesapeak[e]- a t Norfolk - her crem discharged. Phil? a t St Eitt's, to return in April - perhaps May .
New York - SSt Kitts - return uncertmn.
The Constellation - a t Phila crem on board. The Congress - St Domingo - to return in Mu
The Essex, a t New York, no crew on board, except enough to take
care of her. Boston - on a Cruize - to protect Vessels reti from India - but to
call a t St Kitts about the last of April for orders. Jnq Adams - a t Charleston - no Crew.
Adums - a t St Domingo - return uncertain. Genl Green[e]- a t Newport - without a Crew.
INPORT- OF SHIPSTO BE SOLD.
he Portsmindh
a t Norfolk ----,-- - -- The Schooner Experiment
The Brig - Augzlsta.
a t BaltQ- - - - - - - - - - - - - The Schooner Enterprize.
at Phil*-- - - - - - - - - - - - The Ship Patapseo.
a t New York- - - - - - - - The Brig Richmond.
The Connecticut with a full crew, & prepared
for a Voyage to Batavia.
at New London- - - - - - The TrumbuU - Just arrived Crew to be discharged.
The
Ship
a t Boston ---------- -- The Ship Merrimack
Herald.

d

r

iI

The Ship Wanen
Near Guadaloupe- - - - {The
Brig Eagle.
Near St Domingo----- Brig Scammel.
e ordered home At Havmna --------- The Ship D e h z ~ a ~ordered for France---- The Maryland - Capt. Rodgers.
Algiers-------------- The George Washington.
Batavia ------------- The Ganges
[NDA. Nom. Appts. LB, 1798-18iO.1

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

425

Presumably to Secretary of State from William Eaton, U. S. Consul, Tunh

TUNIS61. March 1801
SIR,Letters to Mr OBrien and myself accompanying this announce
that the Bashaw of Tripoli has declared his treaty with the United
States null, and that he will in future hold no intercourse with us
through the medium of Algiers - He demands 225,000 dollars as a
consideration of peace, and an annuity of 20,000 dollars for its maintenance WILLIAM
EATON
[SDA.

CL, Tripoli, Vol. 1, Part 11, Jan. 1800-May 1801.1

Extract from log of U. S. S. Cmrge Washington, Captain William Bainbridge, U. S.
Navy, commanding, Monday, 30 March 1801
Commences with Moderate Breezes with Flying Clouds under all sail
a t 5 P M saw a Brigg in the S. S. W.
half past 11 P M [?] Fresh Breezes took in steering Saih - Observed the
Eclipse of the moon
a t 6 A M bent New Fore & Mizen top sail
a t 9 DP Squally with Rain Handed top Gallant sails & reefd the top sails Lat Obs 24.35
[H. E. Huntington L&AG.]
To Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Bevy, from Samuel Smith for Acting Secretary of
the Navy*

[WASHINGTON,
D. C.]
Navy Dept 1" April 1801
I have this da directed Capt Derby of the Connectid to repair to
New York, & degver over all his able seamen ordinary seamen & boys
to the fri ate Essm, rendering to you an account of the time they
res ective y entered, & the advance made to each *he Connecticut is allowed sixty able seamen, & fifty seven ordinary
Seamen & boys, & I believe has a full crew; so that you will only have
thirty seven ordinary Seamen & boys, to recruit, to complete the
complement allowed the Essea:

7

[*When Secretary of the Navy Benjamin Stoddert left office, Secretary of War
Henry Dearborn became Acting Secretary of the Navy. He in turn ordered
General Samuel Smith to perform the duties of said o*.
His brother Robert
Smith became Secretary of the Navy, 27 July 1801.1
[NDA. OSW, Vol. 4, 1800-1801.)

To Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Navy, from Samuel Smith for Acting Secretary
of the Navy

[WASHINGTON,
D. C.]
Navy Depart l n April 1801
Cap! E PREBLE
of the Essm
The President havin determined to send a Squadron on a Cruiz
under the Command o Cap$ Truxtun I have it in Command from
him to Notify you that you are appointed to that service, you will
therefore repair without delay to the Essm & prepare her with provisions & stores for a Cruiz of twelve Months, Ship your Crew wlth all
ssible Expedition & proceed to Join the Fleet a t Hampton Road
&ere I t is expected you will be on the first Day of May - I t being
intended that the Squadron will sail on the lot$of May -

f

426

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1786 TO 1801

The Law providing for the Peace Establishment of the N a v of the

U, S, directs the President to select from the Captains Nine Gentlemen

& from the Lieutenants thirty six to be retained in service the Duty
is unpleasant where Gentlemen are not retained
On the present Occasion I t is pleasing to have the Gratification of
informing you that the President has been pleased to select you as One
of those who are retained in Active service - I t will frequently
happen that Lieutenants will prefer declining to the being retained in
service - I t is therefore proper that you should (without Corning
under any engagement) inform me whether all the Lieutenants of the
Essez mean to continue such who do not will receive their discharge &
four months Extra pay Remember that it is desirable to continue in service those Gentlemen who are the most promising - Your Opinion of their Merit
would be of service - One hundred & fifty midshipmen are to be
employed (agreeably to law) in the Six Ships Kept in constant service,
you will say how many & the Names of those on board your ship who
choose to remain in service. that I may know the number necessary
to send you. [Such as do not choose to remain] are entitled to four
months pay on being discharged.
On your arrival a t New York you will apply to Mr Daniel Ludlow
(the Navy Agent) who will supply you mth Stores &?I& -also the
Money necessary to ship your Crew To aid you in estimatmg the quantity of provisions for your Cruize
you have enclosed a Copy of the Rations as established by the late
act of Congress,
[NDA. OSW, Vol. 4, 1800-1801.1
To Captain Thomas Rnxtnn, U,S. Navy, from Samuel Smith for Acting Seuretpry
of the Navy

[WASHINGTON,
D. C.]
Naoy Dept 2* A p d 1801
The President having determined to send a Squadron to Consist of
three Frigates & a Schooner on a Cruise, I have it in command from
him to notify you that you are appointed to the chief command on
that Service - You will therefore be pleased to re air without
& prepare her for a Cruise of 12 konths with
delay to the Pr&d
Stores of every kind except provisions, & of provisions for as many
months as she is calculated to carry - You will proceed to Ship
your Crew with all possible expehtion The other vessels of the
Squadron which are the P h W p h i a , the Essez, & the Enterprize
are directed to rendervouse in Hampton Road by the 1* of may, it
being intended that the Squadron Shall sail on the lo* of may The Law provid' for the peace establishment of the Navy directs
the President to se ect from the Cap" Nine Gentlemen, from the
Lieutenants thirty six & from the Midshipmen 150 to be retained in
Service The duty is unpleasant where Gentlemen are not retained On the present occasion it is particular1 pleasin to me to have the
gratification of infarming you that the %,esident as been pleased to
select you as one of those who are retained in active service It will frequently happen that Lieutenants and Midshipmen will
prefer declining, to the bang retained in
the service - I t is therefore
'
under any engagement) inproper that you should (mthout co
form me whether all the ~ieutenant%idshi~msn of the Preddnl

"f:

%

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

427

wish to continue, such who do not, will receive their discharge, & 4
Months extra pay Remember that it is desirable to continue in Service
those Gentlemen who are the most promising - Your opinion of
their respective merits would be of service
To aid you in estimating the quantity of provkions for your Crew,
you have enclosed a Copy of the Ration as estabhshed by the late act
of Con rew I sh& this day transmit recruiting instructions to the Commanding
Officer on board the President - that the preparations may be
progressing even in your absence [NDA. OSW, Vol. 4, 18(HT1801.]
To Havd Constructor Joshua Humphreys, U.8. Bavy, Philadelphia, Pa., from Samuel
Smith for Acting Secretary of the Bavy

[WASHINGTON,
D. C.]
Navy Dept S* April 1801
The Frigate Philadelphia is under orders to prepare immediately
for a 12 Months Cruize - Captain Decatur writes that She is in
want of Considerable repairs.
I request that you will be pleased without delay to examine her,
ascertam what is necessary for a Cruise of such Duration, & have the
same executed with the utmost dispatch [NDA.

GLB, Vol. 4, 1800-1801.1

Extract from log of U. 8. S. Ccolgc Washington, Captain .William Bainbridge, U. 8.
Bavy, commanding, Saturday, 4 Apnl 1801
Commences with Light Airs of wind and fair
At 3 P M saw a Schooner bearing West Standing to the South4 At 4 P M
took in top Gallant Sails and reeft the top Sails - a t 12 Midnight Double reeft
the top sails handed the Main a i l Squally &CA t 5 A M tacked Ship Let one reef out of each top h i l
At 10 A M Sent down top Gallant Yards a t half psst 10 spoke the Brig Juno
of Portland from Surinam out 16 days James Hardy Master Bound to Boston
A t Meridian Spoke the Schooner Atlantic of Salem out 11 days bound to Jamacia
Got Several Newspa rs from her Lat Obs 25.24
Ends with Fresh ]FPereezes & Squally
[H. E. Huntington L&AG.]

[5 April 18011
To Henry Pater, Port Mahon, from Richard O'Brien, U. S. Consul Qeneral, Algiers

(Duplicate Copy) CIRCULAR
SIB The Bashaw of Tripoli has ordered his Cruisers to Sea with
an hostil Intention to Capture American Vessels & make Slaves of
the Citizens of the U. S. in order to give him secunty of an Acquisance
on the part of the U. S. that his Exorbitant demands will be complied
with. This is to forewarn all Citizens of the U. S. of the impending
Da er that is to be apprehended in consequence of this Event1%ve to request of you Sir that ou ad lo the Name of the U
States make this Circular known to
the Citizens of the U. S. which'
should be a t Mahon or arrive there, and request the favor of all Commanders of His Brit&Ma'? Sbips of Warr and private Corsaires to
give this Intelligence to ad American Vessels they should meet.Given under my hand & Seal of Office at Algiers
the 5. day of April 1801

td

[NA. SDA.

CL, Algiers, Vol. 6, Jan. 1801-Dea. 1803.1

428

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1786 TO 1801

TOWilliam Smith, U. S. Minieter to Liebon, Portugal, from Riahard O'Brien, U. 8.
Consnl General, Algiers

ALGIERS
the 6% of April 1801.
COPY
SIR,The A [AlgerineJ corsrrirs is as yet all in port - and waits the
result of the 2c mision to Constantinople. I hope same thing will
come forward from the U. S. before they s d if not I have my fears
On the 15 Ins: I sent to the Dey requesting he would permit a 24
letter to be wrote by his orders to the Bashaw of Tripolia, he answg
thnt his letter has certainly gone safe and would answer the desired
effect. April the 5* this morning a t 8 a. m. the prime Minister of
m e r s sent a Choux or Constable to me to inform me that the
Americans was in arrears in their annuities nearly 3 ears. That what
has been sent lately - is very trifleing and thnt t e Dey is not well
pleased a t this neglect or detention. I answQy my Droguman to
ve my best respects to the prime Minister to inform him that in our
Cst settlement we arranged the annuities for 2 years and 9 months,
that 1 year was considered by the U. S. to be obmitted, that we had
bmughf sundry stores since {in the Sophia and [George] Washington)
which were not counted. That great commissions of Timber m d other
articles were wrote for or ordered by the Regency on the annuities,
that these articles I ex-pected were preparing in the U S to be shipt
for Algiers that our rivers were froze^ until Marcb and thnt by this
time I expected said articles were shipt and would of course come forward sufficient to ans' all the requisite stipulations on the part of the
U. S. which were due to the Regency
The prime Minister observed that we were much in arrears more
so than is customary to admit any Nation. That he hoped shortly
these requisite articles on the rtnnuities would soon arrive at Algiers,
that they were the chain of our friendship with this Regency - this
looks squally -

I

INA. SDA. Disp. Spain, Vol. 5, 1799-1806.1
To Captain Stephen Decatur (Senior), U. S. Bavy, Philadelphia, Pa., from Abishai
Thomas for Acting Secretary of the Bavy

[WASHTNGTON,
D. C.]
Navy Dept Qt? April 1801
Your Letter of the 6': to the Secretary of the Navy is received It is intended that the Squadron to be commanded b Capt
Truxtun shall rendezvous in Hampt.on Road by the 1" & sai on the
lo* of may from this you can judge whether any & what part of the
improvements you contemplated m respect to your Water Casks &
Shlngle Ballast can be accomplished in time

r'

(NDA. OSW, Vol. 4, 18W1801.1
To Captain Thomas Trnxtnn, U. S. Navy, Norfolk, Va., from Samuel Smith for
Acting Secretary of the Bavy

[WA~HINGTON,
D. C.]
Navy Dept 1O* April 1801
ME Stoddert has put into my hands your Letter to him of the Znd
Inst. - It appears therefrom that It is your Intention not to acce t
the Command of the squadron for the Mediterranian unless I t shou d
be intended to act decisively Against the Mgerines - It is therefore

P

roper that you should know that the Object of the squadron are
enstructions to our young Officers 6r to carry into Execut~ontbe Law

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

429

fixing the Peace Establishment of the U. S. I t is Concieved also that
such a squadron Cruizing in view of the Barb
Powers will have a
tendency to revent them from seizing on our ommerce, whenever
Passion or a esire of Plunder might Incite them thereto
The Intention is to devide the Peace Establishment into 2 squadrons
the second to relieve the present squaddron & thus alternately to keep
a force of that kind in the Mediterranean should you decline the Command after receiving my letter of 2 g Inst you will still be considered as
retained in service rntitled to your present rank & to receive half pay
weeably to Law until your actual service shall be required I should
think i t more than probable that your offer to attend to the building
of one of the 749 would be highly Acceptable
When I am informed of the Names of the Lieutenants & Midshipmen
to whom you Allude they shall be attended to
[NDA. OSW, Vol. 4, 1800-1801.1

Y

b

To Lieutenant Bichard C. Beale, U. S. Xavy, Boston, Mass., from Samuel Smith for
Acting Secretary of the Bary

[WASHINGTON,
D. C.]
Naoy Dept lot! April 1801
Your letter of the 30* March has been received The Essex is
ordered to re are for a cruise in the Medditeranean, the principal
are instruction to our p u g officers to csmy into
object of
effect the Law roviding for a naval peace establishment
Should you c use to remain in service, you shall be considered as one
of the number of officers authorized to be retained & you will repair to
Now York & rejoin the Essex; but should you think i t more to your
advantage to make an India voyage, your resignation will be accepted,
& you will be pleased to forward your account for pay & subsistence to
the 20tP inst inclusive to the accountant of the Navy on the receipt of
which i t will be adjusted & the balance due you, will be remitted to
you or paid to your order Your Bill for the extra pay of 4 months allowed by Law to such of
the officers RS are not retained in service, expressing therein that i t is
drawn for that precise object, will be paid at sight You will let me know your detewlination immediately.
[NDA. OSW, Vol. 4, 1800-1801.1

WLCK
%

To Lieutenant Andrew Sterett, U. 6. Navy, Baltimore, Yd., from Samuel Smith for
Acting Secretary of the Navy

[WASHINGTON,
D. C.]
Naoy Dept I@.' April 1801
I have this day directed L? [David] Porter to place himself under
your command - if you have not written to L?[R. Henry L.] Lawson,
decline writing, & immediately order Lieu1 [Charles] Gordon to Join
you Your Schooner [Ederprize] must be read to sail from Baltimore by
the 10* of May next I t will not be posaib& for you to take on board
all the provisions ordered; but you will take as much salted Pmvisions, bread & flour, as you posslbly can - If having smaller water
caaks will enable you to stow away our water with more convenience
you will indent for them immediate y to Mr Campbell [NDA. OSW, Vol. 4, 1800-1801.1

3

430

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1786 TO 1801
To Secretary of State from William Eaton, U. S. Consul, Tunis

Despatch NQ35.
TUNIS109 April 1801
Sm, The dispatches herewith inclosed Tom the C d of fha United
States at Tripoli seem to me of so muc consequence to the safety
and interests of our maritime and commercial citizens, and, in the
event, to the revenue of the government, that I not only feel myself
justifiable but constrained b duty to use extraordinary means to
communicate them to the Apartment of State: I have therefore
chartered a Regusee brig to proceed direct1 with them to the United
Stakes on conditions expressed in a trans ated co y of the charter
party, herewith inclosed. I prefer this flag as least Eable to be turned
out of its course; and I dispatch the vessel in ballast to prevent all
possible annoyance. The expense of this expedient bears so small a
proportion to the interests it aims to secure that I cannot doubt it
will recieve the President's approbation: I t is now more than nine
months since the alarm passed through this office from Mr Cathcart;
it would seem some fatality must have intercepted it in its passage
to America: possibly Mr OBrien's construction of the cause of the
Bashaw's demand may have betrayed Government into a security.
Facts are now indubitable. The Bashaws corsaires are actually out
and fitting out against Americans - And the Agent of our Government a t Tripoli is taking measures for the safety of himself and family.
I have advised him not to give his passports to the corsaires except
the Bashaw will explicitly declare they are not destined against
Americans; and, in case of refusal of such explicit declaration, to
make haste to get himself and family to Tunis. I advance this
counsel because it is become a stratagem of these Bashaws to decoy
their game with Consular Passports; and because, in caw of war,
Mr Cathcarts remaing in the hands of Tripoli would tend rather to
embarrass than to assist any measures Government should take to
reestablish the peace. The Bashaw demands, as a condition of sparing
us, Two hundred and twenty five thowand ddlars, prompt payment,
and Twent five thowand annually: Terms to which the Swedes
have agreel and which will be demanded of the Danes. But if our
Government yield these terms to the Bashaw of Tripoli it will be
absolutely necessary to make provisions for a requisition of double
the amount for the Bey of Turns. Algiers also will be to be respected
according to rank. If the United States will have a free commerce
in this sea they must defend it: There is no alternative. The restless
spirit of these marauders cannot be restrained. Here is not, at this
moment, a vessel on the Mediterranean except American which they
can touch. The king of the Two Sicilies has strictly prohibited any
of his vessels going to sea - Spain is embargoed by a dread of the
English - Denmark and Sweden are infriendship with the regencies ainst the French they dare not cruise - And England is in
iance with them. Our commerce is rich; it is defenceless: these
are good causes of war. Five days ago the Bey of Tunis let me know
that he wanted a number of 24 pound iron guns to mount castle
batteries; and desired his friend, the Presi&ent of the United States,
wouLd send them to him: his object in calling me to the palace was,
through me, to make this communic'tttion to the President. After
three hours discussion I decidedly refused to write the President on
the subject: but believed, if the Bey would propose to change the

I

i

%

431

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

guns, due to him by treaty, for larger calibers, and if t h o s e r h y i
not already left America, the President would have no d culty m
making the exchange. The Bey thought it very hard that the United
States gave f ' ates to the Dey of Algiers to indemnify him for delays;
but that himse ,who had waited four years for his treaty stipulations,
could not prevail on the Agent of that Government to state h s demand
s on the same consideration:
'Or a
He wou d write the President himself. I refused to write, because,
I find, when these Bashaws prevail on a Consul to state a demand to
his Government they consider it as an assumpsit. I shall recieve
the Bey's letter tomorrow - and give it a passage in this express.
I t may be considered as the prelude to outrage - In this way the
rupture with Denmark had its origin - But here is no immediate
danger, I believe. It is to be hoped, however, the President will
return an answer: i t will be flattering to the Bey. I t was one article
evance on the part of the Danes that the King did not answer
his etter directly - This Hi hwayman is much the most GentleOf
manlike of the three. He sel om robs a man without first creating
a pretext. He has some ideas of justice and not wholly destitute of
a sense of shame. He is vain of the notions of integrity and honor
which he imagines the nations accord to him - and m this point he
is vulnerable - I state these observations that the President ma
form an answer on them. While we me in difEculty with ~ r i p 0 5
i t seems to me a good policy to be on good terms with Tunis: But if
Govt should think differently; and, in lieu of a ship with presents,
will consign to me a transport with h e thowand Marines, between
twenty and thirty eight years of age, native Americans, and properly
officered,under convoy of a 44 gun frigate, I pledge myself to surprize
Porto farina and destroy the Beys arsenal. Again, I repeat, something
must be done: And, we must dtimately rely alone on the strength of
our own arm. Wh should we be any longer amused by the smk of
Jewish perfidy in ATgiers? * * *
This may serve as a caution against passing any thing through
Algiers which may indicate coercion against the Bashaw of Tripoli I t gives me pain to present these facts. I would willingly suppose
them the effect of a blind confidence, had not so many demonstrat~ons
offered to evince the perfidy of the Jews, and did not OBrien nevertheless persist in his attachment to them. He alleges for his reason
that Government affords him no adequate support and he is consequently compelled to this resort - If true i t 1s hoped Government
will remidy that difficulty - * * *

f

Y

aF

*

%

*

*

*

*

*

*

The vessel has been detained three days for the
P. S. April 14.
Beys letter: i t will be ready tomorrow morning. From an Interview
with the Bey this morning I am persu[a]ded his letter will be dressed
rather in terms of friendshp and respect than otherwise - I venture to
inform Gov. that we may rely on a perfect
summer The Bey this morning expressed a
the conduct of the Bashaw of Tripoli, and,
passport to any vessel, I have or may have in port.

*

*

*

*

*

[SDA. CL,Tunis, Vol. 1, July 1797-Dec. 1800.1

*

*

432

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1785 TO 1801

To Israel Whelan, U. S. Purveyor, from Ebenezer Stevens, New York, N. Y.

NEWYORKI1 April 1801
SIR

*

*

*

*

*

*

*

I wrote the SecS a t War, respecting the Powder to be furnish'd

the Tunisian Powers, he has assented, to deliver the quantity from
the U States Magazines, & I have wrote him to have it sent me, to be
deposited here, tdl, a vessel is ready to receive it.
Permit me to suggest to you the propriety of the Cannon wanted,
for those powers, being furnish'd from the Navy Department, as
there will be considerable number, remain'g on hand, t,hat will be
useless, & thereby save the Public of Purchasing them [Skuylki Arsenal.]
To Secretary of the Navy, from Captain Thomas Truxtun,U. S. Navy

NORFOLK
Is* April 1801
SIR, I Received yesterday your letters of the 20 & 6* current, and
I note the contents, I shall prepare the President for the expedition,
and get all things in readiness, but peace can afford no field for me on
the ocean, and I much wish that some other Officer had been appointed
to the command allotted for me, I shall write you very fully by the
next mail, a t present I only enclose you a list of such Lieutenants, as
i t appears to me most proper to place on board the President
[HS of Pa. NDA photostat, Truxtun's LB 1800-1.1
To James Leander Cathcart, U. 6. Consul, Tripoli, from Richard O'Brien, U. 8.
Consul Oeneral, Algiers

ALGIERSThe 1St? of April 1801
COPY
SIR Your Sundry letters dated Tripolia from the 5'b of february to
the 26" I received the 5* Inst and wrote you in answer the same
day - I have had two long conferances with the dey on the business.
of the united States. Relative to Tripoli. and the dey* Qaurentee.
The result is that the dey writes a strong letter. to his friend. The
Bashaw of Tripoli. to remain Quiet. that he would do Justice. after
he knew. the Bashaw of Tripoh. had any Just Cause of Complaint.
against the americans. that he would then write and State those
Complaints to the Government of The united states
Should you draw on me to any amount. as intimated on this
business - I have i t not in My power to Ansr your bills. I have not
money or Credit. and I further consider that even I had. i t would be
necessary that a Referance should first be made to Mr Smith. and his
Answer and decision to guide us on this affair of so much importance
I have Sir forwarded the most requisite parts of your Communications has wrote Circular letters has Answers to the first. That
they knew Of the threats of Tripoli. and doubt not. but the all requisite
will be forwarded - be Cautious. Enter into. no new treaty mind
The honor and dignity of The U S. and our own responsibility.
PS. the Dey told me that we sho d give tripoli one hundred.
thousand dollars and with difriculty I got him to renounce this idea
and write in our favor * * * * *
I have this da the ll'b of may r e d a letter from Consul Cathcart
dated the 9* of &arch nothing extra h ~ transpired.
s
The Corsairs
of Tripoli was then nearly ready for sea -

d

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

433

I will thank Consul Kirkpatrick to forward a copy of this dispafch
to the Honourable william Smith and &O of the mclosed and The
Orriginal to forward to The S ~ u r e t a r yof S t a b Our Barbsry affairs is much neglected we shall have war - experience losses & Ca tivity to many Citizens of the U States. We have
no information t ese 10 Months from the departmr of State we have
neither funds or Credit.
ALGIERS
the 12thof May 1801

%

[NA. SDA. CL, Malaga Vol. I, June 1793-May 1814.1
To Captain Willism Bainbridge,U. 5. Navy, from Samuel Smith for Acting Secretar
of the Navy

[WASBINGTON,
D. C.]
Aprzl1801
Presuming from your letter dated a t Alicant in February, which is
just received, that you will have arrived a t Philadelphia b the time
this Letter reaches there - I hare to re uest that you w& immediately discharge the Crew of the George U ashington & have the whole
aid off, for which MF George Harrison will furnish the necessary
Eonies on your requisitions on the payments being completed your
Purser must immediately make up his accounts for settlement, $
come on to this place for that purpose.
Before any order is talien m t h respect to the future destination of
the George Washington I request that you will with the assistance of
Mr Humphreys have a thorough survey taken of her, 8: make me a
Correct report of her present state & condition, my view in this, is to
ascertain whether she is fit to be employed further in the business of
tribute to the Barbary powers.
C a m a w providing for the Naval P e w establishment, directs the
President of the United States to select from the Captains nine
Gentlemen, from the Lieutenan& thirty six & from the midshipmen
150, to be retained in the service. - It frequently happens that
Gentlemen prefer retiring to the being retained in the service. I t is therefore proper that you should without coming under any
engagement, inform me whether a.ll the Lieutenants & Midshipmen
of the George Washington wish to continue, such who do not will
receive their discharge. & four months extra pay - Remember that
it is desirable to contrnue in service those Gentlemen who are the
most promising, your opinion of their respective merits would therefore be of service - I enclose you a Copy of the Law.
[NDA. OSW,Vol. 4, 1800-1801.1
Navy Dept

S

To George Homrron, Bevy Agent, Philadelphia, Pa., from Abishai Thomaa for
Acting Secretary of the Navy

[WASHINGTON,
D. C.1

Navy Dept 14" Apnl1801
I expect the George Washinflon will have arrived at Phil* by the
time you receive t h , she is to be immediately paid off, for which
purpose mone will be remitted to you to morrow of which you will
pay over to t e Purser on the requisition of Cap3 Bainbridge what
may be necessary - No steps are to be taken with respect to the
repairs of the Ship until I receive the report of Cap! Bainbridge of
her present state, which I have directed hun to make with the assistance of Mr Humphreys [NDA. GLB, VoL 4, 1800-1801.1

E

434

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1786 TO 1801

Extract from log of U. 8. 8. Ceae W d l i y l o n . Captain W
Bainbridge, U. S.
Navy, commanding, Tuesday, 14 April 1801
Commences Fresh gales and Cloudy under Close reeft to+.
fore sail & Main
stay mil
At 2 P M epoke the Brig Margarctf of Philidelphis 3no. Stewart Marter from
Surinam 25 Days Bound home - 5 part 3 Handed MZQt o sail
6 M housed top Gallant Marta got in jibbann & r d d the Foremail. 7 a m
hantd fore & Main top sail scudded under reeft Fore,uil Throughout the
night Blowing a violent gale of Wind with rain & a hi h Sea.
Continued to mud
At P M the wind hauled about W N W without fullin
her not thinking proper to Brin her too m the nlght. a t 8 M psseda8choonered a Schooner
scudding under Bare poles a t 9 L w e r d down the Main Yard. a t 11 A M handed
foreail & Attempted to Bring too. the hanks of the Storm Mizen Stay aail gave
wa . was oblidged to keep her away & then Scudded under Bare plea
with hard gdea - h t O b 35.15
[H.E. Huntington L&AG.]

2

&&

To Captain Stephen Decatur (Senior), U. S. Navy, Philadelphia, Pa., from Samuel
Smith for Acting Secretary of the Navy

[WASHINGTON,
D. C.]
Navy Depb 15'? April 1801
The following gentlemen are retained in Service & are intended
for the Philadelphia Thomas Wilkey
John Cassin
Lieutenants
Henry Vandyke
WQ Turner
Surgeon
John Cowdery
Surgeons Mate
Thomas W Hughes Sailing Master
The Law contemplating 150 Midshipmen & on1 six Ships to be
that eac ship shall carry
kept in actual service makes i t Necess
as many as possible - Twenty at leastyhope & expect, twenty five,
will without inconvenience be received on board. I will in a shorte
time designate your other Lieutenants No acting Midshi men can
now be admitted & no Warrants can issue to those who ave been
actin as such. The following Midshipmen you will consider as
at& ed to your Ship
M B Carroll
Francis Patton
Jag Decatur
Clement Biddle
Chq Wilson
Charles Moore
Wq Butler & the following midTim?Pickering
shipmen now on
Stephen Cassin
Joo. Wharton
board Constelation have been ordered to Join you
Mr Tilgman
Stewart
Gardner
Mason
Truxtun
Nicholson
I ahall consider further on the retaining or dischare the other young
gentlemen, now on board the Philadelphia, & am sir

i

1

%

WDA. OSW, Vol. 4, 1800-1801.1
To Captain Bichard Dale, U. S. Navy, from Captain Thomas Tingey, U. 8. Navy

WABHINGTON
16* April 1801
material business to attend to I was prevented answering yours of 8's esterday as I intended - I find I
bsve some news to tell you i t i s only corroborative of what I

DEAR
DALE
Having had

'fho~ho'

E7ARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

435

told you before; which you seem to doubt, namely that the laid up
Ships are to come to the Eastern branch - The General Cteen is
already ordered on and I have orders to get a plan for building a
magazine to hold their powder - I don" t o w exactly what
ments will take place, as to the officers in the Service - But=
the cor s of Midshipmen & Lieutenanb, will be acted on exactly with
the Bd?
For the Captains i t is not quite certain yet, I have caught a whisper,
and now whisper i t to you that the majojonty of those consider'd worth
keeping will not be dismis'd until Congress sit again,but this whispr
is only on conjecture - I do~l'tknow as yet of any fullCaptam
dismission except Captp Parry [Perry*] - I shall speak to Mr Turner
about your A/cmas you desire. And also inform Stoddert when I see
him of your doubts as to his business When Burrowes wrote that the President, Phikdelphia, Essex &
Enterprize were to get, under way, I concluded he would also say they
were destind for the Meditteranean - and therefore thought 'twould
not be new for me to say so - the truth is however that it was two or
three days old 'ere I knew i t myself: of course believ'd it was well
known a t your metropolis.
I wrote Tnurtun yesterday, and ask'd if he was going to the Mediteranean this cruize - I have my doubts as to his liking it Am not surpriz'd a t the voyage to the Temple of Hymen being
broke off, by our friends - I have always found delays were dangerous - and friend Samuel (if he was really in earnest) ought to have
struck while the Iron was Hott. As he has a very musical voice let
him learn the old Song"The Loss of one is the gain of two
And the choice of twenty more."
We sincerely commiserate Your good rib on the frequent painful
and disquieting returns of the complaint in her Eye, and hope that
she will find a speedy & perfect cure. Nature begins to smile on our Rural City - Gaiety pervades the
minds of our young friends, in conge uence thereof: Who all, with M
Mistress & Self joins in affectionate ove & regard to Dolly, Yourse
& the lovely Boys and believe me unalterably
Yr friend
-

91

1

THO^ T I N ~ E Y

[*Discharged 3 April 1801, under Peace Establishment Act.]
INDA photostat. E.C. Dale Col.]
To Lieutenant Colonel Commandant William W. Barrows, U. S. Marine Corpr,
from Captain James Hcgnight, U. S. Idorine Corps

PHIL*A p d 17,1801
SIR I have to acknowledge the receipt of your favors of the 9th & 14
Inst. I beg you to accept my thanks for you. .bdness in not ordering
me out in the Philadelphia for the present c r u m I have made the necessary arrangements to roceed to Hampton roads (if not releived)
previous to the ships sa$ng, should I leave the frigate a t Hampton
roads, i t will afford me an opportunity of pay my mpects to you.I have been so unfortunate as to lose three o my men by d e l o n
since my arrival and one by death, the three former are Dm&,
Green & Gerrard. Quinn died on the 5th Inst the necessary s t e s
have been taken to have the deserters apprehended - The ~on.std-

?'

436

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1785 TO 1801

twn still remains in a dangerous situation, but Capt Decatur informs
me, that they intend making an attempt tomorrow to raise her, &
tthat he is pretty positive they will succeed - The Paymaster & I have
been engaged m paying off & settling the accot" of the detachment
belonging to the Philadelphia.
The men are perfectly satisfied with their accts. You may rely on
my paying the greatest attention to the detachment.
In my muster Roll I particularised some Marines that are unfit for
service, there are also several belonging to the Constellation. Would
it not be better, to let D' Strong examine the men & report those that
are d t for duty - Cap Wharton and family left this the 15th Ins*
for New Castle.
L i e u t ~ a l d w e l l ,Thompson, Gale & Amory are hearty - Sergt
Brown is sent to Barracks, & Josh Holland does duty as Sergeant, hs
pay as Sergeant to take place on the latof May I n consequence of the permission - obtained from you, I appointed
Andw Crepman & Neal McCafferty, Corporals. I thought it best to
take them from the detachment, as it would be an inducement*to
others to behave in a way that would be likely to obtain promotloon
for them -I s h a l be oblged to obtain a reinforcement from Barracks,
when obtained I shall forward a Muster Roll &c - Please make my
respects to Mrs. & Miss Burrows & the officers at Head Quarters - I
see your son almost Daily, he is very hearty JAMESMCKNIGHT
Capf of Marines
Coln. W. W. BURROWS
Commandant of the Marine Corps
City of U'ashington
[MCA. LR, 1801.1
&tract from log of U. S. 6. Cwge Warhingbn, Captain William Bainbridge, U. E.
Navy, commanding, Sunday, 19 April 1801

Commences with Fresh Breezes & Pleasant
a t 6 P M saw a sail in the N W.
At 6 DQ-Sounded found no Bottom 100 Fathoms of Line out
At 12 Midnight Sounded 40 Fathoms Water Set Steering Sails At 6 A M took on board a Pilot a t 7 D?made Cape Henlopen Bearing N W a t 8 DQthe Light H o w
Bore S W B S - a t half past 9 Came past the Buoy of the Brown
A t 5 D? Came to Anchor Abreast of Grubs Landing with the Best
Bower in five Fathoms Water
Ends with Fresh Breezes from the N E
fH. E. Huntington LLAG.]
To George Harrison, Navy Agent, Philadelphia, Pa., from Abishei Thomaa for
Acting Secretary of the Navy

~WA~HXNGTON,
D. C.]
Naty De t dl April 1801
Recruiting instructions are this day t r a m t t ecf' to Capt Decatur to
engage s new Crew for the Frigate Philadelphia, for whlch you will be

pleased to advance the necessary monies on his requisitions - That
you may be provided with funds for that object, and to make the customary advances to the Officers, a remittance of 15,000 dollars is now
ordered. [NDA. GLB, Vol. 4, 18!W1801.]
0

WARS W I T R BARBARY POWERS

437

To Captain Stephen Decatrv (Senior), U. 8. Navy, from Samuel Smith for Acting
Secretary of the Bavy

[WASHINGTON,
D. C.]
Navy Dept 218t April 1801
Concieving that i t might be Inconvenient for you to proceed on the
Expidition now in Contemplation I deemed it proper to say to you
what was intended, under an expectation that if inconvenient to you,
your answer would have been to that effect - Indeed the C[h]esepeake
would have been prefered for that service but that I found the Men
could not have been procured for both the President & that ship a t
Norfolk - f therefore preferred the Philadelphiu However as I t will
be attended with serious Injury to your pr~vate&airs I will order
some other Gentleman to be prcpared to take Command of the Philn
in the mean time proceed with ILU possible dispatch in getting the ship
ready to Join the Squadron Should I give the command to Capt
Barron which I think probable you ~7i-111then be under the Necessity
of Conducting her to Norfolk [NDA. OSW. Vol. 4, 1800-1801.1
-

--

To Captain Samuel Barron, U. S. Navy,from Samuel Smith for Acting Secretary
of the Navy

[WASHINGTON,
D. C.]
Navy Dept 22"q April 1801
A Letter is this Moment received from Capt Decatur requesting
permission to decline going on the present Expedition under Cap$
Truxtun - He has described the situation of his private affairs to
be such as to require his personal Attention, This application in some
measure Corresponds with my first Intention which was that your
ship should form part of the squadron - I &-asprevented only by the
fear that Men Could not have been procured for two ships a t Norfolk
you will hold yourself in Readiness to take Command of the Philadelphia Immr on her arrival at Hsmptou Road - Capt Decatur will
proceed with her perfectly prepared to the Road - & there deliver
her to you - I have no Doubt that this appointment d be pleasing
to yourself & pwticularly so h the Commodore [NDA. OSW, Vol. 4, 1800-1801.1
To Captain William Bainbridge, U. S. Bavy, from Samuel Smith for Acting Secretory
of the Navy

[~TASHINGTON,
D. C.1
Namj Dept 22 April 1801
You have arrived a t the Moment when arrangements are making
for the retaining the Officers in service designated by the Peace
Establishment Nine Captains are to be kept in Service your general
good Character makes me anxious that you should be one of the
number - an excellent oppr now offers - Capt Preble has written
that his state of health will not permit him to proceed with the
Squadron now ordered for service -the ship Essex (now under his
Command) will soon be ready & will proceed from N. York to Hamp
ton Roads where you will Join & take Command of her - The
Philadelphia will Carry you to the Rendezvous with your Baggage Her Departure from the Delaware will bo your time for proceeding - I hope [for] your Immediate Answer & am [NDA. . OSW, Vol. 4, 1800-1801.)

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1786 TO 1801

438

To Captain Edward Reble, U. 8. Bavy, from Samuel Smith for Acting Secretary
of the Navy

[WASHINGTON,
D. C.]
Navy Dept 2Pq April 1801
It is a subject of p e a t Regret that our Indisposition should prevent
your proceeding w t h the squadron owever I will do eve
thillg in
m power to Indulge you by this oppr. I write to Capt sinbridge
w o (I cannot doubt) will Accept the Command of the Essex - but,
being
arrived, will require some time to pay off his Crew & remain
with
family - You will therefore proceed with the Essex to
HBmpton Road - where Capt Bainbridge, I expect will repair &
relieve you from the Command - I am sir
[NDA. OSW, Vol. 4, 1800-1801.1

g

E

3

To Secretary of State from William Kirkpatrick, U. S. Consul,Ylalage

COPY
MALAGA
$2'4 April 1801.
SIR, When I last wrote you on the 18" U l t ~I transmitted Copy of
a Circular I had received thro' Genoa from Consul Cathcart of Tripoli
advising the great appearance there was of the Bashaws acting in a
hostile manner - a g m t the United States, his predictions have been
already verified as, ou will observe by the inclosed copy of a letter
I have just reeaiveBfmm Richg OBrien Esqr Consul at 4 e r s dated
5 Inst$,as there are several of our vessels now in the Mediterranean,
I am under great apprehensions that some may have ere now fallen
into their hands, which will prove a most distressing circumstance,
and occasion a great difficulty to bring them to terms. I sincerely
hope a few Frigates are now on the way for these Seas a Small force
would be SufEicient to block the Tripoly Cmizers in their Ports, and
obhge them to admit of conciliatory measures, indeed there should
alwa s be some on this Station, for the Protection of our Navegation,
whic up the Mediterranean is very extensive, and must till then be
constantly exposed to the Caprice of all the Barbary Powers: - I
never expected they would have remained so long on a good footing
with the U. S. for scarcely a Year passes without some one or other of
them making depredations on the Commerce of Denmark & Sweden.
I have been particularly attentive in dispatching Copies of Mr
Obrien's Circular to Gibraltar Csdiz, Corunna Santander, France
Hamburg & London, in order that the Captains of American vessels
may be on their guard, & abstain from going up the Mediterranean
till matters are arranged, as the Tripolitans have I understand only
five or six Crukers of no considerable force, they seldom come on t h
aide of Alicante, & I believe have never doubled Ca e de Gat.
Nothing else of any consequence occuring, I beg eave to Subscribe
myself with much regard; [SDA. CL, Malaga, Vol. 1, 1793-1814.1

g

P

To Captain Thoman Tmxtun, U. 8. Navy, from Samuel Smith for Acting Secretary
of the Navy

[WABHINGTON,
D. C!]
Naay Dept 2 E April 1801
I n consequence of my absence from the seat of Government your
letter of the 13*) 18* & 219 Ins* have remained unanswered - By
those letters it a p p m that you decline the command of the squadron,
& that it is your desire that the president should select some other

439

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

Commander In consequence of this your Determination, I have
ordered Cap! Dale to prepare & proceed immediately to norfolk &
there receive the Command from you. as to the injury done to your
rank. It is [a] subject (placed here only for a short tune) the Conalderation of which I must beg leave to decline entering upon
Lieutenants Chauncey, Clagett and Wederstrmdt will continue
in their Command on board the President. I t be' inconvenient to
search for Mr Brooke. I have ordered Lieutt Jo
Smith of the
Chesapeake to go on board the Praident. - George Washington Read
(at his own r uest) holds his Warrant on half pay & has permission
to go into Merc ant Service -The 15Midshipmen as follows attached
to the Presi&ent are retained & will remain on board
[Philemon C.] Blake.
[James P.] Leonard.
[Joseph] Bainbridge.
[John 0.1Creighton.
[Ben F.] Read.
[Edward] Giles.
[Henry] Casey.
[s-uell
[Johnston]
B akeley.
[Sydney] Smith.
[William F.] Nicholls.
[James]Biddle.
[Archibald K.] Kearney.
and Willis.
[Sloss H.] Grenel.
The following are ordered to join the President
George W Spotswood.
Edward Bennett.
Jacob Vickery.
A. J. Green.
} ~ m mCnesupeake
A. A. Page
L Warrington
Edward N. Cox
Ridgely \From different ships
John Nicholson
William Duncanson)
You have said that Lieutenant Shirley will act as sailing Master.
He may hold his Rank, but draw Rations as Master Mr Thompson &
Mr Garitson are ordered to join the President the latter will set off with
the present mail - I have every confidence that you will proceed with
the e uipment of the Presided & have every thing com lete by the
time b a p t Dale shall arrive For no time ought to be ost - Her
crew is to be full & complete as formsly The Schooner Betsy Capt Hall s d e d from New York the 12th
instant with 250 bbl Pork & 250 lbs Beef directed to Wq Pennock for
the President & Enterprize - perhaps the President may take 200 bls
of each A victualler will follow the Squadron and deposit revisions
for it a t Gibralter The Philadelphia & Essex will Comp ete there
stores of any kind - where they are & I trust be at the Rendezvous a t
the time appointed Capt Decatur having private business which he
could not leave with convenience I have dlrected Captain S. B a m n
to be prepared to take command of the P h W hia, & I have in consequence of the indisposition of Capt. Preble or ered Capt Bainbridge
to go with the Philadelphia to Rampton Roads, & there receive the
command of the Essex Whenever the President has fixed the navy arrangements you will
be advised thereof [NDA. OSW, Vol. 4, 1800-1801.1

%

"b

7.

I

I

P

P

8

440

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1786 TO 1801

To Captain Richard Dale, U. S. Navy, from Samuel Smith for Acting Secretary
of the Navy

[WASHINGTON,
D. C.]

Navy Dept 28tQApril 1801
The Command of the squadron now preparing for the Mediteranean
has been declined by Capt Truxtun -Permit me to say that I t affords
me pleasure to have it in m power to give an appointment so honorable to you whom I so hi y respect - you are appointed to succeed
Capt Truxtun in that Command & will from him receive the U. S.
Frigate President at Norfolk, to which place you will proceed without
delay, taking the seat of Government in your way that I may have it
in my power to Confer with you on your Cruise & that you may receive your orders. Expedition is in a particular Degree necessaq & I
trust that no Delay on the part of the Ofiicers mll happen - The
ships I trust will be ready to suit [sail] at the time appointed say the
lo* May from Harnpton Roads I t is hard I know for Capt. Bainbridge to go to sea so soon but his
resence will be greatly Useful & I sincerely hope & expect there will
e! no diaiculty on Lis Part - I t effectually secures him a Command
in the Navy Your Baggage can go in the Philad* press Caps Decatur to be
expeditious your own early apparance here will be highly acceptable -

61'

[NDA.

OSW, Vol. 4, 1800-1801.1

To Major J. C. Monntflorence, Paris, Rance from William Willis, U. 8. Consul,
Barcelona, Spain

BARCELONA
29" April 1801

DEARSIRMy last enclosed you a Copy of a Circular Letter from

our Consul a t Algiers, which I now re eat, & &so enclose you a List of
American Vessels now in this Port, 31 which must wait until a Ship
of War arrives to protect them; - And having been informed that an
American Frigate was expected soon in some Port of France, I have
sent this List, & I request you to send this Notice and List to all the
Ports, that it ma be communicated to the Captain of any such
Frigate or Ship o War, who will no doubt, if in his Power, repair
immediately to these Seas, in order if possible to rescue our Citizens
from these Depredators Signed WmWILLIS
List of American Vessels in the Port of Barcelona
Ship Alltnomae _ - _ - - - - - - - - -Cap$ Ebenezer Hale - - - - - - - of Boston
Ship C24risea.....................
Tho* Fields- - - - - - - - - do
Ship C~arSumner-- - _ -- - - - - _ -- _ _ -- Nathl Leech- -- - ----do
Brig Minden - - - - - - - - - - _ - - - - - - - - - - Jo* T el - - - - - - - - - - d*
Brig Om. Washin&m. - - - - .-.-.- - - Thr
- - -.....
.- Salem
Brig Nancy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Th* Barker--- - - - - - - do
Brig Mare- ---------------- - - - - - - Jo, Orne-, - -- - - ,---..
do

9

ebb-

Schooner Industry - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - Jonsths Cooke - - - - - - do
Brig Commerce- - - - - - John Shaw- - - - - - - - - - New York
dv
Brig Comet - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - Henr W. Bool- - - - - rig ~ ~ i ~- - -k- -t- -h- - - - - - - - - - _ - - or #aim- - - - - - - -do
Ship Cathetine- - - - - , - - - James
- - Mills--------- -- - Baltimore
Ship John & Jane - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - Seth Long - - - - - - - - - - do
Shib Eleanor - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - Francr R i t t a l - - - - - - - _
Plymouth
Portland
Bhip Nestor-- - _- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - _- - Charles Waite- - - - - - Brig Mahala Windsor- - - - - - - - - - - - - Joshua Woodbury - - - Duxbury
Brig K a y - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - ------ William Cottle- - - - - - Newbury-port
Charleston So
Brig Three Siatere, ,,- - ,- - - - - - - - - John Bonnell- - - - - - - -

-

Carolina

CAPTAIN

RICHARDDALE.U. 5. N A V Y .

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

441

Two more Americans are now in Sight of this Port A true Copy - PARIB
1It? May 1801
J. C. MOUNTFLORENCE
[SDA. Paris, 17W1805.]
To Captain Stephen Decatnr (Senior), U. S. Navy, from Semuel Smith for Acting
Secretary of the Navy

[WASHINGTON,
D. C.]
Navy Dept SOr? April 1801
Your letter of the 25'? instant has been received. - We have no
late News thtlt in an Manner alter the sfate of things from that which
accompanied your
t feeling a disposition to accomodate officers,
in their reasonable requests when not incompatible with the good of the
service, I yielded to yours for leave of absence, & gave orders to Capt
Barron to hold himself in readiness to releive you in the command of
the Frigate Philacelphia - Having once taken these orders, i t is
not now proper Consistant with the rule I have laid down for my
Govenunent to revoke them You will, therefore be pleased to go on with the preparation &
equipment of the Phil*, I hope i t will be convenient for you to accompany her to Norfolk; if however, i t should not be convenient you
will in that case be pleased to confer with Capt Bainbridge who will
command the Emex & who will conduct the Ship to Norfolk & thore
deliver her over to the command of Cap: Barron - But all knowledge
of this Change must be kept between you & Capt Bainbridge - I do
not ever mention it to Mr Harrison f again take leave to Observe that Expedition is requisit Orders for
Recruiting went to you the 20" Insf & Money to Mr Harrison Copies of your orders are now sen! - I trust as this arrives you will
have received them, & that the shlp will be nearly manned
[NDA. OSW,Vol. 4, 1800-1801.1
To Cnptein Thomas Trnxtun, U.S. Navy, from Samuel Smith for Acting Secretwy
of the Navy

[ M 7 h 6 ~ 1 ~ ~ ~D.
0X
C.1
',
ATaq Depd I'f May 1801
Your two letters of 24 Ultg have both come to hand - The Essez
being without a Boatewain & Gunner, or having such as Capt Preble
does not approve I did hope that he would have supplied hs ship at
Norfolk on that account I declined ordering the Pett Officers to be
aid off - Lt John Smith is ordered from the Cz 9sapeak to the
$resident & 1 thin day ordered L t Wood to proceed Immr to Norfolk
& there meet the Essex. which ship Capf Bainhridge will Command.
Much very much is to be done towards putting the Nav in a situation
that ma conduce to its Respectibility While I Act. I s all feel myself
under o ligatiom for your aid & advice No Mention being made of the Rnival of the Provisions from New
York & fearing some Misfortune has happened to the vewll from the
late terrible Weather, f yesterday ordered a farther supply to be
sent - The Philadd+hauled out on Wedenesday & would soon be
manned - The Essez will leave New York this day or tomorrow
she had all her Crew, those of the Conmdicut were turned over to
her - The Enterprize I expect will sail before the 5" lnst she has been
ddayed by getting New Masts -

g

E

442

N A V B OPERATIONS FROM 1786 TO 1801

Our Young Gentlemen must be taught to know that they belong to
the service of the United Statas & not to any particular sbip - those
on board your ship have been particularly favored. All of them me
retained in service - Tell my Young Countrymen that I want each
of them to be capable of obeying that they may know how to Command
and that I will Cherish those who merit.
[NDA. OSW,Vol. 4, 1800-1801.1
-

-

To Captoin Bichnrd Dale, U. S. Bavy, Philadelphia, Pa.,from Ssmnel Smith for
Acting Secretary of the Navy

[WASHINGTON,
D. C.]

N a y Dept 1." May 1801
I t appears to me that the public good as well as your personal convenience, suggest that you should have an officer on board the President in the capacity of Master Commandant If you concur with me
in opinion be pleased to deliver the enclosed letter to Master Commandant Tdbot, now on b a r d the Frigate United Stafes if not you
will return it to this office.
N B There are but four Lieutenants ordered on board the President
they are W Chauncey J Smith J M Clagett Wederstrandt
[NDA. OSW, VoI. 4, 1800-1801.1

To Woodbury Langdon, (appointment as Bevy Agent, Portsmouth, LJ. H.), from
Samuel Smith for Acting Secretary of the Rsvy
~ ~ A S E I N Q T O ND.
, C.]

Navy Dept I* May 1801
The President of the United States impressed with a high opinion
of your character has instructed me to communicate to you your
appointment to the Navy Agency at Portsmouth - & I assure you
Sw, it aEords me pleasure to be medium of a communication that
ma be acceptable to you ?have this da written to Jacob Sheafe Esquire, requesting him to
deliver to you a3 the ublic property in his possession or under his
care for which you w d b e pleased to give him Duplicate Reoeipt An account of all the property delivered over to you, you d be
pleased to return to this office as early as you conveniently can I t is not the intention of Government to commence building the 74
gun Ship immediately, but to have all the timber in a state of preparation to commence immediately, whenever circumstances may render it
I beg that you will take a particular survey of all the timber
now at ortsmouth & communicate to me the exact state in which you
may find it & your opinion of the progress made towards, a State of
preparation necessary for setting up the Ship Attention to oconomy in the expenditure of Public money, will be
estimated in This Department -

"7

[NDA. GLB, Vol. 4, 18Mt1801.]

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

443

To Navd Conek~ctor
Joshua Hnmphreys, U.B. Berg,Philadelphia,Pa., from Samuel
Smith for Acting Secretof the Navy

WASHINGTON,
D. C.]
Navy Dept I* May 1801
As it is not the intention of Government to commence building the
74 gun Ship immediately, you will enter into no further expence on
the wharfe until further orders, but as the timber arrives, you will
have i t placed in a state of security & preservation [NDA. GLB, Vol. 4, 1800-1801.1
To W i a m Jones, Philadelphia, Pa., from Samuel Smith for Acting Secretary
of the Navy

C.]
Nawy Dept 2edMay 1801
I am favoured with yours of 26'P UltQCapt Decater had an idea
that the DecLining to proceed on the proposed Expedition might effect
his Reputation In t b he is mistaken - H a m g ordered Capt S.
Barron for that service, I could not without introducing an appearance
of uncertainty [in] the duties of this Department, make the Charge a
Second time - Once done I have written Capt Decatur I t must not
be undone - He will have full time now to adjust all his private
affairs The high opinion entertained in this Department of Capt Campbell
added to your Recommendation makes me extremel anxious to
retain him in service bud howl - Had he remained ifaster Commandant, It might be done thus - The ships to be imployed are
divided into two s uadrons - I am disposed to give a Master Commandant to each ommodore & trust Congress for approbation - I
have thought of
us Talbot (now of the Unided Stafes) for one
squadron and I co d wish Capt Campbell for the other perhaps he
would agree to hold his present Commission & accept the Pay &
Emoluments of Master Commandant Mr Renshaw is retained in service & ordered to actual service - I
shall with dSiculty get thro the arrangement of Midshipmen 1 shall
great with the Captains M
have some with Lieutenants & ve
View i. to select the Best this
:?zourse j$ve Officers - but I%
w d l be to the advantage of the service ~ A S H I N G T O N ,D.

d

(ir

3

[NDA. GLB, Vol. 4, 1800-1801.1
To Captain William Bainbridge, U. 8. Navy, from Samuel Smith for Acting Secretory
of the Navy

[WASHINGTON,
D. C.]
Navy Dept 3* May 1801
I have received your Letter of the 29* inst - with your report of
the state of the George U'ashington If you had not already considered
oumIf released from the Charge of that Ship in consequence of
L t t e r s written to 7011from this department you will be pleased to do
so on receipt of t b s leaving her in charge of the Sailing Master B o a t
swain and Gunner, & delivering to Mr George Harrison a Complete
Inventory of her Military $ other stores, Sails tackle s p p d &
furniture - Lt Warner may b permitted to retire [NDA. OSW,Vol. 4, 1800-1801.1

Huster Roll of U. 8. Ship George Washington from earliest entry date SO April 1800 to 4 May 1801
Entry
No.

$10 & day year

----

1 June 20 18$l
2 Ay,ri1 90
,,
3

; ::
6
7
8
0

ii

"

"

7

::

11 ~ t lay
19
15
I4 J y e 7
15

::

10
21

n

23
a4
15
28

l u y 20

lo!

'I

"

June

2

0
7

"

"
31
32

g35
58

87

M

"

" 28
June 3
M y 23

"
"

::,,

"

"
"

1:

24
12
27
24

3

"

"
"

"
"

::

.....

D
D
D
D
D
D
D
D
D

May I

D
D
D

Dv
Dv
DP
,a
Dv
Jaly 6 1800 Philadelphia obtained Warrant rsm4 to 1%
A rfi a0
DP
4 i??i
DP

D
D
D
D
D
........ T h o m u K & ~.S..1:: Boat.?.
BOS~;; ...
" Mate.
" .............. D
R
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
William
Cox.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
" ......... John Alexander ....... Seaman ................... D
Providence....... Jesse Eddy ..........
.. Carp!* hlate ..-...........D D
Coventry ........ Rufus Mathewson .... Stervsrd ................... D
D
Providence....... Thomas Goss ......... Armwrer .................
..... Nathaniel Baker ...... Cooper.....................D
New York ....... Edward Oormsn ...... (lunnv Yeom ............. D
D
Walter Laurence ......
Cabbin Stew4... July 8
Providen ce..-.

""

"

Where or for what Reason

---PhUadelpr ....... William Bainbridge ... Captaln ...................
.......... June 20
Providenca....... Wilson Jacobs......... LieutL
..... John 8. FVruuer. ...... " .......... "
.......... July 18
BarnuelPhil1 s
Sat;: Master .... Jun: B
Proviaen r....... a a g e A . ~ % i & i : : :
..... JosephLee ............ S u r ~ e o.n........
..... Arnold Whlpple ...... MidsFjpm~.....
---.
..... BenJamin Smith. ...-'4
---..... Chr~stopher 5. Car-

$6

"

21 May 21

Time lsst Dl*]
settled & D13
mid to
M O c i~~ yYear

8

"

23

Rank

a<

;:

28
13

"

Names

1:
---..... f i l ? s I . Bmftb ....
---.
..... Ben nmin Page ......
::
---. "
..... William 11. ~ l l &.....
--..
..... Dnniel 6. Dwter ......
..... Simon Aldrlch ........ A:tr ,','
--..July 6
..............
..... Simon smith..........
..... John Manchester ..... 1st Mate..................
..................
..... Danlel Car entea
24
..............

"
"
"
"

Whence

::

"

10 May

19

Junz 20

"

11 June

IS

appearanca on
board

Marblebead ...... Nathaniel Dyer ....... Qr hlnster ................. R
D
Providence ....... David Pettls.......... Gail Meker ...... June 28
Newport ----.---.
John Sam son
Cook ...................... D
D
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
f;
OUlcers
Byher..
Pmv denm....... Timothy lake ......
............ DD
Boston ........... William Hawklns..... Ships
......... Peter Lawley ......... Taylor. ................... D
Newport
a
.......... D
......... William DunwU ...... Coo ers Mob..-............
R
......... John Bmith ........... cooEs "
Philadelphia ..... WilliamT.Webster ... B e y a n ......... July 23 D
.................. D
Proridenm-..--..
Olney Clarke- --.-.-.Baston
......... Eiksnah Bayden- .... " .................. D
" ...
........ Willlam Smith........ Boatswr M. .............. D
................... D
New London..... Dudley Emerson...... Beaman
"
.................. D
Hudaon .......... John Lee..............

"
1 7 July
Ma? 4

::"

Philad*
DQ
Dv
IW Philadelphia obtained leave of absence
Philad*
l&3?1
Dv
Dv
DP
Uv

IF1

t d

"

"

I)?

2. April

July 6
29 April
July 11
May 4
2B 4,pril
"

July

IS

&I
1BW
1501
1800
1501
lFl

Pbilad*
Dv
DQ
1800 Philadelphia, obtd Midshipmans Wan+ rem4 tc

"
July 7
2Q Aprll
May 4
"
28 April
Deer 18 1800
28 April I??l
June 30 lp
July 2.1
29pril

lyl

lyl

"
"

"

Philad*
Philadelphia at night whilst lying st Wharf
Philad*
Phllodelphia at 6 P M whllst lying at the Whsrl

138

Philadelphia at night whflst lying a t the Wharl
Philadr
Dv
Dv
Port of Constantinople of a Consumption
Phllsd*
DQ
Philsdelphia a t night ahllst lyln et Wharf
Philedelphia lor being subject to i
t8
Philed*
Dv
Do
Dv
DP

"
.................. D
Boston ........... E benezer Brown .......
"
.
. D
New ;edford .... Stephen Wait .........
R
.................
..... Richard Johnson ...... Qr Master
" ..................
D
Boeton ........... James Gladdon .......
D
Philadi. ......... William Buddy ....... Seaman ...................
DD
.-..----Providence ....... WlLllam Davis ........
" -- ----.D
Philadr .......... John S arks
.
Bo~ton........... ~ a v i s
.................. D
"
......... Edward Dnnn ........ " .................. D
Milford
........ Rezeklah Doane ...... Ordinary.................. D
" ..
......... ledediah Chester ...... Seaman ................... R
Millord .......... Thomas Day .......... Seaman ................... R
- D
u
.
New York ....... William Furlong ......
R
------.-...... William English ......
"
--..--.D
.
Pror-idence....... Robert Corbett. ......
"
.
"
D
New York.-. .... BnmueI Harvey. ......
.
Boston
........... Samuel Ford .......... Ordinary.................. D
"
......... Nathaniel Ryder ...... Seaman ................... D

~wo::::::::

20

::

hlbsny .......... John MvNeil.
...... ordinary
..................
"
N. nsmpton ..... John Re8 .............
..................
"
Pmvldence ....... Snmuel Strow ........
..................
"
Boston ........... Daniel Barrett.. ......
.................
" ........... Solomon Porter.. .....
..................
"
Philad* .......... John Cralg............
..................
..................
"
......... JohnOrsnt ...........
.
at
.
New York ....... John Smith ...........
"
Boston .......... James Caffrsy .........
..................
"
"
......... Wllllem Balls .........
..................
" ......... PamuelDnvls.........
- - .- .- . .
Little Cornpton.. Charles 8. Simmons.. .
" ........ JU!,~ ?I
.
N Kingston ...... Cudjo Philips .........
.
Balllrnore ........ lobn Kinney ..........
"
.
" ......... Wlllism Dougherty- . ' I ..................
Windsor ......... I ~ v Latham
l
.......... Landyman ................
.
Rlohmond ....... Isaiah Oarnse
.
C. town N. ZI .... hhel ~ubbart:::::::
.................
u
Boston ...........
............
Benjamin James.. ....
"
..................
Wiscmet ........ John Brown ...........
New Idondon..... Danlel Stutson ........ Ordinary ..................
Brown ........... Stanton Brown ....... Lsndsmsn ................
"
..................
" ......... Josegh Crane
..................
Barnstable ....... M a t ew Backus
Boy
.......................
Prorideom
.......
William
Keen
.........
"
......... John Randall ......... " ......................
R m f c h ......... Lindsey Nlckerson .... " ......................
......................
North Providenm Samuel Patterson-.. ..
Boston ........... Frederick Oosport ..........................
New port ........ Philip Elampson....... " ......................
Coventry ........ John Cony. .......... " ......................
6 Pblladr .......... James MtOregor ...... Senmen
" ...................
..................
"
......... James EIenry..........
..................
"
......... James Spruchen.......

::

781

79

80

81
82
83
81

85
88

87

Illl
BO

w

91
92

"

"
"
"

"
'*

"

June
M ~ Y
June

JU?,P

"

....::::::

;;

Il
D

"
"

1 "

Do
Dr
PhUadslphia at nlght whilst tying at the Whsrf
Philad*
I??I D9
Jany 23 1E1 Bay 41 Alelers of the small pox
m ? , ~ ~ i l ,, Philad*

June 26
2@?,pril

D?

June 29
June 36
April29
June 26
Ap$I 28
"

June Zi
4

"
"

R

June 24
Ap$ 20

Q

D
D

"
"

?!
; J$y
May 4

D
D
R
R

DD

D
D
D
D
DD
D
D

D

Q

K
U
D

1)
D
D

1800

"
‘*

D
D

D
D

'

Dv
Dv

Philadelphia a t night whilst lying at the Wharf
Philadelphia a t night whilst lying at the Wharf
Philad*
18M Fhil~delphlaa t night whilst lying at the Wharf
l?pl Philad*
Do
Dv
1800 Phllndel[)hln being ouiy engaged to bring the
vessel there
Philad*
I
DP
D9

1SW

ISW
1801

Dv
DP
DP
1800 Philadelphia at night whilst lying at the Mhart
Philad,
l p
Do
Do
Philadelphia
for a lingering Complaint
ItpD Philadelphia lor long Indisposition

April 29 1801
June 30 1800
May 4 1801
July 9 1800
Jenr 16 1??1
APJ!~29
"

"
"

March4
Ma; 4

"

,#

UP

l)c

June 28
4

Apl;fI 29

"

D9

DQ
DI
Dv
A t Sea alter a lonq illness
1z1 Philad'

"

Ms;

Philad*
Philadelphin at night whilst lying at the U7h&rf
Phihd+
Philadel his at night whllat lying at the Wharf
~t ~ e ofthe
a
small POX
Philad*

13W
191

IF1

DP
Philadelphia at night whllst at the
Philad*
DP
Philad*
110

Do

Hurter Roll of U. 8. Ship George Washington from earliest entry date 80 April 1800 to 4 May 1801-Continued

-

Entry

apwar-

mca on

Xo.

Whence

Rank

Names

Mo & day year

,,

g,,
97

'

8

"

!y

l p

'4

$8
"

3

08
9Q

J y e '20
2%
la0 J$r
,?
101
Ir J u g 5
2

,'

8.

,, ,,
June 30
107 JU!J
2
109
"
109
"
110
"
111
"
112
"
113
"
114
"
115
"
116
"
117
" 3
118
119 Jy?e 20
120
1
111 J
' 7
1
"
9
124
"
16
125
"
14
1#I
106

g,

130
131
132
133

"

"

Ju$

6

"

"
4
u 21~
28
Jul; 19
2
Jull 7
2
" "
a4

J

::
lp
4'
$8

"

::

" 8

Julz 27
7
" 23
" 11
I'
6
"

,,
,

I

7
"

a

::" 2213
7

::

;:

::"

"
"

9

11
Juq? 20
Jug 6
18
'4
'4

"

" 24
"

"

20

"

::

:"

44

84

"

19

*a

"
"

"

7
28

a<

31

"

"

Where or for what Reason

----

---93 JuAy

When
Time last DI.1
settled & D D
paid
Mo & day Year

"
"
"

14

23
8.24
#4

22

" 30
" 28
" 31

Phlfpdr-....-....EnochClarke......... Seamen................... D
D
..................
......... Frederlrk Rhinehart ..
D
Oeometown ...... David Meldrum ......
" ..................
D
....-.............
Joseph Curren ........
Philadt
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
8'
......... James Sheridan ....... " .................. D
D
..............-...
Ordlnary
Robert
Lowtber
.........
.......
......... Silas Dinsmoor ........ Purser .................... D
D
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
Boatswain
......... Augustine Sevra-. ....
Ounner ................... D
......... Oeor e Weston
D
Phtl?delphia ..... losepi or^--:::::::: Carpenter .......
......... C h a r l a Hamliton ..... Master Arm ............... D
New York ....... John Woodvllle ....... Qunn. Mate .............. D
Phlladelpr ....... Oeorge Carson ........ Cooks " ............... D
....-....Robert Wilson ........ Capt: Clark ............... D
................. D
......... Isaiah Burd ........... Seaman
" ..
.................. D
Ireland ........... John Oliver ...........
.................. D
Phfladr .......... Jamas Di ence
D
‘a
......... ~eremlahb q ~ t ~ a z i i i n : " ..................
"
.................. D
......... James Coyle..........
"
#a
..................
D
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
John
Oreen
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.1
......... Thomas Laneaster-.. . "" .................. D
.................. D
Ca Ann ....... Henry Herbert ........
.................. D
ph&l*--: ....... James Ward ..........
.................. D
......... John Robertson .......
.
................. D
New York ....... Thomm Hussey .....-. "
"
.................. D
Phfladr .......... John Roberts .........
Boy
.
.
.
.
.
.
................. D
......... Wllliarn James ........
......... James Brown ......... "" ...................... D
"
D
......................
......... Willlam Mitchell- ...
New Jeney ...... Abner WoodruR...... Mi$hlpmr ............... D
D
..................
Phllndr .......... James Renshaw .......
D
Bmton ........... Joshua Blake .......... Lleutent ..................
Baltlrum ........ Hugh Aitkln.......... Surgeons M ............... D
D
Lancaster ........ Abraham M~Neill---. Carp* M ..................
Easton ........... John P. D. H. Crain-. Aetr Mid ................. D
Edward Sloan........ Seaman ................... D
Phflsdr
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
"
D
~
......... Rohert Letford ........ O r d ......................
't
......... Jamw He land ....... Landsman ................ D
N. Carolina ...... Wflliam artigaa ..... Midshjpmr.. ............ D
.......... Thomas Brown ....... A:;$ ,, ................. D
Philadr
*a
................. D
......... John Doney ..........

::

::
::
::

Apfj129
"
"
"
"

Ma;

May 4 1;1
Ap$l 20 1?1)1
"

"

Apffl 29

"

"
<I
"
"
"
"
"

::

rp

"

"

1:

::

4

191

"
"

"
"

Ma!

4

Ap:!l29

"
Aprll29
Apf) 29
Ap~f129

"
"
"
"

"
191
"

::"

Philad*
Dv
Dv
DP
D?
Dv
Dv
Dv
Dv
Philad*
Philad*
Dv
Dv
Dv
DP
DQ
Dv
DV

DQ
Dv
Dv
Dv
Dv
Dv
Dv
1) v
DP
DV
Dv
DV
Dv
Dv
DV
DQ
Dv
DQ
Dv
Dv
Dv
Dv
Dv

Joseph Field. ......... MLdshlpv.
136

.........-.........Thomas Bindon .......

Seamen.

Ltft aick on shore

- - - - - - .- .- - - - - - - .- - - .- - - - .- - - - - - - - -

[$prll,?

1
p
1I Philed'

DP
Bls seeurlty never rendered hlm a n board prowcuted for tha am!

[MARINEBI

Ie$l
"

::''

Iuly 9
June 28
Iuly 24

JUYE

"

July 8
Ju~e

::

lU!?

6,

,'
8'
6'

"
"

;";

!,
a*
'a
I.
#*

%'
?'

Ian7

4

:;

3

Fubbr 28

IF1

:

"
"
"

24

"

June 28

"

"
J~;Y

"
"

June 28

"

. I : I 1 ,I
1

2

Philadelp?....... W W l m Hill .......... Bergeant- .......................................
"
......... 811aa Hand ............ Corporal ........................................
" ......... Peter Wilson ........ Dmrnmor .......................................
" ......... Thorn= Emlagton..- Prlvate. ........................................
" ......... Albert Teaboat .......
---- .--.-.-.----- ------ ------- --.
"
......... OUbert Q Dlckerman.
........................................
" ......... John M~Glhon........
- - - - - .- - -. - - - - - - - - - - .- - - - .- - - -..- - - .'
......... Isaac Rlplna...........
........................................
" ......... Ralph Llom...........
........................................
" ......... J a m s Eayileton
- - - - .-.. - - -* - -- -- - - - - - - . - -.
- - - - --.- - .-.

Jan7 3
F$7

,,

1

-

.

......... Thomas Wilson.-. ....
......... Francis Gordon -......
......... Thomas BnIloday---. .
......... Jamas Croney .........
......... Btepheu Uanoe... ....
......... James Anderson ......

.........
.........

Thornes Burke ........
Elkha Bcott...........

"

........................................
........................................
........................................
........................................
........................................
---.---.
--.---.
--- -..-.----- ------ ------

.................. D
.................. R

/

Qreooml Reta-.. ..................................
D
jlO$ral~&-::::::::
Frederick Hllton .....
. Pcsmsn ...................
.........~ B~ t8e lhaem~1l 1o c8otl n.a..c.y...
.
.
--.----...
------.Al iers

;:

Ju!p

31

" ??

.................. R
SUPERNUMERARIES

[OD-Dfacharged or Detached; DD-Discharged

--.---

-

>

(

feb7 7
Apl

I?

"

- 1y1

, ,

;

1

Returned to the barrwks from N. Cestle by order
Phllsdelphia
Philadelphle

Allmnt
PhUadr

D?

Dead; R-Deserted.]

I Certify that the foregoing Muster Book is just and True, a.nd bha t the Musten where made on each Sunday by me
Philadelphia, 6% May 1801
Wq BAINBR~DQE

[NDA, Miao. Roster, Vol. 1, 1798-1844.1

448

NAVAL OPERATIONS

FROM 1786 TO 1801

To Lieutenant John Shaw, U. 8. Navy, from Samuel Smith for Acting Secretary
of the Navy

[WASHINGTON,
D. C.]
N a y Dept t p May 1801
You will 1mmediat.ely take Charge of the U. S. ship George U7mhington $ with all possible Expedhion prepare her for taking in the
articles due to the Dey of algiers - All her Lower deck Guns will be
discharged & only as many Water Casks as will be necessary for a
Crew sufficient Compleatly to Navigate Such a Ship - The present
sailing Master M' Hallowell declines serving. Mr Hazard late of the
Patapsco is ordered to his place You will say as soon as possible what other Oacer you deem necessary for such a voyage - Mr Humphries will Cause the Necessary
Repairs to be made - & Mr G Harrison will supply the necessary
money on your Requsition The George FT7mhin,gtonwill probably not be considered hereafter as
Ship of War & therefore may be made to carry as much as possible [NDA. OSW, Vol. 4, 1800-1801.1
To Naval Constructor Joshua Humphreys, U. 6. Navy, from Samuel Smith for
Acting Secretary of the Navy

[WASHINGTON,
D. C.]
Navy Dept 4+ May 1801
The George Washington being wanted to carry the Tribute to Abers,
she is immediately to be divested of her lower deck Guns, & with aIl
possible expedition be put into a Situation to receive her Cargo.
You will therefore dlrect the repairs necessary on the Hull & spars
to prepair her for that object, to enable her to carry the most in your
power by remov;l,a the orlop Decks if you conceive it to be proper The greatest dispatch is necessary [NDA. GLB, Vol. 4, 1800-1801.1
To Daniel Ludlow, Navy Agent, New York, 8 . Y., from Samuel Smith for Acting
Secretary of the Navy

[WASHINGTON,
D. C . ]
Navy Dept 4*! May 1801
The state Department being about to make up the Tribute to t.he
Bay of Tunis,drrections have been given to Colo [Ebenezer] Stevens,
their Agent, to take from the guns, powder &o belonging to the Navy
Department: in New York, such quantity as he may deem necessary whch you will be pleased to deliver upon his re uisition takin his
receipt therefor, & estimating with him the value t ereof to enab e us
to settle the acco; between the two Departments - The receipt &
Estimate you will send to this office [NDA. GLB, Vol. 4, 1800-1801.1

e

R

To Captain William Bainbridge, U. 8. Navy, from Captain Edward Preble,
U. 6. Navy

NEWYORKMay PI801
DEARSIR I have this day been informed that you intend to take
passage to Norfolk in the Frigate Philadelphia, it would be extremely
gratifying to me, to have you come here, & take paass e in the Essex,
as you are to command her on her arrival in Hamton- oads, I am at

%

WARS WITH BARBABY POWERS

449

present quite an invalid, m d shall not be able to pay the neCBsaa9
sttention to the ship in case of stormy weather, in addition to t b
circumstance, the firsf & second Lieutenants have not yet joked the
Ship, & should my in& sition increase the Ship may possibly be
detained here, which wo d not be the case if you were present.
I congratulate you on your return from your late unpleasant Cruise
P. S. The &sex will be ready to sail on Sunday next -or Monday
at farthest. please to write me by return of Post [NDA. Area 7, & HS of Pa.]

C

To William Pennock, Wavy Agent, Norfolk, Va., from Abishai Thomas for
Acting Secretary of the Navy

[WASHINGTON,
D. C.]
Navy Dept 9*$May 1801
The Frigate Philadelphia is in want of a Main top M a t , for which
i t appears a proper stick cannot be immediately procured in Philadelphia
I pray ou to have one put in hand at once, so as to be ready by the
time tile rigate arrives in Hampton Road, i t must be 56%feet long &
18 inches in the Cap. -

$

[NDA. GLB, Vol. 4, 1800-1801.1
To Captain Richard Dale, V. S. navy, from Captain Thomas Truxtnn, U, S. Navy

NORFOLK
l l t F May 1801
DEARSIRI have received your letter of the 2qinst-t this moment i t was handed me by Mr Thomson who has a Commission as C h a p

lain in the Navy, and is now attached to the Prei&hnf - Thomson
you will find usefull to the midshipmen as a tutor, in all the branches
of h.lathematica1 Science, connected with their profession. I am this moment about to embark, and to take the Ship in the
road. - Adverse winds has prevented it earlier, but She is in high
order -Stores nearIy ready, and about Eight men wanted to corn lete
the crew -and these I Lope will be procurel before the ~ h d p h i a
arrives. My books you shall have - My assistance, and my good
wishes for your health, and a successfull Gee. - When we meet I
shall candidly communicate to you my feehgs, on the injustice done
to me by Mr Adarns, not Sir to serve or compliment you, but to compliment his own section of the United States. - 1 returned to Service
after an offer to resign my Commission - least .my Patriotism should
be doubted, as the war with France was then I h l y to become more
and more serious, but Peace having blessed our land again - I now
feel much disposed to rest for a whde.
[NYPL. NDA photostat.]

111 May 18011
Circular letter to U. S. Consuls and Agents in Europe, from Jamee Leander Cathcut,
U. S. Consul, Tripoli

To the Consuls & Agonts of the U. S. of America, resideg in Franm,
Spain, Portugal & Itaiy, The Barbary States & Bribsh Gamwns
in the Mediterranean, & unto allothers whom it doth or may
conC8rn,

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1786 TO 1801

450

GENTLEMEN
I n the Circulars, which I have had the honor to transmit to your offices, since last Novembre, I have informed you of the
state of our affairs with this Regency, and now Confirm the whole of
their Contents, and request you to continue to Keep our vessels in
Port, and by no means to permit any of them to sail unless under
Convoy as I expect every Inst? that War wdl be declared against the
United States.
The greatest force that this Regency is able to put to Sea a t once
is one ship of Twenty eight guns, and two Hundred Men One Bark
Ship of Twenty guns, and one Hundred, and fifty men One Brig of
fourteen guns, & two Polaccas of fourteen, or Smteen Guns & one
Hundred men each, the whole of which it is supposed m i l l be employed, against the hterchan t Ships of our fellow Citizens I therefore request you Gentlemen, to make this Circular as public
as possible, and to transmit a Copy of it to the department of State.
Chancery of the U. S. of America
a t Tripoly in Barbary
May the 11* 1801.
GENTLEMEN
I am sorry to inform you that this Instt 6 p. m. The
Bashaw of Tripoly sent his Chaoux to inform me that he intended to
declare War in form against the United States of America, upon
Thursday the 14'? of May, and that the flag of the U. S. has already
been hoisted, on board the Cruizers, in the Place where the Flags of
the Nations a t war with this Regency are always hoisted.
You will please to use every means in our Power to give Publicity
to this Circular, and transmt a Copy t ereof to the department of
State. 111 May 18011

g

*

*

*

*

*

*

*

[NA. SDA. CL, Malaga, Vol. 1, June 1703-May 1814.1

[I1 May 18011
Paseport given a Tripolitan veeael by James L. Cathcart, U. S. Consul, Tripoli

By James Leander Cathcart Agent & Consul for the United States
of America in the Regency of Tripoli in Barbary Notwithstanding the Flag of the United States has been most
insolently insulted by being hoisted on the F. T. M. stav of the cruiser
commanded by Morad Ram on the 9" instant in the lace where the
mags of Nations a t War are hoisted & under the F ag of Naples a
Kingdom a t actual War with this Regenc Notwithstanding His Excellency the Bashaw has for three days
past threaten'd the U. S. of America with immediate War if their
Agent did not comply with terms derogatory to the honor & interest
of his country & has absolutelv refused to accept of the terms profer'd
by said Agent, & notwithstanding the State of the affairs of the United
States with this Regency would 'ustify my conduct not on1 in refusing to give Pass o r b to the desseb of this Regency but Ekewise
in e m b a r k myse f & Family where I may be most likely to render
eervice to my country Nevertheless We deem i t expedient for reasons which I shall explain to government as well as to evince a sincere desire as an individual to reserve the peace which had subsisted between the United
States & is Regency unW the Bashaw etates his demands in form to
the President & receiv's his answer - Do grant this our Passport

P

P

tE

451

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

for a Brig belonging to His Excellency the Bashaw of Tripoli Swedish
built mounting no guns and carrying twelve men whereof six are
Mussuhen & six Christians, Cornmmded by Raix Eamida a Tripoline
and now bound to Tunis We therefore recommend to the HbleThomas T r u r b n Captain of
the United States Frigate the President and commander in c h d of the
American Ships & Vessels of War in the Mediterranean & all other
Citizens of the United States of whatsoever rank or degree to permit
said Bri & crew to pass freely and unmolested from Tripoli to Tunis
and bac to Tripoli again & by no means to impede her passage even
should War be declared after this Passport is issued - Provided
always that said Raiz Hamida and the crew under his Command shalI
conduct themselves in a peaceable & friendly manner towards the
Citizens of the United States of America Given under our Public Seal, at our Chancery Office in the
said City and Kingdom of Tripoli the 1I + day of hfay in
the year one Thousand Eight Hundred & one dz of the
Independence and sovereignity of the United States the
twenty fifth -

E

@

JAMES LEA?CATRCART

[SDA. CL, Tripoli, Vol. 1, Part 11, Jan. 1800-May 1801.f
To Captain Alexander Murray, U. 5. Navy, Philadelphia,Pa., from Samuel Smith for
Acting Secretary of the Eavy

WASHINGTON,
D. C.]

Navy Dept 1P May 1801
Yours of the 3* instant gives the agreeable information that the
Constdation is &oat, & that you are clearing out the Ship - Many
articles will be rendered useless by the late misfortune [Grounded 10
Aprif 1801.1 - on all such you d l call a survey, & cause such as are
thought unfit for a Ship of war to be delivered to the Navy Agent with
Directions to sell them a t auction to the h h e s t bidder for Cash you will remember that the ship is to be Inid up in ordinary & that
it will be proper to preserve eve thing that may be necessary & thst
will answer to bring her to the astern Branch [NDA. OSW,Vol. 4, 1800-1801.1

%

To Secretary of State from Richard O'Brien, U. S. Conaul General, Algiers

ALGIERSThe lSt? of

May 1801

ESTEEMED
SIR I presume you have received The. dispatches I
forwarded. by The Brutus Captain Brown which left Alpers m October
last. and allso those I forwarded by The C[eorge]Washingdon.and My

sundry letters and communicatio~swhich I have repeatedly forwarded
to Mr Smith on Barbary affairs
in february Tbe Bashaw of Tripoli declare,d he no longer held to
his friendship with the United States has demanded vast Sums and
disregarded The de letters and Gaurentee. and every raisonahle
offer which Consul eatheart Could mahe, 6r has sent his CorsaLs ta
Sea to Capture Americans At Algiers we are two &q a half Years in arrears in the Annuities we
are threatened with war if The Stores does not arrive Shortly - The
Consuls in Barbary has neither Money or Credit. and the Govenunent
of the U. ,States pays no attention to our Communications i t is 10

452

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1785 TO 1801

Months That I have not had any letter from the department of State
War Sir will shortly be the result of detention and neglect
I have repeatedly wrote for these 15 Months that Government would
appoint a Succesor to The Consulut of Algiers
Amount of Warrants drawn on Appropriation for Treaties with
Mediterranean Powers -

75,120.1 7 9 7 . - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 388,284.31
---------1798. - - - _ _ _ _ _ _ _ - - _ - _ - - - _ - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -155,470.89
---

In 1 7 9 6 - - - - - - - - _ - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -

$618,875.20

Am' of d Qdrawn on tlie Appropriation for Treatflywith
the Dey & Regency of Algiers In

1797-----------------------------------

109,000.

1 7 9 8 _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ . _ . _ - - - - - . - - - - - - - - - -59,246.63
----

168,246.63

Total in 1796 - 7 & 8- - - - _ - - _ - _ _ _ - - - $787,
- -121.
- -83
-.--

Am; of Warr* drawn on the Appropri" for Treaties with
Mediterranean powers In 1 7 9 9 - - - - - - - - - - - - - - _ - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 72,000.
1800.---------------------------------128,252.90
1801----------------------------------147,115.-

347,367.90

Am+of dQon Appqor Treaty wit,h the Dey & Regency of
Algiers-

$437,967.85
-

[NA. SDA.

CL,Algiers Vol. 6,Jan. 1801-Dec. 1803.1

To Captain Thomas Trnxtun, U. 6. Navy, from Samuel Smith for Acting Secretary
of the Navy

[WASHINGTON,
D. C.]
Nav Dep IS* May 1801

Comodore TRUXTUN
Norjolk
SIR! I have the pleasure to inform you that C a p m a l e is arrived
here, & will set off for Norfolk to receive his command from you in the
course of a very few days. Your son has thought proper, from misinformation, fo resign. He can again resume his situation if you so
determine.
[NDA. OSW,Vol. 4, 1800-1801.1
To Secretary of the Navy from Captain Edward Preble, U. 8. Navy

U. S. Ship Egsex, NEWYORKHARBOR
May 1pp 1801
SIR I have the honor to acquaint you that the Essex is now under
sail bound to Hampton-Roads to join the Squadron agreable to your
directions, I shall enclose the necessary returns to the Navy-Agent
(by return of the Pilot Boat) to be forwarded by him to you.
[LC. Edward Preble Papers, Vol. 4, 1801-1802.1

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

453

114 May 18011
To the B ~ s h a wof Tripoli from James L. Cathcart, U. S. Consul, Tripoli

-

The Agent of the United States of America to the Bashnw of Tripoli
Salute By your Excellency's Shaoux Hadgi Mabarnude la Sore I send my
Ultimatum Viz? I Promise to pay your Excellency thirty thousand dollars & the
Presents which came from Algiers and Tischera for cloth provided you
will state your demands to the President of the United States of
America b letter and wait ten months for the return of an answer said perio to commence from the date of said letter to the President
of the United States of America In Testimony of which I hereunto subscribe my name JAMEB
LEA:CATHCART
Tripoli in Barbary May 14'b 1801.

d

[SDA. CL, Tripoli, Vol. 1, Part 11, Jan. 1800-May 1801.]

To Nicholas C.

I15 May 1801]
Hissen, Danish Consal General, Tripoli, from Iambs L. Cathmut,
U. B. Consnl, Tripoh

N N1860~Esqr
His Danieh Majeatys C d gent
at Tripoli in Barbary SIR- YOUhaving been so obhghg as to accept the direction of the

affairs of the United States of America during the absence of their
Agent, the under signed Agent of the U. S for this Regency takes the
liberty to inform you that the Articles in the following document
d a m m e r as if imeare blnding upon tho U. S of America in as f
diately signed by the President of the United States of America First - As I have no power to enter into any negotiation either
for the re-estsblishment of Peace between the United States of
America & the Regency of Tripoli or for to settle a truce between
the said powers I consequently can not Q1 will not delegate any to
you; but in order that the doors of accomodation may be ke t open
should the Bashaw propose terms more favourable than t rlose so
long in agitation you will please to forward them to me to Tunis for
my consideration Second
As the Bashaw of Tripoli has pawn'd his honor that no
captures shall be made by his Cruisers until1 after the expiration of
forty days to commence from the declaration of War on the 14'? of
May (exclusive) any Vessel or Vessels that mag be captnred before
that period expires, you will please to claim (in vlrtue of mid promise)
in the name of the United States of America Third - As I have been repeatedly refused the Passports of the
U. S. of America by Morad R m notwithstanding the positive Orders
of tbe Bashaw to give them to me and as their are several more of
which I shall leave a memorandum you will please to receive them
should the[y] be returnd, before the Cruisers of this Regency sails
which you will please to advise me of as soon as possible in order
that I ma prevent the consequences attendant on IH) flagrant a
breach of e law of Nations Fourth - The Consular house is psid for in advance unta the
month of May 1804 the receipt for said rent I shall leave with you,

-

tE

454

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1786 TO 1801

the house is a t your disposal entirely, but I could wish you would
permit Citizen Severe Nodi to reside in i t in preference to any otgher
in consequence of his politeness in furnishing me with the Vessel to
depart in Fifth - The allowance given to the American Citizens that were
in captivity at Algiers was to each Captain eight dollars pr month
to each Mate & supercargo Six & to each manner three and three
quarters, and to each a change of cloaths you will please to give them
the same, sllould any be captured which is hardly probable, & you
will please to advance to each Captain a t your own discretion to the
ammount of fifty dollars each upon their private note specifying that
they will refund said sum to me shoulcl it not be allowed by government I shall endeavor to leave funds here if possible; if not you will
please to draw upon Mr Eaton a t Tunis if necessary Sixth - If you obtain the same priviledges for the Citizens of the
United States that you did for the subjects of Sweden tbe United
States will in like manner indemnify you for any loss you may sustain, a t the same time I request you to reduce the risque as much as
circumstances will permit It is presumed the Captains & Officers will behave in such a manner
as not to abuse the confidence you place in them should it be otherwise the mode of procedure is left a t your own discretion as I am
certain you have too much humanity to permit the innocent to suffer
for tho culpable Seventh - Small presents may be given occasionly to guardians to
procure rest from labor & to o b t a i ~as~ good treatment as possible for
the mariners
Eighth - You will please to oppose any of them changing their
religion with all your power, & should any of them be so b e e , abandon
them to their miserable fate - I dont recollect any thmg more a t
presant worthy observation, but if any thing occurs to you please to
lnform me on my arrival a t Tunis for which place I depart to morrow
if the Bashaw permits me That the above obligation may be obligatory on the United States
of America - I hereunto subscribe my name & Affix the sen1 of my
office Done a t the Chancery of the United States of America a t
Tripoli in Barbary the 15I of May 1801 and of the
Independence of the United States of America the 25* -

@

[SDA. CL, Tripoli, Vol. 1, Part 11, Jan. 18WMay 1801.1

[15 May 18011
Circular issued by Jamee L. Cathcart, U. 5. Consul, Tripoli

To the Agents and Consuls of the U. S of America residing in France,
Spain Portugal & Ital , the Barbary States and British Garrisons in
the dediterranean an all others whom i t doth or may concern GENTLEMEN
- In addition to my Circulars of the (MS mutilated)
instant I am sorry to inform you that our Flagstaff was chop'd down
upon Thursday the 14'-" instant and War was declared in form by
the Bashaw of Tripoli against the United States of Amenca You will please to mve every possible publicit to this Circular
and transmit a copy thereof to the Department o State - I shall

a'

9

455

E'ARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

depart from Tripoli bound to Tunis in a few days where I mean to
wait the Presidents orders
Chance of the U. S of America a t ripoli in Barbary May the 1 5 1 1801.
FULWAR
SKIPWITH
ES f
Consul Geni for the% S of America
a t Paris
ISDA. CL,Tripoli, Vol. 1, Part 11, Jan. 1800-May 1801.1

rp

[I6 May 18011
To Secretary of State from James L. Cathcort, U. 5. Consul, Tripoli

Nq 6 - Triplicate
SIR- The followiug is a Journal of occurences since the date of my
dispatches forwarded direct to America by our Consul a t Tunis On April the 199 I received a packet from Mc Eaton st Tunis
which came enclosed to Mf Nissen containing letters from Messs
Smith and Obrien, from the former of the lot? of November & 4* of
Februaq in which I am inform'd that several of mg dispatches have
been forwarded to the Department of State;Mr Smth communicates
to me his entire approbabon of the manner in which I had conducted
our affairs & says the steps which I had informd him I should take
seem'd well calculnted to avert any impending danger untU I should
receive instructions from the President & observes that untill we have
a su£6cient force in the Mediterranean to protect our commerce we
must give money in order to prevent the ruin of our commerce &
capture of our fellow Citizens, and hopes that government are fully
sensible of the expediency of sending some strong Frigates into the
mediterranean and that some are already on their way in which
ho e I 'oin him most cordially Mf Smith acknowledges the receipt of
a &cdar but adds that by h. last letter from A1 'em Consul OBrien
gives him hopes that the steps he has taken a t &em (of which you
are informd - I having forwarded Mr OBriens letters to me in my
dispatch No 3 of this year) will have been sufficient to avert for the
present the Bashaws menaces - The letters from Consul OBrien
were dated the 31" of December (which I have alrendy forwarded
in triplicates some observations on the back thereof excepted which
I did not before receive & are of no consequence whatever) 19* of
January & 2'J and 20+ of February, "On the back of his letter of the
199 of January is wrote the following paragraph "this letter under
cover to Consul Eaton and unsealed is for him to peruse and to inform
me that it is so far as Tunis proceeding upon his Journe
the same time I will thank Consul Eaton to ask Azu ru IfTripolia,
by this
conveyance that he received the Deys latter for the Bashaw of Tripoh
as i t ~9 orderd to be there given to the Algerine Vikd whom is to
forward it 05cirrlly to the Son of Aly Bashaw - "If any such letter
has really arrived here it has been kept
rofound secret from me,
notwithstandii I have made every posslb e en u k y and the result
shews that it has either never arrived or the ~ d a has
w despised its
contents; in either case the effect produced is the same - I had
recommended to Mr OBrien to forward the Deys letter to Mr Eaton
in Order to have it translated by Mr Adamson who translated the
alteration in our Treaty which I presume was 8 more m er conveye ecretcrrg a t
ance than the one alluded to Mr OBrien had bribed

T

P

ti 8

456

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1786 TO 1801

Algiers very properly in order thst he might write more forcible; his
forwarding the letter in the manner I had advised could have been
attended with no dBculty; enclosed is the duplicate of his letter of
the 8 of February and in his of the 20" he acknowledges several of
my communications & informs me of his having received intelligence
of the copys which he forwarded having arived a t Alicant wherein
he informs the Consuls that the precaution I have taken is necessa
this in my opinion indicates thnt he placed no great co&dence in xi
promises of the most impotent Dey of Algiers, a t the same time he
expresses his expectation that the presents he has forwarded and the
Deys letters to tbe Bashaw will give a temporary security to our
~fiairsuntil1 our Frigates arrive in this sea, and adds that without
them & cash we cannot hold to our moorings in which opinion I perfectly wincide with him "He likewise observes that by making such
extraordinary co~cessionsta Tripoli will be the means of the other
R e g e n c ~incre
their demands upon us (to which ve me-leape
to add that by our urning aod sinking a few of their &isem it mll
not only be of service to us here but will in a great measure prevent
Tunis & &en+ from breaking with us, for I assure you none of them
hting; theIy] are only calculated to plunder) which I
am
are certain0 ~ 5 2 4be the case, for my ideas on this subject I refer you to
my correspondence with Mr OBnen which I presume he has forwarded to the Department of State and my dispatches since last
May - Mr OBrien informs me thnt the Swedish Consul a t Algiers
has wrote very pressingly to Sweden to prevent his King from ratifying Mr Tornquists agreement & says he is coddent that the Son of
Aly Bashaw will never get the stipuIatd cash & annuity, the Danish
Consul here has informd me that the Danes will never pay the annuit that Comodore Koefoed would have been here with a Ship of
the &e and some Frigates Ion ago to adjust this affair had i t not
been for their disturbance wi& Great Bntain which has been unfortunats for us, for I had arranged our affairs in such a manner that
the Danes would have adjusted theirs first, which would have
us a respite for several months, in which time no doubt I would ave
received instructions from the President, but their disturbance with
great Britain dersnged nll my plans and made us irnrnediateIy the
object of the Bashaws cupidity - The rest of Mr OBriens communications indicates that no coddence ought to be placed in either
the Dey of Algiers or the Bashaw of Tripoli in which sentiment I
agree with him most sincerely, & will take the libert to make a
triumvirate by adding the Bey of Tunis - Nothing append but
re ititions of what I have dread inform'd you until1 the 25* of April
w en I paid my respects to the nshaw in consequence of the Grand
Bairam or festival which occasioned my sending his Excellency a
letter with a translation in Italian enclosure NQ 1, my motive for so
doing was to counteract n report that Bryan MqDonogh had raised
that I have received orders from government to adjust the affairs of
the United States with the Bashaw, but that I would not through
personal enmity to his Excellency, & to endeavor to prolong the time
untdl I should receive certain intelligence from Malta of m Circulars
havin srrived of which I have forwarded upwards of orty since
last ebruarg On the 30* of April I received an answer from the Bashaw through
the organs of Farfm which infom'd me that he had desired him to
inform me that he would consider of the contents of my letter and was

""Pb

Fen

5

%

f

E

r

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

457

otherwise calculabd to lull me into a false security I likewise received
intelligence from Malta that my Circulars were forwarded to Itsly
and London On the 9': of May Morad hoisted the coilors of all Nations on board
his Ship in consequence of the Bashaw & his Sons going on board of
some Vessels in the harbor, two Flags of the United States were hoisted
on the fore top mast stay where Prize Collors are hoisted & under the
Neapolitan flag,a nation at actual War with this Regency, I immediately sent my Drogoman to wait untill the Bashaw came on shore and
desired an Audience, the Bashaw answered that he was sea sick, and
desired him to tell me to make my communications to Gddi Mohammed Daguize & he would send me an answer by the same person I
accordingly waited upon him & requested he would ask the Bashsw in
my name whether he was at War with the United States, if he answered
in the afbmative I requested to have leave to embark my family
immediately, if in the negative I demanded that the person who had
dared to insult our Flag without orders should immediately be
punish'd - The Bashaw answered that he had given no orders to
hoist the Flag forward, that as et he was at Peace with the United
States, he than orderd all the ags to be haul'd down immediately,
and desired Ciddi Daguize to inform me that he was determin'd to
settle his affairs with the United States immediately that if we arranged, I should have satisfaction, that if not he would take down our
Flagstaff next day, this seems to me sdlicient evidence that the Flags
were hoisted by the Bashaws Orders - Ciddi Daguize infom'd me
thnt the Bashaws great objection was to the length of time, that if I
would agree to give him the promised cash & presents for eight
months time only that their yet was a probability of adjusting this
affair, I informd him that I should be deceiving the Bashaw was I to
promise him that answers could arrive in that time, & after five
different discussions I told Daguize to inform the Bashaw that I
would give him the presents & cash stipulatsd; for him to state his
demands to the President and to wait one year for his answer, Daguize
made the report and infom'd me that the Bashaw had rejected my
ofler, & was determined upon War u n l w I enterd into a negotiation,
"to alter the Treaty & promise the annuity were stipulated as the only
means of accomodation, that the sum probably might be reduced
considernbly providad we
eed to the said, but if War was declared
that he would ask a much arger sum" I answerd that he might ask
what he pleased but that it was a p w e whether he would get it, and
negatived the whole - In the evening Siddi Daguize sent for the
Danish Consul Mr Nissen, who is intimate with me, and desired him to
try to persuade me to make a spontaneous offer of forty thousand
dollars & the presents for the Bashaw to wait ten months for tho
Presidents answer - but that ho would advise me to try, and that I
might depend upon his influence, I requested Mr Nissen to inform
Daguize that I was aurprized be should send me such a message after
what I had informd him so often in the presence of Fmfara, that if
the peace of the United States depended upon reducing the time to
ten months, that I was ready even to mako that sacrifice, but that i t
was entirely out of m power to increase the sum in cash,let what would
be the consequence;itis N k n returnd $info&
me that the Bashaw
had given orders to take down our Flagstaff in the morning, & Ciddi
Daguize had advised him to tell me to send Mn Cathoart & family to

d

T

458

hTAVALOPERATIONS FROM 1785 TO 1801

some of the other Consuls houses for fear of her being alarm'd a t the
event Sunday 10" We waited with anxiety untill after eleven oClock
but the Bashaw sent no person to take the Flagstaff down, I call'd on
Daguize and endeavor'd to settle upon the terms of esterday but
without effect nothing took place but repetitions & ding a War
inevitable I endeavor'd to form a precedent in this Regency, and
demanded and obtained a promise from the Bashaw that no captures
should take place untill forty days after declaration of War; but I do
not believe he is sincere & for that reason have not mentioned this
circumstance in my Circulars, lest it might be the means of g i v 3 my
we
fellow Citizens a security that does not exist nor ever will un
have three or four of our Frigates stationed constantly in this river of
thieves; but I think we are in no great danger as I have forwarded so
many Circulars since February last, that the fault of our Consuls in
not publishing them or the obstinacy of our mariners in comeing to
sea after receiving information can only be assign'd as reasons for even
a probability of any of our Vessels f a h g into their hands Monday ll*? The remainder of yesterday and part of to day I got
in as many of our passports as possible, their yet remains four whch
I am &raid I will not get, Morad has absolutely refused to give his up,
but the[y] are old consequently of no use, "the Bashaw sent to me a t
meridian to grant a passport for a Brig which I gave immediately
(enclosure NQ2) not only for her passage to Tunis but likewise back to
Tripoli as 'I was convinced the Bnshaw wanted to justify his conduct to
the Dey of Algiers provided any questions should be ask'd, by saying
the American Consul had refused to grant him Passports, the manner
I have i t wrote will likewise serve to inform any of our arm'd Vessels if
any their are in this sea of the state of our affairs at Tripoli This evening a t Six P. M. Hadgi Mahamude la Sore the same that
went to m e r s in the Hamdullah came to the American House & told
me not to be alarme'd for the Bashaw had sent him to inform me that
he declared War against the United States and would take down our
Flag staff on Thursday the 14+ inst "that if I pleased to remain in
Tripoli I should be treated with respect, but if I pleased I might go
away, I sent my comp* to the Bashaw and inform'd him that it was
not a t my o tion as I had positive instructions not to remain an instant
after a dect3ration of War took place, and that I should charter a
Vessel to morrow if possible - I had made an agreement with a
Ragusee but Farfara underhanded jew like, charterd the Vessel for
Barcelona a t the same time that he was making me a tender of his
friendship and influence - Had I stay'd hero I should have impeded
the operation of government which from the nature of the Demand, and
consequences attendent on a pusillanimous com liance must be coercive
if government intends to give any cash a t alf' here i t had better be
sent in one of the Frigates a t once to save future embroils which we
ma expect every two years a t least $uesday 12Y Forwarded n detail of our affairs so far to Mess?
OBrien & Eaton with a number of Circulars and sent several others
privately on board two Malts Vessels, altho Bryan MqDonogh had
orderd the Captains a t their peril not to take any letters from the
Americau Consul, supposing I had waited untill now to alarm our
Citizens he shew'd his malice but without offect Wednesda I sent my Drogoman this evening to the Bashaw to
inform him &at i t was fiftoen months since I had received letters from

&

WARS WITH BARBARY POWEBS
-

-

p
p

- -

--

-

-

-

459

government, that I expected theh] had arrived and that a Courier
was on his passaga to me, and re uested that he would wait ten or
twelve days, that probably I mig t receivegomething satisfactory,
he sent me in answer that he would not wait one moment longer than
he had promised, that he already had waited too lo , I waited upon
Daguize who made the same request in my name & o tain'd the same
answer from the Bashaw, & he inform'd me in confidence that if the
Bashaw really intended to break with America fifty or sixty thousand
dollars would not prevent him, as he had even greater expectations
from a War with America, than he had from Sweden or Denmark
Thursday 14'P At. 1. P. M. Hadgi Maharnudo la Soro came to
inform mo thst the Chaoux were a coming to take our FlagstafT down,
I waited untill the Seraskier arrived & then sent said la Sore to the
Bashaw to offer him ten thousand dollars in addition to what I had
already offerd, which was rejected by the Bashaw and orders given
to cut away the Flagstaff, wMe la Sore w m away, I sent my dragoman
to the Bashaw with enclosure NQ3 who sent it to Siddi D~guizewho
c d ' d Mr Nissen the Danish Consul to translate it for him this produced an order from the Bashaw that if they could not take it down
directly to place a number of men to tho halliards and break it of[f]
in the middle which they tried to do in rain, but at n, quarter past
two they effected the grand atchievmont and our Flagstaff was
chop'd down six feet from tho ground & left reclining on the Terrace,
"thus ends the first act of this Tragedy, I hope the catastrophe may
bo happy This evening I requested Citizen Nodi Agent for the French Reublic to gmut me lus Vessel on the same terms thst he charter'd her
L
f
l
.-- to transport my family to Tunis which be promised to do if
possible Friday the 15* [May] mado the arrangement with the D a n a
Consul contained in Enclosure NQ4 in order that provision may be
made for any of our Countrymen that may be so unfortunate as to
fall into their hands Saturday "the port was embargoed, and I entered into a contract
with the Captain of an Imperial Polaccn, and am now busy embulnng
my goods, & household gods, and w i l l sail for Tunis as-soon as the
Port is open'd, from whence I w i l l forward you several rmnutia worth
recording; "I must do the Bashaw the justice to say that he has been
mom polite to me than to my other Consul on the same occasion,
and that I have suffer'd no personal insult, nor has my ropert been
embezzled in the least, and I am @ted
to walk a&Iut w ere I
please, exnctly the same as before the War commenced - I have
likewise to observe that Captives are much better treated here +an
a t Algiers, the Captains never do any thing, the Officers sometunes
are made to work on board the Crtlisers, & tho mariners are dow'd
Sunday to themselves, but then they get hardly m y thing to eat but
what they buy themselves I hope Sir you will do me the justice to believe that 1have done
every thing in my power to preserve my country's peace, and that I
have risqued more than almost any individual would have done
without orders, to no effect, "the Bashaw was determined upon the
War in consequence of the conc88siom of Sweden which however are
not yet paid, therefore any thing I ooul'd do wouh not prevent it, in
February last I alarm'd our commerce from Smyrna to London, the
result is 'in the hands of the most high, which if a sdEcient force is

1

"%

i

460

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1785 TO 1801

sent into this sea will be propitious, if not expect nothing in future
but to pay as large sums here as we have a t Algiers without having
half the security for our commerce
TRIPOLIIN BARBARY
May the 1P 1801.
N. B. Dispatch N? 1 - 3 - 6 of this year only are of consequence [SDA. CL, Tripoli, Vol. 1, Part 11, Jan. 1800-May 1801.1
To Captain James Barron, U. S. Navy, from Samuel Smith for Acting Secretary
of the Navy

[WASHINGTON,
D. C.]
Nay Dept 1PMay 1801

Capt Jar BARRON
Care oj Capt Dale Norjolk
The President from a respect for your character & a desire to secure
to the Public the Services of a gentleman so well qualified for Naval
Commander, is anxious that you should avail yourself of an opportunity now afforded you of being retained under the Peace Establishment act Commodore Dale wants a Captain on board of the President;
and although i t may appear to you to be a retrogade motion, to act
in Subordination to any officer on board the same Vessel with yourself,
I hope when you reflect that there is no intention on the part of
government toward your feelings, you will have no hesitation in
accepting that command. Had you arrived in this country a few
weeks earlier, another arrangement might hare been made for you
which however will s t i l be made after your roturn from the Present
cruise Your reporting yourself to Comodore Dale will be agreeable to me:
your not doing it however will be attended with no circumstance,
prejudicial to yourself [NDA. OSW,Vol. 5, 1801-1802.1
Extract from letter to William Eaton, U. S. Conaul, Tunis, and Richard O'Brien,
U. S, Consnl General, Algiers, from Secretary of State

DEPARTMENT
O F STATE,Washington, May 20, 1801.
"The proofs which have been given b the Bashaw of Tripoli of
hostile designs against the United States ave, as you will learn from
Commodore Dale, determined the President to send into the Mediterranean a squadron of three frigates and a sloop of war, under the command of that officer. Should war have been declared, or hostilities
commenced, this force will be immediately employed in the defence
and protection of our commerce against the piracies of that regency.
I t is hoped that the contagion will not have spread either to Tunis or
Algiers; but, should one or both of them have followed the perfidious
exam le, their corsairs will bo equal1 repelled and punished.
' ~ %policy
e
of exhibiting a naval orce on the coast of Barbary has
long been urged b yourself and the other consuls. The present
moment is peculiar y favorable for the ex riment, not only as it is
a provision against an immediate danger, ?I ut as we are now a t eace
and amity with all the rest of the world, and as the force emp oyed
would, if a t home, be a t nearly the same expome, with less advantage
to our marinem. The President has, therefore, every reason to expect
the utmost exertions of your prudence and address, in giving the

I

P

f

P

461

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

measure an im rossion most advantageous to the chsrscter and
inkrest of the nitod States. I n effecting this object, the means
must be left, in a groat degree, to your knowledge of the local and
other circumstances, which cannot be understood a t this distance.
You will, of come, take due pains to satisfy tho Bey, that the United
States are desirous of maintaining peace with all nations who are
willing to live in peace; that they frave e v e n abundant evidence of
their disposition to cultivate tho frieridship of the Barbary regencies,
and of himself in particular; and that, if the flag of the United States
should be engaged in war with oither of them, it will be a war of
defence and necessity, not of choice or provocation. You will also
give every friendly explanation and assurance, on this occasion, which
may be requisite lor the consuls and agents of other Powers residing
&tTunis.
"You are autholized to inform the Bey of Tunis that a vessel is now
preparing to take in fhe cargo which will complete the regalia due to
him, and that no time will be lost in getting her on her voyage."
(NOTE.-The same was written to Mr. O'Brien, except the lnst
paragraph, with the following addition:
"You will, of course, take due pains to satisfy the Dey that the
United States are desirous of maintaining peace with all nations who
we willing to live in peace; that they have given abundant evidence
of their disposition to cultit-ate the friendship of the Barbary regencies,
and of himself in particular; that they expect from his good faith an
efficacious interposition, according to our treaty with him, for guarantying the treaty with the Bashaw of Tripoli.
"The United Stabs, it appears, will, before you receive this, be
three years in anears to the Dey. Towards making up the deficiency,
the George Washington is under active preparation to carr timber and
other stores, for a t least one annuity. Commodoro Da e is charged
with thirty thousand dollars, which the President hopes the De may
have been induced to accept as a commutation for the stores &e for
another. He has also in chnlge four hundred yrards of cloth and
thirty pieces of h e n for the biennial presont. Sl~ouldyou not have
prevailed on the Deg, and should find it still impossible to prevail on
him to accept the t h t y tilousand dollars in lieu of the stores, without
the application of four, five, or six thousand dollars, you will be suplied with that sum; m d the sum of thirty thousand dollars will then
6 0 made up out of other moneys in the commodore's hands. Should
there be no possibility of inducing tho De to the measure, even with
this aid, the whole sum of thirty thousan dollars is to be retained b
the commodore. The bnlanco for the remaining, or third year,
bo sent as soon as i t can be done, either in stores or money, as may bo
agreod. You are already aware how much both the con~enioncyand
intarest of the United States will be promoted by substituting money
for stores, rating the latter a t thirty thousand dollars, as a permanent
regulation, and wilI take due pains to bring about such a change.
You may find it, perl~nps,nn fugument of some weight with the.Dey
for preferring money to stores, that tho former can always be renutted
with more punctuality, and that, in times of war, such of the latter as
are held to be contraband by the Europoan law of nabons, may be
exposed to captures by which he must be affected as well as tho United
States. I n case you should succeed in the pecuniary commutation
proposed, i t wilI be proper, in d e f i n i i the sum of thirty thousand
dollars, to refer to some standard of welght and fineness in the metal,

6

i

$

d

462

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1786 TO 1801

@r-

that will secure the United States
t arbitrary regulations of the
Dey, and quiet his jealousy, if he s ould have any, of imposition on
the part of the United States. The Spanish dollars now in circulation
may, for example, answer this purpose.
"The pretensions set up against the United States, in the case of
the ship Forficne, for indemnification to the owners of the merchandise
with which she was laden, show the disadvantage of employing our vessels in the freight of Algerine property. You will, therefore, as far as
you can, discourago that branch of trade; and, as far rrs it cannot be
done, will take care to repress all expsctation or claim whatsoever, to
throw on the United States the losses by capture under their flags.
"One sub'ect of equal im rtance and delicacy still romains. The
sending to &nstantmople t e national ship of war the George W d ington, by force, under the Algerine flag, and for such a purpose, has
deeply affected the sensibility, not only of the President, but of the
ople of the United States. Whatever temporary effects it may have
ty is of so serious a nature,
ad favorable to our interests, the ind
that it is not impossible that it may
deemed necessary on a fit
occasion, to revive the sub'ect. Viewing it in this T h t, the President
wishes that nothing may e said or done by you t at may unnecessarily preclude the competent authority from animadverting on that
transaction in any way that a vindication of the national honor may
be thought to prescribe.")

f'

E"

P

b

[Am. State Papers, For. Rel., Vol. 2.1
To John Gavino, U. S. Consul, Gibraltar, from Samuel Smith for Acting Secretary
of the Navy

[WASHINGTON,
D. C.]
Nazy Dept 20t+May 1801
The Present will be handed you by Commodore Richard Dale
Commanding a squadron intended to Cruise in the Mediterranean
He will probably touch a t Giberalter & may require supplies for which
purpose he is authorised to draw a Bill on the very respectable House
of J Mackinzie & A, Glennie of London, you will therefore give
Credit under the most perfect assurance of the Bills bt&g paid to hia
Drafts or in Case of Accident to hba those of the Commanding OfEcar
of the squadron
Your friend1 aid & assistance to Commodore Dale will be gratefully acknowl ged by the Government of the U. S.

‘d

[NDA. GLE, Vol. 4, 1800-1801.1
To De Butte & Pumiance, Leghorn, Italy, from Samuel Smith for Acting S e c r e t u ~
of the Navy

[WASHINGTON,
D. C.l
Naby Dept 2@+May 1801
A Squadron of Frigates ie now ready for sea under the Command
of Commodore Richard Dale Intended to Cruise for the protection
of our Commerce & the Instruction of our Yo
OfEcers within the
Mediterranean I t consists of the following we appointed Vessella
of War OUM
President- - - - - - -,
- - ---Commodore Dale--- - - - - - - 44
P h W p h k - - - - - - - - -Capt Sam1 Banon- - - -- ,- , 44
f i s m - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - Capt Wq Baimbridg ------ 32
Enterprize (Schooner)--Lt A, Sterrett
-------- 12

"E

__-

-,-a

-

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

463
-

-

I have authorized Commodore Dale or in case of accident to him,
the Commanding Officer for the time being to draw on you for money
neceaaary for tha squadron under his Command or to apply to you
for such supplies as hs ma require - To Reimburse you for the
amount of such sup lies or gills. I hereby authorize ou to draw on
J. Macldneie & A. Xlennie of London with whom a &edit of 8000s
sterling will be lodged for that urpose - You may rest under the
most perfect securit that your ills will meet with due honor probably go into the Ports of Naples Palermo
The Squadron
& Syracuse, at all which piaces you will Lodge Letters of Credit in
favour of Commodore dale or the Commanding Officer of the American Squadron c e i n in the Mediterranean seas It is not improbab e that the schooner may be dispatched to you
from time to time for supplies In such case Exerhon & dispatch
will be in a particular Manner necessary Should the squadron meet with any accident & put into any of the
Ports of Itdy or France $ the resezlce of your Mr De Butts should
be deemed usafd, I trust he wil not decline going Should Commodore Dale put into Leghorn you will pay him the
Respect due to an Officer held in the highest Estimation by the
President Inclosed you have Directions from the accountant of the Navy
Department directing the Manner of Conducting the Business -

8

7

P

[NDA. GLB, Vol. 4, 1800-1801.1

To Captain Richard Dde, U, S. Bavy, from Samuel Smith for Acting Secretpry of
the Revs

[WASR~NGTON,
D. C.1
h7avyDept $OF May 1801
Commodore R DALE
The Peace establishment of the United States agreeably to a Copy
of the Law, hereto annexed, authorises & directs the President to
keep actualy employed, a proportion of the Navy of the United
States, The President anxious to promote the views of the Coptituted authorities, has directed a Squadron Consisting of the Fngats
President, P h W p h i a & f i ~ e z& Schooner Enterprize to be prepared
& ut tosea- *
8 n e grest object of the resent s uadron is to instruct our Young
Officers in nautical knoarlege e n e J l v , but particularly in the Shores
& Coasta where you cruise.
this 1beg your particular attention.
The President enjoins on you to cultivate harmony among your
Officers - t
It is the particular desire of the President that exact discipline be
observed on board of all our ublic Ships: that the Conduct of the
OfEcers, Commissioned as weI?
as Non Commissioned, exhibit to the
men,an example of obedience $ subordination to the orders of their
supperiom, & attention to every oint of duty: that the Commanders
cause to be punished with all t%e Vigor the rules & regulations for
the overnment of the Navy will admt, such oEcers, as r e e m of
the k,onorable distinction to which their Commissions enlatle them,
prove themselves Unworth of their Station & that the names of
those who deserve well of tieir Country, be reported to him $rough
him a t the end of every Cruise. If being not less his intenhon to
honor & reward by promotion, as fast as opportunities offer the

%

464

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1785 TO 1801

7

Meritorious Officers than to rid the Service of men who
should he experience the mortification of finding that any of t e latter
description have insinuated themselves into the Navy,
The rules & regulations for the Government of the Navy, point
out the punishment to be inflicted upon Delinquents of every Class These should be strictly enforced. The knowledge of them will
prevent the introduction of a Practice prevalent m other Navies,
among the Inferior Officers, of beating the men without form of trial,
& often unjustly. The men will more chearfullp perform their duty
& more readily re enter the Service, when they know that t.heir transgressions are to be punished according to Law, & that without offence
they cannot be punished you will observe by the Laws,that 811 prizm
are to be sent mto some port of the United States for trial. They
should always be accompanied b all the papers found on board, &
every thing necessar for their
ndemnntion It is the positive. &-and
of the President that on no pretence
whatever you ptlrmlt the public armed Vessel under your Command,
to be detained or Searched, nor any of the officers or men belonging
to her to be taken from her, by the Ships or Vessels of any Foreign
Nation, so long as you are m a Capacity to repel such Outrage on the
honor of the amencan Flag. If force ahould be executed to compel
your submission, you are to resist that force to the utmost of your
power; & when overpowered by su erior force you are to strike your
flag, & thus yield your Vessel as we as your men, but never your men
without your Vessel You will remember however, & it is strictly en'oined by the President, that our demeanor be respectful & friend y to the Vessels &
People of a Nations in amity with the Unitcd States;& that you avoid
as careff ully the Commission of, as the submission to, insult or injury.
Prior to your sailing, you will please to cause every officer on board
of the Presided - having charge of public stores of any kind to make
returns of the quantity on hand: You will keep Copies of such ~.eturns
in a Book, to enable you to check extravagant demands from the
different officers on the return of the Ship into port The V g a n t attention of the Commanders in regard to Stores, is
the only ircumstances, which can prevent great waste & great frpud
on board of our Public Ships when you are on your return to the Uated
States each Officer should prepare his accounts of the expenditye
of Stores during the Cnrise - should shew in the returns, the quantaties on hand & what may be wanted for another Cruise of six Months. These re turns with your Signature should also be forwarded
to this office, on the very day of your arrival I have only to add, that the President enjoins i t as a duty u on the
Commander of every Ship, to inculcats among his Officers & h e n a love of Country - respect for its constitut=ed authoritia - a high
Sence of National Character & a Veneration for the honor of the
American Flag W Letters with the following addition between the 1.t & second B third paragraphs, were written to Capr [Samuel] Barron of the PhilP Cap0 Bainbridge of
the &sex and Lt. A. Sterrett of the Enterprize -

80

R

9

i

*"Appreciating highly your character tw an officer, he hss elected you to the
and has placed the whole Squadron under the
Command of the
Command of Comm*? Richard Dale, to whose orders he enjoins you to pay
strict attention & due obedience" -

465

WARS M71TH BARBARY P0WE"RS

tSLft
will not be neceaeary to remark,that a proper understanding with & a due
respect towsrds the commanding officer will greatly promote your own happinem
~nd
the public good''
[NDA. OSW, Vol. 5, 1801-1802.1
To Captain Richard Dale, U. 6. Navy*,or Ofacer Commending the America Squadron in the Mediterranean, from Samuel Smith for Acting Secretruy of the Hevy

[WAEHINGTON,
D. C.]
ATavDep $0 May 1801
SIR!The United States being at peace with all the world, Congress
assed a Law,during their last session, providing for a Navd Peace
Establishment, by which the President is authorized to keep in mnstant service, a proportion of the Navy of the United States.
Under this authority, he has directed that a squadron, consisting
of the F ' ates Presided, Philadelphia & Essex, & schooner Enterprize shou d be fitted, prepared & manned for a cruise; and relS;Pg,
with the utmost confidence on your knowledge, bravery & &h
reputation as an Officer,he has confided to you the command thereof.
One great object expected from this Squadron is, the instruction
of our young men: so that when their more active services shall herethe honor of
after be required, they may be capable of defen
their Country. I t is parhcularly requisite, that t ey should be
made acquamted with the coasts & Harbours of the Mediterranean,
where their services in all probability will fre uently be required.
Recent accounts received from the Cons of the United States,
employed near the Regencies of Algiers, Tunis & Tripoli, give cause to
fear, that they will attack our commerce, if unprotected, within the
Mediterranean; but particularly such apprehension is justified by
absolute threats on the part of the Be of Tripoli.
Under such circumstances, it is t ought probable, that a small
squadron of well appointed frigates, appearing before their Ports, w i l l
have a tendency to prevent their breakmg the Peace which has been
made & which has subsisted for some years, between them & the
United States. I t is also thou ht that such s Squadron, commanded
by some of our most gallant &cers, known to be stationed in the
Mediterranean, will give confidence to our Merchants, & tend greatly
to increase the commerce of our country within those Seas.
I am therefore instructed by the President to direct, that you proceed with d possible expedition, with the squadron under your command, to the Mediterranean. It will be proper for you to touch a t
Gibraltar & obtain permission from the Governor for depositing Provisions there, for the use of your squadron. I t is not presumed there
will be any refusal; but should he deem it improper, you wdl then
leave a letter with Mr Gavino the American Consul, for the Captain
of the Provision Vessel, that will be sent hereafter, directing him
where to proceed.
On your arrival at Gibraltar you will be able to ascertain whether
all or any of the Barbary Powers, shall have declared War against
the United States. In case all are tranquil, you will water our ships,
O'Brien,
proceed off the Port of Algiers & send to the Consul
whom you will inform that ou have arrived - that the views of
our Government are erfec y friendly - that ou have a letter for
& the Dey - an that you request to see
: or that he send

9

9

A

g

d

L

B 9

Ln

466

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM I786 TO 1801

some person in whom he can confide, for the letters - or that he send
a Permission for one of your officers to go to the city - You will have
on board certain Goods which you wdl deliver on his Requisition.
They are for the Biennial Presents to the Regency. The George
Wuahington is preparing to carry timber & other stores for a t least
one year's annuity - and you have on board the Presided, Thirty
l be
thousand Dollars, which i t is hoped & expected Mr OBrien d
able to induce the Regency to receive for another year - the balance
may go, some time hence - But if Mr OBrien cannot induce the Dey
to receive money instead of Stores, you will retain the thirty thousand
dollars, excepting 4 or 5000 Dollars, which on Ma OBrien9srequisition
may (if he should think i t useful to commence with) be given him on
your arrival, & which amount may be replaced, if the Dey shall
afterwards agree to receive the 30,000$ in full for one year's annuity,
out of the 10,000 dollars heareafter mentioned as b e i intended for
the Bey of Tripoli - And the stores will be sent as soon as possible.
When your business is arranged a t Algiers, to your satisfaction, you
will proceed to Tunis & there cause the letters you ca to be delivered
to Mr Eaton the Consul. A ship is prepnring & a s a i l as soon ss
possible, with stores ageably to Treaty with that Regency.
From thence you wdl proceed to Tnpoli - on your arrival there,
send for M Cathcart, American Consul for that Port, to. whom
deliver his letters, & either by him or one of your 06cers (whichever
mBy be deemed most proper) send the President's letter to the Bey.
You have on board Ten thousand dollars as a Present from the
President - the whole or such part thereof as you may have on your
arrival a t Tripoli, & which Mr Cathcart may conceive useful, will
be given the Bey, provided he has conducted himself peaceably
towark9 the United States.
You will be careful not to sollicit the honor of a salute from any of
those Powers; if you do, they d l exact a barrel of Powder for every
gun they fire You will enjoin upon your Officers & men the propriety & the
utility of a proper conduct towards the subjects of all those Powers a ood understanding with them being extremely desireable ghould you find the conduct of the Bey of Tripoli, such as you may
confide in - you will then coast with your squadron the E ptian &
Syrian shores as far as Smyrna d: return by the mouth of the ~ L t i c
thence pay the Bey of Tri li another visit - fin*
him tran uil,
proceed to Tunis 61 again s ew your ships, & thence coast the 1t&an
shore to Leghorn - where you may stay some days - and then
proceed along the Genoese to Toulon - which Port it will be instructive to your young men to visit -from thence roceed again to Algiers.
If there should be no hostile appearance on %e part of any of those
Powers, & you should be well assured that no danger is to be apprehended from either of them, you may on the 15% Octr commence
your return homewards; but if there should be rtn cause for apprehension from either of those Powers, you must p ace your ships in a
siturt.tion to chastise them, in case of their declaring W.W or committing hostilities, $ not commence your return to the Umted States,
until the l q t day of December On your return you wilI go into Hamptun Road & rep* yourself
to this place, as soon as you can - Order the Phila' to Phda* if the
sefason will permit; if not, let her go with the Esaez to New York The Enterprize send to Baltq

f?

r

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

467

But should you find on your arrival a t Gibraltar that all the
Barbttry Powers, have declared War against the United States, you
will then distribute your force in such manner, as your judgment shall
direct, so as best to protect our commerce & chastise their insolence -

by sidking, burnin or destroying their ships & Vessels wherever you
shall find them. $he better ta enable you to form a just deterrmnation, you are herewith furnished with a correct state of the strength
& situation of each of the Barbary Powers. The principal strength
you will see, is that of Algiers - The force of Tunis & Tripoli are
contemptible, & might be crushed with any one of the Frigates under
your command.
Should Algiers alone have declared War against the United States you d
lcruise off that Port so as effectually to prevent any thing from
going in or coming out, and you will sink burn, or otherwise destroy
their ships 8: Vessels, wherever you find them.
Should the Bey of Tripoli have declared War (as he has threatened)
against the United States - you will then proceed direct to that Port,
where you will lay your s h p s in such a position as efFectually to
prevent an of their Vessels from going in or out. The Essez &
Ederprize $y cruising well on towards Tunis, will have i t in their
power to intercept any vessels which they may have captured, - By
disguising your ships, i t d l be some weeks before they will know that
the Squadron is cruising in the Mediterranean - and give you a fair
chance of punishing them.
If Tunis alone or in concert with Tripoli, should have declared
War against the U States, yon will chastise them in like manner, -by
cruising with the Squadron, from the small Island of Maritimo near
the Island of Sicily, to Ca e Blanco, on the Barbary shore; you may
effectudly prevent the orsairs of either from interrupting our
commerce in the material part of the Mediterranean sea, & may
intercept any Prizes, they may have made Any Prisoners you may take, you will treat with humanity and
attention, and land them on any part of the Barbary shore mcst
convenient to you. This mode will be humane & will shew that we
have no sort of fear, what such men can do -It will also tend to bring
those Powers back to a sense of Justice, which they owe to us. But
you will be careful to select from them, such Christians as may be on
boayd, whom you will treat kindly, and land when convenient on some
Chrptian shore - Should you have occasion, you may accept t h q r
semces.
Upon applications for convoy, when you can afford it, you will
collect as many American Vessels as possible, & not by giving Convoy
to one or two only, expose the rest to capture.
Although our Nation has suffered as much as any other by the abuse
of Neutral rights, & is therefore desirous that these rights should be
more justly defined & efEcaciously protected, yet in the present divided
& wavering state of mind in the Nations interested, we do not think
we ought to go to war, in favor of either opinion: We, therefore,
recommend to you, if s Public armed ship of any Natlon should require
to s e a r ~ h ~ a nMerchant
y
Vessel under your convoy, that you endeavour
to avoid it in a friendly way, by giving every assurance which may be
reguisite & true as to the cargo of such Vessel: but if notwithstanding
thls, the search be insisted on, you are to suffer i t to be done without
resistance by force - but this is not to extend to the armed Vessels
of any of the Barbary Powers, or the Privateers of any Nation, which

6

468 -

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1786 TO 1801

are in no case to be permitted to search a Vessel under your convoy:
not however without every discreet & friendly endeavor, in the c m
of such Privateers, to dissuade them from their attampts, before resort
be had to force.
But in all cases of clashing with the Vessels, O5cers or Subjects of
other Powers, we enjoin on you the most rigorous moderation, conformity to right & reason, & suppression of all passions, which might
lead to the commitment of our Peace or our honor. We shall scrupulously & without indulgence, examine that conduct which shall b m g
us into collision with any other Power -: yet we do not mean that
you are to submit to unequivocal insults or wrongs - : and particularly
you are not to suffer your own ships to be entered - or your men
examined or taken out, a t sea, by any person or power whatsoever;
but to resist such attempt to your uttermost, yielding only to Superior
force, & surrendering, if overcome, your Vessel & men, but never your
men without your Vessel.
In your treatment of the Vessels, Citizens & Subjects of all Nations
a t Peace with us, you will bear in mind, that we are a t Peace & wish
to continue in Peace with all Nations - and that the commander of
a n American squadron, ou h t to be as much distinguished for his
attention & adherence to a the rights of humanity & hospitality, as
by his firmness in support of the honor of his country.
I t is expected that the Port of Gibraltar will be open to your
s uadron. I t is not doubted but that you will be received with hospit a 'ty & friendship in the Spanish Ports of Carthagena, Barcelona
&F the French Port of Toulon - a t Leghorn & Naples, Palermo &
Syracuse - Nor is i t conceived that there will be any obstacle made
to your entering the Ports of Malta, now in possession of the British.
Letters will be written on this subject to our several ministers & to
our consuls in the Mediterranean, & other convenient Ports, to enable
them to give proper explanations, & to enjoin on them the attentions
& Offices they may be able to render the expedition.
A credit will be established for the use of the squadron, a t the
respectable house of J Mackenzie & A Glennie of London: by whom,
your bills (or in case of accident, the Bills of your Successor in command) will be paid. You have three copies of a letter from this
Department to Mess" DeButts & Purviance of Leghorn, directin
them to accept your bills drawn agreably to the direction you w d
receive from the Accountant. - one of which send from Gibraltar the other send as occasion may require - and the third keep to 've
you credit where you may go - M: Gavino American Consu a t
Gibraltar, is directed to give credit to your Bills.
It is ro er to inform you that the credit fixed for you in London, on
which eI! utte & Purviance will draw, to re lace the amount of our
m o u n t with them, will be the sum of nine t ousand Pounds stergng,
which sum it is expected will be more than sufficient for a squadron
every way so well appointed & provided. The Purser of your ship,
will pay over to the Purser of the other ships, under the requisition of
their respective Commanders, the mor~iesthey may deem necessary
for the use of the ships they command - Perhaps a few thousand
dollars of this credit, may be usefully employed with the Barbary
Regencies; if so, you are a t liberty to make use, a t your discretion, of
four or five thousand dollars, in that way.

f'

71

Y

8

1

469

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

I have ordered the Pursers of the Preskhnf & Phikdd h k , each to
receive 1200 Dollam - the Purser of the &sex 900 Do ars - & the
Purser of the Enterprize 500 Dollm: to supply small expences at
Gibraltar, or wherever else you may go.
Should the Barbary Powers or elther of them have made Ca tives
of any of our Citizens, you will endeavor through the S w d i h onsul
to afford them usual relief & comfort; for wbich purpose you are
authorized to furnish, from the money you will have on board, or from
your credit, what sum you may deem .nShould all be at Peace & you think i t not unadviseable, you m y
touch a t Constan tinople; & If it can be done without much difliculty
& without expence obtain a permission to send an American Consul
to Smyrna.
You have a copy of these Instructions herewith, which you will
give to Cap$Barron - this recaution is made use of lest any accident
should prevent the ~ r e d n from
t
proceeding, & to enable Cap'
Barron to act in such case, with the rest of the squadron. You may
communicate these orders also to Cap' Bainbridge.
Wishing you an honorable & successful cruise, I have the honor to
be with sentiments of great consideration & respect,
[* "Commodore" was a courtesy title given U. S. Officers commanding equedrom, "Captain" being the higheat commis&omd rank. See "Hamedy's Naval
Encyclopaedia".]
[NDA. LB, May 15, 1799-July 18, 1807.1

d

8

To 3. Msckenzie & A. Glennie, London, England, from Samuel Smith for Acting
Secretary of the Navy

[WASHINGTON,
D. C.]

Naoy Depf 21s May 1801
A Squadron of three frigats & one schooner will sail under Commodore Richard Dale for the Mediterranean, for the rotection of our
Commerce & the Instruction of our young Offtcers, he ships are the

$!

Oons

Presided- - - ------- Richard Dale- ---------------- 44
Phihkiphia ----- - - - Sam! Barren. . - - - -- - - - - - - - - - - - - 44
f i e x - - - - - - - - - - - - - - Wq Bmnbndge - - - 32 - Schooner Enterprize - - - - - - - - - L1 A. Sterrett- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 12
By this Mail I direct Mr Dan! Ludlow of New york to purchase &
remit you £4000 Sterling & in a few days should direct S. Smith &
Buchanm to buy & remit to you $5000 say together £9000 which
sum you will hold Subject to the orders of Commodore Dale or M89sCm
De Butts & Purviance of Leghorn, agreeably to the Directions of the
accountant of this De~artmentherein inclosed It will be well for
you to write to your Correspondents a t Giberaltar requesting them
to give Credit to the Bills of Commodore Dale or the Commanding
officer of the Squadron of American ships which sailed under hia
Command & assuranc to De Butts & Purviance that these Bills be
paid
[NDA. GLB, Vol. 4,1800-1801.1

470

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1786 TO 1801
[21 May 18011
To the Bashaw of Tripoli from President Thomas Jefferson

Thomas Jefferson, President of the United States of America, to the
illzcstand honored Bey of Tripoli of Barbary, whom God preserve.
GREATAND RESPECTEDFRIEND:
The assurances of friendship
which our consul has given you, and of our sincere desire to cultivate
peace and commerce with your subjects, are faithful expressions of our
dispositions; and you will continuo to find proofs of them in all those
acts of respect and friendly intercourse which are due between nations
standing, as we do, in the relations of peace and amity with each
other.
At the conclusion of our treaty with you, we endeavored to prove
our respect for yourself, and satisfaction a t that event, by such demonstrations as gave you then entire content: and we are disposed to
believe that, in rendering into another language those e ressions in
your letter of the 25th of May last, which seem to imp y purposes
inconsistent with the faith of that transaction, your intentions have
been misconstrued. On this supposition, we renew to you sincerely
assurances of our constant friendship, and that our desire to cultivate
peace and commerce with you remains firm and unabated.
We have found it expedient to detach a squadron of observation
into the Mediterranean sea, to superintend the safety of our commerce
there, and to exercise our seamen in nautical duties. We recommend
them to your hospitality and good offices, should occasion require
their resorting to your harbors. We hope their appearance will give
umbrage to no Power: for, while we mean to rest the safety of our
commerce on the resources of our own strength and bravery in every
sea, we have yet given to this s uadron in strict command to
conduct themselves towards all frien ly Powers with the most perfect
respect and good order; it being the first object of our solicitude to
cherish peace and friendship m t h all nations with whom it can be
held on terms of equality and reciprocity.
I pray God, very great and respected friend, to have you always in
his holy keeping.
Written a t the city of Washington, the twenty-first day of May, in
the year of our Lord one thousand eight hundred and one.

"P

2

By the PRESIDENT:
JAMEB
MADISON,
Secretary of State.

TH: JEFFERSON.

[Am. State Papers, For. Rel., Vol. 2.1

[21 May 1801?]
To the Dey of Algiers and the Bey of Tunis, from Captain Richard Dale, U.8, Navy
Form o a letter which Commodore D d was directed to wrde to the Dey
o j A k t 3 and the Bey o j Tunis.

MAYIT

PLEAELEYOUR

EXCELLENCY:

Havin the honor to command a s uadron of observation, despatched
the President of the United totes into the Mediterranean
sea, to sup ort the safety of their commerce threatened with attacks
by the Bas aw of Tripoli, and to exorcise our seamen in nautical duty,
the instructions that I have received from the President require that,
in approaching your harbors, I should tender the profound respect

fY

1

8

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

471

that is due to your excellency's dignity and character, and should
recommend the squadron under my command to your hospitality
and good offices. I leave to the consul of the United States the task
of explaining more particularly the friendly dispositions of the United
States towards your excellency, the proofs with which he is charged
of their desire to maintain the treaty between the two Powers, and
the reliance of the President on similar dispositions on your art; for
myself, I only make use of the occnsion to assure your excei?lency of
the sensibility with which I shall experience y o u friendly countenance
and accommodations, and of the sentiments of reverence and exalted
esteem with which
I have the honor to be, your excellency's obedient servant.
[Am. State Papers, For. Rel., Vol. 2.1

To Bufna King, U. 8. Mnister to London, England, from Secretary of State

DEPARTMENT
OF STATE,
Washington 21 May 1801.
SIR:For a considerable time past suspicions have prevailed that a
rupture with the United States was intended by the Bashaw of
Tripoli Of late the alarms and proofs have been such as to impose
on the President the obligation of making immediately the most
effectual provision within his authority for the defence and protection of our Mediterranean commerce m case it should be attacked
from that quarter. At the last session of Congress six frigates were
directed by law to be ke t as a peace establishment. Out of this
force three frigates and
a sloop of war have been equipped and
will sail for the Mediterranean in a few days under the command of
Commodore Dale. Should war have been declared or hostilities be
actually commenced against our trade, tILis force will be employed in
the most effectual m m e r for its safety. Should the means, which
have been or may be employed to obviate the necessity of such an
application of the force, be successful, the squadron after cruising a
sufficient time in the Mediterranean, perhaps, if circumstances should
not render i t unndvisable, as far as the Levant and towards Constantinople, will return to the United States. The expedition will by
this means be not without its use, whatever may be the state of things
on its arrival; It will have the e$mt from which so much advantage
has been promised by our Consuls and others of exhibiting to the
Barbary powers a res ectable specimen of the Naval faculties of the
United Stabs. I t w& exercise our mariners and instruct our officers
in the line of their service, and in a Sea which it may be particularly
useful for them to understand; And as they form a art of the pence
establishment the measure will add but inconsiderab y to the expence
otherwise to be incurred. The United States being now also happily
in Peace and Amit with all the European Powers, the moment IS
more favorable in t a t view of the subject.
The President has thought proper that this earl information and
explanation should be given to you, that being ful y possessed of the
causes and object of the expedition you ma guard aiinst any misconstruction or misrepresentation that may y posslb ~ t be
y attached
to it and moreover prepare the Government where you met to lend
to the Squadron such hospitalities and accommodatiox~sin rts Forte
or elsewhere as opportunities may claim and as it would be imcumbent
on the United States to reciprocate. The friendly disposition felt by

&

P

c

rV

g

-3

472

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1786 TO 1801

the United States towards En land justifies them in their confidence,
that no convenient proof of a &ke disposition will be withheld, and of
this friendly disposition you are authorized and instructed by the
President, on all proper occasions to give the most explicit and cordial
assurances.
[Similar letter sent to David Humphreys, Madrid; William Smith, Lisbon, and
Willism Vans Murray, The Hague.]
[SDA. Dip. Cor., Inst. to Min. Bk 5, 1798-1800.1
to U. a. Consuls listed below, from Secretary of State
DEPARTMENT
OF STATE,Washington, May 91,1801.
SIR: The proofs which have been received of the hostile purposes
of the Bashaw of Tripoli having imposed on the President the obligation of providing immediately for the safety of our Mediterranean
commerce, he has judged proper to send to the coast of Barba a
squadron of three f ates and a sloop of war, under the cornmany of
Commodore Dale. T h e squadron will sail in a v e T few days from
this date. Should war have been declared, or hostihties commenced,
Commodore Dale is instructed to make the most effectual use of his
force for the object to which i t is destined. Should the means employed by our consuls, and those which accompany this expedition,
for obviating such an event, be successful, the squadron, then, after
cruising for some time in the Mediterranean, perhaps, if circumstances should not forbid, into the Levant, and towards Constantinople, will return to the United States. The expedition will, by this
means, be not without its use, whatever may be the state of things on
its arrival. It will have the effect, from which so much advantage
has been promised by our consuls and others, of exhibiting to the
Barbary Powers a naval force from the United States. It will exercise our mariners, and instruct our officers in the line of their service,
and in a sea where, more than any other, their services may be wanted ;
and as they form a part of the peace establishment fked by law, the
measure wdl add but inconsiderably to the expense that would otherwise be incurred. The United States being also happily a t eace with
all the Powers of Europe, the moment is the more favorab e in every
view that can be taken of it.
The President has thought proper that you should be furnished
with the information here I v e n , in order, first, that you may be ready
to &ord every friendly and useful accommodation that occasions may
admit, to the squadron, or any part of it: secondly, that, beingpoaeessed of the objects of the expedition and the considerations which
led to it, you may be able, by proper explanations, to revent its being
misunderstood. The United States persist steadfast y in their desire
of living in peace and friendship with all nations who will permit
them; and on all occasions where assurances to that effect can be
proper, you are authorized to make them in the most satisfactory
manner.
A cop forwarded to each of the following named consuls: Thomas Bulkeley,
coneul, Lbon; John Gavino, Gibraltar; Anthony Terry. (acting) Cadi.; Jamea
Simpson, Tangier; William Kirkpatrick, Malaga; William Willie, Barcelona;
Robert Montgomery, Alicant; John Matthieu, Naples; Frederick H. Wallmton,
Genoa; Thomas Appleton, Leghorn; John Lamson, Trieete; Etienne Cethalan,
agent, Marseilles.
[Am. State Papers, For. Rel., Vol. 2.1
Circular

P

P

473

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

To Acting Seoretary of the Bavy, from Captain Thomas Truxtun, U. 8. Navy
NORFOLK
21." May 1801

SIBLittle remains now to be done for the P r e d n t to make her
comp[l]eat for the expedition. 413 is now the number of her Crew,
15 more will be engaged and sent on board by saturday night the 23*,
my successor will have but little to do except attending to his own
private arrangements previous to sailing. It is reported the Essex is
within the capes but no Account of the Philadelphia,I am momently
expecting Captain Dale, & hope he has provided his own Stores a t
Philadelphia for nothing else can detain him after the ships are Collected.
[HS of fa. NDA photostat, Truxtun's LB 1800-1.1
To Captain Richard Dale, U. 8. Bavy, from Captain Thomas Trnxtnn, U. S. Bsw,
on giving up command of U. 8. Frigate P r a i d d

UNITED
STATES
SHIPPr&d
Hanzpfon road 223' May 1801
DEARSIR taking i t for granted that you will arrive at Hampton
this morning, I send the pinnace for you with an Officer - and shall
be gratified by an early oppertunity, of congratulating you on your
post - to the command of the Squadron.
[NYPL.NDA photostat.]
To Captain Richard Dele, U. S. Navy, from Captain Thomes Truxtun, U, 8.

low

UNITEDSTATESSHIPPresident
Humpton road A4ay 2PJ1801

DEABSIR Having this day resigned to you the command of tbis
ship (Now in compleat order for Sea,) and presented to you my
r e p t e r of all her materials received and expended, from the moment
of taking the command a t New York, up to her present outfit, together
with the indents for stores in every department for an expedition of
twelve months, with my orderly book, form of quartering the crew,
mode of working, reefing, handing, fighting, kc, &c, &c.
I have little to add furthur than to assure you, of my best disposition to render ou any assistance you may require, as to the arrangement for the overnment of the Squadron after its departure from
hence, and to make you acquainted with the qualities of the President,
whoes best trim is two feet difference of draught by the stern, when
she is about one whale down in the water a midships, if more than
one whale is sunk the difference should not be so much by two or
three inches, if less than one whde is in the water as aforesaid, i t
should be a little more.
This ship sails very fast by the wind, large, & before it, especially
if the breeze is fresh, she is lund and good humoured in a gale of wind
a t %a, but as i t seldom blows so hard that such a ship cannot carry
her close reefed Main & Fore top sails when every other sail is handed,
I advise your never heaving her too unless a gale is so violent as to
obhge the taking of those sails in; for certain it is that while ou can
keep steerage wa on a ship by carrying this canvass,she will ow the
sea and go stea ' y along by the wind; and on the contrary if you
heave too and es ecidly under a low sail, there is no vessel but d
fall off more or ess, and by etting in the trough or between two
m o u n t a h of seas, the low sa' will m the hollow get becalmed, and

8

, !i

d;

f'

P

474

NAVRL OPERATIONS FROM 1785 TO 1801

hence i t is that ships labour and accidents frequently happen, that
might otherwise be avoided by carrying tho canvass I have recommended, which by being more lofty is always full.
In the voilent tempest I experienced in September last, when so
many ships were dismasted and lost, British Men of War as well aa
others; I kept the President under her main & fore topsails close
reefed, and lowered down on the cap, and never lost a rope yarn or
met with the smallest injury, tho' the gale continued an uncommon
length of time.
The officers of this ship are generally well selected, and have been
taught to obey, you will no doubt keep them in similar order by strict
discipline & at the same time show them every sort of Kindness and
respect due to their rank & Stations. I shall now leave you my friend
and proceed to Norfolk, and hurry down the small balance of men
and Stores, that you are to be supplied with; the rest of the stores are
to follow to Gibralter as General Smith writes me, & for the mode of
conveying to you what remains of the 12 months Stores indented for
the President a transport will be taken up to receive them with articles
for the Squadron generally.
Permit me to wish you every success in the expedition you are
about to make, and that you may enjoy health and comfort while
performing it, that I shall again have the pleasure to see you return
at the end of twelve months, to our native Country, & with you
uninjured the finest frigate that ever floated on the waters of this
Globe.
Respectfully and with Esteem - Yours THOMAS
TRUXTUN
RICHARD
DALEEsquire
[NHS, NYHS. Portfolio No. 264, and HS of Ps.]
To Captain Richard Dale, U. S. Navy, from Samuel Smith for Acting Secretary
of the Bavy

[WASHINGTON,
D. C.]
Navy Dept 22ndMay 1801
M: Nicholls one of the Navy Clerks set off this Morning with your
Dispatches - The 30 thousand Dollars & the Goods nlentioned in
our Instruction were ship ed on the 20 on-Board the Packet Capt
6eagls, which Vessel saile yesterday M o m g from Baltimore t% I
trust will be with you before this Letter - Capt Preble writes a t
sea off sandy Hook 16 Inst that he is on his passage with a fair Wind The Phddelphia left Chester 4 or 5 days past Capt Preble (ow'
desertion) wants a few Men but not so many as to Induce the sma est
Delay he wants a fourth Lieutenant an acting Lieutenant may be
made of C. Ludlow or some other Midshipman few Men wanted must
be no prevention to your sailing on your speedy arrival in the Mediterma depend whether we have War or Peace you may possibly
rand n , d necessary, in the Mediterranean, - sufier nothing
gi,"tc",P,trq
wincis detain you [NDA. OSW, Vol. 5, 1801-1502.1

B

?i

,

WAnS MTITH BARBARY POWERS

475

T o Captain Richard Dsle, U. 8. Navy, from Samnel Smith for Acting Secretmy
of the Navy

[WASHINGTON,
D. C.]
Navy Dept B e d May 1801

Commodore DALE
The Commissioned officers of your present squadron, rank agreeably
to the following Arrangements
Commodore Dale
Lieutenants
Cap$ [Samuel]
Captains John Cassin
Charles Gordon
Cap$Bainbridge
R: H: L. Lawson
Lieutenants
Thomas Wilkey
Godfrey Wood
Ands Sterret t
GeQWas Tew
Isaac Chauncey
John M Clagett
John H Dent
P. C Wederstrand
David Porter
Joshua Blake
If from any cause whatever you should want Lieutenants for any
Vessel in the Squadron, you d be pleased to ctppoint some of the
most meritorious Midshipmen actDLieutenants [NDA. OSW, Vol. 5, 1801-1802.1

To Captain Zohn Barry, U. 8. Navy, from Samuel Smith for Acting Secretary of
the Bevy

[WASHINGTON,
D. C.]
Navy Dept ,939 &lay 1801
I am honored with yours of 21'5 inst & cannot help expressing great
satisfaction with the dispatch you have made Mr John Gough who lately surve ed the [Pobmac] river under the
orders of Commodore T n u t u n w d go on board your ship [United
States] -He reported 18 feet Water a t low tide & 22 feet at high water.
He will go on board your ship -he has promised me that he can bring
20 feet up the river. One Vessel goes down this morning & will wait
for you a t Maryland Point another goes this Evening they will carry
100 Tons others will be rovided if these should not be found s&cient - Cept Tingeg
visit you on rnondny in a Small Packet &
will render you every assistance that may be necessary -

w8

[NDA. OSW, Vol.

5, 1801-1802.1

To Captain Richard Dale, U. 8. Navy, from Samnel Smith for Acting Secretary of
the Navy

[WASHINGTON,
D. C.]
Navy Depi 2S'JMay 1801
Mr Harrison mites the 20" ins$ that the P h W was then at
Newcastle & would s d the Evening of the 21* from an acct given by
S.[tafes] (now in the River) I am induced
the Purser of the U.[nited]
to believe the B s e x is with yo? - Delay may be fatal -if the Philadelphia, should not have m v e d prepare every thing, so that Capt
Barron may have not
to do but step on board & set sail - s d e r
none of the Officers or en to be on shore - if the P h W p h k
~houldrequire any time about her Top Mast - rather order her to
follow you t h m to lose a fair wind -If the Top Mast is not very badlet the ship proceed & put i t up at sea or at Gibraltar -

%

[NDA. OSW, Vol. 5, 1801-1502.]

476

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1785 TO 1801

TO Captain Richsrd Dale, U. S. Bpvy, from Samuel Smith for Acting Secretary
of the Navy

[WABHINGTON,
D. C.]
Navy Dept 93g May 1801
I am informed by a Gentleman from Phila* that Capt Baimbridg,
Ill state of Health would prevent his going - In such Case or a
similar One you are to act in such Manner as will best tend to the good
of the services - My friend Cap$James Barron must then take the
Essez & your orders must be Obeyed
Letters from our Consul at Malaga Confirm the fears of Tripoli
doing wrong, but not a word of A1 iers the letter is dated the 17
March - Uo not Stay for the ~ h & ~ h i a - Leave orders witb
Cap$ Barron to follow soon as possible [NDA. OSW, Vol. 5, 1801-1802.1
To Acting Secretary of the Navy from Captain Richard Dale, U. S. Havg

UNITEDSTATES
FRIGATE
Pr&d
Hampion roads May 24?1801
Sm, I have the Honour to inform you that 1 arrived on Board this
ship on the 22+ Inso where I found Commodore Truxtun to receive
me after the usual ceremony was over on such occasions he informed
me the state of the ship in genniral, from what I understood then, and
since, every thing is nearly completed, some of the stores is yet to
come on Board, the Crew is nearly completed, in fact from what I
know at present the ship will be ready for sea in a few days, there is
no sailing master belonging to the ship, nor is there a man to be had
here to fill that station. - Commodore Truxtun inform's me he
has wrote to Baltimore for one, it is highly necessary to have a ood
man to fill that station, Should there be such a man in any o the
ships, that is going, or at Washington, it will be well to send him
forward it is possible he may be here in time, The Essez arrived here
the same day that I did, She is in Very complete order, the Phik&!hia is not yet arrived it is reported here that she got aground in the
belaware and had to take her Guns out, I am Very anxious for her
arrival my Baggage and stores is on board of her, which is not so
agreable for me a t present; I am Extremely unwell a t resent - fiter
to be in bed than out of it. a total lassitude and debifby. so much so
it will go of[fl in a day or two.
that I can scarce walk - I a m I n ho
if it does not I can not say what will e the consequence, You told me
that you would write Cap$ Barron about his going in the President,
I dont hear that you have, I think he will go, but I can not say positively as yet [NDA photostat, Dale LB, 1801-1802.1

f

E‘=

TO Secretary of State from William Kirkpatrick, U. 6. Consul, Xdags, Spain
MALAGA
98 May 1801.
SIB I had last the Honor of addressing you on the 2294 april,
Du licate of which you will find herewith, I have since received the
ineosed letter from Mr OBrien of Algiers, which I transmit you
Chigbl, and repest my hopes, that Borne Frigates may be already on
the way towards the Medibnanean, to prevent depredations on our
Trade by the Triplitan Cruizers, and a t same time to force the
Bashaw to come to an amicable accomodation; Twenty Six of our

P

477

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

Merchant ships are now detained in Barcelona, without daring to
Stirr from thence, Those that were in Alicante have got of£ in Safety,
and from hence I consider there is no manner of risk, as none of the
Tripolitans ever come this length, consequently all that were in this
Quarter, have proceeded on their Voyages, and passed the Gut without any molestation, except two, which are not yet in readiness. The five sailors which I claimed as America.ns (in consequence of
their producing unto me proof of being Citizens of the United States)
that were on Board the English Ketch Albanese, brought into this
Port by pa,rt of her Crew, who rose upon the officers, have not yet
been given up, and as I find from good authority, that tho' they had
not entered on Board that Vessel, as they asserted to me from the
beginning, that they were pressed out of an English Privateer in which
they had engaged to do Duty, and besides that the Chief part of them,
had been concerned in the Mutiny I have resolved, should they in
the end be d e b r e d up to me, through the interference of our Minister
in Madrid, who has claimed them a t my request of the Spanish
Government, to send such of them as remain (for some I understand
have already run off from their confinement) to the United States subject to your order, that they may be Judged by the Lsws of their
Country, which I trust you will approve of, I shall forward you a t
same time such Documents as I can procure, regarding their being
concerned in the Mutiny and that they had entered on board the
Privateer out of which they were pressed. I can procure no alliviation of the rigorous uarantine imposed on
vessels from the U. S. but I am happy to say, have succeeded thro'
our Minister in Madrid, to obtain the revocation of a most unjust order
that was communicated here in the beginning of March last, to exact
from all the Importers of Spanish Colonial Produce by American
Vessels, since the Month of april 1799, the amount of foreign Duties,
which a t the time of Introduction had not been demanded by the
Collector of this Custom house, who i t would appear, did not understand the orders transmitted him, & consequently only recovered the
Same Duties as if the goods were imported by Spanish Vessles.
The sums which different Houses acting as agents for the Americans, were Called upon for, on this Score, amounted to above $65,000.but such powerful motives were alledged, that the Spanish
Ministry has thought proper to renounce the Idea, [NA. SDA. CL, Malaga, Vol. 1, June 1793-May 1814.1

I!

To Captain Ssmnel Bsrron, U. 6. Navy, from Captain Richard Dale, U. S. hlavy

U. S SHIPPresided HAMPTQN
ROADS
29t+May 1801
SIR,The Inclosed is a Coppy of my Instructions I20 May 18011
which I am requested by the Secretary of the Navy to ve you that
you may know how to act, in case any accident sho d happen to
the Frigate President should we seperate between this and Gibraltar,
but I hope Every attention will be paid to prevent it, you will make
the best of your way there, on your arrival there, you will make
yourself, acquabted with the general state of things, and should
t.here be a war between this Country and any one of the Barbary
States, or all of them
you will act then agreable to the Instructions that you have got from the Secretary of the Navy - Should
you sail from Gibraltar before I arrive you will leave instructions

3

-

478

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1786 TO 2801

(that is) a place or places of rendezvous (with Mr Gavino the American Consul) that I may know where to find you - Should there be no
war you will wait fifteen days, should I not arrive in that time you
will proceed and act agreable to your instructions. leave a letter for
me a t Every place tbat you go to [NDA photostat, Dale LB, 1801-1802.1

U. 8. Navy, commanding U. 6. S. Eua from
Captam Richard Dale, U. S. Havy

To Captain William Bsinbfidge.

U. S. SHIPPresident RAMPTON
ROADS
&fay 29* 1801
SIR, AS you have read my instructions you know full well the Intentions of the Government respecting the present ex erdition, when
I have time you shaU have a Coppy of them, sho d we separate
between this and Gibraltar (but I Hope every attention will be paid
to prevent it) you will make the best of your way there, on your
arrival there you will make your self ac uainted with the general
state of things, and should there be a war etween this Country and
any one of the Barbary States, or all of them, you will wait four or
five da s, if the President nor Philadelphia do not arrive in that time,
you
then proceed up the Straits and act agreable to the Coppy
of the instructions that I received from the Secretary of the Nary, Mr Gavino is the American Consul should he have a letter for me
from Cap$ Barron you may open i t and follow its directions, should
that not be the case, you will leave a Letter directed to us both, informing us where we may find you, but should there be no war then
you will wait Twenty days, should the Philadelphia nor the Presided
arrive, by that time you will proceed and act agreable to the Copy
of my instruction leaving a Ietter a t every port, as directed before -

3

B

[NDA photostat, Dale LB, 1801-1802.1

To Lieutenant Andrew Sterett, U. 6. Pavy, commanding U. S. Schooner
Enterprfu from Captain Richard Dale, U. 6. Navy

US. SHIPPresident HAMPTON
ROADS
2gthMay 1801
SIR,Herewith I send you the Signals that is to be observed by the
Squadron under my command, you will pleaso to pay due attention
to them both day snd night, to prevent your seperation from the
Squadron, but should you unavoidable part Company, ou will make
the best of your way to Gibraltar and there wait unti 1 some of the
Ships belonging to the Squadron arrives, on your anival there you
will make known to the Governour 8nd the Admiral that you belong
to a Squadron of observation bound up the Medeterranian - Mr
Gavino is the American Consul ther[e], should he have a letter for
you from the Commander of the PhdudeipIti&or E88a you will follow
its directions - due attention in every port must be paid to Econimy,
you must e m p r w on the mind of your Officers, strict attention to
propriety and Officer like Conduct m every port that you go in you
are not to permitt, any of your O£ficers to sleep on shore without
there is real necessity for i t
[NDA photostat, Daie LB. 1801-1802.)

i

479

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

[29 May 18011
To Secretary of Stste from James Leander Cathcart, U. S. ex-Consul, Tripoli

LAZZARETTO
LEGHORN
June 4* 1801

NQ7

SIR

*

*

*

*

*

*

*

On the 23rd no letters appearing I sent to inform the Dnshaw I
should embark precisely a t 5 P M I took leave of Daguize & all the
Consuls & were accompanied by them on board the Imperid Polacca
Thetis where they wish'd me a pleasnnt passage as they supposed to
Tunis On the 24tbat Sun rise Mr Nissen came on board with a letter from
the Bashaw of Tripoli to the Bey of Tunis, which I r e d & made sail
immediately steering a direct course for Cape Bon when I got out of
sight of land I shaped our course for Malta & in fifty nine hours from
our departure landed my dispatch Np 6 at the Citty of Valletta and
24 Circular letters, MF England my correspondent there inform'd me
that a convoy
sail for England & Gibraltar in a few days and
that my dispatch $ letters should he forwarded with the greatest
dispatch. I then shaped our course for the west end of Sicily and on
the 29 inst was boarded by a Tunisian Galiot belonging to the Sahib
tappa and commanded by raiz Candiotto, who sent Belch Shaoux and
an other on board of us, who made me open all our trunks tumbled
all our cloaths, but took nothing from me, but a Damizan of Malaga
wine some fowls vegetables & fruit, but from the vessel they plunder'd
several articles among which was t l ~ eCaptains Octant, Chart, cSt only
Compass, however a t the pressing remonstrance of the Captain,
Raiz Candioto condescended to $re h i m an old french Compass
whose needle fortunately retain'd ~ t magnetism,
s
& which I fitted up
with paste & sealiw wax so as to serve our purpose, with the assistance
of whrch we arrived here on the Pdof June, hiin Catlicart nnd daughter
were very much intimidated in consequence of the Brute Bekir Shaoux
haring drawn his sabre several times in the Cabin, not with-any intention ta hurt tiny person but merely to cut twine & other hgatures
which were round the articles he plunder'd At 3 P M I came on shore to the health office & deliver'd to Mr
Ap leton fourteen circulars who promised to forward them immediate y, & inform'd me of my fellow Citizens intentions to sail which
occasioned my official letter (enclosure N9 3) which I deliverd on
the third instant & removed my family to the hzzaretto whera we
are sentenced to perform twenty five days Quarantine in consequence
of bein boarded by the Tunisian Shou d any of our Frigates arrive in tlie mediterranean while I
remain here they will find every necessary intelligence deposited at
Algiers $ Tunis,and I imagine the saving of sovcral vessels & cargoes
is of such great importance & the expense attending my expedition
banring so small a proportion to service render'd, that i t cannot fail
to meet the approbation of the President, who I beg leave to congratulate on h s election to the chief magistracy of the United States,
I not having known of i t before my arrival here, as I have only
receiv'd one letter from thc Department of State since my arrival in
Barbary

i'

f

[NA. SDA. CL, Tripoli, Vol. 2, June 1801-Scpt. 1805.1

480

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1785 TO 1801

Extracts from journal of U. S. S. Esra, Captain William Bainbridge, U. 6. Navy,
commanding
Friday, 99 May 1801
Pleasant Weather This day came on board & received the Indents of all stores & sleo a Muster
book of the Crew from Captain Edward Prebble, gave a receipt for the same &
releived him in the command of the Essssez.
At 5 P M by permission of Commodore Dale I went to Norfolk to procure my
private Sea Stores The present American Squadron now lying in this road of Hampton, consista of
the Frigate President, (Commodores ship) Captain James Barron, Frigate Philadelphia Ca tain Samuel Barron, Frigate Essm under my command & Schooner
E n f e ~ p i tEieutt
c
Sterrit Sunday, 31 May 1801
The Weather Exessively warm At 8 A M returned from Norfolk
3 P M signal from the Commodore to unmoor Immediately unmoored Several Gentlemen from Norfolk to view our little Squadron, in my opinion t h e n
are very few handsomer ships
[NA. ND original.]
To whom not indicated, from Surgeon William Turner, U 8 Navy

FRIGATE
Philadelphia JUNE 19 1801.
CHEASEPEACKE.

Dr SIR Our Commodore gave orders for the Squadron to get to
Sea to day, the attempt was made, but the wind corning in from the
Southward we were forced again to come to a t a Short Distance from
our h t moorings. I can assure you we cut a very Respectable
appearance, every Punctilio of Etiquette is observed all the movements of the Commodore Ship are very Particular1 followed and an
acuracy in following his manouvres very correct.
think we should
not do Discredit to the most Experienced fleet of Britain - The
first fair wind we shall take the advantage of and bid adieu to America. I can scarce Describe the Sensation that is excited by the Idea.
I certainly have felt Less Reluctance in leaving my Parents so Pleasurable & agreeable is the Impression Excited by a Confident Recollection
that you leave a Country Happy & Tranqull - where you Possess all
the Immunities, Rights & pnvalige of an Independent citizen. This
consideration when contrasted with the Servile situation, of the most
of the People of Europe is the more striking when viewed by one who
possess the Opposed blessings I sanguinely contemplate a great deal of Enjoyment on the Impending Expedition: under the Command of a man Universally beloved &
whose qualifications are amiable whose Disposition Lenient & Indulent cannot fail to produce the most agreeable Result, one of the
fmt Importance Harmony & Tranquillit? - Independent of those
Comforts the Expedition will be additionally agreeable from the
variety which will Present itself in that Celebrated country.
I Presume we shall Have very little to do & what I learn of the
Disposion of the Commodore He will Indulge the different Ships, under
His Command with the Gratification of visiting most of the Ports in
the Levant Smyrna Constantinople, Egypt &c - The French Ports
Particularly. - As this will be the laat night I shall spend in the
United States I have set up ve late. Tis now one OClock - I have
with W c u l t y arranged a few zcoherent Ideas In which I might say
farewell. I never was less Calculated for writing in my life - What
few Ideas I had Have been Dissipated by the Extremity of the Heat,

f

-

-

which Has produced a singular effect on body & mind - I have Had
little Opportunity of S[tJudying the Disposition of my Difikrent Mess
mates the Generally appear to be Cfenteel: I hope on that H d I
shall not g a v e very serious Complaints - We have Mr Fenwick 6c
[word mutilated] on board as Marine Officers - I have not been
able to eflect your Commission to Capt. Barrou: not Having Had the
Pleasure of seeing Him - He goes out in the S uadron: as Cap5 with
with us ss freCommodore Dale - I am much gratifyed in
quent Opportunities will Offer that I may see Him - I shall be particularly attentive to your C o ~ s i o na,t Leghorn & other PI-,
in
the hfeditarranian. You may rrlso Inform the Ladies that theirs shall
not go unattended
Inform Mess Clifton & Whitehead I shall Procure that Pett for
them in Algiers. That I Have already Procured the Cage for Him &
they may Expect a Lion or Tiger, Ostritch or some other Handsome
thing by the first arrival from the Straits, consigned to Mess Whitehead - you will be kind enough to Offer my most Respectful Compliment them, yc family, & Mr Whiteheads, Tell the Ladies my only
S o l m in m absence, is that a thought of me may a t some Leisure
Hour obtru e on their Memory -

saving

$

[NYPL. NDA photostat.]
To Amhibald Campbell, Navy Agent, Baltimore, Xd., from Samuel Bmith for
Acting Secretary of the Navy
~ A B H I N G T O N ,D.

C.]
Naty Dept 1.' J ~ n e1801
It being found in many instances, that the Powder which has been on
board frigates for some time, hm by some means, perhaps the original
bad quality of the Powder, been greatly injured - I have deterrmned,
that i t will be prudent to part with all that has made a Vo age -You
will therefore, sell all the Powder of that description t a t may be
under your care provided you can obtain a fair price. I n order to
obtain a Purchaser you may, if he should require more than you may
have of the powder described above, sell a few tons of the New Powder
belonging to the N&vy - You are a t liberty to give a reasonable
credit, taking care to have one or more good Endorsers on the Notes,
& when due, credit this Department therewith, in account on your
first settlement thereafter with the accountant You will dispose of to the best advantage in your power, the residue
of the Hemp, & settle with this Department therefor, as in the case
above.

%

[Sameletter to George Harrison & Samuel Brown, Navy Agents, Philadelphia
& Boefon, respectively, dated 1 June 1801.1
[NDA. GLB, Vol. 4, 1800-1801.1

To Seoretary of State from Thomas W. Fox for Robert W. Fox, U. S. Conad,
Fdmouth, England

FALMOUTH
I* June 1801

ESTEEMED
FRIEND
I beg leave to inform thee that there has lately

been detained & sent into this port Br, Plymouth several Vessels under
the American Flag, their Names &Q 1take the freorlom to send thee
annexed - most of them I expect will be iibemted very shortly -

482

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1786 TO 1801

indeed the Owners of most of their Cargos obtained a License to
permit these Vessels to load the Cargos & to discharge a t Guernsey The American Seamen hereaway are generaly protected from the
Press & Ships under the American Flag are much saught after, tho
from the
most of the Masters are affraid to go up the Medite~~anean
prospect of Hostilities with some of the Barbary Powers.
A large quantity of American Flour has been sold a t 561 @ 701
PrBarrel in the last Month, & had i t not been for the large quantity
of this article arriving from the United States I expect prices would
have gone up again - this part of the Nation is very tranquil.
A great number of Ships touch here from the United States of
Amenca for orders and are permitt.ed to proceed to any part of Europe
the concerned chuse to order them.
[Enclosure]

F A L M ~ U TJune
E , 1 s t 1801.
[American merchantmen]
Brig Diana of Baltimore, Tho* Fort Maater from Bayonne to Hull witli a Cargo
of Turpentine & Cork, detained by the Alert Privateer of London & sent into
Plymouth
Ship, Joseph of New Bedford, Paul Dilano Mastr from New York to Amsterdam
with a Cargo of Sugar Coffee, Tobacco, Hides & Dye Wood, detained by the Akrl
Privateer & sent into Plymouth
Ship Three Sietets of Philadelphia; John Ansley Masr from Philadelphia to
Falmouth, for orders with a Cargo of Flour & some Iron Hoops, detained by the
Alert Privateer do
Brig Neptune of Newport, W. H. Baker Mssr from Rohde Island to Amsterdam
with a Cargo of Sugar Coffee &c detained by the Alert Privateer & sent into
Plymouth
Ship Minewa Stephen Merrihur Mssr of New Bedford from Almeria to Hamburg with a Cargo of Barilla, detained by the Ferrd Privateer of Plymouth &
sent into Plymouth
Ship Hedor - Pinkham Masr of New York from Barcelona to Guernsey, with
a Cargo of Brandy &c?, detained by the Alert Privateer & sent into Falmouth Ship Hope - John Greenfield Ma& of New York from Barcelona to Guernse
with a Cargo of Brandy &cr, detained by the Alert Privateer & sent into Fa[
mouth
Ship TiUiam & Mat , Henr Dicksen Mr of Norfolk from Lisbon to St Sebsetisns with a Cargo of &ides, 6ocoa kc? detained by the Alert Privateer & sent
into Falmouth Schooner Blossom Nathl Gunnersson Maar of Portsmouth from Charleston to
Amsterdam with a bargo of Sugar & Coffee, detained by the Parlican Privateer,
sent into Falmouth & since liberated
Brig George Washington, Luke Keefe Masr of Boston, from Boston to Nantz
with 8 Cargo of Sugar & Coffee, detained by the Parliean Privateer, sent into
Falmouth & since liberated
[SDA. CL, Falmouth, Vol. 1, 1790-1802.1

-

[l June 18011
Orders for relieving watches, from journal of U. 8. 8. ESIQ, Captain William
Bainbridge, U. 6. Navy, commanding

When the time of the watch that is on deck has expired, the Officer
commanding the Watch, will order the watch below to be called by
the Boatswain or one of his Mates; ten minutes will be given them
to muster & answer their names, At the end of which time the officer
commanding the watch will order the watch roll called of the watch
that has just come u ; When d l have answered to their names, he
will order the roll ca ed that has been on deck, to ascertain whether
any h v e left their stations before being releived: he will then order
the watch to be releived, by calling aU the watch, which being done
the watch that has been on deck can go below, & not before on m y

lf

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

483

pretext whatever. As the ofticers are artic~dsrlyrequired fo be
vigilant & attentive in keeping the peop e to their stat;lons, for the
safety of the Ship greatly depends on i t ; they are authorised to inflict
the following p w h m e n t s upon delinquents that may justly merit
it, by lrtziness or inattention to duty unbecoming the Sailor or Soldier-

P

PUNISHMENTS

Shoud any person quit his station before he is regularly releived,
or orders to do so, he is to ride the spanker boom three hours the
succeeding watch & his grog stopped for three days successively; for
a second offence of a sirmlar nature he is to be put in Irons $ flogged
as I may direct & lose his grog for 15 days - Any erson who does
not answer to his name after the expiration of 10 &utes, the time
allowed to Muster, is to have his grog stopped three succeedmg days
for the first offence, & for a second offence of the same nature is to
be put in Irons & punished 8s I may direct, unless he can give sufficient reason to the Officer Commanding the Deck.
The crew to be called on to answer to their names, are all to Muster
on the break of the Qr Decli, that they may be enabled to hear the
Call & answer without noise or confusion The officer having charge of the deck will order & see that every
man is at his station, & frequently cause the rounds to be made by
the Midshipmen of the watch, to prevent sleeping & detect the sleeper,
& shoud there be any so base as to sleep on their station he is immediately to be put in Irons Given on board the United States Frigate Essez l q t June 1801
Wq BAINBRIDOE
[NA. ND original.]
Extract from jonmal of U. S. 6. Essa. Captain William Bainbridge, U. S. Navy,
commndiag, Yonday, 1 June 1801
Commences P l w n t Weather with light breezes from S W, At 6 AM signal
from the Commodore for dl boats to return on board their respective ships
At 8 A Signal to get underway, immediately weighed anchor $ made d,
very
light airs, the E8sez leaves the fleet - At 1 AM, Wind came In from the Eastward, came to anchor on the back of the horse shoe.
In my Journal I &all not
In the afternoon went on board the Commodore
remark the eignals made during the cruize, but shall en& them in a signal book
to which refer
[NA. ND original.]

-

-

To Thomas Appleton, U. S. Consul, Leghorn, fr0.m Jsmes Leander Cathc~rt,
U. 8. ex-Consul, Tripoh

OEcial

QUARANTINE
AT LEGHORN
June 2Y 1801 -

SIRAS I find several of my fellow Citizens in this Port who seem
determined to sail notwithstanding their .bein informed of War
being declared b the Bashaw of Tripoli a g m t t e U: S: of America,
I conceive it my b u t g to inform them through our OfEice of the actual
force of that Regency which was ready to s on the 24" Ultp and of
the Consequences attending the Capture of any of them. First. Should any of our fellow Citizens be unfortunatdy Captured,
they will be Kept as Hostages in order to force our Government to
comply with terms who1 incompatible with the honor and .Interest
of the U: S: and which {am of Opinion our Government wdl mlmt
with Disdain. -

J

Ph

484

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1786 TO 1801

Second. If on the Contrary our Fellow Citizens should defeat them
and sink two or three of their Cruisers they will render an essential
Service to their Country, as we shall be enabled thereby to conclude
a Peace with Tripoli upon our own Terms; and the other Regencies
will pfobably be intimidated in some measure from breakmg with us. Thrrd. The Bashaw of Tripoli has pawned all the honor he has that
he will not Capture any of our Vessels, until1 the expiration of forty
Days, to commence from the fourteenth of May; but I am persuaded
that if his Squadron falls in with any of our Vessels even before that
Period expires, that they will Capture them, and if they are valuable
they as certainly will be Condemned; nevertheless I recommend our
Countrymen to act upon the Defensive on1 until the expiration of said
Period; but should the Tripolitans fire the &s t Gun to exert themselves
to the utmost in order to inspire those People with a high Idea of
American intrepidity, and to realize the Idea which I have already
inspired them with "that Americans were a superior Race of Men to
the Castrate" of Naples, and that they would never take any of our
property without its being h t disputed to the utmost
4*!' The actual force of Tripoli ready to sail on the 24'b of May was
first: The Admiral an American Built Vessel, Coppered, Deep Waisted,
Yellow sides, with a white streak, muzzles of Guns red, looks Paltry,
Green Stern, with Flowers festooned above the windows Painted
white, and a White Woman head; heavy Riggin, and looks a t a distance
like a Spaniard: She is Commanded by Peter Lisle (alias) Morad
Raize an English Renegade, mounts 18 nine pounders on her main
Deck, six fours on her Quarter Deck, two Bow Chases, and two
Stern Chases, which are placed in such a manner that the Taffril is
cut down very Low, and 1s a good mark to know the Vessel by; she is
manned with 200 Men, and Carries 28 Guns. - Second a Swedish
built Bark Ship which is fitting out at Malta, and is to carry 150 Men
and 20 Guns 6 Pounders. - A Swedish built Brig which is fitted up
in a hurry and carries 14,4. Pounders and 120 Men, has a great sheer
aft and has the Johannes Von Bork, painted above her Cabbin
windows, and a white Woman head. - Fourth 2 Pollram mere
shells of 18 Guns each, one of which has Black, the others Yellow
sides, and a Bermudian Poop painted red, their Guns are 4 Pounders,
and carry 100 Men each. - Two Quarter Gallies built a t Malta
the one Rows 28 Oars, the other 24, carry 4 Guns each, and from 70 a
100, Men each; are Calculated to Keep under your Stem and rake you
in a Calm, in a fresh breese are of service, may easily be known by
extraordinary lar e lateen sails. - The whole Force of
Tripo conei[s]ts of 7 S& of Vessels carrying 106 Guns, 4. 6, 61 9.
pounders and 840 Men very badly equipped; they have more Vessels
But have not People to man them; their mode of attack k first to fire
a Broadside, and then to set up a great shout in order to intimidate
their enemy, they then board you if you let them, with as many Men
as they can, armed with Pistols, large and small Knives and probably
a few with Blunderbusses;if you beat them off once they seldom risque
a second encounter, and three well directed broadsides will ensure you
a complete Victory. - The Capture or sinking their Admiral is of
such great importance that it will not on1 ensure us a permanent
Peace upon our own terms but will proba ly effect a revolution in
Tripoly favorable to our interest in the whole of the Barbary States;
from viewing the importance of the Object meant to secure should a
Battle ensue I am persuaded that every worthy Son of Columbia will

havm&

g

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

4%

exert himself to the utmost of his ability, and w i l l sooner submit to
Death than slavery the continuance of which probably may be many
Years, which God in the infinitude of his Mercy forbid. I request Mr Appleton to furnish the Masters of all the American
Vessels in Port with a Copy of this Letter to make i t Circular to all the
Forts in the Mediterranean, Lisbon, London, and Hamburg, and to
transmit a Copy thereof to the Department of State.
JAME
LEA:
~ CATHCART.
P: S: The Admiral is a reputed Coward seldom goes near a Vessel
that looks warm - a few wooden Guns top waist, and quarter Cloths
would be of Service, and in Case of Action boardug nettings ought
not to be neglected A True Copy Witness my hand a t GENOA
the 10thJune 1801.
F* H: WOLLASTON
[NA. SDA. CL, Genoa, Vol. 1, Mar. 179Wct. 1836.1
To George Hamitton, Bavy Agent, Philadelphia, Pa., from Samuel Smith for
Acting Secretary of the Bavy

[WABHINGTON,
D. C.1
Navy Dept F June 1801
The more information I receive respecting the bad quality of the
Navy Powder the more am T disposed to sell as much of it as possible
you may give six Months credit when well secured, & may add such
proportion of New Powder to sell with the old as you may deem proper
Captains Sever & Morris had their Powder from Phdadelphla the
quality is infamous - Such Powder ought not to be received [NDA.

GLB, Val. 4, 1800-1801.1

Extrmt from journal of U. S. 6. k,
Captain William Bainbridge, U. 8. R ~ v y ,
commanding, Tuesday, % June 1801
Commences Clear Weather, with smart breezes from the Wedward A t 6 AM the squadron weighed anchor & made mil out of the Capes. At 10 fell
calm wes obliged to get our boats ahead, the Commodore sent his Jolly boat to
tow us clurr of the President Several Vessels going in & coming out of the Capes These remarks begin at 12 Oclock at night & end at 12 the following day
[NA. ND original.]
TOJohn Qavino, U. S. Consul, Gibraltar, from Captain Richard Dale, U. S. Hsvy

UNITEDSTATES
SHIPPre&n[t]
GihaEtar June S"P 1801
SIR,The Government of the United States Intend sending out a
Vessel loaded with stores for the use of the Squadron that I have the
honor to command, it is left to me to point out the most Proper place
to have i t deposited, - I conceive Gibraltar to be the most proper
place, therefore, Sir when the Vessel arrives with the stores you will
please to have them landed and put in a store for the sole use of the
said Squadron - Should the Vessel be a t the Expence of the Government of the United States while she is in this port you will loose no
time in dispatching her, I have requested the captarn to follow your
Orders, respecting the publick stores of the Uruhd States, that he
may have on board [NDA photoatat, Dale LB, 1801-1802.1

486

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1786 TO 1801

To Thomas Fitzsimons, Chairman, Chamber of Commerce, Philadelphia, Pa.,
from Samuel Smith for Acting Secretary of the Navy

[WASHINGTON,
D. C.]

N a y Dept &" June 1801
The Sec? of State has referred your Letter of 36 Inst to this Department I hasten to give you the Information you require - I t
a pears that early in 1800 the Government of the U, S, were apprized
$at the Bashaw of Tripoli shewed a Disposition hostile towards
the U, S, which disposition was known at the Depf of State to bear
a menacing appearance in the Autumn of that ear On the 13'P March the First copy of Mr athcart letter of the
18*? October was received at the Department of State in which he
reports the followin declarations from the Bashaw of Tripoli ["]I
now deeire you to d o r m your Government that I will wait 6 months
for an answer to my Letter to the President that if it did not arrive
in that eriod & if not sa.tisfactory, if it did arrive, that I will declare
War in f'o m [against]U. States - I answered that it was absolutely
impossible to receive answer in that time - The Bashaw answered that I will wait for answer from your President, but I expect when he
sends his answer that they will be such as will impower you to Conclude with me immediately - if they are not I will Capture your

8

VeSseIs["] -

About the 20" March the President determined on sendin a
s uadmn to the Mediterranean of which Commodore T m t u n &en
%mmanding the Frigate President was informed on the 23'1 - On
the 31* March & 1" April the Commanders of the PhiladWs8ez &
Eniet-prize were ordered to prepare their ships for a cruiz & to Rendezvous a t Hampton Road from whence they were expected to sail on
the lo'? May - Notwithstanding every Exertion, they did not all
assemble untill the 28" of that Month - A Letter of the 29" from
Commodore Dale (now Commanding the Squadron Consisting of
2 shi s of 44 Guns one of 32 Guns & a schooner of 12 Guns) Informs
that e should sail on the first day of this Month - The Squadron
will rendezvous a t Giberaltar, & will act agreeably to Circumstances
& the Information the Commodore may receive - His orders are to
give Convoy to the American Commerce when applied for & when
he Can do i t with ropriet
This Force is %med h l Y adequate to the Destruction of the
Naval Power of Tripoli & to meet the Navies of A1 'ers & Tri oli
united - When Capt Bainbridge left Algiers Con uot of the g e a
had a friendly appearance, by the last Letter from Conssal 0.Brien
he seems soured a t the delay of payment from the U, S t a h - I t
is true that the U. States air in arresrs to that Regency near three
yesrs ssnuities * * * The two 44 Gun ships are deemed
fully Competent to the Blocking up of his Port A Liat of his forces you have inclosed - That of Tripoli is Contemptible. That Bashaw he has but one ship Carrying 18 Guns
the other few Vessella that he possesses are of 12 Guns & under Recent accounts which have been published Indicate that the
Baahaw of Tripoli would not wait the Presidents answer - & that
there is reason to fear that he has declared War The squadron having sailed Convoy Cannot now be offered
It would perhaps have been imprudent to have suffered it to be

1

f

-

487

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

delayed by waiting to Convoy. - I t was thought that Its early
arrival in the Medeterranean was of too much Consequence to suffer
any thing to Creab Delay [NDA. GLH, Vol. 4, 18W1801.]
To Lieutenant John Shaw, U. S. Navy, Philsdelphis, Pa., from Bamuel Smith for
Acting Bscretary of the Navy
[ ~ A S H ~ N G T O ND.
,

C.]

Navy D e p t 5* J u n e 1801
I have received your letter of 2 d inst & am well pleased that you
will so soon commence the loading the George U'ashington - If
Algiers should go to war with us you will certainly require some nine
pounders - because in Such case you will robably have to go up
the Mediterranean with the cargo If Tripo ' alono declares war the
Squadron under Commodore Dale will keep you from all harme
Besides Algiers would punish the Tripolitans, if they dare to touch
you, We shall l a o w more on the subject than we now do & will be
better able to Judge what ought to be done before your departure
You &ill be permitted to have a privilege of six Tons, & each of
our Lieutenants one & a half ton your S d m g Master one ton - Mt
&addox is considered as out of the service He declined joioing the
Enterprize when ordered
I have already sent a Lieutenant sailing Master $ Purser to the
George Washington Mr Thomas may be M. acting Lieutenant for the Present I have
sent you four Midshipmen You will be allowed one Boats man one Carpenter & one Sailmaker - for which stations you w4ll be pleased to select proper
characters, & name them to me, that they may receive their appointments prior to your Sailing - You are also allowed forty able, &
twenty ordinary Seamen & ten Marines.
Let me recommend oconomy to you, lest you make the Disbursements amount to more than the freight would Cost -

1

[NDA. OSW, Vol. 5, 1801-1802.1
To Lieutenant Charles Stewart, U.S. Navy, from Samuel Smith for Acting Secretary
of the Havy

[WASHINGTON,
D. C.]

Naay D e p t @? June 1801
LIEUTENANT
STEWART
Norfolk
I have received y o m of the Itt ins$ It is not intended to go
immedistely into reequipment & preparation of the Chesapeake for
sea - such repairs, however, as may be indispensibly necessary, must
be made upon which your own Judgment must direct you.
Knowing that your ambition & love of character will stimulate
you suf6cientlyJ to have every necessary attention paid to the safety
& preservation of the Ship & the public property on board, I will
not add any thing on that subject [NDA. OSW,Vol. 5, 1801-1802.1

488

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1786 TO 1801

Extracts from journal of U. S. S. Eua, Captain William Bainbridge, U. 6. Navy,
commanding
Saturday, 6 June 1801
Commences clear Weather & blowing fresh, At 1 PM took in top gall* Bails The Entervm'ze lone wav astern not able to k e e ~un. the Philadr carrvinn TOD
gallant sails & stay szls & keep way - At 5 p&t 5 P M single reefedstoG saih
I find under low sail we can beat the President tolerable easy, on any way I
think we are the fastest sailer vet. We have however scarcely had a fair trial
as none of ua have been drove
At ?4 past 3 P M Mustered all hands Throu hout the night proportioned sail to the mallouvres of the Commodore ~t 6
coud not see the Enterprize - she parted from the squadron during the
night - Latter part heavy rains with Thunder Lat. ObsQ 35O30' N. - Long. ObsQ 66'40' W.
Wednesday, 10 June 1801
Commences clear & pleasant Weather
At 1 P M spoke the commodore
All the afternoon lying to with the Mizzen & part of the time Main top sail
aback, for the Philadelphia to come up - She sails much slower than the Preaideni or RPsa in light winds
Throughout the night light sirs & clear weather Latter part exercised the crew
by the station bills to reef, furl & manouvre ship Ends hazy weather with drizzling rain
Latitude Observed 34O32' N. - Longitude in 57'17' W.
[NA. ND original.]

~d

-

To Captain Thomas Truxtun, U. S. Navy, from Acting Secretary of the Bavy,

[WASHINGTON,
D. C.]
Nawy Dept 11 June 1801

*

Your letter expressing a W i h to be informed as earl as possible
of the New arrangement of the O5cers retained in the avy on the
Peace Establishment has been received - The arrangements of the
Lieutenants are not yet Compleat - that of the Captains Numbered
agreeably to Rank is as follows Ng 1 John Barry
2 Samuel Nicholson
3 Silas Talbot
4 Richard Dale
5 Thomas Truxtun
6 Samuel Barron
7 John Rodgers
8 Edward Prebble
9 James Barron
10 William Bainbridge
You will Observe that one Cap+ is retained more than the Law
Actually authorizes; this was owing to a Desire that the Commodore's
ship m g h t have a Captain. I t is hoped that Congress will not only
approve of this Measure a t the next session, But i t is expected another
Captain will be called into service for the Commander's Ship of the
squadron intended to sail in Jan? or febrv next The Rank of the respective Ca tains being now ermanently arranged, I t is expected that all d s e r v e harmonous y with dr under
each other when they shall be Called into actuate service - The
Number for Duty is too few to admit of Gentlemen who have heretofore disputed Rank to be kept separate There are yet a Number of very respectable Gentlemen who haqe
Commanded the ships of War of the U. S. and not removed tha! it 1s
hoped Congress may a t their next session Choose to Call into service -

&

f

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

489

Your pay and Rations will be settled as usual up to the 1* Day of
July next - from that period you will (as the Law directs) be on hdf
pay untill called into actual service [NDA. OSW, Vol. 5, 1801-1802.)
Extract from journal of U. S. 6. k.
Captain William Bainbridge, U. S. Navy,
commanding, Friday, 12 June 1801
Commences Raining, blowing, &agreeable weather 3 P M under close reefed
fore & mizzen topsa~h,double reefed main top sail, fore sail, main mil, mizzen
h fore top maat staymila - The .??8sex close hauled, head to sea. Went 10
Knotte - Shortly after the Commodore took in sail - In haulng up our Main
sail the quarter gunner in clearing the turns delayed Iet fly the sheet, the sail
being wet & it blowing hard split it considerably, in hauling out the maintopsail
reef tackle tore the sail from the leech ro , got down top gallant yards, repaired
main topsai1, bent another main sail. K o u g h o u t the night was close to the
Commodore under low sail - Ends dull cloudy
[NA. ND original.]

(14 June 18011
Extract from Letter to Secretary of State from Stephen Cathalan, U. S. Conaul,
Marseilles, France

SIR

*

*

*

*

*

*

There is only Two American Ships in this port Viz. the Martha of
Salem CapMohn Prince arrived from Smirna in distress at the End
of February well armed, waiting for convoy The Anm Ma& Cap? Geo. G. C o f b of Newyork from Tunis unarmed, but provided w t h a Passport from the33ey of Tunis for one
year to protect her against all the Barbarian Powers, who intends
to Sail for Newyork under such Protection in about 10 days hence.
[SDA. CL, Marseilles Vol. 1, 1790-1802.1
Extract from journal of U. S. 6. Eucr, Captain William Bainbridge, U. 6. Navy,
commanding, Sunday, 14 June 1801
Fore part of thwe 24 houm smart breezes with heavy rain Keeping cloae to the Commodore & watching his Manouvm.
At 10 P M he fired a gun to shew hie situation 8 AM out reek, got up top gall*
yards (the squadron the same Manouvre) being clear weather, followed the
Commodores motion, loosed dl a& to dry
9 AM spoke the Commodore - Ends Clear & pieasant breezes Latitude Observed 39' 40' N. - Longitude in 51' 09' W.
[NA. ND original.]
To George Little &quire, from Samuel Brown, Navy Agent, Boston, Mass.

BOSTON16 June 1801.
SIR I am advised by a Letter Received this day from the Secretary

of the Navy dated on the 6 instant "that it has been determined that
"the Boston Shall be immediately prepared to follow the Squadron
"that Sailed from the Chesapeake on the h t instant for the Mediterranean." I have therefore been requested by the % c r e w to
direct that that the Boston be forthnth prepared to Receive her
Crew & provisions for nine Months.
[F. D. Boosevelt Collection.]

490

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1786 TO 1801

Extracts from journal of U. S. 6. k ,Captain William Bainbridge, U. 8. Navy,
commanding
Tuesday, 16 June 1801
Commences clear weather & pleasant breezes At M past Meridian the Commodore made a signal for the Essez to chase S S E. 5 before 2 P M made a signal to
recal us, saw the chase was a square rigged vessel, in returning to our station
spoke the Philadelphia Capt. Barron.
Throughout the night under easy sail - The Philadelphia carrying steering
a i l 8 - This day had all the hammocks marked & new numbered - gave a
designating mark to the different watch stations
Ends pleasant breezes and fine Weather.
Latitude Observed 39" 48' N. - Longitude Observed 45" 15' W.
Wednesday, 17 June 1801
Comnences pleasant weather with stendv breezes, carrying steering mils aloft.
At 3 P M measured the distance of the Bun & Moon & took their respective
altdra with a Hadleys Quadrant & a Sextant belonging to the shi
Long. by
Quadrant 45' 15' W. Long. by Sextant 44" 30' W., - The sextant f t G n k a good
one, 1n adjusting my own sextant (a very excellent one) I in'ured the adjusting
screw, which renders the sextant uselem - At 4 P M the dommodore's signal
for Longtd* by observation, E s s a answered 4-4' 45' Philadelphia 48O 9' W .
President 46" 53' W . At 8 P M spoke the Commodore.
Throughout the night kept close to him, latter part squally with showers of rain.
Latitude Observed 39" 50' N. - Longitude in 39" 7' W.
Thursday, 18 June 1801
All these 24 hours clear weather & pleasant breezes - At past 5 P M spoke
the Commodore when along side of the Prenident tryed the trim of our ship by
the people found we ailed best when they were all aft Throughout the night close to the Commodore At 9 AM the President made
all sail, (about 1% points free) except the steeri~igsails - At 10 made the same on
board the E s s a , when under full sail blowing fresh find we are very even sailers Friday, 19 June 1801
Commences fair weather & pleasant breezes, carrying stay&
& fore top
mast steering sails. The President this day under full sail beat the Essez a little
Throughout the night light winds & rain a t times At 4 P M took a lunar observation found the LongtQ*33' 41' W. At 5H 12' P M measured the distances &
altitudes again & fou~ldthe Long. 33" 20' W.
I n the morning there was lowering clouds every appearance of approaching
land. At 9 the Commodore made signal to speak - made sail for him a t 10
spoke him, same time saw the Island of Corvo bearing S E 112 E, directly after
made the Island of Flores bearing S S E. I find the Lunar observation very
Correct.
Latitude Observed 3g0 55' N. - Longitude in 33' 20' W.
Thursday, 86 June 1801
All these 24 hours pleasant Weather & light breezes No particular Occurrences,
employed in various work, putting the ship in order & disciplining the Crew
At 7 P M spoke the Commodore,
I find the Philadelphia improvea in sailing as she lightens.
Ends clear Weather & North Easterly Winds
Lat. obs4 37" 55' N. Long. in 15' 31' W.
[NA. ND original.]
To Lieutenant Colonel Commandant William Ward Burrows, U. 8. Marine Corps,
from Abiehai Thomas for Acting Secretary of the Navy

[WASHINGTON,
D. C.]
Nawy Dept 8 P June 1801
Instead of the Frigate Boston being ordered to this place as was
intended a t the time I wrote you the Letter of the 14* of april informing you of the destination of the several Vessels therein named, it
has been Determined that she shall remain a t Boston until further
orders, her Crew being paid off & discharged - A Letter to thie
effect has been transmitted to Cnpt Little [NDA. GLB,Vol. 4, 1800-1801.1

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

491

h t r s c t from journal of U. 6. S. k,
Csptain WiUiam Sttinbridge, U. 6. Navy,
commanding, Saturday, 27 Jnne 1801
Commences plesssnt Weather & fresh breezes, a t % past 6 P M the Commodore
made a signal to speak. bore down & e oke him, At 7 P M he gave orders to go
ahead & keep a good look out - At z p a a t 1 P M being on deck myself to keep
a look out. the clouds being heavy & every appearance of land. It being the
opinion of myself & officer8 that it was land under the clouds, caused me t o make
the signal of &covering land to the Commodore he answered the signs1 - Owing
to the number of Lanthorns n e w a u y to make the prtsent signah, they are too
complex, & am certain they will not answer when it is blowing fresh - % past
2 A M the Commodore made a signal, coud not distinguish it At 2(1 past 2 A M, the Commodore made a signal, the Lights being so numerous
& so close together, coud not distinguiah the order in which they were made,
bore up to him & when we got cloee found it NP215 bring to. starboard tack.
At 4 A M wore shi & stood to the Southwe & E&wQ At 10 A M made
Monte Chico bearing Ebs. £3 or 10 leagues
At Meridian made Cape S1 Vincent, ~ b n t eChico same time bore ENE, the
Ca EbN distance 7 leagues.
Eonte chic0 makes in two hi& both long & sloping a t the points, the southernmost the shortest & lowest on the end, directly on the pitch of Cape Ss Vincent
is an old fortification, & a white building, to the Eastwd of which are several
buildin s composing a fort, off the Cape is a high peaked rock
&t obs) 36' 59' N. Long. in 8' W.
[NA. ND original.]
To Secretary of State from William Eaton, U. S. Consul, Tunis

T W N IJune
~ , 28,1801.
SIR:On the night of the 18th instant a fire broke out in the Bey's

alace, which, in its progress, consumed fifty thousand stands of arms.
!he second day following, I received a message to wait on the Beg
but was a t that moment confined to my bed with a bilious fever, sd
that it was not till this morning I have been able to go in my carriage
to the palace. The Bey's object in calling on me was to demand of
the Umted States ten thousand stands of a m . I refused to state his
demand. "I have proportioned m loss,J1said he, "among my friends,
and this falls to you to furnish. $ell your Government to send them
without delay." I t is impossiblel said I, to state this claim to my
Government. We have no magazmes of small arms ; the organization
of our national strength is m e r e n t from that of any other nation on
earth. Each citizen carries his own arms, always ready for battle.
When threatened with an invasion, or actually invaded, detachments
from the whole national body are sent, by rotation, to serve in the
field; so that we have no need of standing armies, nor depositories of
arms. It would be an affront to my Government, and an imposition
on the Bey, to state to them this demand, or to flatter him with a
prospect of receiving it. "Send for them to France or England," said
the minister. You are in a much more eligible position to make this
commission to Europe than we are, said I. "If the Bey had any
intention of p u r c h q the asms from Europ~,"said the minister,
"he could do it without your agency. E e did not send for you to ask
your advice, but to order you to communicate his demands to your
Gopernment." And I came here, said I, to m u r e ou that I wilt make
no such communication to my Government. "%he Bey wiU write
himself," said he. If so, it will become my duty to forward his letter;
but, a t the same time, it is equally obligatory on me to let the Bey be
aforehand apprized that he never will receive a single musket from the
United States. I should suppose a sense of decency, if not of gratitude,
would dissuade the Bey from this new extravagant claim. Has he

492

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1786 TO 1801

not, within eighteen months, received two large ship cargoes in
regalia? have we not now another ship laden for him on its passage?
and has he not, within sixty days, demanded cannon extraordinary of
the United States? At this rate, when are our payments to have an
end? "Never," said the minister; "as to the ship you talk of, they are
but the part payment of reg& you have long slnce owed us, as the
condition of peace; the other claims we make are such as we receive
from all friendly nations once every two or three years; i t is an established custom, and you, like others, will be obliged to conform to it."
When we shall have completed the payment of our peace stipulations,
you may never calculate on further donations. I t is by treaty considered as the conditions of a perpetual peace, and any new claims on
your part will be a t least an infraction of the treaty, and will be eo
considered by us. You ma ,therefore, at once, and forever, abandon
the idea of future claims: or I again assure you, in the name of my
Government and country, that the discharge of our treaty obligations
will put an end to our contributions here. "Your contributions, as
you think proper to call them," said the minister, "will never have
an end. If this be the language you think of holding a t this court,
you may prepare yourself to leave t h e country, and. that very soon."
If change of style, on my part, s a d I , be the condition of residence
here, I will leave the Bey's liingdom to-morrow morning. "We will
give you a month," said the minister. I ask but six hours, I replied.
"But you will write?" No. "But it is your duty to write." For
deficiency in duty this is not the place where I am to be questioned.
"I tell you again," continued he, "your peace depends on your compliance with this demand of my master." If so, said I, on me be the
responsibility of breaking the peace. I wish you a good morning.
k v i n g the place, I heard the minister say to one of his colleagues,
"By God, that man is mad! but we shall bring him to terms; never
fear." I do not know how this affair will end. I will not change my
position.
Hon. SECRETARY
OF THE UNITEDSTATES.
[Am. State Papers, For. Rel., Vol. 2.1
To Lieutenant Colonel Commandant William W. Burrows, U. 6. Idarine Corpe,
from Henry Dearborn, Acting Secretary of the Navy

[WASHINGTON,
D. C.]
Navy Dept 28" June 1801
On the question of the right of a Captain in the Navy to transfer
men from the Corps of Marines, to that of seamen I presume on reflection that no doubt will remain in the minds of an one of the Gentlemen of the Navy or of the Marines - as a genelafprinciple where a
man has been r
arly enlisted mustered & clothed, he cannot be
discharged from e corps to which he belongs except by the centance
of a Court Marshall, or by the authority of the Execuhve -

e

[NDA. GLB, Vol. 4, 1800-1801.1
Extract from Journal of U. 6. 6. Euu, Captain William Bainbridge, U. S. Navy,
commanding, Sunday, 28 June 1801
Commences fresh breezes & pleasant weather
At 3 P M bent cables At 6 P M Cape St Vincent bore N W H N, Cape S+Mary E M N & the eaat end
of Monte Chico N E by N - Making Cape S; Marys from the Weetward, it makes
in a hummock, round -

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

493

Latter part of the night close hauled by the Wind to the Southward - At 4
AM came on to blow, the squadron took in top g d * sails & reefed topsails. At
psst 4 the Commodore made a sign& to tack, tacked ship & stood to the NorthwQ
& EastwQ A t 5 made signal for strange sails.
The latter part of this 24 hours standing in for the Spanish ahore. The Commodore displayed eeveral signals relative to forming the line & tacking fleet to
preserve the Bsme order, which evolutions were performed by the Squadron,
The B88ez in the Van. A t 11 A M from the topeail yard-mede S1 Mary's bearing
N W 5 N distant 7 or 8 leagues. Making it in this d~rectionyou see a white
house on the top of the round hill, below which you discover the town of Farro 1'11,
the point of St Maw makes out to Seaward low & sandy A t 3 past 11 tacked ship, the Town of Tavira bearing N N E M E distant 4 or
5 leagues - This is s small town on the back of which you see a round sandy hill,
sloping down with some bushes on it, to the W. of this town 2 or 3 Miles is a sandy
point with a town [NA. ND original.]
Circular issued by John (favino, U. S. Consul, Gibraltar

CONSULAR
OFFICE,AT GIBRALTAR
2?9+ June 1801.
SIR This day arrived from a Cruise of 35 d ~ y as Tripolin Ship of 28
Guns and 246 Men, she is American Built, whose Commander speaks
English in Perfection, & suposed to be a Renagado; he was asked by
the h t t i c k Mmter if Tripoli was at Warr with America which he
Politely Denied;he was also asked if had taken any Prism; srrid not was on a Cruise & wanted Water -he has a Brig in Come of 16 Guns
& 146 Man, which please publish that our Trade may be on their
Guard. On the 26 arrived the American States' Schooner Enterprise,
Commanded by Lieu1 Sterett of 12 Guns & 90 Men in 24 days; she
arted Corn? three days after she left America, from 3 U. States
t g a t e s coming to the Mediterranean, this being the Port of Randezvouse & are looli'd for every Moment.
[P. S.] 30') The 3 mentioned Frigates are now coming in.
S. WILLIAMS
Esq
London.
[SDA. CL, Gibraltar, Voi. 2, 1796-1804.1
To William Eaton, 11. 6. Conaul, Tunis, from James Leander Cathcart,
U. S. ex-Consul, Tripoli

(COPPY)

Wv EATON
EkqT

LEGHORN
20 Jum - 1801
D ~ S I RI,am happy to i[n]form you that the Bills drawn upon t,he
government of Sweden by hIr Tornquibt, have return'd protested &
that the King of Sweden has determined to send a squadron against
Tripoli as soon as his sffairs with great Britain are arranged, every
pains has been taken to keep this Intelligance secret, lest it might
arrive a t Tripoli & injure their captives, but I have i t from authority
that precludes the Probability of my being deceived you therefore
may depend upon its truth & I trust d l make use of i t in such a
manner as will be most likely to promote our Interest without Injuring the unfortunate - By the last Posts from London (Via Hambur)
& France 1have received the pleasing intelligence that Commodore
Truxtun in the President of 44 Guns, the Phidaddphia of 44 Guns.
Decature the Essez of 32 Prebble & the Schooner Entctprize of 14
pointed to the Station, we have so long solicited for, they
about the last of April & I have some reason to suppose

494

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1786 TO 1801

they are actually in the hfedeterranean, the same letters informs us
that (if rumor is to be credited) the government of the United States
have resolved to pay no more subsidy's (they are ashamed of the name
g Tribute, thank God) to the Barbary States, - if Algiers is
inclu ed in this resolve i t will be pulvk fulminans [?] for the nostrils
of the Villanious Sanhedrim & their Patriotic Secretary prudence seems
however to dictate the Necessity of our adjusting our acctq with
Tripoli first, which I hope will be the means of obtainin respect a t
Tunis, if not we must procure it a t the mouth of our annon but
should we break with tho whole of the Barbary States a t once we must
have considerably greater force in this river of Thieves. I purppse
chastizing them one a t a time & propagating reports & pursuemg
measures a t the Ottoman Court which will effectually prevent a
coalition to the detriment of ourinterests, In my last letters I informed
you that I do not merely contemplate to conclude an honorable &
advantageous peace at Tripoli no Sir more must be done, we must
establish a nahonal character in B a r b a q by effecting a revolution in
favor of Hamet the Bashaws Brother who ~sa t T m , for so long as
Joseph Bashaw lives, our commerce mill not be secure, allowing that
we conclude a peace upon our own terms; the first time our frigates
are off their guard or employ'd upon other service his cruisers will capture Americans in retaliation for haveingimposed upon him terms which
he may consider humiliating, not reverting to the cause, and that the
concessions he will certainly be forced to make (If I am empower'd
on the service in conjunction with the Commodore) are merely
Inflicted as a Just punishment for his want of faith & to oblige him
to observe his promises Inviolably Sacred In future - I therefore
request you to give me what Information you are master off upon the
above head, and how far you can engage said Hamet in an expedition
of that nature, should we not succeed in dethroning Joseph Bashaw
his presence on Board of Comodore Truxton would stnke such a
pamc in to 1Js brother which could not fail to be subserverent to our
Interest I need not mention that the greatest secrecy on your Part is
necessary The Ship Venture Cap! Loring of Boston has arrived a t Genoa a
o in twent one days from Lisbon & met with none of the
Tri days
h e quadron ihee mounts twenty Guns - When I tauch'd
few
a t alta I Inform'd Mr England, that our Frigates were actually
arrived & that I was going to Malaga in quest of them, I likewise
requested bim to place every obstacle in the way of the Tripoline ship
that was fiting out there & if cash could procure an entire suspension
of her outfit that I would be responsible for a moderate sum to be
employ'd upon that Service It appears to me that this news has
been made publick upon the arrival of Morad Raiz st Malta, which
Join'd to the reports which had been circulated a t Tripoli & the
Bashaws being inform'd that, I had alarm'd our commerce six months
before the declaration of war took place, has Intimidated the said
Morad & his brother Pirates from cruising to the Westward & that
they will cruise to the Eastward for a month or six weeks & return to
Tripoli & say their are no American Vessels out in consequence of my
precautions, god send this may be the case if Truxton has not arrived
but if he has I could wish it Quite other otherwise - as you In all
probability will hear of his arrival before I shall, please to request him
not to put any confidence in any person whatever a t Tripoli even
should the Bashaw hoist a flag of Truce & by no means go on shore,

par

8

C 3

WilRS WITH BARBARY POWERS
before the Bnshaw sends his eldest son on board a s a hostage otherwise
his person will be by no means safe, I persume he wilI have no orders
to negotiate for p e w as the war cannot be known in America before
the Middle of August - he uill have time to humble them before I
can receive any Instructions from the President - Five sail of
Americans well arm'd sail'd from this Port upon the 18* Ins' direct to
the United States if they meet the Triplines, Morad is Damnd beyond redemption - you me n few sheets of Paper in arrears to me
which I ex ect to receive soon m t h answers to my severaI reqwitions,
the arriv of which will determine the continuance of my sojourn
here, I propose however Leaveing my family here untill our affairs are
sattled upon honorable terms -

ai'

[NDA photostat, Dale LB, 1801-1802.1

Extract8 from Journal of U. 5. S. Euu, Captain William Beinbridge, U. S. Eavy,
commanding
Monday, 99 June 1801
Commences blowing very freah with Clear Weather At 1 P M the Commodore displayed to a strange sail under our lee, the British
, after he had hauled down the British Frigate answered the
private day si
signal. At 2 M blowing very freeh, head aea, yards braced very sharp, going
upwards of 10 Knots, took in top gall$ sails, single reefed fore & main top sails,
Immediately after the Commodore made the signal to tack in succession beginning
a t the Van. At 5 P M a frigate & two War brim with a Convoy bore down on us.
The Commodore made the signal to repare for action, hoisted our Colors Answered by them with Portuguese &lorn. The Commodore fired a lee gun,
answered by them. Lay to with our courses up, after getting within two gun shot
they hauled their wind & made sail, by the manouvering of the Shipe they 8p
perued much frightened. The Commodore on their making Bail ordered the Eslrez
to chace & epesk the strange mil, Immediately made mil under a full press of
canvaea; after chaceing little better than one hour & half the Commodore recalled
the E88ez, during the chace I gained on them considerably & had the frigate within
gun shot - The Commodore before he recalled me had spoke the En ish Frigate
who informed him what the convoy was - At 7 P M returned
spoke the
Commodore - After which returned to my station in the order of eailing - At
the same time saw 7 sail bearing down on us with steering sails set. by order of
the Commodore we displayed the British night signals, not answered - All
hands to quarters, by the Essex Making the ei a1 they bore down directly for her,
At past 8 P M three '74's came along side p h o v e to within biscuit throw, with
difficulty I was able t o keep the Ship clear of fhem, they hailed, proved to
British, I informed them that the ship Betern of me waa the Commodore, by t h s
time the R e s i d e d came down, & I was so penned up that I was not able to shoot
ahead & let her come in my birth, she hove aLl aback to windward of the Admirals
quarter, finally I filled on the Easez & shot ahead, three boats boarded the Commodore At 10 the ceremoney was over, made mil- At I A M got into 15 fathom water,
wore shi & stood to the SQ& WQ, At 3 AM had 20 fathom, At 4 AM 22 fath.
At 9 ~ d e a 8%
w Lucar bearin East distance 7 or 8 leagues, same time the Commodore made a signal for all 8aptains to repair on bwrd him immediately, went
in the pinnace Tuurday, 90 June 1801
Throughout these 24 hours light bafiing winds, At 7 P M returned from on
board the Commodore ship, same time Cadiz bore S E by S. pr Compass 8 or 9
leagues 'Ithroughout the night kept ahead of the Commodore, shewed a light, being the
look out ship had liberty from the Commodore to display ordering signals; kept
the lead constantly going, a t 1 P M got into 15 fathom made t h e si a1 for the
had 35
Squadron to tack, found the bottom eeceediogl sticky - At 4
fathom, Made signal to tack - At Sun rise saw 8adia very plain, At 6 the light
house bore S E b E, 5 leagues.
All the Britiah flect in sight, under the Command of Adrnirsl Summers, blockading Cadiz.
Cadis N E'by E !4 E 12 Milee
[NA. ND original.]

%"'

kl

PM

-

496

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1786 TO 1801

To Thomaa Rtzsimons, Chairmm, Chamber of Commerce. Philadelphia, Pa.,
from Henry Dearborn, Acting Secretary of the navy

[WASHINGTOX,
D. C.]
Navy Dept 1 Jzcly 1801
The Gorge Washington now preparin for a Voyage to Algiers will
sail from the Delaware about the mid e of this month, the precise
day, when ascertained, will be made knowq to you by Israel Whelen
Esquire purveyor of public supplies She wdl have orders to touch a t
Sandy hook, perhaps to go up to New York, & in the latter Case will
remain there two or three days -from thence she will proceed directly
for Giberalter where she will also call, for the purpose of affording
Convoy to such American Vessels bound into the Meditermean as
may be assembled at that place & choos to avail themselves of her
protection - so far as they may bound the same course The Qeorge Washington,although not fully equipped & manned as
a Ship of war, it is presumed will be of force sufficient to be of an overmatch for any such hostile cruizers as she may be appreheneded to fall
in with in her course - She mounts fifteen Nine pounders & her
Compliment will be little short of 100 Men - Be pleased to Communicnte this information to the merchants of your City - & accept
the assurance of my respect & esteem -

*

15

[NDA. GLB, Vol. 4, 1800-1801.1
To Israel Whelen, U. S. Purveyor, from Henry Dearborn, Acting Secretary of
the Navy

[WASHINGTON,
D. C.]
Navy Depf 1 Jdy 1801
Letters have been written from this Departmont, informing the
Merchants of Philn-ew
York & Baltimore that the Cfeo. Washington
bound to Algiers would afford Convoy through the Straits to such
Vessels as mi ht be ready a t Giberalter & would choose to avail
themselves of er protection they are referd to you for the day of her
sailing when you have ascertained to a day when she will sail be
pleased Communicate the same to Mr Fitzsimons of Phila* Mr JnQ
Murray of New York & S. Smith & Buchanan of Baltimore [NDA. GLB, Vol. 4, 1800-1801.1

E

Extract from Journal of U. 6. 8. k,
Captain William Bsinbridge, U. S. Navy,
commanding, Wednesday, 1 July 1801
Commences clear & pleasant weather. At Meridian the Town of Cadiz bore
N E b E 112 E distance 4 or 5 lo es - Cadiz makes like an Island with numerous
steeples, a number of towers &?%untry seata to the Eaetw* - About 4 leagues
to the Southward of the city close in shore there is an Island with a white buildin
on it, Cape Trafal
makes high with a sandy bay to the Northr' - At 7
fell in with three e n c h mil of the line, two of Ei hty four gum 6 one seventy
four, - The Admiral sent his boat on board the &mmodore. At 8 AM spoke
the Commodore, he ordered me to lead into Port & Anchor, At 112 paat 9 came
to anchor in the Bay of Gibraltar in 15 fathoms water & with the following Marks,
Europa point S, 16' E
South signal tower E 46' S
New Mole .
N ilOO E
Algezires . . . . W 25O N
Cabaretti Point . W 20° S
found the Enterprize Lt Sterret a t anchor, immediately after anchoring the Commodore esluted the garrison, returned gun for gun, He then made a signal for d l
Captaine to Come on board, where I met M Gavino the American Coneul who
had lettern from Consul OBrien, that leaves very little doubt, but thrrt the Tripolitam have commenced hostilities - & a very strong appearance of it ia our finding

~d

..

497

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

two Tripolitsn cruiaera at anchor here, one a ship of 26 guns commanded by a
Scotchman who is their Lord high Admiral, the other a brig, they are. under
quarantine which prevents immediate communication with them
went on
shore with the commodore & the 2 Capt. Bmona & paid our respects to the
Governor - we found lying in this port the ship Gand Turk with presents for
Tunis from our GOY*
[NA. N D original.]

-

To U. S. Midaters to Madrid, Spain, and Lisbon, Portugal, from Captain Bichwd
Dale, U. S. Navy

On Board the UNITEDSTATESSHIPPresident
Gi6ratbar Bay J d y 2sd 1801 SIR,I Have the Honor to Inform you of the safe arrival of the
Squadron under my command a t this place yesterday all well, the
1 receive by this conveyance will inform you the
Letters that you d
Intentions of the Squadron in the Mediterranean, I am sorry to Inform
you from the Infermation that I Have received here from Mr Gavino
the AmeriCan Consul respecting our Barbary affairs that it is likely
there will be full employment for all the Frigates belonging to the
United States, I found Laying here on my arrival the High Admeral
of Tripoli, a ship mounting 26 nine & six Pounders & 260 Men & a
Brigg mounting 16 Guns 160 men, he says he is not a t war, with
America, I put no confidence in what he says I have no doubt but he
is bound in the Western Ocean to capture Americans, I shall leave
one of the Frigates here to watch his motions, and take him, if
Possible he Inform's me that Mr Cathcart had left Tripoli five or
ski days before he sailed, I dont think it Possible that he can have
a letter of Friendship from MF Cathcart, I wish I had him a t sea - the
ship Grand Turk loaded by the United States, with stores for the Bey
of Tunis has been laying here seven weeks fearful of being taken by
the Tripolians, I expect to sail to morrow for Algiers, I shall take her
with me - You mll please to Inform the Government of the United
States of hly safe arrival thus far on the Intended expedition. DAVIDHUHPHREYS
&qr, Afadrid, &
W@SMITH,Lisbon,
[ NDA photostat, Dale LB, 1801- 1802.1

To Secretary of the Ravy from Captain Richard Dale, U. 6. Navy

On board the UNITED
STATESSHIPPresident
Gibrallar Bay, Jdy fid1801
SIR, I have tbe honor to Inform you of the Safe arrival of the
Squadron under my command, a t this place yesterday all well, or
nearly so, the passa e has been Longer than I expected when I s d e d
from Hampton roa s. - the first ten days after we wera out, we had
very bad weather much rain snd the wind continually from the
Eastward, the fourth day after we were. out I gave Mr Stemtt,
Commander of the Enierpn'ze orders to make the best of his way to
Gibrdtar, ha not being abIa to keep company with the Squadron,
when it blowed fresh, sailed faster in light m d s , Sbe arrived five
da s before us &o pertieular Oocurrences worth relating took place an the Passage, - saw and spoke, the English S uadron of seven sail of the Line
Commanded by, SY,James ~sumere.,%lookadeingthe port of Cadi. -

C

498

NAVAX OPERATIONS FROM 1786 TO 1801

In sight of Gibralter, spoke a French Squadron of three sail of the Line
bound for Cadiz if the English will let them; there is not one English
ship of war, a t present a t Gibraltar, on the Arrival of the Squadron
under my command in this port every attention was paid by the
Goverment. - Mr Gavino the Anerican Consul came on board %
I went on shore with him and waited on the Governour who received
me very politely - strange as i t may be to relate, but not the less
true, on my arriva1 here, I found laying a t Anchor here, the high
Admiral of Tripoli, in a ship mounting 26 Nine & six Pounders 260
men - & a Bngg of 16 Guns 160 men he has been out 36 Days, he
says he is not a t war with America, nor has be taken any Vessel he
came in here for water, he is under Quarenthe a t present [word
illegible] I get my Information from the Consul) - he arrived here
the day before the Squadron, what a pitty we did not arrive a few
days sooner for his sake, from every Infermation that I can get here
Tripoli is a t war with America, i t is our Joint opinion that the Admiral
is going to t,he Western Ocean, to capture Americans, i t would have
been a fortunste thing, to have fell in with him at Sea,so fully perswaded
am I that he intends to capture American Vessels that 1 intend to
leave, Caps Barron in the Philadelphia to watch his motions, - that
I s to take him when he goes out, he can Rave no Letter of friendship
from, Mr Cathcart, I understand, that he left Tripoli five or Six days
before the Admiral sailed, this said Admeril is a Scotchman, which
makes him the more to be dreded in our Seas. - I am Very sorry
to say our Barbary affairs look ve gloomy -long before you receive
this, you must have received Mr 0 Sans and the other Consuls, infermations respecting the Business,it is much to be Lemented that the
Government has not paid more attention to the infermation that has
been received from that quarter I am fearful i t will cost the United
States many Thousand Dollars before things are put to rights; there
is ful Employment a t present in the Medeterranian, for all the Frigates
belonging to the United States. - I found on my arrival the Grand
Turk laded with stores for the Bey, of Tunis, she has, been here seven
weeks & a Brigg from Baltimore bound to Triest 5 or 6 weeks all fearful
of being taken by Barbary Powers, I understand there is upwards of
Twenty lor Seventy?] sail of Americans, laying at Barcelona, & Man
in other Ports all fearfull of being taken, you may depend there sha
be nothing wanting on my Pert to render them every possible assistance that Lays in my Power
I intend sailing from this place to morrow there is no time to be lost,
I shall take the &and Turk & the Brigg, with me, - as there is no
warter to be got a t Gibraltar, I dont think i t a good place to deposit
tho stores for the Squadron - Malags will be a more Proper Place. if the Danger is not to greate when the Vessel arrives a t Gibraltar, I
shall leave orders with Mr Gavino res ccting that business
I em happy to Inform ou there is E?'very possible harmony throughout the Squadron. - I gave found Cap! Jss: Barron of much semce
to me he IS an excellent officer - July 3'g I did not get to sea as I
expected, but shall sail to morrow, - this day I have had some conversation with the admiral myself I wint alongside of h i s Vessel, I
told him I was bound for Tripoli & had a letter from the President,
and a present likewise for the Bey, he told me it was very well he said
the Bey of Tripoli was not a t war with America I ask'd him the reason
of Mr Cathcarb leaveing Tripoli he answer'd that i t was his own fault
& said that Mr Cathcart was no friend to america -I ask'd him when

%

f

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

499

he was going to Tripoli, he said in two or three months, I told him I
would be glad if he would 60 on Board with me, that I wanted to have
some conversation with h m respecting his nation he said no, he did
not like to go on Board with me; I h d there is no depe[n]dsnce to be
put in what he says; nor would he go to M? Gavino's house, so fully
persuaded am I and the rest of the Commanders that he intends to
capture American Vessels, wherever he can find them, I think one of
the ships cannot be better em loyed than watch his motions, and et
hold of him if possible I s h a f proceed with all possible dis atch or
Algiers with the President and the Schooner Enterprize, t e &and
Turk is a heavy sailer & would detain me much Longer than I wish,
I shall give Caps Bainbridge orders to proceed with her with all possible dispatch for Tunis, from there cruise of[Q tripoli, should I not arrive
at Tunis before he is ready to sail from there but a t the same time to
consult with the Two Consuls - I am Informed that Tripoli has six
Cruisers out a t present, - it would be a good thing to get hold of
this Admiral he is a man of Great weight, he is married to the Bashaws
Daughter, I cannot conclude this letter without givein you a description of the Admiral's ship, she formerly belonged to oston She d
carry about 25,OO barrels of flower, the Brigg Sweedish built carries
her Guns on the upper deck, she cannot sail fast, I think the ship ma
sail fast Enough to catch our Merchant Ships, and would do muc
damage to our trade, if he gits in the Western Ocean - which I think
he intends he came in here for water, I hope Barron may be so fortunate as to get hold of him -

1 'i

%

K

[NDA photostat, Dale LB, 1801-1802.1
Extract from journal of U. S. S. Ertu, Captain William Bainbridge, U. S. Bsry,
commanding, Thursday, 2 July 1801
Pleaant weather & Light winds - No particular occurrences - employed in
clearing the booms and stowing the Cutter This day dined with General OHara Governor of Gibraltar.
The Tri olitan Admiral informed Commodore Dale that Mr Cathcart the
American Ebnsul had left Tripoli five days before he sailed & he beleived that he
went to Tunis, that it was 35 d a s since he left Tripoli From the information of our d n s u ~ leaving
s
Tripoli I have no doubt but that
Regency haa commenced hostilities against the U. Statea - I verily [believe]
that the Admiral now in this port was bound in the Western Ocean.
[NA. ND original.]
To the Commander of the American Ship carrying Provisions for the U.S. Squadron
in the rediterronean, from Captain Richard Dale, U. S. Navy

GIBRALTAR
BAYJuly QrQ 1801
SIR,This letter will be banded you by John Gavino Esqr the American Consul at this place you will please to follow his Orders respecting the Publick stores, that you may have on board for the Squadron,
that I have under my Command
[NDA photostat, Dale LB, 1801-1802.1

To General O'Bsua, His British Majesty's Governor of Gibraltar, from Captain
Richard Dale, U. 8. Navy

GIBRALTER
BAYQrQ July 1801
SIR,As I expect Vessel to arrive here for Orders, in the course of
two or three months, loaded with stores for the use of the Squadron
that I have the Honor to Command, it has been su e s t d to me by
the Secretary of the Navy of the Umted States, tha%ibtibraltar would

500

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1786 TO 1801

be the most convenient pIace to make a deposit of stores, for the use
of said Squadron, - I therefore Sir have the honor to request your
permission (if consistent) to leave orders with Mr Gavino the American
Consul here, When the Vessel arrives with the stores, to have them
depossited here for the above purpose. [NDA, photostat, Dale LB, 1801-1802.1
To Captain Samuel Barron, U. S. Navy, commanding U.8. Frigate Philadelphia, from
Captain Richard Dale, U. 6. Navy

UNITEDSTATESSHIPPresident GIBRALTER
BAY,
4'? Jdy 1801
SIR, From every infermation that I have received in this place
respecting our affairs with the Bey of Tripoli, confirms, that he is a t
war with the United States, - his admiral being in this Port a t
present and Commanding a Ship of 26 Guns, nine & six pounders
260 men, likewise a bri g under his command m[o]unting 16 Guns 160
men, he does not say wl ! ere he is bound to, but I have every reason to
beleave that he Intends to capture American Vessels, from that
conviction, and conceive that one of the ships cannot be employd
better, for the Interest of the United States than preventing him frome
making his esca e, - Therefore Sir, I give you orders to Lay of[f]
this port & watc his motions, and (act in such manner as your good
sence will direct) to take him when he comes out keeping in View a t
the same time, to keep such a distance from the Harbour that i t
cannot be called a Blockade, should you be so fortunate as to take
him, after keeping all the Principle Officers you will dispose of the
rest, agreable to orders received from the Secretary of the Navy, the
Vessels you will keep, and proceed with them to Algiers for farther
orders which I shall leave there with Mr Rich'! O'Brian the American
Consul, I have requested Mr Gavino to keep a lookout and know when
he sails he can see from the Rock weather he goes East or West, I
have given him order to dispatch a boat to you to give you Infermation respecting him, if you should see a Boat acoming you will hoist
English colours, should you receive infermation that he is gone to the
Westward, through the Straits mouth, you must follow him, if you
should be certain that he is gone through you must spend two or three
weeks in looking after him, not hearing any thing of him you will
make the best of your way to Algiers - but should he remain in this
Port you will remain as long as he does should you want water you
must get i t a t Tetuan After saying what I have, I leave i t to your own, good Judgement,
being on the spot you will be better able to judge how to act that it is
possible for me to direct [NDA photostat, Dale LB, 1801-1802.1

!i

To Captain William Bainbridge, U. 8. Navy, commanding U. 8. 6. Ewex, from
Captain Richard Dale, U. 6. Navy

UNITEDSTATESSHIPPre9ident GIBRALTER
BAY
4'k Ju& 1801 SIR, YOUwill please to take under your Convoy the Ship &and
Twck loaded with publick stores for the Bey of Tunis, and proceed
with her there, with all possible dispatch, you will also give protection
to the American Brigg Hope James Norman Master belonging to
Joseph Young of Baltimore, as far as you go, Should you meet with

501

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

any of the Tripolitan Cruisers or any Vessels that they have taken
you will act according to the Instrucbons received from the Secretary
of the Navy
On your arrival a t Tunis you will make known the same to William
Eaton Esqr the American Consul before you suffer the Grand Turk
to go w i t h the power of that Government, I send you a copy of a
letter that I have got from the Department of State for M' Eaton
after you have compleated our business a t Tunis - as I am fully
convinced that the Bey of ripoli has commenced Hostilities against
the United States, you will proceed and cruize ofif] Tripoli where I
shall proceed after I have been nt Algiers and Tunis, and Join you,
with all possible dispatch i t is not Impossible but I may Join you a t
Tunis Should there be much Danger for the Brigg to Proceed after
you get as far as Tunis you may see her clear of that Passage, You can make known to Mr Eaton the Inte[n]tions of thls Squadron - You may gain much Infermation a t Tunis respecting Barbary
Mairs: Notwithstanding what I have said you will act according
to the Infermation, you may receive Should you sail before I get there you will leave a letter with the
Consul informing me where you are to be found. - My great anxiety
to get to Algiers is to prevent any disagreeable thing that might take
place between that regency and the United States Oweing to not
seeing any Vessels, nor hearing from there, Otherwise I would not
part from you -

f

[NDA photostat, Dale LB, 1801-1802.1
To Secretary of State from John Gavino, U. S. Consul, Gibraltar

GIBRALTAR
th
July 1801
NQ66
SIRMy last dispatch was N9 65 pr the Schooner Charlett of New York
with Copy of one of 9'? April from Consul OBrien. On the 26') UltQ amved the State Schooner Enter rize Cap9
Steritt, who had Ceperated from the squadron intende for those
seas, and on the 29') Ditto anchord in ths Bay a Tripoly ship of 28
Guns (american Built) with 246 Men, Commanded by thier high
Admiral, an EngQRenegado Maried to the Bashaws Daughter; also
a Brig of 16 Guns & 146 Men they are both Cruisers, sailing in Comp?
reported on arrival to the Health Office that they had been out 35
days & Captured nothing but wanted Water; the Prattick Master
askd of the Admiral if they were a t War with america, sayd was not.
On the 30F ditto arrived the P~e&nl Comrnodor Dale, the Philadelphia & Essm frigates, they anchord close to the above Cruisers
who were in uarante, I irnediately waited on the Comrnodr taking
wth me Cons s OBrion & Cathcarts Letters relative to the affairs
of Barbary &zC?. for his information he Deliverd me your favour of
24" May last, the Contents of which duely noted, & permit me to
assure you that every thing in my Power to serve the Comodor his
Squadron & the Nation in Gen! shall not be wanted, and it trill give
eatest pleasure, when can be usefull to either, as in duty
the he Comodor made Enquiry of the admiral if they were a t
bound;
War or Peace with the U. States he sayd the Latter, then he enquired
if he left Consul Cathcart well, he replied that he had gone from
Tripoly a fortnight before he Saild, for Tunis, that he went of his
own accord, and that he was no friend to the Americans, I likewise
went a long side of h i Yesterday Morning (as his agent Expressd

d

9

F

502

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM lY86 TO 1801

to me that he wishd to have some Conversation wtb Commodor Dale
to tell him, as he was to get Prattick that da the Commodor had no
objection in seeing him on board the ~ r e d n t or
, a t my house on
shore; which he rejected saying would see us a t a Tavern & no where
else indeed I perceived he was t d i n g in the business; so that the
Commodor detennin'd to go to Sea with the Squadron, which he did
this Morning taking with him the Ship Grand Turk, bound to Tunis
with the stipulations, & the Brig Hope of Baltimore JaP Norman
Commander, for other particulars permit me to refer you to what
Commodor Dale, now writes the Seer of the Navy, & to the inclosed
Copy of Consul OBrions Letter to me of the 27t? May regarding the
&and Turk by return of the Express sent him on that subject. Some time ago came here from Alguesiras the Brig Neptune John
S. Crane Commr W4b he sags to have bought there, also the Cargo
Consisting of Port Wine, Od & Wool, when he was on the point of
sailing the Spanish Government Detaind his Papers & Commenced
a s u b on supposition that he was coming here with the Cargo (w"P
was cleard for New York), but the night before they were to begin
Landing, he got the Vessel under way & brought her here, where
after remaining some days, was detaind by His Maj? Polaca Calpe
Cap"undass
as having no Papers on board, she was libeled, when I
made repeated official applications to the Spanish Govr of St Roque
and he sent me authentick Copys of the Detaind Papers which were
presented on the day of Tryal, so that the Vessel & Cargo was liberated, and free of Costs of Sute. A few days since came in sight from the East three french ships
of the Line and a frigate, but the wind taking them short in the Gutt,
got a back of the Rock; this day sprung up to the East, when they
went to Alguesiras & are landing 2800 seamen to Man the ships a t
C d i z , before
Port arrived Sir James Sommorez with five sad the
Line from England when joind the two that were there; said French
Squadron came from [MS illegible] & captured aback of the Rock the
Enge Brig of Warr Speedy, & the Mahon Packet, both coming to this
Port - * * *
[SDA. CL, Gibraltar, Vol 11, April 1796-Nov. 1804.1
Extract from journal of U. S. 6. k,
Captain William Bainbridge, U. 6. Navy,
commanding, Saturday, 4 July 1801
Commences Clear weather & Southerly wind -

At 5 AM by signal from the Commodore unmoored ship the rest
of the squadron did the same - At 9 by signal the squadron weighed
& sailed out of the bay of Gibraltar At 10% P M gave chace to a Brig,
At 11 spoke it, an American from Barcelona, ordered him down to
the Commodore that he might enquire the news from him - Came
out of Gibraltar with us the ship Grand Turk for Tunis & the Brig
Hope for Trieste [NA. N D originsl.]
[5 July 18011

To Miallhipman (acting M Lieutenant) Abner Woodruff, U. S. Bavy, from Captain
Samuel Barron, U. 8. Ravy

Lt Woodruff will take charge of those men who are Station'd in
the Quarter Bill a t those Guns which have been remov'd from the
division of Lt Blake (into the hold) and consider them under his
immediate Command ss Musquetteers

WARS WITH BARBARY POWEI2S

503

The Men a t the Braces are also to be considered as Musqueteers
occasionally, & under his command when acting in that capacity,
but never to be withdrawn from their Stations without the Consent
of the Mashr or Captain - he is to have a sufficient number of
Muskets and Catouch Boxes always ready & in good order & see
them exercised by the Master a t Arms or some other Person, whoever
i t may be ordered. a Musquet is always to be prepared for the use of each Midshipman
& they are frequently to be exercised under the direction of the Junior
L$- a seperate Chest will be repared for the reception of the Musquets, Catouch Boxes, &c. of t e Midshipmen & Seaman. JULY6+ 1801
M Thom, Purser, will furnish hfr Brown with three dutch Blankets
for the use of the Arm Chest.
JULY6 - 1801 -

t

[NYHS. Cooper's History, Extra Illustrated, Vol. 1.1
To Lieutenant Andrew Sterett, U. S. BTovy, from Captain Bichsrd Dale,
U. 8. Navy

UNITEDSTATES
SHIPP~esidenda t Sea
July 69'1801
SIR,TOprevent your parting Compan during the knight, you will
please to keep close s stern, and off the l?ee Quarter, of the Prssidant,
taking care a t the same time, not to be so near as to get fowl of each
other.But should you part corn any you will proceed with aU
possible Expedition to Algires, and t ere remain untill I arrive, you
will not anchor your schooner within reach of the Guns of that place,
on your a n i v d there you will hoist a read flag a t your fore top mast
head, which is a S'clllal for Richg OBrian Esqr the American Consul
there, to come off s o d d any of the Algerin Cruisers or any other of
the Barbary powers be laying there, you will be cautious, and not
put our self in their ower but cruise ofjf] and on, about the place
until I arrive; Shoul they be superior force to you - On your
way there should you fall in with any of the Tripoliton Cruisers, or
any other of the Barbary owers that has not a Letter of friendship
from our Consuls or Cons a t the place they say they belong to. you
m d l bring them to Alaiers
You wdl bring to afi Vessels that you map suspect to be Americans,
to see and know, that they have not been Captured by any of the
barbary powers, should you fall m with and Take any of the above
Description of Vessels ou will take them to Algires - You are not
to hoist any Colours gut English while a t sea, without there is s
necessity for the Contrary. -

E

"2

9

cf

2

[NDA photostat, Dale LR, 1801-1802.1
Extracts from journal of U. S. S. Easex, Captain William Beinbridge, U. 6. Berg,
commanding
Sunday, 6 July 1801
Commences pleasant weather, light Easterly winds at pest Meridian spoke
the Commodore, he requested that I woud come on board, Immediately went
when he delivered me my orders part of which was to take in charge the veasela
under convoy, the same time Captain Samuel Barron came on board the President
& recQ hie orders which were to guard the W7eetern Mouth of the straits & to
endeavor to catch the Tripolitan Admiral Immediately on my receiving my
orders came on board Made signals for the convoy & delivered them to them

504

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1786 TO 1801

At 7 P M Ceuta bore W 4/r S distant 5 leagues - Throughout the night plying
to windward with light winds - Tacked twice, each time made the signal for
the convoy At 8 AM the ship Recovety of New York from Portsmouth, England,
bound to Barcelona fell in with us - I sent signals on board of her & offered to
give her protection as far as I went on the North shore, same time sent a hawser
on board the Grand Turk & took her in Tow, I find she Bails very dull At 11 AM mustered all hands & read the Articles of War.
Monday. 6 J u l y 1801
Commences clear weather almost calm having the Grand Turk in tow
Throughout the night light breezes head to the Eastward, At 9 AM made Malaga
saw several h h i n boats off the bay At !4 ast 10 haalaga bore N $4 W pr compass distance 7 or 8 leagues - The
Bay of Ralaga makes in deep, to the Westward of the bay along shore you see a
white fortification, over the town is a hill on which is a white house or tower,
there is a remarkable large building with a steeple, in the Town All hands busily employed preparing preventer dings, braces, stoppers &c &
filling Musquet cartridges & making every necessary arrangement for being well
provided for a Naval Action A t 2 past 11 the ship Recovery made a signal to speak, At Meridian spoke
her, aptain Richards desired to know whether I coud give him safe convoy to
Barcelona, on my informing him as I did yesterday that I coud not, he determined to leave the convoy & go into Malaga - which is abreast of us - a t 10
took a Lunar Observation found the Longt* to be 4 O 35' W. Malaga bearing
N N E 8 leagues its Longt'? is 4 O 15' - the Luna observation is very accurate [NA. N D original.]

-

To Lieutenant Colonel Commandant William W. Burrows, U. 5. Marine Corps,
from Acting Secretary of the Bavy

[WASHINGTON,
D. C.]
Navy Dept @h July 1801
Be pleased to furnish the George Washington, now prep*
at
Philadelphia for a Voyage to Algiers, with a detachment of Marmes,
to consist of ten privates with a proper proportion of non commissioned W c e r s
[NDA.

GLB, Vol. 4, 1800-1801.1

To Acting Secretary of the Bavy from Lieutenant John Shaw, U. 6. Navy

PHIL.7" July 1801
SIR I should be ready for Sea sometime back were it not for a
number of lower Masts which were ordered to be taken in a t a time
when we found it almost Impractable but with much difficulty have
got them on board. I propose opening Rendezvouse to morrow & on
next Friday I Expect to haul off in the Stream to Receive my Men,
The [George] TVashington wanted many unexpected repairs but I am
now of Oppinion from the Overhaul she has got she will be Able to
run 2 or 3 Years with little or no Expence to Governmt & I think no
better ship could be Imploy* in the Algerine Service as she stowes a
very large Cargo, to much advantage, please Inform me should I
settle up to the time of Sailing the Acctq of the dift Officers attached
to the Ship as I presume they may want some Money prior to Sailing
Mr Geo H, Geddes a retained Midshipman has been in the service
of the ship for sometime & wishes to proceed in her I hope you w i l l
Comply with his re uest as there are but two as yet Joined in yours of
5') Ultq you please to mention to me to select the Warrant Officers
for the [George] Waehington I think with propriety I can recomg
Augustine Serre as Boatswain he has acted in that station with
Cap-ainbridge
& is strongly recornended by him he has attended
on the Ship in her Outfitt & done much Justice to his station also

3

505

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

Geo Weston as Gunner he is a sober steady & Experienced Man &
fully ade uate to the station
Jn. ~t?Iohnhas been recomendod to me as Carpenter by Cap$
Barry he served in the Frigate U Rates for 3 years as Carpinters Mate
he bears a good Caracter a sober M a n &4 no Sail maker as yet has
Offered, I have to recornend to your Consideration Ja* Preston & Jno
Sullivan the former an Imploy Rigger on board the [Cfeorge] Wmkington who got his left Le broke in 2 places in the Aot of stripmg the Foremast & the latter a la%ourer got 2 of his Ribs broke from a tumble in
the hold they are very poor & necesseated for Assistance
Prior to my Sailing I hope to be furnished with every necessary
papers for my bettar Govern$
AGUBTIN
SERRE
-Boatswain
GEO.WEBTON- Gunner
JOHNSt JOHN - Carpenter
INDA.

Misc. L, Vol. 2,1801.1

Extracts from journal of U. S. 6 . &YE, Captain William Bainbridge, IT. 6. Navy,
cammsndin~
- .-.-..-

Tuesday, 7 July 1801
Firat part light airs & pleasant Weather, sailing along the Spanish Coast between
Malaga & Velez Malaga At 1 f M requested the Brig to send a Hawser onboard
the Grand Turk to be towed which she complied with We then had them both in
tow - At 6 P M Vehz Mslaga bore Pr Compass N N W 7. leagues, At 7 fell
calm, fearful of the Vegsele getting foul of each other, ordered them to cast loose.
Throughout the night light winds & calm - At 7 A M took the Brand Turk in
tow Latter part light airs & calm discovered several Bail to the Eastward.
Wedneiday, 8 July 1801
Light aim from the Westward, At 2 P M gave chece to a Brig ahesd, At 3
fired a rmn & brouaht her to. an American from Leahorn bound to New York.
informa us that t6e four eaa of Vessels in shore, were all Americans from Leg:
horn in corn any with her - From the Brig I received a copy of a Circular letter
written by
Catbcart late American Consul a t Tripoli, dated, Quarantine ground.
Leghorn, 24 June 1801, informing thst Tripoli had commenced hositilities against
the U. Statea - At 4 P M parted the hawser in towing the Grand Turk, got her
smaU bower on board us, filled away & parted that, sent a new 9 inch hawaer on
board her, At 5 P M got i t secured, filled away & made sail At 6 P M called all hands to quarters and exercieed great guns & amall arms with
blank Cartridges after which scraped & spunged the guns well & loaded aLl with
round & grape shott. At 7 P M the bay of Almeria bore E N E pr compass distant 8 leagues Throughout the night pleasant breezes the Grand Turk in tow.
A t 6 AM diacovered several sail 8 19 E from us. A t 94 paat 9 m w Cape Figale
bearing 8 S W & C a m Falcon S S E $4 E
- ~ m a o ~inscr6bbing
ed
& cleaningall decks, bedding & Earnmocks At 10AM exercised the Midshipmen Cape Falcon S S E b S 5 lesgues - Latitude observed 36O12' N.
[NA. ND original.]

&

-

To Captain Samuel Barron, U. S, Navy, from Captain Richard Dele, U. S. Navy

On Board the US SHIPPresident
Algierg Bay 9" July 1801
SIROn your Arrival st this place, ou will receive this letter from
Richard OBrian Esqr Consul for the nited States, you will loose no
time in rooeeding with the Ship under your command off Tunis, at
which pace you will hear of me or from me again, should you not
hear any thing from Mr Eaton the Arnsricsn Consul there respecting
me in one or, two days, after your arrival there - you
then proceed off Tripoli where I expect you will find me but in all your movements you must keep a good look out after the Tripolian Cruisers or

6

I'

wh

506

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1786 TO 1801

American Vessels that they may have captured, Should you have been
so fortunate as to have captured the Tripolian Admiral you will
bring both him and the Vessels with you off Tripoli they may be the
means of bringing the Bey of Tripoli to his sences - which I hope in
God may be the case -particularly so if his Cruisers have captured any
Americans - I expect in six weeks from this date to be in Maltar to
get water, by that time I shall stand in need of i t - I can not make
any calculation when you will be on this way Should you not find me
off or about Tripoli you may expect that I have gone to Maltar for
water, Should you stand in need of that article before we meet you
will proceed there to get it - My Cruising ground will be off Tripoli,
off Tunis & between the two, I shall send Bainbridge on the convoy
business as it is highly necessary that we should give protection to our
merchant ships, as much as lays in Our Power [NDA photostat, Dale LB, 1801-1802.1
To Bichard O'Brien, U. 8. Consul General, Algiers, from Captain Richard Dale,
U. 8. Navy

UNITEDSTATESSHIP President
At Anchor in the Bay of Algiers Jvly 9* 1801 DEARSIR; Your favour of this day in answer to mine of the same;
I have received. I note its contents, as well as yours of this Morning,
I feel my self much obliged to you for the copious Infermation that I
shall receive by the papers you put into my hands respecting our
Barbary Mairs - Respecting the Thirty Thousand Dollars that
was put under my Charge by the Government of the United States
for certain purposes, which you are acquainted with, I have no discretinary power from the Government to land the Dollars without the
Intentions of the same bein[g] carried fully into efect therefore Sir
ou see the princi~llsthat I act u on - I shall keep the money on
goard untill I amve here again hope then there will be a more
favourable oppertunity to make use of the moneys than there is a t
present. If i t is possible in the morning to send of[q the things, that you have
a list of, with the addition of 4 or 5 Bullocks and two or three ood
Milch Goats, I will thank you to send them, with the am+of cost, fwill
send ye money if you cannot come of your self, I shall get under way
Early m the mornin , but will stand of[f] & on if you think you can
get them oflfl - A u will please to make my respecta to your Good
ribb, tell her I expect to have the pleasure of seeing her on my return You will please to deliver the Inclosed Letter to Cap$Barron of the
Philadelphia when he arrives. -

P

[NDA photostat, Dale LB, 1801-1802.1
To Lieutenant Colonel Commandant William W. Burrows, U. 8. Marine Corpr,
from First Lientenant Hewton Keene, U. S. Marine Corps

FRIGATE
h?sided
Algiers 9a July 1801
SIR!I beg leave to inform you that we Arrived a t Gibraltar on the
Thirtieth of June last after a Passage of Thirty days from the Capes
of V i a & i t is with regret I now announce to you that Hostilities
has Certainly commenced on the Part of Tripoli a ainst the United
States of America, they have lately Captura five o our Vessels; the
American Consul has left Tripoli & gone to Tunis this information we

!

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

507

received from the Captn of one of their Cruizers a Ship of Twenty two
Guns lying in the Bay of Gibraltar. this Vessel formerly S a i d from
Boston & was captured by those Barbarians the present Captn was
that time Mate, is now Manied to [the Bashaw's] Daughter, is a
Scotchman by Birth, has on the robes of State, Perfectly Naturalized
to their customs & has all the looks of a Savage - We left Gibraltar
on the 4* Ins* & arrived here this Morning. As soon as the Prwidmd
made her appearance off the Town the American Consul M' Obrian
accompanyed by three of their most lea*
men, came on bQ Soon
after, a Salute was fired from the Forts whch was Answerd from the
Frigate President. We shall leave Algiers this Evening, or Tomorrow
for Tunis where I expect we shall meet with the Frigates Philadel hia
& Essez, those Ships having parted with us the day we left Gibr tar,
the Former to Cruize off the Rock, for a few days for the purpose of
intercepting the Tripolian Ship above mentioned, the latter to take
under convoy to Tunis rtn American Ship, the Ifrand Turk-M
Marines look well, I have issued to each man, New Clothing, whic
I do not suffer them to wear, except upon Particular occasions. Commodore Daie t Cap1 James Barron to whom I am much indebted for
their great Attention to me appear much Pleased with the Detachment.
L*Sterit Spmb highly in fwour of Ls Lane, as well as Cap$ Samuel
Barron of Lieutvenwick and Johnson, I am sorry [to] say that the
latter Gents Detachment is not so Brilliant as I could wish, owing to
their want of C l o t h . I have Deliverd to Lt Fenwick, what Coats &
Vests I could S are & had requested of Lt Alexander to inform me what
Quantity of C othing we had on board the &sex for the use of his
Detachment, if more than Necessary, they might be Sent on board the
Philadelphia, this informrttion he has not yet given me. However as
I have a part of the Money which I drew Previous to my leaving the
United States for the purpose of aying my men & as they are not a t
present in want of Money, I sha 1 make use of what I have (Should
you not send Clothes out in time) to Supply the wants of the Marines
on board the PhiladeEphia. A few days before the Arrival of Lt Fenwick, a t Norfolk, I had given
Lt Johnson an Order on L+Baldwin for Clothing for his Detachment,
but the very hasty and unexpected departure of the Squadron from
Hampton Roads prevented his geting i t on bq
I have purchased for my Men Summer Dresses, they all consent to
take - I should have forwarded ou by this conveyance, returns of
my Detachment, but no materia change having taken place, since
my returns from Hampton Roads of the 304 Mi~ylast which ou
received; I have deferd doing of it untiU I go to Tunis when I s all
have a better Opportunity. - L;Osborn for some time after he left
America was much Indisposed, he has now erfectly recovered &
Much Pleased with the Sea. Your son when ruw him n few days
past was very well. With Compts to your family & the Officers at
the Barracks -

E

P

f

r'

i

f

fMCA LR, 1801.1

k,
Captain William Bainbridge, U. 8. Navy.
commanding, Thursday, 9 July 1801

Extrmt from journal of U. S. S.

Commenaee clear & pleamat weather, The Grcrold Tkrk in Tow & the brig
e under convoy
Throughout the night under easy sail for the Brig. At
8
Cape Tenes bore 9 b E 3 E & Ce Albetel SE b E % E. Cape Tenmakes t~ rugged, m a m y body of Lnd, the %t point of ths Crp b.a the appear-

Ho

XM

-

508

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 17'86 TO 1801

anee of being shaken by some convulsion of nature, no small rock or islsnde (aa are
laid down in charte) to be seen, when abreast of Cape Tenes within about 4 leagues
you discover Cape Albatel bearing about E M S., in this direction makea very like
an island, the lowland by which it is joined to the main cannot be seen at thia
distance
Cape Albatel E b S 7 leagues - Latitude observed 36' 45' North.
[NA. N D original.]
To the Dey of Algiers and the Bey of Tunis,from Captain Richard Dale, U. S. Navy

On Board the UNITEDSTATESSHIPPresided
At Anchor I n the Bay of Algiers - July 1@'' 1801 MAYIT PLEASE YOUR EXCELLENCY,
Haveing the Honor to Command
a Squadron of observation dispatched by the President of the United
States into the Mediterranean Sea to superintend the safety of their
Commerce, threatened with attack by the Bashaw of Tripoli, and to
exercise our seamen in nautical duties; the Instructions which I have
received from the President require that on the A p p r o a c h your
harbours, I should Tender the Profound respect which is due to your
Excellency's dignity and character, and should recommend the
ron under my command to your hospitality and good Offices, I eave
to the Consul of the United States the task of explaining more particularly the friendly dispositions of the United States towards Your
Excellency the proofs with which he is charged of their desire to maintain the treaty between the two Powers, and of the reliance of the
President, on similar dispositions on your part - for myself, I only
make use of the Occasion to assure your Excellency of the sensibility
with which I shall experience your friendly countenance, and accommodations and of the reverence and exalted esteem with which I
have the Honor to be
Your Excellencys, Most Obdt and Devoted servi
RICHQ
DALE

yBd-

[NDA, photostat, Dale LB, 1801-1802.1
To Secretary of State, from James Simpson, U. 8. Consul, Tangier, Morocco

TANGIER
1P July 1801.SIR At the moment of receiving the honour of your Dispatch of
21* May, transmitted me by Mr Gavino, an opportunity offers for
Algiers [?] which I lay hold of to advise Commodore Dales arrival in
Gibraltar Bay the first of thii month, with the three Frigates under
his orders: - the Enterprise Schooner reached same anchorage on
the 26'? June, and Mr Gavino advises me the whole Squadron proceeded up the Mediteranean on the 4'p Ins; - I beg leave to say,
that this measure of Government, appears to me extremely likely to
be productive of the best consequences in your negotiations with the
Barbary Powers, and I sincerely hope i t wdl prove to be the case. As Commodore Dale met a French Squadron in the Straits, soon
after he passed this Bay, I had an opportunity of seeing his colours,
when reflecting that for some time back the Bntish Ships have chiefly
watered in Tetwn Bay, because of the scarcity at Gibraltar, I thought
it was probable, the Americans might have occasion to do the same;
in consequence of which I wrote the Governour of Tetuan, to say !t
was possible they might touch there, in answer he assured me,. If
they did they would not only be supplied with Water, but also with
every other refreshment they might ask for, and I am persuaded they

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

509

would meet a similar Friendly reception a t every other Port of this
Empire. - Mr Gavino in his Letter of the 4''' Inst advises a Tripoline
Frigate of 26 Guns 246 Men, and a Brig of 16 Gum 146 Men then
lay in Gibrdtsr Bay, that the Commanders denied having any
authority to capture American Vessels; but I am sorry to say, I do
not believe it. - I understand the King of Sweden has not ratified
the Treaty made in January last with the Tripolines - The Consul
here has been advised so, but not O£Eicidy. The British Consul returned from Court 22 last Month, it appears
he has not been able to obtain a reduction of the Duty on Cattle
exported from this Country for Gibraltar in general, only a special
permission to ship two thousand Head for the use of the Fleet &
Garrieon a t the former rate of five dollars, all others to pay fifteen.
Bulkely has not been able to execute Maley Soliman's Commission for Gun Carriages, which I am very sorry for; His Majesty was
extremoly pleased with my readyness in endeavouring a t obtaining

them. Thank God we continue to enjoy good health thro'out this Empire,
and having now passed the season of usud chief danger, it is to be

hoped we shall not be again visited by that terrible scourge the
Plague, this year. [SDA. CL, Tangier, Vol. 1, 1797-1803.1

Extracts from journal of U. 8. S. Bsu, Captain William Bainbridge, U. S. Navy,
commanding
Friday, 10 July 1801
Commences pleasent weather & light breezes from the Westward. The Grand
Turk in tow & the Brig Hope under convoy. At 4 P M exercised the Midship
men with small arms - At sun set observed the Magnetic Amplitude, found
the Variation 1% points Westerly
At 7 P M cape Albatel bore S 3 E 4 or 5 lesguea At 8 fell calm, cast loose
the Grand Turk from UR for fear of getting foul of her - At 6 AM made Cape
Caasine bearing S S E 5 E. pr Compass, distant 6 or 7 leagues, in making Cape
Cessine with this bearing, you will discover the entrance of the river, about half
way between Albatel & Cassine, the 1md between those two capes level, u3th a
sandy shore, different from all the other coast of Barbary - Cape Caseine is
easily known b the numerous white h o ~ ~ a on
c s the Cape & after you have opened
the bay to the &stward you diaeover the Town of Algiers, forming the appearance
of an Amphitheatre, to the S W of the City ie the large Castle of Ernpredore,
wated on a hiU & can be distinguished a long distance a t sea, At the bottom
of the city is a Mole over which you can see the shipping lie in the Bason, on the
end of the Mole is a fortification & light house, U hen abreast of Cape Cassine
you see t o the Eastward Cape MJison ior Matifoul which makes a low level
lump, with very high land a t the back of it.
Saw a ship lying in the bay, su pose her to be the President, Commodore Dale,
also several Vewls within the dole, two appeared large, I take them to be the
two Algerine Frigates - Algiers South 5 leagues Saturday, I I July 1801
Commences pleasant weather & very light airs, The ship Grand Turk in tow,
The tam of Algiers in sight a t 2 P M, wind hauled to the Eastward, in steerin
mils L braced up, At 4 P M the city of Algiers W S 71'. & Ca Matiaon, 8
W, same time tacked ship t o the Northwd At 6 P hPebloniog frpsh
W
breezea, single reefed the topsails, At 10 parted the hawsers in towing the Grand
- at
Turk At 4 AM sent the hawser on board her, At 8 AM ~ a r t e di t twain
9 Bent him s new 9 inch hawser,
Ends a firey Levant breeze, I find the Essez much tenderer with the starboard, than with the Larboard tacks aboard, suppose some change in the hold
Latitude obeerved 37' 49' N. Loneitude
in 2 O 66' E.
Sunday, 1% July 1801
Commerices strong breezes from the EastwZ - At 1 P M wore ship to the
Northward & Eastward, At 4 P M discovered a ship & echooaef in the S
stsnding on the same tack that we were suppose i t to be the Restdent & Enter-

8

-

w.

510

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1786 TO 1801

prize. Throughout the night more moderate. At
past 4 AM discovered a
polacre ship ahead, cast loose the hawser on board the Grand Turk & made all
sail - At 5 the Island Cabrira off Majorca bore pr compass N N W 112 W.
dist. 10 leagues - At 3 past 6 spoke the chace, sent the boat for the captain,
examined his papers & let him proceed, bore down for the Grand Turk
At
past 7 took her in tow. At 11 AM mustered all hands
[NA. ND original.]

-

-

To Secretary of the Reasnry, from Tench Coxe, Lancaster, Pa.

LANCASTER
P+July 13'? 1801
SIR Samuel Hughes, Esquire, of Harford County, Masgland bas
made an application to me, on the Subject of a contract for Cannon
with the United States. I t took place in June 1794. As I acted in
relation with the department a t the head of which you are, I con-

sider i t rts most proper & regular to address you, knowing that my
letter can be used, as occasion may require, by the heads of the two
other departments, which were then contained in the Department of

War.

I am not satisfied that I ought to trouble you with any thing upon
this subject without your request, nor without a revision of the
papers or a statement of the matter on the part of the U. S. Mr
Hughes however was so desirous of a line from me, that I promised
to write to you by the mail of this Evening.
The offers for Cannon, which were made in my time, were produced, I think, by circular letters to the principal Iron Masters, and
applications thro the Revenue officers in all the States, where the
Furnaces and iron Masters promised a safe and good contract. I
think that of M' Hughes was the only one, which appeared, for some
time, to be worthy of acceptance. Another with Brown & Francis
followed. Gen! &ox appeared to consider the casting solidly, indispensible. M' Hughes feared the risk & cost. Gen! Knox would not
relax from that part of the obligation. Mr Hughes wished a positive
stipulation to be allowed for it. As the cannon, in either way, must
be bored, and as i t appeared possible, and even probable that the
iron bored out would do to fuse again, I wished the allowance to be
hypothetically stipulated. The discussions between Mr Hughes &
myself were transferd to the war Office, where Gen! &ox concurd
with me in the form of that article of the Contract. Mr Hamilton
happend to come in, & from my recollection, and one of the du licate
contracts shewn me on Saturday, I am of opinion that the fo o w e
words were introduced in conse uence of an appeal by Mr Hq [Hu hes]
to him. "It is further agree%, that if, on experiment, i t sha& be
"found impracticable to make Cannon u on the plan of cast'
them
"solidly they shall be cast in the usua Manner, but with pruce
"head as before specified." The execution of the plan of casting
solidly seems however to put this provision out of question.
Mr Hughes mentions to me a M: Foxall, whom I do not remember
ever to have offered. The idea of casting solidly came, I think, from
the Sec? a t War, & I believe his Notes or letters to me will shew it.
I think Mr Foxall was unlrnown to the Treasum in December 1794
when I declined the Service of procuring supplies for the army &
navy, or rather, I believe, for the navy from its interference with my
revenue duties and from a conviction that it was so contrould and
influenced by two heads of departments, ~ n by
d the Captains, Navy
Agents, &c"hat i t was extremely W c u l t to procure the adoption of

IP

P

9

511

WARS WITH BARBABY POWERS

economical & promising measures, and impossible to have them adhered to. A roper head of the naval department appeared to be
the only reme y, but at that time there was no disposition to separate
it from the general business of War affairs, nor did I venture to
suggest it. As my mllicitude about the military and naval supplies was very
great, I think it probable that much d be found on paper to explain
the rise, m d completion of the Contract with Mr Hughes. I, of
course, yield all that I remember, to be explained & controuled by
what is found in writing. I presume that httle of it remains in the
Rerenue Office: Some of the papers may be in your office, and some
in the late MF Francis's office IGAO. KO.12.531.)

d'

Extract from journal of U, S. S. Euex, Captain William Bainbridge,
commanding, Monday, 19 July 1801

IT. 6. Ravy,

Commences clear Weather with a Levant wind ?4past 1 P M, made the signal
&tacked shi to the NorthwQ& Eastw4 At 3 past 7 P M The Island of Majorca
and Minorca N N E, bearings pr compve Thew It3landa at a
bore N W
distance make in hills & valley, like numerous islands - At Midnight tacked to
the South4 No particular occurrences, aU hands busily employed in
boata, cleaning ship, b fitting preventer brfore & aft for the lower
yarde - I lead them forward considering it the best plan.
Ends pleasant Weather, head winds, the two vessels under charge.
Latitude observed 38' 31' N. -Longitude in. 4' 4' E.
[NA. ND original.]

ZW,

rkzz

To Daniel LndIow, Navy Agent, Bew York, H.Y.,from Acting Secretary of the Navy

[WAS~NGTON,
D. C.]
DAN!LUDLOW
Navy Dept
Jvly 1801
I have to request that you will be pleased to Charter a Ship equal to

the transportation with convenience of Two thousand & fifty or 2 100 Barrels, to be ready to sail in all the first Week of August with rovisions for our squadron in the Mediterranem - The C o to onsist
of 250 Barrels of Pork, 300 D? Beef, 1250 Dq Bread 3%9
Flour, 30
Tierces Rice 8 100 Barrels Beans or Pease - It is presumed you
have on hand the Beef & Pork from that which was to be sent you by
Messr!John Caldwell& CQof Hartford Connecticut - If not, write to
those Gentlemen to forward i t a t once they have been directed so to do
since the 3fl of June you have also on hand part of the Bread MI
Pennock of Norfolk will be directed to forward immediately to you 6
to 800 Barrels, i t may be well for you to be prepared to meke up the
deficiency in the event of his sendmg only the smaller number - Mr
Pennock will also send you the Flour Rice & Pease or Beans m e n ou have engaged the Vessel be pleased to inform this Department of [or name [American Packet] by whom Commanded $ 9 that
her orders may be forwarded in due t . h e - You will fill up the bills of
lading specifying that the articles are to be delivered to John Gavinu
American Consul a t Giberaltar or to such other persons as Comodore
Dale may have appointed to receive them a t that place or elsewhare
as it may happen that the Comodore may have left orders for the provision Vessel to make her Deposit at some other p l m or to follow the
squadron into the Mediterranean a- provision to this eflct, will of
course be necessary in your Charter arty - I s u b m t to .your
judgment whether freight should be
by the B-I
or the dup by

2

512

NAVAL QPERATIQNS FROM I786 TO 1801

the run; and whether payment should be made in advanca or after the
business is performed assuring myself that your decision will be that
which you conceive to be most for the interest of the public [NDA. GLB, Vol. 4, 1800-1801.1

To William Pennock,Navy Agent, rJorfo&, Va., from Aoting Secretary of the Navy
[WASHINGTON,
D. C.]
Navy Dept 14" July 1801
Be pleased to ship inlmediatcly to New York to be delivered to Dan1
Ludlotv N a ~ yAgent, six to eight hundred Barrels Navy Bread 80
Barrels Flour, 30 Tierces of Rice, & one hundred Barrels, sa 300
Bushels, Pease or Beans, freight to be paid by Mr Ludlow on de ivery
of the articles - It is determined to make the shipment of provision
for our squadron in the Mediterranean from New york, and to sell all
that may be on hand a t Norfolk after sending off the above articles
to hfr Ludlow except what may be necessary for the supply of bhhs
Chesapeak & the Schooner Ezyerimenf in the event of their being
ordered out before a supply of new provisions could be procured in the
fall, & for the occasional supplies m Port say 200 Barrels of Beef, &
200 Barrels of Pork all to be retained - You will therefore take order
for selling the residue on similar terms as to Credit $F as you have
heretofore sold provisions & other stores by order of this Depart~nent,
the money to be collected & placed to the credit of this Department in
the same manner Be pleased to put the repairs of the Chesapeake immediately in
hand -

!i

-

[NDA. GLB, Vol. 4, 1800-1801.1

To Lieutenant John Shaw, U. S. Navy, from Secretary of State

Instructions to Captain John Shaw, Commander of the United States
Frigate George Wushinglon
(COPY)
[WABRINGTON,
D. C . ]
DEPARTMENT
OF STATE16* J d y 1801
SIR,Your ship being loaded with a cargo the property of the United
States and intended for Algiers, you are to proceed to Sandy Hook,
and take under your convoy the Ship Peace and Plenty, bound to
Tunis, with a cargo of Milita and Maritime Stores also the propert
of the United States; You wi then make the bost of your way wit
the Convoy and such merchant vessels as may be ready to join you to
Gibraltar, where you will touch for advice whether our peace with
Barbary remains unbroken, and for thia purpose you will address yourself to John Gavino Esqr our Consul there. If you find we are st
peace with the Barbary powers, you will proceed in company with the
Peace & Plenty towards Algiers, and leave her off that Port to wntinue
her voyage to Tunis. If we shall be a t war with Tunis both vessels are
to deliver their cargoes a t Algiers. If we are a t war with Algiers and
a t peace with T-, you are to convoy the-Peaceand Pleniy to that
port, and then proceed to the most convement Neapolitsn, Tuscan,
Austrian or other neutral port and sell your cargo to the b e t advanta e, on account of the Umted States. As most of i t is by some of the
be 'gerent powers considered wntraband, you are strictly
not to sell i t in any other than a neutral port, and if you
Tuscany or Austria in a state of war; you witl avoid the

'f

51

g

513

WARS WITH BARBARY POWEBS

any of them who may be engaged in it. If Tunis ss well as Algiers shall
have broken their peace with us, you are to take the Peace & Plentg
with ou and sell her cargo in a neutral port in like manner. If
~ r j ~ should
o g
alone be hostile to us, the Porno b Plenty must be
escorted to the Port of her destination either by your own ship, or
some other adequate convoy.
I t is known to you that Commodore Dale is cruising in the Mediterranean with three frigates and a sloop of war: From him, should
you fall in with him, you may obtain the necessary advice as to the
state of our affairs and convoy in case of need.
I n case you go to Algiers your cargo is to be delivered to Richard
OBrien Esqr our Consul General, or in his absence the person who
ma be charged with the affairs of the United States. John Mathieu
{ J o L 53. hl. Metthiew] is our Consul a t Kaples, Thomas Appleton at
Leghorn and John Lamson a t Trieste.
Wishing you a safe and fortunate voyage,
[Schu ylkill Arsenal.]
Instructions to Captain Richard Wood, Master of the ship P e a r
Secretary of State

and

Pfucrv, from

[WASHINGTON,
D. C.]

DEPARTMENT
OF STATE
15&Jdy

1801.

SIR,Your ship being loaded with a Cargo the property of the
United States and intended for Tunis. You are to proceed to Sandy
Hook and there put yourself under the Convoy of the United States
Frigate Gorge Washington Cap! John Shaw bound to Algiers with a
cargo of Military & Maritime Stores also the propetty of the Unitad
States. You will then make the best of your way under the orders of
Captab Shaw to Gibralter where you will touch for advice whether
our peace with Barbary remains unbroken; and for this purpose Capt
Shaw will address himself to John Gavbo Esqr our Consul there.
If he finds we are at Peace with the Barbary Powers you will proceed
in company with him towards Algiers, off which Port he will leave you
to continue your voya e to Tunis. If we are at war with Tunis and
a t peace with Algiers 0th vessels are to deliver their cargoes at Algiem ; If we are at War with -em
and a t Peace witb Tunis your
Vessel is to be con~oyedto that Port, and then Capt Shaw d proceed
to the most eanvenient Neapolitan, Tuscan, Austrian or other neutraI
Port and Sell his
to the best adrantage on account of the United
States. As most of i t is by some of the belti erent powers considered
c o l r m a n r m he is strictly enjoined not to set it in any other than a
neutral port and if you find Naples, Tuscan or Austna in a state of
War he is to avoid the Ports of d or a q g of em wbo may be engaged
in it, If Tunis as well as Algiers &all have broken their peace with
us ou are to proceed with the Peace and PZenty under Cept Shaw's
O J e r l s and he ia to sell your Cargo in a neutral port in like manner
as is directed for bis own. If Tripoli should alone be hostile to us the
Peace & Plenty must be escorted to the Port of her destination either
by the George Wmhington or some .other adequate convoy. It is
known to you that Commodore Dale ~scrulxing in the Meditteranean
with three frigates and a sloop of War. From him should you fall in
advice as to tbe state of our
with him ou may obtain the necess
affaim an convoy in case of need. y n case you go to Tunis your
Cargo is to be dehvered to W4L Eaton Esqr OW Consul there, or in his

i

tg

J

514

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 17'85 TO 1801

absence to the person who may be charged with the affairs of the
United States.
John Matthieu is our Consul a t Naples, Thomas Appleton a t Leghorn, and John Lamson a t Trieste. In every thing you will consider
yourself whilst you are together under the direction of Ca tain Shaw
to whom you will also communicate these Orders. wis!kg you a
safe & fortunate voyage.
(COPY)
[Schuylkill Arsenal.]
Extract from journal of U. S. S. Euu, Captain William Bainbridge, U. 8. Navy,
commanding, Wedneday, 15 July 1801

Commences clear weather & very light Aim,
At 5 P M tacked ship to the Southwd & Eaatwd At 54 past 5 P M came on
squally Throughout the night pleasant breezes, the Grand Turk in tow, the Brig Hope
under convoy, At 8 AM made a signal for the fleet to make sail the Brig paid no
attention to it. No particular Occurrences. Swell from N. from which point
we may expect the Wind.
Ends clear weather inclinable to calm.
Latitude observed 3S0 51' N.-Longitude observed 7' 00' E.
[NA. N D original.]
To Lieutenant John Shaw, U. S. Bevy, from Acting Secretary of the Navy

[WASHINGTON,
D. C.]
Nawy Dept 1 P July 1801
Lt JOHN
SHAW
of the George Ubhington Phila"
The Instructions you will receive from the Department of State
are so particular on the subject of the voyage you are about making,
as to render it unnecessary for me to say any thing further than that
you must proceed, with all the dispatch in your power, to carry those
gnstructions into effect: that after accomplishing them, you will make
the best of your way to Philadelphia, or in case the Delaware should
be frozen, to New York, giving me-immediate information on your
arrival: & that the shorter you stay in any of the Barbary Ports, the
less liable your crew will be to receive those infectious disorders which
usually prevail there, a t the soason when you will probably arrive You will receive by this days mail Fifteen hundred dollars: for the
purpose of procuring Fresh Provisions for your crew at any of the
Ports where you may touch, & of making advances to the officers
occasionally, during the voyage. This sum you can either pay over
to your Purser, & let him distribute i t and procure the necessary
supplies of Provipions under your orders, or otherwise, as you may
t h n k beat you wrli be held accountable for it I enclose instructions for the General Government of your conduct
on a cruise, & a copy of the Law, providing for a Naval Peace Establishment Wishing you a pleaaant Voyage & a speedy return to the United
States On our way out, you are to call at Giberatar & take from thence
an d r c h a n t Vessels wishing to avail themselves of convoy - L you
w& give them Convoy as far as they may be bound the same course
with youwelf [NDA. OSW, Vol. 5, 1801-1802.1

515

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS
Extract from journal of U. 8. S.

&a, Captain William Bainbridge, U. 8. Bar).,
commanding, Thnraday, 16 July 1801
Commences clear Westher & calm. At 5 P M exercised Musquetesrs. A t
7 P M the brig Hope 6 or 7 Miles astern W i n g N N W. hir, neglect in not making
sail has bror him that distance sstern.
Throughout the night very light Birs inclinable to calm, laid with the Main
top ail aback. At 6 A M coud just diecover the Brig from aloft
At 8 AM
cast 100% the Grand Turk k made sail for the Brig bearing N E b N, very light

-

ah.

At 4 P M took a lunar observation Long 7' k t
Latitude Obeerved 38" 35' N.
[NA. ND original.]

To Captain William Bainbridge, U. 8. Bnvy, commanding U. 8. 8. Euc*, from
Captain Richard Dale, 0 . 8. l n v y

On board the UNITED
STATESSHIPPresident

At Anchor I n the Bay of Port Farim
17" Jdy 1801 -

SIRYour will please to proceed with the Unibd States Ship &ex
under your Command to Barcelona in Spain In going there you will
keep a good lookout, and speak every Vessel you see, ~f you can without looslng too much time to know that they are not American Vewls
captur'd by Tripolian Corsairs or the Said Corsairs - I understand
there is from 25 to thirty sail of American Vessels laying a[t] B&rcelona,
and many more in the other Ports, along the Coast of Spain, in !he
Medeterranean waiting for convoy to see them safe out of the Struts,
on our arrival a t Barcelona, ou will make i t known to William
w&ijs E S ~the
! American consui?there, and the American Commanders,
that you have come to give them Convoy out of the Straits, you will
impress on the minds of the American Commanders, that they must
not loose time in giting thew Vessels ready for sea, I suppose it will
take them 4 or 5 da s to get ready, and you to water your ship &c You will write to t e American Commanders or the Consuls in the
different ports along the Coast, that may have any American Vessels
in them, to hold themselves in readyness to join ou as you goe down
the Coast I suppose Mc W2![i]s will be able, near y, to inform you, the
number of Vessels that is, m the diierent rts waiting for convoy
at any rate you will make your self as wePoacquainted as possible,
the number of American,Vessels that wants convoy, and give them
every protection that is-m your Power, as it is out of my power to
say or know what situation the Vessels may be in, or how many that
may be ready for sea, on your arrival a t Barcelona therefore I leave
you to act, agreable to circumstances and as you find t h g s situated
on your arrival there knowing that you will act for the best for the
Interest of your Country and to the best of your Judgement - You
are to take no Vessels under your convoy but Amencans and should
you be met a t sea by a Pubhck a m $ ship of any of the European
Nations, that may wish to search any shxp, or ships, under your Convoy,
you will then act agreable to the Copy of my Instructions from the
Secretary of the Navy that X ave y ~ uon
, such Occasion.
When you anive off Gibra tar with the Convoy you will send in
your boat to know from Mr Gavino if he knows what is become of
the Tripolian Admiral if he has reason to think that he has got past
Cap1 Barrwn and gone in the Western Ocean - you will then see the
Vesaels under your protection, as far to the W e s t d ss the Longitude
of 10 or 11
Should you go that far with the convoy you may take

i;

I

f

-

516

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1786 TO 1801

a look into Lisbon to know the New's Should the Admiral have been
on that Coast it is very likely that you may hear of him there should
that be the case,. you may spend some time in looking after him, if
you think there 1s any prospects of falling in with hinl, should you
hear nothing of him a t Lisbon you will loose no time in ret
""g
Gibraltar, send your Boat on shore, to know the News should
t ere
be no American Vessels there that wants your Protection up the
Mediterranean gou will proceed to algiers from there to Tunis from
Tunis to Tripoli; or rather off Tripoli; it is to let those powers know
that we have a force in those seas - There is no necessity of anchoring at any of those places i t is much better to stand of[f] and on, if
you want to have any Communication with the shore, should there
be American Vessels laying at Gibraltar wanting your protection you
will give it as far as you think i t necessary, but in no case higher up
than Leghorn you are not to understand, that you are to go about
convoying one two or three Vessels the Merchants cannot expect any
thing of the kind when we have objects of more consequence in View,
for the general good of our Country but at the same time it is my
intention, as I well know i t is the intention of the Government of the
United States, that every protection (that is consi[s]tent) by this
Squadron, s h o d be given to the commerce of the United States in
thoes seas - On your arrival off Gibraltar as at first directed should
M' Gavino not be able to give you any infermation respecting the
Admiral you will see the Convoy clear of tbe Straits and act as if you
had returned from Lisbon My Cruising ground will be between Tunis and Tripoli and off
Tripoli, when I want water I shall go to Maltar for it, I t being the
most handy place for that purpose I expect I shall be in Gibraltar
about the middel of October by that time or before the provisions for
the men will be expended - I shall be guided by that altogeather,
when your convo-yng business is over you will be able to form some
Idea where to find me - You may inform Mr Will[i]s that I shall take
Barcelona in my way to Gibraltar As it is Impossible for me to tell how long you -41 be on this Convoy, business nor is it possible for me to foresee what situation you
may be placed in Likewise the Infermation that you may receive
whde you are absent from me, which makes it necessary for you to
deviate from the above order therefore, Sir notwithstanding what I
have said should you find i t necessary to deviate from the above
orders you have my concent so to do alway's keeping in view the
honor and Interest of your Country, and the good of the Service You have nine hundred Dollars on Board your shi , put on board by
the Goverment of the United States for the use o the said ship, but
should you meet with any accident or from any other cause, yo?
should want more money before we meet again - I have a credlt
for the use of the Squadron under my Command, on J Mackenzie &
A. Glennie of London and Messn De Butts & Purviance in Leghorn,
vou have my liberty to draw on them for what money you may want,
lor the use of the United States Ship Essez under your command,
always paying strict attention to frugallity, and taking the necessary
Vouchers for the money that you expend for the use of said ship

!

[NDA photostat, Dale I'B, 1801-1802.1

lXA.RS WITH BARBARY POWERS

617

To William Eaton, 0.6. Consul, Tunis, from Secretary of State

DEPARTMENT
OF STATE
WASHINGTON
July 17th 1801.
SIR, Enclosed is the Invoice of the ship Peace & Plenty which
carries out the last Cargo of the Stores, stipulated to be delivered to
the Bey of Tunis. We hope they will be favorably received & that
the business of the present of Jewels has been arranged at as small a
sacrifice as possible - By the last advices from Mr King it is probable that they have before now arrived a t Tunis. If you have saved
the whole or any part of them it may answer a good purpose to let
Mr OBrien & Mr Cathcart know confidentially and in cypher what
the reserved portion consists of, in order that they may now or on a
future occasion apply them to some demand which necessity may
compel an acquescence in. You will inform Mr Cathcart by letter
that we have rec* very ample details from him of his proceedings
with the Bashaw of Tripoli up to the 13" of March, and that we are
well satisfied with the prudent alarm he gave to the American Trade
on the appearance of danger from Tripoli - We hope that the timely
arrival of Commodore Dale, witlt his Squadron, and the continued
refusal of the Bashaw to receive the douceur offered by Mr Cathcart
w i l l have saved it to the public [Schuylkill Arsenal.]

To Richard O'Brien, U. S. Consul General, Algiers, from Secretary of State

DEPARTMENT
OF STATE
I4'ashington 1 7.July 1801.
SIR, YOUwill receive this from Capt John Shaw commander of
the frigate Geo: HTmhingtonwhich carries a Cargo, as pr the three
enclosed Invoices, viz N Q l .of ship Timber, Naval & Military Stores
in pursuance of the order transmitted by last year, & some Cables &
Gun Carriages, you had borrowd of the Regency for the use of the
Polacre Dey. It also includes some Masts not ordered but which
were put on board to fiU up the Vessel, under the opinion, that they
would bt! acceptable to the Regency & at the same tlme turn out as a
favorable article of Remittance - IT9 2 contains a portion of the
Articles you designed for distribution on the arrival of the Timber,
and No 3 some articles procured for the Bacre's and not sent last year.
These last kticles they rcre to pay for - If on the arrival of the
George U'ashington s t Gibralter it shall be found, that we are at War
with Tunis & at peace with Algiers, the Ship Peace & Plenty which
sails under her Convoy with the last Cargo of the Regalia for Tunis,
is to proceed to Algiers & deliver the Cargo to you. It 1s expected that
the Dey will in that Case be willing to take it a t a favorable Valuation - should he refuse it the Peace & Plenty must proceed to the
nearest & most suitable Neutral Port & gel1 it on Acct of the U States,
but as it consists of articles which are considered by some of the
Beligerent powers as contraband, i t is in no event to be sold in the
port of a power a t War. Tbe President has not yet fixed upon a
suitable character to succeed ou in the office of Consul General;
but his decision will not be de ayed longer than the tune when the
next Vessels shall be ready to sad for the Meditarranean & he may
probably releive you sooner It is desirable to hsve in this Department (and you will transmit it as soon as Convenient) a drawing of

9

$18

NAtTAL OPERA TfONS FROM 1786 TO 1801

the Kind of Galley used by the Algerines exibiting their construction,
w-ith a description of the mode of manning, equipping & navigating
them, & also the peculiar mode of mTarfarefor which they are adapted
&usedI have only to add that no delay will be made in collecting & forwarding the ballance of the Order of which the George Washington's
Cargo is the first remittance
P. S. You m i l l in no event allow the Dey to make use of the
Gear e W.t'ashingtonfor any purpose similar to that for which she was
emp oyed when last at Algiers: but if Commodore Dale should not be
a t hand you will endeavor to procrastinate the Dey's Designs upon
her until you can aquant him with them, which you will accordingly
do with the utmost dispatch after you shall have discovered that the
Dey seriously meditates such an hostile Act -

9

[SchuyIkill Arsenal.]

Extract from journal of U. S. 6. h t x , Captain William Bainbridge, U. S, Navy,
commanding, Friday, 17 July 1801
Commences pleasant Weather, inclinable to calm
At 3 P M sprung up a breeze from the N E - At 4 P M took the Grand Turk
in tow same time fired a t the Brig Hope to make him bear down, at 5 past 4 sent
the Jolly boat on board him with a letter requesting that he woud pay greater
attention to the signals made from the Es8ez. Throughout the night light winds At 9 AM cleared ship for action, slung all yards, stoppered sheets & rove preventer
braces, Musquets in the Tops,small arms on deck & every preparation as in battle,
came to quarters, exercised great guns, made a sham fight, repelled boarders and
boarded - Ends light breezes from South Latitude Observed 37' 57' N. - Longitude in 8' 12' E.
INA. ND original.]
To Daniel Lndlow, Havy Agent, Bela York, N. Y., from Abishrri Thomas for
Acting Secretary of the Havy

[WABHINGTON,
D. C.j
Navy Dept 1P July 1801
Besides the Provisions mentioned in a Letter from this department
to you on the 14'h instant, which are to be forwarded to New York
by Mr Pennock of Korfolk, He is this day directed to forward a
uantity of Slop clothing which had been proved for the Frigat,e
$ r e d e n t , and which on receiving you ail1 be pleeaed to Ship with the
other stores directed for the use of the Squadron in the Meditermoan
under Comodore Dale [NDA.

GLB, Vol. 4, 1800-1801.J

To Secretary of State from John Qavino, U. 6. Conaul, Qibrdt~z

GIBRALTAR July 1801
SIR Deprived of a? of your honord favours since my last Dispatch NP 66 which is st~lldetaind want of Conveyance, and goes with
this I have not heard from Commodor Dale since his departure, on the
13'0 Inst I received a few lines from Consul Eaton of Tunis in ans. to
mine of 17'h May last
67

CapP Baron that the

WRRS WITH BARBARY POWERS

519

Tripoly cruisers were still here, and seems afraid of going out, Cap!
Baron had been the day before a t Tangier for Refreshments I made application to Rear Ad1 Sir Ja-aumerez
regarding the
sailing of our Merchant Vessels, & the Tripoly Cruisers in Port, who
has promised on being appraised of the time of sailing of the former
will detain the latter 24 hours On the 12t@Ins! saild from Atguesiras Bay the 3 french ships of the
Line under Jury Masts with the frigate, Escorted by five Sph & one
french Line of Battle Ship also 3 frigates (two of the Spaniards of
112 Guns,) that came round from Cadiz to take them to said Port,
five sail of the Brithships of the Line of 74 Guns 4 of wC@that had been
in the late action with a frigate & a Portuguese of 44 Guns went into
the Gutt & has soon the Combind fleet got round Cabrito Point the
Engb bore down upon them, about 11 oClock a t Night a very warm
action Commenced which lasted till about one, when the two Sph ships
of 112 Guns & 2400 in all blew up, & only about 40 Men were saved;
the Ex Spanish ship St Antonio of 74 Guns now officerd & M a m d
mostly wh french useing said flag was take[n] & brought in. All the
Engh ships could not come to action as had but littie Wind, two of
them went on & are Cruising off Cadiz where the others will also go
first Wind as have very little damage
The Gazet of the action not pubbshd yet
[SDA. CL, Gibraltar, Vol. 11, April 1796-Nov. 1804.1
To Lientenant Colonel Commandant William W. Burrows, U. S. Marine Corpa,
from Second Lieutenant John Johnson, U. 6. Marme Corpa

GUT OF GIBRALTAR
18th of July 1801
DEARSIR I can inform you the Tripolitans declared war against
the U S -on the 2d day of April last. Our Consull Mr. Cithart is

left Tripoly for America. They have 30 cruisers now in the Mediterenean their 2 strongest vessels are now laying a t the Rock Commanded by their Lord High Admiral the one is a ship the other a brig.
The ship carries 26 uns & the Brig 16 - they have about 500 men
on board. The ~ h & i a is cruising oB the Rock waighting for their
comeing out, we will of Course have them in our Cole hole in a few
days, the President & Essez is gone up the Mediterenian.
A severe action took place on the 6th instant between the British
and French fleets whitch we were spectators to in sight of the Rock a t
9 Oclock in the Morning the Engagement Commenced between 4
Line of English battleships 8: 3 French ships of the same force. The
Engagement lasted 4% hours under the Guns of the Spanish fort
Algeslras. The French took one 74 and crippled the other very
mutch - the Hannibal was taken after the loss of 27 officers, 250
killed & wounded: and on the 12th the action was Renewed between
6 English 74" and the French & Spanish Fleet Combined, the Spanish
had 2. 120 Gun Shi s Blown u and the En lish took one 74 - and
afterwards chased tYIem into adiz - the ast action took place in
the night the 2 Ships t b t was blown up was in Action with Each
Other not bowing each others signals 300 men was Lost in the
Action - we fortunately seen a part of i t & Time will not Admit me
to sa any more.
p:8 Mr. Fenwick and Williams is well do Present my Best wishes
to Mrs: B m w s & Family and the officers a t Camp.
{USMC. Recruitem' Bulletin, March, 1916, p. 8.1

8

P

520

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1786 TO 1801

Extract from journal of U. S. S. Eua, Captain William Bainbridge, U. S. Ravy,
commanding, Saturday, 18 July 1801
All these 24 hours clear Weather & pleasant breezes from the Westward, carrying
steering esils, the Grand Turk in tow At 2 P M observed the 8itance of the Sun
& Moon & their respective altitudw found the Long. 8' 13' East - At 2 AM
made the idand of Galatea, bearing South dietant 3 leagues. the lunar obgervation
very correct. the Island of Galitta makes in a high rugged lump, with several
Islets around it At 9 AM cast loose the Grand Turk & gsve chaw to an armed
Brig. At I1 gsve the chace over, A t # psst 11 took the Grand Turk in Tow
sgsln - Town of Bizereta S. 7 Miles.
[NA. ND original.]

To Acting Secretary of the Bavy from Captain Bichard Dale,U. 6. Navy

On Board the UNITEDSTATESSHIPPresidenl
At Anchor in Tunis Bay 19'' Jdy 1801
SIR,My Letter to you of the 3r.dInst from Gibraltar Informs you
the Desternation of the Squadron under my Command from this
place, I had a Tedious passTe of six days to Algiers Owing to head
winds and Calms, on my arnval a t Algiers on the 9* Ins! Mr OBrian
came on Board, before we came to Anchor, the Cap! of the Port came
with him they Prointed out the proper place to anchor the ship Mr
OBrian Informed me that the Dey of Algiers had be[en] complaining
very much of the United States in not making their anual payments
good, and had gone so far, as to say that he would not put up with it
much longer, he was now confident he said, that the Dey would not
speak so big and would pay more attention to what he said, - he
was confident he said, that the arrival of the Presided a t Algiers had
much more weight with the Dey than if the [George] R7ashing60n had
arrived with stores; I think they must be a dam$ sett the whole tribe,
Algereans Tunisians and Tripolians there is nothing that will keep
there avericious minds in any degree of order, and prevent, them from
cornmiting depredations on our commerce whenever thay May think
Proper, but for the United States to keep constantly four or six
Frigates in the Mideterranean, without that, there is never any
security for our commerce Mr OBrian told me he did not think it was
a proper time to mention to the Dey -about receiving thirty Thousand
Dollm in Lieu of stores; he said if it was mentioned at the present the
De would conceive that the [George] Washington was not a Coming
an that Government of the United States ment to fore the money,
by the force of armes, at present the Dey was statisfyed with what he
had been told respecting the Intentions of the President, and i t was
beat to let him remain so (he has got no Corsairs out nor is he a fitting
any out) Mr OBrian said if the [George] Washington was arrived, he
thought with the money and the stores, there might be s prospect of
doeing something he advised me to land the money as i t would be
safe, that he might have it ready when the [George]Washington anived,
to t q what could be done with the Dey, I told him I had no discretionary power respecting the money, and could not land i t without
the intentions of the President being fully carried into effect but if
he wanted 5 or 6 Thousand Dollars he mlght have it, he told me he
would think of it, - I told him I would keep the money on Board,
and when I returned perhaps somet
could be done with it, then to
advantage, he said i t was very well - e took the cloth and Linen on
shore with him, Mr OBrian is not in a good sttlte of health at present,
but he says the arrival of the Squadron m the Mediterranean, he thinks
will make him well a t any rate he could die with much more ease he

iI

'-i

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

521

told me the sooner that I was off Tripoli, the better, I told him I
should loose no time in gitting there On the morning of the 11%Inst the wind blowing Very fresh f[rom?]
the E N E and a high sea setting in the Bay of &ern, I did not Like
my situation much, then at anchor in 30 Fathoms water; double
reefed the Topsails and made every preparation for GiGng under way
hove short to about 45 fathoms of cable the ship began to drift with
the anchor, a t 6 a. m. found it necessary to cut the cable to save the
Ship a t 8 A. M. Cleared the topsails down, to close Reef them, the
maul and four topsails split to peaces the ship is very bad off for top
Sails - The Bay of Algiers is a bad place for ships to anchor in L
dont think I &alI ever let an anchor go there again - from Algiers I
Proceed for Tunis but had a very Teadious passage owing to the same
cause as before, - 1 arrived in Tunis bay the 17 Ins! Sint a letter
on shore to Mr Eaton, the 18+ he came on board, - The Essez and
ship Grand Turk arrived the same day -from Mr Eatons Infermation,
this Regensy has been much in the same way as Algrers, and the a p
pearance of our ships, will have the same effect on the Great and
M' hty Bey of Tunis ~ s h refer
d you to the Letter of hlr Eaton by the same conveyance
as this; for every Infermation respecting this Regensey who will I am
confident eay every thing that is necessary, he appears to be a very
proper person for 5 Consul a t such a place he seems to feel for the
honor of his Country - In fact from the Letters that I have seen,
none, of them seem to be deficient in that respect, Respecting Mr
Cathcart Consul for Tripoli you must have received his Letters before
you can receive this, Infor
you of his being a t Leghorn, and the
reason, in fact every particu ar respecting Tripoli - from every
Infermation that I can get I dont understand that the Corsairs of
Tripoli has taken any American Vessels, I most sincerely hope that is
the Case, I shall proceed from this to morrow for Tripoli taking the
Enlerprize with me, my spirits will begin to flag if I dont fall in with
some of the Tripolian Corsairs soon - Should Ca Barron, have
been so fortunate, as to have taken the Admiral it wil be a great ste
towards making a peace, on our own terms with the Bey of 'I'ripof
a t any rate I shdl not like to come home without bringing a sample of
those great people with me, I am sorry that I am under the necegsity
of sinding Cap+Bainbridge in the Essex to Barcelona to convoy 25 or
30 sail of American Vessels that is laying there & many more in other
Ports waiting for a convoy to see them Clear of the straits, it is to be
lemented that there was not two or three more Frigates sent out a t
the time those was sent - to have given that rotection to our Cornmerce which is so necessary in those seas, a t e present time - In
five or six weeks I shall be under the necessity of Proceeding to Gibraltar for Provisions I hope the store ship will be sent out in time If Ca 5 Barron Joins me soone, (which I hope he will and bring the
~ r i ~ o E aAdmiral
n
with him) 1 shall then be able to keep one ship
Constantly Cruising oQf] Tripoli, which will prevent the Corsairs from
Getting in I hope the next Oppertunity that I have of writing to you, that I
shall have the pleasure of Informing ou that some of the Squadron
has mads some Capturae of the ~ r i ~ o E Corsairs,
an
and that the Beg
begins to'think that he must not trifle with the Amencans and that
the American character must be respected, then I shall be heppy I
am heppy in Informing you that the Crews of the Squadron is in Good

-f

P

&

522

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1786 TO 1801

health - the Inclosed list is the names of those that we have been so
unfortunate as to Loose - the other ships has not lost any [NDA photostat, Dale LB, 1801-1802.1
-

-

To Captain Samuel Barron, U. S. Navy, from Captain Richard Dale,

U. 8. Navy

On Board the UNITED
STATES
SHIFPresident
At Anchor in Farina Bay July 19. 1801
DEARSIR,YOUwill receive this from Mr Eaton our Consul for Tunis,
if you can get any Fresh Provisions & water here, by waiting two or
three days I think you had better doe i t you will loose no time in
Joining me off Tripoli, I shall Cruise of[f] Tripoli as long as my water
will permitt me which will be about five weeks from this date I shall
either go to Maltar, or the Island of Sicily a port in the S. E part of
the Island by the name of Saragosa where I am informed both water
and provisions can be had in great abundance, should you not find me
off Tripoli you will know that I am gone after water you will cruise off
and about Tripoli as long as your water will permitt you - so as to
prevent if Possible any cruisers or Vessels that may be captured by
them giting in I shall loose no time in returning off Tripoli after I get
water it is my wish if Possible, not to leave that place without one of
the ships Cruising off it that is as long as we remain in those seas - I
shall be under the necessity of being at Gibraltar by the first of October for Provisions by that time there will be little danger of Tripolian
Corsars - I have sent Bainbridge to Barcelona to Convoy about
thirty American Vessels out of the Straits [XDA photostat, Dale LB, 1801-1802. ]
Extract from journal of U. 9. 8. h.Captain William Bainbridge,
commanding, Sunday, 19 July 1801

U. 8. Bsvy,

Commences plersant Weather with Iight Westerly breezes A t 5 past Meridian
set all drawing sails, At 1 P M saw two mil in the E N E, discovered one to be a
frigate, she disphyed various signals, none of which I understood At H past 1
she hoisted En lish Colors & fired a gun to Windward, At M pmt 1 P M cast
loose the ~ r a n f ~ u rprepared
k,
ship for action, hauled our Wind for the Frigate,
At 2 came to quarters, At ?4past 2 spoke her, the English Fri te Penelope, c a p
b i n Blrkwood, she is a 38 Gun frigate, 18 pounders below, P a 2 pound C a m
nades above, from Egypt bound to Gibraltar
At 4 P M took the Grand Turk in tow, At 5 P M passed by point Garde &
descryed a schooner & ship lying in Farina Bay, the ship displayed the private
s i g d of the day, answered it, proves to be the President & Enterprize, same time
hauled round to the Eastward of the island of plane, coming round this island
had from 12 t o 9 fathom water. The Island of plane is a very low sandy island
lies about 3 or 4 miles from pointe garde, is very dangerous in the night. At 6
AM came to anchor abreast of the Commodore in 15 fath. water, very muddy
ground. Port Farina in which the Tunisians are building 8 32 gun Frigate, bore
about K W distant 4 or 5 Miles - Immediately after anchoring went on board
the Commodore gave him an account of my transaction & occurrences since parting with him,he then delivered me new orders - on board the President I met
Consul Eaton, who psys our frigates appear* here will have a very good effect for
the &aim of the U. S. with this regency [NA. ND original.]

To James Leander Catheart, U. 8. ex-Consul, Tripoli, at Leghorn from Captain
Bichard Dale, U. 8. Xavy

On Board the UNITED
STATES
SHIPPreeidenl
A2 Anchor I n the Bay of Tun& 2 P July 1801
SIB,Being informed by Mr Eston that you where, at Le horn I
embrace the Oppertunity of sending the Letter that I had or ou,
from the Secretary of State, of the United S t a b by the U. S h i p

B

523

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

Essex Cap' Bainbridge who I send to Barcelona to Convoy a number
of American 'S7essels that I hear, is in that, & other rts in Spain
waiting for Convoy, to see them clear of the Stra[i]ts, hsve a letter
on Board from the President of the United States to the Bey of Tripoli
and a present of Ten Thousand Dollars, which your Letter will Inform
you of - I suppose money an4 Letter is of Little consequence st
present, I shall sail this afternoon (taking the schooner Enterprize
with me) for Tripoli to cruise off there, to Intersept thier Corsam or
any Vessels that they may Capture, Captain Sam! Barron in the
Philadelphia I left of[f] Gibralter to watch the motions of the Tripolian
Admiral end a B ' g Corsair under his command, which was a t
Gibraltar when I a z e d from there, I hope C a p Bamon has got hold
of him before this time Cap5 Barron is to Join me at Tripoli, i t is my
Intention to kee one ship constantly of[fj Tripoli for some time to
come, I hope t e Squadron will be fortunate Enough to Brake up
the Admirals fleet He Informed me a t Gibraltar that it was your own fault that you
left Tripoli and that you was no friend to America: I. hope I shall
have the pleasure of leting you See him on Board the P t A n i
before long Should the Philadelphia Join me soon you may Expect to see me a t
Leghorn -

P"

g

[NDA photostat, Dale LB, 1801-1802.1

(20 July 18011
Bill of Lading for Cargo of U. S. Ship Csorge Worlliryh

SHIPPEDin good order and well conditioned by Israel Whelen
Purveyor of Public Supplies for the United States on board the good
ship called the George R7shington whereof John Shaw Esquire is
Commander now laying in the River Delawctre and bound to Algiers
To Say. Seventy seven peices of Seasoned Oak p l a d , Two Transoms,
Twent four peices for Keels, Twenty Hause peices, Twelve water
wags, &en Stem peices, Nine Clamps, TWOStem posts, One double
Cutwater, One peice for Deadwood, Fourteen four inch white Oak
plank, One Hundred forty three, three inch ditto, One hundred & three
two & an half inch Ditto, Fifty one peices for Boor or rising Timbers,
Five Hundred & twenty two Oars or Sweeps, Eight Masts, One Bowsprit, One hundred barrels of Pitch One hundred barrels of Tar, One
hundred barrels of Turpentine, One Hundred barrels of Rosin, One
hundred & fifty barrels of Gun Powder? Three Hundred Coils of
Cokdage One hundred peices of Canvas, Fdteen Boxes of Lampblack,
Two b o n Heads Carved & painted to life, Three Cables, Eight Gun
Carriages complete, One Box fine loaf Sugar, One Teirce of Green
Coffee, E' ht Bags of Pe per, Four boxes and three Churns of China,
of Dry GOO&,Three best Spy Glasses, Four Mabogan
One
Lo , Ten Mahogan Boards Five red Birds & Cs es, Two squure s
an Houses, Seven arrels of Gum Benzoin, One eirce & one half
barrel of Sal Amoniac Crud, One barrel of Gum Benzoin Opi One Ke
Gum lac She1 & One Keg of Gum lac seed. being marked & numbe
as in the Margin and are to be delivered in the like good order md
well conditioned a t the aforesaid Port of Algiers (The dangers of the
seas o d excepted) unto Richard OBrien Consul General of the
United tatea or to his Assigns. INWITNESS
WHEREOF the Com-

r

Trdf

g

I

%

9
A

524

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1785 TO 1801

mander of the said ship hath affirmed to Five Bills of Lading all of
this tenor & date; the one of which Bills being Accoinplished the
others to sta.nd void Dated in Philadelphia the twentieth of July 1801 -

*

*

*

*

*

#

*

JOHN
SHAW

[Schuylkill Arsenal.)

[20 July 1801]
Policy insuring Ship PCMCmd Plmfy on voyage from New York to Tunis

By the President and Directors of the
INSURANCE
COMPANY
OF NORTH
AMERICA.
NO. 10,809 WHEREAS
Israel FFhelen for account of the United States as
well in his own Name, as for and in the Name and Names of
all and ever other Person or Persons, to whom the same doth,
may or shal appertain, in part or in whole, doth make Insurance, and cause himself and them, and every of them to be
insured, lost, or not lost, at and from New York to Tunis in
Barba with liberty to touch at Gibraltar for Convoy and to
p r o c e g a i t h or without the same to her port of destination upon the Body, Tackle, Apparel, and other Furniture, of the good
Ship called the Peace &. Plenty -of the burthen of [space] Tons,
or thereabouts, whereof is Master, under God, for this present
Voyage Richard Wood - or whosoever else shall go for Master
in the said Vessel, or by whatsoever other Name or Names the said
Vessel, or the Master thereof, is or shall be named or called, beginning
the Adventure upon the said Vessel, Taclile, A parel, kc. a t and from
New York aforesaid, and so shall continue an endure, until the said
Vessel be safely arrived a t Tunis aforesaid, and until she be moored
twenty and four hours in good safety. And i t shall and may be lawful
for the said Vessel, in her Voyage, to proceed and sail to, touch and
stay a t any Ports or Places, if thereunto obliged by Stress of Weather,
or other unavoidable Accident, without Prejudice to this Insurance.
The said Vessel, Tackle, &c. for so much as concerns the Assured, by
agreement made between the Assured nnd Assurers in this POLICY,
are and shall be valued without any further Account to be given by
the Assured to the Assurers, or any of them for the same. Touching
the Adventures and Perils, which we the Assurers, are contented to
bear, and take upon us in this Voyage, they are, of the Seas, Men of
War, Fires, Enemies, Pirates, Rovers, Thieves, Jettisons, Letters of Mad,
and Counter Mart, Surprisals, Takings at Sea, Arrests, Restraints and
Detainments of all Kings, Princes or People, of what Nation, Condition
or &uality soever, Barratry of the Master and Mariners, and all other
Perils, Losses and Misfortunes, which have or shall come to the Hurt,
Detriment or Damage of the said Vessel, or part thereof. And in
case of any Loss or Misfortune, i t shall be lawful to and for the Assured, his Factors, Servants and Ass s, (and the said Assured, on
his Part, agree and engage, by himse'$
f his Factors, Servants or Assigns) to sue, labour and travel for, in and about the Defence, Safeguard and Recovery of said Vessel, or any part thereof, without pre&
udice to this Insurance, to the charges whereof we the Assurers w
contribute, according to the rate and Quantity of the Sum herein
insured. And it is agreed by us the Assurers, that this Writing or

9

ci'

WARS n71TH BARBARY P O W E R S

525

Policy of Insurance shall be of as much Force and Effect as the Surest
Writing or Policy of Assurance heretofore made in any of the Unite&
States of America, or elsewhere. And so we the Assurers are contented,
and do hereby bind the Capital Stock, and other common Propert
of the President and Directors of the Insurance Company of ~ o r t g
America, to the Assured, his Executors, Admistrators and k s s ' i s ,
for the true Performance of the Premises, confessing ourselves paid
the Consideration due unto us for the Assurance, by the said Assured,
or his Assigns, after the Rate of Six per Cent - And in case of Loss,
the Assured is to abate Two per Cent. such Loss to be paid in Thirty
Days after Proof and Adjustment thereof; the Amount of the Note
given for the Premium, if unpaid, being first deducted. PROVIDED
ALWAYS,and it is hereby further agreed, That ij the said assured shaU
have made any other assurance upon the premises aforesaid prior in date
to this policy, then the Assurers shall be answerable only for so much as
the a m w n t of such prior assurance may be dejicient towards j d covering
the premises hereby assured, such amount being understood to be the whole
sum u d r written without any deduction for the insolvency of all or a n y
of the under-writers, and thut this Policy, so ar as the property has been
prewiously insured, shaU be considered as n 1 and void to all intents and
purposes, and the said Assurers shaU return the Premium upon so much
of the sum by them assured as they shaU be by such prior assurance exonerated from: And that in case of any insurance upon the said premises
szcbsequed in d d e to this Policy, the said Assurers shall nevertheZess be
answerable or the fuU extent of the sum by them subscribed hereunto,
without rig to claim contribution from such subsequent assurers and
s M accordingly be entitled to retain the premium by them received, in
the same manner as ij no such subsequent assurance had been made.
I N WITNESS
WHEREOF,
The President and Directors of the Insurance Company of North-America, have by the said President subscribed the Sum insured, and caused their common Seal, to be annexed to these Presents, in Philadelphia, this Twentietb Day of July
One Thousand Eight Hundred and One MEMORANDUM.I t is agreed by and between the Assured and Assurers, that no loss shaU be paid on any average u&r FIVE PER C E N T .
unless the said average be general.
It is further agreed, that ij any dispute shad arise relating to a loss on
this POLICY,it shaU be referred to two persons, one to be chosen by the
Assured, and the other by the President of the Insurance Company of
North America, for the time being, which two persons s M ham power to
adjust the same; but in case they cannot agree, then those two persons shall
choose a third, and any two of them agreeing, their determination s h d
be obligatory to both parties.
If the above Vessel, after a regular survey, should be condemned for
being unsound or rotten, the Underwriters shaU not be bound to pay their
Subscriptions on this Policy.
I t is also agreed between the Assured and Assurers, thad in all cases of
Return Premium, O N E HALF PERC E N T .upon the sum insured, shaU be
retained by the Assurers.
I t is m u t d y agreed by the parties to this Policy, that no part of the
Premium shall be returned or abated, on account of any Deviation which
shall be made by the owners, or their Factors, from the present Voyage.
Warranted by the A s w e d free from any Charge, Damage or h 8 8 ,
which may arise in consequeme of Seizure or Dedentwn of the Property
for, or on account o j iUicit or prohibited Trade.

d

h

526

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1786 TO 1801

This Insurance is to Cover Nine thousand eight hundred and
seventy five dollars and twenty five Cents money advanced on Freight
of above Ship
D* 10,178 Ten thousand one hundred & seventy ei ht Dollars CHA* ETTIT Pred
Dollars 10178 Freight 610.68
Policy
1. 50
D'?6 1 2 . 8

8

ISchuylkii Arsenal.]

To Secretary of State from William Eoton, U. 6. Connul, Tunin

KINGDOM
OF TUNIS
P07tofarin.e Jvly 20.1801
SIR,On the 17'? instant Commodore Dale, in the President, arrived
with the Sloop Enterprize; and the day following Captain Bainbridge,
in the Essex, having under his convoy from GibraIter the Ship Grand
Turk,and the brig Hope from Baltimore. The ships of war have taken
in fresh water and provisions and witl proceed on their destination
this evening; to facil~tatewhich measure I have been so much occupied
that I have not been a t the palace since the arrival; it is imposible
therefore, a t this moment, to state thq effect it may have on thls Bey.
The inclosures A. B. & C. show my posltion with him before the arrival;
which position, I trust, may now be maintained with less discussion
and much less writing. Dispatches gone forward a t various times &
by diverse routs must long since have informed Government of the
declaration of war against the United Stas by the Bashaw of Tripoli.
{NA. SDA. CL, Tunie, Vol. 2, Part I, March lM1-Dec. 1802.1

To Captain Bichard Dale, 0. 8. navy, from hbiehai Thomaa for Acting Secretary
of the Navy

[WASHINGTON,
D. (3.1
Comodore DALE
Navy Depl 2Oth Jdy 1801
Lt Sbaw of the George E7mhington,bound with a Cargo on account
of the United States to Aleiers. has received instructions from this
department of which the foflowibg is a Copy (17 July 18011
"In the event of the Dey of Algiers or any other of the Barbary powera
attempting to send the G e o ~ o r W~sa~ivoronrto Constantinople or to
employ her on any service whatever, inconsistent with the inatructions you
receive from the department of state in relation to the delivery of your
Cargo &c or deregatory to the honor of the Flag of the United States, you
will resist euch attempt by every means in your power, eending immediate
information thereof to Commodore Dale, C if persisted in you must procrastinate its execution as long ae pomible, thereby giving time to the Commodore
to sppesr for your protection, who will have orders to that effect
Signed % DEARBOEN
acl* SecT o j the Naw"

I t is hoped and expected from its being known to the Barbary
wers that we have a respectable Maratime force in their neighberood, that no attempt will be made by any of them to force an employment upon the Geo Washington - If, however such should happen
to be the Case, it will be expected from you that you will take prompt
de effwtual measures to prevent its execution, if m your power A revision Vessel is directed to be prepared a t New York t~ s d
for 8iberdter in all the fir~tWeek in august with supplies for your
Squadron -

go

[NDA. QSW, Vol. 6, 1801-1802.1

527

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

To W e 1 Ludlow, Navy Agent, Hew York, B. Y., from Abiehd Thornor for
Acting Secretary of the Xavy

[WASHINGTON
D. C.]
Navy Dept 9PP July 1801

I transmit you enclosed a Letter for Commodore Dale & one for
Lt Shaw of the George Wmhin@on who is to touch at Sand Hook
and proceed from thence to Alpers taking under his care the e m &
Plenty loaded at New York for Tunis - I pray you to have these
Letters conveyed on board Lt Shaw without fail -

B

[NDA.

GLB, Vol. 4, 1800-1801.1
-

-

Extract from journal of U. S. S. L.bKI, Captain William Bainbridge, 0.S. Bavy,
commanding, Monday, 20 & Tuesday, 21 J d y 1801
Commences clear Weather & very warm. At 5 AM signal from the Commodore for BU captains to repair on board - Immediately went on board.
At 2 P M the 2lU went on board the President and received Commodore Dales
dispatches, also Consul Eatons for the U. S. At 4 P M returned on board, the
squadron weighed anchor, also the Brig Hope that I had in charge & which I am
to see (by the Commodores orders) as far aa Sicily, After we had weighed lay
to for Consul Eaton to come on board, At 5 P M he left the ship - Made sail,
took the Brig in tow The Wind Easterly were obliged to ply to windw4, find we
sail with the Brig in tow nearly as first ss the Commodore.
Island Gimaco [?Ibore S S W 6 leagues
[NA. ND original.]
To Secretary of State from Richard O'Brien, U. S. Coned General, Algiers

ALQIER~
The 22Q of July 1801
ESTEEMED
SIR On the 9* Ins5 arrived at algiers The U S. Ship
President and Schooner Enterprize. I have recQyour letter of the
21"f of may and the Cloth and Linnen. The money the Commodore
did not land. as I had considere nothing could be done in m a w a
cash payment. until1 the arrival of the [George] Washington wlth
Stores. when the regency in Eating of the Sheep might be induced to
Eat allso some of the fowl. The comodore expects. to be here before
the [George]Washington arrives On the 10" the U. S. Ship &sex. was in sight standing to The EastQ
with as we suposed The Grand Turk - on the morning of The 119
sailed the President and Enterprize destined for Tunis - The
Commodore did not land here - nothing was to bs done here his
presence was more requisite to The E a s t q h e U S Ship P h W p h i a
he left cruising off Gibralter &F to watch the two Tri line Corsairs On the 23q of May Consul Cathcart & family eft Tripoli They
were intended for Tunls but is arrived a t Livorn
The Algerine Ministry told me the dey had wrote 3 letters to The
Bashaw of Tripoli that it did not ansr the desired Effect. As the
U S would not aid said letters with Money. I answerd never as .long
as we could Lye our Course on the opposite Tack Trip011 Corsarrs IS
a t Sea in quest of americans - &g a t Tunis on the 28* June that
Govt demands of the U S, 10 Thsq Stand of arms Eaton has rejected
This Claim & that Govt remains discontent
Allso a t m e r s The Regency is growling that the articles is not
arrived or the Annuities. but I supose they will not Bite as they are
here much threatened b Lord E e ~ t h& Captain Bashaw I have given Commo ore Dale every information in my power & I
am convinced that Tripoli should have money or Balls without delay -

P"

d

528

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1786 TO 1801

We want Sir 3 -or 6 more of our frigates hthis sea our present force
might be Employed to the Eastg and a sudden rupture to the west4
we Cannot therefore be too gaurded in preventing The Citizens &
property of the U S from f a h g into the hands of Barbary Villians.
be convinced Sir that nothing shall be left undone on my part which
dcontribute towards The honour & interests of The U, States
[NA. SDA.

CL, Algiers, Vol. 6, Jan. 1801-Dec. 1803.1

Extract from journal of U. S. 6. &sex, Captain William Bainbridge, U. S. Pavy,
commanding, Wednesday, 22 July 1801
Commences pleasant breezes and hazy Weather, carrying all sail by the Wind,
with the Brig Hope in tow - At 112 paat 5 P M made the Island of Maratimo At 7 P M i t bore E b S 112 S, distant 6 or 7 leagues.
Throughout the Kight light winds & calms, standing by the wind to the Eastward - At 6 AM were close to the Island Maratimo - At 8 A M it bore N N W
1/2 W, the island Favaugnana E hi E, The town of M m d a in Sicily East same time
parted with the Brig Hope, James Norman Master, having convoyed him as far
as ordered by Commodore Dale, hauled our Wind a t 11 A M to the S@& Wd Island Fauvagnana N E b E 3 leagues [NA. KD original.]
Circular letter to U. S. Agents and Consuls in Europe from William Eaton, U. 8.
Consul, Tnnis

CONSULATE
OF

UNITEDSTATES
OF AMERICA
in Tunb July dSd 1801 The Bashaw of Tripoli having declared War against the United
States of America, a squadron has been destined by the American
government to impede the mischief meditated by that Regency
against our Commerce and tranquility. It consequently becomes
obligatory on us, to inform the agents of all powers in friendship
with us, that Tripoly is actually blockaded by said american squadron:
and that any vessel attempting to enter that Port, will be dealt with
according to the laws of Nations applicable in such cases
Sign'd WILLIAMEATON
Agent
and Consul of the U: S: of Ameriea
for the City and Kingdom of Tunis THE

[NA. SDA. CL, Tripoli, Vol. 2, June 1801-Sept. 1805.1

Extract from journal of U. 6. 6. h,Captain William Bainbridge, U. S. Havy,
commanding, Thursday, 23 July 1801
Commences clear weather Q. pleasant breezes, carrying all sail to advantageAt 4 P M the Island Maratimo bore N E 112 N about 7 or 8 leagues.
At 1/2 past 4 took in spanker & top gallant sails. At 112 pest 6 Maratimo bore
N E b N, Pantalaria S E b S. $ Cape Bon W b S 112 S.
Throughout the ni ht llght winds & squalls st times Tacked ship as pr Log. At
1/2 past 7 AM Cape %on bore N W b N & Cape Cabria 8 W b W - On Cape Bon
there L a round csstie like a spire, on Cape Cabria a large square fortification Cape Cabria forms a round sloping hill, has the appearsnce of an island, the
land between the two points is low - I find a very strong current setting to the
Eastward - Cape Bon N W 4 or 5 leagues Latitude observed 36' 57' N.
Longitude in 11° 20' E.
[NA. N D original.]

-

To Captain Richard Dale, U. 8. Navy, from Wiliiam Eaton, U. S. Consul, TuDin

TUNIS
24. July 1801 SIR, I Cannot give you Stronger evidence of the favorable impression your appearance here made on this Bey than by informin you
that on the instant of his recieving advise of the arrest of the Sc oon-

f

WRRS WITH BARBARY POWERS

529

er's boat's crew* he dispatched one of the most distinguished megad- of his Court to cause them to be released and to order his Coast
guards to have particular respect for the Americans - Yesterday
morning I had audiencs a t his Palace, And delivered him your letter
wi!h an ItaIian $anslation. He seemed highly flattered with its
Stlle; but I could &ern some uneasiness in his countenance which he
endeavored to concad, but which discovered itself on my return from
the Palace to the City. A person of confidence a t court, and much in
my friendship, came to advlae me that Tripoli was actually famishing
for bread, $ that she depended alone on tunis for Supplies. He intimated that applications would be immediately made by this Government for my passports of Safe conduct for Several Vessels which were
now taking in thew Cargoes for that place - In order to evade such
an application, And with a view of profiting of this weapon toward
tho enemy, I instantly circulated Among the foreign Agents here
Exhibit A. of the inclosures sending ;at the same time a Copy of the
Bey's prime Minister - I t produced convulsions a t the Palace All
commerce here is monopolized by the Gov*-The chief Commercial
Agent waa sent to my house with a particular request that the blockade
m g h t be so modified as not to effect the interests of this Regency I answered that however desireable such a modifkation in respect to
our friendship with Tunis might be, i t could not be acceded without
defeating the intention of the blockade Tripoli had made war against
us in violation of the most Sacred faith and honor - She ought
previously to have taken into calculation all the possible consequences
of such a Step - And if our friends Suffered a artial and temporaw
inconvenience from the Dispositions we foun ourself compelled to
adopt to punish the outrages of our enemy it was but the commqn
effect of war, and ought not to give umbrage - Some time passed m
discussion. The Agent grew agitated, and said he was authorized to
assure me that Adherence to this position would endanger our pssce
with Tunis. Here I appealed to the good sense of the Bey; observing
that I felt a confidence that he, the Bey, would never so far depart
from the established and acknowledged maxims of war as to demand
of an Agent of a nation a t war passports to furnish the means of
defence and Subsistence to an enemy. He demanded a letter from
me recommending to your Clemency a Vessel laden with wheat already
departed and another on the point of departure for Tripoli - T h
I refused on the General rinciple - He proceeded to menace my
personal Situation. I to1 him I was prepared for 811 events but the
censure of my Government - He demanded "Are you then d e
cided?" Necessarily so. said I - He left my house in a *mostviolent
rage and immediate1 forbade the imbarcking of promions I had
made for the Grand urk, observing as he went out that indemnit
would be claimed of the U. S. for any damages which might res t
from this Step - To which I replied that this would then h m e an
Article of discussion between the two Governments, which, a t the
present crisis, could not be debated. To day I received a Note B. from His Britanic Majeste's Agent To which I answered C.all of which I Submit for your approbation.
Thus, Sir, I have blockaded Tripoli at Tunis without consulting you,
because this, with many other things, the want of time and pressufe
of Affairs let Slip my memory. I trust, however, the emergency mll

1

f

$

d

530

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1785 TO 1801

justify the expedient. It is certainly the most distressing blow which
a t this moment we have the power of inflecting - & f e n is a weapon
lawfully employed to vex an enemy - I cannot doubt therefore but
this measure will obtaih your approbation and Support. - Tripoli
is in great distress - Her Corsaires are all a t Sea. She is S t , d g
in her Capital; And will be thrown into consternation a t your unexpected appearance. - If this position, which the good providence of
God gives us, can be Sternly held a few months Tripoli will be compelled to ask pence on our. own terms - The object is so desirable
that it soems worth exertions - more especially so as Algiers and
Tunis are looking to t.he issue of this rupture as precedent for their
intercourse with the United Statcs COPY*The boat's crew hnving landed at Xiarsa, site of ant Carthage, an
unusual place, were arrested by the coast guards - But to prevmt
detention I bribed the guards for $15 - before information wns
carried to the Beg [NA. SDA. CL, Tunis Vol. 2, Part I, March 1801-Dcc. 1802.1

To Secretary of State from John Oavino, U. S. Consul, Gibraltar

GIBRALTAR
24F Jdy 1801
NP 68
SIR I had this pIeasure of adrossing you the 18'? Inst pr Duplicate
N9 67 - since then have none of yours, said day the Y h d d frigate
came close into the Bay, wbqn the two Tripoly Cruisers lowerd their
Flags & have not as yet hoisted them again, indeed I think they are
afraid to stir out. Cap? Baron requested my sending lGm a Coasting
Pilot as was to go to Tetuan Bay for Water (of which we are very
scarce here, & the Governor slows no ships of Wan to take any, I now
suppose the PhilauJ-nd three Engh Line of Bnttle Ships watering a t
Tetuan River) when I sent him one who is second of the best, and has
been a long time Employd on said service with the Portuguese alowing
him same pay of one & a half Cobbs pr day, with his Diet. The
Philad? took five sail of homeward bound Vessels with her, & more are
Collectin . The timely arrival of Com~nodorDales Squadron has
prerente$ those Tlipoly Cruisers from doing a deal of Damage indeed
had i t kept off a fortnight longer, I dare say upwards of 20 sail of
Merch! Vessels would have been Victims of those Pirnts, & i t is necessary to keep a look out about this Gutt, - Tho Expence of the
advice Boat dispatchd to the Philaddphia is $36 pt Incloaed Receipt
and have debited Goverment therewith Three English line of Battle Ships aro now off Cadiz, the Adb Ship
and another are ready to join them and only waites for a Wind. I now inclose you the two last publications with us Within these 4 days I have obsorved three american
26* July
Brigs from the Westward having been carried by the french & SpQ
Privateers into Alguesiras, & Yesterday a large ship also supposed to
be an runerican [SDA. CL, Gibraltar, Vol. XI, April 179%Nov. 1804.1

WARS WITH BARBARY POWER8

531

To Lientenant John Shaw, U. 6. Elavy, from Abishai Thomss for Secretary of the
liavy

[WASHINGTON,
D. C.]
Navy Dept 24* J d y 1801

L+JOHN
SHAW
Geo. Washing4on NEWYORK
Enclosed I transmit you an extract of a Letter from Rufus I(ing
Esqr, our minister a t the Court of London to the Secretary of State,
containing the pleasing information, that orders had been issued b his
Britannick Majesty that the Ports of Giberaltsr, Minorca and d a l t a
should be open to our Ships of War, & that they should receive supplies
from his Majesties Magazines if necessary [NDA. OSW, Vol. 5 , 1801-1802.1
To the Bashaw of Tripoli from Captain Richard Dde, U. 8. Navy

On Board the UNITED
STATESSHIPPresident
off TRIPOLI
$Jib July 1801 -

To The BEYOF TRIPOLI
May IT PLEASE
YOUR EXCELLENCY
- Haveing the Honor to Command an American Squadron, sent into the Mediterranean Sea by the
President of the United States to Protect its Commerce, I was sorry
to hear on my arrival a t Gibraltar, Algiers, and Tunis from the
American Consuls there, and MT Cathcart that was Consul a t Tripoli
that Your Excellency, had declared war against the Unitad States,
Your Excellency must be fully convinc'd that i t is a Violation on your
part in braking the Treaty of Peace and Amity, that was made and
agred to betwen, your ExceUen[c]y and the President of the United
States of America - without any provocation on the Part of the President of the United States - I am sorry to Inform your Exceilency that your Conduct towards the President of the United States, I n
declarin war against him, has put me under the necessity of Commenting host itys against your Excellenc s Vessels and subjects, where ever
I may fall in with them, I have ta -en one of your subjects out of a
Nutral V w e l bound to your Port but to convince your Excellency
that I do not wish to distress, your Officers, that I may find in a
Nutral Vessel, a t Present (but I can not m y how long that will be the
case) I Gave him his Liberty again I saw your Admiral, and one other Corsair under his command, a t
Gibraltar, I have left a Frigate of[f] Gibraltar to watch his motions, I
expect he is taken before this, the Squadron under my command will
do Every thing in there Power to take, and distroy the Corsairs and
other Vessels belonging to your Excellency But a t the same time I can
assure your Excellency that i t is very painfull to the President of the
United States to be a t war with an Nation, to the contrary his most
sincere wish is to be a t peace with $the World - I have s Latter for
your Excellency on board from the President of the United S t a b and
a Present of Ten thousand dollars from himself to ou as a mark of his
respect, and friendship for you - but your Excel ency's present conduct towards him put i t out of my power to send you either the one or
the other, If your Excellency has any dispos~tionIn n Just and
honorable way, to make peace with the United States, ou will please
to let me know by sending a boat off. I give you my onor that the
Boat and Crew shall be sacred, Should your Excelloncys Consairs taka

8

i

i

I

532

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1786 TO 1801

any Americans, I hope they will be treated with humanity, as L shall
Treat an of your Subjects with the Greatest Humanity that may fall
into my Hands [NDA photostat, Dale LB, 1801-1802.1

To Bcholas C. Bissen, Danish Consul, Tripoli, from Captain Bichard Dale, U. 8.
navy

NESSEN
Esqr

On Board the UNITEDSTATES
SHIPPresi&ent
of T ~ p o l i2b* July 1801 -

C dfor Denmarck ad Tripoli SIR, I was Informed by Mr Eaton a t Tunis that Mr Cathcart tbe
American Consul for Tripoli (but now absent, on acct of a War between
the two Countrys) empowerd you to act for him in his Absence, should
there be any Occasion for it, I have the Honor to Inform you that I
have under my Command in those Seas a t Present three Frigates and
a Sloop of War, and I Expect as many more in a few months, to protect
the Commerce of the United States against any of the Barbary powers
that may be a t war with the United States, I shall thank you for an
Infermation that you can Give me respecting the Beg of 'Fripog
towards the United States of America, I t is possible that he will let
you come of[fl to the ship - I have wrote a Letter to the Bey by an
Officer of his in a Nutrial Vessel bound for Tripoli [NDA photostat, Dale LB, 1801-1802.1
To Bicholas C. Bisaen, Danish Consul. Tripoli, from Captain Richard Dale,
U. 8. Navy

On Board the UNITEDSTATES
SHIPPresidend
of Tripoli 26'k July 1801
SIR,I have Just receivd your note of this Ins! - you d l be pleased
to Inform the Beg, my Intentions In comeing here were In the first
Instance friendly towards His Excellency, but Hearing on my arrival
at Gibraltar Algiers and Tunis that he had Declared War against the
United States of America & that his Corssirs, where out for the Purpose of capturing American Vessels - My Intentions have been since,
to take the Beys Corsairs wherever I may fall In with them - My
Letter to the Bey, which I wrote yesterday by One of his Officers,
will ExpIane more fully m Intentions, -which Letter I expect he will
receive this Evening - allso wrote by the sam Convayance to you

%

[NDA photostat, Dale LB, 1801-1802.1

Extract from journal of U. 8. 6. &sex, Captain W i a m Bainbridge, U. 8. Bavy,
commanding, Sunday, 26 July f 801
Commences aloudy Weather with squab, single reefed the Topsails. At
2 P M hard e ualls, double reefed the topsails.
At 4 P M 8ape Partevento in Bardinia bore N N W j4 W 2 leagues, same time
tacked ship to the southward, the Cape makes high land, with several Watch
towers along the coast, To the e a ~ t w 4of the Cape, you will discover two small
Islands with a tower on each. At 5 P M tacked t o the 8 4 At 7 P M Cape
Tolari bore W N W about 8 leagues, same time tackcd ship, Cape Tolari haa 8
singular appearance, a high perpendicular hanging poiut, the top of i t inclining
over the Bes Throughout the night squally took in & made sail ss circumstances required
At 11 AM muetered all hands & read the articles of War Latitude oberved 38" 15' N.
Longitude in 8" 4' E.
[NA. ND original.]

-

-

533

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

To Nicholss C. Nissen, Danish Conaul, Tripoli, from Captain W c h d Dale,
U. 6. Navy
On Board the U STATES
SHIPPresident
off Tripoli 2?@ Jzlly 1801 -

I have Just been Honfl with the Bey's and your favour of yesterday
by a Boat from the Shore, I am sorry that the Bey will not p e m t
you to come of[fl - that does not look friendly in the Bey - I
thank you for your friendly E ression, I Inclose you here with a
Latter for the Bey I should be g ad to know his reason for declaring
war against the United States and upon what principle he Expects to
make peace I have no powers to make a new Treaty as there was no
Expectabon of war, nor was it Expected that Mr Cathcart had or
would leave Tripoli, when I sailed from America - If I had powers
to make a new Treaty what security w i l l the Be Give that he will
not break it, as he h s done the present one, d m e n ought to pet,
agreable to there engagements the President has done Every thing
he promissed in the Treaty betwen him, and the Bey of Tripoli I
have Inclosed the Bey the I* and 12* Articles of the Treaty of Peace
between the two Nations it will show him, that he has been the sole
caus of the war without any Provocation on the part of the United
States, it is the wish of the President to be at Peace with all nations,
and if the Present war continues, it will be the Bey's Owne fault,
you will Please to tell t h o Bey this; it is out of my Power to come on
shore or send s n officer a t present ?Then the Bey fully E x p b
himself on what Principles he wishes, or expects to make a Peace with
the United States, I wdl tben talk to him about a Truce -

9

[NDA photostat, Dale LB, 1801-1802.1
To the Baahow of Tripoli, from Captoin Richard Dale, U. 8. l a v y

On Board the UNITED
STATES
SHIPPresident
of Tripoli I&P
JPlly 1801 -

To the BEY,OF TRIPOLI,
MAYIT PLEASE
YOUR EXCELLENCY
I have Just Had the Honor, to
receive your favour of Yesterday b a Boat from the shore, In answer
to mine of the 25 Inst Your Excelfency says you did not Declare war
ngainst the United States, without having Good refor it your
Excellency will please to look into the 1.L and 12* article's of the
Treaty made the 4 of November 1796 between your Excellency and
the President of the United States, where in you w i l l find, should an
dispute arise between the two Nation[s] it should be left to his ~ x c e l
lency the Dey of Algiers (the friend of Boath Parties) to deside and
ty to resort to a m . I Indose you the Two Articles herenither$==
with, a t you ma see them I Have no powers to make a New
Treat with your d x c e ~ e n c but
~ , I should be glad to know the cause
and t e Intentions of your Excellency, by declaring war .sgsinst the
United States, that I might transmit the same to the Prm~dentof the
United States, that the cause of your Goeing to war, may be settled
without loss of time, if it be a Just one - Your Excellenc will
Please to observe, that i t is the wish of the President to be a t 8 8 ~
with all Nations, this is a war he did not Expect, being f d y convinced
that no one article of the Treaty between your Excellency and the
United States being by him Violetd, Therefore sir he knows nothing of the war a t present the sooner you
communicate to me on what fhnciples you Expect to make a peace,

K

%

~

534

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM lY86 TO 1801

with the President of the United States, the sooner you will know his
dete~nination our Excellency will please to Excuse me for not
sending you the residents Letter, or the present, the present state of
affairs will not permitt it, respecting my Treatment to your Officer,
I Hope I shall never have any cause to treat, any that may fall in my
Hands, In my other manner -it is not in m power to come on shore
a t prisent - notwithstanding I said in this f,
ttcr I did not think it
was proper, to sand you the Presidents Letter [21 Ma 18011 In the
Present state of offairs between the two C o u n t y I st& send it, that
ou may see the friendship he bore townrds you when he wrota it, and
tow Little he Expected tbat you would have acted as you have done
In Declaring war against him -

5

[NDA photostat, Dale LB, 1801-1802.1

U. S. 8, Euer, Captain William Bninbridge, TJ. 8. Bavy,
commanding, Wednesday, 29 July 1801

lhrrret from journal of

Commence6 light breezes & clear Weather.
At 2 P M gave chace to a Brig ahead. At 5 found her to be the Danish Brig
Venus from Port Mahon bound to Marseilles - At Midnight discovered B saiI
on the Weather besm, tacked and gave ohace a t I A M came u p with after firing
two shott a t her found her to be a Ragusen Brig from Mamillea bound to
.- At 2 A M made the land lay t o till day light - At 8 A M made mil,
m e tlme Cape Croiaette bore N N E about 5 leagues. this Cape makes with
eeveral rugged, shelving lumps about i t At 7 A M made the tower on the very small, low Isle of P h i e x that lies to
the South of the Islands in the bay of Mamilles, This City on first making i t hse
the sppearanoe of s ship, end an, before the Wind, with her Top gallant Maste
down,you cannot discover the land it stands on untii ou are very olwe to it, this
T o m bore from ua NEbN - In this dwection the $lands before the City hide
the view of it, Those islands three in number, have each cr Castle on them,
A lump of a rock you discover to the West+ of them, but lie6 cloee to the Iah Cape
Cauronne, t b t forms the Western point of the bay, makes rather low with regular
land to the Eastward, which appcars to be barren but has one or two villagee & E
few forts dong the Comt - At 9 entered the Road of Mmelles l e a the islands
on the starborvd hand, At % past 9 got a Pilot on board, not Conceiving any
difficulty in entering, but to give us a good anclloring birth - At 10 A M came
to in the road abreast of the entrance of the bason, in 20 fathom water sandy bottom - I found it shoaling very sudden the bank is very eteep, just before we
brought to had 20fathom I consider it a very bad mad to be moored in, on account
of the steepness of the bank & exposed to Westerly Winds & obliged t o bring
to eo near the City
After we came to, Capt. Prince of the ship Martha of Salem,
came dong side, & informed me that there were but 3 vemela in the harbor. two of
which had not begun to unload - he was ready for sea.
(NA. ND original.]

-

To lieutenant Andrew Sterett, U. 8. HEW, from Captain Richard Dale, U. 8. Navy

On Board the UNITED
STATESSRIPPresided
o y Tripoli i9O"dy
1801 SIR,On the receipt of this, you will pIesse to proceed with the
United States Schooner under your Command, with dl posseble d i ~ patch for the Island of Malta, there to take in is much water as you
can poisibley bring back, you .will please to make every Exertion to
e to and from
Join me again ~ t soon
s
as posslbIe - In your Pa
Malta you will not chace out of your way articular y in g o y is
you have not much water on board, You d P 1 e a s e to be p a t i c arly
attentive to the LEbWs and regulation's of the ace, and not sufler your
officers or Peo le to get into any scrapes wit the People on shore, or
elswhere - fhould you be asked any questione respecting the Squad-

7

R

535

W a s WITH BARBARY POWEBS

ron, - you may say that the Bey of Tripoli has declared war aga,inst
the United States, that two of the Frigates is Empd in convoying the
Merchant Ships, of the United States to and from Different portg in
the Mediterranean that the President and our Vessel, a t present are
cruis'mg between Tunis and Tripoli - &odd you fall in with an
American Vessel that has been Captured by the Tripolians on your
P a w e to Malta you will take her In with you and Leave her there,
under the care of one of your officers and a few m:- but if on our
pass e back bring her with you, should you fall in with any o the
Tripo an Corsairs that you are confident, you can Manage, on your
Passage to Malta you will heave all his Gum Over board Cut away his
Masts, & leave him In a situation, that he can Just make out to get
into some Port, but if coming back you will bring her with you if you
think you can doe it with safety but on no account run any risque of
your vessel or the health of your Crew - you will make use of any
colours as a deception when necessary, but on no account to fire under
any but your Owne - Should you be ask'd when we are agoing to
quit those seas you may say not until1 we ar[e] releaved by twice the
number of ships that are here a t Present The Inclosed is a Letter to the Governor - you will please to seal
it before you deIiver, or send it -

9

"&

[NDA photoetat, Dale LB, 1801-1802.1
[Enclmnre)

To the Qovernor of Pdta, from Captain Richard Dale, U. 6. B ~ v y

On Board the UNIT& STATESSHIPPresident
Beetwen Tunis & Tripoli SOt? July 1801
MAYIT PLEABE YOU[R] EXCELLENCY
The present will be Handed
you by Mr Sterrett, Commander of the United States schooner Enterrize, which is attach'd to a Squadron of Fkigatea which I have the
Eonor to command in those Seas for the protection of the Commerce
of the United States, I send him ta your Port for Water Your friendly aid and assistance to enable him to pro[c]ure water in
your Port with dispatch, that he may lose no time in returning to me,
will be Greatfull acknowledged by the Government of the United
States and my se [NDA photostat, Dele LB, 1801-1802.1

E

To the Insurence Company of Pemsylvaqia from Israel Whelan, U. 8. Pnr~eyor

PHILAD*
Jdy 30.1801.
The George Wmhingdon Frigate John Shaw Esqt commander has
sailed to the Mediterranean under instructions from the department of
State, of which the endosed is a cop you will perceive that Ca
Shaw is to convo the Ship Psau & h ? n f y also bound to the
be; both Vesfle s are loaded on Account of the United States. I
wish Imurance to be effected on !he Cargo of the Qeorge Washington
from hence to
'era or Tunis mth liberty to touch a t Gibraltar for
advice, and com ormable to the instruct~onsto proceed to two or
more other o r b to dispose of the Cargo. I also wish Insurance on
the Cargo of' the Peace & Plenty from New York to Algiers or Tunis
with the like liberty ae above.
ISRAEL
WHELEN

f

9

~ d :

536

NAV&

OPERATIONS FROM I786 TO 1801

Effect Insurance on $15000 on Cargo of above Ship George Wcrshington at & from this port to Gibraltar & a t & from thence to Alg~ers

or Tunis or two or more other ports in the Mediterranean - at
631 p' C' to return 1%pr C' if she does not proceed to more than one
port in the Mediterranean besides Gibraltar Algrers or Tunis and
arrives safe. Also Insure $20000 on Goods p? Shi Peace & Plenty
from New York, Fame voywe as above a t 7% pc
to return 1% pc
CtasaboveJuly31. 1801.

B

IERAEL
WRELEN

[Schuylliill Arsenal.]
-acts

from journal of U. 6. S. Erwx, Captain William Bainbridge, U. S. Havy.
commandinn
- - - -- -

Thursday, SO J u l y 1801
At Meridian the American Consul m e along side informed me it wss necessary to send my boat on shore to the health osce, to know whether they woud
give pratick - Accordingly I sent the pinnace with L$ Decatur, & wrote a letter
to the consul stating the situation of the ship, & mentioned to him that I presumed
they did not expect sbipa of war to be subjected to Port rules & regulations adapted
for Merchant Ve88ele At past 12 Lt Decatur returned on board & brought for answer that the least
quarantine woud be 15 days - At 2 P M weighed anchor & made d out of the
harbor of Marseilles, sent my boat to inform Capt. Prince ta get underweigh as
soon as he coud & I woud wait for him off the harbor. A t 5 P M the Martho
eame up with us - At 6 the City of Marseilles bore E b N 6 or 7 lesgues same time it came on to blow violently from S S E close reefed the Topsails, At
7 housed the guns, got down top gall, yards, launcht top gall4 masts - At 9 P M
blowing excesrrive hard took in mizzen top Bail under fore sail cIoee reefed fore &
main top sails A t midni ht moderated turned one reef out, set mizzen topsail & Jibs - 4 AM
swayxi u p
G. masts
~t 8 crossed TOP galls yards. ~t o came to quartem
exercised great guns, Ends calm - Madha in company Friday, 51 J d y 1801
Commences clear Weather & calm, At past 1 P M backed Main topsail for
the Martha
Throughout the night excessively foggy, fired several g u m to let the Martha
know our situation
At 5 AM the fog cleared off, found ourselves close in with
Ca 8t S e k t i a n bearing W 5 N. distance 5 Miles
lPehe Cape makes high, several lumps of rocks just to the Westward of it &c
about 2 or 3 milee to the Westward of the Cape is a small Town that haa a narrow
bay where we discovered 2 brigs lying. To the Westward of this you see the town
of Palamoa in whjch there is a tolerable high steeple, this town atands on the
side of a hill, the point of the bay makes out to the Southwd & WestwG of the
Town, the shore to the WestwQ a sandy beach - This is a pleasant country &
well settled - About 6 or 7 leagues from Palamos is the town of Blane, which is
&ly known, being eituated along a bay a t a little distance from the shore, to the
westwQ of which on a hill is a fort, then rugged land for about 3 or 4 leagues
At the end of this rugged land you see a round lump of a hill which haa a fortification on the top, also another fortification on the back of that in the country, the
coast from this to Barcelona is thickly gettbd, with several large towas - Ends
clear Weather, Wind B b W - Town of Blane North 5 Miles [NA. ND original.]

-

5.

-

[l August 18011
To Benjamin Tallmedge, United States Congress, from Secretary of the Ravy

[WABHINBTON,
D. C.]
N a q &pt I S Jan. 1809.

Honble BEN: TALMADGE
I am honored with yours of this day and agreeably to your reguest,
I subjoin copies of such documents, as will afford every requisite mformation, relatively to the engagement between the U. 5. schooner
Enferprize and a Triplitan Corsair.

537

WARS WITH BARBARY POWEZS

Copy of Liezatenant Andrew Sferrett's letter to Commodore Dale, dated

at Sea, Atlgzcst 6,1801.

SIR,I have the honor to inforn~you, that on the 1 of August, I
fell in with a Tripolitan ship of war, called the Tripoli,mounting
14 Guns, commanded by Rais Mahomet Rous. an action immediately commenced within pistol shot, which continued three
hours incessant1 She then struck her colors. the carnage on
board was d r e d u l ; she having 30 men killed and 30 wounded,
among the latter was the Captain and first Lieutt Her sails,
masts and rigging were cut to pieces with 18 shot betwmn wind
and water. Shortly after taking possession, her mizenmast
went over the side.
eeably to your orders, I dismantled her
of every thing but an o d sail and spar. - with heartfelt pIeasure
I add, thnt the officers and men throughout the vessel, behaved in
the most spirited and determined manner, obeying every command with promptitude and alertness. we have not had a man
wounded, and we have sustained no material damage in our hull
or rigging.

T

[See letter from Captain Dsle dated 18 August 1801.1

List of Commissioned officers on board the U. S. Schooner Enterprize of 12 Guns and 94 men, a t the time of the engagement with the
Tripolitan Corsair.
Andrew Sterrett .
Lieuts in the Navy
David Porter
Richard H. L. Lawson.
Enoch S. Lane Lieutt of Marines

ROBSSMXTH
[NDA. Con. LB. Vol. 1.1

I1 August 18011
To Nicholaa C. Nissen, Danish Consul, Tripoli, from Captain Richard Dale,
U, S. Bavy

On Board the U S SHIPPresident
03Tripoli Az~gsr8" 1801 SIR,The person that will hand you this command$ a small Vessel
that sailed from Tripoli this morning, bound for MaIta he says, that
he is a Tunishan but I do not beleave him. I think he is a Tripolian
but as I a m not certain of i t - I send him in to Tripoli again you will
please to M o m d those that may be concerned, that I shall, not let
the read flag pass, while I am blockadeing Tripoli without I have more
certain proof that they do not belong to the subjects of the Bey of
Tripoli. They must get, Passes from M:Eaton a t Tunis,certifying that
they are TuIllaians. - or for the present, should you and the Consuls,
of other Nations friend1 to Boath parties think proper to Give them
a Pass,Certifyin that &ey are Tunisians or Algierens, they ma
then
pass - I am d m o s t certain the one that I let go in the day efore
yesterday, was a Tripolian, alltho he said he was a Tunisian. I was
so close in shore and the wind ri h t on shore, prevented me from
paying that attention to her that ahould have done if I had been
further ofE Shore - I am happ to Inform you that the schooner
under my command, Command ? by Cap; Sterrett on her assage
to Malta on the 1* I n s t fell in with one of his ~ ~ c e h e n [ c ] ~e sBey

g

B

&

538

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1786 TO 1801

of Tripoli's Corsairs [the Tripoli], Commanded by Race Mahomet mounting 14 Guns: an action commenced which Lasted three hours,
the Corsair struck after haveing 20 men killed, and 30 Wounded, the
Schooner had not one man hurt [NDA photostat, Dale LB, 1801-1802.1

[l August 1801j
Extract from letter to Lieutenant Colonel Commandant William W. Bnrrowa, U. 8.
Marine Corpa, from First Lieutenant Newton Keene, U,S. Xarine Corps

FRIGATE
President off Tripoli
10 Aug41801

* * * * * dispatched the Schooner Ederprize to the Island of
Malta for the purpose of Supplying the Presided with that article
[water],& on her Passage to that place met with a Tripolitan Cruizer
a Ship of Fourteen Guns & Eighty men. an action commenced which
continued for upwards of three Hours when the Tripolitan was
obliged ta strike, having all three of her masts shot away, Twenty
men Killed & Thirty wounded, Lr Steret Immediately Boarded the
Ship & threw overboard her Guns Anchors Cables &c &c * * * * *
[MCA. LR, 1801.1

11 August 1801j
Captnre of Ship of War Triplf by U. S. Schooner Ehmprfze

WASHINGTON
CITY,

Wednesday, November 18, 1801.
Naval Victory
Yesterday captain Sterrct, commander of the schooner Enterprize,
part of the Mediterranean squadron, arrived here, with dispatches
for the Secretary of the Navy.
Captain Sterret is the bearer of dispatches from commodore Dde,
which exhibit a detailed account of the proceedings and situation of
the Mediterranean squadron.
On the 1st of August, the schooncr Enterprize, commanded by
captain Sterret, and carrying 12 SLYpounders and 90 men, bound to
Malta for a supply of water, fell in with a Tripolitan cruizer, being s
ship of 14 six pounders, manned by 80 men.
A t this time the Enterprize bore British colours. Captain Sterret
interrogated the commander of the Tripohtan on the ob'ect of his
cruize. He replied that he came out to cruise after the mericsm;
and that he lamented that he had not come along side of some of
them. Captain Sterret, on this reply, hoisted American, in the room
of British coIours; and dischar ed a volley of musquetry; which the
Tripolitan returned by a partia broadside.-This was the commencement of a hard fought action, which commenced cbt 9 A. M. and
continued for three hours.
Three times, during the action, the Triplitan 8ttarnpted to board
the Enterprize, and was as often repulsed with great sku hter, which
was greatly increased by the effective aid afforded by t e Marines.
Three times, also, the TripoLitan struck her colours, and rte often
treacherous1 renewed the action, with the hope of discrbling the crew
of captain terret, which, as is usual, when the enemy struck her
coloure, crune on deck, end exposed themselves, while thoy gave three
cheers as a mark of victory.

d

f

%

z

U, S . SCHOONER
ENTERPRIZE CAPTURING THE TRIPOLITAN
CORSAIR TRIPOLI, 1 AUGUST 1801.

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

539

When for the third time, this treacherow atfrtck was made, captain
Stemet gave orders to sink the Tripolitan, on which a scene of furious
combat ensued, until the enemy cried for mercy.
Captain Sterret, listening to the voice of humanity, even after such
perfidious conduct, ordered the captain either to come himself, or to
send some of his officers on board the Enterprize. He was informed
that the boat of the Tripolitan was so shattered as to be unfit for use.
He aslred, what security there was, that if he should send his men in
his own boat, they would not be murdered?
After numerous BU plications & protestations the boat was mnt:
a n discovered to be in the most deplorable
The crew of the ~ r i ~ o E t was
state. Out of eighty men, 20 were killed, and 30 wounded. b o n g
the killed were the second lieutenant and Surgeon; and among the
wounded were the Captain and first lieutenant. And so decisive was
the fire of the Enterprize that the Tripolitan was found to be in a most
perilous condition, having received 18 shot between wiud and water.
When we compare this great slaughter, with the fact that not a single
individual of the crew of the Enterprise was in the least degree injured,
we are lost in surprise a t the uncommon good fortune which accompanied our seamen, and a t the superior management of Captain
Sterrett.
All the officers and sailors mnifesbd the truest spirit, and sustained
the g w t e s t efforts during the engagement. All,therefore, are entitled
to encomium for their valour and good conduct. The mariues,
especially, owing to the nearness of the vessels, which were within
pistol shot of each other, were eminently useful.
After administering to the relief of the distresses of the wounded
Tripolitans, and the wants of the crew, Capt. Sterrett ordered the
ship of the enemy to be completely dismantled. Her masts were
accordingly all cut down, and her guns thrown overboard. A spar
was raised, on which was fixed, as a flag, a tattered sail; and in this
condition the ship was dismissed.
On the arrival of the Tripolitan ship at Tripoli, so strong was the
sensations of shame and indignation excited there, that the Bey
ordered the wounded captain to be mounted on a Jock Ass, and
paraded t h o ' the streets as an object of public scorn. After which
he received 500 bastinadoes.
So thunderstruck were the Tripolitans a t this event, and afi the
apprehended destruction of their whole marine force, that the d o r s ,
then employed a t Tripoli on board of cruisers that were fittin out
by the government, all deserted them, and not a man co!dI d be
procured to navigate them.
[LC. "National IntelIigencer & Adv.", 18 November 1801.1
[l August 18011
Act pertaining to the Navy

UNITEDSTATESSTATUTES
A T LARGE.SEVENTH
CONQRESS.SEW. 1.
Resolutions, Ezpressing the sense of Congress on the conduet
Stmet, -the ojkers and crew of the United W e e schooner
PRIZE.

by the Senate and House qf Repre.sedatk of the United
RESOLVED
America in Congress assevnbkd, That they entertain a high
sense of the gallant conduct of Lieutenant Sterret, and tha other

Stafe8 of

540

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1786 TO 1801

officers, smmen and marines, on board the schooner Enterprize, in
the capture of a Triplitan corsair, of fourteen guns and eighty men.
Resolued, That the President of the United States be requested to
present to Lieutenant Sterret, a sword, commemorative of the aforesaid heroic action; and that one month's pay be ttllowed to all the
other officers, seamen and marines, who were on board the Enterprise
when the aforesnid action took place.
APPROVED,
February 3, 1802.
[Statute 11, p 198.1

11 August 18011
To Captsin Bichnrd V. Morris, U. S. Navy, or the Commanding OBcer of the
American Squadron in the Mediterranean, from Secretary of the Xavy
~ A B H I N G T O N ,D. C.]
Naqy dept f 5 Nofl1802 SIR,Congress have directed that a sword be presented to Lieutenant
Andrew Sterrett, in consideration of his gallant conduct, on the 19
of August 1801, in attacking and vanquishing an enemy of force
superior to his own - in which his manouvres were so admirable that
although the enemy lost 20 hfen killed, and 30 wounded, there waa
not a man injured or wounded on board of the vessel he commanded. My feelings will not permit me to wait the return of Lieut? Sterrett
to this Country, to carry the directions of Congress into effect. I
have therefore to request that you will be pleased to purchase and
present to him, in the name of the Government, a suitable Sword,
not exceeding in the cost the sum of one hundred & eighty dollars. You will draw on the Agents a t Leghorn for the amount, articularly
exprassing in your draft, the purpose for which it will be &awn. -

(NDA.LB, May 1709-July 1807.]
Extract from jonmd of U. S. S. k,
Captain W i i a m Bdnbridge, U. 8. Bavy,
commanding, Saturday, 1 Augnet 1801
Commences with light airs and pleaeant Weather
At 1 P M being almost cslm & within 2 miles of the shore got the Pinnace out
ik towed the ahip head of shore, during the afternoon beating to Westward along
shore
A t 4 P M Fort Blane bore N b W distant 4 or 5 leaguea At 5 came on fiery
squalh from the ESBtwQ, double reefed topsails - Throughout the night under
low sail for the Martha - At 9 AM discovered Mont Joui with the fortifications
on the top of it, this Mount makes the western part of the harbor of Barcelona, &
is eseil known by the length of the Mountain dE the size of the works on the
tap - &&t airs atanding aloog the shore by the Wind
[NA. ND original.]

To Secretary of State from William Kirkpatrick, U. 8, Consul, Ydaga, Spain

Duplicate,
MALAGA
f l August 1801
SIR,I had last the Honor of addressing you on the 30 June, with the
Account of my disbursements for the Public Service,. & s d v i s i to
have d r a m on you Sir, a Small Bill for the Amount m $197.70* to
the order of Head & Amory. Two days ago I had the Satisfaction to receive your respected Letter
dated 21. May, and to learn thereby the very Judicious, md well
concerted Ph,.which the President had adopted of sending Coqmodore Dale m t h Three Frigates & a Sloop of War into the M d -

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

541

ternmean, for the Protection of our Trade; This Squadron arrived a t
Gibraltar on the 1 Ultq & I understand Commodore Dale has proceeded with the Presidenf & h e x for the Coast of Barbary, whilst
the Philadelphia has been stationed to cruize in the Gut for to watch
the motions of Two Tripolin Cruizers, that r m c h Gibraltar onIy a
cou le of days previous to the arrival of our Squadron, & had made
no r i m on their way down I am persuaded the ap earance of these Frigates in the Mediterm e a n , will be of essentra Service in bringing about Peace with the
Bashaw of Tripoli, as also in containing the other Regencies from
breaking out with the United States, but it would be proper in my
Opinion that Some force continued here even when P a c e is ebblished, as little dependance can be placed on the whole of them
remaining long on good Terms with any Nation,
The Bashaw of Tripoli is again a t v ~ i a n c with
e
Sweden, & somewhat
embroiled with Denmark, which has induced Commodore Koefoed
now in this Station, 6 t h two Frigates under his orders, to proceed
aloft to endeavor to Accommodate matters Every Service & possible assistance, shall be rendered to Cornrnodore Dale, or any of the Officers in his Squndron that may happen
to call in here, and in case of need the object of i t being Sent into the
Mediterranean, shall be proper explained, as also the desire which
Government persists in, of living in Peace & Friendship with all
nations, in conformit to your Instructions. The quarantine s t d continues to be inforced on all Vessels from the
United States, notwithstanding the repeated representations of our
Minister at Madrid for the orders regarding i t to be repealed, or a t
least modified,
This disagreeable circumstance must materially reduce the Trade
which was carried on direct between the United States, & this Gountry, & particularly as it is only certain articles that are permitted to
be landed whilst the quarantine lasts, & that not a t every Port. -

8

[NA.

7

SDA.

CL, Malaga, Vol. 1, June 1793-May 1814.1

Extract from journal of U. S. 6. Euu, Captain WiiIiam Bainbridge, U. S. Navy,
commending, Sunday, 2 August 1801
Commences pleasant Weather & smart breezes from South, carrying all sail by
the wind, At 1 P M discovered the steeples in the City of Barcelona bearing
West about 20 Miles. At 3 was within 4 or 5 miles hoisted my colors, which was
answered by the Americans in Port, then lay to until] the Martha came up - At
4 made mil stretched in the road, the wind drew ahead off. the land, 8 found a
utrong cum* setting towards the east, was obliged to tsck s b p .
At 7 P M came t o anchor in the road of Barcelona in 20 fathom water the
light house b a r i n g North.
Same time Mr Willis the American Consul came dong side, but mud not
come on board, got down top gallant yards. At 8 AM the health officer came
along side with the American Consul, admitted us t o Pratick. Went on s h o ~
waited on the Captain General offered t o salute but the Spaniards wroud not
return gun for gun, commenced watering tho ship, Moored wlth the stream
cable [NA. ND original.]
To Secretary of State from John Gavino, U. S. Consul, Gibraltar

NQ69

GIBRALTAR
3 Augusf 1802
SIRWitllout any oi your favours I referr to m y last dispatch N9 68

p' duplicate by thls Conveyance, since then the 'rripoly admiral havmg been refused Provisions by this Governor unbont the sails of both

542

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1786 TO 1801

Cruisers and thrcmbnd the Ragvsean Commanders of Vessels in
Port with imediah wan if they did not su ply him with shipping to
take his Crews to Tripoly being blocaded flere by the mencam, ss
they Navegate with a FIEMAN
or Pass Port of the Grand Signor,
agreed to g~vehim the use of a Brig, since then he has demanded of
them and R
an Agent, a guarantee that the U. S. fri ates will not
molest said rews on board their Vessel as being Nutra which they
have refused, what he will &ally determine upon is not yet known,
perhaps it may be a fines to try and give the slip. Said adml has
appleid to the Govr of Tetuan for Provisions which he has promised
to send over with an offer of granting him nny other supply, or service
in his power.
By a Vessel from Alguesiras I learn the Brig A&rt of Boston was
Chnsod into Barcelona by two Triply Cruisers of 20 Guns, & 100
Men each, that they followed her there and were wate
As to Nom from Egipt referr to the Inclosed Chromc e and have
the honor to be. -

Y

9

"8.

[SDA. CL, Gibraltar, Vol. 11, April 1795-Nov. 1804.1
Earact from journal of 8. S. S. k ,Ceptsin William Bainbridge, U. S. Navy,
commanding, Idonday, S Angau~t1801
[At Barcelona] Pleesant & clear Weather,
This day hired b a t e & commenced getting baIlaet for the ship, continued
Watering & painting ehip.
At 11 AM waited on the Captain General to demand satisfaction for a National
insult received last evening from a Spanish Kings Zebec lying within the Mole,
laat evening between the hours of 9 & 10 when leaving the Mole to come on
board, WM fired a t 7 times & detained in t h e Frigates boat some time, after
making use of abusive language,permitted me to depart without giving them any
further explanation than I had a t first done before detention, the Captain General requested that I woud commit the charge to wmting & he woud invest1 ate
the buainess and give every pwible & S a c t i o n . After my arrival Consul & ~ l i R
dispatched a messenger to the vessels at Villanova & Salon to detain them untill
I arrived. I this morning wrote to the American Conaule a t Alicant & Malaga,
notifying them that I shoud give convoy from their Ports.
I find it very tedious watering, aa we are obliged to draw i t by a bucket from
a well & then roll i t some coneiderable distance [NA. ND original.]
To Lieutenant Colond Commandant William W. Burrowe, U. S. larine Corpa,
from Second keutensnt John B. Penanck, U. S. Xarine Corps

U. S. Frigate [PhiEadelphia] (at Sea off M~laga.)

Augusl bth1801 -

SIR- Agreeable to your Orders in leaving Head Quarters I avail
myself of this Opportunity the only one perhaps which will present
itdlelf as I presume from our having been constantly at Sea it is the
orders of Commodore Dale, we should be vigilent, & not breath too
much of the land Air. You no doubt have heard of the insignificant
State of Tripoli having let loose their miserable & merciless Cruizers
against our Commerce, it has been our Fate (I cannot call it an
honor) to be station'd here to watch the motions of their Lord high
Admiral (as he superciliously calls himself) & his attendant of 16
Guns - this discreant Renegade has been in Gibraltar for nearly
two Months - $ possessing all that dastardly disposition attached
to their characteristic cruelty he is determined to exhaust our patience,
by Keeping his present position. T therefore cannot promise m ~ l f
the Satisfaction of informing you of the good Conduct of OW

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

543

Men in action. I Batter myself should his highness give them an
Opportunity you will not be disappointed in the relation that will
be ven of the part they took in the Engagement - I am satisfied
wit the Dehchment. Cap$Barron has expressed his approbation to enable them to make that appearam in Port, to impress the
British (whose Troops are better organized, & make a better Figure
than ever) with as favorable ideas as possible of the Marines of the
U.S. I have ventured to take up from Lt Keene some Coats - I am
also desirous to obtain a Summer Suit for them, but for want of
Funds I have in this instance been disappointed. I shall endeavor
with LQKeene to procure the Money - I flatter myself you will not
be displeased with the arrangement we shall make for the Comfort &
Credit of ourselves, & Men - as in all my official conduct I shall
give you reasons for my actions - the Detachment still remains ss
I reed it consisting of 37 Privates & Six MC. Officers - this is not
sufficient for the dut of the Ship. I should have made up the Complement as Capt. *Knight intended - but f have not Yet been
able to get them, from the Essex, where Lt. Keeno supposes there are
too many - I have not enclosed you a Clothing Return, as I did
not understand from you it would be necessary at tbis distance Should I be mistaken I will make a point in my Next to send you
that & every other roturn Lt. Keen may direct - I beg my Compliments may be presented to the Officers at head Quarters -

f

d

[MCA.

LR, 1601.]

Extract from journal of U. S. S. E m , Captain W i a m Bainbridge, U. 5. Navy,
commanding, Friday, 7 August 1801
CIear b: pleesant Weather, having Iaet night completed our ballasting, bent
all our force to water ship.
Thie dsy Consul Willie reed a letter from the Captain General, which I suppose
he intended as an annwer to my letter. I t being an improper & unsatisfactory
one caused me to submit the Affair to Col. Rurnphreys our Minister at Madrid.
[NA. ND original.]

To Captain Samuel Barron, U. S. Navy, commanding U. S. Frigate Philaddphio.
from John Oavino, U. 8. Consnl, Gibraltar

GIBRALTAR
8+ Awgmi 1801
SIR I have to communicate to you for your Govg that this day the
Crew of tho Tripoly I3 Cruiser Mutined & came on shore k i n g out of

(COPY1

3

Provisions and Yeste ay Eaf the sweepings ,of the Bread room, a
Moor has promised them three days frovistons if will return on
board which they hositatc at, the Admiral is taking her Guns out &
Carrying them to his own ship. his Crew is also discontented having
only three days Provisions on board. This day saild in the Portuguese Convoy the American Ship Lw&a Cnp"msdel1,
& the Brig
Jar Stuart Cap-avis
for the U. Statss on their going to Sea the
Tripoly Admira.1 begun in a hurry to bend his sails as if the] meant
to go to Sea, when I wrote ad1 Saurnarez an official request to detam
him 24 hours agreeable to the Laws of Nations & h s Promise to
wrh he geve for answer would take care of them.
As it is now well known from the Vessels that drop in that you are
Cruising about - I think it would be adviseable to keep between
Tanger & Tettzan according to the winds. The Tripoly Admiral
having been refused Provisions by the Governor here & on1 for three
days on board it is likely he means to run for Tangsr, %mch, or

544

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1785 TO 1801

Tetuan as the winds may answer, certain i t is he camot go farr.
& I have the honor to be -

This goes by a Dispatch Boat

(SDA. CL, Gibraltar, Vol. 11, April 1796-Nov. 1804.1
To Secretary of State from John Gavino, U. S. Consd, Gibraltar

(Duplicate) N Q70
GIBRALTAR
Q* Augmt 1801
SIR After referring to my last dispatch NQ69 have now to crave
your refference to the inclosed Copy of mine to Cap"-Barron of Yesterdays date p? Boats hird on purpose to o in quest of him to East
and West, I this day learnd he was off M aga two days o; the two
Vessels with the Tripolin Crews are now under way or Tetuan
Convoyd by an English K i i Lugger of 16 Guns and not the admirals
ship as was given out (one of them has Morrocco Collours) be this
as i t may they are well out of the way as I look upon their Cruize
next to be knocked up, had the Commander of the Cruisers been
a Person of Conduct, such as the Algereens are he might have
the P h W 8 the slip one way or other and done damage. I n or er to
have a proper Check to block up Cruisers in this Port, there should be
frigates stationd both to East & West of i t at same time for when the
Calmes & wind to the West setts in the Current will take any Vessel
from aback of the Rock to above Malaga when this Port remains
unguarded for before they can come down when the wind changes
to the East, the Cruisers from hence make their Passage good to the
west & take their Prizes to Larach, Salee, Mogador kc*. The Tripulin admiral his officers & a few seamen rem8in here in the Vessels
in all about 80 Persons I have a few lines of the 22g Ult? from Cdnsul OBrion inclos
the one herewith, he tells me on the 9* arrived the Pregident an
Enterprize, on the lo* they supposed to see the &sex & Orand Turk,
when on the ll? the two former proceeded for Tunis.
P. S. None of the Boats sent in quest of Cap-arron
rcturnd as
yet he must have been drove up -

3

?

p

7

[SDA. CL, Gibraltar, Vol. 11, April 179GNov. 1804.1
Captain William Bainbridge, U. 8, Nsvy,
commanding, Sunday, 9 August 1801
Commences cIear & pleasant Weather, light easterly Winds. At 2 P M un. At 7 P h5 finished watering. took in the hunch & stowed her.
"0°At
"" 5 A
sent up Top gallant yards. At 6 almost ralm, made t.he signal for the
fleet to weigh & roeeed to sea - At 7 AM got under way wind very light
from 6 S W to S
16 sail of Americans under convoy & one Swedish ship permitted to sail amongst
&hefleet. Momt Joui N N W 5 Miles.
[NA. XD original.]
Extract from journal of U. 6. S. &ex,

s2'

8.

TO Captain Richard Dale, U. S. Raw, from James Leander Catlacart,

U. 8. ex-Consnl, Tripoli
Dkpatch NQ 10
B
LEGHOBN
A'U.SU8f loib 1801.
RICH^ DALEEsq?
Commander in chiej o j th U . S. Squadron,
Stationed in the Mediterranean.
SIR. f had the honor of receiving yours of the 20th July (enclosiqg
instructions from the department of State) on yesterday e v e n i n x t
was landed a t Marseilles by Cap*Bainbridge on the 29gbUltq o

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

5$5

sail'd the same day for Barcelona taking under his convoy the Shi
Matiha of Salem Ca Prince the only ship a t that place ready to s a x
it would have been ortunate if he had taken this place in his passage
as there are five sail of our Vessels here ready to sail, but as they
have all armed & mean to sail tomorrow in Company, I presume we
have nothing to fear for them. The fortunate crisis which you arrived in, joined to the very judicious arrangement of the Squadron under your command seems
well calculated to g v e full security to our commerce, a t this period
we have not lost One Single Ship, we hnve their Admiral in our
power & our operations are not impeded by the contemplation of
having a number of our fellow Citizens in Captivity; We have every
opportunity of inspiring those Barbarians with an Idea that we
have not sued for peace through impressions of fear & that we will
not suffer our Flag to be insulted with impunity. I have no orders from Government. to treat with the Bashtlw
whatever, which I arn very glad of, as it gives us on opportunity of
acting upon the offensive, I beg lcave to suggest for your information
that when you are join'd again by the Essex or P h W l p h i a & should
your Ideas coincide with mine upon the subject; that the cruisers &
prizes belonging to the Bashaw may be easily destroyed in the Night
by the Boats of the Squadron, this would strike the Bashaw with a
panic & would be favourable to our interests in the other Barbary
States. - I should recommend you Sir by no means to trust your
person on shore a t Tripoli, to inform no person that you have either
cash or a letter from the President to the Bashaw on board, to enter
into no negotiation whatever, however delusive appearances may be,
as the Bashaw like Satan only flatters to deceive & is destitute of
every honourable sentiment which digdies the human heart; trust
no person whatever as you may depend that the agents of other
Nations are ashamed of their pusillanimous conduct & will oppose
us in order that the result may justify their own conduct, by our
being reduced to ns humiliating terms as they have reduced themselves to, unwilling that any Nation should enjoy privilidges their
bad conduct has forfeited; should you find it expedient to burn their
Cruisers in Port I should not wonder to hear of the Massncre of
Juseph Bashaw & i t is my unalterable opinion that no treaty ought
ever to be made with Tri oli, until1 its Government are made sensible
of their inferiority, until the Bashaw sues for eace and signs the
treaty with his own hand on board the Co~nmoore's Ship. This is
the period Sir to establish our National character with those pirates,
should we not embrace this opportunity i t is doubtful if ever we have
so favourable a one again, happy, extremely happy shall I be if my
sentiments coincide with yours m our plans of operation, should they
not "Nevertheless you may depend that I will most cordially coincide
with you in every thing which may seem likely to promote the interests of our Count to obtain the end contemplated by Government
in sending a Squa ron into this sea & to maintain the dignity of our
Flag. - I don't expect the Tripoline Admiral will leave G~braltar,
linpp should I be to see him on board the President, he promised to
enricg the Basllaw with the propert of our fellow Citizens, whom he
ht~dthe insolence to stile damn' rebellious Rascals, worse than
French Men, I imagine he was encouraged by his friends Lucas &

/'

P

?'

7

B

546

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1785 TO 1801

MQDonoghwho were continually intoxicated together, & his great
success against the Swedes last year made him expect the same
against us, happy I am that he is disappointed. - On the 20th of
June the Columbia & four more sail of our Vessels weil armed saiI'd
from hem for the United States with my ultimate dispatches for
Government, they anived a t Gibr ttbout the time of your arrival
there & I hope that you reca a copy of my circular of the 2* of June
which describes the Tripoline Squadron & informs you of the great
importance of the Capture or destruction of the Admiral, if you did
not receive i t there i t is presumed you got it from Mr Eaton, who
is in possession of Copies of all my dispatches to Government since
my anival in Barbary, consequently has i t in his power to give you
every information as well as if immediately on the Spot myself,
Nevertheless I conceive it to be my duty to be a t the Scene of action
as soon as possible & re uest you to facilitate my arrival there as soon
as the semce our Vesse s are employ'd on will permit with propriety.
I s b l l be happy to see you here, but am sorry to inform you that you
wiIl be subject to a tediorrs quarantine of from Eighteen to thirty
days according to circumstnnces; viewing tho premises if you think
proper to send the Schooner for me, I am ready to embark in one
hours time, as I have already settled my family here where they shall
remain untill all our affairs are settled both a t Tripoli & Tunis. Nothing decisive can be done untill we receive fresh instructions from
Government, which I hope & presume will be a positive order to
make no Concessions. - We may expect to receive instructions
from Government in October; but i t is probable that nothing decisive
will be done untiIl after the meeting of Congress ns our Commerce
is perfectly secure & I conceive it
to our interests to make
a precipitate peace, I have
that no peace o u ~ h to
t
be made with Tripoli
the effects of h s Temerity.
Thw goes tomorrow to Tunis, & a copy will be forwarded by the
Penelope, direct to the United States, rvho sails from this port on
the 12 inst.

I

(NA.

SDA. CL, Tripoti, VoI. 2, June 1801-Sept. 1P.05.1

To Lieutenant Colonel Commandant William W. Bnrrowa, U. 6. X h n e Corps,
from First Lieutenant Newton Keene, U. 5. larine Corps

FRIGATE
Pre&nt

OFF

TRIPOLI

1Oa Augt 1801

SIR, In my letter of the 18 July last, dated Tunis inclosing a Muster
Ron, I gave you ail the information worth relating, respecting the
Situation of Marines in the Squadron. Since that time nothing of
consequence has transpir'd worth relating. Now beg leave to inform
you that we left Tunis on the 19* of July & arrived a t this place on the
256 Immediately upon our appearance off the T o m the Bashaw Wrote
to Commodore Dale requesting to Know if it was the wish of the
Government of the United States for peace or War, if the former the
end might be accomplished by paying to him (the Bashaw) for the use
of his Subjects the Sum of two hund9 & fifty thousand Dollars, down,
& twenty tho~isandDollars P Ann. this Sum to be S e c d by giving the
Danish Consul a t Tripoli as Security. What Answer was given to this
letter I am unacquainted with, a few days after this a Mr. Iy b m ,
formerly coneern d with our coned Mr Cathcart sent on bd a etter to

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

547

Commodore Dale enclosing one to Mr. Obrion, Open, in this letter he
Says that Hostilities having commenced on the part of Tripoli Proceeded from the Conduct of Mr Cathcart [?], on Shore [?], Says every
thing Prejudical to his Character that malice could devise. this letter
drew from Commodore Dale Sundrey Questions Relative to an accommodation between the two Countryes, those Questions not be'
ointedly Answered & the Bashaw Still Continuing to send on boar
Ltters of a Trivial Nature the Commodore has refused to have any
farther communication with him & being inform'd that most of ~ E I
Cruizers were out, determined to continue off this place for Some time
to prevent their prizes geting in, & being in want of Water despatched
the Schooner Enterprize to the Island of Malta for the purpose of
Supplying the President with that article, & on her Passage to that
place met with a Tripolitan Cruizer A ship of Fourteen Guns &
Eighty Men, an action commenced which continued for upward of
three Hours when the Tripolitan was obliged to Strike, having all
three of her masts Shot away. Twenty nine Killed & Thirty wounded.
Lt. Steret Immediately Boarded the Ship and threw overboard, her
Guns Anchors Cables &c &c. and left her an entire Rack, with orders
to the Captain to proceed with his men to the Nearest land. Three
days after this took place we spoke the Ship under a Jurymast, the
Captain inform'dl he was from Tunis & had a few days previous, off
Malta fallen in m t h a French Corvet of twenty-four Guns & had got
damaged in the manner we then Saw him, this appearing to be a
plausible tale Commodore Dale give him a Compass & SuiTer'd him to
proceed on - It is with Pleasure I inform ou that Lt Steret in this
Action did not lose a single man, Either Ki ed or wounded, altho the
Ship attempted three different times to board him, Lt Steret & officers
conduct during this Action deserves the praise of their Country.
I have not Seen the Philadel hia or Essez since my letter of the
Eighteenth of July, the former 6ruizing off Gibraltar, the latter gone
to Le horn for the purpose of taking under Convoy Some Amemcan
vesseflying a t that place. I have no cause of Complaint as to any
interference with my Command - Inclosed is a Muster Roll of my
Detachment, - we shall leave this place in Two or three days for the
Island of Malta - Lt Osborn is well, I have the Honour to be
I forward this Letter by the way of London - N. K.
[MCA. LR,1801.1

Y!

lf

Extracts from journal of U. S. 6. Esru. Captain William Bainbridge, U. 8. Bavy,
commanding
U'ednesday, It August 1801
All these 24 hours light Winds, and clear Weather
First part standing in on a wind to the Spanish shore almost abreast of Castle
Ferro, At 4 P M having got within 3 or 4 miles had 6 fathom water, tacked ship
At 7 P M tacked to the WestwQ,throughout the night under easy sail along shore,
light easterly Winds.
At 5 AM passed by the tow of Lige - At 7 was abreast of Villanova, made s
signal for the fleet to continue their course, made Bail & stood to the m t w Qbeat
up astern of the fleet & took a dull eailin ship in tow, the shore from the Town of
Lire to Salon, is thickly eettlcd, full of billagea Thursday, 13 Augwl 1801
Commences light breezes & Cloudy Weather, sailing along the shore of Cstalonia
towards Salon [?I, with the fleet under convoy, o ned the harbor fired three une
for the Vsuela to mme out. between 6 & 7 P &?six sail came out & joinefthe
fleet, 4 Americans, 1 Swede & 1 Dane Throughout the night steered to the SQ & WQ -

548

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1786 TO 1801

At 5 AM saw a cutter come in amongst the fieet, gave ohnce, A t 7 fired several
shot a t her was very near within +pn shot - obliged to give the chace up on
sccount of losing sight of the fleet in charge - At 7 Bore away & made sail for
the fleet. At 10 AM made the Isla,nd of Columbretes, they make in three barren
islets with a very singular high rock to the Southward, resembling very much a
large ship of the line under sail, near to this rock there are several small rocks,
which must be dangerous in the night or thick weather. The Point of W o n makea
out to seaward about 1% milee, It is barren, with white epota of aaqd on it, the
old ruins of s tower & a new small battery cannot be discovered unt~llyou open
the harbor & a small town near the beach To the Eastwrrrd of point Salon is s pretty deep bsy, a good shelter for Weaterly
Winds, but directly open to the East
On the Esstmn point of this bay is Tamarel, it stands on a hill with a large
church, about the centre of the Bay, 2 or 3 Miles in the country is Tarragons, you
see a lsrge steeple in the town A t Meridian running before the Wind with our Topsaik clewed down, the
fleet under full mil
The largest &let of t h e Colombrotes bore N W by Compass, 9 Miles. The
fleet 23 in number in good sailing order.
[NA. ND original. J
To the Commander of the American Merchant Ship A w i m Packt, from Secretary
of the Navy

[WASE~INGTON,
D. C.]
Nav: Dep. 1.4 AugU801
You will proceed with the Ship Arnerica9~ Packd under Your
Command, loaded with Provisions and other Stores for the use of
the United States Squadron commanded by Richard Dale Esq? in
the Mediterranean, to Gibraltar, where on Pour arrival You will
report to John Gatino Esqn Consul of the United States a t that
Port, to whom You will deliver your Cargo unless you should receivo
instructions to the Contrary from Commodore Dale; in which case
You will act agreeably to such Instructions.
You will be pleased to communicate to this Department by the
first Opportunity that may occur, Your arrival a t Gibraltar and the
disposition You may hsve made of the Cargo.
You will take duplicate roccipts for the Stores You deliver, one of
which you uill transmit to this department & the other to Mr Ludlow.
Daniel Ludlow Esqn N. Agent a t New York, being fully empowered to settle every thing in respect to freight &c, i t remams for
me, only to recommend to your particular Care the Articles of which
you have the charge, as it is of material importance that they should
arrive not only safe but free from damage, and to wish You a prosperous Voyage. [NDA.

OSW, Vol. 5, 1801-1802.)

To Captain Richard Dale,U. 8. Haw, from Secretary of the Bsvy

[WASHIN~TON,
D.C.]
Nav: Dep. 14 Augt 1801.
I have directed to be shipped from N. York on board the Ship
American Packet, for the use of the uadron under Your Command,
a Supply of Provisions and Slop CIot ' g, which are to be delivered
to John Gavino Es uire Consul of the United States a t Gibraltar
~ubjectto our or er generally, but issuable nevertheless to the
Orders of t e respective Commanders of the other Veasels of your
Squadron if occasion should so require.

"h,

K

3

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

549

D. Ludlow Esq? N. Agent a t N. York is directed to send You a
Bill of Lading. [NDA. OSW, Vol. 5, 1801-1802.1
To Daniel Ludlow, Navy Agent, New York, N. Y., from Secretary of the Bavy

[WABHINGTON,
D. C.]
Alan: Dep. 14, Augt 1801
I have reco your Letter of the 11 Inst., and enclose You the order
for the Sailing of the Provision Vessel for Gibraltar, which is left
open for Your perusal, and that you may insert therein the name of
the Commander of which you omitted to inform me, after which you
will please seal and deliver the L e t k r I enclose also a Letter for John Gavino EsqmConsul a t Gibraltar This too is open that you may insert the name of the Captain which
done, please seal and forward the Letter.
You will please forward to this department one of the Bills of Lading, enclose one to Mr Gavino, and another to Commodore Dale.
You will also inform me on what Terms ou have engaged the
Vessel - You did right in replacing the ba Bread with good, and
it will be right to sell the bad, which be pleased to have done as You
have heretofore sold Articles for the department. -

J.

[NDA. GLB, Vol. 4, 1800-1801.1
[Encloburel

To John Gavino, U. 6. Consul, Gibraltar, from Secretary of the Havy

[WASHINGTON,
D. C.]
Nav: Dep. 14, Augt 1801
By the Ship American Packet [space] Commander, I have directed
to be shipped to Your Address by Daniel Ludlow Esqr? N. Agent
a t N. York a Cargo of Provisions & other Stores for the use of the
United States Squadron in the Mediterranean commanded by Commodore Richard Dale, which You will be pleased to receive in charge,
unless the Commodore should have left instructions with You for
the Vessel to proceed elsewhere, in which case the Captain has orders
so to proceed - In the Evcnt of Your receiving the Stores,
will please pay particular ntt'ention to the order in which they s all
be delivered, and take every care for their safe and whole keeping
whilst the remain in your Possession.
You w& deliver out those Stores to tho orders of Commodore
Dale or of either of the Commanders of the other Vessels of the
Squadron as Occasion may require taking receipts for the same, and
keeping an exact account of your receipts and issues, which when
completed, You will transmit to Thomas Turner Esq? Accountant
of the Navy for adjustment, on which You will be allowed a Commission of 5 per Cent on the value of the Stores - You will deliver
duplicate receipts to Captain [space] for the Articles he shall deliver
to You. -

you

[NDA. GLB, Vol. 4, 1800-1801.1
To William Kirkpatrick, U. 8. Consul, Malago, Spain, from John Qavino,
U. 6. Consul, Gibraltar

COPY.
GIB. 14 Aug"l801]
Dr SIR. I have only time to tell ou the two Tripoly Cruizers having
had a further desertion they have auld into the new Mole to lay up,

K

so

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1785 TO I801

as they say in the two vessels they can only now Muster 26 a 30 Men
officers & all together.
[NA.

SDA.

CL, Malngs, Vol. 1, June 1793-May 1814.1

Extract from journal of U. S. 6. Eua, Captain William BPinbridge, U. 6. Baoy.
commanding,Friday, 14 August 1801
Throughout these 24 hours clear Weather & pleasant Esgterly breezes, running
along with the fleet, our topsails clewed up, At 4 AM made cape St Martins, It
is very remarkable land being very high a little in the country, the cape makea a
ftat blM, fo the N*of the cape on a hill close by the aea side is a large fortification,
near which in a Valley stands a Town - At 9 A M saw a ship with a pennsnt,
standing down on the fleet, hauled our Wind & prepared ship for wtion, At 10
spoke her, proved to be a Genoeae from Barcelona - At ll exercked grest
& s d a m , had a shtun fight, Bame time came by Cape St Mart'ms, this
makes an even point, not so high as the land in general along the coast the land back is very high [NA. ND original.]

To Lieutenant Colonel Commandant William W. Burrows, U. 8. Xarine Corps,
from Second Lieutenant John Johnson, U. 8. Yarine Corps

U. S. Frigot [Philadelphia]

OFF

GIBRALTAR

16* August, 1801

DEARSIR When I last wrote you I was in hopes by this time to
have i t in my power to inform ou of the Good conduct of Our
detachment and our success in t a L g the Two Tripolitans that was
a t that time a t Gibralter but I must confess our prospects of them is
lost in a grate measure, as a mutiny took place on board their vesels.
A few days a . and out of about 500 their now remains but about
70 Men. the Eutineers made their Escape to the Barbeary shores,
whare theb] will be protected by the Moors
Two days before theb] Mutinized the[y] bent their sails and
atempted to Go out with some American Vesels that was Going
out - The British Admiral prevented them, & ordered them not
to leave the port for 24 Hours. The[y] had then been - living on 4
Ountzes of Bread Pr day, the Governor of Gibralter has refused to
Give them any more provisions the Admiral has ofred to sell out
his ship & Bng but Can get nothing for them. wee Expect in the
Course of a few days the Admiral with the Remains of his Crew will
d s o Make their Escape.
Wee ware esterda informed by an Inglish Cutter Just from
Barselony dc Goart d h o n e that a number of Tripolitan Cruisers
ware off shore to places and Blockading the American Ships, one of
the Cruisers ware seen in Chace of an American Ship and i t was supposed would be taken We have, i t not in our power to leave this
station without orders from the Cornadore, Capt Barron is Expecting
Orders dayley, when I presume we shall remove their A late acount has arived a t the Rock of the French preparing to
stack them in Combination with the Spaniards, their force is to be 40
sail of the line 1200 Gun Boats 50,000 men. The Troops stationed
a t Gibrdter is Dayley imployed in making their Fortifycations more
Extensive and stronger. The Spaniards is dayley Commiting Depradations on our Commerce in the sea - their is a t prosent six American
Vesels a t Algeirua prises to the Spanish Gun Boats and amongst the
Rest is the late Cap1 Mayley who is a mate with Ca,pt Flin in a ship
belonging to Philadelphm. W e e have not seen or heard from the
Predent or Essez since theIy] left us on the 5* of Apr

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS
We have been oblidged to put Sergt. Rodgers in irons today for
striking a Midshipman. Mr Fenwick says he will keep him Confined until we fall in with the other Shlps and then Try him b
courtmartis1 the remaining part of the detachment Behaves we
Capt Barron is mutch pleased with them. William is well, I understood by him he had wrote you that he had been Arestid. By Capt.
Barron. But you may rest assured the Capt. did not Consider it as
an Arest. The Cause was in working the ship it was Williams watch
on Deck Capt. Barron told lfim to atend to the men a t the Bray[?]
he thought William did not pay the atention he ought to have done
told him to walk down to his Apartment. The second day he resumed
his Command & done h i s duty as usual. he apeam now perfectly
satisfied & Desires to be remembred to you & the Family
Please to make my Respects to all the m c e r s a t Headquarters.

f

[MCA. LR, 1801.1
Extracts from journal of U. S. S. Eua, Captain William Bainbridge, U. 8. Bevy,
commanding
Saturday, 16 August 1801
Fore part of these 24 hours steady breezes - At 5 past 1 P M past by Cape
Carpe, it makes like a shelving rugged. Islet, I t is joined to the Main by a very
narrow low neck of land. To the WestwP of i t lies the town of Carpe - from
Cape Carpe to Cape Benedorme is 7 or 8 Milea between which there is a bay, a t
the bottom of it lies the town of Altier. Cape Benedorme makes very high &
remarkable steep on the sea side, a t the east end of the cape stands a tower,
about 2 miles from the West end is the small Island of knnedorme abreast of
which on the main lies the Village St Joseph
At 3 P M passed by said Island was 15 Miles from Cape La Honita, that forma
the East point of the Bay of Alicant - At 5 P M ordered the fleet to m&e the
best of their way & come to anchor in the bay of Alicant
At % past 7 the rear of the fleet having doubled Cape Honista, made sail, 5
pest 8 P M came round said Cape, doubling it pessed from 14 to 9 fathoms water
& then hauled our wind for the town of Alicant - M past 9 came to Anchor in
Ten fath. water, the w t l e on the hill above the town of Alicant bore N N W;
Alicant is very easily known by this castle, as it can be seen a long distance & t h e
walls runs down the hill quite to the Town - Between Cape Benedorme and
Alicant in the country is a very high Mountain with a remarkable gap in the top
of it, called St Georges Gap, it is cut as square as if it has been done by the hands
of Man.
At 6 AM Mr Montgomery's clerk came along side, & informed me Mr Montgomery was in france, & that there were but two American Vessels in port both
ready for sea, immediately made the signal for the fleet to get under way; a t 7
Weighed Anchor & sailed from Alicant, Wind S E. some of the fleet not able to
weather the island of plane, lay to until1 they effected it.
Ends clear & pleasant Weather
Sunday, 16 August 1801
Commences pleasant weather & light winds from the S E At 5 P M, six sail of
Swedish Merchant Vease18 came out of Tarviessa & joined the fleet - At 6 the
Island of plane bore N N E 5 E. 4 leagues. At the same time saw a Xebeck with
Latine sails to windward, bearing down on the fleet, gave chace, fired several
guns a t him to bring him to, At % before 7 he stood for us, At 7 crossed our
bows with red colors flying, saw they had Turbans on, ordered him immediately
to heave to, & lower away his sails made every motion possible for him to understand me, which had no effect, fired 2 guns ahead of him to no purpose The wind
dying away & falling calm fearful of his getting away, & every reaeon to beleive
him a Tripolitan Cruizer, fired into him, which cut sway his rigging & sails, &
mortally wounded one man, & obliged him to haul down his colors, boarded him,
found him to be a Moorish Vessel belonging to Tangier from Barcelona, Doctor
Wells went on board & dreseed the wounded man. At # past 9 the surgeon returned on board, filled away & thro' the night reconnoitred the fleet.
At 6 AM saw a frigate standing for the fleet out steering sslls & bore down on
her
A t 7 passed si &, an English Frigate, hauled into the fleet agsin, Waa
then Abreast of Cape
which cape may be eaeily known by the small Island
Formigues lying off it & the watch tower on the cape, it makes low.

-

RUM,

A t % paat 7 spoke the Martha requested Captain wince to run off Carthagena
& make the signal by firing guns in case that any American Vessels shhoud be
there, that they might embrace the convoy At 11 AM Mustered all hands & read the Articles of Wnr.
Monday, 17 Atcgust 1801
Thmughout these 24 hours clear weather & pleasant Easterly breezes.
At 2 P M the harbor of Carthagena bore N E % E 9 or 10 leagues, Carthagena
is easily known by the narrow entrance between two mountains and the Island off
the harbor, on the Larboard hand going
one
- in is two fortifications the uppermost
..
stands on a very high hill.
The Marlha led the fleet with A light. The Easez reconnoitred thro' the night.
At 6 AM made Cape de Gatt bearing W h' W. This Cape is easily known by the
watch towers, one on the Esgt point, two on the West, & several along it, on the
West point near the sea, on a s m d hi11 stands an old fortification, above it is one
of the West Wateh-Towers on the summit of the Cam,
There are many white spots along the Cape - A t G t 5 Miles to the East from
the West point is a small bay guarded b a white fortification that stands low
A t Meridian the town Almeria bore
b N. & Cape De Gatt E N E. [KA. ND original.]

d~

To Secretfry of the Navy from Captain Richard Dale, U. 6. Navy
On Board the U S SHIPPresiclent
Malta &rbou~ A?@ 18* 1801
SIR,My Letter to you of the 19* ult? from Tunis Bay Informs you
the Desternation of the Squadron under my command - I have
not heard from Either the Philadelphia or Essex since. - I
arrived of[f] Tripoli the 24 ultQthe 25" I received a letter from Mr
Nissen Consul for Denmarck a t Tripoli he was requested by M'
Cathcart to act for him in his absence, should there be a necessity for
it, this Letter was wrote by the request of the Bey to h o w my Intentions In coming off Tripoli, whether i t was to make war or peace, I
wrote him that my Intentions in the first Instance was friendly but the
act of his Excellency in declaring war against the United States had
put that dispo[si]tion, out of my Power & that I was determined to
take his Vessels of Every Description and his subjects where Ever I
could h d them, but a t the same time I should be glad if his Excellency
would Inform me, his reasons for declaring war against the United
States, and on what principles he Expected to make peace those points
I wished to be informed of, as soon as possible, that I might Inform
the President of the United States, and know his Determination
respecting the Business the next Day the Bey sent of[fj a Jew to negotiate for a peace or
Truce, I informed the Jew his Excellency had not Answered my Letter, I told him I was not Inpowerd to make a new Treaty, but if the
Bey would answer my letter, and send of[q one of his Officers and was
serious I n the Business I would then Treat with him about a Truce the Jew went on shore; I have not hearn from him since he wrote me
previous to this, that he had good reasons for Declaring War against
the U S but if I would come on shore, he was very certain that we
should be able to make a peace, he said he did not like the 1 & 12
Articles I n the Old Treat , he did not wish to have any thing to do
with the Dey of Algiers t t a t MI Cathcnrt was d w a y s telling him of
the Dey of Algiers Long ere you receive this the Government must have received Mr
Cathcarts Letters Informing of the Demands of the Be of Tripoli;
from the United States and pointing out what a ra[a]caI e is, in fact
the Dey of Algiers & the Bey of Tunis is as eat rascals as he the two
last was looking on, and encaurageing the Fey of Tripoli, to go in if

fi

WARS

WITH BARBARY POWERS

553

he made out well In his Demands they Intended to regulate their
Demands accordingly, but fortunately for the United States, the
arrivaI of the Squadron (which f have the Honor to Commd) I n
those seas has stop'd their mouths for the Present I t is to be lemented,
there was not three more Fri ates sent there is nothing like, sitting
out well a t first, I have been ed to beleave that MT MGDonogh (the
British Consul a t Tripoli) and Mr Cathcart hm not been friends
for some time past & that he is not friendly to the afairs of the United
States, that he has been pushing the Bey for some time past to commit
the act that he has done Persuading the Be that the U. S. was a t too
eat a distance to protect her trade I n t e Miditerranean, there is
ttle dependance to be placed in any man to manage the affairs of
the United States I n those regencys but those that is truly Interested
for the Honor and Welfare of His Country Should the United States Determin to carry on the War against
Tripoli i t will be highly necessary to keep i t closly Blockaded, not to
suffer any kind of Vessels, of any Nation to go in or come out, to do
this i t wdl take Two Frigates and two Sloops of F a r , two to be of[f]
the Harbour and two to cruise along the Coast, to the Eastwd and
Westward the will be under the necessity of going Into port for water
CP that must ge done by turns, also I think it would be advisable to
have a small Vessel constructed to carry a Bomb to heave a few shells
In the Town now & then the more this Mr Bey is Harrassed the sooner
he will be glad to make peace, and i t will have a good effect on the
other two powers they d l then see America is not to be trifled with
on the 30e ult" sent the Enterprize to this port for water, Expecting
a t that time she would be able to keep the President supply'd with
water so as not to be under the necessity of Quiting the coast of
Tripoli, to go Into port for water, but on her return back, I found she
brought so Little water, and that little so difficult to get out a t sea I
found that I should be under the necessity to go into port for water I n
CL few days, I put the time of[Q as long as it was prudent, Expecting
every day that the Philadelphia would Join me in that case one of the
ships would have remahled of[Q Tripoli until1 the other went Into
port for water I am Happy to Inform ou that the Enterprize on the 1"?1nst on
her passage to this place fe l in with a Polacre Ship Mounting 14 Guns
and 80 Men a Corsair Belonging to Tripoli, the lnclosed is a copy of
Mr Sterretts Letter to me which a4l give you an Acct of the action,
and the result of it. - Mc Sterrett is a Good Officer, and Deserves
well of his Country
After being 18 Days off Tripoli and seeing nothin in that time, but
two smdl Vessels, Tunisms one Bound In, and t e Other out and
receiving Infermation that the Bey had Boats stationed along the coast
boath to the Blastward & Westward, on the ll* Inst 1 determined to
run ra long the coast to the Westward as far as the Island of Pidussa
from Pidussa, to this place for water, I arrived here, the 169 Ins! saw
nothing on my Passage, I was Informed at Pidusa, that ten days before
ot there two Tripolian Corsairs had been there and robbed them of
there fowls - I have been Informed here that there is several
American Vessels In the ports of Sicily and along the coast of Naples
waiting to get protection to go down the Straits it is not Possible for
me to give them protection a t present - I shall loose no time in
returning off Tripoli again and shall remain there as long as my provision will k t (say about the 15'? Septr) I expect to s[a]ii from this

f

I

!E

?'

"h

3

554

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1785 TO 1801

place on the 20+ Inst I am Happy to Inform you that we continue to
be Healthy - I put this letter on Board of an English Frigate here
the Commander of her says i t is possible that he may go to Gibraltar,
if he does not he will put it in a way to get there, the figate is Just from
Egypt, he says i t is not Possible for the French to hold out much longer,
from every Infermation that I can get, i t must be the case h4dta
is a very fine Harbour, but Very narrow to go in and out, d t h o the
Government appear to be friendly towards us, I should not advise
any of our ships of war to come in here for supplies there is nothing but
water to be got here, they have so many ships, here I n general in want
of that article i t takes some time to get supplied, I am Informed the
best place to get every kind of supplies is a port on the Island of Sicily
by the name of &ryosa [NDA photostat, Dale LB, 1801-1802.1

To lieutenunt Andrew Sterett, U. S. Ravy, from Captain Richard Dale, U. S. Bevy

On Board the UNITED
STATES
SHIPPresident,
M t a Harbour 1fi Au.5 1801
SIR,YOUwill Please to proceed with the United States schooner
Enterprize under your Command with all Possible dispatch off Tripoli
& there Cruise untill I Join you, which I Hope will be In two Days
after you get there, you will Just keep In sight of the Land, at such a
Distance as not to be seen from the shore, should you take any prize,
you will keep them with you until1 I Join you. let me Impress on your
mind, not to run any risque In going alongside of Vessels that may be
above your force, and at the same time not to treat small ones with
contempt but rtllways be on your guard - I Expect you will meet with
the Philadelphia, Should that be the case you will request Cap5 Barron
to remain of[f] Tripoli untill I Join him, if he is not in Great want of
water, should that be the case you will Inform him, to go to Saragosa
In Sicely for water that I do not think Malta a proper place Should any unforeseen accident happen to the President so as to
prevent her from Joining you In 10 or 12 Days you will proceed back
to this place to know the cause Should you not hear of me hear you
will proceed to Gibrdta and there wait untill. some one of the Ships
arrives, by the time you get there your Provisions will be nearly expg
Should you ha-ve taken any Prizes before you return back to this place,
you will dispose of them In the same Maner that you Did the other
[P. S,] Since writing the above orders for you to proceed to Tripoli
I have thought proper that you should In the first Inst proceed to
Saraosa in the Island of Sicily there to Inform your self what kind of a
port it is, and what kind of reception our Ships of War wiU meet with if
the go their If they can be supplyed with water and Fresh Provisions,
an on what tirms; you will make your stay there as short as Possible,
you will call by this place as you return to know if the President has
sailed if She has you will follow her, if not you will la ofIf] an[d]
on untill she comes out you will make every enquiry n Sicely to
know there is any American Merchant, Vessels there is in the Different Ports -

1

9

[NDA photostat, Dale LB, 1801-1802.1

WARS WITH BABBARY POWERS

555

To the Governor of Saragossa from Captain Richard Dale, U. 8. Bavy

On Board the U STATESSHIPPresident
Malta Harbour Augt 18 1801

HI^ EXCELLENCY
The Governor of Saragosa,
SIR, This will be Handed you by Cap$ Sterrett commander of the
United States schooner Enterprize attached to A squadron that I have
the Honor to command In those seas, I send him to your Port for the
purpose of knowing if i t is a safe Harbour if Fresh Provisions, and
water is to be had there, should any of the ships belonging to the Squadron put in there
The Bey of Tripoli having declared war against the United States there will be ships of war Belonging to the United States I n those seas
for some t h e to come. [NDA photostat, Dale LB, 1801-1802.1
Extract from journal of U. 8. 8. k,
Captain William Beinbridge, U. 8. Ravy,
commanding, Tuesday, 18 August 1801
Fore part of these 24 hours, pleasant Easterly winds running along the Spanish
Shore with the fleet
Middle part calm, Latter part Westerly Wind.
At 10 AM Made all sail in chace of several Vessels in the East, displayed the
signal for the fleet to heave to, with the Larboard tacks aboard
Ends very light airs almost calm - Latitude Observed 36O 41' N.
[NA. N D original.]
To John Gavino, U. 6. Consul, Gibraltar, from Captain Bichard Dale, U. S. Navy

On Board the UNITEDSTATESSHIPP r e d n t
AIdta Harbour 19+ Augc 1801
SIR,YOUwill please to forward the Inclosed letters to America by
the first Oppertunity I put into this place for water, but shall sail again in a few days for
Tripoli there has several Letters past betwen the Bey and my self,
his pride wont let him sny, that he is sorry for what he has done, he
wrote me if I would come on shore he was Very certain that we should
make peace or a Truce for a certain time I wrote him if he was serious
in the Business to send one of his OfIicers on Board; I have not since
hearn from him; - I am happy to Inform you that M' Sterrett in the
Schooner Enterprize, fell in with one of his corsairs, off this Island
on the Ist Ins! She mounts 14 Guns & 80 men, he took her after an
action of three hours, he killed 20 of their men & wounded 30, - Not
a man hurt on Board the Schooner, - I am anxi[ous] to know what
is become of Cap$ Barron and the Tripolian Admiral, I hope the
Admiral will never see Tripoli again (that is in his ship, you. may
Expect to see me about the Grst of October my Provisions d be
nearly Ex ended by that time I hope the store ships has arrived
safe, the ey's Corsairs has not taken any of our Merchant Vessels
as yet I sincerely hope they may not take any -

8

[NDA photostat, Dale LB, 1801-1802.1
To William Eaton, U. 8. Consul, Tunis, from Captain Richard Dale, U. 8. Navy

UNITEDSTATESSHIPPresi&.e7d
MaUa Augc 19* 1801 SIR,I came into this place on the 16*?Ins! for water I shall d
again to morrow for the Coast of Tripoli, - you will plesse to Inform

556

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1786 TO 1801

the Bey of Tunis that it is hghly necessary that the Merchants
Ships belongkg to his Subjects, should have your pass, I shall give
three months for this regulation to take place after that time I shall
take all those that say they are Tunisans that has not got your
Certificate certifying the Same, i t is not Possible for me to know a
Tunisan from n Tripolian, I have let two Vessels pass allread that
called them selves Tunisans all tho I had some reason to th&
&el
whare T r i p o h my respect and wishing to keep on good terms wit
the Bey of Tunis prompt me to do it there has been several letters
past betwen me and the Bey of Tripoli and my self I am confident
he is very sorry for acting as he has done towards the U S but his
pride wont let him say so
I am Happy to inform you that Cap! Sterrett in the Schooner
Enterprize has taken one of the Tripolian corsairs mounting 14 Guns
& 80 men, after an action of three Hours, the corsair had 20 men
killed & 30 wounded, the Schooner had not a man Hurt, - this action
took place on the l* Ins; about 7 Leagues to the Westward of Malta.
I am In hopes we shall fall I n with the moast of Them
[NDA photostat, Dale LB, 1801-1802.1

To Samuel Wiiliams, U. 6. Consul, London, England, from Captain Richard Dole
U. S. Navy

SAMUELWILLIAMS
Esq?

On Board the U S SHIPPresidt!nd
Malta Harbour 1P Augt 1801

American Consd; London
SIR, YOUwill please to forward the Inclosed letter, by the k t
Oppertunity to the United States,- I put into this place the 16*
Inst for water. I shall sail to morrow again for the Coast of Tripoli,
the Schooner, Ederprize commanded by Lieu! Sterrett, attached to
the Squadron that I have the Honor to command on the first Inst
6 or 7 Leagues to the Westward of Malta fell in with a Tripolian corsair
mounting 14 Guns and 80 men, He took her after an action of three
Hours, the Corsair had 20 men Uled and 30 wounded, there was not
a man hurt on board the Schooner; the corsairs of Tripoli have not
taken any American Vessels as yet; I have Blocked up the Admiral
and one other corsair In Gibraltar, I found him there on my arrival.his Intentions ware to have gone Into the MTestorn Ocean to cruise
for American Vessels,- I fortunately arrived In time, to prevent him,
at least I hope so, I left the Frigate Philadelphia off Gibraltar on the
4* of July to watch his motions I have not hearn from her since, of
course I take it that the Admiral is still in Gibraltar.[NDA photostat, Dale LB, 1801-1802, and SDA, CL, vol. 8, London.]
Circular to Commanding O5cers of U. S. Ships of War concerning general rules
of conduct in U. 6. Bavy and Yarine Corps
~ A S H I N G T O N D.
,

%QT
&I
BUBmwB
TO

con: BAXUY,
CAPTAINS.

Tnvr.~ln,

20"

C.]
Nuv: dep, 19 Aug! 1801.
SIR,TO correct certain erroneous opiniom - to introdurn a regular and respectful subordination - and
to establish an energetic Government on board of the
Ships of the United States - I have found it necessary

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

1

%'?

557

to adopt, and to send forth the following Instructions,
which you will be pleased to consider as Rules of Conduct to you upon the point8 to which they relate. Ship of the United States, there must be
observed
In
y the Marines, as well as b the Seamen, a
ed Submission
respectful Subordination and an unqua&i
to the orders of the Captain or commanding OfEcer of
such Ship. All persons whatsoever on board, Marines as well as
Seamen, shall cheerfully, promptly and without any
appearance of hesitation, obey every order given by
the Captain or commanding OfEcer: and no person
shall on board presume to object to or in any mamncr or
form question the Propriety of any such order.
The Captain and other Officers of the Ship will consider the Marines as deserving objects of their regard
and attention as the Seamen; and they will not wantonly subject either the one or the other Corps to duties
which do not regularly appertain to their respective
Departments. Seamen are not to be ordered to do the
duty of Sentinels or to perform any of the other appropriate duties of the Marine Corps, and the Marines
are not to be ordered to go aloft or to perform any other
acts of mere Seamanship. To prescribe in detail to the Sea and Marine Officers,
their several and respective Authorities and duties,
with all the proper modifications, would, in practice,
greatly embarrass the Government of a Ship, & would
~nevitablytend to produce endless altercation, and a
consequent confusion, that would be seriously and extensively injurious to the Service. - And hence results
the indispensable necessity of committing, without restriction, the absolute and exclusive command of the
Ship to the Captain, or commanding Officer, who from
every consideration of Public good, and personal responsibility will be zealously interested in the Appearance the g;ood Conduct, the discipline and the happiness
of the Marines as well as of the Seamen. No Gentleman worthy of the honor of commanding
a Ship in the Navy of the United States, will ever be
ca able of an Act so abhorrent to the Principles of an
d o e r as to abuse this eat and important Authority.
If, however, there sho d ever occur, an instance of a
gross abuse of this power - such transgression will
upon a proper representation thereof, be a subject of
serious enquiry in this Department.
Marines before they are attached to a Ship, are under
the Command of the Lieutt Col? Commdt of the Marine
Co s: but after they are so attached, the command of
the 'eut Col? Commdiover them ceases, and from that
moment, the Marines, Officers as well as privates, are
under the command of the Captain or commanding
officer of such Ship. And the Marines so attached to
a Ship are not to be removed from her but by the order
of t b department; nor is any officer of Marines, so

?f

'E

558

hTAVALOPERATIONS FROM 1786 TO 1801
attached to a Ship, to obtain leave of absence upon
furlough, but by the order of the Captain or commandin Officer of such Ship or of this department. If a b a r b e on Board of any Ship of the United
States, should a t any time be desirous of becoming a
Seaman, and the Captain of such ship should be well
satisfied, from his ersonal knowledge of his Merits
that he deserves suc promotion, and also that such an
advancement would contribute to the good of the
Service, he is authorised to make such trapsfer and
promotion, subject, however, to the supemtending
Control & ratification of this Department. An Officer of Mnrines has no rank on Board a Ship of
the United States, over any of the OfiEicers of such
Ship. -

1

[NDA, OSW, Vol. 5, 1801-1802.1
h a , Captain William Bainbridge, U. 6. Raw,
commanding,Wednesday, 19 August 1801
These 24 hours commences light breezes from the Eastward & clear weather,
3 P M discovered the sails we were in chace of were Merchant Vessels, gave over
the chace, & hauled our Wind for the fleet, displayed several signals, the greater
part of the convoy were very inattentive to them, were obliged to fire several guns,
to make them a i l in close order - Middle & latter part very light airs.
Applying to Windward along the Spanish Shore I find that we have a Southerly
current. Latitude Observed 3ii0 28 N.
[NA. ND original.]

Extract from journal of U. 6. 8.

Circnlar letter to certain Navy Agente and Captain Thomas Tingey, from
Secretary of the Bevy

[WASHINGTON,
D. C.]
Nav: Dep, $0:Augt 1801

To WOODBORY
LANGDON,
Podmouth, N:H:
hbrjolkSAMUEL
BROWN,
B o ~ ~ M L , WILLIAMPENNOCK,
DANIEL
LVDLOW
- N. York, Cap$ T H O ~ I N G E Y
It is very desirable that the preparations for the buildmg of the 74
Gun Ships authorized by Law should progress with all possible dispatch. - I have therefore to request that you will be leased to
l the Mafurnish me with a complete Statement or Inventory of aY
terials you have purchased or have otherwise on hand for the Ship to
be built a t [space) particularly designating the quantities of plank
thick Stuff &o procured of the order and estunate transmitted to your
Predecessors by this Department in September 1799, what remains to
be exscutcd of that order and estimate, The quantity of live oak
Timber received from Georgia. The Method adopted for seasoning
and preserving the Timber as i t is collected & the Situation it is in in
those respects. Also that ou will favor me with a Statement of what
remains yet to be
[NDA.

GLB, Vol. 4, 1800-1801.1

Extracts from journd of U. 8,S. Estu, Captain William Bainbridge, U. 6. Navy,
commcnnding
Thursdag, 20 August 1801
AU thew 24 hours very light aim from the NQ & EQBteerr by the wind. from
N W to N distance 36 m i l a & made 26' southing, a rapid current setting

s b E.

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

559

At 5 AM discovered a number of strange mile to the East & West of our Convoy,
coud not see the land No particular occurrences. Was this day joined by an
American Mercht Ship from Carthagena, she came out laat Sunday, after Captain
Prince had left the harbor.
Latitude Obeerved 36' 02' N.
Friday,d l August 1801
Almost all of these 24 hours calm, only went 10 miles North pr Log, notwithstanding this Northing we made 25 Miles Southing, by a South Current, At 10
~ a w
the land about Albouzeme on the Moorish shore bearing from S to S W.
diatanoe 8 or 10 leagues.
No particular Occurrences. Tho whole of the American Merchant Vessels in
company, with the convoy 23 sail in all. - Latitude Obaerved 35O 37' N.
Saturday, 2.2 August 1801
Commences light winds from the W N W,
At 4 P M began to breeze. Middle part smart breezes from West. At 2 AM
several ships & brigs apparently a convdy, paaaed thro' our fleet, got all hammocks
& stowed them, wore ship & stood under the lee of our fleet & reconnoitred, the
strange sails kept their course to the Eastward, two of them a
ared like frigates
Latter part blowing smart gales from the WestwQ. At 5 ~ r m a d the
e land. At
11 AM the town.of Almunica bore N N E distant 3 leagues to the WestwQof
which about 3 mlles is Castle Torres situated near the sea with several Towers
round it, & about 2 Miles up on the side of the Mountain is a Village.
The bay in which this Castle makes has several villages.
Latitude Observed 36" 38' N.
Sunday, $3 August 1801
Commences clear weather & strong breezes from the Westward, with a tumbling
head Sea & current setting to the Eastward. At 6 P M discovered 2 polacre ships
in the East about 8 Miles from us At 7 P M they appeared to be standing close hauled for some of the fleet, very
suspieious looking vessels. beleiving them to be Tripolitan Cruizers and fearful
of their getting amongst the rear of the fleet in the night. Made a signal to speak
the Martha requested Captain Prince to lead the fleet whilst the E88m brought up
the rear. At 112 past 11 one of the Polacres close aboard of us, got instantly to
quarters fired 4 shott a t her, found she was Greek vessel 10 guns & 41 Men. At
Midnight made sail for the fleet, At 5 AM was 5 or 6 miles astern! of them, got
becalmed, when they had a breeze, At 8 AM was driving fast on the shore, h ~ g h
Iron bound coast, got all boats out, endeavored as much as possible to keep clear
of the dangerous shore, found no alternative left to save us but anchoring in the
open sea, in 40 fathom water
We anchored about 2 or 3 Miles to the Eastwd of Almuncia abreast of two
towers & where there is a beautiful cascade of water, the fleet appeared not to
have the current that set us to the EastwQ Monday, 24 August 1801
Commences calm, lying a t anchor in 50 fathom water about 3 Miles to the
EastwQof Almunica, Castle Torres bore W b N & a cape to the east of us S E
b E - At 4 P M sprung up a light breeze from the West, hove up Anchor &
got under way, boats ahead, found that we were drifting in shore, obliged to let
go the anchor.
At 8 P M light breeze from South, hove up the anchor and made all sail on the
ship instantly I dont think it was more than 20 minutes from the time of first
manning the capstan, before Royals & staymils were on the ship & the anchor
to the bows At Midnight got in amongst the fleet, At 4 A M close off the harbor of Malaga, At 5 A M being no wind, & fearful of the current setting us to
the Eastward, Made a signal for the flcet to anchor At 5 past 8 came to in 25 fathom water, the lsrge church bearing N N W. &
the signal tower N E b N, distance about 3 Miles from the Mole The bay of
Malaga is a pretty good one, on acct of its madual s11oaline;s& good holding ground,
I t is exposed to the Sea Winds from 8 W to East, but 1 presume a vessel well
found in ground tackle woud ride any gale out, The Mole is large, 7 fathom
water a t the entrance, R: shoals on to 3 fathom sufficiency of water for m y
Frigate.
past 9 Mr Kirkpatrick came on board, a t Meridian sent Lt Decatur on
At
shore & got pratick, find there are no American Vessels ready to sail from this
for the Westwd before the 15 of next Month, all our fleet anchored here except
the ship hTeslon,which I expect ran by the Port.
[NA. ND original.]

-

-

560

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1786 TO 1801

To DeButts & Purvimce, Leghorn, Italy, from Captain Richard Dale, U. 8. Hsvy

On Board the UNITEDSTATES
SHIP President
08Tripoli Augf 65.1801
GENTL'S~When I lef America, i t was my Intentions to have spent
several Days a Leghorn you have known long ere you receive this:
by Letters that you have received from the Government of the United
States, that I have a credit on your House for a certain Am$ (should
I want it) for the use of the Squadron that I have the Honor to
Command
On my arrival at Gibraltar, contrary to my Expectations 1 found
two Tripolian corsairs laying there bound Into the Western Ocean
to cruise against the commerce of tfhe United States, that the Bey
of Tripoli had declrrred war against the United States. I t then became Necessary for me to distribute my force In such a malmer, as
to counteract the Intentions of the Bey & his Admiral, and a t the
same time, to give as much protection, to the commerce of the United
States as lay in my power, as the Squadron is Very much seperated
and not knowing what accident may happen to any one of the ships,
nor what port they may be under the necessity to put into I will
thank you to write your friends in Toulon Car[t]hngena, and the
Island of Sicily say the port of Saraosa i t being the most conveniant
to the Coast of Tripoli that the commanders may Draw on your
House for what money they may want for the use of their ships, sa
Cap* Sam! Barron, William Barnbridge and Andrew Sterrett, I s t 4
have hopes of h a ~ i n gthe pleasure of seeing you before the Winter
setts in
INDA photostat, Dale LB, 1801-1802.1
To James Leander Cathcart, U. 6. ex-Consul, Tripoli, at Leghorn, from Captain
Richard Dale, U. S. Bavy

On Board the U STATESSHIP President
08 Tripoli Augt 9'5') 1801
SIR,I have just returned from Malta where 1 have been to get water,
I was Informed a t Malta that the Tripolian Admiral, was still a t
Gibraltar, the Philadelphia keeps him In there, I am happy to Inform
you that the United States Schooner Enterprize Commanded by Mr
Sterrett; on the I* Ins: fell In with Yellow sided Polncrea corsair
belonging to Tripoli, mounting 14 Guns & 80 Men Mr Sterrett took
her after an action of three Hours, the Corsair had 20 men killed and
30 wounded there was not a mnn hurt on board the Schooner; you see
we make your promiss good to the Bey - that the Americans will
fight - the Bey is much mortified, that so small a Vessel should take
one of his corsairs,-On my k t arrival of[q this place the Bay sent
a jew oflfl to know if my intentions was peace or war, I Informed him
my first Intentions was peace, but he had put it out of my power to
continue so, as he had declared war against the United States, he
wrote me the next Day that if I would come on shore he was very
certain we should be able to make a Just and Honorable peace I
wrote him for answer that I could not come on shore a t present.
But if he would Inform me his reasons for declaring war against the
United States, and on what principles he Expected to make a peace
&F &F I would then talk to h i on the subject.
I have not heard from
him since, the fact is he is a t a loss a t present to know what to say
he lives in hopes that some of his corsam will take some of our Ves-

561

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

sels - Should that be the case, and he get them safe in (I sa God
come
forbid) he will then talk Very Big: I have no doubt but he
to his sences durin the next summer, when the Port of Tripoli is
close blockaded an now and then heave a few shells into the Town
to amuse him. he dont sleep well at present, he will sleep less then,
I am still in great hopes of Geting hold of his Admiral, & long to take
him to America - I shall be under the necessity of leaving this
place about the 10"Pf next month and proceed to Gibraltar for
Provisions there is a deposit of stores there for the squadron; i t will
not be in my Power to call a t Leghorn without the Philadelphia
should join me soone, in that case it may be possible, Capt. Bainbridge has got my orders, to give every assistance in his power, to
the Commerce of the United States (that is in the Mideterranean)
the Bey of Tripoli has five Corsairs out a t Present Counting the
Admiral, there is three in Port two ships One is the Swead, and one
Polacrea. -

d

f

[NDA photostat, Dale LII, 1801-1802.1
To Secretary of State from William Kirkpatrick, U. S. Consul, Malaga, Spain

MALAGA
26 Augusl1801
SIR, YOUwill find annexed duplicate of what I had the honor of
adressing you on the 2 d Inst. thro' Lisbon, Yesterday Morning the
Frigate Essex came safe into our Bay, with Twenty three Sail of
Merchant Vessels principally loaded on the Coast of Catalonia for
different Ports in America, & the North of Europe, Cap! Bainbridge
proceeds the first moment of a favorable Wind, to escort his Convoy
thro' the Gut. By the last accounts from Gibraltar it appears the two Tripolitm
Crulzers remain blocked up by the Frigate Philadelphia, and that the
crews were deserting fast in consequence of having no provisions,
some had been fumshed by the Emperor of Morocco, & probably
more may be sent over to permit them attempting to get out, they
are however so closly watched that it will be a very difficult Matter to
escape tho Vigilence of Cape'Barron The Sickness which last Season raged with such violence a t Cadiz,
Seville & Adjacent Towns, has not returned this, thank God, and
People in General seem to apprehend little danger that it will now, so
advanced in the year,
P. S. Since writin the foregoing I have received a Letter from Mr
Gavino dated Gibra tar 14 Inst of which I enclose Copy for Your
information,

7

[NA. SDA. CL, Malaga, Vol. 1, June 1793-June 1814.1

Extract from journal of U. S. S. E s a , Captain William Bainbridge, U. 6. Navy,
commanding, Thursday, 27 August 1801
Commences light aim from the Southward & Westward
Throughout the night calm
At 9 AM light aim from South, Made the signal & got under way, latter part
employed in beating out of the bay, find some of the Vessels get to leward
[NA. ND original.]

562

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1786 TO 1801

To William Eaton, U. 6. Consul, Tunis, from Captain Richard Dale, U. S. Navy

On Board the UNITED
STATESSHIPPresident
off Tripoli Augt 98t51801 SIR, I have the pleasure to Inform you, that I have just received

your Dispatches, to me by your Polacer; of the 24'h Ult? the 1 & 11
Insu Allso the Inclosed notes, the 26 Ins: I received Copys of the
Same from the Danish Commodore which you sent by him You giving Infermation in Tunis that I had Blockaded Tripoli
Meets with my approbation; I have been determined for some time
past, not to suffer a Vessel of any Discription or Nation to enter the
r t of Tripoli that had any Cargo In. I gave that Infernation to the
g y p sAgent in Malta, should the English think proper to send Empty
Vessels to Tripoli for stock, I shall not prevent them, they are our
friends I have found them so boath in Gibraltar and Malta they know
what is right, respecting a Blocliaded Port.
I am happy to Inform you, that there has not a Vessel of any discription gone I n or come out of the Port of Tripoli since I have been
away, the Bey has three Corsairs in port two ships and one Polacre,
one ship of 20 Guns the other 18 the Polacre 12, their mils are Bent,
but he can not get men to go to sea in them, the Admiral is still in
Gibraltar; that E the reason you doe not see the Philadelphia. The
lattempt to come to Tripoli,
Bey has onlv three corsairs out, that d
say two ~rsjlies,and one Polacre, I am looking out for them Every
day - Your Polacre firrived at Malta two Days after I sailed, the
Enterprize returning from Saraosa a poart in Sicily where I had sent
her, stoped a t Malta to see if I had sailed, found her there & brought
her on here, if the Cap! had given the dispatches to Mr Sterrett, i t
would have prevented him from coming here, & saved much time The Danish Commodore would not tell me how he settled his
Nations affairs with the Bey of Tripoli, but said, he did not give him
much money. he did not seam to be Communicative respecting what
was going on, on shore, or what was said respecting the War between
the Bey & the United States - Mr Nissen the Danish Consul
appears to be friendly from the Communications that I have had
with him,The Inclosed Letter is rt copy of one that I wrote you from Malta.
I have in that said I will give three Months for the Merchant Ships,
to Furnish themselves with your Pass; it is not to be understood that
your pass Will screen any Merchant Ship belonging to Tanis or any
other Nation, bound to Tripoli should they attempt to enter the port
without my Leave, while i t is under Bloclcade by my Orders. - I
am sorry to say that I have recv'd Information at Malta, that the
Corsairs belonging to the Bey of Tunis has in several Instances
Boarded and plundered American Vcssels of Provisions and such other
articles as they wanted - you will Please to Inform tho Bey .In the
way that ou may think the most pfrjudent, that I am Determined to
have the ag of the United States respected by tho Corn@ belonging
to him & the other Powers of Barbary, In Friendship with the
United States, you will please to Inform the Bey if I continue to hear,
that his Corsairs Continue to disrespect the Flag of the United States,
I shall conceive their Violence Sanctioned by him, and that he no
longer wishes to be in friendship with the United States, and However
painfull i t may be to q e , I shall be under the necessit to Chrtstise
them for it - You wrll please to Inform hlm how h q ly necessary

A

i

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

563

it is, that he should Impress on the Minds of his Commanders, to pay
that due respect, to the Flag of the United States, that ought to be
paid to a Nation I n friendskp with him, - the United States wishes
to be at Peace with all Nations but She Will not suffer her Flag to be
Insulted by any Nation.
[HB of Pa. and Dale LB.]
Extract from journal of U. S. S. Eurx, Captoin William Bainbridge, U. 6. Bavy,
commanding, Friday, 28 August 1801
Commences very light aim from S W to 8 S W finding the fleet falling to Leward. At I P M made the signal for the fleet to go into harbor, & come to anchor,
Wore Ship & stood in, At paat 1 P M, anchored in 22 fath. Water, the p t
chu(r]ch N % W the signal tower N E b E.
At 34 ppast 6 P M made the signal for the fleet to get under way, At 7 weighed
anchor $ sailed, throughout the night beating out of the harbor very light Birs
but find dong shore we have a '(TTwterly Current At 7 A M found we had all the fleet except the Rabo & Betsy which did not obey
the signal - Ends very light airs inclining to calm [NA. ND original.]
To Captain Richard Dale,U. S. Bavy, from Charles A. Iggestrom

GOTHENBURG
29'P A@ 1801,
SIR: Having a number of aquaintances and Correspondents in the
United States of America in whose freindship I put a great value, this
Connection inspires me with a full Confidence to address you this
letter which I hope will be delivered you by Captq M a e @Blomster of
the Swedish Ship Occonomien, having a valuable Cargo on board for
my Account destined for Naples.
The unfortunate Predicament in which I find myself as Subject to
his Majesty the King of Sweden, as well as all the Citizens of the
United States with Respect to the Tripolitans or the Barbarians on
the Africa Coast who are exercicing their Cruelties against all merchant Ships of our Nations makes me take my refuge to you Su,
praying you to take the above said Capt with my Cargo, as well as
all other Ships belonging to me which you may rencounter in the
Mediterranean or elsewhere under your valuable protection, and see
the same, if ppssible or convenient to you, safe to their ports of destlnation, knowmg that you command a suEcient Force to cruise all
over those parts of the Mediterranean Seas in which any attempts
of the said Barbarians might be feared. Permitt me Sir in Revenge to assure you that I shd! esteem myself
extreemly happy and gratified whenever I shall have lt m my power
$0 render any service or assistance to any of the Ipdividuds of your
respected Nation coming to this place or to thls Country. - I
should particularly rejoice to see yourself or any of your Squadron
enter this harbour!! CHARLES
A. IGGEBTROM
(25) (Private)

[E. C. Dele Col.

NDA.

A-4.1

Extracts from journal of U. 6. S. h e x , CsptDin William Boinbridge, U. S. Bavy,
commanding
Saturday, 39 Auglrst 1801
Begins hot $ sultry weather with tight airs from S.
A t Meridian saw the rock of Gibraltar bearing W b S. 5 S. distant about 15
leagues.
A t 2 P M spoke a Danish Bri from Leghorn. A t 3 sent the pinnace to try
the current, found it setting 6 b
1% Miles pr Hour from 4 to 6 P M heard a
very heavy cannonading to the Westwg

6

564

NAVAC OPERATIONS FROM 1786 TO 1801

Throughout the night very heavy dews & light airs At 9 AM being off the rook
of GibraItar the fleet astern with a smart Essterly wind coming down, sent the
pinnace with an ofEcer on shore to enquire the news lay to until1 the fleet come up,
find we have a counter current setting to the Wmtwg. I can discover nothing of
the Philadelphia frigate
Sunday, 30 August 1801
Commences pleasant Weather, with smart easterly breezcs, At 1 P M proceeded through the straits with the fleet. At 2 P M the Pinnace returned,
infomcd the two Tripolitan Comaires are laid up & had only 20 men belonging
to the Vessels, their admiral had gone to Malta in an English Veaoel At 2 P M brought to a Spanish Gunboat that was in chace of a Portuguese
schooner, under convoy with several others of a frigate, detained the boat to
enquire who he was, which time the frigate might have saved the schooner, but
he most shamefully neglected it. Of course the Spaniards captured her At 4 P M sent my letters on board the Mudha & the Cornet. At 6 P M the fleet
under full sail several of them down to Cape Spartel. The Essez under easy a i l
to bring u the rear of the fleet.
parted from them. Throughout the night excessively foggy, lying to
At 8 P
off Spartcl, with the cxpectatiou of falling in with the Frigate Philadq
At 7 AM coud discover nothing of her, made sail
At 8 wss abreast of Tangier, a t Meridian was off Europa point, in 4 hours
beat to Windward with the wind right on end, 30 Miles.
Ends clear & plessant Weather strong easterly breezes, bound in to Gibraltar
to obtain a supply of provisions Monday, 31 Augwt 1801
Commences clear Weather & easterly breezw, standing in for the harbor of
Gibraltar. At 2 P M came to an anchor in 11 fath. Water, abreast of the ragged
staff, a Britirrh 74 Gun shi lying in the bay, the Pratick officer came along side,
& gave prstick - At 4 M The American Cons111 came on b a r d . At 5 went
on shore, he informed mc that the Philodelphza had not been seen since the 20'4
Ins* & that there was no provisions to be had.
I requested that he woud try & borrow some from the Victualling office - At
7 sent an OBcer on shore to M? Cavino, to know the result, hi8 answer was t l ~ c
victualling office coud neither lend nor sell, & what i t was possible to pick up
woud be about 3000 'b a t the rate of 44 dollltrs pr Tierce, weight 310 'b.
At 8 AM several masters of Vessels came on board respecting convoy. there
were 4 sail, 2 bound to Malaga & 2 to Barcelona. I informed them that there
was but very little danger, & that I was bound out to look for the Philadelphia
Frigate, but tomorrow Morning I woud hokt a signal & fire two guns, when they
coud come out & get. protection from the Gun boats clear of the rock.
At +/1 paat 8 AM weighed anchor & beat out of the bay of Gibraltar under
double reefed topsails, At 5 past 10 just weathered the rock - Ends strong
breezes from the Southw4 & Westwd bound out to look for Capt. Barron stretching
by the wind for Tetuan [NA. ND origind.]

fi

8

To Hicholae C. Bisaen, Danish Consul, Tripoli, from Captain Richard Dale,
XJ. 8. Ravy

On Board the U S SHIPPresident
03Tripoli, A ~ g 31
t * 1801 SIR, Yesterday I Took out of a Greek Vessel, bound into Tripoli,
one Tripolian Officer, 20 Soilders, 14 Merchants 5 Women & one Child
Most of the Merchants have their Familys In Tripoli., -all of them
appear to bo very mvch distressed In there present ~ltuat~ions,
from
Humanity and not wishing they should feel the Hardships of wm, I
have sent three of them on shore In my Boat, with this Letter, you
will please to Inform, His Excnlle[n]cy the Bey, that if he will send
of[Q a Boat for the remainder, and will consider them in Exchange
for as many (or what is Customery) American Prisoners that he has
or may have During the resent, Disagreable war between the two
nations, I will send them a on shore, should the Bey think properr not
to receive them, I Expect my Boat and the three Prrsonere will be eent

i

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

565

off - as I shall dispose of them I n another way - By the rools of war
Tripoli is under Blockade by the U. S. Ship President and Enterprise
under my Command I am determined not to suffer any Vessel (that I
can prevent) to enter the port of Tripoli that has any cargo in. You will please to Inform His Excellency that he is much mistaken
I n the Character of the Americans,if he thinks they are to be Frighten'd
they love peace, but it must be an Honorable one and when ever his
Excellency may think Proper to conlmunicate his Sentiments in that
way to me I shall be happy to receive them that I may send them to
the Government of the United States [NDA photostat, Dale LB, 1801-1802.1

[l September 18011
To Yajor Perkins lagra, Britiah Agent and Consul General, Tunis, from
William Eaton. U. S. Consul, Tunis

To MAJORPERKINS
MAGRA
His lSritanic Majesty'g Agent and Consul General
for the City and Kingdom of Tunis
SIR,I t is a disagreeable task the duty of my public trust imposes on
me to present to you and through you to his Britanic Majesty That a
certain Bryan Mwonough, by birth an Irishman, Physician to the
Bashaw of Tripoli in Barbary, actually charged with the affairs of his
Britanic Majesty in that Regency, has for a long time pursued a system of conduct in that regency hostile to the United States of America;
that he has been notoriously instrumental in stimnlating that Bashaw
to make war against the said United States; and that he is now not
only aiding by his counsel, the measures of offence and aggression
carrying into operation by said Bashaw against said States but is
actually planning and encouraging projects of an attack upon the
American squadron now before Tri oh in direct violation of the treaties
subsisting between his Britanic h ajesty and the Government of the
United States of America. For the support of these articles of charge
I pledge myself. Conduct in a public Agent so injurious to the
interests of my nation, so inconsistent with the faith and friendship
of our two nations, and so derogatory to the honor of the nation he
represents cannot but excite some sensibility an our part, and, I am
persuaded, will not escape investigation and punishment on yours But, what is most remarkable, Mr MFDonough is racticing these
injuries against us in violation of his private faith p&hted to us, a t
least so far as respects his neutrality in all our affairs w ~ t hTripoly, for
a pecuniary c o d e r a t i o n . This precaution, on our part, was taken a t
an early period of our intercourse with Tripoli because it was intimated
to us that this same Mr MqDonough was in the habit of raising a
revenue from the imbroils he had the influence to create between that
Bashaw and Christian nations by afterwards insinuating himself as a
mediator between the parties - You cannot be ignorant, Sir, that
this species of fraud is not uncommon to most of the half renegades we
see here., who from motives of gain, or fugitives from justice, abandon
a christian country & attach themselves to the service of these Barbary princes: I n this class of Speculators Mr MqDonough holds a
distinguished Chnracter.
'I pray you will have the goodness to transmit a copy of this resentment to such of his Britanic Majesty's Ministers as have the uperin-

4

8

566

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1786 TO 1801

tendence of this de artment as I shall do to the Minister of the United
States near his & ajesty, in order that it may be laid before your
Court.
Sep. 1. 1801 The foregoing is a copy of a remonstrance which I [Wlliam
Eatonl lodged in the British chancery office in Tunis the day of it's
date: which I also forward to the American Minister in London by the
same express which carries this to Gibraltar - Mr Cathcart has
always complained of him (MqDonough) and undoubtedly with good
reason, as a very meddlesome, misch~evouscharacter - But i t was
hardly to be suspected that he would presume so far as to act openly
in his hostilities against the United States - I have thought it my
duty to present h ~ m- Since M: Cathcart's departure from Tripoh,
about the middle of last month Jos. Ingraham has returned thither,
and, as complaints from our acting agent state, is combined with
Mr MFDonougb SEP.5. 1801

P

[NA.

SDA. CL, Tunis, Vol. 2, Part I, March 1801-Dec. 1802.1

Extract from journal of U. S. S. h e x , Captain William Beinbridge, U. S. Navy,

commanding, Tuesday, 1 September 1801
Commences blowing very strong from the WestwQ close hauled by the wind,
the ship going almost 11 Knotta, discover a ship a t Anchor in Ceuta bay, hoisted
our lruge ensign, coud see no colors that she had hoisted
At past 2 P M coud discover the road of Tetuan no Vessels there, tacked ship
to the NorthwQ
Middle part blowing hard, under three reefed topsails, flying to Windward for
the rock - At 10 AM was close to the rock, made the signal for the Merchant
Vessels to come out, but when I passed by the rock & got the gut open, found i t
blew excessive hard & that it woud be impossible for the Vessels to get out, & not
seeing any thing of the Philadelphia made me determine to embrace the wind for
Malaga in hopes of meeting her there, & inform myself whether i t woud be possible
to get supplies of provisions a t that place to enable me to proceed to the Eastward
in conformity to Commodore Dales orders At 11 squared away the yards & made all sail before the wind [NA. ND original.]

To Captains Samnel Barron or William Bainbridge, U.S. Navy, from William Eaton,
U. S. Consul, Tunis

TUNIB
2QSep. 1801
SIR,Day before yesterday arrived here in six days from Tripoli an
express vessel on her way to Gibraltar with a view of taking on board
and carrying to Tripoli Morad Rais the Tripoline Admiral and the
crews of the two corsaires which are supposed to be blocked in that
port. The vessel charged with this commission bears the following
discri tion - She is a Greek Polacre ship with a prow and her bowsprit ashed to it, her stem head about four or five feet high above i t
turning inward with a shoar from i t to the bowsprit outside. Two
guns pointed forward, one on each side of the foremast. Her quarter
deck raised about two feet above the main deck, running forward
something nearer the main than the mizen mast, with a crab upon i t A camboose house on the starboard side with an arched top, and
four remarkable stantions in front of it. Three streaks of her Bide
have been paid with Turpentine, but, this bein$ worn off, now appear
white. Her stern has four small window holes m it and below them a
carved moulding which has been broken on the larboard side and
mended but not carved; also the stern round moulding on the same

f'

567

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS
-

side intirely gone, the other side on - A stern ladder ha
g on one
side. Her forestay is covered with sheep skin with the woo outside Her constructions is long, low, and squat, though in ballast. Her sheer
something round and quick aft. Her stern high, having a reddish
appearance. Her equipage are chiefly Greeks from the Island of
Candid and speak no other language but the modern greek. She has
a pilot on board, a pale, meagre frenchman whose name is Jacques
Cortez, very much of a scoundrel, as you will naturally suppose from
the employ he is in, who speaks french and Italian and, I believe,
Turkish - She has a bill of health signed by Bryan MqDonough and
countersigned by Perkens Magra, british Consul, a t Tripoli and Tunis
She pretends to navigate with Ottoman papers: This may be the case;
but she is actually in the service of the Bashaw of Tripoli aiding and
assisting his offensive operations against the United States, and belng so
employed is liable to capture and condemnation even with or without
the Tripolines on board. I dispatch a polacre ship of my own, C a p
tain John Padwanni, being the only one here I can trust in this enterprize, to carry you this information in hopes that it will inable you to
get possession of the Tripoline Commodore and people. This would
be an event so fatal to the Bashaw of Tripoli that it would a t once
put an end to the war. He can do nothing without the crews of these
two corsaires - They are many of them from the first families of
Tripoli - this circumstance, if they fall into our hands, would excite
an insurrection in his Kingdom and give us the intire command of
terms - To secure this very important object the best method I
concieve, would be to let the greek vessel pass lnto Gibralter unnoticed
and recieve her passengers, to watch her departure and sieze her the
moment she is clear of the port: If she be permitted to pass over to the
Barbary Coast our design will be lost. The crews of these corsaires,
together with officers, are about three hundred and fifty men - I n a
desperate case they would be very apt to attempt boarding you; against
such an assault it IS presumed you are prepared. If you get possession
of the Commodore it is advisable to force from him an order to surrender you his ships - His own is a Boston built vessel of eighteen
nine pounders on her main deck, six fours on her quarter - two bow
and two stern chases - The other a Swedish brig of fourteen four
pounders - When you shall have executed this project proceed off
Tunis and, without making yourself known, give me notice. I will
immediately board you and lay before you a scheme I have projected
to decoy the B d a w of Tripoli into your ship - The prospect of
advantage to our affairs which will result from the success of this interprize seems so practicable and is so promising that I will not entertain a doubt of its taking full effect: I shall feel the utmost anxiety
until I hear of its operation - If you should have need of Captain
Padwanni to bring forward your prisoners, or any other service of
the Govt the ship is a t your disposition - I suppose it is hardly
necessary to caution ou to put your prisoners in irons, provided
ou catch them - Zom? Dale's last letter to me is dated 28. ult.
ft gives nothing interesting. The schooner Enterprize on the 19 Aug.
captured a Tripe corsaire of 14 guns & 80 men after an action of 3
hours - The corsaire had twenty men killed and 30 wounded The schooner nobody hurt - I cannot but repeat, if you get possession of the English renegade, Morad Rais, it d l decide our contest

P

568

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1786 TO 1801

with Tripoli; But if he escape us and return to Tripoli i t will prolong
the war and be productive of incalculable mischief(COPY)
[NA.

SDA.

CL, Tunis, Vol. 2, Part I, March 1801-Dec. 1802.1

To Nicholas C. Nissen, Danish Consul, Tripoli, from Captain Richard Dale,
U. S. Navy

On Board the U. S. SHIPPresided
ofl Tripoli 9 c Sepl 1801
SIB, Your favour of this date I have received by a boat from the
shore, I note Its Contv you will please to Inform His Excellency the
Bey that I am very sorry he does not sett a greater Value on his
subjects. - from Humanity the Distressing supplications of the
merchants, and not wishing to distress peaceable men, I am, Induced
to permit the Vessel to enter his port with their Goods in this particular Instance - I shall not consider the merchants as prisoners
until1 I know the determination of the President of United States respecting the twenty soldiers. I agree to accept three American
Prisoners for them, but his Excellency must observe, it is not to be a
President in any futer negoatiation - the Officer of the soilders, I
permitt to go on shore with them though his Excellency has not said
any thing respecting him, I trust he will Exchange one American
Prisoner for him should his corsairs take any - I am sorry His Excellency takes so long a time to make up his mind upon what principles
he Expects to make a Peace with the United States; the fact is, (I
suppose) he wishes to wait and see what success his corsairs has in
taking Americans should any Americans be so unfo[r]tunate as to be
taken by his corsairs, you will please to give them every assistance In
your Power - I shall make mention, to the President of the United
States your attention, to its Interest [NDA photostat, Dale LB, 1801-1802.1
To Lieutenant Andrew Sterett, U. 6. Navy, from Captain Richard Dale, U. 6. Bavy

On Board the U S SHIPPresided
Off Tripoli E Septr 1801 SIROn the receipt of this you will please to proceed to the Island of
Malta, when off the Harbour ou will send in your boat, to know if
there is any American Vessels t ere bound for Gibraltar,. or out off the
Straits, if there is you will take them under your protection, and make
the best of your way there, and wait untlll I arrive there, which I
Expect will be a bout the first of October, Should you fall In with
Cap$Samuel Barron or Cap5 Bainbridge, you will Inform them, that I
Expect to see them a t Gibraltar about that time, and not to be out of
the way without something of consiquence makes i t necessary, you will
allwa s consider ourself under the Orders of Either Cap4 Barron or
Caps ainbridge n my absence should i t be necessary, I shall proceed
from this to Tunis from Tunis to Algiers from Algiers to Gibraltar You will pay attention to my former Orders respecting the Tripolian
Corsairs as you have no money on Board I Give you four Hundred
Dollars, on acct of the United States, should you meet, with any
accident & be under the necessit to put into port before you get to
Gibralta, you will please to pay very attention to Econimy.

K

5

9

2

[NDA photostat, Dale LB, 1801-1802.1

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

569

Extracts from journal of U. 6. 6. Euu, Captain William Bainbridge, 0.6. Navy,
commanding
Wednesday, % September 1801
Commences smart breeees from West, carrying all sail before the Wind. At 5
P M came round Cape De Molins, & hauled our wind into the bay of Malaga,
At 6 P M hauled up the courses, lowered down the Pinnace, sent Mr Benj. Smith
on shore with a letter to Consul Kirkpatrick t o know whether he coud supply us
with provisions. At 8 AM the pinnace returned, the Consul answered he coud
not e t any other supplies but bread & fresh Meat, no salt provisions to be got
in dalaga, made sail & hauled our wind to the Wentwd with the intention of
giving the VesseLe a t Gibraltar convoy from that clear of the gut t o the EsstwQ
Ends with Westerly winds, turning t o windward, but find we make but slow
work of i t on account of the current.
Thursday, 9 September 1801
Commences pleasant Weather & light winds from the WestwQ turning to
windward.
At 9 P M spoke the American barque Hannah bound t o Malaga.
Throughout the night light winds from S E At 3 AM was abreast of the rock
of Gibraltar - At 4 AM hauled in the bay, & discovered a schooner standing
into it, close under point Cabretta & near a Spanish fort, she had American
colors hoisted, Made sail & spoke her from Boston bound to Malaga, she informed
that she saw a frigate to the Southwd of Cape Spnrtel. Not finding the Philadelphia nor being able to procure provisions in Gibraltar or Malaga I was determined to try a t Algeziras, stood in for that town, At G was abreast of it within
1% Miles, & near to the Island where they have a fortification Sent L* Decatur
on shore with a letter to the American Vice Consul Mr Mullony, t o see if he
coud get us a supply of provisions in Algeziras. As the pinnace was rowing to
shore, the fortification on the Island fired a shot over the E58eX, lay off & on
until1 the boat returned which was a t 9 AM with the answer from the Consul,
he coud only procure us 4 bbls of Pork. As the schooner we spoke in the morning had seen a frigate to the southwd of Spartel it being probable it might have
been the Philadt, the wind then being to the EastwQ to make myself more assured she was not on this station I squared away the yards and ran thro' the gut,
calculating that I coud soon beat back. If I did not find the frigate. In going
thro', the wind encremed, hove the log myself & found she was going 13 Knotts
6 fath. Ends strong Levant gale
[NA. ND original.]
To Secretary of State from William Eaton, U. S. Consul, Tunis

ON BOARD THE Grand Turk
Road o j Tunis Sep. 6.1801
SIR,The inclosures which I have the honor herewith to forward
will inform Government, as accurately as I have the means, of our
actual position and future prospects in regard to Tripoli-one circumstance only omitted, which is a project in concert between the
rightful Bashaw of Tripoli, now in exile in Tunis, and myself to attack the usurper by land while our operations are going on by sea.These two men are brothers; the younger is on the throne having
expelled the elder about eight or nine years ago - The subjects in
general of the reigning bashaw are very discontented and ripe for
revolt; they want nothing but confidence in the prospect of success:
this confidence may be inspired by assurapces of our determination
to chastise this Bashaw for his outrage agaulst U. S. - The Bey of
Tunis, though prudence will keep hun behind the curtain, I have
strong reasons to believe, will cheerfully prompt the scene: He is in
favor of the elder brother. The Idea of dethroning our enemy and
placing a rightful sovereign in his seat makes a deeper impression on
account of the lasting peace it will produce with that regency, and
the lesson of caution it will teach the other Barbary States - These
are objects which, to me, seem so cleqly within our power that they
ought to command exertions - Havmg begun to coerce Tripoli 16

570

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1786 TO 1801

would operate an injury of perpetual duration to relax in these measures. I t is a rnisforturle that we have not more small war craft here The document which must have already reached the department
of State, together with this, will show how freequently we have occasion for dispatch vessels - I dare no! any longer confide in foreigners - it is very dangerous employmg my own on this service
mthout regular papers - I t is hoped these embarrassments will be
removed - If we do not succeed in arresting the English renegade,
I apprehend two or three bomb ketches will be absolutely necessary
before Tripoli - This however is a little out of my sphere of action Full support to our Cormnodore and dispatch in furnishing that support are so obviously necessary that i t seems superiluous to speak
of i t I am destitute of funds - I n the actual situation of our affclirs i t
is presumed this intimation is enough - Happen what will I shall
have no resort to Jews - I have no credit in Europe.
[NA. SDA.

CL, Tunis, Vol. 2, Part I, March 1801-Dec. 1802.1

Extract from journal of U. S. S. &ex, Captain William Bainbridge, U. S. Bavy,
commanding, Saturday, 5 September 1801
Commences strong Easterly Wind, beating up the Gut. At 3 P M saw a
frigate coming out of Gibraltar, At 112 3 displayed the American signal for the
day which was answered by the Frigate, which proved to be the .Philadelphia.
At 4 spoke Captain Barron. At 1/2 past 4 went on board the Phtlad* where I
r e d several letters for Commodore Dale from America last from Algeziras, all
of which were open Capt Barron said we had better try & get into Tangier as
the provisions I wanted coud not be well delivered a t sea, aa it was blowing so
hard - At 11 P M, the wind came from the WestwQ & very foggy lay to thro'
the night in the straits. Captain Barron proposed as we coud not get in Tangiers
to proceed to Tetuan & there deliver the provisions & also to enquire the news,
respecting the crews of the Tripolitan Corsairs, now moored in the Mole of
Gibraltar and dismantled.
At 6 the Philudelphia & Essex being off the rock of Gibraltar, the Philadelphia
made sail for Tetuan, The Essez laid off the rock, made the signal fixed on for
the American Vessels that were there in the bay of Gibraltar bound to the Eastward, and fearful of coming out on account of the Algeziras boats and my intention was only to give them convoy clear of the rock against those privateera
Ends clear Weather & smart Westerly Wind [NA. ND original.]
To William Baton, U. S. Consul, Tunis, from Captain Richard Dale, U. S. Bavy

ON BOARD
THE UNITED
STATESSHIPPresident
Tunis Bay Septr 6'+ 1801 DEARSIR, At sunsett I fell in with your Polacre I Took the Dispatches out of her - I saw your Letter respecting the Vessel going to
Gibraltar to take the Tripoline Admiral home, my Intentions in
coming in here, was to see you, and get your dispatches for the Government of the United States, but as I find them on Board the Polacre
I take them on Board and shall proceed to Gibraltar without loss of
time and try to defeat the plans of the Bey of Tripoli, I suppose, you
will not be a little surprized to know that I have left the coast of
Tripoli I am sorry to Inform you that I have 152 men on the Doctors
List a number more get+ on it eve day where or when i t will stop
God only knows I am Uewise un er the necessity to proceod to
Gibraltar for Provisions not Haveing more than four weeks Provisions
on Board. - The 3@ Ins+ I dispatched the schooner Enterprize to
Malta, to take under her convoy any American Vessels that might
be there Bound down the Mediterranean, I shall dispatch her for

7

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

571

America as soon as possible after her arrival a t Gibraltar should
nither the Phdadelphia nor the Essex arrive here shortly, I shall dispatch one of them for Tripoli to tuch here on her way; on my arrival
a t Gibraltar if the store ship is arrived, neither of them a t Present has
more than five weeks Provisions on Board, - You will empress on
the minds of the Tunisans that there is a ship cruising off Tripoli if
the suspect that I have left the Coast ou will please deliver the
~ncKosedLetter to either Cap: Barmn or apr Bainbridge -

F

[NDA photostat, Dale LB, 1801-1802.1
To Captains Samuel Barron or William Bainbridge, U. 6. Navy, care of William
Eeton, Tunis, from Captain Richard Dale, U. 8. Navy

ON BOARD
THE U S SHIP
President
Tunis Bay Eitp Septr 1801
DEARSIR, Should you put in here, in shurch of me, on the receipt
of this if our ship is in a proper state you will proceed without loss of
time off ripoli and there cruise a few Days (say three or four, if you
see cause to remain longer you may) after that you will proceed to
Leghorn there Inform your self if there is any American Vessels there
or m adjasent Ports wanting convoy down the Mediterranean if there
is, you will take them under your Protection calling a t the principal
ports along the const of Spain as you come down, you will observe
you are not to looss too much time for one or two Vessels The cause
of my Leaveing the coast of Tripoli was, the want of Provisions; and
Haveing 152 men on the Doctors List, - when I left Tripoli there
was three corsairs in Port, two ships of 20 Guns each mounted on the
upper Dick, they look like Armed Mercha[n]t ships, one Polacre
mounting 12 Guns, and three Gun Boats, you will prevent all Vessels
from Entering the Port of Tripoli that has a cargo onboard, I have
decleared i t under Blockade - i t will not be prudent to keep too close
in shore, should you want any communication with the shore, a red
flag a t the Fore Top Gall: mast head, & one Gun is a Sign! for a Boat
to come of[f]- Mr Nissen the Danish Consul, has the management of
the Affairs of the United States there, should you not see the corsairs
in port, you may expect they have one on a cruize - the corsairs
that are out a t present, say, two Ga lies, one Polacre and the two a t
Gibraltar, they Have taken nothing as yet. -

I

f:

[NDA photostat, Dale LB, 1801-1802.1
Extract from journal of U. S. 6. k,
Captain William Bainbridge, U. S. Bavy,
commanding, Sunday, 6 September 1801
Commences fresh breezes and pleasant weather.
At 112 past Meridian the Brig Ann bound to Barcelona came out from Gibraltar,
saw no others preparing to come out, spoke her, & made tail across the Gut for
Tetuan, goin close by the wind, the frigate sailed 11 Knotts & 3 fath. At 3 P M
was near to 6ape Porcus, the Philad* about 2 miles OR, both vessels becalmed,
tryed the current found N E. one knott pr hour.
At 8 P M came to blow very hard from the Westward Throughout the night
lying off & on the ba of Tetuan under close reefed topsails. The latter part
beating in the bay of h t u a n . At 11 AM brought to in 24 fathom water.
Ends strong Westerly Winds, got the boats out to bring the provisione from the
Philadelphia
[NA. ND original.]

572

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1786 TO 1801
To Captain Richard Dale, U. S. Navy, from James Leander Cathcert,
U. S. ex-Consul, Tripoli

LEGHORN
Septemb: 7:? 1801
SIRWith infinite pleasure I received yours of the 25* Ultp, informing me of the capture of the Tripoline Cruiser [Tripoli], Mr Stemett
has behaved galantly, & has my warmest thanks for having so well
proved by demonstration that the idea I have endeavor'd to inspire
the Tripolines with of the energy of the American character was well
founded; continue Sir in the same line of opperation which you have
so judiciously pointed out, & be confident of a happy result, which in
all probability will not only insure a permanent peace with Tripoli,
but likewise prevent the rest of the Barbary States from imposing
upon us I can't help manifesting my perfect coincidence with M:
Eaton in the manner he has conducted our affairs a t Tunis relative to
the blockade of Tripoli, & would certainly have acted in the same
manner had I been in his place, even had War been the immediate
consequence; "the question a t this moment is" shall we be tributary
to Tripoli, & consequently to Tunis or not; if we act with energy &
perseverance we shall be respected, but the Nations that makes concessions are imposed on continually, & will continue to be treated in
the same degrading & humiliating manner they have been until1 they
adopt the same plans that we have; that is to repel their unjust
demands by force of arms, & I solomnl declare that if a peace could
be procured with the Regency of Tripo i for one hundred Dollars that
i t would be contrary to the interests of the United States to pay it Your idea of bombardin the Town is an excellent one, the eyes of all
Europe is upon your litt e Squadron, & I am certain they d l reflect
honor upon their Country & justify the idea already formed of
American valor & intrepidity
Enclosed I send you some abstracts from Mr Nissen's Letter with
my answers to them, if Mr Ingraham ever goes on board your Ship,
you will please to confine him on Board, to prevent him from insuring
the United States, & to answer for his past conduct - I hope efore
long that you will oblige the Bashaw to hoist a white flag; see Mr
Nissens letter to me & my answer Their is a Swedish built Dogger which navigates under British
colors & trades from Tri oli to Bengasi but is or was commanded by a
Frenchman; This Vesse is coverd by Bryan MgDonogh but is the
property of Murad Raiz the Tripoline Admiral, her motive for being
put under British Colors with a French Commander was in order to
facilitate the forwarding of dispatches from the Court of France to
Alexandria by the way of Bengasi & Derna, where many Vessels loads
upon account of the Bashaw & his Subjects; I should imagine should
you fall in with the Dogger she would be a good prize, the articulars
of her papers you will be able to ascertain by enquiring of %I r Nissen
in whose office they originated - Now Sir a person that would be
guilty of such an act of Treason to his own Natlon in consequence pf
a pecuniary reward, certainly would not hesitate to injure ours m
hopes of ingraciating himself with our enemies, & thereby reaping a
benefit, his venality is well Known by every Consul a t Tripoli
On the 2'3 & 3'9 ins; arrived the Ships Henrietta $ Serpent in 60 days
from Baltimore, & 13 from Gibraltar, they bring us intelligence that
the George Washington, & Chesapeak were a fitting out for the Me&terranean; & that they were boarded by a Lieutenant from the Philadelphia who informed them that the Tripoline Admiral & Consort

9

S

b

I'

573

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

were still in Gibraltar that a number of their Crew had deserted, &
that the Philadelphia boarded every thing in the gut, this I suppose
is in conse uence of Captp Barron's having recelved intelligence of
the Admira 's intentions to ship his crew on board a Ragusian, & to
push over to Barbary in the night, this news was commurucated to me
by Cap*."James Sampson of the Milford who arrived from Baltimore
on the 30thUltv
I send you enclosed a list of the quantity of Salt provisions in this
Market for your government in order that you may determine whether
it will be most adviseable to send the Schooner here for them, or to
proceed to where you informed me you were agoing for them, we have
a number of Merchantmen in this Sea, & should any ofsthem be captured it would alter the appearance of our affairs amazingly I shall
write next post to Capt? Bainbridge to inform him of three Vessels
b e 4 here, & to inform him of the time of their departure as near as
possible, I suppose he will be found in some of the Ports of Spam COPYMr B in my letter to Nissen, means the Swedish Consul - The
Doctor who is in the American House is an Italian but not Mr Bryan
MFDonogh

9

[NA.

SDA.

CL.

Tripoli, Vol. 2, June 1801-Sept. 1805.1

Extracts from journal of U. S. S. Esscx, Captain William Bainbridge, U. S. Navy,
commanding
Monday, 7 September 1801
Commences pleasant weather & Westcrly wind, employed in unbending new
sails to bend others & also in receiving provisions from the Philadelphza. At 9
P M Captain Barron dispatched an officeron shore for news, returned on board,
the information respecting the Tripolitans was such, that Captain Barron felt
himself a t liberty to quit his station & go with the Essez to join the Commodore But he is obliged to proceed to Malaga to water his frigate, & to expedite it I
accompany him Middle & latter part under sail in company with the Frigate Philadelphia bound
for Malaga
Tuesday, 6 September 1801
The fore part of these 24 hours fresh brcezes from the SouthwQ & Westward.
A 2 P M came to an anchor in Malaga bay in 15 fathom water.
Sent the boat with an Officer on shore t o receive pratiek.
At 3 P M the officer returned but was not able to get pratick before 5 P M.
a t which time both Vessels obtained it.
At 6 went on shore. The latter part assisting the Philad* in Watering.
No articular Occurrences, 4 American Vessels waiting for Convoy t o the
~ m t ~ ofBthem
t in
~ ballast
~
Br one of them but part loaded.
Thursday, 10 September 1801
All these 24 Hours, Easterly Winds, All our boats cmployed in Watering the
Philadelphia.
Four American Masters of Vessels this day by letter solivited convoy for Alicant
& Barcelona, two of them empty, one loaded & one part loaded & mentioned in
their letter that in case we refused, they shoud protest against us for such refusal.
About 15 mil of American Mercht Vessels in this port now loading with fruit,
expect to sail on the 20tbof the Month.
[NA. N D original.]
Circular to U. 6. Consuls in Europe from James Leander Cathcart, U. S. ex-Consul,
Tripoli

*

LEGHORN
Septc 11 1801
SIRI have the honor to inform you that a few days ag? arrived i n
this Port Hadgi Mohameteben Luna a native of Tripoli in character
of Ambassador from the Bashaw of Tripoli to the Emperor of Morocco,
he has since through the Agency of Arbib a Tripoline Jew chartered

574

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1786 TO 1801

the Imperial Polacco Marco Aurelia Captq Antonio Zuppa for four
Thousand Six Hundred Dollars to carry himself & suit to Tangiers,
to there load wheat & to proceed from thence to Tripoli
I t is presumed that said Ambassador is employ'd in order to influence the Emperor of Morocco in favor of his Master, & a t least to
procure provisions for the Tripoline Cruisers blockaded by the Philadelphia a t Gibraltar I therefore request you Sir to forward a Copy of this Circular to
wherever you may suppose that any of our Vessels of War are & likewise to the Consuls of the U. S. a t Gibraltar & Tangiers in order that
they may act in such a manner as will most effectually counteract
the Views of the Bashaw of Tripoli & promote the interests of the
United States I presume that should any of our Ships of War be so fortunate as to
fall in with said Vessel that they would be perfectly justifiable in
detaining her untill they receive the Comodore's orders; who shall be
furnished with a Copy of this letter as soon as possible
Copy's of this Circular was sent to our Consuls a t
Marseilles
Barcelona
Gibraltar in duplicates
Alicant
Mdra
Tangiers
To Comodore Dale, & put on board of several vessels that saild from
this port - in order that the[y] might put i t on board of any of our
vessels of War that the[y] might fall in with CATHCART

1

[NA.

SDA.

CL, Tripoli, Vol. 2, June 1801-Sept. 1805.1

Extract from journal of U. 6. 6. k ,Captain William Bainbridge, U. 8. Navy,
commanding, Saturday, 12 September 1801
These 24 hours begin with light easterly breezes At 5 P M finished watering the
Philadelphia, took in launch & all boats, At 6 P M was ready for Sea, being calm
prevented our sailing,
Throughout the night calm. but a great swell from S W. At 3 AM a strong
breeze from the Westwq At 4 A M up all hammocks & manned the capstan At ?4 past 4 the Philadelphia made signal for the sternmost & leewardmost ship
to get under way fimt, immediately weighed & sailed out of the bay
At 6 A M spoke a Swedish Brig from the WestwQsaid she saw an American
Frigate in the Gut yesterday, I suppose it to be the George Waahingtm lay to
till 8 AM, untill the Philad* came up then filled away, atrong gales from the
Weatw? Under three topsails & Jibb the Essez went 13 Knotts, without any
other sail - Ends Westerly Wind
[NA. ND original.]
To Secretary of State from John Qavino, U. 8. Consul, Gibraltar

GIBRALTAR
14'' September 1801
NQ71
SIRI now beg leave to inclose you du licate of my lasts NP 69 &
70 also what wrote Cap! Barron the 8"
to which referr. Cap.
Barron of the Phila.de has a Deal of Merit in keeping the two Tripobn
Cruisers so closely hlookd up, which Occasiond fresh Desentions
among the remaining Crews, in Consequence the Tripoly Admiral
ot leave to hall his two Vessels in the Mole, when they struck yards
Fopmasts &c? and about 20 Men is all that remains in the two Vessels,
the Admiral with 8 others chiefly Officers went Passengers for Malta
in order to et to Tripoly, had they not met so imediate a check by the
arrival of t e frigates must have done great Damage,.it is still apprehended if the CapP of the Brig finds a good opportumty will take her

htQ

R

575

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

over to Tetuan where he may recruit a Crew out of the Men that were
sent round, he went for thence some days ago and is return'd I now inclose you Copy of a Letter r e d from Consul Cathcart
dated 11* May last agreeable to his request. On the 29% Ult? the &sex went past to the Westward with 26
sail of our Merchant Vessels, after seeing them out of the Gutt she
Cdld in here next day for Provisions having only for 8 days, but none
arrived or to be purchased here, she went out on the 31" in quest of
the Phil& to the East for a sup ly but could not fall in wlth her;
the Eaaa on the 3 V n d was oB dPguesiras and went to the West, said
Evening the Philad* came in when I informed Cap? Barron of what
was passing with the Essex when he went in quest of her & on the 5t.h
they both went to the East, and has since been in Tetuan Bay. -

*

*

*

*

*

*

*

[SDA. CL, Gibraltar, Vol 11, April 1796-Nov. 3804.1
Extract from journal of U. S. 8. &a, Captain WilIiam Bainbridge, U. 6. Bavy,
commanding, Monday, 14 September 1801
Commences pleasant Weather & light Winds from the Westward.
Middle & latter part Variable airs from S S W [?I to S E.
At 8 AM the Philadelphia made signal for the E ~ s mto chace N b E, immediately set all steering sails A t 9 spoke the chace, a Dane from Trieste bound to
Bremen, eight days since off the Island of Sardinia fell in with 2 Turkish & 1
English frigate
See a number of Vesseis that we do not chace on account of our plainly distinguishing them t o be Danes or Swedes unarmed & steering along the Spanish
shore, for by chacing all those we see, it woud too much retard our progress to
the Commodore Latitude Observed 37'42' PI'. - Longitude in 18' E.
[NA. ND original.]

-

116 September 18011
To James Lewder Cntbcart, U. 6 , ex-Consul. Tripoli, from Captain James Brown,
of the Friuds Adoenfurc

SIRI wish to inform you that on the Twentiet-h of August I was
Boarded by the United States Frigate Ph2adel~hiaCommanded by
Captn Barron who told me that the Two Tripobne Cruzers that were
then lying a t Gibralter were Compleatly unriged and hawled up in
the inner Mode, and he also inform'd me that their Admiral had
saild the day before for Tripoli On the Twenty first Latg 36.13 N Longitude 2.30 W I fell in with
an English Convoy bound to Malta with Troops a t 6 A M spoke
their C.ommodore CaptW1iver who very Politely told me I was at
liberty to stay by the Fleet as long as I thought proper he informed
me that the Night before he spoke an American Fleet botmd to the
Westward under the Convoy of one Frigate
on the Twenty second on runing along side of one of bhe fleet that was
loaded with Wine for the British Government I observed a Tripoline
Walking her decks and on inquiry I was informed by a Military officer
that it was the Tripoline Admiral wit.h whom he was very well Acqunnted when a t GibraItcr and that he was obliged to take his passage
to Malta as ho could not procure one to aney port of Tripoli,
On board the Friends Adventure
LEGHORN
MOLDSep? I @ 1801
[Haverford College, Haverford, Pa.

NDA photoetat.]

576

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1786 TO 1801

Extract from journal of U. S. S. Essu, Captain William Bainbridge, U. S. Navy,
commanding, Wednesday, 16 September 1801
Commences Moderate breezes with showers of rain, took in & made sail as
circumstances required
At 8 P M the Weather appeared more settlcd sent up top Gallant yards.
Throuahout the night sauallv, cloudv.
" , dissmeeable Weather. under essv sail
for the f6gate P h i l a d to keep 6 '
At 8 AM made the Island $&mentarn, this island makes very low in the
Middle, & tolerable high a t each end, the eastermost the highest, that makes
Level on the top, very steep & rugged the sides, between the East & Weat points
the shore forms a half moon bay considerably sandy towards the E a t point,
On the West end is a round Tower, also one or two others further in towards the
Middle of the bay. A t 10 AM tacked ship to the Southwg same time the East
end of the Island bore N E b N & the West end N b W.
A t 112 past 11 The Philade made signal for the E s s a to speak a strange sail
bearing S S E. Immediately gave chace.
Ends Cloudy unpleasant Weather
Latitude Acct 38" 26' N.
Longitude in lo 10' E.
[NA. ND original.]

-

-

To Captain Richard Dale, U. S. Navy, from James Leander Cathcart, U. S. ex-Consul,
Tripoli
LEGHORN
Septr 17') 1801 Duplicate

SIR By the enclosed letter from MF Cathdan, & my answer thereto,
you will be informed how far I am of opinion that it will be our interest to m ~ k euse of the friendly offer of his Majesty of Sweden, as
for any coalition with that power, I presume it is foreign to the intentions of our Government, & if it is not, in the resent State of our
affairs it is entirely unnecessary; I wrote to Mr aton some time ago
upon this subject, & as I have had no reason to d t e r my opinion I
here transcribe an extract from my letter to him of the lo* of July "Comodore Truxton has resign'd. Comodore Dale has taken the
command of the Squadron" the fates have decreed the ruin of Tripoli
for the iniquity of their Government Their is a probability of Denmark & Sweden shaking offf] the yoke
a t Tripoli, indirect proposals have been made to me to form a coalition
with the Ships of Sweden which I discouraged, as I have no idea of
dividing the honor of setting an example to all Europe, our aim is to
establish a National character, which we must do, without the assistance of any of the powers of Europe -

8

[NA. SDA.

CL.

Tripoli, Vol. 2, June 1801-Sept. 1805.1

Extracts from journal of U. S. 8. h e r , Captain William Bainbridge, U. 6. Navy,
commanding
Thursday, 17 September 1801
Commences cloudy disa eeable weather, the wind from S b E to E N E. At
112 past Meridian spoke
Vessel we wore in chace of a Danish Brig from the
Island of Sardinia bound to Hamburg, 4 days out no news. At 1 P M spoke the
Philad, & informed CaptP Barron what the Brig was: At 6 spoke the Philad*
Capt Barron ordered the Eseez to lead, weather looking dull & very disagreeable,
in Top gall+ sails & reefed to sails - Throughout the night smart breezea under
easy sail. Iatter part clou&, wind S S W. At 11 AM made a signal to the
Phzladelphia, strange ships bearing E. a t that time discovered 2 sail together but
mud not diatine~rishwhat thev were ~atitude"0bserved38'32' N. - Longitude in. 4' 27' E.
Friday, 18 September 1801
Commences cloudy Weather with drizzling rain and stiff breezes.
At 5 P M the Philad9 made sienal for the Essex to chace East. immediatels
made all sail by the wind after two armed Brigs. At 114 past 6 tacked ship tb
the Southwg in chace of them, 114 before 6 fired 3 ns, brought the chace to
they were 2 English Brigs from Liverpool bound to &ltn.

tg

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

577

Throughout the night very thiek disagreesble weather blowing fresh, under
double reefed topsails At 9 AM exercised great guns, drew all the charges & loaded with fresh Cartridges Cleansed & fumigated birth deck. - Ends clear, smart breeze from S b E.
Latitude Observed 39' 03' N. - Longitude in. 6 O 26' E.
[NA. ND original.]
To Lieutenant Andrew Bterett, U. S. Navy, commanding U. S. Schooner Enlupriie,
from Captain Richard Dale, U,S. Navy

On Board the U S. SHIPPresided
af Sea Septr $19 1801
SIR,On the receipt of this you will proceed to Algjers, with all
possible dispatch, on your arrival In the Bay, you are not to anchor,
but stand off and on Hoist, the American Jack at your Fore Top
M w t Head, and fire a Gun, that is a Signal for M! OBrien to come off,
or to send a Boat, in Either case, you will give the Inclosed Letter
to him or send i t by the Boat that comes off - Should you not see
nor hear from, Mr OBrien, in four or five hours, after you get into tho
Bay, (if the weather is so that a Boat can get off) you will then proceed
for Gibraltar, without loss of time [NDA photostat, Daie LB, 1801-1802.1
[Encl~urel

To Richard O'Brien, IT. 8. Consul General, Algiers, from Captain Richard Dale,

U. 9. Navy
hnh:

1.30.E. Latt. 37.20

On board the UNITEDSTATES
SXIP
President at Sea Septr dl* 1801
DEARSIB, I send Mr Sterrett in the Enterprize with this letter to
you; you will please to send by him your Despatches, for the Government of the United States, as I Intend to Dlspatch the schooner for

the United States, as soon as she gets to Gibraltar, you will also please
to Inform me if you have negotiated with the Day of Algiers, to
receive the thirty Thousand Dollars that I have on Board, in lue of
stores, agreeable to the request of the Government of the United
States, - if you have not, or if you have any prospect in doing it;
becaus if you have not, I shall make use of i t and shall not be under
the necessity of Drawing for money to n disadvantage, I should heve
called in a t Algiers my self, but I am very anxious to get to Gibraltar;
not only that, the weather has been so unsetled I did not like to go
in with the Land, you may Expect to see me before I sail for America Inform me if you got my anchor that I left behind, and the News of
Algiers - M: Sterrett w i l l Inform you nearly all that I could write,
If I Had time, which I have not a t present, respecting, Tripoli, The
Bey wanted very much to make a Truce, [NDA photostat, Dale LB, 1801-1802.1
To Secretary of State from William Kirkpatrick, 0.S. Coned, Mdsga, Spain

MALAGA
$2 Sept 1801
SIR,I wrote to you last on the 25 Aug? of which duplicata goes
inclosed, since then both the Philadelphia & Essex, returned here, and
again proceeded on the 12'P Inst, to the Eastward, after the former

had watered & received some small supplies that Capt B s m n stood
in need of. -

578

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1786 TO 1801

On the 5 Inst I received an Official Information, of which the enclosed is Copy, and immediately notified all the foreign Consuls
residing here, that the Port of Tripoly was to be considered in a state
of Blockade, by the Squadron under the Command of Commodore
Dale, for their 1nfornlat.ion & Governm'
I am happy in having it a t last in my Power, to announce to
,
that the ngorous Quarantine, which has been imposed for near y a
Twelve month past, on all Vessels from Al?erica, has a t last been
reduced to Ten days, which is a great Ahvlation to our Merchant
Vessels trading to this Country. I find by Advices from Gibraltar, that the Tripoline Admiral has
hauled up his Vessels, and embarked himself for Pvfalta, only about
Twenty Men including Officers remain, to take Charge of them,
Consequently our Vessels have nothmg to fear from that Quwter.
I have this day received advice from hlr Gavino Consul a t Gibraltar,
of a very gallant Action performed by Capt Sterritt of t'he Schooner
Enterprize, after an Engagement of Three Hours, EIe has Captured,
and carried into hlalta a Tripoline Cruizer of 14 Guns, & Eighty men,
with the loss of 20 men Killed & 30 Wounded, ttt the same time I am
happy to add, that the Enterprize has not lost a single M ~ D,
P. S. The Ship say Frigate Gent Washington has this moment come
to an anchor.

Y"'

[XA. SDA.

CL, hlalaga, Vol. 1, June 1793-May 1814.1

Extract from journal of U. S. S. Erwx, Captain William Bsinbridge, U. S. Navy,
commanding, Tuesday, 22 September 1801
Commences with strong Easterly wind, flying clouds, appearance of squally,
disagreeable Weather.
At 2 P M fired at, & brought to a brig, found she belonged to the Island of
Cephalonia was from Smyrne bound to Algiers with Turks on board, several of
t h e Algerines t h a t I had carried from Algiers t o Constantinople were passengers
on board. She was 40 days out no news From 4 to 7 P M excessive hard rain - At 9 P M cleared up made full sail
by t h e wind which enabled us t o lye along t h e shore. A t 11 P M p w e d by the
two small Islands to the Eastw* of Bizerta, which are dnngerous in the night.
as they cannot be discovered without a very good look out before you are on them,
A t 2 A M came round Cape Farino & doubled t h e very low Island of Plane
The remainder of t h w e 24 hours beating into Tunis bay with Southerly wind 8:
light breezes - Ends clear & pleasant Weather [NA. ND original.]

-

To William Eaton, U. S. Consul, Tunis, from Richard O'Brien, U. 6. Consul General,
Algiers

SIR

ALGIERS The 23q Sep tember 1801

[* * * See letter to Secrctnry of S h t e from Kieherd O'Bricn, of 26 September
1801, p a r a p a p h 11.1

The City was just as if Entering The Gulph Stream - Yesterday
I was on board - The United States Schooner Enterprize and had
a letter from the Commodore - Dated in The latittlide of 37.20
N - & Long$ of 1.30 East he has two owerfull Enemies to Encounter
and The Son - of Ali Pashaw houn b Your letter of the 20thI have recQTruth will carry the day - and

cf

facts will prove That you are mistaken The Govt of the ITnited States
knows that The Govt of Algiers is Turks and well knows The influence
of The Jew directory. This has been known to Europe These 10
years. -- and lrnown to Mr Pickering a long time before that you were

WARS WITH BARBABY POWERS

579

thought of as Consul you shall be answered more fully on this tack
than time admits of a t present
I wrote you on the 18*."on the affair of the Dey &p If Doctor Jiratti
had told you that you were a 2q Don Quixot he would have told you
a fact - you have seen a fog bank - and you took it for the Main
land - I repeat to you that I defy you in Eve? respect - You
have got into the Eddies and took i t for the tow0 btream He can't help advocating the cause of the Jews!
[Haverford College, Hsverford, Pa. - NDA photostat.]
To Captain Richard Dale. U. S. Bavy, from Samadet & Cnshing, Marseilles, France

M A I ~ ~ E I Lzp
L ESej7tr
~ 1801
SIRHaving becn requested by Mess'? H De Butts & wy[sic] Purviance of Leghorn, Agents for the American Ships of War in the Mediterranean, to make an arrangement at Toulon for the Supply of any
thing you may stand in need of for the use of your Squadron a t that
Place, being the only American Establishment in this Neighbourhood,
we are much gratified in complying with the request of said Gentlemen;
$ i t will afford us great Satisfaction should it be in our power by any
means to promote the success of tho glorious cause you are engaged in.
We have ordered our Correspondents at Toulon, Messm Luw &
Crassons Cadet, for this purpose to furnish you with money & whatever else you may require; & if there be any thing that cannot be had
there, we shall Send i t from hence at the Shortest notice, provided it
should not be convenient for your Ships to come here, tho' this would
afford us a double satisfaction, as we should have the pleasure to see
you - However, our Mc Cushing of Boston will probably pay a visit
a t Toulon, ss soon as we hear of the arrival of any of your Squadron
there when he will not only have the honor of making your personal
acquaintance, but of communicating with you E ~ Srelates to the best
measurcs to be taken for the supplies of your Squadron; moan wbile we
trust Messn L & C. C will give you eTery nssisttmce, & we beg you on
dl occasions to c o m a n d us freely & bo assured of our Zeal & Activity
in the public Service & to make your stay in this neighbourhood as
agreable as possible.
[NDA. A4.1
Extract from journal of U. S. S. k,
Captain William Bainbridge, U. S. Navy,
(52)

commanding, Wednesday, 23 September 1801
Commcnces Clear & pleasant Weather, The Wind from N E to E N E with
very light airs. At 3 P M sprung up a breeze made sail in company with the
Philad? for T u n i road, At 6 P M came to Anchor iri it, Cape Carthage bearing
N W about 3 Miles, the City of Tunis W >tS. depth of Water 9 fathoms, had 12 &
I4 a considerable distanoe to the Northwd of our anchorage.
When you enter the Bay of Tunis, you discover a Nnrnhr of bays and appearance of inlets between the different mountains & land, the similarity in their
appearance makes it difficult to know the entrance of Tunis. The best marks are,
nearly in the centrc of the great bay of Tunis, you will discover two high rugged,
cli8lted hills or smaU mountains, these make on the left side of the entrance to
Tunis, by steering for this mark you will soon discover Cape Carthage on which
stands an old ruin, resembling an ancient castle near which are several houaea that
are white & EM you approach Cape Carthage you discover several columns of
darkish color which are part of the ruins of the Ancient Carthage, you leave Cape
Carthage on your starboard hand, & when arriving there you see a large fortification & some houses which is called the Goletta 6 guards the narrow passage into
the bason of Tunis, which is 6 or 8 miles in extent to the City of Tunis, but only
navigable for small boats. The best anchorage for a frigate or Ship of War is
about half way between a white fort on Cape Carthage & one on the opposite
shore-depth 8 fath. very good holding ground -

580

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1786 TO 1801

After coming to anchor visited Captain Barron a boat from the ship Grand Turk
came down to us by which Captain Barron wrote to M: Eaton our Coneul at
Tunis Throughout the night variable Winds kept a sea watch a t anchor.
A t 11 AM the American Con~ulvisited the Philad* & delivered a letter from
Commodore Dale, directed to Capt. Barron & myself dated the 6'b Ins* & b
the Consul waa informed the Commodore left Tunis for Gibraltar the 12'L
that the f?derprPze had been dispatched home, she h d had an action [l August
18011 with a Tripolitan Polacre ship of 14 gum and 90 Men, which she captured Ends blowing hard from North [NA. ND originaI.1

%

To Secretary of the Ravy from Captain Richard Dale, U. S. Bavy

On Board of the US. SHIPPredend
I n sight of Gibrdar, Sepir 25* 1801
SIR,I Just have time to Inform you by a Brig that is bound for
Boston that I was under the necessity to give up the Blockade of
Tripoli on the 3'.dInsVor want of Provisions, and Having Upwards of
one Hundred men in the Doct" List, and proceed for Gibraltar whare
I hope to find the store ship, I am Happy to Inform you, the sick list is
reduced to 37 men only; lost three men since I left Tripoli, we have had
a very Teadious time thus far; I spoke a Boston Brig yesterday, the
Captain Informed me that the U S Ship [George] Washington, arrived
four days ago at Gibraltar, I have not Heard of the Philadelphia since
the 5* of July, nor the Bsex since the 20*; I Expect to find them
tomorrow at Gibraltar on the 2296 Inst I fell in with the EnterpPize,
on her way from Malta to Gibraltar whare I Had dispatched hir to see
if there was any Americans there, bound down the Mediterranean; I dispatched her to Algeirs for Mr OBriens dispatches for Goverment
and to know if he had come to any determination with the Dey respecting the thirt.y thousand Dollars that I have on board; I am Happy to
Inform you that the Bey of Tripoli's Corsairs had not taken any Americans on the 3+ Ins! I wrote you on the lStP Ultq from Malta by two
Convayances - I Expect the Enterprizr wilI Join me in a day or two
a t Gibraltar; I shall Dispatch her without loss of time to Baltimore
with my Dispatches to you; also Mr OBricns and Mr Eatons Dispatch-, with Every Infermation that I can give to Government respecting this TripoIine War - I have not time to say more, I Expect
the Enterprize will arrive in Baltimore, long Beforo you get this
[NDA photostat, Dale LB, 1801-1802.1
Extract from journal of U. 6. S. Eucr, Captain William Bainbridge, U. 8. Navy,
commanding, Friday, 25 September 1801
Commences with light Winds from N N W, carrying necessary sail by the wind
in company with the Philad*, beating out of the bay of Tunis.
At Midnight doubled the Island Cimaro & steered to the Eastward.
Middle part clear weather & pleasant aim from N N W. At 6 AM was about
half way between the island of Pantelaria & Cape Bon - At 9 AM exercised
great guns & rnsnouvred the mils
The Island of Pantelaria makes the highest a t the East end, you discover many
white houses on the South side [NA. ND original.]

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

581

To Secretary of State from Richard O'Brien, U. 8. Consul General, Algiers
ALGIERSThe t6* of September 1801

ESTEEMED
SIRYesterday The dey and Prime minister sent
to me four different times desireing I would give a passport
and make gaurentee for upwards of 250 of the crews of the
two Tripoline Corsairs which were Blocked up a t Gibralter
by an American frigate. and Those crews to prevent being
" 5 s Captured and starved. Crossed Over to Momcco. and is
g4
S arrived by Land a t Oran. in This regency The dey intends to
3. 1
oa<
send them in a vessel from Oran to Tripoli which port is de(a Llr cP
clared by the american Commodore to be in s state of
Blockade
- I have answered. That the Bashaw of Tripoli
paB
declared war (notwithstanding the deys gaurentee) agamst
f gg The united States. ordered The american Consul to depart.
g' ,o had sent his Corsairs to sea in Quest of Americans. That
7 3, those people was and is The Enewes of My Country - The
I %$ dey insists I must acquise and I am determined not, even
g
% that war should be The result 3.-s
for some time i t is known here That the american frigates
Po
2; has blockaded the two Tripoline corsairs a t Gibralter. and
~2 declared Tripoli in a state of Blockade. that allso on the l*
L g" of August. The U S schooner [Enterprize] had given a severe
drubing to a Tripoline Comaire and Captured said Vessel haveing Killed inmy of the tripolines and afterwards let
E X snid Corsair & crew go for Tripoh That for some days past that several of the crews of The
&! . tripoline
corsairs which were blocked up a t Gibralter & had
a E crossed to Morrocco had arrived by land in this City - and
that the chiefe of the Tripoline crews were on their rout from
.
% k Morrocco for algiers - $ 9
When on the 24'p inst the dey and Ministry. had letters
",B
from Tunis in 9 days - and for certain allso letters from
Tripoli - which stated that an american corsair had capE$
e " tured a tripoiine and after Very much disableing her let her
go - that the american corsairs hnd admitted. Some Vessels
to Enter the rt of Tri oli and some were not admitted.
g* That the Pasc a. of Tripo ' had much wanted grain: -That
he had offered to Make a truce with the american Comrno&
? dore - but that he rejected it. that Tripoli depended much
on their friend the dey - to Succour and clear from Gibralter the two corsairs of Tripoli - The said letter reminds
the dey of the services and favour rendered by Tripoli in
getting the deys corsair & crew from The Portugeese - and
therefore hopes the dey would do as he would & was done
by That from Tunis Thero is reports that. The american frigates is
intended to act against this regency. That further Tunis and Tripoli
is inviteing the dey as their bully not to admit of The custom of
Blockade that if i t is ac uised to b algiem and Tunis.that i t wiIl
become a custom and w& on like ccasions be Verg prejudicial to
Algiers and Tunis - Therefore I consider the deys r uest. aa a
confederation of The regencies of Algiers Tunis and
- to do
away the Custom of Blockadeing ports of Barbary On this subject
of informations I have it from a ahure channel - * * *

BF

(P

ig

f'

\

d

%a

LIEUTENANT ANDREW STERETT. U. S . NAVY.

WAhS WITH BARBARY POWERS

583

"The 2 * party intended to have Entered The Church and made way
"with the dey and Ministry - but the too suden a l m of The 10 "gave time to the dey &4 to secure the doors of The holy Sanctuary "and The 2 9 party was Ohliged to disperse and save Themselves - as
"well as they Could - They intended to have made a great reform
"by destroying the dey & Ministry & Jew directory - Whose in0u"ence these 10 years has been Very great in Most all public and
"private affairs of This regency - Lord Keith has teen threatening this regency nearly two years. and
t,o no eat Effect The same time. Gibralter Mahon & Malta. has
heen cgeflg supplied from this Coast. The 350 slaves was given up
by The influence of the Grand Signior &$some feare of The British both captains Keith & Bashaw has demanded of the dey to dwtroy
and Turn away The Jows Bocris & Dusnachs $s but the regency considers thorn as their Eyes and Ears and has not granted the request and as yet the affairs of The regency is not setled with the Grand
Signior whom demands payment for The robberies of Algiers On the
Greeks & Imperials - but Algiers Knows well that they can allways
Buey The Captain Pascha As there is upwards of 70 Thsd french troopes in spain The idea of
Theire intended to invade this country should be pushed on as much
as American influence wili admit of with The Chiefe Consul, it would
be rendering sn Essential service to Many particularly to the U
States - The regency seems to be Very discontent a t present and is
continual1;y growling on acct of The regalia or stores or the Annuities
not arrivelng - They are nearly of Opinion that I have been feeding
Them with a String of lies - a t a l Events we should have a Beet of
reserve between Gibralter &$ Algiers - with orders & ready to act on
any Sudden Emergencio AlEBo requisite to hnve Consular funds and a
shure Credit in Europe
I inclose to you a statement of The accounts Debts &" of The
United States with the Bacris of Algiers allso - with the dey &$ I am
liveing in sad ho s of rsliefe on all tacks like unto a Mariner on a
wreck - and aha 1 consider it a happy Event when I have the Honour
of personally communicating to you Very essential information relatire
to this regency & &o On the morning of The 25'h the dey sent a lottor to The minister of
Portugd by a dean Vessel destined for spain - 1 hnve my f e r n that
it might bo on the business of Truce peace or ransom - what might
facilitate - This Event might be an intent of This Government to.
Occasion a war with The U States it is allways in the power of The
regency to lower Theire terms and secure The friendship of Portugalwhat will give us security agrainst such events will be More frigates in
this Sea -

P"

[NA. SDA. CL, Algiers, Vol. 6, Jan. 1801-Dec. 1803.1
Extract from journal of U. S, S. Essu, Captain William Bainbridgo, IT. S. Navy,
commanding,Eaturday, 26 September 1801
Commences pleasant Weather i& moderate breexes from N N W, carrying all
sail in company with the frigate Philad*. At 4 P M exerciwd the Musqueteers.
At j.4 past 6 P M the Island Pantalaria bore N b E ?hE distant 9 or 10 leagues
Throughout the night pleasant Weather. At 3 AM made the Island Linosn,
At 5 AM made the island Pidussa, sailed between them.
At pist 8 the Philadelphia made signal for UR to chacc S S E, ret aU w i l after
a Polacre ship At 11 R ke the clmce, a Greek from Constantinople bound to
Toulon, a Cartel with
primners.

%rich

584

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 17'86 TO 1801

The Island Linosa make tolerable high in two hills The Island Pidusea, swelling
land may be seen about 20 Miles. Island Linosa [?I 10 leagues
Latitude Observed 35O 24' N. [NA. ND original.]
To Lieutenant Colonel Commandant William W. Burrows, U. S. Marine Corps,
from First Lieutenant Newton Keene, U. 6. Marine Corps

Frigate President

Gibraltar
28 Septmr 1801

SIR I n my letter of the 21 of AugUated off Tripoli enclosing a
Muster Roll & forwarded by the way of London I gave you an Acc'
of an Action between the United States Schooner Enterprize LUteret
& a Tripolitan Ship of Fourteen Guns & Eighty men which Continued
for u wards of Three Hours, when the Tripolitan being a perfect
~ r e c E Struck,
,
to the Flag of tho United States.
The Water on bd the Y~esidentbeing nearly exhausted we left
Tripoli for the Island of Malta, where we arrived on the 23" of Au
and left that place on the 256 with an intention of Cruizing off Tripo
for Some Weeks, a few days after our Anival on that Station our men
were taken with a Kind of enfluensa & our Sick list increased to an
alarming degree from 100 to 160 persons. Conmodore Dale thought
it more advisable to Proceed on to this place, where we anived Yesterday & have now the Pleasure to inform you that our men have near1
recoverd with the loss of only two or Three Persons, but i t is wit
pain I now anounce to you the Death of Joseph Atwood a Marine
whose death was occasioned by a fall which he got from the Gun to
the berth Deck, on the 10dInst. & notwithstandmg every exertion of
medical aid a mortification took place and he expired on the 174, the
Marine Corps in the Death of this man, has lost an Old but a faithful
Soldier - A few days previous to our leaving the Station off Tripoli
we boarded a vessel from Constantinople bound to that place with
Soldiers sent by the Grand Segnior to the Bashaw; Commodore Dale
being infonn'd that that those Barbarians had taken Several American
vessels took the Soldiers on bd the President & Sent Two of them on
Shore informing the Bey that he would give them in exchange for
any Americans he might have in his Possession, the Bey gave for
Answer, that, he had no Americans, if he had, he would not give one
in exchange for all the Turks we had, which in number was forty one,
those people being disagreeable on board & Not Knowing what to
do with them, Commodore Dale Sent them on Shore to Tripoli. This
Sir, you See, whats to be expected from lenient Treatment to Such
Savages Therefore if our Government expects to Command respectability to their Flag by Sending their Ships of War, a cross an
Ocean of Four thousand d e s & giving their Commanders Instructions to Treat d Pirats who may fall in their Hands with all the
Humanity of the more Civilized nations the ends for which they are
Sent will not be accomplished & our Navy as well as Government (in
my opinion) will sink lnto Contempt. - I n my Letter dated off
Tunis on the 18Q of July last & forwarded by the way of Leghorn I
gave you a f d acts of the Situation of the Marines in the Squadron
& having Deliverd to Lt Fenwick for the use of his Detachment a few
Coats & Vests. Since that time I have neither seen the Philadelphia
or &sex - I have this day a t the re uwt of the Surgeon of the
Ship, Sent on Shore to the Hospital a t eibraltar William Justice (A
Marine who has been for some time past much afflicted with the Cramp.

%
E

585

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

I hope he will recover in a few days when I shall again take him on
board.
The United States Frigate George Washington arrived here on the
20 Inst & proceeded Immediately for Algiers, I was much disappointed
in not receiving a letter from you by this Vessel. I am pleased with
Commodore Dale & Capt James Barron - Lt Osborn is well, -

*

*

IMCA.

LR, 1SOl.I

*

*

*

*

!e

To Captsin Richard Dale, U. 6. Bevy, from Clement Humphreys, Algeciras, Spain
(24)
ALGECIRAS,
Sep?bPh 1801.
DEARSIR, A few days after your departure from Gibraltar, I had
the pleasure to receive your favor of the 4+ July. I hope sincerely,
that your cruize to the Eastward, has been attended with happy
consequences to the commerce of the U. States: and it must be very
evident, that the time1 appearance of such formidable Ship's, will,
in future, compell the arbarg Pirabs, as well as those in this neighbourhood, d d y to appreciate the American's; as for the Cruizer's
from hence, few of our Merchant Vessel's escape them.
I presume, that on your return to Gibraltar, you must have been
informed of the misfortune, that hns befel the Speculation's of Mess?
W. & Francis, in the Mediteranean; by the capture of three of their
vessel's, (MoUy, Sophia, & Joseph Wamj,) since that of the Amelia;
nnd of the unfortunate fate, that attended the &folly. The Sophia,
was more lucky, & escaped with the confiscation only of s few Chest's
of Tea, & some Candles: she sailed yesterday afternoon for Malaga.
The Joseph Harry, I am in expectation, will be liberated in the course
of the day; her Cargo, is composed of Carrtzcas Cocoa of a very
superior qualit , which I have recommended Cap: Montieth to sell
here; it wdl yi d a very handsome profit, as it will command 42 hard
Dollars onboard; so that her capture, which at first appeared unfavourable, will, in the event, prove very beneficial.
I m sorry to add, that the Amdia & Cargo, are still in the possession of the Privateersmen, nor has a single vessel here, that has
been captured by the Prench, been released notwithtmdjng the
Exchv of Ratification's, was eBected some time since, at Paris; such
detention, is painful & ruinous, & i t is still more aggravating, as we
have but little hope's of obtaining our enlargement, for tis some time
yet. Cap; Montieths destination was for Barcelona, with instructions
from Mess? W. & Francis, to secure a return Cargo from that place;
which he will be unable to accomplish, unless at a great disadvantage
by procuring the goods in this noighbourhnod: You wiIl tllerefore do
me an essential favour, by informjng me, if the risk from the Tripolian7swould be too great, to hwwd a voyage that way. There are
likewise, several vessel's here, who are in expectation of being freed,
that are bound up the Meditermean; but will not move higher than
M a l q a , untill they are certain of prosecuting their passage, m safety.
Any ~nformationthat you might be pleased to communicate this
way, would be very thankfully received.
CLEM,HUMPHREYS
P. S It was reported here, that the En#erprise, had beat off a Tripolitan ship of 20 guns: be so good as to let me know, the truth of this.

B

el

[NDA. A-4.1

To the Governor of Algeciras from Captain Richard Dde, U. 6. Navy

On Board the United States Ship President
Cibrclltar Bay Sepdr 2tP 1801
SIR, From the Infennation that I have received respecting the
capture and detention, of a number American Vessels that is now in
our Port, Captured by the Gun boats belonging to His Catholick
&a.estY or his subjects In the S t r i t s off Gibraltar bound to Port,
or borts, up the Miderterranean, possible with orders from their
Owners to touch at Gibraltar to know if any of the, Barbarg Powers
was a t wsr with the United States, if there was, to get convoy if
possible, up the Miditerrmean by some one ship of the Squadron,
which I have the Honor to Command in those Soas, to give protection
to the commerce of the United States, most if not dl the American
VesseIs that is bound up the Mediterranean have such orders at
resent, from their k e r n - there is three or four of the Vessels
Edonging to Mess" Willings and Francis and Messn NicUin &
G S t h s , those Genlemen T am well acquainted with they are American
Citizc~lsm d in high respectability in America, and Every whare els
where they are known, I also understand Sir, thnt you would not
Permit the W t e d States Frigate, Phihdelphia, Commanded by
Samuel Barron Esq' (which is attached to the said Squadron) to
anchor in your Port, when I sniled from America it was Expected that
the United States was at Peace with dl the World f can,assure you
Sir, it is the wish of the United Stntw to be, and remain in friendship
with all the u~orld,I can not help observing to you Sir, thnt such
conduct of the officiers of your Gunboats, towards the American
Vessels and there Crews, when taken by them, and your not suRerin
the Unjted States Frigate to Anchor in your Port, will tend very muc
to distroy that Friendship which has so long Subsisted between the
two nations, I can not protend to say whnt will be the determination
of the Government of the United States, when it is made acquainted
with those circumstances, which 1 shall lose no time in doelng - I
shall be glad to know Sir by the return of my OfEicer if i t your determination not to suffer, the squadron which I hctve the Honor to
Command, or any one of the s h p s to anchor in your Port to get water
or any thing Els they may stand in need of - I expect dayly the
Arrivd of a ship from the United States (ordered by the Government
to tuch at this place) Loaded with stores for the usc of tho Squadron
that I command I hope Sir you will girt! positive orders to your
Gunboats not to molest. her -

f

*

*

*

*

*

*

*

[NDA photostat, Dale LB, 1801-1802.)
Extracts from journal of U. S. S. Ew, Captain William Bainbridge, U. 8. Ravy,
commanding
Monday, 28 Sepiemkr 1801

Commences Clear Weather, and light air8 from E i*u' R in company with the
Philadel hia.
A t 4 M waa in 100 fathom Water.
Throughout the night under short sail. At 6 A M saw the two hilb on the
back of Tripoli bearing S h E
A t 10 AM made the Town of Tripoli. At 11 coud distinguish the maat head8
of the shipping, at the asme time ssw a Vessel coming out.
The land here iR low & sandy, resembling mrich the coast of Camlina Tripoli S E b S. 9 Mites

%

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

587

Tuesdag, $9 September 1801
Commences clear Weather & smart easterly breezea
At Meridian waa in 36 fathom wahr. The town of Tripoli then bore S E b S
distant 8 or 9 Miles. The shore along is low & sandy, dangevus approaching i t
in thick weather or night, the marks to know Tripoli by a t a d~stanceare the two
woody hills on the back of i t which may be discovered I suppme about 26 Miles
in clear Weather. In the Town of Tripoli there are a number of trees, except
which the coest east & West is a low sandy beach. The town has a mean appearance, i t Iooks little better than a Village. Their fortifications appear t o cover a
good deal of ground it showa but few guns & apparently ia slightly built At
3 P M being on board the Philadelphia we discovered two mall Vesaels corning
out which we supposed were boats bringing the English $ Danish Consuls off to
us, as Captain Barron had made the signal which the Commodore had fixed with
the Danish Consul. At 4 we distinguished they were Gun boats - He immediately began t o cannonade us, their shot fell very nigh
I immediately repaired on board the Essex, when both Vessels opened their
lower battery's which caused the Gun boats to tack for the shore - our shot fell
short of them, their guns must have been heavy by the distance they threw t h e
shot Throughout the night light winds from East stood off the land under easy
sail At 9 saw the Town of Tripoli. At 11 discovered the Vesselels in the harbor.
very light airs. Captain Barron did not think i t prudent to approach too near
the uhore - Town of Tripoli S S E M E 10 Milea Wednesday, SO Sepiember 1801
Commences light breeaw from the S W & sultry Weather
At 2 P M the Town of Tripoli bore S 8 W pr oom ws distant 8 or 9 mile^,
sounded, 7.5 fsth. Wster. yellow u n d - At 5
M went on b o u d tbe
Philadelphia when Captain Barron & myself agreed to leave the station being of
the opinion that we coud render no service by remaining, and the Philrrdelph~as
crew beginning to get sickly.
Throughout the night light easterly wind, latter part en& dear Weather, the
Wind S S W. - Padussa N W 90 Miles
{NA. ND original.]

5

To Captain Daniel HcNeill, IT. 6. Navy, commanding U. 6. 8. hbn, from
Secretary of the Navy

[WASHINGTON,
D. C.]
Nav: Dept 1 Oct: 1801,
Herewith you will receive Circular Instructions of the 19 Augt m d
3'5 instant[*] which contan Rules for the general Government of
your Conduct on a Cruize.
As soon as you have received the Minister and his family on board,
the President directs that you proceed to France, and 1n;nd the Minister in LrOrient, Ha-me, or any other snfe and.cpnvenlent I'ort where you will procure a Supply of Bread & Spints to last you the
Remainder of the Cruise - for whch purpose you have 3500 drs on
board. - After watering and getting these Supplies on board, you
will set sail for G~braltar,where you d
l deliver the accompanyin
Letter to Mr Gavino the Amencan Consul there. - Thence you wi
proceed to 'om the American Squadron cruising under Commodore
Dale in the editerrancan Sons.
If Commodore D Je shodd have left the Mediterrrtne~previously
to your arrival at Gibrdtar; and you should ascerttun from undoubted Authority, that the Barbary powers arc all a t peace with us,
& no probability of a Rupture, you wll in that Case return immodiatoly t.o the U: States. But if Tripoli shotild still continue in a St.ate of Warfare yith us,
you will then cruise off that port, & tlse your utmost exertdons to
rotect the Commerce of your Country, by affording to American
teasels dl the Shelter in your Power by s h b n g , burning or otherwise

!i

fi

558

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1786 TO 1801

destroying all !he Barbary Vessels you mBy meet with, cruising with
hostile dispositions towards us; and also by recapturing any American
Vessels you may find in their possession. But if Algiers and Tunis
or either .of them, should have joined Tripoli in the Warfare, you
may posslbly find yourseIf too weak to face their United force. In
the Event of such a Junction therefore, I leave it with your discretion
to determine whether t q return immediately home or not - You
will collect such rnformation from Mr Gavino & others, as will enable
you to form a proper declsion upon the Subject. Not knowing whether you may find the Barbary powers in a State
of hostility with us or not, I cannot here rescribe the duration of your
Cruise. If you should find Captain Da e, you wiU obey his Instructions on this Subject: othernise you must determine for yourself, considering, should i t be indispensably necessary that you have libert
to s h y till the latest period for which your Crew is entered, whic
however, I. cannot suppose will be necessary.
To provide amply against every Situation in which you may be
laced, I have deposited a Credit of £1500 Sterling with Messn J
ackenzie & A Glennie of London, subject either to your drafts,
Commodore Dale's, or of MesswDe Butts and Purviance of Leghorn,
to obtain reimbursement for any draft you may draw on them or any
necessary Supplies you may procure from them. Should you touch
a t Leghorn you will call on those Gentlemen for any necessary Assist
mce, & deliver them the enclosed Letter.
I enclose two Copies of my Letter to De Butts and Purviance, one
of which you may forw~rdas you may find convenient the other keep
to procure credit to your Bills a t Malta, Minorca 8 cisowhere. You
will find no difficulty in m y of the ports mentioned, in procuring any
necessary supplies.
I have further directed Mf Ludlow to pay over to your purser 1000
dollars in Specie, for defraying small Expences a t Gibraltar, or
wherever else you may go. Should any of the Barbary Powers have made Captives of any of
our Citizens, you will endeavour t h o ' the Swedish Consul, to afford
them usual Relief & comfort; for which purpose you are authorized to
furnish from the Money you will have on board, or from your Credit,
what Sum you may deem necessary. Any Prisoners you may take, you will treat with humanity & attention, and land them on the Barbary Shore. This Mode will be
humane; and %illtend to brirlg those powers back to a Sense of Justice. You will be careful to select from them, such Christians as may
be on board, whom you will treat kindly and land them when convenient on some Christian Shore, or if you should have occasion, you
may accept their Sel-rices. Upon applications for Convoy when you can afford it, you will
collect as many American Vessels as possible, and not by givlng Convo to one or two only, expose the rest to Capture. f o u will wribe to me by every good opporturuty after leaving the
Country, giving particular Information of all your proceedings. -

f

g

h

[*Cannot locate circular oi 3 September or October 1801.1
[NDA. OSW, Vol. 5, 1801-1802.1

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

589

To Captain Bichard Dale, U. S. Navy, from Secrettuy of the Navy

WASHINGTON,
D. C.]

Nav: V e p : 1 Od?1801,
This will be delivered to you by Captain MWeill of the Frigate
Boston, who is instructed to place himself under your Command.
For the disbursements of the Ship Boston, I have deposited an
additional Credit of 15006: with Mess" J Mltckenzie & A Glennie of
London, subject to your order or that of Mess? De Butts and Purvimce.
You will consider yourself invested with a discretionary power of
retaining all or an of the Vessels under your Command in the Mediterranean Seas, t 3 the latest period for which the respective Crews
entered to serve: or to send the whole of them home. From being
on the Spot you will be better able to form a correct decision on this
Subject, and I have every reliance on your Judgment. [NDA. OSW, Vol. 5, 1801-1802.1
To John Qavino, U. S. Consul, Gibraltar, from Secretary of the Navy

[WASHINGTON,
D. C.]
Nae: Dep: 1 Oct? 1801.
This will be handed you by Capt. MvNeili who is instructed to join
tho American Squadron cruising under the Command of Commodore
Dale in the Mediterranean Seas.
In the Event of Commodore Dale with his whole Squadron having
Ieft t.heseSeas previously to Capt. MqNeill's anival, he IS authorised to
You will
draw on Mess? J Msckenzie & A Glennio of London.therefore give credit to his Bills under the most perfect assurance of
their being paid Pour fnendly aid & Assistance to Capt McNefil, will not fail to be
duly appreciated by the Government of the United States. [NDA. GLB, Vol. 5, 1801-1S02.J
To De Butts & Purviance, Leghorn, Italy, from Secretary of the Navy

[WASHINGTON,
D. C.]
Nav: Dep: I OctF 1801.
Capt MtNeill of the frigate Bosion has been directed to join the
American Squadron cruising under the command of Commodore Dale.
To meet the disbursements of this Ship I have deposited a further
Credit with Mess? J. Mackcnzic & A Glennie of £1500 Sterling, subject to our drafts, or to the drafts of Commodore Dale, or of Capt.
MqNeil , in the absenc.0 of Commodore Dde. You d l draw agreeably to the form heretofore prescribed by the
accountant of the Navy.
I have only to add that I rely with C~nfidenceupon your giving
every necessary aid t o this ship as well as to the whole Squadron.

3

[NDA. GLB, Vol. 5, 1501-1803.1
To David Hnmphreys, U. S. Minister to Hadrid, Spain,from Captain Bichard Dale,
U. S. Wayv

On B o d the U S SHIPPresident
at Anchor in G%bralbar Bay Octr 1 1801
SIR,I have the honor to Inform you that I cast anchor in this Bay
the 27" UltQ I left the mast of Tripoli the 3hd at that time, nor

590

NAVAL OPERATIORTS FROM 1785 TO 1801

to my knowledge, there has no American Vessels been Taken
by any of the Tripoline Corsairs; on the first of Augg Mr Sterrett in the
U S. Schooner Enterprize attached to the Squadron, that I have the
Honor to command, ,about seven Leagues to the Westwg of Malta
fell in with a ship n ed Polacre [the Tripoli] mounting 14 Guns
and 80 men, a ~ r i p o g eCorsair, He took her after an action of
three Hours, the Corsair had 20 men killed and thirty wounded,
there wss not, a man hurt on Board the Schooner, she is tho only one
that has been seen at sea by the Squadron; on my arrival here I
found the T i p d i n e Admiral had laid up his Vessels and gone home
with the most of his crew, I came down here for Provisions Expecting
to have found the store ship here from America, with stores for the
Squadron, but she is not yet arrivcd, I was very sorq to hear on my
arrival here that the Gunboats and Pri~vatiersbelonging to S p m
had carried s number of American Vessels into Algeziras, that was
bound up the Mediterranean, but was going to tuch a t this Place to
Inform themselves respecting the Barbary Powers to h o w if any of
them was at war with the United States, if there was to get convoy
if possible, by some of the ships of the Squadron I have wrote the
Governor of AIgiziras a Letter on the Business a copy of which I
send, you herewith - I m Informed that the King of Spain has
Declaired Gibraltar in a state of Blockade, becaus the English has
Blockaded Cadiz, with a fleet of Line of Battle Ships, js Spain to
take satisfaction on us, by taking our Merchant Vessels, becaus the
English has Blockaded their Port with such a force as they can nither
go in or out, the English can supply Gibraltar, when they please with
any thing the Ganison may want; that is not the Case with Spain, I say if the subjects of Spain is suffered to take our Vessels, that are
bound up the Mediterranean, and stoping a t Gibrdtar for Infermation with their Gun boats and Privatiers, that is Lurking about the
straits, Treating the Crews very Ill after they do take them, those
that they do not think proper to take rob & plunder them of their
necessary stores, - if the citizens, of the United States is suffered to
be treated in this manner by those srndl Gun boats & Privatiers of a
nation that protends to be in friendship; they had much better be
a t open war no court of Justice, agreeable to the Laws of Nations I
think, can say that Gibrdtar is Blockaded at present, ou are the
Best Judge of that, I can not persuad my self that the overnment
of the U S will suffer such proceedings long, Calmly - I shall Dispatch the Ederprize in a few Days for the U. States I shdl represent
it to Government in the strongeat light I can I am told the Governor has a particular Interest in the Privatiers,
which I think renders him a Very Improper person to Judge; In those
Cases. I suppose I shall be Here in about one month from this on
my wa to America; If you have any Dispatches for the United States
you w& plto Direct them to the care of Mr Gavino
since,

6

[NDA photoatst, Dale LB, 1801-1&02.]
To Jamem Simpson, U. 8. Consul, Tangier, Morocco, from Captain Richard Dale,
U. 8. Bevy

On Board the UNITED
STATESSHIPPresident,
Gibraltar Bay I* Octr 1801
SIR,I Have the pleasure to inform you that your favours of the

25" of August, the 10 & 11 Ultq to Cap$Samuel Barron, is before me,

-

-

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

591

I note there Contents I thank you in the name of the United States
for your good lookout, after those Tripoline rascols, and Intended Zeal
for the Interest of the United States. - Cap? Barron is a t present,
I Expect, off, or about Tripoli; you may depend Evory attention
be paid in keeping a good lookout after those fellows; should you
hear of any boats fitting out, or men collecting on your side of the
water on any protence what Ever, you will please to Inform Mr
Gavino, without loss of time - On the 2* of Septl MF Nessen, the
Danish Consul was on Board of the President he informed me that the
Sweedish Consul Expected a F ate Every Day with Orders to make
a peace with Tripoli, I saw his F ag d y i n g there, you may be assured
I am well disposed to give Every protection in my Power to the
Sweedish Merchants Vessels, that I may meet wlth, against the
Tripdine Corsairs -

9

[NDA photostat, Dale LB, 1801-1802.1

To Bnins King, U. S. ?diLinister to London, England, from Captsin Richard Dale,
U. S. Havy

On Board the UNITEDSTATES
SHIPPteddeni
d Anchor in G i b d a r Bay 1" Octr 1801
SIR,I have the pleasure to Inform you that I have received three
Copys of your favour of the 10%of July I note Its contents, - It
is m t h pleasure that I Inform you that I have been received with
Every mark of Attention, in aU the British Ports that I have been in,
I left Malta the 219 of Augt I put in then, for water, the Case
that ou speak of had not arrived a t that time, - The 3* UltP I
left t e Coast of Tripoli, - I am Happy in saying the Corsairs of
Tripoli had not taken any Americans at that time, there is only three
at sea, a t present, the one that MT Stcrrott, Commander of the
Ederprize took, is the only one that has been seen at h a by any one
being nearly Expended I proceeded
to find a store ship, from Amencn with stores
to say, that I a m disappointed I shall
wait a few days, if she dos not arrive in that time, I can get supplyed
with what I want from His Majestys Magazines, this Garrison IS very
Friendly and attentive to the Squadron of Spain has thought proper to declare Gibraltar in a
The
state of Blockade, without havlng a Slnglc Ship before it, there is
few gun boats in the Straits, at the sight of an English ship of war they
run close in with the Spanish Shore, I can not think such a Blockade
can be maintaind in any court what Ever, those gun boats have
taken a number of Vessels lately belonging to the United States
Bound to Gibraltar to get Infermation respecting the war between the
United States and Tripoli, and to get Convoy should there be a necessity for it, up the Mediterranean If the Government of the United
States suffers its Citizens to be robed in such a manner, and that by
Spain,i t is time for the merchants, tq give over a13 kind of commerce,
and turn their attention to Somthmg Els. - I Have been well
assured that Mc MvDonogh acting a t present, as English Consul a t
Tri oli ersuaded in some measure the Bey of Tripoli to take the step
Bone towards the United States he
[NDA photostat, Dale LB, 1801-1802.1

rl

592

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1786 TO 1801
-

Extracts from journal of U. S. S. Essa, Captain William Bainbridge, U. S. Eavy
commanding
Thursday, 1 October 1801
All these 24 hours pleasant Weather & moderate breezes from S S W. At 4
AM made the Islands Linosa & Padussa shaped our course between them, the
appearance of those Islands have already been described Padussa ought not be
approached in a thick night.
At 6 AM the Island Linosa bore N b W and Pidussa West, pr Compass Linosa E S E 15 Miles. - Latitude Observed 36O 05' N.
Friday, 9, October 1801
Commences Clear Weather & pleasant breezes from W S W.
At 2 P M made the Island of Pantalaria bearing N 1/2 W pr Compass 14 or 15
Compass Ileagues?]
Throughout the night moderate breezes. At 5 AM ssw Cape Bon bearing
N W 112 W. distance 4 or 5 leagues.
At 11 AM tacked ship to the SouthwQ same time Cape Bon bore S E 112 S. &
the island Cimaro S b W 112 W At 112 pafit 11 A M sent my boat on board the
Philad* t o obtain Captain Borrons permission t o part company Latitude observed 37' 0.5' N.
Saturday, 3 October 1801
The fore part of these 24 hours li ht airs, variable from S t o W. The Philad*
parted & went into Tunis. At 4 P
every appearance of blowing hard from the
N W double reefed the Topsails, got down top gall, ards & housed the Guns.
At 6 P M Ca e Farina bore West, Cape Blanco W
W. the Island Cimaro
S E 112 E pr 8ompass At midnight stretching in for plane Island, sounded, no
bottom At 8 AM Cape Farina S 314 W & Cape Blanco W b N. Wind a t North.
A t 10 A M being close in with the island of Canis the wind on shore, tacked ship.
Discovered 8 or 10 sail of shipping in the bay of Bizerta Latitude observed 37'05' N.
[NA. ND original.]

81

&

To Lieutenant Andrew Sterett, U. S. Navy, commanding U. 8. Schooner Embpri~c,
from Captain Bichard Dale, U. S. Navy

On Board the UNITEDSTATEG
SHIPPresident
At Anchor in the Bay of Gibralfar
Octr pl* 1801 SIR, On the receipt of this you will please to proceed with the
United States Schooner under your command with all possible disatch for Baltimore on our Arrival there, you m i l l proceed, without
fxs of time, with the %ispatches that you have on Board, to the
Seat of Government, there Deliver them, to the Secretary of the
Navy, should you be under the necessity to put into Hampton Roads
you will in that case send one of your Officerson with the Dispatches
from that place - On your passage from this place you will not
chase any Vessel, nor go out of your way for any without you see a
necessity for it, I t is my advice that you run the Trades down, and
go well to the Westward before you go to the Northward - Should
Mr Smiths ship Join you, you will give her protection through the
straits, should any of the Spanish Gun Boats, that belong's to the
King of Spain request to sarch her, you must grant that promission,
but to no Privatier, in a11 such cases, you will be moderate and not
proceed to violence until1 the last Extremity Should you see that you
are likely to be detained by the ship lon er, that i t was natural for me
to Expect, that is if the wind comes rom the Westward, ou can
get through the Straits, but the ehip can not in that case s e must
Come back, - You may give my Honor that the ship and Cargo 18
the Property of American Citizens

f

[NDA photostat, Dale LB, 1801-1802.1

g

WARS WlllU BARBARY POWERS

593

Ta William Kirkpatrick, U. S. Consul, Malaga, ESpain, from Captain Richard Dele,
U. S. Bavy
On Board the UNITED
STATESSHIPPredenl
at Anchor in Gibraltar Bay OcF 3"'41801
SIR,YOUwill please to Inform the American Commanders in your
port, that wants convoy to Italy that I have received their favour
of the 24* UltP (it did not wme to hand untill yesterday) for their
Infermation you will. please to Inform them and all others that may
be Interested, that it is my wish and Intention to give protection to
a11 American Vessels, Either bound up the hlediterranean or down,
as much, as in my Power lays, but the Commanders must have
patience, I have to observe to you there is only three Ships of War in
those seas at present belonging to the United States, one of them
must be kept in or about this place, one off and aBout Tripoli so you
see there is only one to go on the convoy Business. I t cannot be
expcted that this ship is to set of[f] with two or three, or four, ships,
becaus in a few days there may be as man more wanting convoy, i t is
natural for Every mctnt to think of him se f first, the time is approaching fast that the weather will be such in those seas that there will be
little danger, of Tripoline Corsairs The Philadelphia and Essex, is a t present up the Mediterrnnean
when they or Either of them rcturn, one of the ships will be dispatched
up the Mediterranean to convoy what ships may be here and at Malaga
Bound up, - I Expect the Ships Dayly I know there Provisions is
nearly Ex ended I t is Impossible for me to fix the Procise time when
a ship wil be of[Q hlalaga, to take the ships there under convoy circumstanced as I am, the slip with provisions, from America for the
use of the Squadron, is not arrived here yet, I Expect her Every
Day. -

9

I'

[NDA photostat, Dale LB, 1801-1802.1
Presumably to Secretary of the Bavy from Captain Bichard Dale, U. S. Navy

GIBRALTAR
BAY,October 4, 1801.
"IInving completed my water on the 21st August, I sailed again.
On the 30th, I brought too a Greek ship from Constantinople and
Smyrna, bound into Tripoli, loaded with beans and merchandise,
and having on board one Tripolitan officer, twenty soldiqrs, foyrteen
merchants, five women, (four of them black.) and one w h t e chdd, all
Tripolitans. I took them a11 on board. I thought this a favorable
opportunit to try to bring about, and settle an exchange of prisoners
with the ey, should his corsairs take any Am~ricans,(I say God
forbid.) I accordingly sent three of the Tripohtans on shore, m a
smnl boat, with a letter to Mr. Nissen, requesting him to make the
conterlts of it known to the Bey. The next day, Mr. Nissen came off
nt the Bey's request, to know if I would make a truce. Mr. Nissen
informed me, that he had told the Bey before he came off, that he could
not, say m y thing to me on that subject, until he had answered m.v
letters on that point. The Bey told him to go off and try; and if I
would, he would then talk to me about the exchange of prisoners and a
peace. My mind was made up on that subject, knowing I had no
orders to make a truce, little was said on that subject. Mr. Nissen
told me, that the Bey mid, that he would not give one American for
all the soldiers, and that only eight of the merchants were his subjects.
He cared very little about any of them. At length the Bey sgreed

14

594

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1785 TO 1801

to give three Americans, for twenty-one soldiers, and three for the
eight merchants. Circumstanced as I was, I was under the necessity
to act as I did, namely, to put all on board the Groek ship again, and
permit them to go into port. I wrote to Mr. Nissen, to inform the
Bey, thnt I agreed to the exchange of three Americans for the soldiers,
but I did not consider the merchants as prisoners, nor could I fix on
any thing respecting them, until I knew the determination of my
government, and that the present transaction was not [to] be considered a precedent in any future negotiation. This transaction took
place on the 3d September, the shp's company then very sickly,
ninety-four on the doctor's list, nnd a number more complaining. Not
knowing to what extent the sickness might go, and not having more
than one month's provisions on board, a t eight P. M. I was under the
necessity of coming to a determination to give up the blockade of
Tripoli, and proceed to Gibraltar.
"Mr. Gavino informed me about a month ago, that the Tripolitcm
admiral had laid up his two corsairs hare, and took his passage, with
eight of his officers, on b o d of an English ship bound to Malta,
leaving tbe captain of the brig and twenty men, to take care of the
two vessels, and bring the ship home, if he had an opportunity; sent
the remainder of his men over to Tetuan in boats.
"I think i t necessary that two frigates should remain in those seas
all the winter, under the present circumstances. Tho Philadelphia to
rendezvous a t Saragossa, the south east end of the island of Sicily.
I shall give captain Barron orders to show himself off Tripoli and
Tunis every now and then, to lot those fellows know and see that we
are on the watch for them. The Essex to rendezvous a t Gibraltar
and Algeziras, as may be most convenient, to keep a good look out,
and know what is going on in this quarter."
[Naval Chronicle Vol. 1.1
Extract from journal of U. S. S. Essex, Captain William Beinbridge, U. S. Navy,
commandrmg, Sunday, 4 October 1801
Commences with light breezes & cloudy weather, wind at North, got up top
gall$ yards, carrying all aail by the wind to beat of[f] the shore - At % past
Meridian the Town of Bizerta borc W b N, point Farina S E b S. the island
of Canis S E Ji E.
At 2 P M saw seven sail of Vessels bearing North apparently were standing to
the Eastward.
At Sun set Cape Farina bore 8 E J$ S. & the Island Galita N W b W % W
Throughout the night light winds & calm. At 6 AM the Islaxid Gallita bore
W b S. 5 leagues.
At 11 AM mustered all hands. - Latitude oberved 37' 46' N.
[NA. ND original.]

1.5 October 18011
To Daniel Ludlow, Navy Agent, New York, A. Y., from Captain Bichnrd Dale,
U. S. Ravy

On Board the U S SHIPPresident
Algeziras Bay Octr 26'P 1801
SIR,I Have the Honor to Inform you that the Ship American
Packet Loaded with Stores, by you, on Accc of the United States for
the use of the Squadron, that I have the Honor to command, was
captured by a Spanish Privatier and Brought into this place on the 5*?
Inst -She was not put into my possession untill the 16*?Inst
I nC:
my word and honor to the Governor of this place that she had not

cve

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

595

on Board but stores for the use of the Squadron under my command,
nor Did I conceive at the time there was any thin Els; I saw by the
Charter-party that the ship was chartered for t e sole use of the
United States, I must confess to you, that I was much mortified to
find afterwards, that she had on Board 150 Bbln of Flower and Twenty
Tiercss of rice belonging, to some Merchants in New York, - Such
transactions might have a tendancy to bring Both me and my Country
into Disgrace in the Eyes of the People of this Country, particularly
in the present situation of things. - The Enclosed is a copy of a
certificate that I gave the Cap$ respecting the Dolivery of h s cargo
and the days ho was under my Direction. -

f

[NDA photostat, Dale LB, 1801-1802.1
To the Intendant and Haste? Builder of H. B. M. Dockyard at Gibraltar, from
Captain Richard Dale, U. S. Navy

On Board the UNITED
STATESSHIP
President ab anchor in GibraEtar Bay
Octr 6* 1801
GENTLEMEN,
I have received a Letter from Rufus King Esqr the
United States Minister, at London under Date of the 10* of July lost
Informing me that His Majesty had requested his Ministers to give
orders to the Officers, of this Garrison and his other Garrisons, in the
Mediterranean, to supply the Squadron, which I have the Honor to
Command with any thing that they might stand in need of out of
his magazens, In having received such Inferntion, and the U. S.
Ship PresidW being in w m t of a New Foresail Fore & Main Tops*,
I am Induced to request, that you will be pleased to supply me w t h
the above sdls, and Inform me on what terms & the mode of payment
&o the Provisions that I get out of the Publick Stores here, 1s setled
for in London, at 10 P' C+advance on tho first Cost there, by the
Minister of the United States. [NDA photostat, Dale LE. 1801-1802.1
Extracts from journal of U. S. S. Eua, Captain William Bainbridge, U. 6. Wavy,
commanding
Monday, 6 Ocfober 1801
Commences clear Weather. verv light airs from the EsstwQ At % D& 2 P M
John 8 u g v a lad of 16 years,'Captainof the Mizzen top, unfortunagly fell from
the Crose Jack Yard broke both arm, & fractured his scull. At 3 he expired.
he wss a very smart active youth. At Sun set the Island of Galitta bore S 8 W 3h
W 3 leagues. At 8 P M it bore S b E $4 E 12 hliles. Tllroughout the night
cloudy, light airs & calm.
At 3 past 10 AM Galitta bore S E b E j"r E distant 9 or 10 l ~ ~ g u ea
Latitude observed 37O 47' N. - Longitude observed 8" 12' E.
Tuesday, 6 Odober 1801
Commences cloudy, dull eath her, with light variable winds from the Westward.
Tlmughout the night baffling winds and calm a t intervals. At 6 AM made
the land between Cape Mabera & Cape Ferra on the Barbary shore the lsnd
midway between tile capes is very high & Cape Ferra makes rugged with an
Idand off i t near to which is Port Faicul.
Ends clear weather & Westerly winds
Latitude observed 37' 21' N. - Longitude in. 7 O 26' E [NA. ND original.]

596
-

NAVRI, OPEBATIONS FROM 1786 TO 1801

To Rufue King, U. 8. Minister to London, England, from Captain Richard Dale,
U. 8. Bavy

U. S. SHIP.Pres-ident
a4 anchor in Gibraltar Bap Octr 70 1801 SIR, I Just have time to send you forward the Inclosed copys, of
receipts that I Gave here, for Provisions, and one Main Top Sail, that
I have got out of His Magestys Stores, I am told it is to be setled for a t
10 pr C' advance on the first cost in London No store ship has
arrived as yet from America
[NDA photostat, Dale LB, 1801-1802.1
To the Governor of Saint Boque, Spain, from Captain Richard Dale, U. 8. Navy

On Board the U. S. SHIPPresident a t
Anchor in Algeziras Bay Octc gtQ1801
SIR, I cast Anchor in this port last Evening My Intentions in
coming here is to get water and other necessaries that I may want. I am sorry to understand, that there is a necessity of puting the
United States, Ship which I have the Honor to Command, under
Qua[ra]ntine, I give you m Honor, Sir there is no, Infectious disease
on Board, nor has there, .I3ver been Since She was Built, ou was
pleased to Inform me in your Favour of the 28* UltQthat t would
give you pleasure to render services to the Squadron that I have the
honor to Command, - I was Informed this morning that a ship from
New York Bound to Gibraltar Loaded with Provisions $ 9 by the
Government of the United States for the use of the said Squadron,
was Brought into this ort two Days a o, by your Gun Boats and is
Detained here, you wi please to reco ect Sir, that I mentioned to
you in my letter of the 27 Ult? that I expected the arrival of such a
Vessel Every Day, - & requested you wold give orders to the Commanders of your Gunboats not to molest her. I hope Sir you will have no objection to ordering, that Vessel to
be put in my possession as I am in a Ve Great Hurry to get my
ship ready for Sea, which, I cannot do wigout I get the Provisions,
out of that Ship, I have Dispatches from Goverment on Board of her,
which I cannot get a t present, - I Expect the other two F
the Squadron Every Day. - the two Tripolie Corsairs is s t laying
in the Bay of Gibraltar I can not say how soon, I may receive Infermation from the American Consul there, giving me Infermation;
that the said corsairs is gitting ready to go to Sea, therefore Sir I shall
thank you to givc me Every assistance in geting my water, also to
put the Ship with the Stores in my Possession, * * *
[NDA photostat, Dale LB, 1801-1802.1

9

E

K

ptos

Extractrr from journal of U. 6. 8. k,
Captain William Bainbridge, U. S. Navy,
commanding
Friday, B October 1801
Commencee clear weather & Westerly winds
At past Meridian set all drawing sails in chaw of a schooner. At S P M
Lieutenant George Wsehington Tew, died, after a lingering illness At 4 P M found the chace left us owing to the very baffling winds.
At 6 P.M. committed the body of Lieutr Tew to the deep, with the honors of
War, his corpse followed by myself & all the Officers, ships company sttendmg.
The bell tolled, the Muaic played the dead March with the drum muffled

-

597

WARS WITH BARBARY POU'ERS

Marinee fire three vollies of small arms. He was an excellent Officer & a fine
companion, his death is lamented by all the Essez's Crew.
Throughout the night variable winds.
Latitude obeerved 37' 17' N. - Longitude in 4 O 11' E.
Sundag, 11 Odober 1801

Commences leassnt Weather & light airs from the Eastward, carrying steering
sails. At 5 P
Cape Matjfou bore SW W, distant 4 or 5 leagues, same time
t P M going with a
cloudy with drizzling rain, in all steering sails. At % p a ~ 5
smart easterly breeze 6 knots, was struck all aback with a Most violent qua11
from NW. it blew excessive hard, raged like a hurricane, let fly all sheeta, clewed
up & took in all sail, except fore topmast stayeail, as apeedily as possible, Under
that sail only the frigate lay down considerable, housed the guns, secured the
ports, got down top gall$ yards, launched top gall. Masts,bent storm stay sails,
being on a lee shore made our situation dangmus, the violence of the squalI being
over it. Commenced a gale of wind from WNW, brought the ship under reefed
foresail & storm staysails, her head to the Northwe With the LarbQtacks aboard,
In the squall the Maintopimil got splitt. unbent i t & bent a new one, A t 10 aet
close reefed Main & fore topsail.
Throughout the night blowing a heavy gale from the Westward, a disagreesbie
short sea, ship W r i n g a good deal.
At 7 P M rather moderated, set close reefed Mizzen topas[NA. N D original.]

b

112 October 18011
Extract from Account of Israel Whelen, U. S. Purveyor
The United States for The Barbary Powers in accot with Isreel Whelen, Purveyor
1800 &
1801
8apt

1

Octobr

10

July

15

1501

June

21

1800

Aua,

1

1801

Bepc

90

July

29

To amount of Dishursemanh in purchasing A r t i c h in part of the C w of
ship George Wn'ndinglonfor Algiers height & Ittsmmca..." DP of Ithe
)P for freight of ship Eino'r Cargo for Tunis chartar'd by the
Iste Tench Francis-.---.---------------------------" Dq of Dv for Insurance on Cargo of the Brig W i a effwted by the
late Tench Francis.-.-.--..-.-.-------------------------------

''

DP of DQ on a m u n t of the Cnrgo of the shlp Anna Maria for Tunis
Freight & Insumam---,--.-.-.-------------------------

" DQ of DP for A r t l p
h & which remain on hand -----.---.
'' DQ of ps for Expenses at various times on Timber shipped to 111g

9opt

17

Octur

12

.

-

DQ of Lk for the Cargo of the shlp &and f i r k for Tunis l d g h t &
Iosunrnca in part -..-...-----..----------------.---------'' Do of DQ on account of the Cnrgo. freight & d e m u r e of the ship
Pcaee & PImlg for Tunis ------.-.-.-..----------.---------'' D9 of DP on BOa)unt o f the Cargo of the ship (horqe U'adinglon
24 voyage for ~
~---....---.-------------------------r
s
"

DonJlrs

* * * * * * * *

Errors Excepted

PHILADELPHIA
O d 0 k I f t b1801 -

[Schuylkii ArsenaI.1
To C~pteinRichard Dale, U. 6. Navy, from James Leander Cathcart,
U. S. ex-Consul, Tripoli

L E ~ H O ROctober
N
19* 1801
SIRI had the honor to write you very fully via Tunis on the 7*
16+ & 17') Ultv which I hope you hsva received - I have now to
inform you, that the T r i p o h e Ambassador Had@ Mohammed Ben
Luna who came from Tnpoli on board the Danlsh Frigate, 6G took
his passage on board the Imperial Polaccs brig Marco Aurelia, Ca t g
Antonio Zuppa, bound as was supposed to Tangiers sail'd from t

L

598

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1786 TO 1801

Port some days ago, k has return'd here again, where she now is in
consequence of having been plunder'd by a French Privateer who
has taken even his ring from his finger from him thus has the object
of his mission been impeded for the present, but the Tripoline Jews
have made him considerable advances, & he proceeds in the same Vessel
for Tangiers in a few days, I have reason to suspect that he has orders
to touch a t Algiers in order to influence the Dey of Algiers to espouse
his master's cause, consequently to our prejudice I therefore submit
to your consideration the utility & propriety of intercepting this
Ambassador, & det.nining him, & his property & Suit, as he 1s our
active enemy in every sense of the Word Tbe Preliminary articles of Poace were sign'd a t London between
France & Great Britain on the first instant, & we were informed of i t
here on the 10" by a Courier extraordinary, the distance is so great,
& the time so very short, sinco the act transpired, that i t is hardly
credible
On the Il* the Fortifications saluted, & the Tuscan or Etrurian,
& French Flag were both hoisted together on the Castle Their are seven Sail of American Vessels here bound to the Westward, they will all be ready to sail in three Weeks, our fellow Citizens
here murmurs much that none of our Vessels of War has touch'd a t
this Port, for the purpose of giving them Convoy
I receiv'd a letter from h4c Cathalan a t Marseillos a few days ago
which contains the following Paragraph "Please to present my respects to Comodore Dale when you write
to him, & inform him that should he find i t necessnry to send any of
the Ships under his Command to Toulon for repairs or provisions or
any thing else, that on advising me of their arrival I will be there in
twenty four hours after receiving said advise, & will be alwa s ready
to suppl them with Casll or m y thing either Toulon, or arseilles
affords, Ilr Cathalan is continued in Office by Mr Jefferson, & is no
longer stiled Consul, but Commercial Agent I am impatient to hew from you as I have not received n line from
you since yours of the 25'? of August, nor have I heard from Mr
Eaton since the 20t?August - * * *
P. S. I am ready to embark a t a moment's warning, & will take
with me an Interpreter who writes the Arabic language in order not
be under the necessity of employing a perfidious J e w

J

K

[NA. SDA.

CL, Tripoli, Vol. 2, June 1801-Sept. 1805.1

Extract from journal of 0. S. S. EYQ, Captain William Beinbridge, U. 8. Navy,
commanding, Tuesday, IS October 1801
These 24 hours commences with light breeeea from the Northward & WeatwQ,
clear weather, employed in cleansing & siring all decks.
At 4 P M the Island Ivics bore N N W 1/2 W, the Island Formentari W N W.
At 3 AM violent squab from North, clewed up all mil but M. topmil dose
reefed - aqua11 over s t 4, made sail At 7 AM another very hard squall, took in Mizzen topaail, & clewed down fore
& msin do.
Extremely un leasant weather, rtxemblin very much the weather, that ie
generally in the Ltitudea between the k b n d k r m u d s & Cape Hsttnss Latitude observed 37' 37' N. - Longitude in 4O 06' E.
[NA. N D original.]

599

WARS W I T H BARBARY POWERS

To William Eston, 0. 8. Consul. Tunis, from H. Frumerie, Swedi~hCharg6
d'bffairea, Tunis

MAJEGTY'B
CHANCERY
Ofice in Tunis October 1 4t@1801.
SIR,By a Letter lab1 received from Colonel Tonquist Commander
in Chief of the Thetis rigate we have the honor to inform you, that
the said Colonel has recieved orders from His Swedish Majesty, Our
most gracious Sovereign, to act in concert with the American Squndron
against Tripoli, and that to effect this purpose with more eficacy,
three Swedlsh frigates and a Cutter bng have for some time ago
left Sweden, and are dayly expected in the Mediterranean to join the
Colonel, and to act in combination with the American Squadron
against our common Enemy the Bashaw of Tripoli, or an other
Barbarian that shall in any manner attempt to annoy our F ag and
Commerce in the Mediterranean Sea. The said Colonel will also
in consequence of above mentioned orders take Americans Ships
under hia Convoy. COPY

HIS SWEDISH

B

7

(NA. SDA.

CL, Tunis, Vol. 2, Part I, Mnrch 1801-Dec. 1802.1

Extracts from journal of U. 6. S.

k,
Captain William Bainbridge, U. S. Bnvy,

commonding
Wednesday, 14 October 1801
Commenceu smart breezes & squally weather with rain,made & took in mil as
circumstances required Throughout the night light breezes, A t 4 AM discovered
s ship to the Westwd, gave chace, a t 5 AM, spoke her A Merchant ship from
Algiers (had Consul OBriens pass) bound to Lisbon, suffered her to proceed on
her voyage to Jiisbon. At 7 AM spoke an American Brig from Meusina, eame
time aaw Cape De Gatt, & the Mountains of Grenada, which are covered throughout the year with snow. Cape De Gatt N W 9 leagues
Latitude observed 36'28' N.
Thrttsduy, 16 October 1801
Commences with clear weather & light variable winds from S W to W. At
Sun set Cape De Gatt bore N W 5 N distance 7 or 8 leagues. The greater part
of the night calm.
The latter part of these 24 hours carrying all mil hy the wind, very Iight airs.
At 10 AM discovered a convoy of 41 sail, close under the land abreast of the bay
of Almeria, apparently ~ e v e r a frigates
l
among them. I t being calm, cannot aee
which way they are bound. A Man fell over board, lowered down the pinnace
dz mved him. Cape De Gatt bore N b E E 24 Miles Friday, 18 O&ber 1801
These 24 hours commence with clear weather & light airs from S W b S. At
3 P M had neared the convoy considerably. hoisted our Ensign. The frigates in
the convoy hoisted theirs, No wind to blow them out, coud not distinguish what
colors they were. At past 5 P M being within 5 Miles of the fleet, The British
Frigates Sokbuye boat came nlon~ptidewith a Lieut* in her t o know what ship it
was. Hc informed that the fleet in sight waa am English convoy bound to Minores,
Malta & Egypt. At 5 P M Cape De Gatt bore N N E & a t 6 AM. I t bore
N N W,current drifted us to the Eastward. At 9 A M exerc~sedg r w t guns.
Latitude observed 36"22' N.
Sundav, 18 October 1801
Commences clear pleasant weather & calm,
The hills of Grenada, to the West of Almeria bay is an excellent mark for
knowing the comt hereabouts, on account of their elways being covered with
more or 1- enow, & their extreme height, they msy be discerned a long way off.
They extend in view from Velea Malaga to h n n e . Bonne is a Castle with a
house or two about it, about 10 or 12 Miles to the Westward of Almeria Bey.
It is easily known by a Watch Tower, about a mile to the West of it, standing
directly on s rugged int of land which ia not very htgh.
2 1 AM mustered sHOhsnda $ read the articles of war.
INA. ND originel.]

600

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1786 TO 1801

To David Bnmphreys, U. 6. Miniater to Madrid, Spain, from Captain Bichard Dale,
U. 6. Navy

On Board the UNITED
STATESSHIPPresident
At Anciwr in AZgeziras Bay 1P Oetr 1801
SIR, I wrote you the first Ins? Informing you the proceeding, of
the privatiers out of this place agaimtt the commerce of the U. S.
Bound up the Mediterranean. the Governour, of this Provence owns
three of them, Every Encurngement is given to the Privatiersmen to
bring into this place Every American Vessel they can capture that is
Bound up the Mediterranean, to see if they can find out if they were
going to touch at Gibmltar, when a Vessel is brought in here, there is
no possibility of her geting nway again, under one month; when the
Governours Privatiers brings in my Vessels, he is the Chief Judge of
the Cause; If there is not a stop put to such nefarious conduct ns is
carried on here at present, towards the Americans there is no knowing
where it will end, particularly as the Owners of the Privatiers and
Privatiersmen, have to pay no damages let them be ever so .mo
their conduct, It is very strange to me, that the K'
Of Spm
it issUa dissuch nefarious conduct to be carried on under his lag.
ce to the nation, It is said that Gibraltar is in a state of Blockade,
r m u s t be n Blockade of Privstiers for there is not n Kings Vessel of
any discription, to be seen a t sea; a sbip from New York loaded with
stores by the Government of the U. S. for the use of the Squadron
that I command, was Brought in here by one of the Privatiers on the
5" Inst She was not given u untilt the 16* In5 Notwithstanding I
gave my Honor that she was oaded by the Goverment of the United
States with stores for the use of the Squadron under my command they also had dl the papers, respecting the Business, I was laying in
Gibraltar Bay when the Vessel mas Brought in here, they would not
suffer the Cap+ to write a Letter to me, to I~Iformme that he was
Brought in Here - I cannot help observing to you Sir that I think
such conduct is a Direct Insult to the United States, and ought to be
represented as such, to the Khg of Spain I shall re resent it in the
Strongest manner that Z can to the Goverment of the nited States The P h W p h i a and &sex is not arrived here, as yet. I have
been Expecting them Every Day for some Days past, they not arriving here so soon as I Expected, will detain me in those seas, I
Expect, untill the first of December,
If the King of Spain thinks he dos England or the Inhabitance of
Gibraltar any Inju b the supposed Blockade he is very much mistdcen, ti. his frienz t i e Americans that is Injured the most by it,
by the Privatiers capturing all the Americans bound through the
Straits, under pretext that they are bound to Gibrdtw. -

?f

qb

f'

b

[NDA photogtst, Dale LB,1801-1802.1
To Cap-

John Atonio de Espho, Boytrl Havy of Spain, from Captain Bichard
Dale,U. S. Bavy

UNITED
STATESSHIPPre&nt
at Anchor in Algizirm Bay Octr i94b 1801

DONJOHN ATONIODE EBPINO
Cap+I n the Royal Naq &Q & g Algezires.

SIR, I have the honor to acknowled e the receipt of your favour of
the 15* Inst and the Inclosed cop of?the definitive sentame of the
Tribunal of P W of the Marine epartment of Algeziras respecting

8

I

I

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

601

the American Ship American Packet loaded with Provisions &?for the
use of the Squadron that I have the Honor to command, from New
York, bound to Gibraltar to rec[e]ive my Orders either to land the
cargo there or proceed els where but was captured by a Spanish
Privatier Gun Boat in the Straits of Gibraltar and brought into this
place [5 October] I am happy in declaring to you Sir from Every Infermation that I
have received since I have been here, that in the Tribunal wherein
you Preside, you have shown a disposition to do Every Justice to
the Americans, respecting the above transaction you did not hesitate
in telling me that there was no Just caus to detain the ship from me,
I am fully persuaded as far as respects your self, that you would not
countenence any one Act wherein you thought, that it would have a
tendency to lessen the good understanding which subsists between
the two Nations a t present, which I most sincerely hope will be
lasting. [NDA photostat, Dale LB, 1801-1802.1
Extract from journal of U. S. S. Essa, Captain William Bainbridge, U. 6. Navy,
commanding, Monday, 19 October 1801
Commences very pleasant weather, with light winds from NNE to NE -At
Meridian Csstle Ferro bore NWbN 6 leagues. This Castle is readily distinguished
by its whiteness & standing on a rising ground near the Sea, to the NW of it you
discover a town about 4 Miles off, on the side of the mountain, to the North of
which you will see a large body of trees that appear green A t 2 PM saw Modril bearing NWSW, this town makes about 3 miles from the
shore, & forms a pretty deep bay, to the West of this bay on the point is the
Castle of Modril, that has several houses around it.
The land round the bay forma a handsome plain
[NA. N D original.]
To Captain Richard V. Morris, U. S. Navy, New York,
Navy

B. Y., from Secretary of the

[WASHINGTON,
D. C.]
N. Dept 20* Ocbo: 1801,
Pour Letter of the 6%inst has been received.
I accede to the proposal of raising the Deck of the Adums. - You
will therefore be pleased to take the necessary orders on this Subject.
[NDA. OSW,Vol. 5, 1801-1802.1
To Captain Richard Dale, U. S. Navy, from Anthony Dugan

(16)
MALAGA
20* October 1801.
SIR, I have the pleasure to acknowledge receipt of your much
esteemed favor 14" ins5 & express my sincere thanks for your attcntaon in writing to me. As i t now establishes a certaint that we shall
receive Convoy from one of your Ships. - We hai7 heard of the
Capture of the Store-ship from N York, and was fearfull l t would
have caused a detention; knowing the injustice which every American
eqeriences who is so unfortunate ns to be taken by those licensed [?]
zrates. I take the liberty of enclosed a letter for VC"P Bainbridge
%sqi of the Esscz. - The Captains Q supercargo begs leave to offer
you their sincere thanks for your Politeness & attention. [NDA.

A-4.

E. C. Dsle Col.]

602

NAVAL OPERATlONS FROM 1786 TO 1801
[20 October 18011

To Captain Bichard Dale, U. S. Navy, from First Lieutenant Newton Keene, U. S.
Marine Corps

SIR, This Evening a t five Oclock, I had the Honour to deliver to
John Tripp Midsldpman on board the United States Frigate President,
your letter of arrest, & agreeably to Order received his Side arms,
& confined him in the Larboard Mess Room under the care of the
Sentinal ,

NEWTON
G ~ E E N[KEENE]
E
Lr Coma the Marines

Frigate Presided. 20* OCTOBER
1801
[NDA. NJ.]

Extract from journal of U. S. 8. Euu, Captain William Bainbridge, U. 8. Navy,
commanding, Wednesday, 21 October 1801
Commences with strong gales & cloudy weather, under reefed sails, besting to
the Westward.
At sun set the Cathedral in Malaga bore NWbW & the Town of Velez Malaga
NbE.
At 8 P M moderated, sent up to gall* yards, set the sails. Throughout the
night beating towards the harbor of Galagn. At 7 AM came to anchor in Malaga
bav fo fill our water, the large Cathedral bearing NbW. The signal tower
NEbE depth of water 14 fath. Immediately cleared the boom, hoisted out the
Cutter & dispatched her on shore a watering
[NA. ND original.]

-

Extract from journal of U. S. S. Esw, Captain William Bainbridge, U. S. Navy,
commanding, Wednesday, 21 to Sunday, 25 October 1801
During this time lying in the bay of Malagn with a very hard gale from the
WestwQ Kept all boats em loyed procuring a supply of water At Malaga I learnt that Eornrnodore Dale was a t Algeziras Four American Vessels in this Port waiting Convoy [NA. ND original.]
To William Kirkpatrick, U. 8. Consul, Malaga, Spain, from David Humphreye,
U. 6. Minister to Madrid, Spain

MADRIDOct 24* 1801 Circular
SIR. I am just advised by the charg.6 des Affaires of his Swedish
Majesty a t this court, he hns received intelligence from the Captain
of a Merchant Vessel of his Nation, dated the 24 Ult? a t Mahon, that
a Tripoline Corsair had gone out of that port and that two others were
preparing to sail, all of them having English Colours and Minorcan
Crews, for the Purpose of avoiding, under that mark the searches of
the American Frigates. His informant adds, that these three Corsairs
are furnished with English Documents. - However illegal, extraordinary or almost incredible such conduct might be, I have thought
it a duty to place this information exactly as I have received it, in your
knowledge, in order that you may communicate the same to the commanding officers of your armed Vessels in the Mediterranean, as well
as to all such of our Citizens as may be concerned in Commercs in that
Sea for their advice and Government.
(NA. SDA.

CL, Malaga, Vol. 1, June 1793-May 1814.1

603

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

To Patrick Mullony, U. 8. Vice Consul, Algeciras, Spain, from Captain Richard
Dale, U. S. Bavy

On Board the UNITEDSTATESSHIP President
in the Bay of Algeziras 26* Octr 1801 SIR, YOUwill please to deliver the Inclosed Letters as directed, to
the Commanders of the U S Ships, Philadelphia and Essex, when they
arrive here, and give them Every assistance in your power, to get
their stores off - ou will also please to pay stnct attention to the
Store Houses, that t e stores are in and see that there is nothing stole
out of them you have here with a list of the stores that is in them. -

E

[NDA photostat, Dale LB, 1801-1802.1
To Captain Samuel Borron, U. S. Navy, commanding U. 8. Frigate Pkiladdpnia,
from Captain Richard Dale, U. 8. Bavy

On Board the U S. SHIPPresident
Algeriras Bay Octr
1801 SIR,On the receipt of this you will please to make use of every
exertion in your power, to.get your Provisions and slops, on Board,
that I have had stored in thls port for the use of your ship; our Purser
will see by the Invoice that he will receive from Mr b ullony (the
American Consul here) what has been taken for the use of the President,
and what ren~ainsfor the Philadelplda, and the Essez; it must be so
divided as to last the two ships an Equal length of time, your Purser
wvill send to the Navy Department the Quantity of Every article,
that he receives on Board, of that Invoice. - After you have got
your Provisions &o on Board and your ship ready for Soa (which you
will lose no time in doing of) - you will take under your convoy what
ships may be here, and at Gibraltar, Bound up the Mediterranean,
you will dso touch at Maltlga and take what Vessels may be there
bound, that way and proceed with them to the ports, of their destination giveing them every protection in your power Should ou see any
Sweedish Ships bound the same way that you are, you
give them
rotection also, as the, Sweedisb shps of war, will do the same to our
herchant Vessels - After you have done with the convoy, you will
proceed, and touch a t Tunis to know if hlr Eaton has any news from
Tri li t 9 from Tunis you will proceed and take a look into the Harbor
of g p o l i ; from Tripoli; you mny go to Mnlta, if you please it is a
oonveniant place to water your ship, and a Very fine Harbour, when
you are in, but you cannot go in or out without a fair wind. Saragosa is a very fine Harbour, the S. E. End of Sicily, it is the
place for your General rendezvous as you may get every supply that
you may want in the, Eating way, and that very cheap. - I dont
expect there will be any great Necessity of y o u being much at ma
tlm Winter. You will take a look now and then into Tripoli, to let
that fellow sea and know that you are on the look oiit for him, ou will
also touch at Tunis at the same time to know if Mr Eaton as any
news for you &9 and back to Saragoscr or Malta as you may think best,
always leaving a letter behind at the lace that you sail from to give
infermation, where you may be foun if necessary
The above is your station until1 you are releaved by some Ship
of the next Squadron that is to come out, which I suppose will be soon,
as I have wrote the Secretary of the Navy, that you are to remain
there until1 releaved - Notwithstanding what I have said of your
not quitkg the above station, should you receive Infermation that

9

A

i

i'

604

NAVAL OPEBATIONS FROM 1785 TO 1801

you can place confidence in, that there is Tripolian Corsairs going, or
IS on the coast of Spain, or any other place that you may suppose,
there is any of our Merchant Vessels there you will m that case persue
t.hem; and give all the protection in your powor to the Merchant
Vessds
The endosed is a letter from M' King our Minister in London, Informing me, as you will see that the King of England has given his
Minister Orders, to give orders, to the Officers of his Garrisons in the
Mediterranean, to supply the Squadron that I have the Honor to
command, with my land of stores, out of his Magazins, that it might
want Should you want my thing, and can not do without it you will
apply accordingly. - Captain Bainbridge in the Essm will remain,
in &. about Gibraltar untiU he is releaved by n ship of the next SQuadron, notwithstanding he is subject to your Orders shordd you thmk it
necessary for him to quit his station to go Els where I shall proceed as soon as possible to Algiers to settle some Business
with ?vPOBrien after which if nothing new turns up more than I
know a t present, I shall proceed for America, say Hampton Roads,
you uilI go to Philadelphia, should you not receive orders to the contrary; should you stand in need of money for the use of your Ship,
you will see by the copy of my Instructions from the Navy Department, which you have got the sum, and whose hands the credit is
lodged in for the use of the Squadron; I enclose you a co of M:
Turners Letter to me on the Business for your guide. - ou mag
inform the Commanders that you convoy up, nnd any other Commanders that may be Bollnd down the Miditerranem, that you cannot give them convoy down. I dont think there is m y Danger, of
Tripoline Corsairs, in going up or coming down a t present; you will
be the best Judge of that in going up; and when you are up the Mediterranean, in course you will act accordingly. - When you are releaved and on your return home ou will call a t Tunis, and Algiers, to
get the Consuls Dispatches shou d they have any to send to Government
On your arrival here you will Inform the Commanders of American
Vessels, a t this place Gibraltar & Malaga when you think you will be
ready, to take them under your Convoy up the Mediterranean.
Not withstanding what I have said in these Orders should any thing
of consiquence turn up (which I do not see a t present) to mske it
necessary in your Judgement to deviate from any part of them you
Have my consent so to do. -

!

i

-

[NDA photostat, Dale LB, 1081-1802.1
To Captain William Bainbridge, U. 8. Navy, commanding U.S. 8. h e r , from Captoin
Bichard Dale, U. S. Navy

On Board the UNITED
STATESSHIPPresident
Algeziras Bay Octr 86* 1801 SIR,On the receipt of this you will please to make use of every
exertion in your power, to get your provisions and slops on board
that I have had stored in t l k port for the use of your shi - Your
purser will see b the Invoice that ire will receive from MT&ullony
(the American onsul here) what has been taken for the use of the
President, and what remains for the figex and Philadelphia; i t must
be so divided, as to last the two ships an Equal lengtb. of time, Your
Purser will send forward, to the roper Department the quantity of
every article that he receives of t a t Invoice You will lose no time in

6'

f

6U5

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

Geting your Ship rendy for Sea, and to be kept in that situation when
you are in port, that you may go to Sea, at any moment that It is
necessary ;
Your Station will be io and about Gibraltar, Algeziras,
the S t r r b , and Straits Mouth, and as far as Mdaga, when you may
think it necessay. - (untill relesved by some Ship of the next Squadron that is mrmng out) always taking very good care not to be too
long away from Gibraltar, so as to let the two Tripoline Corsairs get
out. You will please to have frequent Communication with Mr
Gavino to know what situation they are in; Algeziras is a much better road thsn Gibraltar to lay in In the Winter Season I dont think
i t will be necessary for you to be much a t Sea; I cannot think there
will be any Danger from TripoIino Corsairs in the Winter Season.
Should you find i t to the contrary you will give every protection in
your power to the Merchant Vessels of the United States that may
come within your notice, also the Sweodish Merchtmen, as the Sweedish Ships of War w i l l do the same towards our Merchant Vessels, but
in no case whatever are you to quit your Station for any length of
time, without you are very sertsin that the two Tripdine, Conairs,
which is now laying a t Gibraltar, with their yards and Topmasta
down, is in such a sutuation that they cannot go to Sea, under a
much longer time than you would be of' your Station - Should you
stand in need of mony for the use of your ship, you will see by the
copy of my Instructions from the Navy Department, which you have
got, the sum and whose Hands the credit is lodged in for the use of
the Squadron. I enclose you a copy of Mr Turners Letter to me on
the Business for your guide, as you cannot obtain money for Bills on
London under 20 or 25 Pr C? loss you w i l l try to make as little as
possible mrve ou - I also Inclose you a copy of a Lctter that I
have received rom Mr King our Minister in London, Informing you
that the King of England, had given Orders to his Minister, to give
orders, to the OEcers of his Garrisons in the Mediterranian, to supply tho Squadron which I have the Honor to command with any
stores that they ma want, out of his Magazins; Should you stand m
need of any kind o stores (that you cannot do without) for the use
of your ship you will apply according1 . After you are releaved you
will make the best of your way to d w York, without ou receive
Orders to the contrary. I have wrote the Secretary o tho Navy
that you are to remaui untill relieved I suppose he will lose no time
in sending a ship for that purpose
After I take my departure
from those Seas (which will be as soon as I go to Algiers and sittle
some Business with Mc OBrien & return back here) you d
lconsider
your sdf under tile Command of Samuel B a m n Esqr - Afterwards
should he deem it necessary to order you of[fl your station, you are
to obay his Orders notwithstanding what I have said in these Orders
should any thing turn up, which it is Impossible for me to see at present, and of such a nature as to make it necessary in your Judgment,
to deviate from any part of tllose Orders, you have my consent so to do

-

9

3

9

-

[NDA photostat, Dale LB, 1801-1802.1
Extract from journal of U. 5. S. Euu, Captain William Bninbridge, U. S. Navy,
commanding, Sunday, 96 October 1801
Commences with strong Westerly galc, all boats employed day & night to finish our watering At 11 AM received the last boat load, immediately took in all boats & prepared
to 882.

606

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM I786 TO 1801

Thk day entered two seamen & two ordinary seamen from the shore on the
books of the &sez
[NA. ND original.]
To Secretary of the Bavy from Captain Bichsrd Dale, U. S. Bavy

On Board the U S SHIPPresided
Cibrnlfar Bay Octr 9tP 1801
SIR,On the 4* Ins5 which was the day that I wrote you by the
Enterprize a Very Disagreeable circumstance in its event, took place,
the Particulars, is as follows Viz,
On the 1V Ins+Charles Davis (Seaman) Deserted from the ship by
swiming on shore the 2Ydhe was, apprehended by Mr Cox, Midship
man, and Brought on Board again he was put in Irons below, and a
eentinal put over him The mght following he Bribed the sentinel,
and deserted again by swiming on shore; the 4'" Mr John Trippe and
Edward N. Cox, Midshipmen, being on shore on Liberty, apprehended him again; while Mr Cox went to geat a guard, to put him under
confinement (as the said Deserter would not go with them) he made
use of a Very abusive Language to Mr Trippe and attempted to make
his escape from him, as I am Informed, Ms Trippe wounded him in
two places with his Durk, he was then ut under guard until1 he
should be sent for; the said Deserter to1 the Officer of the Guard
that he was an Englishman and claimed the protection of a, British
subject that he was no Americm; a Surgoon was sont for by the
Officer to examine his wounds, the result was that the wound on the
Brest was Dangerous. - A Boat and an Officer of the ship was sent
for the said Deserter, the Officer of the Guard gave him up When he
was Brought on Board, I requested the Doctt to Examine his wound,^
and report to me his opinion respecting them, he informed me they
were slight and no ways dangerous; I sent for Mr Trippe and gave
him a severe reprimand for his conduct, and Empressed on his mind;
the disagreeable consiquences that would have resulted, had he have
killed the man on shore or if the man should still die with his u-ounds.This circumstance made much nois and discontent on shore, among
the Inhnbitance, the Officer of the Guard wss blamed Very much for
givin the man up on the 6" at 11. A. M. a Master and Commander,
the ommanding Naval Officer at Gibraltar a t the time came on
Board to demand the said Charles Davis as being a British eubject,
and the Chief Judge demanded, that both the officer and the man,
should be sent on shore and given up to the Cival Authority I told
the Officer that I knew of no British subject being on Board the U S.
Ship President, that the said Charles Davis, shiped himself with his
own free will, as an American Citizen, and that I should keep him on
board as such, untill I arrived in America if he lived so Iong; as to my
giving Both him and the Officer up to the Civil authority, for the
Officers transaction on shore, It required some conaideration I told
him I would meet him in one Hours time a t the Chief Justises; he
took his leave and went on shore. - I took the Doctr with me and
w&ed on the Judge and Informed him that from the report made to
me, by my Doctor (as he was present he rnigbt ask him any questions
he thought proper, on the subject) the wounds that the man received
from the Officer was no ways Dangerous, and as the man received
them, when he was a deserter from tho U. S. Ship Presided at the
time, trying to make hie Escape from the OBFrcer, I told him under
such circumstances, I could not think of giving them up. I told him

f

8

WARS WITfl BARBARY POWERS
he might send a Surgeon on Board to Examine the mans wounds for
the truth of what my DoctF said. - A little altercation took place
between us, a t last he said he would get a Sur&eon to go on board to
Examine the wounds and would act accordmg to the report the
Surgeon made him I t001i my leave of him and came on Board, At
4 P. &I. the Surgeon came on Board to examine the wounds, after he
Examined them he told me the wounds was of no consequence - I
Hoard nothing more of the Busincm while I lay at Gibraltar, but was
treated with great attention On the 20"' the said Charles Davis,
Died. - the inclosed is the doct=report respecting l i s death, I n con&
quence of whidl I have Ordered M: Trippe under confinement that
ho may be trycd by a Court Martial, when an oppertunity offers On the 9* Inst a t 4 P. M. I got under way from Gibraltar and a t
7 d9 came to Anchor in the Bay of Ngeziras found laying here our
store ship from New York captured in the Straits by n Spanish Gunbont privntier and brought in there on the 5* Inst The Captain waa
not perinitted to write or to send a message on shore, I wrote to the
Governor, the Impropriety of detaining a Vessol of the her discription,
on the l6* she was put in my possession 1 lost no time in taking out
what stores that was necessary for the use of the President, and procured stores to put the remainder in to prevent the ship from laying
a t such heavy damage - the other two ships not being there. - 1
saw by the Charter party, the ship was chartered for the sole use of
the U S. I gnve my word and honor to the Governor that the ship
had nothing In but stores for tho use of Squadron, that I had the Honor
to command, I was much mortified afterwards to find that she had
in 150 Bbl" Flower, and 20 Tierces of rice belonging to some Merchants in New York, Such transactions might have a tendency to
bring both me and my Country into disgrace in the Eyes of the people
of this Country particularly in the present Situation of things, - by
puting the above articles in; the ship was brought so much by the
sterne, that she would not sail; the Caps Informed me if the ship had
been in proper trim he was very certain, he would have been here 10
or 12 days sooner. - You will see by the enclosod certificate the
number of drays that she was in my possession and the articles that is
missin. - I t is a painful task for me to Inform you of the sad catastro he, that happened to the cutter (a boat belonging the President)
an the Officers and men that was in her, on the 22* Ins! i t being a
very h e morning I sent her over to Gibraltar with a Letter to Mr
Gavino, requesting him to have the Articles that had been ordered
for the ship, in readyness, as E Expected to be over with the ship in
two or three Days allso to know the news of Gibraltar. - The Boat
left Gibraltar to return back, a t 11. OClock, A. M. by this time the
wind was Blowing ve fresh; by some niss conduct the Boat
oversett and every sole ost but one man, which I have not seen as
yet When I do I shall be able to give you a more particular A C Cthe
~
enclosed is a list of the Officers and men that mas lost in the Boat, i t is
something surprisin~that the boat was not seen to oversett either
from Algeziras or Gibraltar, as it is not nioro than 5% Miles a Cross,
and tho Accident took place between 2 % 3 oClock. - On this da
I left Algezeras and proceeded for the Bey of Gibraltar a t 9 A.
discovered the &sex standing into the Bay, made a Signal to speak
her, and the Ca tain to come on board Caps Bainbridge Informed
me he left Tri
the 30'. of Septr in company with the Philadel hiu.
the Philad4lp ie went into Tunis, no American Vessels had een

f

'3

d

R08

i

608

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1786 TO 1801

captured a t that time, thank God for alI Good things, I am not Christian enough to thank him for bad, a t h.ieredian I came to Anchor in
Gibraltar Bay. At 1. P. M. Mg CIemrns, supercargo of Genl Smiths
ship came on board; and Informed rne,.there was five American Vessels wanting convoy through the Strmts, fearful of being captured
by the Spanis Gunboats, the wind being to the Eastward, and as I
&d not wish them to loose a good oppertunity of geting through, I
told him, to go and toll the Capto to get underway that I would see
them through without loss of t m e . - After whch I shall proceed
to Algiers - I have left Orders for Capf Sam1 Barron, when he
arrives to get on board his provisions &Q with all possible dispatch,
after which to take under his convoy all the American Vsasels a t
Gibraltar Mgeziras md bfalaga, that IS bound up the Mediterranean
and see them safe to their ports of Destination, after which he is to
repair to his stctt.ion and there to remain until releaved, as I have
Informed you that the YhiEadelphia and &sex is to remnin in those
sew untill releaved by some ship of the Next Squadron; as the su pIys
sent out will only last little better than three months, it u4l be ecessary to send provisions to bring them home I cannot say what is the reason there was no Butter, Cheese, Rum,
&lollasses, or Candles sent out in the store ship. - the Bread that
was sent is full of weevil. - this letter is wrote in a hurry it is an
unexpected opportunity, the British has taken Alexandria, of course
got possession of Egipt. -

d

[NDA photostat, Dale LB, 1801-1802.1
Extract from journal of U. 6. 6. Eua, Captain William Bainbridge, U. S. Savy,
commanding, Monday, 26 October 1801
A t % past Meridian commenced weighing Anchor, was not able to purchase it
until1 2 PM, when we made sail from the Bay of Mdaga, with very light aim
from SbE, bound to join the Commodore.
At sun nett the Cathedral in Malaga bore NbE, 10 miles.. Throughout the night
light easterly wind carrying all sail before it.
At 9 AM came round the rock of Gibraltar,saw to the Westwg the frignte President
standing out from Algezim, bore down for her. At % past 9 gave her t h m cheer6
which was answered, went on board the Commodore. Delivered him all apera
relative to transactions since parting & reahrders from him to proceed to Rlgeziras, where I would find orders for my further deatinstion
[NA. ND original.]
To the Governor of Saint Roque, Spain, from Capbin Richard Dnle, U. 8. Navy

U S SHIPPresident a t Anchor in
Gibraltar Bay Odr ZY* 1801
MAYIT PLEASE YOUR EXCELLENCY,
From your friendly Expressions
towards my Nation, in our last corraspondence, I was willing to hope
that I should not halve had the palnfull task, of addressing your
Excellency again, on so disagreeable a subject ns I conceive the present
to be. - On the 19* Ins; m the Broad da , an Amencan Merchant
Vessel (a Ship) the wind blowing strong rom the Westy* she wss
beating to windward, in standing close in shore to shelter them selves
from the Violence of the Sea, and wind she ap roached one of our
forts a little to the Eastward of the Rock with er colours f l p g a t
the time, the Fort commenced fireirlg a t her, and fired ten shot without
ceasing, the 29d shot killed a man while he was pre aring to get the
Boat out, to go on shore to the Fort, the Vessel was aying too $1 the
time, this Vessel had other damage done her besids the man bang

9

1

P

WARS WITH BARBARY POWEBS

609

killed, I saw the transaction my self from Algeziw, and your Excelency might have seen it from your owne door - I did not say any
thing a t the tlme, becaus I was I n hopes there was no person hurt - I
cannot help observing to your Excellent that I conceive such conducf
more resembles the Savages than a c i d z e d nation
On the 27'P Inst I was beating to windward in this Bay in company
with a Frigate belonging to the Squadron which I have the Honor to
command, and an American, Brigg all with our wlours flying, the
Brig stood within Gun shot, not knowing that they had done rong,
s s they had seen us do i t ; the fort commenced fweing a t her the &st
shot went Just over her, the 29d carried away part of her rudder the
third went within two or three yd? of her, before they could fire again,
the Brig got under my Lee what am I to judge from such conduct,
but that the Officers commanding a t these Forts are perfect Savages
and wish to kill Innocent men for mear sport sake (as I could see a
great number of men about the Batterys at the time) or that they have
orders to act as they do, as f conceive the last transaction, to be a
direct Insult to the Flag of my nation, which I have the honor to command under, a t present, I shall represent i t as such tq His Most
Catholick Ma esty, and my Government, and should a sirmlor circumstance take p ace while I have the Honor to represent my nation in
those Seas I shall return the fire, let the consiquence be what i t may. the whole subject of my complaint your Excellency might have seen
from your own house. -

i

[NDA photogtat, Dale LB, 1801-1802.1
--

-

To Captain Alexander Murray, U. 15. Bavy, Philadelphia, Pa., from Secretsry of
the Navy

[WABHINGTON,
D. C.]
N a y Dept 7
tY
P Oct. 1801
SIR I am honored with yours of the 229 Inst.
The Services of the C o n s t ~ ~ i w
o inl l probably be required about the
I* of Bob? next: M wish is therefore that every proparat.ory step be
taken to complete er by that period [NDA. OSW,Vol. 5, 1801-1802.1

h

To Lieutenant Isaac Bull, 17. S. Bavy, Boston, Mass., from Secretary of the Haoy

[WABEINGTON,
D. C.]
Navy Dept. H* Oct. 1801
SIRI am honored with yours of the 17'P Inst.
The Services of the CmtGitdh will probably be required about the
I* of Febr next - I therefore wish that every preparatory step be
taken to complete her by that period.
From the remons you suggest -in favor of the measure, i t appears
to me roper that the Seamen should be discharged - The Purser of
your shpwill be a t Boston nearly ss soon as this lettar, and you mag
c d on b m , to aid you in paying them. A Guard of Marines will be
indispensably necessary - if you have not such a Guard on board,
you will make a requisition upon the commanding OfEicer of Marines
a t Boston for one The Officers who attend to the repairs of the Constitufiom,and cant
be accommodated on board, must be allowed, in conaidaratmn of the
extra expenses they will be exposed to, on shore, two dollsrs pr week

610

NAVAL, OPERATIONS FROhl 1785 TO 1801

each; but there are a t present attached to the Constitution more
Officers than are necessary, and many of them I understand wish to
have furloughs - You may grant furloughs to such as you think fit,
with an injunction to join the Ship wain by the Id of Febv
[NDA. OSW,Vol. 5, 1801-1802.1
Extract from journal of U. 6. 6. kt
Captain William Bainbridge, U. 6. Nary,
commandmg, Tuesday, 27 October 1801
Commences Clear Weather & Easterly wind. At Meridian brot to anchor in
the bay of Algeairas in 9 fath. water. The Town of Alge~irssbearing W % N. the
fort on the Island WSW.
At 6 AM commenced receiving the provisions from the shore that Commodore
Dale had stored for the use of the Squadron, which came out in a store ship from
America. The enstedy wind blowing strong makes a considerable surf on the
beach & di5cult to lo+ boats:
At 8 AM saw the Ph~lad*joln the Commodore off Gibraltar.
[NA. ND original.]

To David Humphreys, U. 6. gdinister to Madrid, Spain, from Captain Richard Dale,
U. 8. Navy

U S SHIPPresident GIBRALTAR
BAY

Od':289 1801 -

SIR, I have the Honor to acknowledge the receipt of your two

favours one of the 5t! of Augt the other tthe 3Ot> Ultp on the 26" Ins'
the were handed to me by Cap$Bainbridge, he got them a t Mnlaga
on
waJ down from Tripoli: Cap$Barron arrived here yesterday he
is also from Tripoli, but last from Tunis, those two Commanders left
the Coast of Tripoli on the 30'.h Ult? a t which tims, all the Tripolinc
Corsairs was in port, and i t is with pleasure that I inform you, they
had not captured any Americans Vessels a t that time, I do not think
they will go to sea this winter - the Adniiral got to Tripoli three days
before the two Ships nrrived of[fl there, he landed Forty Miles to tho
Eastward of Tripoli in a Vessel from Malta he is a man, of no Enterprize, little danger, I think, is to be apprehended from him, he will
think that Cap' Barron is determined to catch him at any ratc, be
must know the ship well by this time, that is the out side of her, I wish
Cap$ Barron had been so fortunate as to have made him acquainted
with the Inside - Sir respecting my acting in concert with the Sweedish Commanders, in annoying the Marine of Tripoli, and mutually
protecting the commerce of the two Nations agalnst its piracy you
could not act wrong in suggesting the mutual ndvantzge, it would be,
to both Nations, i t meet!s with my sincere approbation, and nothing
shall be wanting on my part, in carrying i t into fuil force. - Motwithstanding it is my Orders to proceed for America with the Squadron,
t of December, I
under my command from those seas, by the b
wrote, the Secretary of the Navy, by the Schooner, Enterprize m
determination of kecping the Philadelphia & &sex, in those sew unt'
releaved, the Philad* is to rendezvous at Sccragosa, a good Harbour
in the S. E end of Sicily, and when it is good weather fo take a look
now and then into the Harbour of Tripoli; ta touch a t Tunis to know if
Mr Eaton has any news from Tripoli &$ I wish the Bey of Tripoli
and his Admiral to know and see, that we are determined not to relax
in our Vigdence in keeping a good look out after them. - the fisez
is to rendezvous a t Gibraltar, Algeziras, and Mala* ta give protection,
and Infermation to the Merchant Vesselis that she may meet with on
that Station, also to keep a good look out after the two Tripoline

4

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

611

Corsairs that is laid up (appearently) in the Bay of Gibraltar I have
not had the pleasure as yet of seeing the Sweedish Commander Should
I see 1Lim before I quit those seas, I shall settle a plan of Co-operation
with him, in such a way, that there will be little danger of the Merchant Vessels of either Nation being taken by the Tripoline Corsairs;
Cap? Barron will sail as soon, as he can get his ship ready (which will
be in two or three days) up the Mediterranean, to give convo to all
the American & Sweedish Vessels, that is here, Algeeeras, and K d a g a
that is bound that way, I have givin Cap$Bainbridge also orders to
give the Sweedish, Vessels protection against the Tripoline Corsairs I shall sail the first fair wmd for Algiers, after completing my business
there I shrtll proceed for the United States touching a t this place on my
way, which I suppose will be about the Latter end of Novr.Should
you wish to write to the U. S. you will please to send your litters to
Mr Gavino - I t is very pleasing to mc, that you should think, that
the Squadron under my command has been so arranged, and conducted, as to have baffled the Intentions, of thc Bey of Tripoli and his
Admiral, I t has been my pride, from the first of my arrival in those
Seas, as well as the Commanders that I have had the Honor to Command, to Empress on the minds of those people, also, the European
Nations, what the Government of the United States can do - and
will do, I hope, when drove to act in a hostile manner - If the Government of the United States will send the force that I have requested
(which is but small) I would be answerable for Tripolis bcing taken
In two da s after the force anived off There - There never was, nor
will there e again, for some time to come so favourable an oppertunity
for the U. S. to Establish a lasting reputation, for its flag in those seas I have not had the pleasure, as yet, of seeing the, Gentleman that you
makc mention of in your letter, when I do you may be assured that I
shall pay him every attention in my power, - the enclosed is a copy
of a Letter that I have sent to the Spanish Commander in Chief a t Ss
Roque - You may do as you think best with it, I cannot suppose
that the King of Spain knows of the disrespect that is paid to our flag
by a number of his OfIicers, If he dos know it & dos not put a stop to it,
we may expect in a Very short time Ve serious consiquences, between
the parties for my part, I shall act as have told the Commander in
Chief in my letter to him, I can never submit to see the flag of my
Country Insulted in that way without resenting it, while I have the
Honor to hold the present post or any other under it. -

g

P

[NDA photostat, Dale LB, 1801-1802.1
To the Governor of Saint Boque, Spain, from Captain Richard Dale, U. S. Navy

U. S. SHIPPresident

AT ANCHOR
i n Gibraltar Bay Ocfr 30th1801 MAYIT PLEASE YOUR EXCELLENCY,
I hape the Honor to acknowledge
the receipt of your favour of yesterday m reply to mine of the 27"
Inst Your Excellency appears to be hurt at some part of my letter,
by saying, some Express~onsin it, might as well have been left out;
I suppose you dude to the word Savages; my allusion, was confin'd
soley to the Officers, or men that was in the Forts at the time, the
transaction that I complained of took place, I should be sorry to
think, that your Excellency should, suppose, that my allusion was to
t.he whole nation, no Sir, my respect is to great for all nations, particularly one that is in friendship with mine, to cast any reflec0ons

612

ATAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1786 TO 1801

on it, iu a dishonorable way, for the Imprudence of a few Individuals;
but dl Individuals, should be punished as the nature of the Offence
may require either O£Ecers or private men, when they act in such a
manner, as to involve or tarmsh the Honor of theire Country; by
your ordering the Officer under an Arrest for the Transaction that I
compl&ed of I am willing to suppose that your Excellency will have
everv Justice done to my complaint; I am always ready, and willing
to &ow, that Spain has spirit to resent any lndignitys that might
be offered to her by my nation - I have to observe to your Excellency that the United States wishes to be at peace and in friendship with all natious, and it is my orders to shew that dispositio~i
wherever I go, but at the same time, I vlish your excellency to conceive that the United States of America, will not s d e r an insult,
with Impunity from m y Nation. [NDA photostat, Dale LB, 1801-1802.1
To Bufns King, U. 6. Minister to London, England, from Captain Bicherd Dale,

U. 6. Navy

U. S. SHIPPresident,

Gibraltar Bay Octr 80tb1801
SIR,I Have the Honor to Inclose you here with a copy of a receipt
that I have givin to the proper OBicers of his Ma'cstj7s Yard of this
place, for Art-ides aa pc receipt, for the use of the S Ship President
under my command ; I cannot suppose that it wns the fntention of
his Majesty, when he gave orders, for the Squadron (which I have
the Honor to command) to be supplied out of his Magazines in those
was, should they stand in need of my thing, to put 75 pr Ct advance
on the first cost of the Articles in England If I had, I certainly should
never applied for any thing,I am told here i t Nill be taken of[fl, and
nothing more put on but the necessary expences of Bringing them
here &F - The Philade1yhi.a and Essex arrived here on the 2Bt@&
27 Ins p they left the Coast of Tripoli on the fmt, at that time all
the Beys Corsairs was in port, I t is pleasing to me to Inform you,
that they have not,, taken any Americans as yet, and I trust witl
not. - the Philadelphia wilI sail the first fair wind with a convoy
up the Mediterranean, I shall proceed to Algiers, on Business, with
Mi OBrien and the Dey ; the Emex will remain in and about this
place, to give 1nfemat.ion and protection to any American Vessels
that may want it, AIso to prevent the two Tripoline Corsairs, that is
laid up here (to appeareance) from geting out

b

[NDA photostat, Dale LB, 1801-1802.1
Extracts from journal of U. 6. S. k,
Captain William Bninbridge, U. S. Bavy,
commanding
Fridag, $0 Odobcr 1801
AIl thew 24 houw atrong Eaaterly wind and cloudy weather.
Received the dopa from the shore, took in the boats, & prepared ship for &a.
The Philade receiving her provisions & the Commodore getting some suppfiea
at Gibraltar.
Saturday, 31 O W r 1801
Theae 24 hours easterly winds more moderate all ready for sea.
Went with Captain &muel Barron on board the Beddent at Gibraltar to visit
Commodore Dale, returned at 6 Oclock in the evening

-

[NA. ND original.]

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

613

[I November 18011
Circular of Thomas Appleton, U. 6. Consul, Leghorn, Italy

SIR, I avail myself of the first courier to convey to your hands,
the intelligence I have this day received from Smyma, under date of
the 17" September: and as it appears to me essential that the Capt&ns of our Merchant Ships should have the earliest infomation of
any additional force the Bashnw of Tripoli may have made to his
Squadron cruizin against the Citizens of the U. S. I here transcribe
that part of the etter which is relative, and to which you will give
that publicity you may judge expedient.
"A Vessel has lately been purchased here by the Tripolines, for
tho purpose, it is said of anning her on a cruize against the Americans,
She is an Adriotte Hull with three Polacea masts, mounts 10 Guns
of a side, with two stern chasers; has IL yellow sleak, about two feet
broad a t the height of her ports - four cabbin Windows that open
and two fdse ones, with a phoenix painted in the centre of the stem,
standin$ upon the stump of a tree, surrounded with a blaze of fire as
if just nsing out of it. - a Bird head of a middling size standing on a
level and painted white: she is now a t the careening Wharf and when
she returns to port and is ready for Sea if any alterations are made,
shall duly inform you as also tho quantity of men she may have on
board when she goes to Sea."
LEGHORN
l B t November 1.301.

f

[NA.

SDA.

Diap. Spain, Vol. 5, 1799-1806.1

Extracts from journel of U. 8. S. h a , Captain William Bainbridge, IT. S. Xavg,
commanding
Sunday, I November 1801

The b t e r l y Wind still continues but more moderate At 6 A M moved the
Essa into 19 fath. Water, have a clear birth for getting under weigh.
The PhtW* receiving the last of her provisions At I1 A M the Commodore
weighed Anchor & aaiied from the bay of Gibraltar, we are waiting for the
Philad? & the Vessels under convoy who are preparing Monday, 9 November 1801

Commences R&
eaeterly breezes.
At 1 P.M. the Phihklphaa unmoored. At 3 PM weighed & sailed, immediately got underweigh & followed her, with two American Merchant Veasela
under convoy
At 5 P M spoke the Commodore in the gut, had 4 sail of Merchant Veaseh with
him, which he ordered me to take under convoy with the two already in charge
to Malaga.
Middle & latter part very iight airs, from the eastward, the current setting
us up.
Our sick liat encresses rapidly near 70 persons on the list.
At Meridian the town of Estapona bore NbW. and the rock Gibraltar WhN
N - The President & Philadelphia in sight
Tuesday, 3 Noember 1801
Cornmenoes liaht
- varial3Le bree~eawith hazy weather under low sail for the
Convoy.
A t 6 P M the west point of Malags bay bore EbN 5 N 8 or 9 leaguea.
Throughout the night exeesaive heavy foga, ao thick that we mud hear the
ple on board the Vessels under Convoy, speak, when we coud not see the

FEnds
d.light airs from the Eastward, heavy dews in the night, a great number
-

of our crew laid u with colds
Wcdneday, 4 $ooember 1801
Cammenoes with a thick fog none of the fket in sight.
At 4 P M cleared off, when we discovered the fieet nesr.h us.
At 6 P M the rock of Gibraltar bore W S. and A p full SWbW 36 W.

614

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1786 TO 1801

Throughout the night excessive foggy, kept the bell ringing constantly. 6 AM.
cleared off, the convoy a considerable distance apart
At 10 AM a breeze sprung u from the Westwd
At Meridian Malaga bore
seven leagues & the castle Fangarora. NNE Thursday, 6 November 1801
Commences with smart breezes from the Westward
At 1 PM, hove t o off Cape Molinero & made t h e signal for the fleet to go into
bfalaga & anchor same time saw the frigates Preazdent & Philad* beating in the
bay - At 2 they anchored. At
past 3 the convoy having all passed me,
made sail & a t 5 P M anchored abreast of the President in 13 fath. The church
bearing N b E % E: immediately went on board the President, from whence I
accompanied Commodore Dale & the two Capt Barrons on shore Friday, 6 November 1801
commence^ pleasant Weather and Westerly Winds.
This day a Court Martial was held on board the Essex, b order of Commodore
Dale t o t r y Mr Tripp Midshipman, for stabbing a sailor
dwerter) Mr Davis,
in the act of apprehending him a t Gibraltar - And also Sergeant Rogers for
resisting Mr Cooper Masters Mate in the execution of his duty.
Capt. Samuel Bnrron, President
Capt. James Barron
Capt. Ww Bainbridge
L1
Chauncey
Members of the Court
L!
Stephen Decatur
Lt
JnO H. Dent
L*
Wood
L+ Vandyke
Mr. Garretaon, Purser of the Frigate President Judge Advocate In the second cause Lt Dent & L* Vandyke retired from the Court, & t h e three
following Licuttr of Mnrines, sat in their place.
LC Kean, L1 Fenwick, & L+Hooper
Mr Tripp was unanimously acquitted Sergt Rogers, was by a Majority, sentenced to be reduced t o the ranks, & to
receive fifty lashes with a cat of nine tails on his bare back, on board the Philadelphia, the ship he committed the offence in [NA. ND original.]

NE

&

I

To Secretary of the Navy from Captain Richard Dale, U. 6. Navy

U S SHIPPrisdent [sic] a t Anchor
In Malaga Bay Novr 6*)1801 SIR, I Informed you on the 26*?UltP that I Intended to proceed
for Algiers after I saw the conro through the Straits but the wind
blowing fresh from the Eastward was under the necessity of Anchoring in the Bay of Gibraltar again; - the 27F UltQthe P h W p h b
arrived from Tunis, nothing new respecting the Tripolines - Doct?
Turner of the Philadelphia, being Very Ill, Cap? Barron put him on
shore at Tunis, to stay with Mr Eaton Expecting it would be of service
to him, but on his return from Tripoli, he found him still so 1ll as
not to be able to go on Board. - the Philadelphia proceeded to Algeziras to tnke her Provisions on Board On the l* Inst a t 8, am. I
made the Signal to the Philadelphia & Essex to know if they were
ready to get under way; they answered ;In two Hours - they would, I got underwa and sent orders to a11 the Merchant Vessels, a t Gibraltar to get unc ferway, the wind still from the Eastward but 1' ht, a t
3, P. M. they Joined me, and two merchant Vessels with t em, I
gave orders to Cap?Bainbridge to see the Merchant Vessels to Malaga,
and to Cap! Barron to proceed on, nnd get his water on Board m t h
all possible dispatch that the Merchant Vessels might not be detained
longer than was necessary, water was not to be got a t Algeziras - on
the 5" Inst the three Frigates and the convoy Anchored in this Bay as their is little probabihty of the thme Ships being togeather agam in

I

f

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

615

a short time, I thought it best to convene a Court Martial, to Try
Mr Trippe and a Serjeant of Marines, as i t is Very disagreeable,. to
keep men so long under confiniment without bringing them to a tnal,
the result of which I intend to send you herewith rf ready. - To
Morrow evening I shall proceed for Algiers, and from thence to Port
Mahon to know the particulars respecting the Inclosed extract, of a
letter from the Sweedish Consul, a t Alictmt, to Mr Kirkpatrick of this
place, Mr Kirkpatrick Informs me, that a man told him, that the
three Vessels Bought by the Bey of Tripoli's Agent, a t Mahon, was
bou ht to be delivered in Tripoli by the persons that sold them, I
am formed, that one of them mounts 36 Guns, a cruiser taken from
the Spanards by the English, - I am more fearful of his getting
a number or renegados of all Nations into his Service than I am of his
Vessels; Should that be the case, he will be able to keep some of his
corsairs a t Sea in the winter Season, in that case I am fearful that they
will capture some of our merchant Vessels, as i t is Impossible to keep a
number of Merchant ships togeather, in bad weather and long
nights. - I am confident you will see the necessity of sending a
strong force into those seas to protect our commerce, if i t is Intended
by Government, to continue the war with Tripoli, the Bey of Tripoli
is making use of every exertion to get the Dey of Algiers, the Bey of
Tunis and the Emperior of Morocco to join him, and make it a common caus, against the United States, from what I can find out, the
Be of Tunis is willing to do it, how far he will succeed I cannot say,
I s all know more about it when I get to Algiers Peace has not as yet, been proclaimed in Spain but it is daily Expected to take place. -

&,

E

[NDA photoatat, Dtle LB, 1801-1802.)

To Midshipman James Sempill Higinbotham, U. S. Navy, from Captain &chard
Dale, U. 6. Ravy

U. S. SHIPPresident Ma@a Bay NOD?7* 1801
SIR Agreeable to your request, I have Directed Cap! Bainbridge to
receive you on Board the U S Ship Essex, as a Midshipman, you will
therefore on the receipt of this repair on Board the sald Ship and do
your Duty as such. Mr JAMES S HIGINBOTHOM
[NDA photostnt, Dale LB, 1801-1802.1

To James Mackenzie & A. Qlennie, London, England, from Captain Richard Dale,
U. S. Navy

U. S. SHIPP r e d i n t

Malaga 7tbNofl1801
GENTLEMEN,
In my instructions from the Navy Department of
the United States, I am informed that a sum of money wdl be lodged
in your hands for the purpose of furnishing Supplies for the squadron
under my command, i t is now become necessary to draw Bills, a t this
lace on you for the payment of sup lies received, by the Essez &
!hiilodZp* I have therefore directed 8 a 5 Sam! Barron of the latter
Shi to draw for the same, - you will t erefore be pleased to honor
his %ills.-

R

[NDA photostat, Dele LB, 1801-1802.1

616

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1786 TO 1801

Extract from jonrnal of U. S. S. h e x , Captain William Bsinbridge, U. 8. Navy,
commanding, Saturday, 7 November 1801
Commences with light breezes & heavy swell from the SouthwQ & eastwq
At 10 P M a very high swell the ship riding by two cables, rides exceeding
hard; got dl prepared for striking yards & topmasts - 11 P M the wind changed
to the Westwd
At 7 A M hove up one anchor, At 8 the Commodore got underweigh, the ewell
was so heavy, & wind BO light was obliged to come to again.
Latter part of these 24 hours busily employed receiving Brandy & Vinegar from
shore for atores for the crew [NA. ND origintrl.]

To David Hnmphreys, U. 6. Minister to Madrid, Spain, from Richard O'Brien,
U. 6. Consul General. Algiers
(COPY
ALGIERS
FP
' NOV!
1801

ESTEEMED
SIR I had the pleasure of receiving on the 39 Instant
yours of the 16th Ult? I am glad to find you are well; ou will have
heard from M' Montgomery that the United States hip the Geo:
Washington Captain Shnw arrived a t Algeirs on the 5* of October
and with snid ship the Peace and Plenty with the last of the stipulation
for Tunis. That the [George] Washington is nearly discharged and
will sail in about 15 or 20 days from this for Tunis and takes under
her convoy the Peme and Plenty.
The arrival of the [George] Wmhingtm has much contributed with
the Knowledge of the 3 Frigates being in this Sea to serve our affaira
and there was no alternative but for said Ship to enter this Port. I t
gives us here security for the present. As I had refused this Regency
the passports &c for the Crews of the two Tripolians from Oran I
did not like to ask the Dey for one for the Ship for Tunis;further
after his not enforcing the guarantee of the Treaty with Tripoly I
thought we had not better trust to H
i passport and further I would
wish to have him and his Ministry both Turkish nnd Jewish know
that we finally would make force to be our passport.
This might not be economy; but Sir it is a t present requisite policy.
I had my fears that the two Tripolian Cruizers a t Gibraltar finding
that we had no Frigate to blockade them and that this Sea was quite
free for them, that as the Gibraltar craft and boats were so frequently
passing from Gibraltar to Oran and returning, that these 30 or 40
men that remained a t Gibraltar in the two Cruizers of Tripoly would
know that the Coast was clear, and that these a t Gibraltar would
Know that these Crews to the number of 250 were a t Oran that the
two Cruizers would push for Ornn and take on board these men and
obtain supplies and be an Enemy in the rear of our two Eastern
Frigates and the President in want of provisions and having a Sickly
Crew could not act, my fears were great on this occnsion. I therefore
intimated to the proper persons here that I daily expected four more
of our Frigates in this Sea, that they would proceed of3 Tunis and
coastways they might get adjacent to Tripoly. This finesse had the
desired effect and they sald 250 were shipped off from Oran on board
of a Ragusean Vessel and sailed from Oran about the 12" of October.
The Essez and Philadelphia were a t Tunis the 25* of Se tember and
fall in with
proceeded for the Coast of T r i p l y where I hope they
the Ragusee with the 25 Tripolians a t all events i t will leave the two
Cruizers at Gibraltar in a sure situation that they can do us no h-,
that if they intend for See to Cruise they must push for Triply or
else Bashaw send them Crews. -

ii

d

617

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

,

The &and Turk was a t Tunis the 25* of September and afraid to
proceed on account of the Tripoly Cruizers. The Algerine General
of Marine the Dey's Ambassador to the Grand Seiior returned here
the 12th Ulto. This Government has purchased the influence and
friendship of the Captain Bashaw, they have arranged their whole
afairs, got their money and to this date there has arrived 750 Turk
recruits - The Grand Sefior gives to Algiers as presents 4000 recruits
40 Braw Guns 500 Barrels of powder 1000 Quintals of Sulphure 40000
Balls 500 Bales sail Cloth 100 Masts 6000 plank and 1000 Quintals
Ropeyarns, Pitch, Tar and Rosin 1000 Barrels besides Caftans and
valuable presents to the Dey and Ministry. part of those articles we
nrrived here. This I suppose is Turkish Policy to strengthen the
hands of this State, the principal political Redoubt of the Ottoman
Empire - or to lull this Regency into security to plunder them - we
shall see what the French and British will do to alter the System of
Barbary.
Thoy might as usual still see their policy in letting it exist. This
place has been for 19 days occupied fitting out 6 of their large Corsairs
they sailed on the 5+ Instant and before this time are on the Coast
of Spain.
This circumstance and some bad Weather have prevented the discharge of the [George] Washingion If Commodore Dale does not arrive here within a few days we shall
have no prospect of making a cash payment for one years Annuity
in lieu of Stores. But peacable times will give us Articles much
Cheaper on the Annuities. The Ship to Tunis will make 21 Thousnnd
Dollam freight.
Rough Sketch of our debts lo the Dey & Bacn's &c
For the Dey borrowed for the [George] Wasbingkm in October 1801 - - - - - $ 8 W
2 Bills of Mr Donaldson protested money received of the Bacris arnount--~a000
$10.000

The 2 Yeam presents am$ 16,000 Dr. Bsoris advanced----------------- 7,238g
Paid Bills of Tripoly and other occasional presenta amount--- - -- - --- - - - 1, &16%
Preeent to the widepatchy returned from Constantinople------- - -------- 350Supposed expences of the [George] Waahingion at Algiers- - -- ---- ------ - -500Consular expences to this date amount- - - --- - ------ -- - --- ---- ---- -- - - - 988%

Dr. 20,923s
Credit- - - - - - - - - ----- -------- - 2 076%
Dr.

Balance D! the United States

18,846s

On the business of the Annuities we shall after setling for the
Cargo of the [George] Washington, be two years in anearera;
suppoee we could effect a Cash payment at 25 Thousand
$50. 000
Dollars PCyear. Thus it would be
Debts to the Dey and Bacris & Consul at Algeire in Cash ---------,--18 846%
- - - - - - - - - L - - , - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -

*

*

*

*

*

*

Dr.

68 846%

*

If the Portuguese have no Frigates at Gibraltar the Corsairs of this
Re ency will push off Lisbon &c #he Dey requests to have mcured and sent by the first Vessel on
his account 500 Mohogany oards of 1. 2. 3 and 4 Inches and as
broad and as lon as they can be procured, also will be wanting the
1 e plank and pikes commissioned for these 2 Yesrs. I expect it
be soma time before the [Ueorgs) Waahingdm will arrive in the

!

3

g

618

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1786 TO 1801

United States, but those articles on the Annuities should be collected,
Copy of this letter please to forward to the Secretmy of State Ezcuse the trouble [NA. SDA.

CL, Algiers, Vol. 6, Jan. 1801-Dec. 1803.1

Extracts from journal of U. 6. S. &ex, Captain William Beinbridge, U. S. Navy,
commanding
Sunday, 8 November 1801
Commences lowering, Cool, disagreenble weather
No pRTtieular Occ~rrrenccs
At 6 A M crossed top gallant yards k hove short on the cable.
At 7 A M Weighed anchor, made sail, light ~'1nd.s & variable, b a t i n g out of
Malwa bay Monday, 9 November 1801
Commences Cloudy disagreeable Weather, Wind SSE, a t 2 PM being abrenst
of Cape Molinero boarded an Algerine brig from Lisbon.
Throughout the night very hazy disagreeable weather, Wind very unstendy
& blew exceeding hard in squalls, under close reefed topsails, top gall* yard down,
from 12 to 4 AM erceasive heavy rain.
At % past 8 AM spoke an Italian Brig from Alicant bound t o the Havanns,
same time the rock Gibraltar bore WNW - 6 leagues, Wind variable
At 10 AM c r m e d topgallant yards Tuesday, 10 November 1801
Commences clear Weather & Wwterly winds.
At 2 P M the wind became variable & furious squalla, mnng of our people being
sick, find the ship works heavy, for the wnnt of their sssistance
At 3 P M being close into the rock of Gibraltar determined t o go in and anchor,
in order to releive the crew a day or two from sea duty At 5 standing in for the town of S I Roque or rather between that & Gibraltar,
very light wind & the ship having scarcely way thro' the water sounded 35 fathom,
immediately hove another caut of the lead 25 fa. Instantly hove with the hand
lead 13 fath, h k in sail directly, hove a second cast with the hand lead 7 fath.
immediately ordered the anchor t o be let go, which wae done & dropt in 5 fath.
hich brou ht the ship up & her stern in 3
veered away 40 fath. to bring u
fath, pot out boats, carried oul
anchors hawser, by 9 PM. had warped
the ship in 14 fath. where we secured her Throughout the night, light winds - In the morning the health boat visited
us k gave us pratick - Ends lowering clouds, threatning rain - At 10 A M
went on shore to Gibraltar, found the Tripolitan Crusers diumantled still, & no
of fitting it. a p Eranee
.
m n g from the Easez a t anchor, North point of Cibrnltar SE. Algerrim
W % S . Eurova m i n t S. Cabretta ~ o i n t SW.
.
Wednesday, i 1 November 1801
Commences cloudy, Rainey, disagreeable Weathr and baffling wind At 5 PM. Returned from Gibraltar - Throughout the night inclining to calm.
At 9 AM weighed anchor & nailed, in heaving to the Anchor the ship made a
stern board & dropt in 434 fathom, before she recovered head way, altho' every
exertion was used, but the sudden shoaling of the water wm the cause, a very
dangerous place in my opinion t o anchor in, in a Westerly Wind, great danger
in getting underway; in an easterly wind. your Anchor draws down hill
Thursday, 12 November 1801
Commeilccs with light, smart, Westerly breezes & clear Weather, standing
over from the rock Gibraltar to Tetuan At 5 P M Ceuta bore NbW & Gibraltar N H E. hove to throughout thc night
under topails. At 5 AM made sail & stood in for the bay of Tctuan. At !4
past 6 fired a gun & hoisted our colors - At % pact 7 AM sent the Pinnace
on shore with an Officer t o go to Tetuan k procure stork for the eick, also to enquire the news relative to the Captain of the 'hipolitan Brig, diamantlcd a t
Gibrtrltsr, the Captain at Tetuan The remainder of this day k y off & on the Bay [NA. ND original.]

K!&g

d

619

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS
To Captain Thomas Tmxtnn, U. 8. Navy, from Secretary of the Navy

[WASHINGTON,
D. C.]
N. Dept. 13 Nm! 1801.
I have sent Capt. Barry a Sketch of rules and regulations for the
Govemnent of the Officers of the Navy, requesting him to examine
them & make his remarks on the blank paper attached thereto then to transmit them to you. On receiving them, I request you to
gyve them your attention & communicate in the same way any i,mprovements that may suggest themselves to you - After whlch
examination be pleased to send them to Capt. Morris. [Similar letters to Captains R . V. Morris and Alexander Murray.]
[NDA. OSW, Vol. 5, 1801-1802.1

To Lieutenant John Shew, U. S. Navy, commanding U. S. S. k g Washington,
from Captain Richard Dale, U. 6. Navy

U. S. SHIPPreSident off ALGIERS

Novr 14* 1801 SIR, YOUwill make all possible expedition to get your Ship ready
for Sea, when ready, you will take the Ship, Peace and Plenty,under
your convoy and proceed with her, to Tunis, agreeable to your Instructions from the Secretary of the Navy, You must be sencible of
the Heavy expence that Ship lays at, to the Government, no time
ought to be lost in etting her away, - After you have seen her
safe to Tunis, you wi proceed to, Naples, from there to Leghorn, from
there to Marscells from there to Barcalona, from there to Alicant,
from there to Malaga, from there you will see what Vessels you ma
have under your convoy through the Straits, affter which you
proceed to America agreeable to your Instructions from the Secretary
of the Navy - on your arival a t Naples you will know from Our
Consul there - if there is any American or Sweedish Vessels there
wanting convoy down the Mediterranean ready to sail, you will Inform
them of the rout ou aro agoing (you will observe, if there is any Sweedish Vessels boun the same way that you are, to give them protection
against Tripoline Corsairs as the Sweedish ships of war will do the
same to our Merchant Vessels) you will make the same inquiery a t
all the above ports. - You are to remain as little time as possible
a t those places, on no account more than two or three Days, without
you have ap lications from 4 or 5 American Capt-forming
you
that they WI be ready in a day or two, - or stress of weather tis
not to be expected that a convoy is to wait for one or two or three
Vessels, pnrhcularly a t this season of the year. - You must be very
cearful as the roads that you will have to anchor in, is not good a t this
season of the year, for which reason you must empress on the minds
of the Commanders and the Consuls, that they must make all expedition possible for their Vessels to Join you, - You will request the
Consul a t Naples, or your Self must writs to the Consul a t Leghorn,
Informing him of your coming - requesting him to Inform those that
want convoy to hold thomselvcs in readyncss; and so on to the Different ports. - When you get down to Gibraltar should ou want
Provisions to carry you home you will apply, to Cap! Bain ridge, or
to Mt Gavino to et i t out of the Kings stores, or in the best way they
can. - You wdorder Lieu' Dorden to come on Board the President,
Mr Nicholson you will keep on Board the Washington Mr
Doct" Mate will go on Board, the fisex should you not fall in with

if

4

g

li'

i

620

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1786 TO 1801

the P h W l p h i a . - You will please to Inform the Cap5 of the
Peace & PZenty, that he must make all expedition possible to Discharge
and Ballast his Vessel when he gets to Tunis as I expect the Phitadelphie, will be there in 20 or 30 Days from this time, Should he be
ready a t that time I have giving Cap? Barron Orders ta se him safe
some distance from Tunis. [NDA photostat, Daie LB, 1801-1802.1
Circular to certain U. S. Consuls from Captain Richard Dale, TJ. S. Navy

U S Ship President,
O$ Algiers, Novr
1801 SIR, This will be Handed you by Cap! John Shaw Commander of
the U S Ship Geo: Washingdon, I Have given him orders to proceed
to your lace to take under his convoy all American and Sweedish
Vessels t a t may be ready to sail, bound down the Mediterranean. You will please to inform all concerned that there will be no more
convoy given by the Squadron that I Have the Honor to Command,
this Winter, I dont think there is any danger to be apprehended from
the Tripoline Corsairs a t present, but the above infermation ought
not to be know,only to those concerned - for your infermation, the
PhikdeIphia's stations this Winter is Saragosa, Mslha, of [rj Tripoli &
Tunis, the f i s e x , in and about Gibraltar, to give protection and Infernation to our Vessels, and to keep the two Tripoline Corsairs in,
as they have 30 or 40 men on Board of them yet, and can get more, if
they have an oppertunity to get out, I shall proceed, to day for Mahon,
I have received infermation that there is three Tripoline corsairs
fitting out there, one has allready sailed I am told they are to rowed
dii8ct to Tripoli, they are maned with Minorcans, and saif under
English colours, that the Bey of Tripoli bought them, to be delivered
a t Tripoli, all this is done to avoid our Ships of War, I shall know more
of it when I get to Mahon, I have received no news from Government
since I have been in tbose Seas, I am a t a loss to know what steps
they will take, in the Spring respect$g this Tripoline War,.I
Have seen no news papers from Amenca that mention the arnval of
the Squadron in those Seas Circular to
JOHNMATTHIEW,
Naples
WILLIAMWILLIS,Barcelona
WILLIAMEATON
Tunis
THO APPLETON,
Leghorn
NB On the sthInst 6 of the largest Algerine Corsairs sailed from
Algiers, their Intentions, is unknown. -

g

INDA photostat, Dale LB, 1801-1802.1

I14 November 18011
Receipt given to Captain Richard Dale, U. S. Bevy, by Richard O'Brien, U. 8.
Consul General, Algiere

Received, Algiers, 14* November, 1801, from ComrnodmRichard
Dale, the Sum of Thirty thousand Dollars - i t being Money sent
out by the Government of the United States, for the Payment of an

Annual Stipend to the Dey of Algiers, to be delivered to me as Consul,
and ap lied to the above use - and for the true performance of which,
I do ho d myself Accountable to the Government of the United S t a m -

P

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

621

S i ' d Duplicate receipts of the same Tenor & Date.
RICHARDOBRIEN
Conaulfo~The United States at Algiers
[NDA.

Misc. L, Vol. 2, 1801.1

Extracts from journal of U. 6. 8. Euc*, Captain William Bainbridge, U. 6, Navy,
commanding
Saturday, 14 Nowmber 1801
Commences with cloudy weather & strong Westerly wind.
At Meridian spoke the American ship Mary from England bound to Naples.
No new.
At '/z pnst 5 P M came on very squally with rain, reefed topsails. At 8 P M
stood to the Southward the rock bearing NWbN 2 leagues. Throughout the
night heavy rain, high winds, very disagreeable weather Lying a t the eastern
mouth of the gut. This day held a survey on the bower cables, condemned 42
fath. of one & 8 fath. of the other Afonday, 16 November 1801
Commences clear and pleasant Weather. At 1 P M fell calm.
At 44 m t 2 P M sprung up a breeze, hauled by the wind to the SQ & EQ At
Sun set Europa point bearing WNW 3 miles, hove the main top a i l to the ~ m t .
Throughout the night squally, rainey, disagreeable weather, expected an easterly
current, found i t variable & generally to the Westwnrd, owing to hard squalls &
dark weather found it troublesome to keep clear of the shores. At 8 PM spoke
an American Brig from Malaga to Hambro'; Blowing, stormy, dkagreesble
weather, all officers sick but one Lieutt & two Midshipmen, myself very unwell.
Thought i t highly prudent to go to Anchor, made sail & stood in for Algeeiras at 11 handed foresail.
[NA. ND original.]

To Lieutenant Andrew Sterett, U. S. Navy, from Secretary of the Navy

[WASHINGTON,
D. C.]
N Dept. 17 Nov. 1801.
The Crew of the Enterprize must be immediately paid off and
discharg'd & you will direct a proper [person] to attend the process of
this business to see that Justice be done to the Crew as well as to the
public.
Your requisitions for Money, must be made upon Col? Stricker,
Navy Agent [Baltimore].
After your purser has paid off the Crew, you will direct him to come
on to t h s place with his Accounts & Vouchers for settlemenIt].
Your long and unintermitting services entitle you now to some
indulgence, I will therefore make arrangements for relieving you of
the command of the Enterprize, that you may have a furlough. It is
intended that the Enterprize shall be fitted out again. You will
therefore be pleased to make out Indents of every thmg necessary
for her Equipment, and transmit them to this Office; and also attend
to her reeqmpment until your successor shall arrive
[NDA. OSW,Vol. 5, 1801-1802.1
To Secretary of State from William Eaton, U. S. Consul, Tunis

TUNIS,
17. NOD.
1801 SIR, Since my letter of 19. ult nothing interesting has occurred here.
The Philad* left this the 4. ult. for Gibr which is the last notice I have
had of any of our Squadron - The Geo. T.t7ashingPwith the Peace and
Plenty arrived a t Algiers 5. ult: They have been some days expected
here; but the winds have been contrary, and are still so - Copy of

622

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1785 TO 1801

letter (inclosure A.) from Mr Nissen, merits, i t seems to me, some
consideration.
The manner in which the King of Denmark has been pleased to
recognize m services the last summer (inclosure B.) places me in
somewhat o an embarrassed situation - I do not know, all things
considered, whether the token of satisfaction his Majesty tenders me
comes within the interdict of the construction of the Constitution. I
submit the question to Govt And in the mean time have answered the
Board (inclosure C.)

9

[NA. SDA.

CL, Tunis, Vol. 2, Part I, March 1801-Dec. 1802.1

Extracts from journal of U. S. S. &ex, Captain William Bainbridge, U. S. Navy,
commanding
Tuesday,17 November 1801
Commences rainey with smart easterly wind, At 34 past Meridian, came to an
Anchor in Algeziras bay in 22 fath. Water; Moored ship, whole cable to the
Eastward & half cable to the we~tward.
Middle & latter part cloudy with rain a t times.
Wednesday, 18 November 1801
These 24 hours begin with pleasant weather and westerly wind; loosed all sails
to dry.
Blacked top gallt yards & all steerr sail booms.
A t 3 PM a general.Salute was fired by the Garrison a t Gjbraltar & the British
fleet lying there, conslating of 14 sad of the line & several fngates: The cause of
the Salute was the creating rear admiral Sir Ja* Saumarez a knight of the bath, by
General O'Hara, under a special commission from the King for that purpose. At
9 AM went to Gibraltar in my barge
The Tripolitan cruizes are still lying there. Their Captain has not come over
from Tetuan. In my opinion Q e y will not attempt the sea, before they have
made peace with the Un~tedStates [NA. ND original.]
To George Harrison, Navy Agent, Philadelphia, Pa., from Secretary of the Navy

[WASHINGTON,
D. C.]
N . Dept 18 Nov. 1801.
I request you to make the necessary enquiries and inform me, what
quantities of Beef, Pork & Bread, can be immediately procured at
Phil* or Burlington, and the prices.
Captain Murray has inform'd me that the Constellation can be
prepared for sea by the 1" of January. - I t is not improbable but
that I ma order her round to Hampton Roads before that period. Pray how ong will it take to fit her so that she can be sent thther with
safety?
Be pleased to enquire of Capt. Murray & ascertain what Articles of
Cabin furniture he conceives ought to be provided for the Captain of
the ConsteUation. I will, upon receiving your answer, determine what
order to take on the subject.

i

[NDA.

GLB, Vol. 5, 1801-1802.1
To Cyrus Talbot from Secretary of the Navy

[WASHINGTON,
D. C.]
N . Dept 18 Novr 1801
The Schooner Enterprize now a t BaltQ undergoing some repairs,
intended to be requipped for the Mediterranean, requires a Commander,
and it would be ve acceptable to Government, if you would take the
Appointment, & t ereby hold your Commission as Mastsr Commandant.

'K

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

623

Be pleased to let me hear from you on this subject, and if it will be
agreeable to you to accept the command of the Enderptize, say when
it will be convenient to you to repair to Balt9.- i t w i l l not however
be necessary for you to go thither immediately.
[NDA. OSW, Val. 5, 1801-1802.1
To the Governor of Minorca, from Captain Bichard Dale, U. S. Navy

U. S. SHIPPresident
Mahon, Harbour Noar 19'h 1801
MAYIT PLEASE YOU EXCELLENCY,
My intentions in coming to this
port, is to get water, and other necessary supplies that I may stand in

need of, but more particularly to be fully satisfied respecting the
infermation that I have received of there Having been three Armed
Vessels (Intended as Corsairs) purchaisid in this port b the Bey of
Tripolis Agenlt], or some othcr person for him I am a.?iso informed
that those Vessels is to be, or has been completly fitted and are to be
maned by Minorcans, and is to sail, or has sailed under English
Colours, and is to claim the protection of that Flag, untill they arrive
a t Tripoli, this is done I am told to deceive the ships of war belonging
to tho United States, should they fall in with any of those that is
cruising in those seas to protect its commerce, and against the Bey of
Tripoli who has wantonly & unjustly Declared war against the
Umted Stabs. Should the above iufirmation be true I am confident that your
excellency will see, that such transactions, is a Violation in a high
degree of the 21" & 24 Articles of the subsisting Treaty, between the
two Nations - I am Very confident (from His Britanic Majesty's,
marked attention to the Squadron which I have the Honor to command in those Seas; in his giving orders to all Commanders of his
Ships of War, and ports in those seas, for the Hospitable reception of
the ships under my command, in the ports of Gibraltar, Minorca, and
Malta, and to be Supplied from his Majestys Magazines, with what
theire necessities may rcquire) that it is his wish that the present good
understanding between tho two Nations should not be disturbed in
that way. - the friendly attentiou that I Iiave mett with a t Gibraltar & Malta the Disposition of the parties has dways been such as
to wish for a perpetual friendship between the two Nations, of which
I am fully persuaded was truly sincere - I am very willing to beleave that your Excellency would not suffer any transaction within the
limits of your Goverment, knowingly to be done, that would tend in
the smallest degree to desturbe that good understanding which subsists between the two Nations a t present. But should any Vessel or Vessels such as I have described have
gone to Sea, or intend going, and should any shi s of the Squadron,
which I have the Honor to Command fall in wit m y of them as I
have given orders accordingIy, I hope the Commanders, and my self,
will be excused for not paying that attention to the British Flag, in
that situation which it so Highly hlerits when displayed in its proper
place. -

\

TO RIB EXCELLENCY
H I 8 MAJESTY8 GOVERNOR
,

& p &9

[NDA photostat, Dale LB, 1801-1802.1

dcq

O F MINORCA -

624

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1786 TO 1801

To Thomas Appleton, U. 6. Consul, Leghorn, Italy, from Captain Hichard Dale,
U. S. Navy

U . S. SHIPPresident PORT
MAHON
NOD:2@ 1801 SIR,I arrived a t this place yesterday, I wrote the Governor respecting the Infermation that I had received of there having been
three Armed Vessels fitted out of this port stating to him the circumstances. The Pre&nt being under quarantine, the Governor sent his Secretary in a boat to inform me that he knew nothing respecting what I

had related to h i and that I might rest assured that he would not
suffer any Vessel to leave the port under that description, there is a
large Xebeck here mounting 36 guns that is bought by the Tunisans
(as they say) the Secretary told me that the Governor would not let
her depart, until1 the man that sold her gave a Bond that she was not
bound to Tripoli nor belonging to the Bey of Tripoli. Not being permitted to go on shore i t is not in my power to give
you any further infermation a t present respecting the Business On the 5'? of this Month the Dey of Algiers sent six of his largest
corsairs to sea. - Mr OBrien assured mo that he was well persuaded
that they had no Intentions to molest our Vessels, but a t the same time
does not know there intention in going to sea
[NDA photostat, Dale LB, 1801-1802.1
Extracts from journal of U. 6, 8. Essu, Captain William Bainbridge, U. 8. Navy,
commanding
Saturday, $1 November 1801
All these 24 hours clear and pleasant weather, the fore and middle part the
wind westerly, the latter part the wind easterly. At 1 P M gave chace under
full sail to the eastwQ after a Polacre Ship.
At f $ past 2 spoke and boarded her, a Russian bound to Lisbon. Throughout
the night under reefed topsails between Ceuta & Gibraltar. At 9 AM squared
away the yards to go thro' the gut with a n intention of shewing our colors a t
Tangiers
Ends clear Weather, light easterly wind, sailing thro' the gut to the Westward
Sunday, 9% November 1801

Commences clear Weather with cool winds.
paat 1 P M took in steering
At 3 past Meridian the rock bore ENE. At
sails. At 3 in all light sails, up courses & rounded to abreast of the bay of Tangiers, shewed our colors, which was answered by the American & Swedish Consuls.
Throughout the night light easterly wind, between Tangiers & Tariffa. At 6 AM
made sail for the bay of Tangiers At 8 the town bore WbS, the tower on Cape
Malbata WSW. At 11 AM being abreast of the bay sent the boat on shore,
with Mr Decatur the first Lieutenant Monday, 23 November 1801
Commences cool Weather, wind from the Westward.
At pest Meridian double reefed fore top sail & took one reef in Mizzen dQ.
Standing off & on the bay of Tangiers for the barge. At 4 PM Lieutt Decatur
returned on board with a letter from Consul Simpon. Made all sail & stood to
the east ward; A number of Veseels in the Straits. No Americans amongst them.
At 6 P M Gibraltar bore N. A p hill SW, Cabretta point NW, &.Ceuta SSW.
Throughout the night cruizin between this latter place & G~braltar. At
Meridian Europa point bore S W ~ %112 W.
[NA. ND original.]
To Thomas Appleton, U. 8. Consul, Leghorn, Italy, from Captain Richard Dab,
U. 8. Navy

U . S . S H I PPre.dunt
Pod M a h n Novr @* 1801
SIR,I find that there is still a number of Emperial, Greek, find
R ~ i e s a Vessels,
,
Continue to Trade to the port of Tripoli notmth-

625

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

standing they Have been notified of the said port being in a state of
Blockade by Ships of War of the United States, - You will please
Inform those wers, and all others that It may concern that the
Port of ~ri~ol!?is under Blockade by Ships of War of the United
States under my Command, and that I shall treat all persons and
Vessels (attempting to enter the said port); agreeable to the laws of
Nations in such cases. [NDA photostat, Dale LB, 1801-1802.1
Bxtracta from letter to Secretary of State from Richard O'Brien, U. S. Consul
General, Algiers

ALGIERS
the 26* november 1801

ESTEEMED
SIR The [George] Wasl~ington.and Ship Peace and
Plenty. left algiers destined for Tunis on tho 22e Inst there was no
alternative for the detention of These Ships a t Algiers as we have had
severe weather in general to unload and Ballast the [George] WQnd
the fitting out The 6 Sail of Theire largest Corsairs. Occupied The
marine department 19 days -

*

*

*

*

*

*

*

N, B, our Medittcranian Passports is defective The top which The
Corsairs of these regencies has does not agree with The bottom or the
Pass which our merchant Vessels has - it is Customary at Algiers
where there is this difficency in the passport to Condemn The cargo.
The deans Swedes dutch Spaniards and french llas acquised often to
this Over act. and it will be our lot and fate if not remidied - This
Circumstance I have fully stated to The late adminastration. They
had a passport cut on a good plan and it is omitted or neglected to be
given to our Merchant Vessels - and The tops sent to The Consuls in
Barbary and 18 months allowed for the changeing The PassportsThe corsairs will carry The old and new Cuts or tops and as our
Merch? Vessels gets the new pass The Old will become Useless - full
details on this Subject I have forwarded in former dispatches - * * *
[See letter of 12 October 1798.1
[NA. SDA. CL, Algiers, Vol. 6, 1801.1

Extract from journal of U. 6. S. k,
Captain William Bainbridge, U. S. Navy,
commanding, Wednesday, 25 November 1801
A11 these 24 hours clear weather & wcsfcrly wind, cruizing just to the eastward
of the Gut of Gibraltar
A Swedish Frigate with a large convoy in sight, bound to the Westward, her
convoy sails in very open order, very much scattered.
Throughout the night under easy sail between Gibraltar & Ceuta. At 8 AM
the rock of Gibraltar bore NbW W & Ceuta S.WbW.
At 10 AM dispatched the pinnnce on shore with Lieutt Smith.
[NA. ND original.]
To Captain Samuel Barron, U. S. Navy, commanding U. 6. Frigate Philadeiphia,
from James Leander Cathcart, U. S. ex-Consul, Tripoli

LEGHORN
Novr H* 1801
SIR Give me leave to transmit for your perusal the last intelligence I have received from Tripoli & Tunis, by which you will be
~nformedthat the Tripoline Crulsers have been out, & probably some
are,at Sea at this imtan$, & have taken a Greek Ship loaded with rovisions whose Cargo they have condemn'd they were compell'8 to

626

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1786 TO 1801

this e x p b e n t by necessity & undoubtedly will put to sea again if
not int~midatedby the appearance of some of our Frigates, i t is to
be lamented that the Senson of the year precludes the possibility of
kee ing some of our Ships on that inhospitable shore, but If compatible
wit the Service theIy] are employ'd on,. one of our Frigate could
make i t convenient to appear before Tnpoli every twenty five or
thirty days I presume we should not risque much from their Cruisers
but if their Coast is abandon'd for a greater l e q h t of time it is highly
probably that they will venture to Sea, & unfortunately pick u p some
of our Merchantmen which would entirely reverse our situation aa
our fellow Citizens would then be held in terrorem in order to prevent
the Comodore from taking coercive mertsurcs against that Regenc
&.to form our Government to comply with the degradin , & h d ~ .
atmg terms exacted by the Bashaw - I have not hea from Comodore Dale since the 2!jm of August, I request you to give me any
information proper for me to ask that you may be in possession of,
relative either to the Comodore's intentions or the Situation of the
Squadron, for my government in my operations, & Comes
tho' I sm of opinion that nothing decisive can be done unt both thi
Comodore, & m self receives instructions from the President Should you ti!'etermine to go over on the Tripoline or Tunisian
Coast, & you imagine my presence can possibly be of any Service I
am ready to embark a t a very short warning Your being in quarantine renders an offer of accomodation in my
House a t present superfiuous, but I request you to command me without reserve in any thing that this City affords P. S. I sent the enclosed Letter with a note in order to be sent
on board to you in the forenoon, it was stopp'd a t the health Office,
& mturn'd to me on pretence that no Letters were permited to be
sent on board or any received on shore before you were viaitad, altho'
i t was after you had answer'd Mr Appleton's note of yesterday
evening - Mr Appleton & myself are taking measures to prevent
similar abuses in future, & in order to insure that respect which is
due our flag in this river of thieves -

E

2

If"'='denw

[NA. SDA. CL, Tripoli, Vol. 2, June 1801-Sept. 1805.1
Extract from journal of U. S. 8. Euu, Captain William Bainbridge, U. 6. Navy,
commsnding, %day, 37 Bovember 1801
Commences with light airs, clear and pleasant Weather
past Meridian Lt Decatur went on board the Swedih Frigate. At 5
At
past 1 returned: The Swedish Frigate is celled the Thefia,Tonguest is the Commanders name.
Immediately after speaking him, hauled our wind for the rock.
Throughout the night blowing very hard from WSW, under c l w reefed
topsails. At Meridian the rock bore West, Ceuta point 8W 5 8.
[NA. ND original.]
To John Qavino, U. 6. Consul, Gibraltar, from Richard O'Brien, U. 8. Conrnl
General, Algiers

(COPY)

ALGIERS2@

NotjI

1801

14'k Instant calld off this Port the U.
States Ship President Cornodor Dale he landed the Money 30 fathoms

ESTEEMED
SIR On the

and I have therewith made a Cash payment to the Regency for one
year Anuety. The Presided steered Mahon. On the 22q saild the
U. States Ship G. Waehingfon having under her Convoy for Tmb

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

627

the ship Peace & Plenty. There was no alternative for the Detention of those two Vessels at Algeir, oweing to severe weather to unload
and Ballast. The which and the fitting out of six sail of the largest
Corsairs Occupied the Marine Entirely for 19 Days, they saild on
the 5'? Inst and since I have not heard more of them. I suppose the
Westerly Winds have drove them to the East.
We have finally paid all our Debt to the Regency on the Anueties.
We are Square for Six Years from the 5* Sepr 1795 to the 5* Sepr
1801. We owe to the B & B of Algeir 15 fathom and some Rope
Yearns. and I have besides given Bills to Cap9 Shaw on the Secretty
of State for E' ht fathom & Some Strands and Rope Yarns. - T ~ M
Information Pease to forward to the Secretary of State and Communicate the same to the Captains of the U. States frigates which
should be at or Call at Gibraltar NB. the [George] Washington from Tunis will run down the other
shore & offer Convoy to all that will be ready to accept of her Protection

?'

-

[NA. SDA. CL, Algiers, Vol. 6, Jan. 1801-Dec. 1803.1
Extracts from journal of U. S. 6. h,
Captain William Bainbridge, U. 8. Bary,
commanding
Sunday, $9 Nmmber 1801
All these 24 hours clear Weather & Westerly wind.
At 1 P M came to Anchor in the bay of Mala a in 17 fath. water.
The large Cathedral bearin N 1/2E & cape%olinero SW.
At 8 AM weighed Anchor atood in for the bay of Malaga. At 10 came to in
18 fath, muddy bottom the Cathedral bearing NbW 112 W, & the signal tower on
Ca Molinero SWbW. The above bearings are Magnetic pointa.
E
o
n
d
ay, 50 Nwembet I801
Commences with pleasant Weather, & light breezes from the SW.
At p t 2 PM the Swedish Frigate with her convoy came in and anchored.
At 8 AM sent a Lieut. on board the Swedish Frigate t o inform Commodore Tonquest that a t 9 I woud wait on him, accordingly a t the hour I did: He appeanr to
have a reciprocal disposition to afford mutual protection to the Merchant Veesels
against Tripolitan Crui~ers.
Wednesday, ?.? December 1801
Commences cloudy Weather and Wind from SW.
A t 5 AM weighed anchor and sailed from the Port of Mdags.
At 9 Mustered all hands on the Gun deck & punished several, for crimes committed some days ago. Ends light baffling winds, b t i n g out of the bay of
Mabga.
[NA. ND origind.]
To Captain Alexander Murray, U. S. Bavy, Philadelphia, Pa., from Secretary of
the Bavy

[WASHINGTON,
D. C.1

N Depr 6 dec. 1801,
Your letter of the 1 instant has been received.
The terms of service of the Crews in the Mediterranean, will expire
on the Is."of June, and the ComteUation will be one of the Vessels to
compose the relief Squadron. It is my wish, therefore, that her
preparatory repairs be accom lished as early as possible, that when
it shall be determined to send er out, there mag be nothing wanting,
but a Crew, to complete her for Sea. She d not be ordered to
Norfolk this winter. I t will be roper to drop down to Marcus
Hook as early as you can. The onsteuatwn can there receive her
uns, the resldue of her Stores, her Crew $ 9 , & proceed thence to
L a without any obstruction I pmume.

fl

8

[NDA.

OSW, Vol. 5, 1801-1802.J

628

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1786 TO 1801

Extract from joarnal of U. S. S. k ,Captain William Beinbridge, U. 6. Navy,
commanding, Bnnday, 6 December 1801
At 3 P M it came on to blow violently from the Westwrrrd, When first struck
her, it laid the ship all under, altho' under treble reefed topeails. I find the
Essm quite tender in a heavy blow. 61ie has ~indoubtedlytoo much spars.
Throughout the night it blew excessively hard; under clwe reefed fore & main
topmila, to gall! yards d o m Guns housed. The sea covered with foam.
At 11 $"stem3
all hsnda. At Meridian Cape Molinero bore NNW. The
Cathedral in Mdaga NE.
[NA. ND original.]

To the Commandant of Marine, at Toulon, France, from Captain &chard Dale,
U. 8. Navy
U S. SHIP[President] TOULON
Deer 7" 1801
SIR, My Intentions in coming to this port is to Examine, if Possible,

the ships Bottom to know what damage it sustained from a rock that
the pilot run her on coming out of Port Mahon, allso to get what other
necessaries the ship may require - I sailed from Mafaga the 9'p
UltQ I lay of[fl and on a few Hours, off Algiers and had the American
Consul on Board, I arrived a t Mahon the 19* and was put under
Quarantine 15 days, for hating communication a t Algiers I sailed
from there on the 30* without having any communication there; I
did not expect to be put under quarantine a t this place, I give you
my Honor, that there is no more sick on Board, than is common on
Board of ships of this description those that are sick theire disorders,
is slight colds $ 9 No contagious deseas on Board. - No gratification that I could receive by going on shore, would Induce me to request
it, if I had the least suspision that the Inhabitance of thii place would
receive any Injury by it, I have now been better than five months in
those seas and have not been five days on shore, put it all togeathor,
therefore Sir, I hope you will take into consideration what I have said,
and give permission for me to have prattique. - I shdl bo glad to
know after I get Prattique, if I safutc the City if it will be returned
with an equal number of Guns, [NDA phobtat, Dale LB, 1801-1802.1
To William Kirkpatrick & John [iavino, U. 6. Consuls, Melaga and Gibraltar, from
Captain Richard Dale, U. S. Havy

U. S. SHIPPresident
Todon Decr 7* 1801
DEARSIR, f arrived in this port yesterday, I am under Quarantine at present how long i t will continue I cannot tell, - I can my
nothing respecting my reception here as yet - I arrived a t Mahon
on the 19* Ultq and was put under quarantine for 15 Days, for having wmmunieation with A1 'era I salled again on the 30* in course
had no communication. -$?om
every Infermation P a t I could get
thore the infermation respecting Tripohan Corsairs b
i
n fitted out
there is groundless, the large Xebeck taken by the Englis , from the
Spanards [or Spanyards] is bought i t is said by the Tunisens, the
Governor assures me that she shall not leave the port until1 good
surity is given that she is not for the Bey of Tripoli nor intended to
go to that port. In corning out of Mahon the Pilot, unfortunately run the ship on a
rock, the ship going a t the time 5 or 6 knots, my intention in coming

%

U. S. FRIGATE
PRESIDENT STANDING 1N

TO TOULON.

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

629

to this place is to examine if possible her Bottom to h o w what injury
i t has received by the accedent It is out of my power at present to
say how long I shall remain here, therefore cannot say when you may
expect to see me M' OBrien informed me that, Six of the Deys largest
Corsairs sailed the 5'? of Novr on a S
i
x week's cruise, He assured me
that they had no intintions of molesting the Flag of the U. S. When I sailed from Mahon, I intended to proceed for Gibraltar
expecting on my way to be fully satisfied respecting the Intentions of
the Algerine Cornairs, but after contending three days with a very
heavy gale of wind from the Westward, which commenced a few
Hours after I was out, I bore up for this place. You will please to
communicate the contents of tbis letter to Cap: Bainbridge, for his
Government, allso to the Secretary of the Navy, I shall write him fully,
the first oppertunity. [NDA photostat, Dele LB, 1801-1802.1
To Samedet & Cushing, Msreeilles, France, from Captnin Bichard Dale,U. 9. Bavy

U. S. SHIPPte&nt
Tovlon Decr 7'b 1801
GENTLEMEN,
I arrived in this port yesterday and have the pleasure of acknowledging tho receipt of your favour of the 239 of Septr,
permitt me to return you my sincere thanks, for its polite and friendly
contents, I am a t present under quarantine how long i t will continue
I cctn not tell, -

* *

*[See letter to Consuls at Malega and Gibraltar, of 7 December 1801.1

I will thank you to inform me if there is any Vessels a t your port to
sail soon for America, and for any News that you may Have, also if
our Minister is arrived a t Paris [NDA photostat, Dale LB, 1801-1802.1
To John Stricicer, Bavy Agent, Baltimore, Md., from Secretary of the Bevy

[WA~HINGTON,
D. C.]

Naq depariment, 7 dec. 1801,
I am honored with your letter of the 34 instant.

The Ship [James] you have chartered, will receive dl her Stores of
whatsoever descript~on,a t BJ timore, and sail immediately thence
to Gibraltar. She will not of course take in any Spars.
You may stipulate with Mq Bias, that the amount of Freight &p
shall be paid him a t Gibraltar by MfGavino, whom I s h d direct to
draw on our Agents Mess? McKenzie and Glennie of London, for that
purpose.
It will certainly be proper to have insurance effected on this Shipment. You will therefore be pleascd to take the necessary order on
the subject.
[NDA. GLB, Vol. 5 , 1801-1802.1
To Daniel Lndlow, Bavy Agent, New York, H. Y., from Secretary of the Navy

[WABHINQTON,
D. C.,]
Naty dep? 8 dec. 1801.
I am honored with yours of the 34 inst The Adam may probably
compose one of the squadron to be sent to the Meditammean, about
the 19 of February, my wish is therefore that every repair necsssary

630

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1786 TO 1801

to complete her for such a cruise be made: no step however with
respect to provisioning or manning her for such a voyage must be
taken until i t shall be finally determined whether she is to be Rent or
not, of which you will receive seasonable information.
I have this day ordered you a remittance of 20,000$.
I have not a doubt of Lieuti Palmer's having acted very reprehensibly, and feel no disposition to overlook such pointed inattontion
to positive instructions, he will therefore be dismissed.
[NDA.

GLB, Vol. 5, 1801-1802.1

To the Commandant of Marine, at Tonlon, France, from Captain Richard Dale,
U. 8. Navy

U. S SHIPP r e d e d

MAYIT

PLEASE

Todon Harbour Decr P 1801
YOUREXCELLENCY,
A man was sent of[f] in my

Boat last Evening from the Prattique House, the Officer in the Boat
informs me he is intended as a Guard on Board to see there is no
improper conduct while in Quarantine; Such a custom may be very
necessary on Board of Merchant Vessels but will not be permitted on
board of Ships of War Belon 'ng to the United States, nor will i t be,
on Board the PreeidePlt, so ong as I Have the honor to Command
therefore I send him on shore. If your Excellency will please to give orders to the proper Officer
to send me the rules and regulations that is to be observed in this
Port, by the Ships of War belongin to the United States, that is or
may arrive, while I am here, I
such orders to the officers
under my command, that your Exce ency may rest assured that no
part of them will be Violated while in Quarantme or otherwise. I expect to receive the same Hospitabty and Attention in this port
thst is given to the most favoured Nation. -

f

dp

[NDA photostat, Dale LB, 1801-1802.1
Extract from journal of U. 8. 8. &se.r, Captain William Beinbridge, U. 6. Ravg,
commanding, Tuesday, 8 December 1801
~ m m e n c e aclear Weather with strong Westerly wind
At 4 P M was close over to the Barbary shore abreast of Taya[?], then tacked
ship, same time Gibraltar bore NbW and Ceuta NNW.
At 6 almost calm, appearance of an easterly wind, housed the guns Throughout the night light easterly breezes. At 7 AM made all sail large.
At 10 being abreast of Europa point, sent the pinnace on shore a t Gibraltar.
A number of sails M e n of War & Merchant Vessels, stsnding thro' the gut to
the Westward. dibraltar NE j$ N. 3 miles.
[NA. ND original.]

To the President of the Board of Health, Toulon, France, from Captain Bichard Dale, U. 8. Rnvy

U. S. SHIPPresident
Todon Decr 94h 1801 GENTLEMEN,
I am informed that I am put in Quarantine on Accouqt
from Mahon, and on susp~cionof my having cornmumcation with esaels belonging to the Barbary powers, its true, I was
a t Mahon, I was put in Quarantine there for 15 Days, for having the
Consul, on Board, off,
em on the 14* Ultp I remained in Mahon
eleven days, I was told, should have prattique the next day, I had
no cornmumcation what ever, there the Pilot that run the ship on

4

WA&S WITH BARBARY POWEBS

fX31

the rock coming out is a man belonging to the ship - It is now
better than two months since I have had a.ny communication with
my of the Barbary powers, either by sea or land except with the
American Consul, as stated above, b e i i consious there was no
contagious deseas in either of the two places, nor having any on
board the ship at present or ever had, 1 cannot help thinking that
my present quarantine is reather severe - If you cannot put confidence in w h t I say (which I should be very sorry to suppose) you
can have retference to the two men that you have sent on Board, for
the present state of the ship. - I am farther informed should a man
die on B o d before I get Prattique that the Quarantine will be cons
In that case (having 409, men on Board) it
tinued thirty d a ~ longer,
may be a long tune before I get Prattique - You Gentlemen may
think 15 Days a very short time, I that have been confind (I may
say) better than six months on B o d ship, think i t a long time in
port particularly in the present Instance. - Notwithstmding I
should be very sorry to be grnti£ied at the expence of the Health of the
Inhabitance of Toulon. - You will please to inform me in writing
the Number of Days, I may expect to be in Quarantine
[NDA photostat, Dale LB, 1801-1802.1

To Robert B. Livingston, U. 8. Minister to Paris, France, from Captain IIicbsrd
DaIe, U. 8. Navy

U. S. SHIPPrmideRi
Tovlon Deer 9* 1801
SIB,I Have the Honor to Inform you of my M v a l in this place
on the ( i t b Inst My Intentions in coming here is to be fully satisfied
respecting the Injurey the Bottom of the Ship has received by the
Pilot running her on a rock coming out of Mahon - I am put in
Quarantine for 15 Days, I am sorry 1cannot say any thing favourable
of my reception in this pla-ce as yet, two Men .as .a guard is.put on
Board, to see there is no improper conduct, wMe m Quarantme, My
feelings as an Officer, Commanding a Ship of War,belonging to the
United States, is Very much hurt, those men cannot suppose, that
I have much respect for the Honor of my Country - or that we have
no Honor at all, to suppose, that I would suffer there Quarantine laws
to be Violated, I sent the men on shore - they were sent back, I was
informed, if I did not permitt them to remain on Boar, I could have
no supplys from the &ore, - Had 1 not been situated as 1 am, a t
present, I certainly woul have left the port without loss of time. I am Happy in s~yingthat the Tripolines has not taken any of our
Vessels as yet. I cannot help remarking that I Have not Heard any thing from
the Govenunent Since I Have been in those Seas. - I shdl be Happy
to receive a few lines from you [NDA photoetat, Dale LB, 1801-1802.1
To DeBatta & Purviance, Leghorn, Italy, from Captain Richard Daie, U. 8. Navy

U.S. SHIPPresident
Tovlon Deer @ 1801
GENTLEMEN,
I Have the Honor to Lnfom you of my Arrival a t
this place, the c a w is not s pleasing one. Coming out of Mahon,
the H o t run the ship on a rock I have come here to be fully s a w e d
respecting the Injurey her Bottom haa rewived there from - I am

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1786 TO 1801

632

put in quarantine for 15 Days on Account of my coming from Mahon,
notwithstanding I had no communication there; - On my Arrival
here a letter was sent off to me by Messn Luce & Crassans Cadet
from Mess? Samadet & Cushing, of Mamccells, Informing me of your
Orders to those Gentlemen to supply the Squadron under my Command with what they might stand in need of, should they put into
either of those places, - Permitt me to return you my thanks for
your attention to the litter that I wrote you, from off, Tripoli
You will please to make my arrival here known to Mr Appleton,
from the Infermation that I got a t Mallon I have no reason to beleave
that there has been any Vessds fitted out there Intended for Tripolien
Corsairs, xou will please to inform me when Caps Barron, in the
Philadelphza arrived and sailed from Leghorn. [NDA photostat, Dale LB, 180l-1802.3
Extract from journal of U, S. S. Essa, Captain William Bainbridge, U. S. Xavy,
commanding, Wedne~day,B December 1801
First part clear & pleasant Weather, breezes South easterly.
At 3 P M the pinnace returned on board. At sun set the rock of Gibraltar
bore N. Ceuta point SWbS. & apes hill WbS.
The news the pinnace brought from Gibraltar was, that the Tripolitans had
sold their Brig for 3700 dolls & that she wss under English Colors.
Their ship still dismantled, but expected a crew from Tripoli for her. Throughout the night cruizing close to the rock. At 9 AM came to quartew & exercised
great guns & small arms [NA. N D original.]

[lo December 18011
To Secretary of the Bavy from Captain Samuel Barron, U. S. Bavy

SIB,Agreeable to the Orders of Commodore Dale I left Malagn on
the lo* Ult. with a Convoy of Ten Americans and five Sweedish
Vessels, bound to the Ports of Alicant, Leghorn and Naples. - After
seeing those destined to the nearest Ports, safe I arrived in those Roads
with the balance (Six Americans) on the 27th November - i t then
blowing a strong Gale from the Westward, which increased to a
Degree of Violence so as to render the situation of the Ship dangerous
for several Days.
Two of our Cables had been so much worn, as to render them
uselesst and the third (a new one) became with the heavy riding of
, much injured as to make it absolutely necessary in my
the S h ~ p so
opinion to purchase Two new ones -which I do t h o ' Messr*De Butts
and Purvinnce, as also a considerable uantity of Cordage, of which
the Ship was very difEcient, when sho eft America. The Supercargoes of the Vessels Convoyed here by the Philadelphia
have determined to proceed no further, of course I shall proceed
agreeable to my orders from Commodore Dale (which he has doubtless
communicated to you) ns soon as the Wind serves to get through the
Pass e of Elbe. By etters received by Mr Cathcart from Tunis, we learn that some
of the Tripolane Cruizers had been lately out & had Captured a Greek
Vessell, but as et not one American has fallen into their Hands,
nnd the probab&t is that the Ris ue will not be great during the
Winter as the w d n o t venture far orth during that Season, but in
the Summer {have no doubt but the will have s great number of
Cruizers a t Sea, unless closely Block ed in their Port.

9

?

%

J

WABS WITH BARBABY POWERS

633

A letter from Smyrna of the 17th Octo is received by MT Appleton
(Consul here) which informs that a Ship of Twenty two Guns has
been Purchased there by the Tripolanes & was then Equiping for the
purpose of Cruizing against the Americans and is mam'd principally
by Europians. I Suspect many Vagabonds will enter that Service for want of
employment in the Privateering line, this only wiU enable them to
put many Cruizers to Sea, being themselves destitute of good Sailors
U.S. SHIPPhilade LEGHORN
ROAD
Decr lo* 1801
Duplicate
[NA. SDA. CL, Tunis, Vol. 2, Part I, March 1801-Dee. 1802.1

To Secretary of

State from

William Eaton, 13. S. Consul. Tunis

SIR,I have the honor to inform you that the P e w and Plenty,
Captain Richard Woods, under the conlvjoy of the Geo. Wmhingfon,
arrived here on the evening of the first instant - She has already
delivered her powder (which though somewhat damaged has passed
with a bribe to the surveyor) and a small quantity of her plank The rest of her cargo, so far as I have been able to examine it, appears
in good order, nnd will be delivered, it is hoped, within her k y days I have not the smaliest doubt but that it will be well accepted as I
am in perfect habits of friendship with the Governor of Portofarine
who is to receive it; and as Captain Woods desires to profit of the
return of the frigate, which takes her depmtue tomorrow, to communicate such information to his owners as may ennble them to
obtain the residue of the freight I take the liberty to offer my opinion
that there will be no risque on the part of the United States m paying
that balance on the receipt of this information HoN!"SIC?
OF THE UNITED
STATES
[NA. SDA. CL,Tunis, Vol. 2, Part I, March 1801-Dec. 1802.1
To Secretery of the Navy from Captain Eichard Dale, U. S. Rsvy

U. S. Ship Presidenf
Toulon Dee' lSL? 1601
SIR,Since I had the Honor of writing to you, on the 6'h UltQfrom
Malaga, a copy of which you have herewith, on the 9" the wind bemg
fair I got under way and proceeded agreeable to my then Infermation;

The ,?&sea: proceeded for Gibraltar, the P h W p h i a , would proceed
in the course of the day with the Convoy up the Mediterranean On
the 14* I arrived off Al 'ers, M' OBrien came on Board I told him
that I had come for the ast time, to know if he hsd made any agreement with the Dey, about receiving money instead of stores, he told
me he had not but he would go on shore and talkwith him on the subject.
I stood off, and on untill the next morning, Mq OBrien came ofIf] and
Informed me that the Dey had agreed to receive, the Thirt Thousand
Dollars that I had on Board for one years payment, I de lvered it to
him accordingly Cap' Shaw came of[f with him, he told me his cargo was all delivered
but h
u
ts ship was not B lasted, he was ge*
it done as fast as possible,
the store ship for Tunis was allso m t h s port, you have herewith a

r

a

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1786 TO 1801

634

copy of my orders to Caps Shaw, M?OBrien assured me that the Dey
had no intentions to make use of the [Qeorge] Wushingttcwr in any way,
what ever, I took Lieu' Gorden and Mr J. B. Nicholson (Mide) on
Board the P r e d n t
On the 5* of Novr Six of the Dey's largest Corsairs sailed on a six
weeks cruize M' OBrien assures me that the have no intentions of
molesting the flag of the United States, and t at he is allmost certain
that the Dey will not take any part with the Bey of Tripoli against the
United States, but at the same time says those Barbary powers is not to
be trusted I agree with him most sincerely in that respect He thinks
they intend to cruize against the Portagues or Danes,or Both
Having completed my Business I proceeded for Mahon, and arrived
there on the 19e and was put under Quarantine for Having communication at Algiers, and having a great number on the Doctrf list
say (100 men) when I wrote you from Malaga there was 46, the
Essez at the same time had 80 - the PhiEadeEph 70. - I m o t e the
Governor respecting the infermation that I had received, of there
Having been, or was, then, Vessels fitting out at Mahon intended as
corsairs for the Bey of Tripoli, he sent his, S e c r e w along side to
assure me that he knew nothing of any such transactions, but would
make strict enquiery into the Bueiness, and should he find there was
any such transaction oing on that I might rest assured that he would
put s stop to it, he d o informed ma from the inquiry that had been
made since he received my letter, that there was a large Xebeck
mounting 34 Guns 12 & 9 pounders, said to be purchased for the Bey
of Tunis that the Governor was determined that she should not leave
the port untill good surity was given that she was not for the Bey of
Tri li nor intended for that place - from, every infermation that I
get, I have no reason to beleave that there has been, or is fitting
at present any Vessels answer the description, of the infirmstion that
I received I should have been Very disagreeably situated here had it not been
for the polite sttention, of Henry Patu Merchant in this place, He
came dong side, and offered his services in any way that I wished to
make use of them, he was very attentive all the time that I lay here,
I am told he is a man of very good respectability in this place, Should
our ships of war continue to cruise m those seas it will be highly
necessary for the U. S. to have a Consul here, I think he would make
a very good one, I enclose a copy of his letter to me for your perusal. The ship was put under Quarantine for 15 Days by the poleam,
which is corn sed of twelve Minorcans who have the sole m
ment of that usiness. - the Commanders of the men of war""$
cal ed
e, and told me that they were liable to the same regulations,
and emented my being under Quarantine, as it prevented them from
being as friendly as they could wish. - Having filled up the water
& com leted several necessary repairs to the rigging $9 and the
Doctq
reduced to SO Men. - On the 3O* it being a ftivourabls
time to get out, to Sea,I gave orders accordingly - It 1s very sinful
to me to Inform you of the sad accident that Happened to t e ship
in oing out. - the Particdam is es follows i t past 2 P. M. P Breeze sprung up from the Westw9 and the
necsssarg preparations being made, weighed the Anchor, ha
Hawser mede fast to the weather shore and brought to the wee tw
Quarter to cant and prevent the ship from having a s t e m Board (the

E

-

eoE

"""a"

F

Lt

g

5"

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

635

w a g e being very narrow) when the ships Head had the direction the
h o t wished; at which time the Hawser was sliped, and B e ship
under perfect command of the Helm, Just within the enterance of
the Harbour the Pilot run the ship on a rock going a t the time 5 or 6
Knots, which stoped her way almost Instantly, she fell of[fj from the
rock and soon geathered way, and in the course of a few minutes was
out of the port, The shock was so great as almost, to Heave me of[fl
my feet in the cabin (I had been confined to my cot for several days,
but not feeling easy in my mind, knowing the passage to be very
narrow in going out I got up and put on my cloths) I thought in the
first lnstmoe that the Bows was stove in and that the ship was
sinking, which was the Opinion of Cap$ Barron, and the officers (on
the Quarter Deck) when I got there - I cannot describe to you my
feelings a t the timo, but you may readily suppose they were very
disagreeable, my apprehentions was (in some memure) soon agreeably
releaved by being informed that the Ship made no water - I called a
Counsul of the principal Wicers, to know there opinion relative to
the damage that might be occasioned by such a severe stroke, Bt
weither it would be most prudent to keep the sea or return to port
(the result was as it did not appear a t present that the ship made any
more water than usual) to keep the sea. Notwithstanding, I am very confident that some part of the fore
Bod of the shi (low down) is considerably injured from the severe
stm e it reoeiv2 against the mok. - At 8 P. M. it came on to Blow
a very Heavy Gale of wind from the Westward, and continuedthree
days so violent that we could not carry more s[a]il than the Fore Sail
and Storm Staysails, the second and third day the sea got so very
High, and short, as to occasion the ship to labour Very much, and
make more water than usual but I a t t n b u t d it to the upper works
being open Several of the Half ports being forced in by the Sea - A
quantity of wahr geting on the Gun,deck, in course some part of it
got on the Birth Deck, and the Air port in the betwen Decks, leaking
very much, the 3'q Day at 6 p. m. one of the men came on the Quarter
Deck and Informed Cap1 Barron that the water was above the cole, in
the Coal Hole, the pump well was sounded, found there was between
3 & 4 feet water in the Hold the pumps was set to work, Mr Wood
2'q Lieu;, the Master & the Gunner (the Carpenter is good for nothing,
in course not to be depended on) was ordered to examine the state of
the Coal Hole, they returned and confirmed the report of the man, the
Gunner said he could hear the water run in Mr Chaunsey the first
Lieut, said he could not hear tbe water run in, but the water was there,
It occasioned a Very general alarm for some time as the Coal Hole is in
that part of the ship that struck against the rock in a little time the
was freed by the pumps, and did not make more water than a good
in two Hours after, and I suppose would not make much more
an usual, in moderate weather - Notwithstanding it was my
opinion, also Ca Barrons that it was most prudent to bear up, and
proceed for To on, there examine her Bottom as well as we wuld to
see if it was absolutely necessary to heave her down, or put her in
dock, before we proceed for the United Statas being confident should
we d v e safe there, that it would be absolute1 necessary to look at
Her Bottom before she went to sea again only that going on
the coast of America in the middle of winter liable to many severe
Gales of wind and a long passage, with a feeble ships company, many of

l

d'

At

636

ATAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1786 TO 1801

-

-

them down with the Scurvey and other diseases, &o a number without shoes or stockings, and badly clothed otherwise. - under such
circumstances i t would have been very probable, to have been very
disagreeably situated before we arrived in America, a t that season of
the year - and should we have been so unfortunate as never to have
been heard of more, the accident would be attributed soly to the ships
runing against the rock. - My mind had enough to contend with
before, without the addition, of the disagreeable apprehentions in
every gale of wind, of the sad consiquonces, that mi ht possibly take
place from the said accident, when I sailed from d & o n , it was my
Intentions to proceed for Gibraltar from thence to the United States,
but not without knowing the Intention, of the Algerine Corsairs
being out, - I expected to have fell in with some of them on my way
to Gibraltar.
On the 6* Inst 1 arrived in this Port, I can not say much in favour
(as yet) of the attention of the People of the Grent Nation, in this
place, towards the Flag of the U. S. When corning in I fired m r a l
Guns and made the Sign! for a Pilot, no Boat came near the
ship until1 I was a t Anchor two Hours, or better, then Admiral
Ganthom [Gantheaume] sent his boat, and proffered his services m d
Informed me, that I must send my Boat on shore, to the Prattique
House, the Boat was, sent - She returned shortly after with the
p M n g infernbation of the ship being put in Quarantine for 15 Days
and two men sent on Board as a y a r d to see there was no Improper
conduct while in Quarantine, I sent them on shore again, they were
sent back, Informing me that if they were not permitted to remain
on Board, I could not have any supplys from the shore Had the
ship not been in the situation she is in a t present I would not have
remained one moment longer in port, those people can not think, that
I have any Honor, or respect for the character of my Count#5 "he?
they suppose, by sending a guard on Board, that I would su er t h m
Quarantine laws to be Violated - I suppose the fact is, they think
no nation have any Honor but them Selves. - The Commadnnt of
Marine informed me, by letter, in answer to one that I wrote Him,
that he would be Happy to render me every assistance in hi power,
that i t is his orders from his Goverment to be friendly towards the
United States. - I Ho e my treatment will be such (when I et on
Shore) from those poop e as to make me think more favoura le of
them. - the weather has been so Blustrous ever Since, I have been
in this Port, as not to be able to exnmino the Bottom to my sstisfaction, in sweeping the ships Botbm with a rope we find obstruction,
from the lower part of the stem to 16 or 17 feet abaft, Cap5 Barron
& M': Chauncey informs me, that they can discover the lower part
of the stem & fore part of the keel gone, should that the the case, there
will be no avoiding, of Heaving the ship down, as I understand she
cannot go into Dock, I t is impossible for me to say a t present how
long I shall be here not being permitted to go on shore untiil the
Quarantine is out, in course cannot say what expedition they could
make in Heaving such a ship as the Praideni Down. - She makee
little or no water at present, - Admiral Ganthom is getting ready
seven ships of the Line and several Frigates with d possible expedition
and Expecta to sail in 8 or ten Da s for the West Indies I Drew a Bill a t Mahon on d
e
s
s
q M a e k m e y & A Olennie of
London in favour of Mr Henry Patu, for £ll2.lOSt5 - Caps S Bar-

P

%

637

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

ron of the Phdadelphia Drew on the same House & the Hous in
Leghorn for 5 or 6 Thousand Dollars for the use of the Philad* &
Essex, the 10,000 Dollars put on Board the Presirleni as a present from
the President of the U. S. to the Bey of Tripoli Has allso been Expended
for the use of the Squadron, for which Vouchers will bs sent forward in
Due time. [NDA photostat, Dale LB, 1801-1802.1
Presumably to Secretary of State from William Eaton, U. 8. Conaul, Tunis

Duplicate
TUNISDec. 15. 1801 SIR,On the morning of the third inst. I had the honor to receive
your letter of 17. July, by the Peace and Plenty, which arrived here
six oclock p. m. of the IF as stated in mine of yesterday, under
convoy of the Geo. FVushington, ton days from Algiers -

*

*

*

*

*

*

*

On the 28. Oct. anlved the Danish Commodore, Koefoed, and a
Consul Holck, five days from Leghorn. * * *
On the morning of the 3q Nov. I r e d a message from Sidi Mahornet
Bashaw, the exile from Tripoli, informing me that his brother, the
usurper, had addressed the Dey of Algiers and begged his mediation
to bring about a reconciliation with the American government; and
expressed great solicitude to know whether, in my opinion, the
Americans would admit such an intervention? I did not hessitate to
give i t as my opinion that my Government, haring once been deceived
by that Dey, would now seek to establish their peace on a surer brase.
Ho then desired to be advised whethcr he might place m y reliance on
the operations of the Americms in his behalf - I recommended to
him patience and silence; at the same time gave him leave to entertain the hope (may it not be illusive) that thc next summers Operations would favor his views With my letter of 19. Oct. wont a copy of one from the Swedish
C h q O des affair= here, stating a resolve of the Court of StockLtolm
"To act in co-operafim and make common cause with the United
States against Tripoli" - This reads much better than if the
United States had resolved to act in co-operation and make common
came with Swede11 against Tripoli. Does not their common eawe
and co-operation with the Dancs in the late Northern Coalition afford
a useful caution to tho United States against such an alliance? Besides, what American can cheerfully admit the idea that the United
States will t h i i proper to divide with any nation whatever the honor
and the advantages of chastising Tripoli: The object itsclf does not
seem to rcquire such a parade.
On the axth ult arrived here the british line-of-battle ship, Northumberland, Cap. Martin - & two frigates, Cap" Campbel and Lord
William Steward - Evening of the tenth Cap9 Campbell said to
me He had heard .from Lord Elgin at Constantinople, that the Sublime
Pwta Irad resolved to prohibit the American frigates coming info the
Meditemnean; but that he would, at the same Came, become gw~ranieejor
the peaceable deporiment of Tripoli. * * *

*

*

*

*

*

*

*

This morning the Bey's Prime Minister sent for me to the pdace
to let me know that there is a deficiency of eighty quintals of powder;
the stipulation being 300 quintals and only 300 blf commg forward -

638

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1786 TO 1801

I have always stated the stipulation to be entered ?n the regency's

books 300 quintals - there is twelve pr cent loss in welght ;the Turlnsh
C. being so much heavier than the English. I t was with much difficulty I evaded the Bey's demand for making up the deficiency out of
the [George] Washington's magazine, but there can be no evasion of supplying i t ultimately; I shall therefore procure i t a t Malta or Mahon:
l t d be a saving to the U. S. -

*

*

*

*

*

*

*

WILLIAMEATON
[NA.

SDA.

CL, Tunis, Vol. 2, Pnrt I, March 1801-Dec. 1802.1

Extract from journal of U. 6. S. Er-, Captain William Bainbridge, U. 6. Navy,
commanding, Sunday, 19 December 1801
Commences clear Weather & strong Westerly gale under double reefed top
f3siIs.

At 1 PM brought to a Moorish boat from Tetuan bound to Gibraltar.
At aun set the rock bore WbN & Ceuta SWbS. Throughout the night tacking
to the Westward. At 7 AM found we were 7 or 8 leagues to the Eastward of the
rock, having had a strong easterly Current.
At 11 AM mustered all hands and read the articles of War.
Gibraltar NNW 3 W, Ceuta NWbW 34 W
[NA. N D original.]
To Captain Bichsrd Dale, U. S. Bavg, from Secretary of the Navy

[WASHINGTON,
D. C.]
Navy dept l 4 dec. 1801,
It is the command of the President of the United States, that if, on
your arrival a t NorfoIk, i t should appear in your judgment, practicable
and safe, taking into consideration the pmbabllity of ice closlng up
the navigation of the Potowmac, you proceed with the frigate Preszdeni
immediately to this place, where it is intended she shall be laid up in
ordinary: that you, immediately on receiving this letter, inform me
what determination you may have made on the subject, that I may
take measures for providing ou lighters, to take out your Guns &q
should i t be necessary. sho& you determine that i t will be safe and
practicable to proceed immediately to this place, when you get to
the Mouth of the Potowmac, a proper pilot must be engaged. ~f you
can get John Gough, who lives near Leonard Town, you will give
h ~ ma preference to any other: he has sounded the river and can
bring, as he sa s 20 feet to the Mouth of the Eastern Branch. if the
President shou d draw more, you will of consequence have her wator
started, and brin her by the Head. should you think i t unsafe to
proceed to this p ace, the Crew of the President must be discharged
a t Norfolk, and immediately on receiving informat.ion from you to
that effect, I will transmit the necessary monies, and g v e such
further instructions as may be requisite.

f

k

[NDA. OSW, Vol. 5, 1801-1802.1
To George Hamson, Navy Agent, Philadelphia, Pa., from Secretary of the Navy

[WASHINGTON,
D. C.]
Navy dept 16 dec. 1801,
I am honored with your letter of the 11 instant.
The nine thousand feet of live oak timber mentioned in my l e p r
to you of the 5 inst is, as is stated in that letter, Intended for P a dcIphia, - is marked for that place, and must not be tramported t~

639

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

any other. be p l e d therefore to make the necessary alteration in
the charter party.
With respect to the ConsleUation, my orders for her to bs removed
to Marcus Hook, were founded on the principle of security, & I had
ood reason to believe she would be less secure at Phil*, than at Marcus
ook. If, however, in the opinion of Captains Barry and Murray,
which I presume has been founded upon an actual survey of the
different placas, the contrary be the case, she must remain at philadelphia.

b

[NDA. GLB, Vol. 5, 1801-1802.1
To Captain Bichard Dale, U. 6. Bavy, or the Commanding Ogicer of the U. 8. Shipr

in the Mediterranean, from Secretory of the Navy

~ A S H I N G T O N , D.

C.]

Navy depc 16 dec. 1801.

I t is the command of the President of the United States that two
Vessels out of the four now in the Mediterranean be immediately
sent home, and he has designated the Bodon and such other vessels,
as in your opinion may be the most proper: should the President have
sailed for this country, prior to the arrival of this letter, or should
either of the other vessels besides the Boston have sailed, then the
Boston only must come, so that there shall be two vessels left in the
Mediterranean.
If you determine that the two to be left shall be the P h i W hia &
2%8ez, in that case you will be leased to transfer to Captain f(armn
such instructions as you may ave rewived from this depf, & communicate to him all the in!ormation you may possess, that may in
any degree be of service m the prosecution of the object of the
squadron.
You will perceive that these orders are predicated upon the suposition, that Algiers and Tunis still remain peaceful, and that there
%as not been any formidable preparations made by Tripoli for prosecuting the warfare. The vessels returning home must deposit all the provisi?ns, they
may have on board, be ond what will be necessary to b m g them
home, with John Gavino sq., for the use of the public ships rem
The ship Boston must be sent to Boston, the other, return agreeab y
to her original destination.

%

E

7.

[NDA. OSW. Vol. 5, 1801-1802.1
To the Captain of the Ship Jamu from Secretary of the Bevy

[VCTASHINGTON,
D. C.,]
Navy department, 16 dec. 1801.
As soon as you are propared for sea, you will weigh anchor and
roceed immediately to Gibraltar, and there deposit, agreeabl to
gill of lading, the public pro rty committed to your care m t h ohn
Gavino Esq. the American Snsul, to whom you will also deliver the
accompanying letter. should you meet in your assage either of the
ublic ships in want of mvislons or any thmg &e you may have on
loard, you will supply t em therewith, taking the Captain's duplicata
receipts therefor, one of which you will be leased to trammut to t b
de artment, the other you will present to r Gavino, who thereupon
duly consider such supply in the ill of bding,and no intermp

f

E

Wf;

R

640

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1786

TO 1801

tion with respect to the settlement of freight and primage, will be
experienced,
[NDA. GLB, Vol. 6, 1801-1802.1
To John Gavino, U. 6. Consul, Gibraltar, from Beoretary of the Bavy
~ A S H I N Q T O N , D. C.,]
Natry department, 16 december 1801,
Colonel Stricker the Navy Agent a t Baltimore, will transmit you
an invoice and bill of Lading of the Cargo of the provision ship, the
James; which cargo you will be pleased to receive, and deal out to the
ships of our Squadron agreeably to their necessities, for which a
reasonable compesation will be allowed you a t this department.
On receiving the Car o in good order & well conditioned, you will
be pleased to draw on !if css? MqKenzie and Glennie of London for
the amount of freight & primage which you will pay to the legal
representatives of those who have an original propnetorship therein,
or to the proprietors themselves as they may make the arrangement.
The whole amount of freight & prirnagc amounts to 4725 dollars, for
which sum, the enclosed letter to Mess? MqKenzie & Glennie, which
you will forward with your bill, will warrant your drawing upon them.
The Captain of the ship James has been directed, in the event of
his falling in with any of the public ships, on his outward ptamge, in
want of provisions, or any thing else he may have on board, to supply
them therewith, taking the Captain's receipt which when presented
to you, you will consider as a bona fide dclivery; that the proprietors
or their representatives may experience no interruption to receiving
the freight $ 9
The Accountant of the Navy will give you directions upon that
branch of the business appertaining to his department.
Two of our ships in the Mediterranean have been ordered home.
should they have any surplus provisions on board, they will deposit
them with you for the use of the squadron.

[NDA. GLB, Vol. 6, 1801-1802.1
To Captain William Bainbridge, U. 8. Bavy, from Captain Richard Dale, U. 8. Bavy

U.S SHIPPresident TOULON
Decr 16'Q 1801 SIR, I wrote MI Gavino & Mr Iiirk Patrick on the 7'4 1ns"forming
them of my arrival here, the day before allso the unfortunate circumstance, of the Pilot runing the Ship on a rock coming out of Mahon
which is the caus of my paying a Vist to this place - I requested them
to make you Acquainted with the circumstance, as you would be
much a t a loss to account for my absence - I should have wrote you
a t the same time, but waited to be fully satisfied respecting the Injurey
that Ship received by the severe stroke - Yesterday being the first
calm day since we have been in this port we embraced the oppertunity
to examme the Bottom, the result was, I am sorry to say a disagreeable
one, the fore part of the Keel is entirely gone we su pose 16. or 17
feet, - we Judge from sweeping the ship, we can plain y see the lower
part of the stem also the scarf were the Keel Joined to i t but no Keel.
the stem from where the Keel Joined, 6 or 7 feet u is allso Very much
injured the Botts is 12 or 14 Inches without the #ood. - As the s h l ~
has made no water (or very little) on account of the accident, I was
In Hopes that there would not have been a necessity to Heave down

!

641

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

Here, but from what I see (and it may be worse t h m I expect) i t is
absolutely necessary to repair the Bottom Here, How long it will take
to Heave down &, and be in readiness again to sail for Gibraltar, i t ia
out of my power a t present to say - I shall get Prattique to day,
when, I get on shore I shall be better able to Judge. I Have heard since I have been here that Cap$MFNeel in the U.S.
Ship Boston, has sailed from France, i t is to join our Squadron - as I
have never received any Infermation from Govennent of his corning - it is possible he is come to act under the orders of the Commodore that is coming out to releave me, in that case he will have orders
to act accordingly - If he is come to act under my orders, you will
please to Inform him, to proceed for this port without loss of time. U S. SHIPEssex OFF GIBRALTAR
[NDA photostat, Dale LB, 1801-1802.1
To Lieutenant Colonel Commandant William W. Burrows, U. 8. Marine Corps,
from First Lieutenant Newton Keene, U. S. Marine Corps

BRIGATE
Pre8idRfl.d

Toukon 16* December I801
SIRWhen I wrote you by LtSterett on the 5 @November Imt, I
expectedit would have been the last time that I should have addressed
you from the Mediterranean, Commodore Dale having then determined to Sail for America on the first of December, but unexpectedly
c d e d to Algiers & upon our arrival a t that place being inform'd that
the Tripolitans had purchased s e v e r ~Vessels
l
a t the Port of Mahon
in the Island of Minorca & were fitting them to Cruize against the
vessels of the Uni'ted States we proceeded Immediately to that Port,
for the Purpose of making Enquiry respecting this Armament, as
well as to retrieve the Health of our men. Having accomplished those
ends, we left that Port on the first Inst. for America where we expected
to arrive by the first of Jenuary, but how soon was our expectation
Expeld, upon coming out of the Harbour, the Mouth of which is
Narrow & Rocky, the Ship Stsuck & Supposing her Bottom much
Injur'd & there being no place iq Mlnorca for repairing Vessels,
Commodore Dale thought most advisable to proceed on to this place,
where we arrived on the 6Q& ShaIl without dela make the Necessary
R e p a h . To do this I expect i t will take us unt& the 6rst of February
Next A few days Subsequent to my Letter by Lt Sterett the Frigate
Philadelphia arrived in the Bay of Gibraltar when I was informd by
Commodore Dale that Cap! Samuel Barron wished a Court Martial
for the trial of Sergt Rogers of the Marines, belonging to L?Fenwicks
Detachment, charged, with Striking one of the Masters Mates on
board the Philadelphia. Accordingly a Court was Summoned to be
holden on board the Vessel on the 7d of November which Consisted
of the Following Officers Viz Capts Samuel & James Barron Capt Bainbridge, Lts.Chauncey, Decatur,. Fenyvlck, Hopper, & myself, I stated
to the Court, that in my opimqn, ~t was k b l y Improper for the
OEeers to ait on the trial of M a m y , when Marine Officers suflicient
were present to form tb Board, t b caused for Some time a warm
discussion between Captain Saumel Barroq and myself, be oveniled
we promded to Trial when i t was determined that Rogers hould be
reduced to the Ranks & receive fift h h e s , which sentence was
executed - As you will be better ab e to Judge of the Propriety of

3

9

642

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1786 TO 1801

this Sentence when you See the Proceedings of the Court, which will
be forwarded on to the Office of the Secretary of the Navy, as well as
a Copy which I shall take for your satisfaction, I shall refrain from
Saying anything on the Subject a t Present. - Capt Sam1 Barron
having determined to discharge Rogers I thought i t best to take him
on board the President & not suffer him to be discharged in a Foreign
Country, Since he has been under my Command he has behaved
himself extremely well - During the Cleaning of the Ship I sha.11 take
the Marines on Shore their clothes look well. I have purchased for
the greater part of them New Hats: Commodore Dale, I believe, is
Pleased with the Detachment. LtWsburn & myself are as Happy
under the Command of Cnpt' Dale & Barron as we could wish Your Son when I last saw him, which was the latter Part of Nov. was
well. The PhilruZelphia is Cruizing off Tripoli, the Essex between
Gibraltar & Malaga The enclos'd letter to Mr John Keene you will Please have put with
Post Office (Geo. Town) as I wish him to get it soon.
Inclosed is a Letter from Ll Hoopor. Pardon me for observing (in
my Opinion) if any 2* L; is entitled to a Separate Command he
(Hooper) is worthy of it. Cap! Bainbridge is much Plaased with
him from his great attention to duty
[MCA.

LR, 1801.1

Extract from journal of U. S. S.

Captain William Bainbridge, U. 8. l a w ,
commanding
&sex,

Wednesday, 16 December 1801
Commences with a hard gale of wind from WSW, dark horizon and disagreeable
weather. At 5 PM the tower of Marhlla bore NE % E. a t % past 5 wore ship
to the SouthwQ % past 11 PM took in Mia. topsnil. At midnight handed foretopsail. At 1 AM blowing violently, took in close reefed Main topsail, fearful
the canvsss woud not stand; find the ship lies to remarkable well under reefed
fore sail & close reefed Maintopsail, Comes up & falls off not more than 1%
ints, & after the Maintopsail was in, found, she lay very steady under storm
iz. staysail & reefed foresail, but did not lie quite so close to the wind; still did
not come up & fall off more than 1 point. At 4 AM put storm fore & main stays&
on her. At 5 past 7 set close reefed main topmil. These 24 hours wore
ship several times not mentioned in the remarks. Generally laid her head 3
houm each way to the Ng & Sg Saturday, 19 December 1801
Commences hard rain, very thick weather & a heavy gale from SE. At 5 PM
took in fore top sail & got the flying Jib boom in. At 6 hove to under close
reefed Main topsail.
7 P M blew a violent gale of wind with a high sea. At 10 fell in with the Swedish Convoy from Malaga bound t h o ' the straits. At 3 AM moderated, made
sail in proportion to the wind & sea. At 8 AM aent up top gall$ yards & set the
sails. At 10 set steering sails At Meridian - The Village Marbeilla bore NbW % W & Cape Molinero NE N
[NA. ND original.]

K

To Robert R. Livingston, U. 8. Minister to Paris, France, from Captain Bichard
Dale, U. S. Havy

SIR,Since I had the Honor of writing to you on the 9* Inst I Havo
the pleasure to Inform you that I got prattique on the 15* Inst I
waited on the Chiefs of the different Departments who received me
very politly, and promised me every assistance in their power, on
the 16* got the ship into the iner Harbour, we are making every

643

WARS WITH BABBARY POWERS

possible exertion to get the ship ready for Heaving Down, with the
friendly assistance that we have already experianced, since we have
been in the h e r port I am in hopes, (if the weather kee
ood) that
I shall be ready to sad by the middle of next month, I s a be better
able to Judge when I see the Bottom, I can Discover that the fore part
of the Keel is entire1 gone and the lower part of the stem very much
injured, what other %lamage the Bottom Has received I cannot say
a t present, but I Hope not much, I shall write you frequently that you
may be able to inform the Govermt of the U S. should ou have an
oppertunity, the time t,hat it will be likly I shaU sail
have wrote
the Secretary of the Navy Via Bordeaux. -

PI!?

9

[WDA photostat, Dale LB, 1801-1802.)

To Samadet & Cuahing, Herchants, Marseilles. France, from Captain Richord
Dale, U. S. Navy

TOULON
D E C21e
~ 1801
GENTLEMEN,
The hurry of Business has prevented me from Answering your esteemed favour's of the 10. 12 & 14 Inst until1 the
present, which I hope you will excuse - every arrangment is made
for expediting the Business of the Ship, M' CathaIan and your friends,
MessmLuce & Crassans [or Crassons] Cadet, has been active in the
Business Mr Cushing in his letter of the 12" Ins?request that I would
write to Mess? Luce & Crassans Cadet, for their Satisfaction, that
your House would reimburs to them what ever money they might
furnish for the use of the U. S. Ship President,agreeable to my orders,
I did not conceive that it was necessav to make an final Arrangment in thitt Business untill, I was certam that I shou d be under the
necessity of heaving the ship down M' Cathalan, on his arrivd here
produced me a letter from the House of Mess? Mnckinzie & A Glennie,
of London to him, wherein they request him to furnish the Squadron
under my Command with whatever it might want, should any of the
ships put into h$arscilles or Toulon, He being the Consul, a t present,
for the U S - i t becomes his duty to pay attention, to the Interest
of the U. S. - Yesterday he gave to MessmLuce & Crassan Cadet,
an instrument of writing malun himself accountable to them, for
their disbursements for the use o the U. S, Ship Pre&d.
- Not
withstanding should those Gentlemen prefer, the business, to go
through your Hands in case i t should not be conreniant for them to
take my Bills on London, for their Disbursments a t the rate of
Exchange a t the time we come to settle - (as I think that will be
the best way) f shall always be disposed to act in that way which
will give them the most satisfaction, Keeping a t the same t h e the
Interest of the United States In View - Your Attention to the Honor
and Interest, of the United States, allso to my Self (on my arrival
here, calls on me [to] write and mention your house to its Government,
in a way that i t deserves, i t is v e 9 possible that I shall do my self
the pleasure of paying, you a Vis~t,i t will only be for one or two
Days therefore I beg that you wiU not, provide any appartments. I will thank you to Inform me should any Vessels arrive from Amirica
to your port allso when any is a bout departing for America [NDA photoatat, Dale LB, 1801-18-02.]

9

!'

644

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1786 TO 1801

Extracts from journal of IT. 6. S.

&ex,

Captain William Bainbridge, U. 6. Bavy,

commending

dfonday, 21 Decembm 1801

Commences clear Weather & light breezea froin NE; Several of the crew having
the scurvey, from the Doctors report it was necessary to have Vegetables for
them Went into Algeeiras bay & anchored a t 2 PM,in 25 fa. water, with the
following marks Rock of Gibraltar NEbE % E. Algeziras WbS $6 S Cabrette point
SbW W and Ceuta SbE. The Southern tower to the North of Algeziras WbN
N the next one to the N+ NW % W. St Roque NEbN
All these bearings are Magnetic points.
This day got Vegetables from the shore scrubbed & Fumigated all decks. I
visited Gibraltar found the Tripolitan Ship in the same dismantled state
Tuasday,22 December 1801
These 24 hours clear & pleasant Weather employed in bending mils afreeh, and
putting rigging to rights.
At 5 AM unmoored ahip and prepared to weigh, when we discovered that the
Boston Frigate had arrived a t Gibralbr, & was a t anchor amongst the Britkh
Squadron. At 9 went to Gibraltar bay in the Barge, on board the Boston, which I
found was just arrived from France after 9 days passage Wedmday, 23 December 1801
Commences clear Weather and strong Westerly wind. A t 7 AM light Northerly breezes, Wei hed Anchor & put to sea, to proceed to Malaga to fiU our Water.
No articular bccurrencea
At Leridian Europa point bore NW H W and the North point of the rock

N % w.

Friday, 25 December 1801
Commences pleasant Westerly breezes under all mil standing into the bay of
Malaga. At 3 P M came to anchor in 14 fath. water, The Cathedral bearing
North $ Cape Molinero WSW.
Immediately eent the innace on shore for pretick.
A t 7 A M the Bogton Bapt. MgNeill arrived from Gibraltar.
[HA. ND original.]

To William Lee, U. 6. Commercial Agent, Bourdeaux, France, from Captain Bichard
Dale, U. 6. Navy

TOULON
Decr 66*!1801
SIR,I will thank you to forward the two Inclosed letters, by t h e

first oppertunity, you will please to send them in different Vessels
should t h e r e be t w o going I Eope you will excuse the trouble I give you in this Business, t h e
postage you will please t o get from any Captain Belonging to Philad*
or New York, most of them k n o w me, I wiU repay them again, in
America it is not my wish that y o u should be at that expence I am
making every possible exertion to heave the ship Down, to see what
Tnjurey the Bottom received by runing on a rock coming out of Mahon,
it is with pleasure that I inform you that the Tripolines have not
taken any of our Vessels as yet. I will thank you to write, me and Inform me if you have any news

from America. WILLIAMLEE EsqF
C d Bur&

(NDA photostat, Dale LB, 1801-1802.1
To Samadet dt Cushing, Merchants, Idarseilles, France, from Captain Bichard Dale,
U. 8. Havy

TOULON
Deer 21it.h1801 GENTLEMEN,
My letter to o u of the 21* Ins! I concluded would
have given you to understan that Mr Cathaltin would advmce the

i'

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

-

-

645
-

money that would be necessary for the use of the United States Ship
Preside~Junder my command, should Messy Luce & Crassons, Cadet,
have no objection, who advances the money in the first Instance they
waited on me last evening to know whos Orders they were to act under
in supplyin the Ship as they had orders both from you and Mr
Catherlan, told them the latter, I hope in this instance you will not
suppose, that I give a preference to Mc Catherlan, no to the contrary,
I am guided to acct in a line, that I think is right and just, Mr Catherlan being the Consul for the United States, He Conceives i t his duty
to come forward in this instance, and render the U. S. eve service in
his power his Having, allso a letter from Messr! J Mac enzie & A
Glennie (who is to accept all Bills that I may Draw for the use of the
Squadron under my Command, to supply any ship or ships of the said
Squadron with what mone they might want, He is allso reappointed,
Consul by the President,
informs me that his Appointment has not
been rejected by the French Goverment, and that he will be allowed,
to act in his present office, those circumstances has induced me to act a t
I have done Your polite attention to me has induced, me to make this statement
to ou, should it ever be in my power to render your House any service,
I s all do it with pleasure, as Mr Cushing is agoing to New York, or
Philadelphia, I expect and Hope to Have the pleasure of seeing h i in
Philade - when he goes, I shall intrude on his goodness to take a Box
or two of the first Quality, Muscat Wine for me. -

f

i!

E

[NDA photoatat, Dale LB, 1801-1802.1
To Bear Admiral Gantheaume, Commander-in-Chief of the French Squadron
Toulon, from Captain Bichard Dale, U. 8. Navy

TOULON
Dec' 259 1801
SIR,John Lawdon an American seaman has applyed to me to get his

discharge from the French Ship, the Tenth, of August, he says he
entered on board the said ship, reather than o to prison, being taken
in an english ship (which he was pressed on Board) by the Squadron
under your command, His Father lives in New York, he wrshes to
return Home in the U. S. Ship President under my command, should
he not be indebted to the ship, I hope you will grant my request, by
ordering him to be discharged, and his wages paid him, should any be
due, that he may Imbrace this Oppertunity of returning to his friends
[NDA photostat, Dale LB, 1801-1802.1
Departure and Arrival of Cruisers at Tripoli 26 December 1801

Saild
Return'd
October 89 saild a Guerlinogdcci Decr 12* Return'd without having
taken any prize [?] of 14 Guns Decr 7* Saild a briq of ten guns Not yet
bound to Derna mth orders
Decr lgt." Saild a Corvette of 14 st, all hands perish'd but ten
who were saved Guns
The two following Cruisers are a fitting out for sea & will sail in
about 14 days The Guerlinoguicci[?] noted above which is painted black &
yellow -

k

647

WARS WITH BARBAIlP POWERS

T o Samadet & Cuahing, Merchants, Marseilles, France, from Captain Eichard
Dale, U. 8. Navy

TQULQN
Deer fl-"
1801
GENTLEMEN,
I have the Honor to acknowledge the relcfiep! of your
favour of the 25" Inst I note its contents Your conjectures respecting Messre E. DeButts and W. Y. Purvinnce of Leghorn being Agents for the United States is right in some
measure - Those Gentlemen have received orders to supply the
Squadron under my command, with whatever it may stand in need
of, should it touch a t Leghorn, also to accept any Bills that T may
draw on them, they received orders from the Government of the
United States, also from my self, to lodge letters of credit in favor of
the Commanding, Officer of the Squadron in thc different ports of
Italy, France and Spain, that they might not be a t a loss, should the
Squadron or any of the Ships belonging to it put into any of the Said
ports and want Supplys - Those Gentlemen are authorbed to
draw on Mess? Mackmzie & Glennie, of London, to reimburse them
selves for any money that they may advance for the uso of the Said
Squadron So far those Gentlemen are Agents, but i t always rests with
me, to draw either on them or on the Gentlemen in London. - as I
may think best for the intereat of the U. S. I n the present Instance
(as MessN J. M & Glennie has lodged a credit in the Hands of Mr
Cathalan) I think it best to draw on them - notwithstanding M;
Cathalans Having the said letter had he not been consul for the
U. S. I should not have hesitated in letting the Business go thro h
your hands I shall always consider i t my duty wbile I am in t e
Publick Service, and in a foreign Country to give as much credit as
possible to the man that my Government has honored with its confidence as Consd, without I am informed from good authority that
he is not deserving of it, and that the Goverment has been deceived
in the man - If h 0 Cathalan is a man of that description i t has
not come to my knowledge as yet. You must know when a man is appointed to an Office a fore
Country, the moro respect and confidince placed in ~UII, by t e
Government, that appolnts him, and its officers the moro influence,
and respect he will Commnnd in the Country that he resides m those motives has been the solo caus, in this instance, of lettlng the
Business go throu h the Hands of Mr Cnthalan particularly when I
conceive the emo umenta arising from the transaction cannot be
p e a t and as far, as i t respects the, Interest of the U S. the same, as
if i t had not. - I should be very sorry that any act of mine, should
give pain or ,uneasiness to any person, and more particularly to you,
after your friendly attention, (on my arrival here) to the Interest of
the U. S. and my self, you may rest assured that it will always give me
to render services to your House of which I Have tho

?

+

Y?

y

to give me a few days notice, when he is
about to sail for the United States, RS 1 wish to write by him [NDA photostat, Dale LB, 1801-1802.1

648

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1786 TO 1801
[July 1800 to 31 December 18011

Statement of the Account of Israel Whelen with the United States
Israel Whelen Purveyor of Public Supplies, in relation t o Treaties with the Mcditerranean Powers, in Accor with t h e United States- Cr
By Treaties with the Mediterranean Powers, for amount of the following
Expenditurn ------ --Vh

I

I

Coat of a Cargo Shipped by the Owrpe Wa?Aington Cap+Bainbridgo in tho Month
of July 1800 Consigned to Consul OBr~ena t Algiers, including c-es
& Insurances pr Invoice & bill of lading ...................................N I .. 67,572.10
Cost of a Careo Shinoed hv the Qeorar lhahinoton Cans Shrtw. in the Month
of July 1801;consilr;ned 6 the m e - ~ o n s u in~ludingccharges'&
l
Insurance pt
Invoice 6 bill 01 lading ............................................... 9 2.... 20,788.15
s
by the
Pmnium of Insnranm on the Cargo of the Brig Sophia for A h ~ e r effected
late but paid by the present Purveyor- ............................NP 3.... 2, SX 50
Rent and TVharWe paid for Timber,
and shipped for * l g I ~ N Q
924. W

I

A I

Cost of a Camo Shipped by the Anna Mario Caps Coffin in the Month of August 1800. Consigned to Consul Eaton at Tunis includidg freight & Insurana?
pr Invoice & bill of lading ............................................N 6
Cost of a Cargo ship@ by the Qrond Turk Capi Lnughton in the Month o l
March 1801, consigned to the same Consul, including charges, Insurance &
part freight pr Invoice & bill of lnding ................................NP 6.. .Cost ofa Cargo S h i p w by the Pace & P l e n t ~Cap!
.
Wood in the Month of July
1W1,consigoed to the same Consul, including charges, Insurance & part fre~ght
pi Invoice & bill of lading-- ..........................................N 7
Amount paid for freight, primage & Demurrnge of the Ship Hero, Capc Robinson
Chartered for a Voyage to Tunis pr A m $ - -..........................NP 8 ....

Cast of 46 Bags of Coffee Weight XI43 Ih. intended for Algiers, but remaining still
.--.----.--------------------- .-- ---- ------------ -- -- ---- N? 9---on hand---.

23.147.36

15.342 77
38,281.20

20,436.62

I l-

- - - - - - ----.
.

Dollars. ...............

Exclusive of the above the following Articles previously purchased by the Secretary of State and the late
Purveyor have been ship
by Mr Whelen, Viz
Pr the Ship Omroe &ingfon
f h t Voyage.
129 Casks of Spikes purchased by the Secretary of State, and 2 Cables.
131 P,White Oak and 26 Pl Pine plank, purchased by the late Purveyor
also 8.12 pound Cannon, said to replace so many heretofore lent by the d e y of Algiers tn tho Navy
Department.
h the aloreseld Bhi on her Second Voyage.
320 D, White oat plank 8 Masts and 1 Bowsprit purchased by the late Purveyor, and J', m Oars or
sweeps received from C o l ~
Thompson of Portsmouth New linmpshire

-

[Auditor's Office February 20': 180.2

P. FEREALL]

[GAO. No. 13, 141.1

