NAVAL OPERATIONS
FROM SEPTEMBER 1803 THROUGH MARCH 1804

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS
To Secretary of the Navy from Lieutenant Charles Stewart, U. S. Navy

UNITEDSTATESBRIGSiren
New Castle Sep' 1@ 1805
SIR I have the honor to inform you that we a,renow ready for Sea &
shall procede as soon as the severe Noath East wind tha.t now blows,
abates. I received your favor of the 24th Augt & Mr Valencin the
Tripolitan applied accordingly for his passage, but as he was not
ready & would not be until1 he got his papers he remain's - Oweing
to the bad state of health of Mr ClemWiddle & Mr Brown Midshipmen which you will perceive by the enclosed certificate of Doctor
Marshall I have given them permission to remain on shore [NDA.

Misc. LB, 1802-3-4.1

To Josef Yznardi, U. S. Consul, Cadiz, Spain, from John Gavino, U. S. Consul,
Gibraltar

Cirdar.
GIBRALTAR
l e t September 1805.
SIR - I have to inform you that yesterday Evening I received
advice from Cap; Bairnbridge of the U. S. Ship Philadelphia that he
had taken possession of one of the Emperor of Morrocos Cruizers of
22. Guns & 100. Men off Cape de Gatt, as she [~Mirboka]had
taken the American Brig Mia Cap! Barns of Bost,on & had orders to
take & send to Tangiers all American Vessels - Said Emperor has a
30 Gun Ship off Cape St Vincent & two Roe Boats with 4 Guns &
50 Men each in the Gutt, which suppose has same orders as the Ship
stoped by the P h i l a d V l e a s e do the needful1 with this information
that your trade may not suffer The above Brig & Crew was also recaptured & are expected here [NOTE.-For fuller information the following letter is included herein, as well
as in Volume I1 of "Naval Documents related to U. S. Wars with the Barbary
Powers".]
To James Simpson, U. S. Consul Tangier, Morocco, from Captain
William Bainbridge, U. S. Navy

U. S. FRIGATE
Philad*
East of Malaga a 10 Mils
Monday tgth Augt 1803
Dr SIR I m o t e you from Gibraltar on the 24th Ins5 mentioning
that we should sail the next Morning for Malta (COPY)

1

2

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1803 TO 1804
Hearing a t the Rock that two Tripolitans were off Cape de
Gatt made me proceed with all Expedition to Examine that part
very fresh a t 8 P. M.
of the Spanish Coast. On the 26t4blo*
being nearly up with Cape de Gatt fell in mth a ship c
y only
her foresail & had a Brig in Compan under the same sa' , it being
night di her Guns housed prevente8 sll imediate discovering her
to be a Cruiser, after hailing for some time found that she was a
Vessel of Wmr from Barbary, on which information I caused her
Boat to be sent on board the frigate Philad* with her Pass ports from wo@ I discoverd that she was a Cruiser belonging to the
Empr of Morocco CaUd Mesboh [Mirboka] Commanded by
Ibrahim Lubarez Mounting 22 Guns & Mand with 100 Men,
by not making ourselves known to the officer who came on board
he Confessd that the Brig [Celk] in Company was an American
& had been with them 3 or 4 days, was bound to some Port in
Spain, had been boarded by them, but not detaind, the low sail
in wPQ the Brig was under 'induced me to suspect that they bad
Captured her notwithstanding their having your Pmsport which
must appear from the sequel was only obtaind to protect them
against the American ships of Warr I sent my &st Lieu? on board to Examin if they had any
American Prisoners, on his attempting to Execute my orders, he
was prevented by the CapQ of the Cruiser, this increased my
suspition and I sent a Boat with a m d Men to inforce m
tions, after they were on board they found Capri Richar Bowen
In
of the American Brig Celia Ound by Mr Amasas Thlalyer of
Boston and several of his Crew, who was taken the 17's Inst
from Barcelona - bound to Malaga within 2 or 3 Leagues of the
Spanish shore, & about 25 Miles to the Eastward of Malaga,
the Caps & the Crew they had Confined below Deck which
they always did when speaking a Vessel, after Making this Discovery I instantly ordered all the Moorish Officers on board the
frigate, for I made no hesitation in Capturing her after such
proceedings on their part and Violation of the faith of Pass o r b
which ought to be Sacred - Oweing to the high Wind an Sea
it took me the greatest part of the Night to get the Prisoners
on board and Man the Prize which detention Occasiond loosing
sight of the Brig, the following Morning discovering many Vessels
in diver directions the Day was spent by the frigate & Prize in
chasing to find the Captured Brig about 4 P. M. made her coming
round Cape de Gatt from the Eastward, standing dose in shore
for Almeria Bay, owe& to the wind being very fresh we was
going slow in approaching her, all the greatest Exertions was
made by Lieu! Cox in Towing & Rowing the Prize, fortunately the
Wind increased in the Evening and we recapturd her a t 12
cClock at Night. - The Moors Confess that they came out
aCruising for the sole purpose of Capturing Americans to be sent
to Tanger. I have r e d a paper from them writen in Moorish

g

B

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

3

w F ~they

say is their authority from the Govr of Tanger for so
doing - I inclose this to John Gavino Esqr with a particular
request to have it safely Conveyd to you that you may be informed of the Circumstance and act accordingly. I beleive the
Govenour of Tanger is much disposed for Hostilities with the
U.S., the Moorish Prisoners accuse him as the sole cause of their
present Cituation. I sincerely hope that this Capture may be
productive of good Effects to the U. S. with the Emp' who may be
assured that if he injustly goes to Warr with the U. S. he will loose
every large Cruiser he has, & God grant that i t may not in the
least prove a disadvantage to you. My Officers and self have
made i t a Markd point to treat the Prisoners not only with the
lenity that is due from Humanity but with particular attention of
Civility to impress on their mind a favourable Opinion of the
American Character.
That you may receive this information as Early as possible I
dispatch my Boat on shore a t Malaga to request W. Kirkpatrick
Esqr Consul to forward it by Express to Gibr L shall be Extremely anxiouse to hear from you, as also for the arrival of
Comodor Prible to receive his Instructions relative to the Captured ship. I am bound to Gibraltar Bay with the Prize, but
am fearfull we shall be detaind for want of an Easterly wind.
[SDA. CL, Cadiz, Vol. 1, 1793-1805.1
Extract and translation from a journal kept in French by an unknown person on
board the U. S. Frigate john Adam. Captain John Bodgers, U. S. Navy, commending, Thursday, 1 September 1808

At 2 P M . . . Headed for the city and made sail. The convoy
astern of us followed in our course. At 3 P M one mile from the
city . . . The boat went ashore. Tacked to the south to wait for the
convoy. At 4.30 P M headed N E for the city. The convoy had
rallied. Found three vessels in the roadstead, one Danish, one
Ragusan, and the other flying no flag. At 4 P M cast anchor . . .
The Lighthouse to the N W, Monjuich W N W. The most southerly
point to the W . . . The entire convoy anchored in the said roadstead . . . At anchor a t Barcelona.
[LC. EPP, Journal 1803.1
Extract from journal of Midshipman Henry Wadsworth, U. S. Navy, on board
U. 6. 6. Nuo Yort. Captain Richard V. Morris, U. S. Navy, commanding, 1 September 1803

Off Corsica North Point. * * * Once More afloat on the
Ocean & bound to Gibraltar the John Adam sailed sometime ago with
a Convoy. The Adams sail'd for Tunis -We shall meet a t Gibraltar.
This Morning we were chased by two British Frigates, hove too &
spoke them the Narcissa & Active. [H. W. L. Dana Co1.l

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1803 TO 1804
To Secretary of State from James L. Cathcart, giving Details of Operations at
Tnnie, 2 t o 8 September 1803
[Mr. Cathcart left Leghorn 27 August 1803, on board U. S. Frigate Adams.]
FBIDAYSEPT: ~ N 1803.
D
- Anchored in Tunis bay a t 6 p. m. SATURDAY
3d, I went on shore, At 6 A. M. and dispatched a Courier to Tunis,
to inform the Bashaw of our arrival, and sent a Copy of inclosure NQ1, to Doctor
Davis. I came on board a t 8 A. M,. While on shore the Dutch Colonel of
Engineers, mentioned in my former communication, informed me, that Doctor
Davis had been a t the Gouletta, last Evening, when the frigate Anchored, and
had told him he had seen her flag, and that she was an American.
At. 2 pm.
Doctor Davis came on board and Dined with us: on our interrogating him respecting our situation with the Regency of Tunis, he answered, that perfect tranquility
existed a t this moment; that he had exerted himself considerably since he resided
a t Tunis; and that he was happy his efforts had been crowned with success. On
my expressing an impatience to land as soon as possible, as Captain Campbell's
instructions limited him to Four lay Days a t Tunis, he answered, the Bashaw
had not granted permission for our landing, and that He had come to know our
business, which he would explain to hi Excellency, as soon as possible, in order
that the desired permission might be granted. Captain Campbell presented him
with a Letter from Commodore Morris, informing him of my appointment and
suspending his functions; and I informed him of the motive of my errand. He
seemed considerably agitated, and went on shore a t 5 p m , . In the course of conversation, Captain Campbell declared, that he had no business t o transact on
shore, nor had He any desire t o see Tunis; and that He would consequently remain
on board, Doctor Davis said, the Bashaw would be displeaeed if the customary
visit was not paid him; that He was extremely psrticular in the etiquette of his
Court; that the Officers of all Ships of War paid his Excellency that compliment;
and that i t would be expectedfrom us; that as nodifficultgexisted, therewasnothing
to be apprehended; and that He would forfeit his Life and reputation, if any
impediment was placed in the way of his departure, when ever He pleased. I
joined in Doctor Davis's request, believing what He said; and Capt: Campbell
acquiesced, saying if B e could be of any service, He would go, though much
against His will. S U ~ A YSEPTEMBER
~ T E .Captain Campbell kept a boat on shore a t the
Goletta nearly all day: no n e m whatever was sent by Doctor Davis. We consequently were not informed of the cause which prevented our landing as customary;
this however, raised some unfavourable impressions, and Captain Campbell
determined that if an answer did not arrive next day by Meridian, to write to
Doctor Davis upon the subject, in terms expressive of his sense of the indignity
ogered us, and to get under way the moment his lay days expired. MONDAY
SEPTEMBER
~ T E .The Drogoman came on board with a Note from
Doctor Davis, about 10 A. M. expressing, that the Bey of Tunis offered no objection t o my landing with Captain Campbell and his suite: alledged, that want of a
Carriage was the cause of our detention, and that a Headache must plead an
excuse for his not receiving us a t the Gouletta. We landed and proceeded to Tunia, where we arrived a t 3 p. m, and found
Doctor Davis very well to all appearance. Permission was requested to visit the
Bashaw, and granted; and the audiance was appointed next Morning, a t 7 P. M.

-

*

*

*

*

*

*

*

TUESDAY
~ T H . Waited upon the Bsshaw, in company with Captain Campbell,
Mr Davis, and two of the O5cers of the Adams; waa received very politely and
resented with Coffee. E delivered the Presidents Lettern to the Baehaw, with
fiteral translations in Italian: informed his Excellency, that I had some Verbal
communications to make, when He would please to hear me; He desired me to
make them to his Minister, when I pleased. Capt: Campbell having previously
determined t o go on board the next Morning, wished to take leave and asked if
his Excellency had any commands. The Bsshaw answered, None, only to wait
his answer to the Presidents Letters. Captain Campbell said the period for hb
remaining a t Tunis, expired next Day, and that He could not diviate from hi
instructions, I request you (replies the Bashaw), to wait Two Days longer, you
shall have my Answer on Thursday mornin precisely. In that case, (replied
Captain Campbell, to oblige your ExceUency) will wait the time you deaire. We
retired and waited on the Sahibtappa (ie) Prime Minister and seal bearer; was
received politely - common place conversation ensued. We drank Coffee and
retired, the minieter having appointed the next day, a t the Bame Hour for the
discussion of the points mentioned in the Presidents Letters to the Baahaw of
Tunie. -

5

*

*

*

*

*

*

*

5

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

WEDNESDAY
~ T H . Mr Davis did not arrive a t the Consular House from the
Country, untill 8 A. M. We waited upon the Minister a t 9. He asked what
language we should discourse in. I answered Italian, as I understood i t best.
Well then (says He), we will begin with the frigate. Have you perused the Presidents Letters? four or Five times, answered He. Then you are informed of
my instructions on that head, and consequently that point needs no further discusslon. What have you to offer that will be pleming to the Bashaw? A mark
of the Presidents esteem, which is calculated to perpetuate the good underatanding which so happily exists between our Nations, upon a basis permanent and unequivocal. The President viewing with some regret that other Nations enjoy
previledgea by Treaty with this Regency, which are fefmed to the Citizens of the
U. S, has ordered me to offer the Bsshaw of Tums, the sum of 24,000 Milled
Dollars payable every Three Years, to commence from the date of the agreement,
in order to induce him to make some slterations in our Treaty, of which, that of
most consequence, is to reduce the duties paid by Citizens of the U. S. to the
standard of other Nations (ie) 3 pr Cent. Advalorem; for you must be sensible,
that the unequality of duties militates equally against both parties, by your
exacting 10 pr Cent from Citizens of the US, while other Nations pay only Three,
You give them the advantage of underselling us, 7 Pr Cent; consequently you exclude our Vessels from your ports, and in lieu of encreasing your Revenue, you
prevent us from trading with you.
He paused a few moments, and said. He would inform the Bashaw of my proposals, and bring me his answer. I n half an Hour the Minister returned, and declared, that his Master (the
Bashaw) had ordered him to inform me, that He had not demanded an Annuity;
that He had demanded a Frigate, because He knew we had given one to another
of our Friends: that He did not want Cash: that Denmark. Sweeden and other
Nations gave him presents occasionally, of 'Maratime and &lilitary Stores; that
He treattd all His friends alike, and hoped the President of America would do the
same. And then, by way of interrogation, asked with a smile, pray what do you
pay a Year to Algiers? I leaded ignorance and the Minister continued, I likewise am ordered by my d m t e r to inform you, that, aa his policy is peace, He
cannot receive you as Consul resident, in this Regency, you having been the cause
of the War with Tripoli. He has wrote to the President of the United States on
the Subject, and will await his answer; during which time, He desires me to inform
you, that the American flag shall be treated with respect; and that He appoints Mr
George Davis to remain in the same situation, that Commodore Morris left him,
untill the will of the President is known. You may call for the Baahaw's Letters
in the Morning, a t 8 OIClock. -

*

*

*

*

*

*

*

The American Drogoman brough[t] a message from the Bashaw tu Capt: Campbell, informing Him, that He had determined not t o receive me as Consul of the
United States, for reasons which He would inform the President: that His Excellency had appointed Mr Davis to remain until answers came to the Bashaws
Letters, which He would be ready to deliver in the Morning. Mr Davis * * * said He would not wonder if Captain Campbell should
be detained untill Hadgi Unis ben Unis was satisfied for the claims made by the
Moors for prize goods sold a t Malta; and asked me whether I would assume the
debt or not. I informed Him, that I conceived this affair to depend entirely upon
the Commodore of the Station;

*

*

*

*

*

*

*

Ca t: Campbell informs me (for I was not in the office myself,) that Mr Davis
told f;im candidly, that He was apprehensive, that He would be detained untill
Hadgi Unis ben Unis was satisfied. Capt: Campbell answered, He may keep me
to all Eternity; but the Ship Sails to-morrow; and I will write home for government never to pay the debt; I will remain here for ever, before I suffer such indignity to be offered with impunity. * * *
THUR~DA
~T
YH . This Morning, daptain Campbell, Mr Davis and myself proceeded towards the Palace, in order to take leave of the Baahaw; while in the carriage, I asked Doctor Davis if He had settled with Hadgi Unis ben Unie. He said
He had not yet. Captain Cam bell then repeated nearly what He had said in the
,
He had already sent an order for
Office, and positively assured &r D a v i ~ that
to get the Ship under Way; and that if He was detained one moment, she should
sail without him. We waited a t the Palace untill the Arrival of Hsdgi Unis ben
Unis: was received by the Baahaw, in the Hall of Justice, drank Coffee and psssed
the customary complimente. Hadgi Unis ben Unis presented s very long liet in

6

-

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1803 TO 180.4
--

-

-

Arabic; which, He said, was the Note of the things, claimed by the Tunisian claimants, many of whom were present, Doctor Davia answered without hessitation, or
asking their Value, that He would write to Malta and have all the things returned,
that were not sold; and that He would pay for the rest as soon as possible; a t which,
the claimants seemed perfectly satisfied. During the whole transaction, Captain
Campbell nor myself were not asked one question, nor did we, in the least interfere. - [Translation of list is in IVDA.]

*

*

*

*

*

*

*

We returned to the Consular House; and being determined to go on board immediately after surmounting some little difficulties placed in the way of our ro
curing a Vehicle $ 9 We arrived a t the Goletta about 3 o'clock; found the f h i p
under sail, and the Boat waiting for us; We embarked immediately: * * *
[Mr. Davis] went on Shore a t 6. pm. At 9 i p. m. the boat came on board, and
Captain Campbell made sail, leaving the abode of happiness,
without much
-re et.
%Zy mason for not suspending Mr Davis's functions while on shore was to prevent Captain Campbell from being detained; had I informed the Bashaw that any
contract entered into by Mr Davis was non-valid, He having no power whatever
vested in him, but positively was instructed by Commodore Morris to the contrary,
the Bashaw would immediately have mid, well then, We will detain the Captain,
untill the claims made by the Moors are satisfied. I therefore thought i t most
prudent to wait untill We got on board, and then to Write to the Bashaw, in order
that the U. S. may be exonorated from the Acts of this infatuated young man.
To what a degrading situation are we reducedl the Commanders of the very
Squadron which k sent out to preserve the Honor of our Nation and dignity of our
Flag cannot land as the Officers of all other Nations do, and depart unmolested;
but have twice, in the small period of Six Months been subjected to arrest; and a t
thia moment i t would be the heighth of imprudence to land a t Tunis, aa certain
arrest maybe imprisonment, would be the consequence. * * *
JAMES LEANDERCATHCABT
I do certify that the above detail of our operations a t Tunis is a true statement of
facts, which either happen'd in my pre~lenceor came immediately to my personal
knowledgeaexcept only, the purport of the audience a t the Psllace on Wednesday
the 7th of dePtember 1803 a t which I was not present; and in testimony of which I
have hereunto subscribed my name HUGHG CAMPBELL,
Commanding the United States Frigate the Adams
[NA. SDA. CL, Tripoli, Vol. 2, 1801-1806.1

-

[2 September 18031
Temporary Orders isaned by Captain Edward Preble, U. 6. Navy

Whenever all hands are call'd for the purpose of making or taking
in sail, tacking or wearing Ship &c* The Officers are immediately to
repsir to the following Stations, to keep Order, and to cause the Orders
from the quarter deck, to be promptly and correctly executed Viz t
The first Lieutenant to take the trumpet on the quarter deck Second Lieutenant
.
to take the trumpet on the Starboard Gangwa and waiste ~ h i d Leutenant
i
to take the trumpet on the Larboard Gangway and wcliste Fourth Lieutenant on the Gun deck
Mr Reed on the fore-castle
Mr Deacon. fore and foreto~sailBraces Starb'! Side
Mr Morris ' Dq
D;
Do Larbs Side
MrIZard
the commanding Officer
Mr Haswell
Mr Dexter to 'attend Signals

e ear

7

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

Mr Burrows to attend, Main and Maintop sail Braces Starboard side
DQ
DQ
Mr Baldwin - D Q
Mr Hunnewell Cross Jack braces Starb* Side
Mr Bartell DQ
D QLarG Side
Mr Nicholson Fore top Mr Rowe Main top Mr Thompson Mizen top -

Larboard Side

Given under my hand this 2w of September 1803
on board U. S. Frigate Constitvtion at Sea
EPMr Hunt Gun deck Fore sheet, and main tack Starboard side
MT Laws - D Q
DQ
DQ
Larboard Side
Mr Davis Main sheets Starboard side
M: Hall DQ DQ Larboard Ditto
E.P.
The Officer of each division is on the 27@ day of each month to
make a return to the Captain of the necessary clothing wanted by the
men of his division in order that it may be issued on the last day of
the month; as clothing will not be delivered excepting on those days First division 2**Lieutenant his division to consist of all the men stationed a t the first Division of Guns on the lower Deck, and the fore
topmen
Second Division, 3'1' Lieutenant his division to consist of the men
stationed st the second division of Guns on the lower deck, and the
Main top-men Third Division - 4tb Lieutenant his division to consist of the men
stationed at the third division of Guns on the lower Deck and the
Mizen Topmen Fourth Division - 1@ Lieutenant his Division to consist of a l l the
men stationed on the upper deck, together with those stationed at the
Magazine, Shot lockers ;Pumps, Galley and Store rooms On board U S Frigate Constitution
a t Sea 2* Sept 1803

-

E. P.

[LC. EPP,Vol. 6, 1803.1

12 September 18031
To the Emperor of Morocco from James Simpson, U. S. Consul, Tangier, Morocco

COPYMay it Please Your Majesty
It is with great concern I find myself constrained to address Your
Majesty on matters so unpleasant as will be the chief subject of this
Letter. When Your Majestys intimation was made to the Consuls here
that the Ship Mes[h]owla had become Your Majestys property, I
instantly granted the usual Passport for her as such*, and she sailed
from Gibraltar in the resence of the Commodore and several Ships
of War of the United ttrtes, unmolested; but having been overtaken
b sn American Elrigate when attempting to enter the Port of Tripoly
d&rhaving
taken on board a variety of Articles of Warlike Stores a t

-

l

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1805 TO 1804
Arabic; which, He said, was the Note of the things, claimed by the Tunisian claimante, many of whom were present, Doctor Davis answered without hessitatlon, or
asking their Value, that He would write to Malta and have all the things returned,
that were not sold; and that He would pay for the rest as soon as possible; a t which,
the claimants seemed perfectly satisfied. During the whole transaction, Captain
Campbell nor myself were not asked one question, nor did we, in the least interfere. - [Translation of list is in NDA.]

*

*

*

*

*

*

*

We returned to the Consular House; and being determined to go on board immediately after surmounting Bome little difficulties placed in the way of our ro
curing a Vehicle 619 We arrived a t the Goletta about 3 oJClock; found the ifhi;
under sail, and the Boat waiting for us; We embarked immediately: * * *
[Mr. Davis] went on Shore a t 6. pm. At 91 p. m. the boat came on board, and
Captaii Campbell made sail, leaving the abode of happiness, without much
regret. My reason for not suspending Mr Davis's functions while on shore was to prevent Captain Campbell from being detained; had I Informed the Bsshaw that any
contract entered into by Mr Davis was non-valid, He having no power whatever
vested in him, but positively was instructed by Commodore Morris to the contrary,
the Bsshaw would immediately have said, well then, We will detain the Captain,
until1 the claims m+e by the Moors are satisfied. I therefore thought i t most
prudent to wait untlll We got on board, and then to Write to the Bashaw, in order
that the U. S. may be exonora.ted from the Acts of this infatuated young man.
To what a degrading situation are we reduced! the Commanders of the very
Squadron which is sent out to preserve the Honor of our Nation and dignity of our
Flag cannot land as the Officew of all other Nations do, and depart unmolested;
but have twice, in the small period of Six Months been subjected to arrest; and a t
this moment i t would be the heighth of imprudence to land a t Tunis, as certain
arrest maybe imprisonment, would be the consequence. * * *
JAMESLEANDEBCATHCART
I do certify that the above detail of our operations a t Tunis is a true statement of
fa&, which either happen'd in my presence or came immediately to my personal
knowledge. except only, the purport of the audience a t the Pallace on Wednesday
the 7 t h of deptember 1803 a t which I was not present; and in testimony of which I
have hereunto subscribed my name H n a ~G CAMPBELL,
Commanding the United States Frigate the Adams
[NA. SDA. CL, Tripoli, Vol. 2, 1801-1806.1

[2 September 18031
Temporary Orders issued by Captain Edward Preble, U.S. Navy

Whenever ctll hands are call'd for the purpose of making or taking
in sail, tacking or wearing Ship & c + T h e Officers are immediately to
repair to the following Stations, to keep Order, and to cause the Orders
from the quarter deck, to be promptly and correctly executed Vizt
.The first Lieutenant to take the trumpet on the quarter deck Second Lieutenant to take the trumpet on the Starboard Gangwa and w h t e ~ h i r J L i e u t s n a n tto take the trumpet on the Larboard Gangway and waiste Fourth Lieutenant on the Gun deck
M? Reed on the fore-castle
MF Deacon, fore and foretopsail Braces Starb0 Side
DQ
D9
D9 Larbd Side
MrMorris
MFIZard
the commanding Officer
M?Haswell
Mr Dexter toaattend Signals

ear

7

W D S WITH BARBABY POWERS

Mr Burrows to attend, Main and Maintop sail Braces Starboard side

Mr Baldwin - DQ DO
DP
MT HmeweU Cross Jack braces Starb$ Side
Mr Bartell DQ
DQLarQSide
Mg Nicholson Bore top -

Larboard Side

Mr Rowe Main top Mr Thompson Mizen top -

Given under my hand this 296 of September 1803
on board U. S. Frigate Constitution at Sea
EPMr Hunt Gun deck Fore sheet, and main tack Starboard side
MrLawsDQ
DQ
D?
Larboard Side
Mr Davis Main ~heetsStarboard side
Mr Hall DQ DO Larboard Ditto
E. P.
The Officer of each div%on is on the 27*@d q of each month to
make a return to the Captain of the necessary clothug wanted by the
men of his division in order that it may be issued on the last day of
the month; as clothing will not be delivered excepting on those days First division Zn'4 Lieutenant his division to consist of all the men stationed at the h t Division of Guns on the lower Deck, and the fore
topmen Second Division, 3'9 Lieutenant his division to consist of the men
stationed a t the second division of Guns on the lower deck, and the
Main top-men Third Division - 4'@ Lieutenant his division to consist of the men
stationed at the third division of Guns on the lower Deck and the
Mizen Topmen Fourth Division - I @Lieutenant his Division to consist of all the
men stationed on the up er deck, together with those stationed at the
Magazine, Shot lockers; umps, Galley and Store rooms On board U S Frigate Constitution
at See, 2nc Sepf 1803

f!

[LC. EPP, Vol. 6, 1803.)

E.P.

[2 September 18031
To the Emperor of Xorocco from Jamea Simpson, U. S. Consul, Tangier, ldorocco

COPYMay it Please Your Majesty I t is with great concern I find myseIf constrained to address Your
Majesty on matters so unpleasant as will be the chief subject of this
Letter. When Your Majestys intimation was made to the Consuls here
that the Ship Mes[h]oudQ had become Your Majestys property, I
instantly granted the usual Pssaport for her as such*, a.nd she sailed
from G~brsltarin the resence of the Commodore and several Ships
of War of the United tates, unmolested; but having been overtaken
b sn American Frigate when attempting to enter the Port of Tripoly
a&er having taken on board a variety of Articles of Warlike Stom at

d

8

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1803 TO 180-4

Al 'ers, for the avowed purpose of being carried to that Port, altho'

fi

we known to the Commander to be blockaded, it became the duty of
the Captain of that Frigate to conduct the Meshozcda to a Port for
examination and she was taken to Malta.
The American Commodore instantly acquainted me of this event, s a e g a t same time if this
roved to be an Act of Raiz Omars unauthonsed, the Ship should be
gberated as a proof of the &position of the American Government
to gratify Your ~Vajestyon every occasion, for had this Vessel been
under any other Flag than that of your Majesty, she would perfectl
consistent with the Law of Nations and invanable Custom in sucfl
cases, been instantly confiscated.
I communicate a11 these circumstances to Alcayde Hashash who
assured me Raiz Omnr had acted contrary to the Orders he gave hix?
in Your Majestys name, which I lost no time in writing to the Amencan Commodore, but unfortunately the want of conveyance for Malta
delayed that Letter a very long tune a t Gibraltar, in?omuch that to
this day I have not got the Commodores determination. - I have
however always entertained good hopes the busyness of the Mes[h]ouda
would be amicably accommodated. To my very great astonishment yesterday I received information
that another American Frigate had fallen in with Your Majestys Ship
Mirboka Commanded by Raiz Lubarez to the Eastward of Malaga,
having the American Brig Celia from Barcelona for Malaga with hun
as Pnze, and the Master and seven Mariners on board the Ship
Prisoners.
Raiz Lubarez confessed 'fie Cruized for purpose of takeing American
Vessels and gave up a paper in the Arabic Language d i c h he said
was his authority for that purpose delivered to him by Alcayde
Abdashaman Hashash. As my Passports were applied for and granted for the Mirboka and
all the other Vessels of War sent, out from Your Majestys Ports this
Summer, I could not but be very much surprised to find they were
authorised to capture American Vessels, as I never had received the
least information that Your Majesty had seen any cause to disturb
that harmony which so happily bad been restored and continued to
subsist, between Your Majesty and the United States of America. Under the mentioned circumstances it became the indispensible duty
of the American Captain to retake the Brig of his Nation, and also
to detain the Mirboka as she had been sent to Sea for the purpose of
making War against America. - The Navd force of the United
States at this time in these Seas is such as to afford ample protection
to its Commerce and for every other purpose it can be required; yet
as i t has ever been my steady endeavour since I have had the honour
of being placed near Your Majesty by the Government of the United
States, to do every thing within the compass of my power to maintain
Peace and Good Friendship between the Countries, so now I beg leave
to answer Your Majesty that I am highly disposed to receive such
propositions as Your Majesty may be leased to make t h o ' me for a
re-establishment of Peace, which I wdtrsnsmit to the Commanding
UfEcer of our Squadron in these Seas who is daily expected at Gibraltar, or send them on to America as circumstances may appear to
render most proper for furtherance of the Grand object in view. A first and very necessary measure for this will be Your Majesty
withdrawing the authority the Captains of your Cruhers have for

-

9

WARS W I T H BARBARY POWERS

capturing American Vessels, when that shall be done they will no
longer be in any danger from the Ships of War of the United States. Alcayde Hashash thought proper to c o n h e me to his house Your Majestys known attachment to strict Justice I am fully persuaded wdl induce you to order that no such insult be offered to me
again.
I pray the Almighty to have Your Majesty in his good keeping and
beg to assure you I am
TANGIER
%Q Septemc 1803
His Imperial Majesty MULEYSOLIMAN
Ben Mohamet
Ben Abdallah - Ben Ismabl &"? &a%a"
*In the Arabic copy was added "but not to enter Ports blockaded".
[LC. EPP, Vol. 6, 1803.1
Extract from journal of Midshipman F. Cornelius deKrafft, U. 6. Navy, in U. 8.
Brig Siren of 18 guns, Lieutenant Charles Stewart, U. S. Navy, commanding,
Friday, 2 September 1803

Standing down the Delaware
Clear & pleasant weather with light breezes from the IT* a t 7 A. M.
set up riggmg below & aloft fore & aft. At 8 A. M. sent up top Gall$
yards At 9 unmoor'd & brought up on the stream anchor, at 11 sent
on shore 5 water casks being more than could be stow'd. - at 2 P. M.
hove short on the stream cable. At 112 past 3 P. M. hove up & got
under way with the wind from the southQ& WQ At 112 past 7 P. M
came too m 4% fathoms water, about 2 miles to the SQof Reedy Island,
gave the ship about 20 fathoms Cable, ends with light breezes from
the SQ[NDA.]
Daniel Bedinger, Navy Agent, Norfolk, Va., from Secretary of the Navy

NAVYD E P ~Septl 3. 1803 Agreeably to your requisition of the 30tQ ultimo, I have this day
directed you rt, remittance of four thousand dollars for the purpose of
paying half the freight of the ship Old Tom, to be charged to the
appropriation of "Barbary Negociations". [NDA. Rarhary Powers LB. 1803-1808.1
To Captain William Bainbridge, U. S. Navy, from James Simpson, U. S. Consul,
Tangier, Bdorocco

TANGIER
3=*Septemll803
DEARSIR, Your favour of the 2gtQpast I received on thursday at
noon, with news which you will have seen by my letters to Mr Gavino
I [space] but certainly did not expect a t that moment, for our Governour on a very recent occasion assured the Consuls thro. Sir Peter
Wyk that his Imperial Ma'esty did not authorize his cruisers then
a t Sea, to capture vessels be onging to any Nation West of the Straits
besides Russia & Prussia, repeatedly mentioning America as one of
the nations with whom they were a t Peace; this contradiction does
not surprise me, as I know where I am.
At receipt of your letter I immediately waited on Alca de Hashash
and acquainted him of the capture and re capture [ irboka and
Celia]you had made, when he denied in the most positive tarms Raiz

1

L

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1803 TO 180.4
Lubarez being authorized by him or any other person to capture
American Vessels. I could only insist on the a d v m you had given
me, and he was as positive on the contrary strain. At a second
interview in the early part of the evening he was Civil, the sub'ect
was again canvassed mthout any interesting issue;
he had c h e d
me a third time to his house at eleven at mght, when I was told by
his people the Governour had retired (& I dxd not see him) but that
i t was hi^ orders I should be detained untiU suoh time as the Frigates
were released; they instantly shut the doors and there I was until
yesterday morning a t ten. My release was obtained by ta demand
made to that effect by all my Brother Consuls, but he insisted on
their becoming answerable that I should not leave the country without
previously obtaining his Majestys permission. God knows I had
no intention of going without i t - the necessary representations and
complaint on this vlolence has been laid before his Majesty by the
Cons& collectively, as well as by myself. I concfude you will have
had the paper delivered to you by Raiz Lubarez, as the authority he
had for capturing American Vessels translated, but the question is
whether you have been able to obtain a faithfull translation of it
be redly what he said it is a most material paper, I beg to have a
copy and translation of it by the earliest dire& conveyance. - I
have sent an express t o the Emperour a t [space] with my account of
what has happened, whose return I may e ect by this day week
At this time i t is impossible for me to say"gy whose authority Raiz
Lubarez acted in capturing the Celia, - by what him and his officers
told you it appears likely to have come from Hashash in whom the
Emperor has of late placed unbonded confidence, insomuch that we
have seen acts of his of a most extraordinary nature sanctioned by his
master. From whatever source the order came, I have not the smallest
doubt but the object in view thereby, was to influence the restitution
of that most unfortunate Vessel the hles[h&]
In the ni h t of
thursday a Moor had escaped from that ship at Malta arrive here,
& the Governour brought him before me on Friday, when he made a
declaration on subject of the ill treatment he said the crew met from
Captain Rodgers, in such terms as I could not possibly believe; but
a t that moment i t suited the Governour's purpose extremely, as well
as a t the conferrence with the Consuls in the fore noon, and I am
persuaded he hrts painted the whole as facts, and in very lively colours
to the Emperor. For this reason I must particularly request that
some others of that crew be examined if ossible before Hamet B i a
or some other principal Moore a t Gibrafter, on subject of the treatment they met with, that I may be prepared to efface from the Emeror's mind the im ression thts fellows story ma have made with
- In this view beg to have in writing what t om men may say,
subs'tantiated in the best manner circumstances will admit of.
You know there is an other Frrgata of this country a t sea it is to
be supposed her commander has similar Ordem as Lubarez, Lut I do
not know how it is possible to ascertain the fact, unless she actually
makes some captures, however I doubt not but she will be looked
after - it is not a t all likely she is gone to the Eastward. At this
time it appears impossible to say what may be the best termination
to be aimed a t in this most unfortunate business - some light may
be thrown on it by the Emperors answer, for I have told hun if he
desires a restoration of Peace I will be very ready to recieve his propo-

-

-

%

&m

g

i:

11

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

sitions, and transmit them either to the Commanding Officer of our
ships of War in these seas, or to the President, as circumstances may
appear to render necessary; - adding that a primary measure must
be his withdrawing the authority given his Cruisers to capture h e r ican Vessels, which alone could give them security with our shi s of
War. I was led to hold forth this because we have security in and
for their good behavour. War with this Country is of all others most
to be avoided, but Peace must not be bou ht on terms incompatible
with the honor & dignity of the Nation. f Commodore Morris has
reached Gibralter I persuade myself he will in the present critical
state of affairs remain untill Commodore Preble arrives, or at least
untill can transmit by him to Government the Emperours answer to
my dispatch of yesterday. - I must not omit expressing the very
great satisfaction I felt at your handsome treatment of Raiz Lubarez
and his ships Compan it does yourself honor and even with these
people must impress gvourable opinions of us not possible to be
forgotten by all of them.

fl

f

JAMEB
SIMPBON

[LC. EPP, Vol. 6, 1803.1
Extract and translntion from a journal kept in French by an unknown person on
board the U. S. Frigate John Admns, Captain John Bodgers, U. S. Navy, commanding, Saturday, 3 September 1803

Departure from Barcelona on Saturday, 3 September 1803. At
sunset signded to the convo to unmoor. . . Weighed anchor and set
sail. The entire convoy fo'?l owed. . . At sunrise. . the convoy to
leeward of us. . At 11 A M went to rally the convoy. . .

.

.

[LC. EPP, Journal 1803.1
Extract from journal of Midshipman F. Cornelius deKrafft, U. S. Navy, in U. S.
Brig Siren of 18 guns, Lieutenant Charles Stewart, U. 8. Navy, commanding,
Saturday, 3 September 1803

At X past 1 A. M. weighed the Larboard bower & got under way
with the wind W.N.W. At 6 A. M. unbent the stream cable $ got
the anchor in board, Likewise stow'd the sheet & Larboard bower At 8 A. M. the Pilot laft us the light house on Cape Henlopen bore
S.W. by S. distance 2 Leagues. - People employ'd on necessary duty
such, as stowing the sparrs anchors, &c. &c. At 12 A. M. Cape Henlopen bore W. by N % N distance 4 Leagues
from which we shall take our Departure Lat: of Ca e Henlopen- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 38'46' N.
Long: of C
'! ape Henlopen-- - - --,- -- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -75' 5' W.
((NB.) These remarks lnclude but 12 hours. - - - - - - 1
Lat: of Gibraltsr- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 3
5' N.
Long: of Gibraltar,------..---- -------5'16' W.
,-

[NDA.]
[4 September 18031
U. 6. Squadron in the Mediterranean
(R6sum6, resumably prepared in Navy Department about 1806 or 1807, conaernlng the
S. Squadron in the Mediterranean]

6.

THESQUADRON
OF COMMODORE
EDWQ
PREBLE:
Constitutwn Flagship]

Phila&elphia

12

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1803 TO 180L

Siren Brig - Built at Phil+ Aug? 1803. carrying 16 - 241b
Carronades.
Argus Brig - Built at Boston Augr 1803. carrying 16 - 24Lb
Carronades.
Vixen Schooner - Built a t Balt? July 1803. carrying 14: 6
Pounders.
Nautilus Schooner. Bought of Tenant: Balt? May 1803. 12.
6 Pounders.
Enterprize - Schooner. Part of Morris's Squadron - ordered
to remain.
Commodore Preble in the Constitution arrived at Gibraltar 12 Sep'
1803, and was soon after joined there by Rodgers in the J. Adums,
Morris, the New York, & Campbell The Adams. Morris then took
the Aakms and returned to the United States. Rodgers assumed
Command of the h7ew York and of Morris's Squadron, and Campbell
took the J. Adams.
At this time The Emperor of Morocco was committing hostilities
against the United States.
Rodgers and Preble having taken their measures, Sailed from
Gibraltar for Tangier Octr 6: and laying their Ships before the Town,
on the 12@October 1803, compelled The Emperor to sign the Treaty
of 1786. The Philadelphia was at this time off Tripoli. - Commodore Preble then proceeded aloft R-here he found that the Philad"
on 31 Oct? 1803 had been taken by the Tripolitans and mooredin the
Harbour. The Commodore formed a plan for burning her which was
executed by Lt St. Decatur Jr in the Ketch Intrepid of 4 Guns & 70
Men on the Night of the 16 Febv 1804. April 19 The Brig Argus
joined Company. The Brigs & Schooners continued the Blockade
while the Commodore repaired to Naples where he obtained from the
King a Loan of 6 Gun Boats carrying each a 24 Pounder, & 2 BombVessels carrying each a 13 Inch Sea-Mortar. July 25th He arrived
off Tripoli, his whole Force consisting of the Constitution, Siren,
Argus, V h n , Nautilus, Enterprize, (Scourge,) 2 Bomb-Vessels & 6
Gun Boats, cont! 1060 hien. Tripoli was protected by Batteries
mounting 115 pieces of Cannon - the Harbour by 19 Gun Boats,
2 Gdlies, 1 Brig of 10, & 2 Schooners of 8 guns each, moored within
a long range of Rocks & Shoals which form the Harbour - The
Enemy's Flotilla having advanced without the Rocks.
A U Gs*
~ AT 2 P M, the Signal was made for Battle. The MortarBoats commdd by Lt. Cmm' Dent & Lt Robinson attacked the Town:
The 1 Division of GBoats was commanded by M. Cmmt Somers
who in NQ 1, attacked & drove within the Rocks 5 of the Enemy's
W. division - Lt JVJames] Decatur in N? 2 carried one of the
Enemy's Boats but was shot dead when taking possession of her.
Lt Blake in N? 3 did not go into close fight. The 24 Division was
commdq by Cap5 Decatur who in N94 attacked the Enemy'sE. Division,
boarded & carried one which he took in tow & then boarded & carried
a Second. Lr Bainbridge NQ 5, had early his Latteen Yard shot
away W@ prevented him from closing. Lt Trippe in N? 6 with Mid$
Jn? Henley and 9 Men boarded & carried 1 of the Enemy's Boats:
Lt Trippe r e d 11 Wounds. These Attacks were seconded by the
Brigs, Schooners & by the Constitution which fired within 3 Cables'
length of the Flotilla & Batteries which she always silenced as she
ce bring her Guns to bear. The Action ceased st % past 4, the Enemy

LIEUTENANT EDWARDPREBLE, U. S. NAVY.

--

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

-

13

-

having lost 3 Boats taken, 3 sunk; much damage done to the Town
& Batteries & many men killed. - The Prize-Boats under Lts Cddwell, Crane, & Thorn, being ready.
A U G7fh
~ j6 PAST 2 P. M,the Signal was made for Battle. The Bomb
Vessels attacked the Town from a small Bay to the Westward, while
the Gun Boats were to silence a 7 Gun-Bath which guarded the
s
of the
Approach to that position. NQ3 Corn@by ~ F x r o o k Master
a Calm, the C07t8titution
Argus: N? 6 by Lt Wadsworth.
c'J not get into Action. At % past It
5 the ction ceased. 48 Shells &
abt 500 24!b shot were thrown into the Town & Batteries, & the 7
Gun-Battery nearly destroyed G Boat N? 9 was blown up by an
hot shot from the Enemy, & Lt Caldwell who commdq with Mid@
Dorse & 10 Men, were Killed - 2 other men were killed & 4
woun ed. At 8 in the Evening, the John Adams, Cap$ Chauncey
joined Company. Anat 24tb AT 2 A. M. Commenced Bombarding the Town & continued
it till daylight
A n d 2sth AT 3 A. M. The GBoats covered by the Brigs & Schooners,
attacked the Town, Shipping, Castle, & Batteries. The MortarBoats were not in a situation for action. At % past 5 a m the Boats
were towed off, & the Constitution which had been re-inforced by
Cap$ Chauncey in person, & a number of his Officers & Men, ran in
within Musket-Shot of the Batteries, 2 of which with the Castle,
she silenced for some time. At % past 6 the Action ceased. Upwards
of 700 round shot beside Grape & Cannister, were thrown into the
Town & Batteries wich suffered greatly from this day's Action. NQ
2 was commanded b Lc Gordon & N? 5 by Lc Lawrence. Our
Vessels suffered in Sa' s & rigging.
SEPT~
3Td AT % PAST 3 P. M. The B. Vessels bombarded the Town.
The GBoats drove the Enemy's Gallies & Boats under Fort English
which was then attacked by the Brigs, Schooners, & 1 division of
the GBoats, while the other still continued the fight with the Gallies
& Boats. The Bomb-Vessels being in great danger from the Batteries,
the Constitution ran between, brought to within grape shot, in a
position where 70 guns cg bear upon her & fired 11 Broadsides into the
Batteries. At % past 4 the Action Ceased. One of the Enem 's
Batteries was silenced & the Town & Batteries much damaged. &e
Constitution & p o t h e r Vessels suffered much in their Sails & Rigging
only. B. Vessel NQ1 Commanded b Lt Robinson was disabled.
A plan being laid to destroy the own & Shi ping by a Fire-Ship
filled with Powder & Shells, Sepr 4, M. Commt mers, & L+ Wadsworth & Israel with 10 Men attempted to put it in Execution, but
being boarded before they had gained their point of destination, &
preferring death to Slavery, they put fire to the Magazine & blew
themselves & Enemies up together.
Commodore S. Barron in the President arrived off Tripoli 10 Septr
1804 & the Command of the Squadron was delivered up to him with
the usual Ceremonies. -

1

S

.p

L

[RReumB, presumably prepared in .Navy Departplent about 1806 or 1807,
concerning the U. 5. Fri ate Constzlrctzon, Flagship of Commodore Edward
Preble, 14 May 1803 to 9 kovember 18041

The Constitution Frigate
Put in Commission 14: May 1803:
Recruited.
7: June -

14

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1803 TO 1804

Sailed from Boston 14: Augl Arrived a t Gibraltar 12: Sepr The Emperor of Morocco hving commenced hostilities against the
Unitad Skates, The Con&itubwra in company with the New Pork &
J. Adams, came to an Anchor before Tangier, & on the 12tQOctq
compelled the Emperor to sign the Peace of 1786. The Constidution
then sailed for Cadiz from whence she returned to Gibraltar Movr 6tb
& from thence sailed for Algiers to land ColQLear, ConsuI General.
Wed thence 229
Arrived a t MaIta 27: Novr 1803. Appeared a t different [times] off
Tripoli & st Tunis rendezvousing a t Syracuse.
Anchored in Naples Bay 15: May 1804, I% rocured from the King 6 Gun & 2 Mortar Boats for an attack on ripoli.
Sailed for Messina with an order for their delivery. Appeared
of[f] Tripoli with the squadron July 1804. Took part in the actions
& Se tt 3. - Comm'q Barron having joined, Comrnr*
of Aug* 3@
Preble gave up the ommnnd 10 Sepr Cap! Rodgers in consequence
of Cornr*Preble's Return to the United States took Command of the
Comfitutwn Novr 9. 1804.

4

E

wup6, presumabl prepared in Navy Department about 1806 or 1807,
concernmg the U. 6.
. ate Plailadelphio, Captain William Bainbridge, U . 6.
Navy, commanding, 21 3 a y 11803 t o 31 October 18031

5

The Frigate Philadelphia:
Put in Commission- - - - 2 1: May 1803.
Recruihd
19: June Sailed from Philadelphia 28: July Brrived at Gibraltar- - - - - 24: Augt - and repaired to her Station
on the Coast of Tripoli early in October 1803. OCTOBER 814 1803 chasing a Tripolitan Vessel 4 or 5 Miles to the
Eastward of Tripoli, Run on Rocks 12 feet water forward and 17
abaft. After endeavouring to get her off by every means possible
and s resistance of 4 hour's duration, The Philadelphia struck her
Flag and was taken possession of by the Gun Boats. See letter of
Cap9 Bainbridge on file, Tripoli, Novr 1. 1803.
NOVEMBER 2: 1808, a strong Gale of Windraising the waters on the
Coast, The Tripolitans succeeded in getting her off the Rocks, and
moored her in the Harbour of Tripoli. See Letter of Cap* Bainbridge on file, Tripoli, Novr 6, 1803.
rmmam 16: ISM, Lieu5 Stephen Decatur Junior in the Ketch Intrepid
4 Guns and 70 Men, at Night, attacked, took possession of, and set
fire to, the Philadelphia, which in a short time, was totally consumed.
The Tripolitans lost in the Attack 20 Men: Decatur had 1 Man only,
slightly wounded. - The Philaoklphia was Moored within half gunshot of the Bashaw's Castle, and the principal battery: Two of
their Cruisers lay within two Cable's Length on the Starboard uarter, and their Gun Boats w i t h i half gunshot on the Starboard ow.

.------------

'B

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

15

qificers presed at the Attack.

Stephen Decatur jr
Commander.
James Lawrence
Joseph Bainbridge
Lieutenants.
Jonathan Thorn
Surgeon.
Louis Heennan
Ralph Izard
* VOLUNTEERS.
John %we
Thomss Macdonough
Midshipmen
Tho*0. Anderson
Charles Morris
John Davis
Alexander Laws.
,
See Decstur's Letters to Commodore Preble. Dispatches N? 8.

I

I

Commission and Warrant O$ker8:Station

Names of

OfBans.

I

Commdr.

C ~ t i e and
s Remnrb

Returned home in the New York

3

3

From the N York

8r MW.

Burgeon.

Mtte
Pwer.
Boatsn.
Qonner.
csrptr.
Jceeph DongWu.

81 M*.

d

8
9
a

d
M. omoer.

..........................

JmeaQibbon--------.-.-----.------------Daniel Todd Patterson .....................
Benjnmln F. Read. ........................

I

T h o u Mscdonougb...................... To the Enterprize.
Jsmen
Blddle
.~
--.---..-----.------------------ -~-

I

Bsrnsrd Henry.............................
Wallace Womeley .........................
William Cntbnsh...........................
Bhon Smith...............................
Robert Gamble.-..------.-.---------------Rldmd B. Jonffl...........................
J ~ u w sRenahaw.. -.
- .-.
--.
- -- ---- -- -- -- - - -- From the John Adam
William 8. Osborne 1.1 L:...................

1

I

Peace with Tripoli being effected 35* June 1805 - The Officers and
Crew of the Philadelphia were liberated under its Provisions. [R&eu&, p m m a b l y repared in Navy Department about 1806 or 1807, concerning the U. S. &ig Siren, Msster Commandant Charlea Stewart, U. 8.
Navy, oommanding; 6 Auguat 1803 to 30 September 18041

----

6: August 1803.
"
66
27
"
1: Octr

---,------

-- - - - - - - - - - - - - - -- - - - - - - - - - -

Sailed about 15'Q Octq from Gibraltar to Leghorn for Money &
Presents to the Dey of Algiers.
Arrived at Syracuse from Algiers early in Janua 1804. - then
ordered on a Cruise ofl Cape Bonn & Tunis, then off%poli
oli Tripoli March 1804 - At Syracuse early in April i801

16

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1803 TO 1804

Off Tripoli April. Present at the Attacks on Tripoli in Augt &
Sept' Continued off T r i
11" then rep@to Syracuse. Ordered
off Tangier by Comre Barron last of Septr. * * *
[R.&mmB,presumably prepared in Navy Department about 1808 or 1807, con-

cerning the U. S. Brig Argus, Lieutenant Stephen Decatur, Jr., and Msster Commandant Irwrac Hull, U. 5. Navy, commending; 21 August 1803 to 23 June 18051

The Brig Argm:
Launched at Boston- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - _ _ _ 21: Augt 1803.
"
Sailed from Boston - - _
- -;
- - - - - - - _ - - - - - - - - 8: Sepr
(I
Put lnto Newport m dlstress- - _ -- - __ _ - _ - - - 18: "
II
Saded from Ne ort - - - - - - - - - - _ - - - - - - - - - - 28: "
Arrivedat Gib tar - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 1: Nov' "
Sailed Beginning of Decr from Gibraltar to Marseilles and Leghorn
with convoy. Returned to Gibraltar 4 January 1804, & employed in watching the
movements of the Emperor of Morocco and in Cruising along the
Coast of Spain,
Convoyed up the Provision Ship Woodrop Sims & at Syracuse
early in April - lgth Repaired off Tripoli in Compan with the Vizen.
Tunis Bay 20tVune. Latter part of June off ~ r i ~ o-g
Present at the Attacks on Tripoli Augt. & Septr Convoyed Gunboats to Messina abt 15 Septr - OfF Tripoli 1 Octq Retd to Syracuse.
CM Tripoli 1 Novr Abt 16 Nov? sailed for Alexandria in E pt with
M Eaton. Arrived 26: - Left Alex"9 Feb? 1805 61 ret4 to%alta or
Syracuse. Sailed again with the provision Yessel the Sloop Hornet
to Bomba with the Exgashaw's Secretary on board, 26 March 1805Off Derne Head 3 Bpi and off the coast in company with the Hornet
Cutter Lt Evans. & Nautilus Lt Dent to 27'b - April 2at@with the
above named Vessels came to 5 mile from the Batteries of Derne, &
attacked them by Sea while Gen! Eaton with Lt OBannon, & the
ExBashaws Army and a few American Marines assaulted it by Land.
The Action began at 2 P. M. and ended at 5, at which time OBannon
and his party took possession of the Batteries. June 12. joined by the
F. Consfellation. Left Derne 13Q - arrived in Syracuse Harbour 23a
June.

3

[RkeurnB, preeumabl prepared in Nsvy Department about 1806 or 1807,
concerning the U. S. &homer Vizen, Master Commandant John Smith, U. 8.
Nsvy commanding; 25 June 1803 to 22 May 18051

The Schooner V k n :
La-unched at Baltimore- - - - - - - - - - - - - - _ - - - - 25tVune 1803.
Saded from Baltimore---- - - - - - - __- - - - - - - - - - 3: Bug1
II
I
Capes. - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 11. "
Arrived a t Gibraltar._-- _ - -_ _ - - - - - - - - - - - - 14: SepF
Repaired off Tripoli early in Octr in Company with the P h U p h i a
and in the latter part of Octr was dispatched by Cap1 Bainbridge on a
Cruise off Cape Bonn. Dispatched Be@ Dec? to Gibraltar with Bainbridge's dispatches
'ving account of Loss of his Ship. Returned to Syracuse middle of
Beer B e e Feb? 1804 - Ordc to Tunis Bay & to Algiers. At Malta from
April. Ordc off Tripoli with the Argm lgt@in the attacks on Tripoli in August & Septr. Returned to
port abt 16tQ- Off Tripoli 1 Octr. Returned to Syracuse. Off
(

W B S WITH

BA&BARP POWERS

17

Tripoli 27 Novr Betwixt the 1sland.a & Barbary Shore 9 March 1805.
Tunis Bay
Arrived a t Malta 21 April. Syracuse 234 Sailed May llt@
May 22g - One of Corn. Rodgers's Squadron from this date.
[RBsuxnf5, presumably prepared in Navy Department about 1806 or 1807,
oonoerning the U. 8. Schooner Nautilw, Lieutenant Richard Somers, U, 8.
Navy, commanding; 5 May 1803 to 31 May 18051

The Schooner Nautilw:
Purchased of M' Tenant of Baltimore.
Put in Commission------------------ 5: May. 1803.
Sailed from Baltimore- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 24: June "
It
6L
"
Capes- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 30: "
Arrived at Gibraltar - - - - - - - - - - _ _ - - -27:
- July "
Be@ Novr sailed with the Corasti.tuth to Algiers and then off
Tripoli. Beg Feb? 1804 in Tunis Bay - then to Syracuse. Middle of March off Tripoli. Latter art of April at Messina
repairing: until July Fitn, then Repaired off ripoli in company with the
Constitu&m. Present at the Attacks on Tripoli in August and Septr
Syracuse 11 Sepr Off Tripoli 28: OfE Tripoli 24 OctQ with ConsteUaCioP. in Vicinity of Tunis Bay 9 March (1805) in Company with
the ConsteUatwra. Returned 26 March. M. Cmdr Dent took command Sepr 16. 1804. - Malta March 27. 1805. Syracuse Ap! 1,
Sailed Ap l 8. Malta 10. Sailed 18. Bomba Ap! 25. Off Derne 27.
One of the Vessels that attacked Derne on 28. Off Derne & the
Coast until May 13tQthen engaged in covering Hamet's Army while
in Action OlT Malta 25. Tripoli 3 1. -

d-'

[R!sumB, resumably prepared in Navy Department about 1806 or 1807, conS. Brig Scourpe, April 1804 to 11 February 18051
cermng the

b.

The Brig Scourge:
This Vessel was present at the several Attacks of the 3@7" 2gt@of
August, & 34 of Septr 1804, made by Commodore Preble on the Town,
Shipping and Batteries of Tripoli, being Commanded by Lieutc
Wadsworth and Izard. The above statement is incorrect. - The Scourge was not present
in the attacks but assisted the Boats of the Squadron & was Commanded by Mr Rowe. - The other officers were employed in other
vessels of the Squadron Left the Coast of Tripoli under command of Lt Izard 4 Sepr 1804,
Arrived at Syracuse 10tQ- Left Syracuse 17 Novr Arrived a t
Messina lgt@ Left Messina 22q - Arrived at Palermo 27@- Left
Palermo 2gt@-Arrived a t Norfolk V+ 11 Febr 1805, was dismantled
& laced under charge of the Boatswain and 3 or 4 Seamen. $he Scourge a Tripolitan Vessel [the Tramfir] of 16: 6 Pounders,
Captured by M. Cmd! Charles Stewart of the Siren under the Guns
of the Castle of Tripoli: Valued by three Gentlemen a t 5,000$: taken
into the Service of the United States and Officered by Commodore
Preble from the Officers of his Squadron April 1804.

18

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1803 TO 180.6
Commiseion and Warrant O&xrs.
BtatIon

1

Names.

] Ffom

V-1-

-

1

Cm1Lles urd Bemarks

Henry Wadsworkh --....
.... ..--dr ..--..-----..---.
Killed Sew 4,1804 with Bamers
Aup, 8 to Atguass Lieutenant.
Cbarlw Morris--.-----..-.-.
..--d9--..-...-...----aalph Bard---.-.-----...--.--__
d?..--.--------.--Promoted to Commend to
bring her (Sea~rfe]
home
85

/

Master-.-------

mnPm

I

I

[NDA. Ships' Service, 1801-1809.1
To lecretary of the Bavy from Captain Edward Preble, U. 8. Navy

UNITEDSTATES
Ship Colast~Istion4t4 Sep* 1803
Cape St Vincent beamhg N. 6 . E 6 Leagues d a a d SIR,I have the honor to inform you that the Constituticm is thus far
on her passage, we are now in sigbt of the l a d , and I hope by the
day after tomorrow to Anchor in Gibdter Bay- I detain the Brig
Jack of Cape Ann, Captain Hwkell a few moments to give you this
information - Cap?H. informs me, that the Philadelphia left Gibralter 10 da s since, in pursuit of two, three masted %politan's, which
had taua6d at Algiers - but were cruising off Allicant, when Cap$
B went in pursuit, I hope he will be fortunate enough to fall in with
them. The length of our p w a e has been owing to light and unfavorable winds the whole of the hips Company are in health and the
Officers have given me satisfaction
[LC.EPP, LB,1803.1

8

Extract snd translation from a journal kept in French by an unknown permon on
board the U. S. Frigate JoAn A d a , Captain John Bodgere, U. 8. Bavy, commanding, from Sunday, 4 to Monday, 6 September 1803

.

Afternoon . . five convoyed vessels. At 4 PM signalled to rally.
Fired a shot. At sunset observed Cape Salou to the N W, Point
[word illegible] to the west . . . under way . . . At sunrise . . . the
convoy astern of us. At 8 A M fired a shot st a vessel of the convoy

which was proceeding ahead . . . standing on to the west
Latitude observed 40' 17' N.
[LC. EPP,Journal 1803.1
To Cap&

.. .

Billups, Master of the American Ship Tmdfer. horn Secretary of the

Raw

NAV.DEP*Septemr 6,1803
As soon as you are prepared for sea you will we' h anchor and
proceed to Gibraltar and there deposit apeable to b% of lading the
public property committed to your care with John Gavino Esqr the
American Consul to whom you will also deliver the accompanying
letter - Should you meet on your passage any of the Pubhc Ships

19

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

in want of Provisions you will supply them therewith taking the
captains duplicate receipt therefor one of which ou will transmit to
thu Department the other you will resent to d ~ a v i n who
o thereupon wdl duly consider such supp y in the Bid of ladin and no
interruption with respect to the settlement of freight w& be experienced

f'

[NDA. GLB, Vol. 6, 1802-1803.1
To Captain Thomas Tingey, Superintendent, Navy Yard, Warhington, I). C., from
Secretary of the Bavy

NAV.D E PSeptem
~
6.1803
One hundred Gun Carriages are to be sent as soon as possible to
the Emperor of Morocco - You will therefore caused to be repaired
in the completest manner and with the utmost dispatch 100 of the
Gun Carri es of the navy with suitable coins & handspikes - The
wooden axe trees must be taken out and Iron axeltrees substituted in
their place. These must be not of wrought but of Cast Iron, and
you will contract with Mr Foxall for the casting of them. If the
present wheels should not suit the Iron axel trees new wheels must be
made, and in such case the wheels must be made somewhat larger. But upon the proper size of such enlarged wheels ou will cornmunicate with the Secretary at War who will chearf ui?ly sfford you any
counsel you may need - In selecting the 100 Carriages to be repaired for this object let there be a due proportion of the largest we
have in the navy yard from 12 pounders. upwards - the
exertions must be made to accomplish thw business soon
engagements must yield to this - as soon as you shall form an opinion
of the time when this business can to a certmty be executed you will
inform me. I t is important that I be possessed of information upon
this subject so precise, that absolute reliance may be placed on it.
[NDA. GLB,Vol. 6, 18021803.)

?'

rtt!

To Secretary of State from James Simpson, U. 6. Consul, Tangier, Xorocco

TANGIER
6t@September 1805
NQ62. - Triplicate. SIR I had the honour of addressin to you NQ61 on the 15'0 last
Month in triplicate by the way of Lis on & Gibraltar. It was extremely distressing to me to find by advice from Captain
Bainbridge of the United States Frigate P h W l hia dated off Malaga
2 g t W t Qthat the suspicions I had entertained o hostile intentions on
the part of this Country against our Flag, appear to have been but
too well founded, altho' they were on such shght grounds as justifled
no more than my recommending measures of precaution. At receipt of Captain Bainbridges Letter thursd~ylast I went to
Alcayde Hashash who denied in the most positive terns either having
given Raiz Lubarez authority, or that he knew of such comeing from
any other quarter for his capturing American Vessels: this assurance
he extended to all His Majestys Cruizers, but I confess I cannot have
full reliance on all that Man says, as by subterfuge it is not uncommon
with him to evade declaring facts. - I was with him a second $ 9 0
same Evening on the busyness, without any Interesting or decmve
were unceasing at
issue, his complaints on detention of the Mes&
both interviews. -

"b

f

20

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1808 TO 1804

At eleven at night he again sent and desired to see me at his House,
as it is no uncommon thing to do busyness with Ministers and sometimes with Governours even at that hour in this Country I readily
went, when to my great astonishment the doors were immediately
shut, and I was informed bg a relation of the Governours that it was
his Orders I should be detmed - he was gone to Bed and I did not
see him so there was no remedy but submit to that gross insult, which
none but a person of his rude manners wouId have been guilty of. The only answer I received to the messages I sent was that I must
remain until both the Frigates should be set at liberty.
I will not
detain you at present farther on this subject, than to say I remained
in the same situation untill Friday at ten O'clock, when my Brother
Consuls came in a Body to demand my enlargement, on the principle
of the person of a Consul in this Country as representative of his
Nation being exempt from all Arrest.
The Governour at last consented to release me, on condition that
they became Security I did not quit the Country without the
Emperours permission. A complaint has been made to His Majesty
by the Consuls collectively, on the occasion besides what I have
mentioned to him on the subject. With this you will find copy of a Letter I dispatched on Saturday
for the Emperour at Fez,untdl we receive his answer I do not see that
any thing can be determined upon with respect to the Mirboha. I have in the mean time writt.en Captain Bainbridge fully on the
busyness, and pointed out to him what steps in my oppinion are best
to be taken to ascertain unequivocally the fact whether the Commander was authorised or not to Capture American Vessels, which is
the grand point essential to be known. From the sense I have alwa s in view of the great utility of an
uninterupted Peace with this ountry, I was induced to say to the
Emperour I was ready to receive such propositions as he might be
pleased to make for an accommodation, holdm forth as an encouragement security to his Cruizers on his with rawing the orders for
takeing American Vessels. To take upon me this measure (which I hope will meet approbation)
I had strong inducements, the first that Commerce might not meet
interuption or be burthen'd with heavy Insurance beyond the actual
Risque, the next to bring on a Negotiation with secunty in our hands
for their good behaviour in the course of which we may be able to
obtain a farther Ratification of the existing Treaty, and lastly because
if an open Rupture takes place it will be a most tedious and e
busyness to make a new Treaty and very doubtfull if will be
on such good terms as the present. The h t of next Moon is the time now fixed upon for the Emperour
setting out on his tour to Tetuan and Tangier - I should not be
surprised if this &air brings him sooner. [NA. SDA. CL,Tangier, Vol. 2, 1803-1810.1

-

6

d

ztzi

To John Gavino, 0. 8. Consul, Gibraltar, from William Court & Co., Mogador

MOQADORE
6tQSepl1803
Sm,Bs several American Vessels may be expected here short1 it
would probably prevent their entedog this port if a Sloop of %bar

could run down and cruise off this Port for 20 or 30 days, standing

21

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

-

off and on, and keeping the Land in sight during the day
We
don't know how affairs stand, or if they are likely to be arr
We have no news from Mr Simpson - The American Brig~%!hah
Captain Williams of Salem is detained. The CapP & Crew are in
liberty on shore; the whole of his cargo deposited in the Khg's
under our Locks wareh"ut
[see letter to Captain Preble from John Gavino, 20 September 1803.1

KC. EPP, LB, 1803.1

Extract from Memorandum Book of Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Wavy, on
board U. 8. Frigate Constifufion,6 September 1803

Saw Cape St. Vincent.
[LC, original.]
Extract and translation from a journal kept in French by an unknown person on
board the U.8. Frigate Jdur A d a , Captain John Bodgers, U. 8. Wavy, cornmanding, from Monday, 5 to Tuesday, 6 September 1803

..

Afternoon .
Headmg WSW . . . The small boat went alongside the Mesaowla [Meshouda]. The convoy astern of us. At sunset hoisted in the small boat. Sighted Cohbre to the west distance
about 10 miles [?] . . . . all the convoy astern of us. Heading for
Cape San Martin . . At sunrise sighted several vessels to the
south of us. Sighted the island of Iviza to the SSE . . . At 8 A M
sighted a frigate to the south heading west. At 10 A M bore down
on Cape San Martin about 15 miles distant. Sighted a very white
square rigged vessel [?I . . Cape San Martin to the NNW. At
noon . . . the convoy astern. Heading SW. Cape San Martin to
the NE. . Cape Benidorm west distance 3 or 4 leagues.
Latitude observed 38'38' N.

.

.

.

[LC. EPP, Journal 1803.1
To Secretary of the Havy from Lieutenant Stephen Decatur, Jr., U. 8. Havy,
commanding U. S. Brig Argus

NANTASKET
ROADSSepP 6:Q1803
SIR I have the honor to inform you I am a t last in a reparation
for sea, at the time I informed you I would sail in ten ays, I had
not discovered that the Commodore had contracted with the riggers
& other workmen that they should have fourteen days after launching
to corn leat their work in, I have found it impossible to urge them
to finis their work before the time they contracted for, I &opt
down yesterday with an intention to proceede to sea but the wind
failing was com elled to come to an anchor, & am now waiting for a
wind - ~ ~ r e e a tto
l eyour directions I have the honor to inclose you
William Moshier's warrant, also a letter to Dr Bullas incloseing an
invoice of Medicines received, which he requested me to inclose to
you; we are now compleating our muster roll which shall be forwarded
as soon as compleated, -

$

[NDA. Officers LB, 1802-1805.1
To John bvino, U. S. Coned, Gibraltar, from Sir Thomocl w e , Lieutenant
Qovernor of oibraltar

HEADQUARTERS
Wralfar 6tQSeptembr 1803
(COPY)
SIR In Come uence of your wish that the Mishoba [Mwboka]Prim
to the philadelPiia should be admitted to Prattick, I have to acquaint

22

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1805 TO 1804

you that I am ready to order her to be admitted on your assuring me
that it is not intended to Sell, or in any manner to &pose of the ship
or an part of her stores in this Port I
hope that she may not long remain in this Port ss it will
tend to embroil us with the Empr of Morrocco; the Mischivious
consequences of which you are well acquainted with -

kqso

(SDA. CL, Gibraltar, Vol. 11, April 1796-Nov. 1804.1
To Sir Thomaa Trigge, Lientenant Governor of l+ibraltar, from John Gavino,
U. S. Consul, Gibraltrv

(COPY
GIBRALTAR
6tQSept 1803
SIR I have the honor of owning Rect of your ExV Letter of this
date on the subject of my request in a h t t i n g the Ship Marboha
(Detaind by the U. S. Ship PhzladWP Baimbridge Esqr Comrnr) to
Prattick which observe yr Exc? is ready to grant on m assurance
that neither the ship or stores will be sold in this Port, anJaltho I am
Convinced that neither will be the case yet I cannot take upon myself
to enter into stipulations of the kind, particularly as Cap? Bairnbridge will soon be in, and Comodor Prible eve moment Expected
from America, also Comodor Morris from M ta, who I am fully
persuaded will act in every respect so as to prevent any Embroils,
and a t same time keep up the good Harmoney which subslsts between
His Ma'? the Ehg of the United Kingdoms and the Goverment of
the U.
of America, in the inter[im] I still hope your Ex7 will be
pleased to Direct the Marboha being admitted to Prattick. -

9

9.

[SDA. CL, Gibraltar, Vol. 11, April 1796-Nov. 1804.1
Extract from Diary of Captain Edward Preble, U. 8. Navy, on board U.S. Frigate
Condilufion, Tuesday, 6 September 1803

Light breezes and haz Weather - Bent Cables - at $ past 2
P.M. saw the land about ape St Vincents, at sun set Cape St Vincents
bore NbW dist 6 or 7 Leagues - Several Vessels in sight the wind
too light to speak them - a t noon Cape 55 Maries bore EbS by
Cornpaas 6 Leagues dist and Cape Sg Vincents WNW 10 Leagues Several Vessels and fishing boats in Sight [LC. EPP, Wiry, 1803-1804.1

8

Extract and translation from a journal kept in French by an unknown person on
board the U. 8. Frigate John Adamc, Captain John Eodgere, U. S. Navy, commanding, from Tuesday, 6 to Wednesday, 7 September 1803

...
. .

The convoy astern of us. Sighted a fri ate to the south of
us. Made the distinguishing signal. Amweref. Unable to recognize . At 3 P M sighted the Citadel of Alicante to the west distance
about 15 miles. Lay to in order to wait for the convoy . . The
convoy went ahead, one convoyed vessel remaining astern. Fired
two shots. She came at once. At 5 P M cast anchor in the roadstead of Alicante . . . The boat then left for the shore to arrange
for entry and notify the convoyed vessels. The Citadel of Alicante
to the north distance one mile. The island of St. Paul [Santa Pola?]
to the SW distance about 15 miles. Found several vessels, mostly
Swedish
The point east of Alicante to the east.
[LC. EPP, Journal 1803.1

...

.

23

WARS WI!Z!l BARBARY POWERS
To Secretary of State from W i a m Willicl, U. 8.

RESPECTED
SIR

*

*

Co~ul,Bsucelono, Spain

BARCELONA
September 7'b 1803

*

*

*

*

*

Ca tain Ro[d]gers of the United States frigate J[ohn] A [ h m ]
sailel from this place four days ago for the Strieghts with Six Sail
of American Merchant Vessells and the next day a large frigate paas'd
in Sight of this Port Suppos'd to be the Commodore Morris and
Yesterday the Nazltilm Schooner pass'd here in Search of Captain
Rogers: Captain Rogers had with him the Tripoline Ship [MeshowZa]
that had been so long Blockaded in Gibralter.
[NA. SDA. CL, Barcelona, Vol.

1, 1797-1809.1

To Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Navy, from Tobiaa Lear, U. 8. Conrul Qeneral,
Algiers

On Board the U STATES
FRIGATE
Constitution
a t Sea, near the COASTOF SPAIN,between
Cape St Vincents & Cape St Mary's September 7*@1803 SIR,Agreeably to your request that I would go on board the
Moorish Ship, now laying near us, to examine the passport e d
signature of James Simpson Esqr, the United States Consul at Tan er,
n t h whose hand writing I am acquainted, I have the honor to A r m
you, that I accordingly repaired on board said Ship, where the Captain
shewed me the Passport of Mr Simpson, dated at Tan 'er, the twenty
third of July 1803, addressed to the Commanders of
united States
Armed Vessels; stating that the Shi Maimma, belonging to the
Emperor of Morocco, mounting 30 guns, and carrying 150 men,
Commanded by Hedge Tacher Aumed [?I, was bound on a c m e ,
and request6 all Commanders of United States Armed Vessels to
treat him as a friendly Vessel, he conducting himself accordingly. The Consular Seal was affixed to said Passport, the impression made
on Wax, ve clear & fair.
The said aptain Also shewed me the top of a Parchment Passport,
with a certificate thereon, signed J. Simpson, stating that it was the
true top of an American Passport. - h m the Knowledge I have
of Mr Simpson's signature, having often seen it in the OfEoe of the
Secretary of Stste, I really beleive these signatures to be enuine.
SimpThe number of Guns & men appeared to correspond with
eon's Passport.
The Captain informed me, through an Interpreter, that he had
been from Sallee 23 days - that he was bound to Lisbon, on business
for his King, and that the Emperor of Morocco was at present a t
peace with all nations. I demanded a si ht of his Commission from the Emperor of Mom?;
in consequence o which, he shewed me a paper written in Arabic,
with a Seal made with an impression from ink,which he said was h s
Commission, & the ro al seal; but as there was no one who could
translate the Arabic, ?was obliged to be satinfed with his own declaration on this point.
The Shi a peared to be quite new, was clean and in good order
about the
but appeared to be very deficient & slovenly in her
sails & rigging. She mounted 22 six pounders on her Gun deck &
eight four pounders on her quarter deck

8

8

f

%I$;

24

NAVXL OPB2iATIONS FROM 1803 TO 1804

The reason which the Captain gave for having been so long from
Sallee was, that he had met with contrary winds, which obliged him
to put back several times.
Upon the whole, his Passports appear so clear & correct that,
according to our Treaty with the Emperor of Morocco, I should not
wnceive it adviseable to Detain the Ship, or give her any undue
molestation.
[LC. EPP, Vol. 6, 1803.1

Extract from Yemorandum Book of Captain Bdward Preble, U. 6. Bavy, on board
U. 6.Aigate Canstifuflon, 7 September 1805

Boarded the Moorish frigate Maimona of 30 guns from Sallee
bound to Lisbon, Cape S. Maria in sight.
[LC, original.]
Extract from log book of U. 8. Frigate Codifufion, Captain Edward Preble, U. 8.
Bevy, commanding, Wednesday, 7 September 1803

Light airs and Variable. three strange sail in sight to the Eastwd
one of which a Frigate under french Colours/ at 3 past 1 P. m. Tackd
to the Northa and cleard ship for action/ The Sail i mentioned at
noon standing towards us hoisted Red colours/ at past 2 shortned
sail and Boarded her/ a frigate belonging to the Emperor of Morocco
Mounting 30 Guns and carryg 150 Men. CaptQ Hadge Tacker
arrived, 23 days from Sallee on a Cruise with the American Mediterranian pass Top, and Consular pasport dated at Tanger 2 P July 1803,
and Signed by James Simpson with the Consular Seal - Shee was
examined By the Boarding officer. after this By Colo Lear, who is
a passenger on Board of the Constitution/ as Counsil general to the Barbery powers/ at 8 in the Evening fier'd a Gun at a Brig in shore/
which we boarded Shee was a S ankh Brig from Malaga bound to le
the afternoon and at sundown/ the
Vowe [?I] the wind was li ht
Eastern part of Ca e S6#incent Bore NW b W 6 W 7 leagues Latitude obd, 36. 03 $9

+

d

[NA.

ND original.]

To Secretary of the Bavy from Lieutenant Stephen Decatur, Jr., U. 8. Navy

At Sea off BOSTON
LIGHT

U. S. BRIGArgus Septr 8" 1803
SIR,I had the honor of addressing you the fifth stateing my
readyness for sea, on the evening of that day a gale commenced from
the Eastward which continued untill this morning, when the wind
shifted & we got underway, - I feel leasure at having it in my
power to inform you the Argus sails we -I have forwarded to the
office a compleat muster roll of the Crew of the Argus -

B

IND-4. Officers LB, 18021805.]

[8 September 18031
To the Bey of T w i n Zrom James Leander Catheart, appointed U. 8. Consul, !l'unia
James Leander Cathcart Consul for the United States of America
in the Regency of Tunis unto his Excellency Hamuda Bashaw, Bey of

Tunis -

WARS WITII BARBARY POWERS

25

Health Peace & Prosperity
Whereas Doctor George Davis the person who now is appointed b,y
Your Excellency to remain in the American Consular house at Turns
was mere1 appointed by Comodore Morris to sign Passports of the
Vessels be on ' g to the Regency of Tunis & to perform the functions
of the ~ o n s x until
e
the will of the President of the United States
was known relative to the appointment of a Consul, And whereas
said Comodore Morris has suspended the functions of smd George
Davis, I have the honor to inform Your Excellency that the United
States of America their Agents & Officers consider themselves by no
means bound to f d M any contract publick or private made by said
George Davis & conceive themselves exonorated from the payment of
all debts that he has or may contract, until the will of the President
of the U S of America is known.
In testimon of which I have hereunto subscribed my name &
&'d the %nsular Seal of the United States of America
Done onboard the United States Frigate Adam Tunis Bay
this 8'h day of September in the year of our Lord 1803 J A M ELEA^
~ CATHCART

9

[Boston PL. NDA photostat.]

[9 September 18031
To James Simpron, U. 6. Consul, Tangier, Yorocoo, from the Emperor of Morocco
Translation of Letter from His Imperial Majesty-Muley Soliman.

Praise be given to God done. There is no Power or Strength but that proceeding from the Great
and Almighty God. Imperial
Seal
To Our Servant James S i p s o n the American Consul - Health. We have recieved your Letter and understood its Contents respecting what has happened with Raiz Ibrahim Lubarez and your
Frigate. So soon as this Our order shall reach you, send for the said Lubarez
that he may bring those papers which you suppose he had in his possession and let the Captam of your Frigate come also to Tangier and
there we will examine and see those papers, and what has happened
.
will then be seen in its true
With regard to any offence einggiven you, there is no cause for it;
for in truth you enjoy Our Friendship and are under Our protection
therefore notdisagreeable shall happen to you. What has happened at Sea must be considered and enquired into,
and when the truth shall be made manifest affairs shall go in their
pro r Channel. &
%
n
gi
more can be said untill they come to the Port of Tangier. Dated 21" Chemadi (the first) 1218 (Corresponding to the
9'Q September 1803. Origind of the foregoing wrts translated from the Arabic to Spanish
by DP Manuel de Baccas, and from Spanish to English by
JAMES
SIMPLION
TANGIER
1.p Septr 1803

Yht

[LC. EPP, Vol. 6, 1803.1

-

26

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1803 TO 1804

Pxtrsct cmd translation from a journal kept in French by an unknown person on
b o d the U. 8. Rigate John Adanu, Captain John Bodgers, U. El. Irlrvy, com-

-w

Friday, 9 September 1803
D e arture from Alicante on Friday, 9 Soptamber. At noon signda!ta
the convoy to unmoor . . . At 1 P M weighed anchor and
got under sail . the convoy unmoored, composed of five vessels.
At 2 P M headed for Cape Palos . . . At 6 P M Cape Palm to the
S W, Cape h t a Pola to the N E. The entire convoy rejoined . .
At 8 A M sighted
At sunrise saw two convo ed vessels astarn
two brig. heading east. h e n close to us they hoisted the Swedish
flag and continued on their course. At 11 A M sighted Cape del Gate
to the west distance about 25 miles . . . At noon abeam of Cape
del Gate to the NE distance about 15 miles.
Latitude observed 36'36' N.
From Saturday, 10 to Sunday, 11 September 1808
Afternoon . . the convoy rejoined us . . . At sunset heading
WNW . . . At sunrise . . . the convoy astern of us, only 4 vessels.
At 8 A M sighted the city of Malaga to the NE distance 18 milea . . .
heading for Malaga . . . At 10 A M sighted the city of Malaga
ahead of us and two frigates moored in the roadsbad . . . the city to
the NW of us distance about 12 miles. Malaga to the NW distance
10 d m . on Sunday, 11 at 3 P M we anchored in the roadstead of
Malaga . . The city of Malagta to the NW distance about 2 miles.
Found the Commodore and the schooner [Enterprize].
Latitude observed 36'37' N.

. .

. ..

.

.

.

[LC. EPP, Journal 1803.]

[l1 September 18031
To all the Consuls resident at Tangier, Morocco, from the Emperor of Xorocco

In the name of the Most Merciful God. There is no Power or Strength but in the Most High and Great
God. Imperial

w.

To aJl the Consuls Resident at Tangier - Health. Your Letter has reached Our presence exalted by God, in which you
represent to us the Act of Our Servant Hashash in Arresting the
American Consul when he received advice of the taking Our Ship the
hter for the Islam. - We neither ordered nor will we Order the
onsul to be Arrested, should War ensue between Us and his Nation
he shall be. sent to his Country in Security both with respect to his
rson and property. - In truth what has happened with our
perhaps it may have been occasioned by our Servant Ashaah
having sent a Tripoline Ship was under his direction with our Flag,
after having taken all your Signatures and that of the American also,
s-nd they have acted unjustly and taken that Vessel when under our
Fl without any War being between Us and them; -for this reason
s Our said Servant may have ordered the A m z to take some
Essefof theirs to detain her untill the Tripoline should be restored,but that War should happen without Our order certainly that annot be. - And now let the American send for Our Shp that 8he

3

GP,
%

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

n

may be brought to Tangier with his Ship and we will see that affair
from its beginning, - if he will do that which is just and right in thie,
he will obey it and execute it, then we will continue as we have been in
Peace and Friendship. - And if he will have War it Bhall be so and
we will send the Consul to his Country.
In G-od alone is aid and in him we have put our trust. Written M t 4 &madi the Jirst 1618 corresponding to the lit@ September 1803. A Faithful cop of the translation in possession of the Consuls. TANGIER
96tQ eptemr 1803. JAMES
SIMPSON
[NA. SDA. CL,Tangier, Vol. 2, 1803-1810.1

d

To William Jonas Keen from Lieutenant Bichard Somers, U. 6. Xavy

UNITEDSTATESSCHOONER
Nautilus
Sept 11t@ 1808 Ma2aga Roads Sunday
DEARBROTHERI arrived here from up aloft on the Ninth. I
write you this to [be] prepared against an opportunity may offer of
sending it to you. I will give you a small description of my travels
since my arrival in the Straits
I left Gibralter after laying forty eight hours. Got my provisions
and water in. Made sad with a head wind and it so continued 17
days out of twenty to which time I arrived a t Malta. I chased every
thm that had appearance of Tripolitan. I found none of our ships
a t hfalta and but httle information could I get of them only that they
had sail[ed] about forty days before. From thence I p r o d ' d to
Tripoli,saw none of our ships there -and but only two smallTripolitan
boats close in. I went close in to the Batteries & fired a shot at them.
I hove to for a short time, but I saw no Gunboats make any ap earance. I then boar away for Malta again. The batteries a t 'Tripo{ are
much improved - by their appearance they might mount 300 ieoes
of Cannon, if they had them. On my return to Malta I foun8th.t
the Enterprize had been there the day before in pursuit[?] of men; by
Commodore Morris' orders. I found that the Squadron had all been
together at Leghorn - My anchor was down but one half hour. I
proceed toward Le horn in pursuit of Capt. Ro[dlgers - in passing
round the West en of Sicily I exchanged slgnals with the Adams, Capt
Camble. I then went in chase of a Latteen boat that hove in sight.
The fellow, when he found I stood for him, fired a gun to windward in
defiance of me, but in 3 hour chase he fired one to leeward and hoisted
En lish Colors. I just drop two close alongside & he hove directly
an was very glad to find we were Americans. He mounted 8 guns.
I left him immeadiately and went down and spoke the Ahms, who
was from her hull in sight only top Gal't sail above water. Capt.
Cambell inform'd me that Capt. Ro[d]gers had gone down with a
Convoy that I should find him at B a r d o n a to which place I
procad'd. -but wind never hid'd [?] any vessel equal to this, for let me
alter the course any where I was sure to have a head in the course of a
couple of hours. On my arrival there, I sent the boat in. Cept.
Ro[d]gers had sail'd 2 days before. I then made sail with a fair m d
for the 6rat time for a month a t theU. S.N [?]at 12 next day was within
20 milpa of Allecad [?I when it came on to blow very aevere from the

f

f

28

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1803 TO 1804

south east, then had to haul my wind to keep off the land. I expected
that he had left there that day, supposing he would not loose the
Levant that had blown all that m o m g and the day before. That
night was very squally but the next day they hauld round to Eastw'd.
I arrived here in thirty six hours, I was much surprised to see Commodore's ship here - as I had no despatches for him and he had
heard that I had. I would not for one hundred Dollars been .so
disagreeably situated but I had to obey the orders of a supenor
officer - a t the moment Mr Decatur tells me there is a s uare Rig'd
vessel to windward. It must be the convoy, and I shall %is day-get
off the despatches - my anxiety mind has engross'd all my time smce
I have had them in possession.
The Schooner has not got no paint on her. The rigging is bleatch'd
as white as a sheet, and one suit of sails better than half worn. This
thing would wear the devil out in a short time if he was anywhere
forward of the main mast.
I hear that Capt Bainbridge has arriv'd & captured a Moorish
Cruiser of twenty guns & took an American brig & now in p m u i t of a
thirty gun ship to the [ms illegible] So you can tell Sally I will renig
from the prize money - for I now expect to make prizes or be a prize
but I think but little about the latter. I bid you adieu God bless you
all. I shall write often - I yesterday dined with Mr Kirkpatrick
who treat'd me as he formerly had which was very politely
[From a copy in pencil received from the Earle Hepburn Col.]
-

Extract and translation from a journal kept in French by an unknown person on
board the U. S. Frigate John Admns. Captain John Rodgers, U. 6. Navy, commanding, Sunday, 11 September l
W

.

At sunset the Commodore s' alled to set sail . . the entire convoy
got under way, there being o y four vessels . . . At sunrise . the
Commodore ahead of us, the schooner astern . . . At 8 A M . . the
Captain of the schooner [Enterprize] came on board . . . At noon . . .
rejoined . . .in sight of Malrtga distance about 18 miles to the W S W.

r

..
.

[LC. EPP, Journal 1803.1

Statement concerning Bowsprit of U. S. Brig Argus

UNITEDSTATES
BRIGArgus
At Sea, Sept' lbtQ1803
Persuant to an Order of the above date, from Stephen Decatur Esquire Commander, to us directed, We have examined the Bowsprit,
and give it as our decided Opinion, that it is by no means fit to perform
the passage Across the Atlantic, or even safe to bring the Ship by the
Wind, in a Common Wind & Sea; And further, that it is so badly
Sprung as to make it Utterly impossible to Secure it in any way for
the Safety of the Fore Mast. Jos BLAKE
H. M A G R A
Sailing
~ M&er
GEORGE
NICHOLSON
Bosc
STEPHEN
HURLY
Carpenter
[NDA. OEcers LB, 1802-1805.1

WARS WITH BARBARY POWEI28

29

To Same8 Simpson, U. S. C o d , Tangier, Morocco, from the Secretary of State
of the Emperor of Morocco
Trsnakrtion of Letter from Sidy Mehammed f3elawy dated 124 September

1803.

-

Praise be given to God alone. There is no Power or Strength but in the Great and Almighty
God.
To Consul Simpson the American.
Receive the aper herewith- pay attention to it, and see what you
have done to t e Flag of Our Muter whom God preserve. A Ship of Our Masters inten
to bring a Vessel of yours and detain her until1 the Tripoline sho d be returned, and you know what
happen'd. - If ou w h that Peace and Friendship should subsist as
heretofore, let ur Masters Ship be brought back to Tangier and
Justice shall be done with regard to the Tri oline; - if this was taken
justly and with reason keep it, and Our aster whom God preserve
will provide a Recompencs for the proprietom; if it was not taken
with Justice but that you have acted wrongfully in takeing it let it be
restored. If you desire War and will not listen to what we have here said to
you, we will put Our trust in God, whose name be praised.
We admonish and advise you on this occasion, because of the
Friendship we have for you, but if YOU neglect it and matters remain
as they are, or Our Masbrs Ship be not sent before his a m i d a t
Tangier we cannot say what he may then do, for this reason we have
admonished and advised you. MEHAMMED
BEN ABD E SALEMSELAWY.
[NA. SDA. CL,Tangier, Vol. 2, 1803-1810.1

-

-

%

?f

6

bf

Extract from log book of U. S. Frigate Consiilulion,Captain Edward Preble, U. 8.
Navy, commanding, Monday, 12 September 1805

At 3 past 12 a light Breeze sprung up from the WestwgJ Made all
lain sail and set the starboard studdingsails/ in order to proceed
L m of10 Cadiz to the Strait of Gibraltar we steerd along the maat
with an offing of nearly 5 leagues/ we unstowed the Tow Bowers and
Bitted a lo Raing on the Best bower Cable/ at sundown the south
Extreme of ape Trafalgar Bore by compm ESE. nearly five leagues/
at the same tune we saw the land on the Barbarie C o a t bearing
ESE[?], which we sup ose to be Cape Spartel.
* * * We saw ape Spartel bearing WbS S, nearly 7 or 8
miles/ and the land on the Spanish shore Bore from NEbN to NEbE
at 10 AM. fired a gun and hosted our colours of[q the town of Tmger/
the Swedish coulours was the only colours, we saw in the Town of
Tangsr/ We continued offflthe Town nearly one Hour] and Repeated
the gun/ at 11 AM, bore up and Run thro h the Straits/ We spoke a
6 ankh Brig from the H s v m a h bound to%daga at noon the T o m
o!~arSe on the S anish side bore NE 6 miles/ the weather clear.
Winds from the &W
[NA. N D original.]

"&!

8

+

30

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1803 TO 180L

Rxtnct and translation from a journal kept in French by an unknown person on
boud the U. 6. Frigste John Adam Captoin John Bodgers, U. 8. Bavp, commanding, from Monday, 12 to Tuesday, 13 September 1803

Afternoon . . . quite close to the coast of Spain. The convoy
astern of us. The Commodore ahead of us. To windward of us
severaI strange vessels proceeding east ahead of us. At sunset uite
close to Fuengimla to the N E distance about 10 miles. At 8 (h M
fired a shot a t a Swedish brig. Spoke with her. She proved to be
from Gibraltar and bound for Alicante. Passed several other vessels.
At sunrise aighted the Commodore ahead of us and several convo ed
vessels. At 10 A M
sighted several strange vessels. Signafled
to the schooner [Enterprize] to give chase. She carried away her
[word mutilated] mast. Came up to aid her.
[LC.EPP, Journal 1803.1

.. .

Extract from journal of Midshipman Henry Wadsworth, U. 8. Navy, on board
U. 6. 6. Naa YotL Captain Biohard V. Morris, U. 6. Bevy, commanding, 12
hptember 1803

At Sea off Malaga * * * On the gth inst we arriv'd at Malaga.
On our passage we fell in with the British Fleet to the Northward of
Minorm, consisting of 6 sail of the line & one or two Frigates, under
command of Nelson, we passed close under the stern of the Victory
&. while
-.
the Comr & his Lordship were conversing we had a full view
of him.
Off Cape de Gate we fell in with the Enterprize; she had not seen
the Nautilus & was cruizing off Cape de Gate in quest of two Tripolines of 10 guns each, agreeable to the orders of the Comr she had
chased a Tripoline of superior force into Tunis Bay. we left her
cruising on her station.
The next day after our arrival [lo Sept.] the Nazctilus Capt Summers csme in. We have learnt of War with Morocco that the
Philadel hia Capt Bainbridge has arriv'd a t Gibraltar, that he has
taken t e Moorish commodore (Capt. Ibraham Louberais in the
Merboka) of 22 guns & retaken an American Brig (the Celia of Boston)
her rize that the QonsMutim Comr Prible, with 2 B
& one Schooner
"gsl!! we learn that
of If ar are expected soon. We learn! strange to te
the Commodore is order'd home: * * *
[H. W.L. Dana Col.]

g

James Simpson, U. S. Consul, Tangier, Idorocco, from Captain Edward Preble,

U. 8. Navy
UNITEDSTATES
FRIGATE
ComtitUtion
Gibralter ISt$Sept 1805
SIR,I have the honor to inform you, that the United States Frigate
Cmtibzstion of 44 Guns under my command arrived here this day
she is one of a squadron of seven men of war (independant of those
under the command of Commodore Morris) which the President of
The United States, has been pleased to place under my command
for the protection of our commerce
I have perused the letter from Commodore Morris to you, on the
subject of the Capture of the Ship Mishauda by Captain Ro[d]gers:
and your AnsPr thereto; from the late conduct of the Emperors crumrs
it cannot be doubted, but that Ship was intended to be convey'd to

31

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

Tri oly, under the rotection of the Emperors F1
of &aval, and WarEk
' e stores, in Order to enable er, and
a -tityy
e other

?

&

cruisers of the Bashaw of Tri 1 to act more efficiently against our
commerce, for it cannot be ou ted, but that she belonged to the
Bashaw at the time she was captured: but admitting she did not;
the Emperor knew of the Blockade of Tripoly by our cnrisars, and
that she would be captured if met b them. If he had not been
acquainted with the Blockade, it wo d have been roper, for Cap*
RoIdJgers to have Ordered her away on her making t e first attempt;
and to have captured her, if the Captain should have made a second
attempt
Commodore Morris has the Controul of that business, and must
act as he pleases, but if she came within my command, I should most
mrtainl send her to the United States. The Captains and Wcers
of the mperor, dare not act without his Orders On my passage hither I met with his Im rid Ma'esties Frigate
Maimona of 30 Guns and 150 men admira Hadge ?Cacher, [word
illegible] 22 days from Sallee, on a cruise, I boarded & ve
examined her papers, and finding she had your passports, treated
"'om'Y
her as a friendly vessel, & left her The Admiral told me that
the Emperor was a t peace with all nations; But from the number of
Guns and men, he had on board, and the length of time he had been
out, i was doubtfull; and had I not most sacredly regarded our treaty,
with his Imperial Majesty I should have detained the Maimona,
until my doubts could have been satisfied: and I have now good reason
to wish I had, as I have no doubt, but she has Orders to Capture
American vessels, and may do much Mischief unless the wind favors
my sailing to the westward, with the Squadron The Emperors late gross Violation of our treaty in iss
to his Cruisers, to Capture American Vessels, and one %
ofOrdB1shps
9
the Mirboka,Captain Abrahim Lubarez actually having taken one,
will justify my giving Orders to the Captains of the Squadron under my
command, to capture and bring into ort all vessels belo
Emperor of Morocco, or armed vesseg belonging to his su jects, as
theI
must consider them as acting under the Authority of the Emperor in
capturing our vessels, knowlng that they dare not act without such
Authority, and if I can asscertain that the Maimona or an
meet
le American vessel, & sho d Other
Moonsh Cruiser has captured a
-53 mperor from me, that it is my
with her; you may acquaint the
intention in future to sink every such vessel as a Pirate, as he denies
having given Orders to justify their conduct,
The United States are known for their good faith, and sacred observance of Treaties, and expect i t from other nations - The
President is extremely desirous that the United States should have
peace, and free commercial intercourse with all the States of Barbmy,
more particularly with Morocco but is determined, neither to purcham
or maintain that peace and intercourse b submitting to treatment
dishonorable to our Country - The S p Captured by Captain
Bainbrid e, I think it probable I shall send to America, together
with all tphe Crew, but before I come to any positive determination I
shall wait until the Emperor's answer to your letter arrives I feel for your unpleasant situation, and hope you may soon be
relieved from it; the Emperors Answer I su pose will determine you
how to act, with regard to yourself and fam& [LC. EPP, LB, 1803.1

go5

d

1

-

B

P"

7

uy

&

32

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1803 TO 1804

Internal Bules and Begnlotions for U. 8. Prigrate Constiluffon, 1805-1804, by C a p e
Edward Preble, U. 8. Navy, Oommodore of U. 8. Xediterranean Squadron
1.9 Strict attention must be obaerved to the printed instructions issued by the
Preeident of the United States.
2nd The time by g b , must be regularIy attended to, by night and by day; and
the bell, a t the call of the quarter master from the lee gangway, must be struck
every half hour, and rung every four hours.
3.4 The log is to be hove a t ses every hour, and the rate of going, courses, winds
and occurrences instantly marked on the board, and a t noon each day, the same
are to be entered on the log-book by the master.
4 - A good look out to be kept, night and day, and the officers are always to
c s m to be kept clear, the cannon, and ropes of every description, and to have
every man in his Station.
5 - The pumps are to be sounded by the carpenter or one of his mates every
two hours, or oftener, if necessary, and the ship pumped out, whenever there are
three inches more water in the well than the ship sucks at.
6 - On seeing a vessel or vessels of any description whatsoever, as also on a
change of the wind by night or by day, I must be immediately informed thereof, in
order to determine on the line of conduct I may judge proper.
7 - Every superior officer is t o inform and check those under him, of every
impropriety he may see, or hear of their committing, either wilfully or ignorantly,
and to notify me of the same if it is of any magnitude.
8 - The officer of the watch will be ever attentive in seeing the sails neatly
trimmed, and that no mpes are towing overboard; a t day light in the m o m i n ~ t h e
stock are to be fed, and every evening before sun set, previous to the decks mg
swept and wetting the ship inside and out, which is to be done every morning
& evening.
9 - A sea lieutenant is always to be on the quarter-deck, together with a
midshipman and quarter-master.
10 - The honors due the quarter deck, can not be dispensed with on entering,
either from below or a boat, and a polite address, and decent deportment from one
officerto an-other is expected a t all times thereon, for the character of a gentleman
and an Officer can never be Separated.
11 - The weather side of the quarter-deck is reserved for the walk of the
captain, or in his absence, the commanding Officer of the watch.
12
The time glaes is to be regulated every evening by the watch; and the
qusrter-deck is always to be kept clear of cloaths, lumber and dirt, the ropes
flemished, coil'd and hung up on the pins.
13 - No person is to be struck on the quarter-deck, or improper language used
thereon; good usage is directed to be strictly observed to those who merit it, and
those who do not, shall be punished as I may hereafter direct.
14 - No duty to be done on Sunday, except on extraordinary occasions, or
such as washing and wetting the ship, trimming the sails, or what may be required
by the genersl instructions.
15 - The warra[n]t and petty Officers, together with the seamen, ordinary
seamen, and marines, are to breakfast a t eight oclock, and have their dinnera
regular a t noon; one hour is allowed them for each meal. The common duty
which all hands are employed in, ir, to be concluded a t four P. M. every day.
16
When the time allowed the ship's company a t their meals is expired, the
commanding officer on deck, will send a midshipman to the Boatswain, and desire
him to call all hands immediately, and set them to the work ordered, which the
said officer will see executed without the loss of t i e .
17 - The salt meats, agreeable to the acts of Congress, are to be delivered out
every evening before eundown, to the cook, who is to be aecountsble, and to have
the same well washed and soaked, by changmg the water m steep tubs every four
hours.
IS
The flour, p a s , and other provisions are to be served out every morning
in due time for the cook, the rum is to be W N out
~ twice a day a t twelve oClock
and a t Four; s scuttle butt of water is to be kept filled and lashed near the mainmast, for the use of ship's company; special care is to [be] taken to prevent any
sort of waste of this precious article.
All eorte of dopa and cloathing, must be issued only on a 8peoisl Order
I9
from me.
20 - Whenever we are near a colrat, or a aituation where the anchors may be
wanting, the two bowers are to be bent, the cables kept clear for running; same
time, muat be bitted, and the stoppens and ring ropea in wsdinese, also canvm and

-

-

-

-

cable plate.

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

33

21 - The sails are alwaye t o be neat1 handed, in the order directed a t the time,
the yards squared, stay, back stsys, m i e v e r y rope hauled taught, and the decks
and sidee kept clear of dirt.
22 - Commissioned Officers are requested to exact upon all occasions of duty
from the warrant and petty officers, and they also from their inferiors, the most
ready, unequivocal and respectable compliance with their orders, and i t is expected
of all inferiors that they do not neglect any exterior mark of respect whenever they
address or are addrewed by a superior upon duty.
23 - Officers of every denomination are expected when the duty requires them
a t quarters on their different stations, to be particularly attentive to preserve
silence amongst the men, and see that the orders issued from the quarter-deck are
executed with celerity and without any noise and confusion.
24 - It is my particular request that officers will upon all occasions, encourage
and pointedly distinguish, those persons who are particularly cleanly, alert and
obedient from those of different characters, in order that the deserving may see
their merits are not disregarded, as well as the underserving be made sensible of
the vigilance of the officers, and the advantages resulting from good and respectable
conduct.
25 - Discipline (as i t respects alertness) can only be preserved by a constant
and steady attention to whatever is carrying on; i t is requested, the officers of
the ship will not suffer the most trifling thing under them to be executed with
indifference.
26 - Blasphemy, profaneness, and all species of obscenity or immorality
are peremptorily forbid and i t is hoped the officers of every denomination will upon
all occasions, discountenance and discourage such disorderly and despicable
practices amongst the men.
27 - The officers and petty officers are required to make themselves peraonally
acquainted with the ships company, in order to their being able to address them
by their own mames [sic] whenever they have occasion to call to them aloft or
elsewhere.
In port in the United States,women will be permitted to come on board, but this
indulgence is to be granted (as indeed all others) in proportion to the merits of the
men who require them and upon their being accountable for the conduct of the
women with them.
28 - The commanding officer in port in the united States,will therefore permit
such men to have women on board as he may choose, and he will direct the master
a t arms to keep a list agreeable to the following form, which he will carry to the
commanding officer every morning for his inspection
WOMENS LIST

Wornens names

I

with whom

I

married or single

I

when recQ on board

( Condnct

29 - Every seaman belonging to the ship is expected to supply himself with
the following list of cloaths

In addition to the list of cloaths above w e d the ahips company are expected to
aupply themaelvea with a white outside jacket and waist coat to be worn occasionally in Summer or a warm climate, with long white trowsers.

34

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1803 TO 1804

30 - Whenever all hands are called, no person is to go below from his station
upon pretence of the work being finished, before the people are piped down.
31 - The captains of the forecastle, tops, after-guard and waist, having command over the men of those Stations are expected to Keep them cIear and clean,
the rigging &C neatly coiled, the captain6 of the Starbd watch are considered sa
particularly responsible for the StarbQ side in harbour -the captaina of the Imbd
watch for the LarbQ side, and the captains of the 3d watch or auxilia captains to
be responsible in the absence or illness of either the others for their3tations.
32 - Two Lieutc only can be absent from the ship on leave, but not the first
and second a t the same time.
33 - At Sea and in harbour, a comrniasioned officer is to have charge of the
watch
34 - The first Lieu* is not to keep watch, the Junr Lieut[en]ants are to be in
three watches.
35 - The mates and midshipmen are to be a t three watches a t sea and in port,
one third of which may be absent on leave a t a time
36 - The decks are to be washed in the morning watch when the gun csmages,
port sills, quick work, head and head rails, chains, sides &C, &C, are to be wash'd
and great care taken that the water ways are well dried. In port the necessary
boats to be hoisted out either before or after the washing of decks, as circumstances
of weather and duty may make requisite, yards neatly squared, ropes hauled
tau ht
and hammocks stowed to admit of piping to breakfast precisely a t
8 o8lock
37 - After setting the watch, great attention is expected from all ranks, not to
disturb the tranquility of the men.
38
I n like manner, great care is to be had that the duty of the service be
either completed or suspended a t 7 bells in order that deck^ mag be swept, and
nothing prevent piping ~LIdinner a t 12 oClock.
39 - The first Lieu$ or commanding officer, whether a t sea or in harbour, is
to visit the ship througout every forenoon, to see that the tiers, cockpits, wings
storerooms, passages &C &C are clear, clean and in proper condition, and report
is to be made to the captain when ready for hia visitation.
40 - The between decks are to be cleaned every forenoon, to be washed twice
a week, and fires shall be made, over which centinels are to be placed and the
people not permitted below untill the decks are dry, the cockpit is to be cleaned
whenever the between decks are as are all ladders, gratings, port cills, combings,
hatchways, store-rooms & magazines passages & wings.
41 - The officers are requested to see that the men do not work in their best
cloaths, and when employed washing decks, they are desired to make them pull
off their shoes and stockings and tuck their trowaers up.
42 - Every day after dinner and just before the hammocks are piped down in
the afternoon, the decks are to be swept.
43 - The cockpit and birth deck are to be visited occasionally by the master
a t arms and corporal during the day, and once a t least each watch by a midship
man who are to report any deviation from the general Orders, and if any lightn
are discovered out of lanthorns or improper persons found there
44 - Warrant and petty Officers lights to be put out a t eight oclock a t sea a t 9 oC. in port.
45
No lights on any account whether a t Sea or in harbour, are to be allowed
to remain unattended in any birth or Cabin, and none but in lanthoma elsewhere
in the tiers. No amoaking tobacco is to be allowed but in the established place,
under the forecastle
[46 - This number has been skipped in the original manuscript.]
47 - The commanding officer and officer of the watch will remember that
spirits are always directed to be drawn off upon deck, and never by candle light.
48 - The main deck is to be constantly kept as clear as posaible and no chestn,
empty casks, or lumber of any kind sacred to remain on i t - a great object,
being the health of the men. Dry air should be admitted especially in Summer
or warm climates, but rain and the wsah of the Sea should be avoided, and air
that ie damp sdmitted with great caution, a thorough draft of ail: in the channel
is not nBCeeeary for any length of time, and should be introduced m preference a t
such tima aa the men are employed on deck
49 - The ventilation is to be wnat+ntly worked by day in winter, and by
night and by day in Bummer or a warm chmate, the wind s a ~ lshould
s
be used a t all
timw in the summer when the air is dry and a t times in the winter when the
weather ia fine.

-

-

-

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS
50 - In port, the commanding officer is required to have all psrties aent on duty
or elsewhere, on board rather before 12 oClock; the boats (except on very particular aervice) are not to be abaent during meal times, nor in any r o d stead after
Sun Bet, or in port after gun fire.
51 - No alterstion ie ever to be msde in the ships company's proviaiona, or
allowance but by the captains order.
62 - The men are to meaa in messes of 8 each, the Boatawsins matee and petty
officers b themselves, or with some other petty officers
53 $he Boatswains, Gunners and Carpenters mates, Quarter masters, aapftrine
of the forecastle, Tope, and masta, armourer, Sergeant8 and corporals of marmes
are allowed to have cheets and one to every mees.
54 - The men of the different messes are every Sunday to appoint one of their
meas mates to keep the birth and mess utensils clean and in proper order for the
following week, such men are to be responsible to the officer for any neglect that
they may discover and none but men belonging to boats when in harbour are to be
exempted from this duty.
66 - Any person finding himself ill, ia to make his complaint without loss of
time to the Surgeons matee, as no excuse for neglect of duty on the score of illnem
will be received but through the Surgeon.
56 - Waahing days will be appointed ss the weather, and duty of the ship will
admit and then thinge are to be dried on lines stretched from shroud to ehroud
forward, or in such other places es the commanding officer shall direct.
57 - Matee and midshipmen being acquainted with the established orders and
regulations are expected zealously to enforce them and report any slacknees or
deviation they may obeerve in particular persons.
58 - The mates and midshipmen are ordered to sleep in hammocks, which are to
be brought upon deck and taken down the same time the ships company.
59 - Mates and midshipmen are to keep log books, a public order book, cloaths
list of their subdivisions, Watch, Quarter and Station bills clean and well written
all of which are to be brought
i
e
- to the captain the last Sunday in every month for h
inspection.
60 - Twelve minutes and no more will be allowed from the time of piping
hammocks up, till they are completely stowed, the same time also will be allowed
to take them down and hang them up
61 - The hammocks belonging to people absent on duty, are to be lashed and
taken up by the men birthed next without them, but if an outside man should be
absent, then the men next within him is to preform that service.
62 - The cloathing and bedding of all run [deserted] men, or men suspe~tedto
be run, is to be ordered by the commanding officer into the Boatswains store room,
a list of which is to be taken by the Petty (Warrant) officer of the division to which
they belong
63 - Foremast men going out of the ship on leave are to leave their cloaths
and bedding with one of their mess e t e s , the Petty Officers of the division fo
which such men belong is to satisfy himself that every thing they do not wear is
left behind, and that the mess-mate considers himself responsible for its safety
and forth corning.
64 - When the weather is so bad that the hammocks cannot be stowed in the
nettings, they are to be taken down and piled up in such places as the commanding
officer shall appoint.
65 - O5cers answering signals are to carry the public order book with them,
and all officers of every denomination going out of the ship on duty are expected
to be dressed in their uniform with swords
66 - No seaman or marine will he suflered to go out of the ship on leave, who
hall not uDon examination of his divisional Officer be found clean and decently
dressed.
67
No body is allowed to lounge in ports, and it is strictly forbidden to
throw any bones, dirt, or dirty water out of them, but dirt of all sorts is b be
taken to the heed, and lowere'd well down before i t is started.
68 - It is forbid to enter the ship or get into boats through the ports, or down
the side, or any other way than the gangway steps or stern @idem.
69 - No men are to be allowed to lounge in the c h a m or m the boa&, or on the
booma, nor are cloaths of any sort to be hung below the hammocks, nettings, or in
other than the established places.
70 - Upon the loss of any money, cloatha, bedding, or other articles, the looser
is immediately to make it known to the Officer of the Watch or commanding
Officer, who will take such measures aa appear requisite to discover the thief.
No man is permitted to appropriate to himself any cloaths or other articlea that

-

-

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1803 TO 1804
he may a t any time find about the ship, and if he cannot find the owner he is
commanded to take it to the Officer on the Quarter deck.
71 - The Officers of the different divisions will order the petty officers under
their command occasionally to examine into the atate of the peoples mess utensils
of their division, to see that they have a sufficiency of those Articles and that they
are kept wholesome and clean.
72 - Boa& crews are commanded to obey with as much alacrity and punctuality
the orders of the cockswains as those of any other officer on board. no excuse will
therefore be received for a boat beiig left on shore, or for any thing lost or damaged
belonging to a boat unless previously reported to the commanding officer.
73
Cockswains are strictly forbidden to take any thing whatever in their
boats to carry on shore without permission from the Quarter deck.
74 - Boats are not a t any time to be left without boat kee rs; they are not
ship when they
allowed to lye a t the gangways, nor indeed ever along side of
can lye a stern.
75 - In port, a boat to be sent on shore every evening to bring off whoever may
be on shore, which boat ie to put oE at sun set.
76 -The ships company are to be mustered every evening a t sun set, a t quartera
or divisions, all absentees or men found in liquor to be reported and proper notice
to be taken a t such times of men that are dirty or slovenly. No long untied
hair to be allowed and cloaths however old should not be ragged: the people are
all expected to be clean, shaved and dressed by 10 oclock every Sunday morning
(when they will be mustered in divisions by the m e r e n t officers commanding
them, and) the last thureday and Sunday of every month is appointed as days of
general review or muster of cloaths, when the officers are expected to examine very
particularly into the peoples cloathing and bedding and are to report to the captain
any deficiency that may appear.
77 - On thursdays as well as Sundays the ships Company is expected to be
shav'd, to put on clean shirts and to shift their trowsers.
78 - No man is to be confined by night or day when I am on board without
representation having been made to me of his crime or offence and my orders
having been given to that purpose.
79 - The msster a t anas is to keep a list of the boys and their cloaths and to
have an especial eye to their conduct, Cleanliness and behavor; every morning a t
7 oC1ock he is to take care that they are assembled on the quarter deck attend[ed]
by himself or one of his corporals, and after having been examined report them to
the Officer of the Watch whose orders he is to receive to dismiss them.
80 - The Commissioned, Warrant and Petty Officers having boys attending on
them as servants, are expected to take care they are properly cloathed and kept
clean and neat
81 - The Boatswain & his mates conformable to the old custom of the service,
are to carry rattans, but they are to be used with discretion.
82 - The ditFerent warrant officers are to report every morning before 8 oclock,
and every evening the state of their several departments, to the officer of the watch
in the morning and to the captain or commanding officer a t quarters in the evening.
83 - When an alarm of fire the boarders, engine & fire men with their respective
officers, are to repair to the Quarter-deck, the boarders are to be ranged on the
Starbd side, and the fire men with their buckets on the LarbQ side, the marines
with their Officers are to a pear under arms on the quarter-deck, the first & third
Lieutr are to repair imme%ately to the plane from whence the alarm has arose,
the surgeon and his mates and the purser to their Store rooms, each to examine
those places and to report with all haste to the quarter-deck; the day mate, the
msster a t arms & his corporals are to proceed to examine & report the tieres, the
pumpers with their Officers are immediately to rig & fetch the pumps, and fix &
fill the long hose, and water (by the carpenters stationed in the wings in action)
is immediately to be let into the cistern & well, the other carpenters with their
axes and mauls are to assemble on the Larboard Gangway, the remaining Officers
and men are to repair to their different stetions as watched (unless the drum
ehould beat to divisions) and wait further order from the Quarter deck.
84 - Upon the return of men to the ahip that may have been absent any time,
and upon the receipt of men, whether aa part of the crew, Supernumeraries or
prisoners, they are to be mustered, and examined by the surgeon and his mates,
and any found ailing are to be reported immediately their cloaths and bedding are
also to be aired and smoaked (if a t all n e c m r y ) before they are allowed to mix
with the ships company and frequent musters and examinations to be observed
for a week after their receipt or untill the Surgeon shall be satisfied that no injury
can accrue to the health of the ~ h i p ecompany from their mixing with them.

-

tg

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

37

85 - No midshipmen ie allowed to quit the Deck a t the expiration of the watch,
under pretence that there is no one to relieve him, without having made such
representation to the officer of the watch, and obtained his permission for so doing.
86 - Each Office[r]is to take for his division the men q-tered
a t the gum of
which he has the command and direction. The first Lieu* is to consider as hie
division the men who are quarter'd a t the Quarter deck and forecastle gum;
the carpenters stationed in the well and wings, the men quartered in magazine
passage & hatchways. h c h 0 5 c e r is to keep a list of his division, and to be
respectively responsible for the good order, cleanliness and sobriety of his division.
87 - All boats are to quit the shore & return to the Ship on or before sun set;
They are to be searched by the master a t arms or corporal, and liquor found in
them without permission having been obtained, to be thrown overboard.
88 - That the boats, their sails, oars &C - may be kept clean and in good
order the Lieutenante (except the first) are to take care of the following
2?d L i e u t - - - - , - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - Barge
3 r d DQ - - - - , - - - - - - Pinnace
- - -&
-Jolly
--boat
---4 % h DQ - - - - , - - - - -Lanch
------------to see they are kept clean and in complete order for their respective Service.
89 - A book is to be kept on the Quarter deck, in which each mans name who
has leave of absence, is to be inserted, - the day of leave, the term of it, and the
day he returned; and no blottings are to be made in it.
90 - Seamen having leave of absence to go on Shore are to be review'd by the
Officer of the division, previous to their going; and no man who is not clean in his
person, and decent in hls appearance, is to go on Shore. All returns of leave rue
to be before Gun fire; and no shore boat is to be admitted a long side after the
setting of the watch, and the cap* to be informed
91 - The Store rooms are to be as seldom opened as possible, and never without
every care, and precaution to prevent accidents by fwe. The keys are to be kept
in possession of the I** Lieut, and not to be taken from his cabin but by hie
Orders or that of the Officer of the Watch, who, on the occasion, appearing to him
necessary, is to send a midshipman with them, and also to direct the master at
arms or corporal to attend, till all the stores wanted are taken out, and the door
again locked.
92 - The keys of the stewards room are also to be kept b the first or Senr
Lieut
they may be delivered to the purser from 7 to 10
in the morning,
and from 4 to 7 in the afternoon for the urpose of serving provisions.
93 - The keys of the after hold, spirit $fish rooms are to be kept in the mastera
care, but are not to be opened without the first Lieutr permission, and at all such
times the master is to take care that one of his mates attend, who is to be the last
person in the hold or room, in order that no accident may accrue from lights and
that they may be carefully locked afterwards.
94 - No cloaths to be left neglectfully about the decks, but all cked in the
Hammocks or bags, nor are such cloaths which may be found pyp8sweepers or
others, on any pretence to be appropreated to their own use, but to be brought on
the Quarter-deck to the officer of the watch who will direct a proper enquiry to be
made for the owners.
95 - After setting the night watch, a t gun fie, the centinels are to pass the
word "all's well" the centinel on the Quarter Deck begining, repeated to him on
the Starboard gangway, the forecastle and larboard gangway in turn. I n case of
not being answered, the last centinel who gives the word is to inform the officer
of the watch.
96 - The centineb are to inform the officer of the watch, of all boats he observes
approaching, or passing near the ship, and is not to sufFer any person to enter or
o from the shi between sunset and sunrise, without l a v e & permiasion of the
bfficer of the d t c h .
97 - The centinels are not to Suffer any noise or irregular behavor on their post
and when ever they observe any improper conduct in any person, they are immediately to send for the sergeant of the guard and inform him, that i t may be
reported to the officer of the guard, & by him to the officer of-the watch.
98 - In case of neglect of duty, or misdemeanor in a centmel, he is to be releived and not punished or questioned concerning his crime till regularly releived
from his post.
99 - That one day in every week a Lieutt and the surgeon do visit the hospital
and make a stnct enquiry into the state of the sick belonging to the Phikid* and
report $0 the captain (agreeable to the form annexed.)

-

08.

N A V ' OPERATIONS FROM 1803 TO M U A
100

-In tacking, wearing or reefin

the topsails, getting up or down top gallant

masts or yards in the daytime the first Iieutt or day OfEcer is to takethe direction on
the qusrter deck dtho' all hands are not called, and the Officer of the watch to take

suoh station as is necessary to the ready execution of the duty to be done, but the
Officer of the watch will not understand this as precluding h i from tacking,
wesring or reeling topea& or getting down top gall. mssts or yards, when the
m i o n requires immediate execution
101 Sunday, ships cornpanay to be dressed & mustered st half past 9 oCbck;
to be considered the hour of general muster, previous to which the officers are
to examine their respective divisions, a t what t i e after 8 oCIock may be most
convenient to themselves.
202 - The strictest silence is to be observed by the men a t their guns, and the
Offroera are to prevent any unnecessary noise and all confusion. Particular
orders will be given in sufficient time for the manner of shotting the guns; It is
most likely that 2 round shot will be ordered for the two first rounds on the Gundeck, one round shot & one load grape for the two first rounds on the upper-deck.
The c s p i of the guns are ordered not to attempt to put any oiiher charge into their
guna, than that which is expressly ordered, aa the fatal consequence of loading
the gun improperly has been too often experienced with the loss of their lives.
The greatest attention is ordered to be paid in pointing and elevating the gum, as
it is most neoessarp & essentiil to iire a well directed shot and to fire often. When
order for the n locks is given, the first captains are to go for their Iocka and place
them on the &rW Cum, - the second captains in the same manner are to place
their locks on the LarbQ guns and they are to have their respective guns cast loose
and ready for action on either side of the ship or on both as the order may be given
for that purpose, and the captains of the guns are to take charge of the powder-horn
and see that every necessary article is supplied to his gun on coming to action; by
night the lanthorn-men a t each gun must immediately upon the drum-beating, go
for his lanthorn & secure i t midship a t the place appointed. The powder men a t
such time take care to guard the salt boxes from sparks of fire There being a fire
bucket appointed for each gun on each deck and its opposite gun in the ship, the
bucket men are to bring their respective buckets opposite to their gune on corning
to action, and they are t o be in readiness to break off from their guns to supply
water st any part of the ship it ia called for. The officers commanding a t their
different quarters, are directed to see the Decks wetted and sand or ash- atrewed
upon them, whenever the shi is going into action also that water in the proper
E..L. is aupplied for the popre in action, and it is my directions that they m s e
known immediately at all times any articles ddcient a t their quarters that may be
either delsyed or miming and to caution the people when coming to action to have
vents and a Seizing of Spun yarn about them. The boarders who may be called
upon either to board the enemy is [or] to repel the enemy who may attempt to
herd the Ship are to be attentive to the drum, & upon the call of the long roll they
m e immediately to assemble on both gangways according to their Stations, from
which place their 05cera will lead them on.
103- The colors, in port, are always to be hoisted st 8 oC. A. M. from l r t April
to b t Novr & from the l r t of novemr to l**A ril a t 9 oC. A.M. and hauled down
st run rim; they are never ta be kept aloft in &owing or atormy weather
104 - On tuesdsy~$ thursdsys general exercise of cannon, small arms &
&ti&. On each day (Sunday excepted) Offioers having charge of a division of
Guns are to exercise their men alternately one hour; st such times in the day as
will lea& interfere with the duty carrying on, they are requested to see that the
men pay particular attention in pointing and elevating the pieces, and go through
& the manouvera with alertness
105 - On tuesday, thursday & Saturday the Junr Lieut is to have the division
of emell arms exercised by the ma6fRr a t a m
106 In oing into rts or commg out of pork, all Lieutenants & midshipmen
are rgquntc8to be on c&c.
in their respeotive + b t i o mtu preserve silence and carry
the Orders of evolution in execution i
s emc&i+m with celerity and without confusion; immediately after the sails are furled the Boatswain is to go in s boat and
aqusre the yarde, the ropes on the Quarter deck to be immediately flemished &
coiled, and all decka made clear and swept; after the anchor or anchors are let
gone, the master is directed to mound round the Ship two cables Iength distance
to note the depth of water with the kind of bottom, and clearness of anchorage
p b ; the Lieut* of Msrinea is to place the heentries on the gangway immediately
aftercoming too with the ehip in port, and are to take them from that part directly
after the hip is got under way.

-

-

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

39

107 - The Lieutt of Marine8 ie to exercise his men twice s day st ses when the
weather permib he is charged with placing all centinels, and no centry is fo be
releived but by his order; he is required to pay strict attention to the cleanliness
of the centinels; he is to co-d
the marines in time of action; he is to direct
them in ceremonial honors m receiving company agreeable to the regulations
directed in the "harbor rules". The marines in the rotine [?] of duty in a watch is
under the direction of the Officer of the watch in the same manner as any other
part of the crew except in being sent aloft; the Lieutc of marine, will pay particular
attention in seeing his men's arms kept clean and in perfect order for action - the
Officer of the watch is directed to spare the marines for cleaning their arms when
the duty of the ship will admit of it; but should any evolution for the ship require
their immediate attention, the marines are directed to repair instantly to their
station in the watch.
O W E R E PARTICVLABLY ADDRESSED TO THE MASTER

He is required to pay great attention to the preservation of the ri ging and
cables, and to control the expenditure and conversion of all Boatswains Carpenters Stores and a t the expiration of each week, .to demand from the Boatswain &
Carpenter an account of their expenditure & conversion, which after having
examined and approved, he will present to the Captain
2 - He is required to have the cables and hawser tiers kept clean & clear, a t
anchor to be studious that the hawse be kept clear, and to examine frequently
(especially when the ship rides a strain) the hawse and cables, that no chafing or
injury may arrise from a foul hawse, or want of proper service
3 - He is required to see that there are always a sufficient number and a good
store of nippers, points, robands, gaskets, chafing matts and platts for the Cables
4 - When a t anchor in any road, two ship buoys with a sufFxient length of
buoy rope (according to the depth of water) are to be kept ready, the buoys to be
stopped without the head, and the ropes neatly coiled on them.
5 - When moored, the sheet anchor is to be got over the side, the tier to be
kept clear, & if a t single anchor a second bower anchor and cable are always to be
clear and ready.
6 - He will never suffer any spirits to be drawn off but upon deck, and never
by candle light.
7 - He will attend very particularly to the expenditure of the water and
suffer no waste thereof - On the Ships arrival in port he will expedite aa much
as in him lies the completing the hold with provisions and water, which is always
to be kept clean & he is never to suffer any empty csske to remain upon the
upper deck
8 - On the Ships arrival in port as also when she is complete for sea, he will
mark in the log book her draught of water, both forward & aft, also the hight of
the lower Wale from the water
9 - When a t Single Anchor, he is to attend the ship a t the turnings of the tide
and be careful that in little winds the cable be shortened in and requisite precaution taken to prevent the anchor being fouled.
10 - The keys of the after hold, spirit & fish rooms are to be in the Maeters
care, but are not to be opened without the first Lieutenants permission and a t
all times the Master is to take care that one of his Mates attend, who is to be the
last person in the hold or room, in order that no accidents may arriee from lights,
and that they may be carefully locked sfterwards.
"11- The log, deep sea & hand lead hnes; half and quarter minute glssses are
to be frequently measured and tried by him. The log line is to be marked at the
rate of 47 feet to 28 Seconds with a large proportion of stray line.
12 - He will wait upon the Captain or, Commanding Officer every day at
One oClock with the log
- book, and a written account of the expenditures 6
remainder of water
13 - He will occasionally visit the galley with the Surgeon, and examine into
the atate of the cormere. ~rovisions& boiling utensils &C in order that no injury
may accrue to t h i he& of the ships com$any from any neglect or improp6r
provisions being served
14 He is considered as particulsrly responsible for the placing of the msste,
6 b therefore reauired to examine their position every day a t ees, in order that
they msy not be-subject to be crippled br liable to be sprung or carried away,
should it become necesaary to carry a prees of sail, and as no alteration will be
made in 'the etaye or standing rigging without hia knowledge. He is required to

-

40

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1803 TO 180.4

be present whether st ses or in harbor, whenever i t becomas necessary to take in
or alacken the stay^, or aet up rigging.
15 He will every Saturday morning, take with him the Carpenter and visit
with the different warrant Officers their r
ive Store rooma, bread room,
wings, tiers, mil room, pumps, bulk heads, & and examine nicely into the state.
of the different stores, to discover if there are any suffering from leake, damps,
vermin, impraper Btorage or any other muse; snd make hi^ report accordingly to
the Captain or Commanding Officer.
16 - He is directed to examine into the state of provisions when received on
board, and frequently into its stowage, and state when on board, and on the d i e
covery of any leakrrge or injury to make immediate report thereof to the Captain.

-

"E"t

ORDERS PABTICULARLY ADDBESSED TO THE PUBBEB

He is required on the Ship arrival in port to take early measures and be particularly careful to supply the Ship with fuel & necessaries of every sort sufficient
st leesf to last the time for which ahe is to be stored and victualed, and in case
of any material difficulty or impediment arrising to prevent the execution of this
order, he ia directed to state them in writing to me before the ship ig supposed to
be ready for sea, and a t all events before she proceeds
2 - He is required to see that his steward and attendant keep the stewards &
bread room & passage clean, & neatly arranged.
3 - The key of the Stewards room is to be in the possession of the first Lieu*
or Commanding Officer, who WITdeliver it to him for the purpose of preparing
$ ~erving
provisions, from 7 OClock in the morning till 10 and from 4 in the afternoon till 7 OClock and a t such other times as ckcumstancea of particular duty
may render necessary
4 - Upon receiving slops he is required to be particularly careful to examine
if they are of the proper sire and quaiity & to report to the Captain any that may
prove different in size or inferior in quality
5 - Greet attention is expected to the part of the instructions which directs
the oldest provisions to be served first and unceasing attention is requisite to
prevent vast and unnecessary surveys by taking care that provisions (especially
in the article of cheese) the most likely to suffer by keeping, is served in preference.
6
No change or alteration whatever is to be made in the Ships company's
provisions without my particular direction.
7 - He is required to visit every Saturday with the master & carpenter, the
b r e d room, stewards room and slop room, and point out to h i any Ieaks, damp,
or injuries his stores or provisions may be suffering from thoae or any other causes
whatever.

*

*

*

*

*

*

*

"Pcuticalsr attention is to be paid to the regulations relating to the cutting np of fresh beel, that
4oh~
piam
i ~ be never p t q a d y selected for the OfEcers from thst which is out n far the Bhipa
"Company and that choice piem of Ealt meat be never taken for the OIfioat of
tub or vessel
%om which it m y be asrved to the Bhips Compnny."
"That Orawn do not select easLa of the best wine or gpirits fm,their a m Um from tho= intended
"for the Ships Company nor exchange m y wine or spirits ol thev own for thst wblehhas been aurL
'bboard for the ase or he Ship."

&

8 - Immediate notice in writing L to be made to the Captain on the discovery
of any provisions which may be found unwholesome or unfit for men to eat; and
if a t any time, any part of the crew shall refuse to receive the provisions which
may be serving, or murmur at, or complain of the quality, he is d~rededto make
report thereof without delay to the Captain or Commsnd~ngOBcer.

A Commodore of a Squadron to be received on board with a guard under srma
snd a march; the number of the guard to conaiet of aa many marinea as can be
made to appear decent; the side to be piped by the Boatmain and manned by
Six Sideamen.
Captaine of the Navy to be received on board with a guard without beat of
drum, t h e r d to comiat of 16; the side to be piped by Boatswain, and 4 sidemen.
On the ommodorea visiting the Ship all Officere are to be on the Qullrtcr deck.
On C a p t a b coming on board, two iieut't with the Midshipmen trre to be on
the Quarter-deck; the fimt Lieut, if on board, if not, the next in rank is to be one
of the two. The same oeremony to be obeerved on their lesving the Ship as in
receiving them.
On my coming on board or going out of the Bhip, the etequette for a capbin
must be observed.

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

41

The Officer of the Watch is to particularly observe that attention of politanas
is paid to all gentlemen coming on board, to have the Side piped by a Boatswain's
Mate and manned by two Sides men, and himself to receive them a t the break
of the Quarter-deck.
HARBOR REOWLATIONS

At the begining of the break, the reveille is to be beat, all hands are to be
turned out, hammocks piped up and neatly stowed in the nettings; decks washed
as early as possible; the Shi wetted outside, yarda squared; a t 7 bells the Officer
of Mmines wiil have the hfarines turned out and exercised; ten minutes before
8 oClock, the hands to stand by trieing lines, colors & bell, the Boatswain & his
mates to be ready with their calls; five minutes before 8 oclock, the drummers
call to be beat, in order to call the attention to the following execution. F'recisely
a t 8 A. M., with the roll of the drum, colors hoisted, tacles triced up, bell rung, all
as expeditiously as possible, after these manouvres, the Marines dismissed and
the troop beat. When top gall$ yards are exercised they are to go up with the
roll of the drum, and crossed with a flam, in exercising top gall* yards, the order
for the Colors, tscles & bell must be carried into execution a t the time of crossing
the yards; the evening execution of this Order is precisely the same as the morning
except in time, the distance from sunset, instead of 8 oClock must be observed,
& the retreat beat, instead of the troop a t 9 P. M. the tattoo to be beat, the bell
rung and all lights put out. The Marines in harbour are to be exempted from
standing watches, and when not urgent busineas is to be carried into execution;
they are to be exempted from doing Ships duty by day; but by no means this
order is meant to prevent the Sea Officer from calling on them to do ships duty
when necessary, the intention is, that the Marines may have an opportunity of
having themselves and arms clean & decent.
[H. E. Huntington L&AG. NDA photostat.]
To William Jarvis, U. 6. Consul, Lisbon, from Bobert Montgomery, U. 6. Consul,
Alicante

ALICANTEI P * SepF 1803.

COPY

DEARSIR, My last respects were under the [space] I am since
deprived of your favors and have only to advise that the John Adam
Fngate, Cap! Ro[d] e n arrived here a few days ago and sailed with a
small Convoy to t e Westward, he brought w t h him a Tripoli.

%

Frigate of 28 Guns captured in the Bay of Tripoli near which place
he also forced on shore and blew up another of 22 Guns, great part
of the Crew perished.
[NA. SDA.

CL, Lisbon, Vol. 2, 1803-1805.1

Extract from Memorandum Book of Captain Edward Preble, U. 8. Bavy, on board
U. 8. Frigate Corulihttion, 13 September 1803

Arrived a t Gibraltar and found the U. S. Ship Philadelphia, Ca tain
Bainbridge with a Moorish man of war of 22 guns his prize an$ the
bri Celia of Boston Captq by the Moor and recaptured by the Philadtfphk.
[LC, original.]
Extract from Diary of Captain Edward Preble, U. 8. Bavy, on board U. 6. Frigate
Comtifution, Tuesday, 13 September 1803

Li ht winds from the Westward and hazy weather steering thro h
the traits of Gibralter, a t 1 P M saw the Rock bearing NEb"g,,
Steered into the Ba a t ) ast 3 Anchored in 23 fathoms water
soft bottom. The hYew M O S.~S. E. 2 Miles disl Algezirna W 4 8.
Saluted the Garrison with 15 Guns, which was returned by an equal
number: I found the United States Frigate P h W p h k Captain

I

42

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1808 TO 1804

Bainbridge at anchor, with the Moorish Ship of War the Mirboka of
22 Guns and 98 Men -Captain Ibrahim Lubarez her prize. Captain
Bainbridge fell in with her 0% Cape De Gat and took possession of
her in consequence of finding on board orders to capture all American
vessels, and property of Americans; whether found on board American
vessels or the Vessels of any other Nation, and of her havin under
those orders actually captured the Brig Celh of Boston, 8aptain
Richard Bowen, which Brig, Captain Bainbridge recaptured and
brought into this Bay - and delivered her up to the Master. I
received the usual compliments of respect & ceremony from the
Governour and the Porteguese Admiral - Captain Bainbridge
delivered me copies of his correspondence with Consul Simpson on
the Capture of the Mirboka, and all the papers relative to that Ship
[LC. EPP, Diary, 1803-1804.1
-rot

from log book of U. S. Prigate Gnstifution, Captain Edward Preble, U. 6.
Navy, commanding, Tuesday, 13 September 1803

Steering through the Straits of Gibraltar wind from the WNW/ at 4
past 1 P. M. we saw the Rock of Gibra bearing NEbN, at past 3
PM came to with the Best Bower in 27 fath9 soft Bottom in Gibraltar
Bay/ Veerd to a cable/ The New Mole/ SSE nearly two miles/ algisirasl
on the West side of the Bay Bore mbS 4 S! we found here the United
States F'rigate Philadelphml Captain Barnbridge/ with a Moorish
armg ship detain'd on suspicion/ we alson found here three portugeas
namely/ one ship of the line and two Frigates/ the portugea admiral/
sent an officer on board the Constitution/ who waited on Commodore
Preble/ offering his serveces if Required/ Captain Bainbredge waited
on Commodore Preblel we found here no English man of war/ at 8
PM. mustered the Larboard watch/ as an anchor watch/ and made the
necessary arraingrnents for mooring ship at day light/ i forgot to
mention it above on our anchoring/ we saluted fiveteen guns/ an Equal
number was Returnd from the English Garrison/ at day light Veedrd
away on the Best Bower and moored ship a cable Each way/ Best
bower WNW in 27 fatha the small Bower SEbS in 25 fatha/ out Barge/
the Commodore/ waited on the commanding officer/ at Gibraltar/
the ships company Empd painting the two Bower cables/ fleeting the
Topmast Rigging and setting u the Bobstap/ at 11 AM. anchored
here the united States Schooner ken Lieutenant Smith/ who Brought
dispatches for Commodore Preble/ from the Honorable Secretary of
the Navy, at noon winds from the westwg

+

e

[NA. ND original.]
Extract and translation of a journal* kept in French by an unknown person on
board the U. 8. Irrigate John Admnr, Captain John Bodgere, U. 8. Bavy, commanding, from Tnesday, 1S to Wednesday, 14 September 1808

Afternoon . . . sighted several vessels. Delivered the convoy to the
. Close to the coast of Spain. . . At sunset
schooner [Enter
& the N W distance 8 miles. Mona Limi I?]
the Rock of
to the S W distance 18 miles. At 8 P M abeam of Gibrdtar . .
At 1 P M entered the Bay . . At sunrise saw three American
frigates the 00718titution~the Philadelphia and the New I'o~k. On
Wednesday, 14th at 8 A M came to anchor in the roadstead of CSibral-

.

.

43

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

.

tar. . Euro a Point to the south, Ceuta to the S W, San Roque to
the N W, the gattery of San Felipe [Castle] to the north . . .
Disembarked Friday, 16 September 1803.
[*This journal was written in French, by someone on board the John Adam,
until 16 September, 1803. It is continued, in French and in the same handwriting, on board the U. S. Frigate Constitution, beginning 22 October, 1803.1
[LC. EPP, Journal 1803.1

[14 September 18031
To Captain Bichard V. Morris, U. S. Navy, from the Bey of Tuia

HAMUDA
Bassa, Prince of Princes and the web? defended city of tunas,
the abode of Felicity
To commodore MORRIS,commanding the n a d force of the U S, of
America in the Medite~anean.
SIR by superior reasons, I had beg'd the President of the U S,
To exuse me for not explaining to you my reasons, concerning the
conduct of Mr Cathcart. as I thought it im roper, that he should
remain by me as consul for the U S. In this fetter I a h that the
same cathcart Wrote me from onboard, and set out without waiting
for my answer. you will see that I had very good reasons for not accepting a subject Of this kind for a consul, as your acting consul Mr
Davis will Write you, and you will juge my moderation in this circornstance. I wait with impatiance the friendship and Justice of The
President, and the satisfaction that may be Agmable to you Sir, the
exact declaration if I can consider myself in good friendshp with your
nation. whilst that without my consent you Left Mr Davis to act as
consul untill the Goverment should appoint another. and if Mr
Cathcart had foreseen, that as not being accepted Mr Davis could not
also have been. it would have been indifferent to me who should have
Been appointed. Desiring to hear what as Been decided between Mr
cathcart and the U S. So that I may know how to conduct myself.
I remind your estime with pleasure. and wish you the greatest
felicity DALBARDO
OR CASTLE
OF TUNIS Se t Id* 1803
HAMUDAassa Bay.

33

[LC. EPP, Vol. 6, 1803.1
To Captain Edward Preble, U. 8. Navy, from James Simpson, U. S. Consul, Tangier
Morocco

TANGIERlQtP Septemr 1803. SIR Fully satisfied it was the Constitdh I saw pass to the Ease
ward on Monday I dont hesitate a t addressing you, to congratulate
you on your arrival in these Seas and to assure you of my respect. Having been informed you were expected a t Gibraltar I lodged with
Mr Gavino such details on the actual state of the Public concerne
under my care, as I trust will have given you .ample information regarding them. - It is matter of great consolation to me that you are
so near me a t this critical moment. - It is not necasaary for me to
repeat to ou on Captam Bainbridges opperations - we must view
that ~ e n h a meeting
n
the Emperours Ship with the captured B
in company as a very fortunate event, for thereby a most deceitf
and crdinal conduct towards the U~utedStates has been detected,

3

44

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1805 TO 1804

--

and I trust will be so fully substantiated by the papers found on board
the Cruizer and the Captain's declaration, as to ut the matter past
all doubt. - As it is proper you should be fuE acquainted with
evev particular respecting this very interesting a,$ air I enclose with
this copy of the Letter I wrote J3s Majesty the 2q Ins*,also an Arabic
copy and translation of the answer thereto received this morning. B the Latter you will see His Majesty may be supposed ignorant of
dtiydde Hashash having directed the Captains of his Cruizers to
seize American Vessels, - however extraordinary this may appear it
is not impossible, for we have seen the Emperour place the most unbounded codidence in that Man, nay we have it from good authority
he is possesed of a Letter from His Majest containing these words
"do by Land and Sea as you see fit and I
support you." - You
will see the mode of proceeding the Emperour desires for investigating
the matter, which certainly cannot be precisely followed, nor is the
propriety of Captain Bainbridges conduct to be submitted to his
determination. In my Letter of the 34 Ins$to Captain Bainbridge
I requested he would send me copy & translation of the paper delivered
to h m as the authority R& Lubarez had for taJxing American Vessels,
the Emperours demand shews the necessity of that measure & I
trust the Philadelphia may have returned to Gibraltar that it may
be done without dela .- I would not advise the original bein sent,
but it ought to be odged so as to be within my reach sho d the
validity of the copy be denied, that refference may be had to it. With this is a Letter from the Em erour for Lubarez desiring him to
come to Tangier, before it be deEvered or that he be told of the
Emperours request, it will be highly necessary that he give a declaration stating the time when he was authorised to capture American
Vessels, where and from whom he received that authority, the time
he sailed from Lsrach and when he captured the Celia. - If he can
be brought to state these particulars with the assistance of one of the
Jews of Gibraltar acquainted with the Arabic Language it will be
essentially usefull ;- if he of himself will not state such a declaration
then in my oppinion the best way will be to bring him on board the
Flag Ship and propose questions to him to the effect of what I have
mentioned, if not inconsistent with your established Interrogations;
and the like with one or two more of the .principal persons of the
Ship, without allowing either any opportmty of knowing what has
passed with the others. - After this has been gone throu h the Letter
may be delivered Lubarez, and if you find that facts o y have been
stated in such declaration as he may make, then I hope you will not
see any inconveniency to complying F t h the Emperours wish of his
b e i i sent over here by any opportumty may offer. - Such apers
as may be necessary to send me respecting this busyness Mr avino
will be ood enough to enclose and p ~ under
t
cover to Dg Anto
Salmon panish Consul here, and they w d l reach me in safety. 15* September Noon. What precedes I had written yesterday to be in read ess for any
opportunity might offer - I have just now had the onour of receiving your Letter of the 13tQIns* and must d m i t that the observations you make on hostile intentions of the Emperour of Morocco
against the United States stand strongly justified by actual occur-

-

I'

13

di

P

8

P

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

45

rences. - In the instance of the Mesh& I was instructed by Commodore Morris to say if the Act was that of the Master, and unauthorized by the Emperour the Ship would be liberated. - he will
now determine her fate, which certainly must be influenced by. what
has recently happened. - Mr Gavino has sent me a translahon of
the Orders given Raiz Lubarez, which appear to be from Hashash after having seen this paper I am fully satisfied the Emperour will positively deny havin authorised any such bein given his Captains, from the thorou knowledge I have of t%ese people I perfectly
believe that M ey Soliman did not know the particular Orders
Hahash a
Lubarez, but that he confided in him & has been led
into the situation he now is with the United Stabs uninbntionaly. This even admitted I will fully allow in no Justification of what has
happened, but if you find that the Emperour should be inclined to
an accommodation I submit to you whether it would not be very
adviseable to close with him on such terms as you may consider
honorable, rather than press s continuation of hostilities.

3%

[LC. EPP, Vol. 6, 1803.1

[14 September 18031
To Captain William Bainbridge, U. S. Navy, commanding U. S. Frigate Philadelphia,
from Captain Zdward Preble, U. S. Bavy

The Captains and Commanders of the Ships and Vessels composing the Squadron, under my command, are not to allow their Boats
to land at any other place, excepting at Ragged St& after 5. oClock
PMGiven on board the United States Frigate
Constitution at Anchor in Gibralter Bay
14tQSept. 1803 - E. P.
[Same to: Lieutenant Richard Somers, commanding U. S. Schooner Nautilus and
Lieutenant John Smith, commanding U. S. Schooner Vizen]
[LC. EPP, Order Book, 1803-1805.1
Extract from Memorandum Book of Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Navy, on board
U. S. Frigate Contlitcdion, 14 September 1808

The John Adams and Adams, U. States Frigates arrived from the
eastward on their way to the U. States.
[LC, original.]

&tract from log book of U. S. Frigate Co~liiution,Captain Edward Preble, U. 8.
Bavy, oommanding, Wednesday, 14 September 1803

Moored in Gibraltar Bay. deliverd to the united States Frigate
Philadelphia Elevin
nearly 60 gallons Each/ at 3 anchold
here the united
Yorkl Commodore Morris/ Commodore Preble
Morris/ * * * at 9 AM.
anchored here the united StatesShip/John Adamsl Captain Ro[d]gers/
and the united States Schooner Nautilus Lieutenant/ Summew/
Captain Ro[d]gersof the John Adam, and Lieutenant of the Nuzltilw
waited on Commodore Preble Lieutenant Smith of the Schooner V k
waited on Commodore Preblel the ships
ship and Squarin the Ratling of the
States Fiigate J o sa Adams, had in company a

f

46

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1803 TO 1804

captured under Tropletie Colours at Noon Moderate Breezes from
the Weatwd
[NA. ND original.]
Ciroulor to the Consuls in the Straits of Gibraltar, from W i a m Jarvie, U.8. Consul,
Lisbon

LISBON
15'b September 1803.
SIR,Understanding by a recent arrival that Hostilities have been
commenced against us by the Cmsiers of the Emperor of Morocco, I

embrace the earliest opportunity to inform you that on the Night of
the 13*@Instant, arrived here the Moroquin Cruiser fitted out at
SalleB, it is said witbout having made a capture; she is Ship rigged and
taunt masted, both her Bottom & aides are black exceptmg a pretty
narrow bright streak round the latter, her stern is painted Dove
Colour, but not ornamented with carved work, has a prow head resembling a fiddle head, carries 24 long sixes on the Main and 6 or 8
two or three pounders on the Quarter Deck, manned with 150 Men
and is a round sided Ship somewhat after the Greek model. Ifhat
she is after or how long she will stay is not known, the moment either
comes to my knowledge I shall immediately communicate it. You
will have the goodness to give this information to the Commodore or
to the Commanders of our Ships of War, leaving to their better judgment to act thereupon as they shall conceive most conducive to the
Protection and safety of our flag.
N. B. Since the foregoing I have learnt that one of her Mast is
sprung which she came in to repair, if this Goverment allows her to
do it sbe will probably lay here some time. She is now under Quarantine, but it IS likely will be cleared Tomorrow or next Day. [NA. SDA. CL, Lisbon, Vol. 2, 1803-1805.1
To Captain John Eodgers, U. 8. Navy, commanding U. 8. Frigate John Adam, from
Captain Edward Preble, U. 8. Navy

UNITEDSTATEB
FRIGATE
Cm&itution GIBRALTER
BAY16a Sept 1803
Captain Bainbridge has observed to me that your sensibility as an
Officer, has been very deeply affected by observing a Commodores
Pendant on board the United States Frigate Constztution under my
command, I have only to observe Sir, that it is not hoisted for the
purpose of injuring your feelings or those of any other Officer but to
designate that I command a Squadron of the United States Ships of
War (independant of any other squadron) and that the OfEcers commmding the Ships and Vessels composing that Squadron, may know
where to apply for Orders, and from whence to receive Signalsfor their
Government &c*-and for further satisfaction (as I conceive that the
success of our negociations with Morocco, in a great measure depend
on unanimity of sentiments, and good understandmg among the commanders of our Ships of War) I take the libert to uote to you part
of my instructions from the President of the
States -

&id

"The Squadron under our oommand wiU oonsiet of the Constitution-the Philodslphia Ca tain Bainbri.
the &ten Lieutenant Stewart the Argw Lieutenant
H a the eizen Lt s m k e NautJw L i e u w t Pamem, and the Bnkpriu
Lieutenant Stephen Decatur

-

47

W D S WITH BARBARY POWERS

This force is committed to your direction, for the purpose of protecting effectually the Commerce and Seamen of the United S t a h against Tnpolitan Cruisers,
on the Atlantio Ocesn the Mediterranean arid adjoining Seas"

-

Alter this explanation, I presume you will rest perfectly satkfied
with the propriety of my conduct - I have no disposition to be on
such terms with any officer of either the United States squadrons now
in these Seas, as to injure the interests of our Country, if it posslbly
can be avoided I shall with pleasure meet you, to consult what measures may be best calculated to keep peace with the Barbary Powers
that we are now a t peace with and what measures it will be proper to
pursue to bring those powers to terms, which are at war with us [LC. EPP, LB, 1803.1
To Captain Edward Preble, U. 8. Navy, U. S. Frigate GmNLrdlon, from Captain
John Bodgers, U. 8. Navy

UNITEDSTATESFRIGATE
John Adams,
C4ibraftarSeptember 16'9 1803.
SIR, I have this moment received your letter of this Date, and in
Reply to your observations, permit me to observe, this is not an affair
between private individuds, and that my feelings as an o ar has been
most sensibly injured, and I do (also) insist that if the ate of your
Commission is subsequent to mine, that it is not in the power (Even)
of the Govenunent, to place you or any other Officer m a situation
which could afford an op ortunity of treating me with Disrespect. I t would give me pain to eave the Mediterranean on unfriendly terms
with you, but there are certain points of Etiquette which I can not in
justice to myself pass over and which youhavenot explained -however
to prevent our fee
acting in a manner that can in any [way] effect
the Interest of our ountry I dm the subject until we have more
leisure to D e h e what has past. - propose going to Tituan with the
John Adams immediately in order to know the Emperors Determination which Business I wish to consult you on, and would thank you to
inform me whether you will be on Board at 2 o'Clock If you are I
will call for that purpose.

+?

i'

9?

f

[LC. EPP. Vol. 6, 1803.1
To Captain Edward Reble, U. 8. Navy, from Captain William Bainbridge, U. 8.
Navy

UNITEDSTATES
FRIGATE
Phikdelphia Gibralter Bay
1 P September 180s
SIB,This moment my Carpenter has reported to me, that the main
intel of the Rudder of the United States Frigate PhilQ&elphk is
groke off.
[LC. EPP, LB, 1803.1
To Captain Richard V. Moms, U. 8. Navy, from Burgeon George Davis, U. 8. B a v ,
U. 8. Chargb d'Affaire8, Tnnis

Duplicate

CONSUZAB
HOUSE.
Tunb Sept. 1 i P 180%
SIR, By the enclosed extract from my present Dispatch to the
HonlQthe SecT of State -The letter I had the honor to address to you
by Capt. Campbell - And the one now forwarded you from hia

48

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1803 TO I804

Excr Hamuda Bashaw Bey of Tunis, You will learn that the extravagent passions of Ms Cathcwt, hisjolly, and ill Jud ad communication
to the Bey, has hurried us to the brink of a war -&ur early answer to
the Bey's letter, will not only calm my extreme anxiety. but I trust
reduce our Mairs with this Regency, to their former friendy posture I feel it, unnecessary to make any remarks, on the conduct of My
Cathcart towards me; (And which will be cancell'd when we are alike
free'd from public responsibility) You Sir, are too well acquainted
with my character, and principles not to be satisfied, that I am incapable of abusing in any way the confidence you have reposed in me And I feel satisfied that the decision of my Govr will be as honorable
to me, as agreeable to yourself. I have this day drawn on Messr@
D n Purviance & CQon the faith of your Credit, (as pr advice from
~ % a )for Two thousand Pezees de Otto Reali-in order to defray the
public expences annexed, to the Visit Mr Cathcart &c &c. I also
enclose You the Accr of Hadgeunis-Ben Unis; on which Subject You
will be pleased to give your orders -I must again repeat the extreme
necessity for Yr forwarding an immediate Reply fo the Bey u~isealed;
as I must make the translation in Italian RICHARD
V. MORRISEsqt
Comodo & Commander i n Chief
of the U. S. Squadron in the Mediterranean
Original with the Bey's letter, is forwarded to the cam of Mess'"
Degen Purviance & CQLeghorn.
[Stephen Decatur ColJ
To Captain William Bainbridge, U. 8. l a v y , commanding U. 8, Frigate Philadcfphla,
from Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Navy

UNITED
STATEG
FRIGATE
Comtdution Gibralter Bay

16*QSeptember 1803
SIB, The Emperor of Morocco appears (from recent hostile conduct,
such as the detention of an American Merchant Vessel in the Port of
Moggadore) to evince a determination on war ou will therefore
detain and send to this place for examination dvessels belongin
to him or, his subjects until this Order is countermanded - you
write me often & keep me regularly informed from time to time of
your proceedings [Gimilsr letter sent to Lieutenant John Smith, U. S. Navy, commanding U. 6.
Schooner V h n ,18 September, 1803.1

d

[LC. EPP, Order Book, 1803-1805.1

To Lieutenant John

8. H. Cox, 0. 6. Navy, of U. 8. Frigate Philadclpiia, from
Captain Edward h e b l e , U. 6. Bavy

UIJ~TED
STATES
FBIGATE
Con~titufion
GibraMer Bay
Septr 1803
SIR,you we to take charge of the Ship Mirboka Prize to the United
States Ship P h W d hia, and to keep her in your possession safely
moored a t anchor w ere she now lies, untill further Orders from me;
and to be extremely carefull that not my p u t of her stores are embezzled - You m y make such requisitions, for provisions and necessaries, on John Gavino Esquire our Consul as may be wanted b
youreelf, the Midshipman and four Men, attached to her - Yon wi

f

i

& 1 8 0 d v e o s b o s r d b M ~ 0 s u c h i n v ~ a s CeBainbridgrt
a
m~onbovdfmmtbs~~~~.nd~mride~r~8min

-

manner ss may be suitable for tlmr state of W t h
I shall send a8urgeonsMahon board to give fhemfhemcamwy
medical 8id [LC. EPP, Order Book, 1803-1805.1

To ChpUin Bdwud Preble, U. 8. Hmy, 0. 8. Frigue
William Bhbridge, U. 8. Brvy

-

UNITEDSTATEE FBIQATE
Philad*
OibraUer Bay ltW Scp'r 180j
SIR Is Lieu5 John Cox to remsin on board the prize Mitboka or
does he receive your orders to join the New Pork.
In what mibnner am I to proceed, to send the Invalids on board
the Frigate P h M p h i a to America. could I not ssnd them for
the present on board the Prize, are the Midshipman and four people
now on board that Vessel to remain there.
Will ou be leased to give ordem respecting the pI.ison~p8on botud
the Ph&Q I sBould wish to be clear of them one day, prior to !%hg,
to enable us to clean Ship
I enclose you a Letter for Mc William Lynch of Philadelphia in
caee of your sending the S i p to America appointing him our Agent
in the 881ai.r
[LC. EPP, Vol. 6, 1803.1

To Captain William BPinbridge,.U. 8. Bavy, commmdin(tU. 8. Frigste
P W M 4 from Cwtun Edwud Preble, U. 8. Xavy

UNITEDSTATESFBIQATP~
COlMfirurim

dAllclror~Bay161*Sc~1~
the
SIB, Lieufenant Cox, the Midshipman and four Men on
Prim Ship M+boka, are to be continued on board, and ou ma seanl
the invdds agreeable to your request to that ehi togatier
thsir
e and aceounte - You wdl please to sen on board this Shi
B
al=prineiple
OfEc8rs of the prize and the remainder you
send on board the prize ship the Mcssudo captured by Captein
RoId3g818

%

wd

&

[LC. EPP, Order Book, 1803-1805.1

To Lieutenant Bichrrd Somen, U. 8. Brvy, co-dbg
U. 8. BOhoonerNadihrr.
h m Orpt.39 M w u d Prsbls, U. 8. ear^

SIB, you will 8&il immediately for Malag8 and takeBundwConvoy
all the American M d w t V d bound to the Westward and bring
them into this Bay, you sre not to stay at
ofl
o
e Er
m p asr
~,r
h o w - Should ou f d in with any armed
of Morooco, or, o his eubjecte, you are to bring them into this ptree
for exrrmination
fLa. EPP,Order &loL, 1801)-1(Wa]

Z

U

-C

~

D FZUQATE

16*) Sept 1803
Sir, You wiii please to proceed to sea as soon as you ean r b l y get
retrdy, and take such American Merchant Vessels, se are und from
fhie place to the Eastward under your Convoy, and stop at Malags
24 hours, to take our trade from thence, and-proceed up the Mediterranean,with them as far as in your o &on you may thmk adviseable,
bqe to circumstanc88 and evmta,
for the good of the service,
that may take place, the v i u z t e n a n t Smith will accompany you,
and you may make such use of her as may to ou a pear most properpass near cape de Gatt, cape palm and Eapehu-tin - ~t a be
well to send the V k w d in ahore to look into the Bays, and snug
h,
along the Coast, if you do not eee or hear, any thing of Tri line
L
m by
time
reach caps ~ u t mYOU
,
p r d to
teging that track, most likely to fall in with them you will land at
Malts all your unnecessary spars & lumber but are not to stay them
more than 24 hours, unless necessity ahodd re uke it; but p r o a d
off Tripoli, and maintain (during the sesacln, in w b h it ma be safely
done) an effectual Blockade of that place as can be done w iti the force
you have with you; and annoy the enemy by dl the means in your
power You will detain all the Cruisers of the Emperor of Morocco, that
you may meet with, and send them to this place until further Orders,
You are not to sufFer the v~sseIsof any nahon to enter, or have commerce with Tripoli,but you have a right to treat as an enemy, whoever
attempts to enter that place, or carry any thing to it, without our
of
k v e , while it is blockaded by you - you are to mpect the
aR Nations with whom we are at peace, and not to capture eeseLs
within the Jurisdictional limits, or under the protection of such nations,
war, to BuCCOllr, aid,
yon we at all times so far as ma
relieve and frea any h e r i c a n
be in
attack by the enemy, or in
their possession The Officem of our Ship, ma receive paymenb of money from time
to t$M but no dvmce beyon what may be due to them, in .Uyour
bills (should you have Occasion to draw any) you are to be camfull to
mention the purpose for which they are drawn and whan it can be
done, you we to draw on tbe secretary of the hav, with letters of
advice to him, but when that casnot be done, ou are to draw on
Mess- MgKenzie and Glenni London, or Messrg egen and Perviance
Lea;horn, when you cannot receive a supply from me in consequence
o# our seperation On the arrival here of the rest of my Squadron I ahall send you more
form, and further Orders and dire0t;ions As won as the Season makes it d
rous to 6on the Coast of
Tripoli you may harbor at Mala \m ' you hear from me, or until it is
proper weather for cruising It will be well for you to shew y o d , off Tunis OCCILBiOna31 , as
eoon as force enough b v e e off Trrpoli to keep thair ~Rlisersin
ILC. EPP,Order Book, 1803-1805.1

Elt.

ri+t

fd yOureBO

1

d

'Zr

A.

To G n Q l p ( . s a J u h n ~ U . % . P , v p , o o ~ U .MpteJ.L,1(IBa*,fram
B.
fhptdn WiUiun Binb*d,

?3.&. S a r ~

UNITED
STATES
FEIQATE
P M *
acibralter Bay
S@ 1803
Dr SIB. YOUwiU much oblige me by sending the Chwb b d , asd
the I M a n Servant: and I assure you that it would be rend
aesistenee to the Service by turning over some of your Men w oee
times bave not expired, to the Frigate P W p I &

Yan

[LC. John Rodgem & others, Let. & Doc., 1794-1848, Ac. 3647.1

Ta Captrin Otway, B. X., Commidoner at Ctibraltar, from Captain Edward FreMo,
U. 8. Navy

UNITED
STATEB
F ~ a a n-e0

QtibraUerBay 1 P Sep* 18tB
SIB, The Buddm of the United States Frigate Philadelphia one of
the Squadron under m command hss received damage you wiU ob@
me by allowing it to
repairld in the dwk yard, and furnishing
the necessaries for such repairs as it may require

%e

[LC. EPP, LB, 1803.1
]brtr.ct from Diary of Captain Edward Preble, U. 8. Navy, on board U. 8. %riptb
GmsMdm, Friday. 16 September 1808

Waiting for dispatches from Tanger - Wind Westward - SBilsd
the Schooner Navrilw) L*Somers for Malaga, with ordm to convoy
the Trade from thenw to this Ba , and capture Moorish Vessele Gave Ssiling Orders to Captain &inbridge of the Frigate Ph&&phis - and Lieutenant Smth of the V k [LC. EPP, D i , 1803-1804.1
E#raot from iournd of 1Iid&ipmm Henry gladsworth, U. 8. Eavy, on b o d
U. 8. 8. Nar Y w ~ Captain
,
Richard V. XORUI,U. 8. Xavy, commmndlllg, 16
September 1809

Gibraltar On our arrival hem we found Comr Preble in the Cowtiin the PhQadelphia the Schooner V k & the
fell in with a Moor of 30 guns but not
knowing of War let her escape, the Vizcoz fell in with a privateer
& let her go - unfortunate.
I have reeiev'd orders from the Secretary of the Navy to join fhe
O d m : foday I ut them in execution, & I have gotten up very
thia morning to ring my journal to a c l w .
* * * onboardthe0-.
la. w.L. Dana 001.1

1

To Z a n w Simpson, U. 8. Conml, Tangier,lY[oroceo, from C a p t a i ~E d d Prable
m d John Bodgem, U. 8. Xavy
On board the U. 5. FBIGATE
C&W
Tang@Road 8epS 17'8 l a

52

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM I803 TO 1804

m m ,and accomodating our present Wemces with the Emperor
of M o m c o , if he should be inched promote them, as his letter to
you declares it to be bis wish; and provided it can be done with honor
and propriety on the part of the United State.
We have on board the Moorish & Tri line captains, of the MwBZMd
[ M c s M ] and the captain and Six r" of the Marboka, and as it
may be necassary that these Officsrs should give s fuIl explaination of
&cur orders, and conduct, it is our wish that some proper pmon ma;
be aent off, on the part of the Emperor, to mske t
hexamination.
will slso be necesstlrg, that a good interpreter should come off with the
person who may be sent for this purpose.
As an interview with you, appears to be indispensible towards B
pro r undarstanding, and accomodation of this business, we have no
tted to come off. if it is the sincere wish
dou%etbut you w i l l be
of the Emperor to set e t h l ~business amicably. R e s h d , therefore,
forbear entering into any details, untill we have the pleasure of seeing
you on board, or receiving an answer to this. We have a translation
of tha Original order given to Rais Lubarez fo capture American Vessels certified in his own hand wri
to be a true copy of the order he
r e d from Hashash and the origm also which m a y be examined by
rson sent on board for that purpose. Any 0fEcer.belonging to
the xnperor who rns come on board, shall be at liberty to go on
shore the moment he p eases we shall first know if you are rmitted to
come off before we send the certified copy on shore.
e made a
proposal to the Officers of Marboka, that one of them should ammpan
this letter. this they did not relish unless the whole could be liberatd
Col. Tobias Leu is on board the Constitution and will assist in the
negotiations
{LC. EPP, Vol. 6, 1803.1

&

I:

t$""

9

"F

r'

F

To CapWns Edward Preble and J o b Bodgerm, U. S. Ravy, from J m e r Simproo,
U. 8. Consul, Turgier, Xorocco
TANGIER
17'9 Septemr 1803

-

GENTLEMEN
- At receipt of your Letter of this morning I sent for
the person who commands in the absence of our Governour and communicated to him the object of your coming to this Bay -he, is not
provided with any authority on the subject, therefore is to send off
an Express to Tetuan to give Alcayde Hashash the necessary information and take his orders, which will be here tomorrow evening or
Monday morning. - This sta was indispensible or I would not have
taken it, os you will believe have but too well founded reason to
throw eve objection in the way of that Man having any thing to do
with our egotiations and if possible it must be avoided. - As the
expression in the Emperours Letter ma be taken to apply to himself
"we will examine" - some Tabbs trans ate it as carrying his intention
to have the busyness investigated under his own immediate inspection. - by the answer Alc%ydeHashash may ve that matter
will be cleared up. - Monday is the last time fixed or His Majestys
leaping Mequinez, if he comes here direct he may be with us on
Friday, but rf he goes by way of Tetum it will be ~t least three days
latter. If you stand into the Bay on Monday I shd then be able to hand
you the answer from the Governom, and speak with more p r d m
than now on the Emperours motiona -

f

3

9

f

a

53

WABS WITH BA13BARY POWEBS

By the enclosed you will see a Novelty of no s m d colls~~uence,
as
it appears to throw back the source of our present situation to the
Emperour himself - be that as it may I full hope the Capture of the
Mirbollur will inincline him much to Peace, a J i f the Maimma could be
added to the list of Captures, we might I very much believe dictate
our own terms. - I do not know that by the Laws of War your
e m d here to day should in any shape barr your pursuein those who
are in search of opportunities of acting hostil aglunst our untry. I shall ask the Governour by Express to a Jow me to go off to you on
Monday which I very much wish he may consent to. - I would not
advise any Boat G i g sent on shore yet, we cannot have reliance on
these people Commodore Rodgers will have the goodness to excuse my not
replying to his favour of the gt* - it shall be ready for Monday
in the mem time I consider his arguments in support of detention of
the Mmhouda very conclusive [LC.EPP, Vol. 6, 1803.)

b

-

Ertrsct from Diary of Captain Edward Preble, U. 8. Blary, on b o d D. S. Frig8te
Carutiwon. Srturday, 17 September 1805

Unmoored and got ready for Sea - Ordered Captain Bainbridge
to send the Moonsh Captain and Six of the principal OmBof the
Mirboka on board - ordered the other OfEicers & Crew consist'
Of
92 Men on board the New York's prize, as a prison Ship, I cons ted
with Cof: b a r $ Commodore Rold] em, and concluded to
Tanger with the Constitution & John A ms to endeavour to set e the
present existing difference between the United States and Emperor.
-4t 7 P M Col: Lear came on board to assist at the negotiation Commodore Rogers hoisted a Broad Pendant - Commodore Morris
hauled down h s - at 9 the John Adam sailed - at Midnight
weighed and sailed with the CoMitufim - stood out of the Bay, and
run along the Barbary Coast to the Westward at 6 AM saw the John
Adams to the westward, at 7 Anchored in Tanger Ba the John
Adam in company - our depth of water 16 fathoms rd bottom
Cape Tanger WNW - the town of T a v e r SWbS 2 miles did Eretern
part of the Bay ESE 2 miles. In this situation we had a fair view of
the whole Bay and of the Town. I have a very contemptible opinion
of the Strength of the place from its appearance, The English, French,
Swedish, Danish, & Spanish Colours were flying at the Flagsta& of
the Consuls of those Nations. At 10 AM a boat came from the ahore
with 4 Spaniards to receive letters. Commodore Rogers m e on
board - we wrota to Consul Simpson assuring him of our pacific
dispositions towards the Emperor.

3

r"

%

%

[LC.EPP, Diary, 1803-1804.1
Extract from Xemormdam Book of Captrin Edward Rsble, 0.9. Xavy, on boud
U. 8. Rigate 6nrlltcdlon. 17 September 1809

Went to Tanger to demand satisfaction for the insult otIered our
flag in the capture of the Celia.
[LC,originsl.J

54

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1803 TO 1804

W r c t from log book of U. 6. Frigate Comffiaffon, Captain Edward Preble, U. S.
Xsvy, commanding, Saturday, 17 September 1809

Moored in Gibraltar Bay, Running from Gibraltar to Tangerl and
laying a t single anchor in Tanger Bay, winds from the Eastwd
we recie'd from the Frigate Philedelphia, the Moorish Captain and
six of the officers that was Taken in the armd ship Belonging to the
Emperor of Morocco/ Con1Lear who disambarkdfrom the Cowtitution,
with his Family/ came on board a t 8 in the Evening in Boats/ we
wieghd at Midnight and came to sail/ John Adumsl in com any/ we let
in Gibraltar Bay/ the united States Frigate New York, ommodorel
Morris, without a Broad pendant/ the Frigate Philadelphia/ Captain
Bainbredgel and the Schooner/ Vixen/ Lieutenant/ all left three
portugees men of war/ namely the Arabella/ Mdgrate and the Tossal
we had a leading wind from the Eastwg and Run along the Barbary
shore in order to anchor in Tanger Bay/ a t 4 past 7 in the morning, we
came to in Tanger Bay in company with, the John Adums Commodore
Roggersl Commodore Preble waited on Commodore Morris/ i belive
Commodore Ro[d]gers is the seinor officer for the time being out
depth of water is 16 fatha heard Bottom/ Cape Spartel WNW. Cape
Tanger, which is the North Extreme to the Eastwd the Town of
Tan er SWbS nearly three miles/ the Eastern part of the Bay, ESE,
near y two miles/ in this situation R-e had a fair View of the Town of
Tanger. we saw flying in the Town of Tangerl English Colours/
Swedesh, French Spanish/ and Hambourgh Colours/ a t noon Moderate
Breezes and clear weather winds from the Westw* severed letter past
and Repasg Between, Commodore Ro[d]gers/ Commodore Preble and
Ms Simpson, the American Counsil a t Tanger Tobias lear Esqr
Counsil General to the Barbary powers/ accompanyd/ the two Commodores from Gibraltar to Tanger/ there was not any Boat Belonging
to Either of the ships' Went on shore at Tanger

8

f

[NA. ND original.]
To Secretnry of State from James Leander Cathcart, appointed U. 8. Consul, Tunin

U S FRIGATE
Adams

NQ13

03Almeria bay SeptT 1BtQ1808

SIRThe enclosed detail will inform you of our actual position a t
Tunis, in addition to which I have the honor to inform you that I was
creditably inform'd that the Bashaws political reason for not receiving
me a t Tunis, is no other than in consequence of a request from the
Dey of Algiers to that purport, in compliance with the will of the
Sllnhedrim & their most righteous Secretary; I am consequently
consider'd by them as no longer encharged with the affairs of the
United States in either of those Regencys, & when I have offer'd to
the Regency of Tripoli the terms of peace prescribed by my instructions & dehver'd the Jewels & property of the United States in my
possession to any erson appointed to receive them, who I presume
will either be the ommander of the Station or whoever is a pointed
Consul general a t Algiers my functions will cease, unless the resident
should think proper to send me fresh instructions - If the interests
of the United States should dictate the necessity of appointing an
Agent to superceed me a t Tunis, I request Sir that it may be done in
as delicate a manner as possible, that m y reputation may not suffer
in the estimation of my fellow Citizene, and m order that I may not

8

8

WR&S WITH BA&BARY POWEBS
be subject to the animadversions of the ignorant & malicious of whom
we have too many in the United States, I request Sir tbat this may be
consider'd by government as my resignation I am now in uest of the Comodore who I expect to find either a t
Gibraltar or M age & shall proceed to the execution of my instructions a t Tri oli as soon as he may find it convenient to take me there,
the result o which I will take the earliest opportunity to inform you of
& will from thence proceed to Leghorn to hold myself in readiness to
return to the United States on receiving the Presidents orders I should have dispatch'd a courier from Tunis but in consequence
of the Bashaws refusing our offer of an annuity a t tbat place I was
apprehensive that the Bashaw of Tripoli would be very exorbitant in
his demands unless our offers are accompanied with force, making
propositions in any other way would look as if we were tired of the war
I hope the manner I open'd the negotiation a t Tunis will meet the
Presidents approbation, I offer'd a premium to be allow'd a commercial
p r i d e d e whch we do not enjoy that priviledge was denied us, conse uent fy we are exonorated from the promise of the remiurn most sincerely congratulate the President and alf' those particularly concern'd in the negotiation for the cesqion of Louisiana as well
as my country; this event has form'd an epoch in our national history
second to none but the declaration of Independence, & while it opens
an ample field for commercial enterprize, it consolidates the Union so
far as the western territories are concern'd & prevents our b e i i s u b ject to the devices of an intrigueing ambitious & restless neighbor
which at some future period might produce incalculableconsequencesAs a number of aqpointments.must necessarily take place previ?us
to our taking possession of Louisianrt I should conceive that refrabmg
from petitioning government in due season to be merted as an applicant for one of said appointments would be acting enirnical to the
interests of my family, more especially as contrary to the example of
some Barbary Consuls I shall return home five thousand dollars a t
least poorer than I was the day I was appointed Consul for Tripok,
I therefore request you to mention me to the President & Senate m
such a manner as you may think I merit, & should I be so happy as
to succeed both the President & yourself Sir may depend upon my
gratitude for the preference shewn me & my country may depend upon
to the best of my abilities - Whether
my faithful services accord
my services gives me any c aim to public employ in common with
my fellow Citizens the President and yourself are the proper judges:
my knowledge of the languages used in that country probably would
render me as useful and I hope my character a t this period of my life
is not doubtful In whatever way the wisdom of overnment may determine you
would render me a singular service y infonriing me of my fate as
soon as possible, Mr Gavino a t Gibraltar will know where to f h d me,
I shall either be onboard our Squadron or a t Leghorn As CaptP Campbell will be a t Washington when you receive these
dispatches I refer you to him for any additional information he being
perfectly acquainted with all my operations for some time past, in
the mean timo I have the honor to subscribe myself with the most
resptxtful esteem [NA. SDA. CL, Tripoli, Vol. 2, 1801-1805.1

9

f

1

"K

%

56

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1808 TO 180.4

To Secretary of the Bavy from fhptein Edward Preble, U. 8. Bevy
U. STATES
FRIGATE
~0128t&&fY?&
Gibrder Bay 18q September 1803 SIR, I have the honor to inform you, that the United States Ship
Constitution under m Command arrived here the 12t4instt on my
passage off Cape St incent, I fell in with the Ship Maimonu with 30
Guns and 150 Men, Admiral Hadge Tacher [word illegible] belonging
to the Emperor of Morocco, bound to Lisbon on business for his
Master, I boarded and made three several examinations of her papers
and found them, all fair, as far as we could understand them, she had
the passport of our Consul at Morocco, dated at Tangier 23=4Jul
1803 addressed to sll the commanders of the U. States armed Vesse s
stating that the Ship Maimom, belonging to the Emperor of Morocco
mounting 30 Guns and carrying 150 Men commanded by Hadge
Tacher [word illegible] was bound on cruise, and requesting all commanders of the United States armed vessels, to treat him as a friendly
vessel, he conducting himself accordingly the Consular seal was
afExed to the said passport, the Captain had likewise the top of a
parchment passport, with a certificate thereon, signed James Simpson,
stating that it was the true top of an American Passport her papers
were so fair, and clear that I could not detain her - Indeed I should
as soon have thought of detaining a British Vessel - Altho I must own,
I felt uneasy at parting with her but should have felt more so, had not
ColQLear, (who was acquainted with Mr Simpsons hand writin )
volunteer'd his services to go on board and examine the papers himse(if
he did so, and pronounced them correct, I enclose you his report to
me after the Examination I found here the Philadelphia Captain Bainbridge with the Morocco
Ship of War Mitboka of 22 Guns and 98 men Captain Ibrahim Raiz
Lubarez her prize. Captain Bainbridge fell in with the Mirboka off
Cape De Gatt with an American Vessel which she had captured in
company, this circumstance was sufficient Justification for Cap?Bainbridge to take possession of her, to prevent her doing more mischief .Captain Bainbridge was also so fortunate, as to recapture the pnze
[Celia] On translating her papers one was found to be an Order to capture
American Vessels which the Captain said he received from the Governor
of Tangier, sealed, with Directions not to be opened until he was at
* Sea - I suppose the Ship which I met off Cape St Vincent has Orders
to do the same, on her return from Lisbon, but do not suppose she will
Capture before as she has gone there to receive a present and be well
fitted in order to act more efficientlyagainst our Commerce - Captarn
Bainbridge deserves much credit for h u vigilance, and active exertions
in re-capturing the prize, as well as capturing the cruiser, and for the
humane and v e v pro er treatment, the Officers and crew of hm prize
have received, srnce t ey fell into his hands 14Q Schooner Nautilus Lt Comdt Somers, arrived from a Cruise up
the Mediterranean - The Schooner Vixen arrived from Baltimore The Frigates New York and John Adurns arrived from Leghorn with
the prize Ship Messzlada - taken by Captain Rodgers in attempting
to enter Tripoli - The Circumstances of that affaw, I presume you
are acquainted with -

4

9

-

E

57

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

16tP sent the Nauiilw to Malaga to bring down a Convo of 18 sail
of Merchant V e w h waiting there, and gave s d i n g Or ers to the
Philadelphia and V k n to go Eastward
17tb I unmoored, and got ready for Sea, and directed Ca tain Bainbridge to send the Moorish Captain, and the Six princip officers on
board the Constitution and the other Moorish Officers, and the Crew
by permission of Captain Ro[d]gers I sent on board the M i s d his
prize in Consequence of the Suspension of Commodore Morris from
the Command of the former Squadroa, it devolv'd on Captain Ro[d]gers,
of course Morris hauled down his broad pendant, and Ro[d]gers
hoisted his as Commodore of that Squadron - I felt the Necessity or
propriety of proposing to Comr9 Rodgers (Notwithstanding his Ordem
to return home) that he should remain a few days longer on the Station
with the New York and John Adams, and that we should sail together
for Tangier, to assist M' Simpson in bringing about an accommodation
of our affairs with the Emperor of Morocco, which Commodore readily
assented to - And I requested Colonel Lear to accompany us, that
we might have the advantage of his able advice and Assistance in any
ne ociation that might take place t h i s Gentlemans Zeal for the public service insured a ready compliance on his part, he immediately embarked and a t Midnight we
wei hed Anchor, and sailed, and at 7 o'clock next morning, anchored
in angier Bay, with a white Flag a t the fore, as pacifically inclined a boat was sent off by Mr Simpson with an open slip of aper, purporting that he only was allowed to send a Boat to receive etters - I
wrote m behalf of Cornr+Rodgers and myself, and received Answr"
thereto which were apparently written under restraint, but Mr Simpson found an Opportunity to slip a letter into the packet, which confirms me in m first opinion that the Governor of Tangier has not
acted without &her Authority, he states that he has a scene of the
deepest treachery to unfold as soon as a rsonal interview can take
place, and that the Emperor has been gI$' ty of another act of hostility a t Mo adore by seizing on the Brig Hannah of Salem Joseph W.
Williams &aster (who was there on a trading voyage) and making
prisionem of the crew - The Governor was a t Tetuan, and no person at Tangier that had Authority to permit Mr Simpson to come off
to us, he stated that he was confined to his house m t h two centinels
a t the door this being the case, and the Emperor not expected until
Thursday we made the following arrangement that Commodore Rodgers should go to the westward and cruise off Larache, Sallee and
Mo adore and m self to return to Gibralter to give additional Orders
to aptain Bain ridge and Lieut command^ Smith, and to leave
Orders for a new disposition of the force under my command - I accordingly weighed a t 8 in the evening and Sailed for Gibralter a t 10
AM entered the Ba -found the Philadelphia and Vixenunder way I made S i a l for t e Captains, ave them additional Orders and they
left the Bay, wind westward - anche with an intention to get under
way, and be a t Tangier the next night, but the wind from the Westward has prevented us - I shall weigh this evening and proceed to
Tangier and endeavor b every honorable means to bring about an
accommodation, but if t a t cannot be done, I shall make them feel
that we are sensible of the injury & injustice they have done us, but
shall take no hasty steps, you will a t once discover my opinion of

B

a

8

P

8

g

E

f

g

58

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1803 TO 180.4

this business by a perusal of NQ 1 of my dispatches which accompanies this; that letter was not wrote in warmth, but you may rest
assured that cringing to those Barbarians will not Answer I am
fully aware, that it is for our interest to have peace with Morocco
but it is not necessary, or proper that we should be so over anxious, as
to induce them to believe we must have it, on any terms the choose
to dictate - I have an ardent desire to do right I hope I sha - You
will have all the information in my power to give you by a perusal of
my dispatches as they are arranged, you will there be made acquainted
m t h every transaction since I came on this Station, and with some
transactions before I arrived - some of the numbers are important
documents, particularly the translation of the Order to capture American Vessels which discovers the deep designing treachery of those
Barbarians, who could give such an Order and withold a signature in
order to deny it if discovered - If their vessels of War had been successfull they would not have denied but on the contrary would have
justiiied the Order by some pretext or other; I cannot hear of their
having captured any American at Sea except the one re-captured by
Captain Bainbridge
I am weighing anchor for Tangier - Lt Gordon and the Midshipmen ordered to this Ship have joined her The Adams is momently expected here, and the Enterprize now in
sight standing into the Bay, I shall want her services for a few days
previous to her carrying the Orders N"7 into effect - I t is some
time, I believe since any of the old squadron were off Tripoli, & fearfull that the Tripolines would be Induced to think we neglected
them, I thought prudent notwithstanding our Morocco business to
dispatch the Philadelphia and Vixen to pay them a Visit, I had not
time to give Lt Comdt Smith such full Orders as I wished therefore
directed him to Sail in Company with Captain Bainbridge and follow
his directions until further Orders - I shall give him full instructions by the first of the Squadron that goes to the Eastward You will discover the disposition I have made of the force under
my command by the orders each Commander has received, copies of
which, are among my dispatches; I hope the President will approve
of the Orders I have given to the Commanders of the Vessels of my
squadron to capture the vessels of the Emperor of Morocco I conceived it was my duty, as he had given Orders to his cruisers to Capture ours - the greater the number of his Vessels and subjects we
can get into our possession the easier we can make peace with him I
have no doubt, but this business will be soon settled, and enable me
to bend my whole force against Tripoli, should I be wrong in my conjectures, I think i t will be necessary to keep a small Frigate a Brig
& a Schooner to rendezvous a t this place, and cruise along the Morocco
shore - I find it necessary to remain here myself a t present - and
hope the liberal instructions which you were pleased to give me, for
my Government, in allowing me to exerclse my Jydgment without
restraint for the good of the service, and our situation with Morocco
will justify my conduct - I think with the addition of a 32 Gun
Frigate, a Bng of 16 - 32 pound Carronades, and a Schooner of
14-24 pound Carronades I can effectually Blockade Morocco, and
Triply, and by hiring a few Gun boats bring them both to any terms
we please -

r9

59

WARS WITLI BARBARY POWERS

It is absolutely necessary that every Article which composes our
ration's should be sent out from the United States as they cannot, in
consequence of the War between England and France be purchased a t
Gibralter and even if they could the prices a t present are 50 pr Cent
higher than in time of peace; Candles and Molasses have heretofore
been much wanted by the other squadron, they are articles that cannot be rocured, on any terms in this Country
I sh be able to give you further information on my return from
Tangier, which will not be for some time hence unless our &airs with
Morocco are amicably settled, as I shall cruise for Ship Maimona soon
expected to be ready to sail from Lisbon
[LC. EPP, LB, 1803.1

!ti

To Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Navy, from William Kirkpatrick, U. S. Consul,
Malaga, Spain

MALAGA
18 Sept 1803
DEARSIR I have learnt from Lieus Somers with great Satisfaction
your safe arrival a t Gibraltar, and that you were in better Health
than you had lately enjoyed in America, I shall have much pleasure
in seeing you in this Quarter, and beg you may not think of going
aloft without paying us a Visit, - Some untimely rains, the beginning of this month has retarded materially the Shpment of E'ruit, it
only was permitted yesterday, and not One of the Vessels now loading for America are in readiness, or can be made so, a t the expiration of the 24 Hours Capt Somers has allowed, He consequently
returns, but I beg you may have the Goodness to send him,or some
other immediately back, the Whole of the Americans now here 14 in
number will be ready for Sea on Thursda should the Weather permit Shipping, on this you may depend,
mentioned this day Week
to Capt. Rodgers that in 10 or 12 days they would be ready. I hope you will find it Convenient to attend to the Solicitation
of so many Americans who anxiously wait for a Protection from
you. - * * *
[LC.EPP, Vol. 6, 1803.1

f

To Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Bavy, from Tobias Lear, U. S. Consul General,
-err

GIBRALTER,
September 18q 1803
SIR, The unexpected disposition and evidences of hostility which
have been recently given by the Emperor of Morocco towards the
United States, making i t necessary to guard, as much as possible,
against the evils which may result to the Commerce of the U. States
in consequence of such an event; I am convinced that you will not
consider it prudent to leave this station until some measures can be
taken to place our commerce in the best security that the nature of
the case will permit; I therefore conceive that I shall be fulfilling the
duty which I owe to my Country to remain here, until the Constitution, or some other proper Vessel can proceed with me to A1 ers,
without too much endangering the interest of our Commerce by eaving this important Coast unguarded: And I am the more especially
induced to this, from the instructions of my Government to have an
interview or communication with Ms Cathcart previous to making any
dispositions relative to our Maim with Tripoh and Tunis,and as the

P

60

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1808 TO 1804

arrival of the U. S. Frigate Adams, which is daily expected here, will
probably produce this desireable event.
Knowing your anxious wish to pursue such measures as, in the
unlooked for and critical state of our Affairs w i t h Morocco, may be
most conducive to the interest of our Count ,I am persuaded that the
President of the United States will wrdi y approve of any steps
which may be taken to effect this object, altho' ~t may cause a delay
in executmg your original intentions of proceeding immediately to
Algiers,

3

[LC. EPP, Vol. 6, 1803.j

[I8 September 18031
To James Simpson, U. S. Consul, Tangier, Morocco, from the Governor of the
Emperor of Morocco
Translation of Letter from Alcayde Abde-Raharnan Ashash. -

Praise be Given to God. There is no Power or Strength but that proceeding from God. From the Servant of his Master and the Servant of
Majesty
exalted by God - Hdge Abde-Rahman [HIAshash whom God assist,
to the h e ~ . i c a nConsul Simpson. - Peace be with those who follow
the right way. We have received your Letter and read and understood its ConKnow that we continue in the Friendship established between
tents.Our Master (whom God reserve) and your people without any
change or alteration. - &at you say regarding your two Frigates
that were near the Port of Tangier but do not come in, nor did any
erson go to speak with them, now w-e give you liberty to send and
Eid them come into the Port under the Security of God, - and if
any of them chum to land for transacting the busyness the come u on
the shall be wellwme and if they chuse to come to etuan t ey
sh& be wellcome there also - every thing they desire to do for the
good of both Nations I am ready to carry into effect with the greatest
attention; therefore our deputy Sidy Ahmed el Metigui and the
Director of Customs Hadge Alarbi Fecurt are there and will t m t
with them, informing us what may happen. - But you cannot be
with them alone on board, and on shore only in company with our
Deputy. We have been told here that you dont hoist your Colours as usualWe have not forbid you - then hoist them as you have alwa s done
~
for in truth there is no motive why you should not as ~ r e i n d s &still
continues between us. - Peace be with you Septem' 1803 date should be

4.

%

[LC. EPP, Vol. 6, 1803.1

U. 8. Frigate Coruiftution, Captain Edward Preble, U. 8.
Bavy, commanding, Snndoy, 18 September 1803

Extract from log book of

Laying a t single anchor in Tanger Bay with the Frigate John Adams
in company in the cows of the afternoon, we recie'd different des-

b the convayence of shore Boats/ from the American
8usatehe/
o n 4 tEe Moorish Captain/ and six of his officers, who a m m p a n f l
from Gibraltar/ to Tanger/ some of them had permission to proceed

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

61

on shore But they declined to offer/ there plea for not going a shore
is this/ all officers serving under the Emperor of Morocco/ after being
made Captives/ must first have liberty. granted them from there
goverment/ before they can land at 7 in the Evening we saw fiers on
all the high Hill and Mountain along shore/ which we suppose to be
there alarm signall at 112 past 7 in the Evening Commodore Preble
waited on Commodore Roggers/ at 8 Comme Preblel come on board/
we weighe with a light airs of[Q shore/ made sail and steerd over for
Gibraltar Bay/ we parted Company with the John AdQrnsl Cornmodore Roggersl who is belive cruses a short time of[Q Cape Spartel
[NA. ND original.]
To Richard O'Brien, U. S, ex-Consul General, Algiers, from Surgeon George Davis.
U. 8. Navy, U. S. Charge d'bffaires, Tunis

TUNISSept. lgt@1803.
DEARSIR,Your favour of the lot@Aug. was received on the 1Zt@
Inst. - the AfEair of Eaton, on which I begged your advise must
remain in Statuquo, untill I can receive some intelligence from the
Govt
On the 2* I n s t arrived the U. S. frigate A h , with James Lr
Cathcart Esqr Consul for the Regency of Tunis - The Bey after
learning the Powers this Gentleman was possessed of, as also his
Instructions from Govt, refused to accept him Consul for the U. S.his extreme mortification, not only h~mrried.h
into many extravagancies, but nearly precipitated, his Country mto an immediate warI enclose you an Extract from my resent Dispatch to the HonlQ
the Sec? of State - without any urther remarks, Indisposition
must plead my apology for not writing you more fully - I also
forward you by this occasion a number of letters, long since received
(from Mr Cathcart) -

P

[LC. EPP, Vo:. 6, 1803.1
To James L. Cathcart, appointed U. 8. Consul, Tunis, fzom Nicholas C. Nissen,
Danish Consul, Tripoli

TRIPOLISeptr lgt@1803
SIR TWOdays ago arrived the Cruiser~ommandedby Raiz Halifa
after an absence of two months during whch she cruised on the Coast
of Spain & Algiers and made no captures The Bashaw has terminated the trouble at Guerrian partly by
Negociation and artly by force of Arms, the Inhabitants have agreed
to pay him an In emnification of 100,000 dollars and to permit h1.m to
budd a Castle & place a Garrison on their Mountain; the Bashaw is
now sending an army to Derna to subdue his brother H m e t , who is
in possession of half that Town, but the Coast & Harbour is in the
hands of the Bashaw of Tripoli who has two Cruisers there one of 10
& the other of 12 Guns, to prevent his brother from having any wmmunication with the Island of Malta. lately was ca tured a t Derna
and sent here a vessel belonging to Malta, which d gone there,
notwithstanding the prohibition published by the British Government a t Malta on the 4Q of A ril in consequence of the Bsshaws
demand - The actual force of ripoli is as follows -

!

L

4

62

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1803 TO 180.4

I

10 Guns Comm'J by Raiz Hash
StationJd
hi[?]
A do - - - - - - - - 12 do-,- by Rab Mohammed a t Derna
Suai
A New Brig of 14 d?- - - -built a t Tripoli said to be bound to
Derna with Murad Rab on board
- who is Peter Lisle the infamous
English Renegado A Galliot of 8 Guns which it is said will likewise be sent to
Derna
A do - - - - - - - - 6 do---,
A do - - - - - - - - 4 do- - - A do -----,-,
2 do-,-,
Building a kind of Schooner to mount 10 or 12 Guns
6 Gunboats mounting each one long 18 pounder
2 do- - - - - - - - - do--- each one long 24 do
2 do---- - - - - - do.. -- one 12 pounder & the other an 8 pounder
The above is an exact statement of the Maratime force of Tripoli,
there not being any of their Cruisers a t Sea
We have not seen during the last 3 months any of our vessels of
War, we are informed that they keep up a vigdant ruise between
Cape Bon, Malta & Sicily, with Schooners, this plan is well conceiv'd
and I presume more useful than a Blockade.
On the point of Girgash 3 or 4 miles to the Westwd of Tripoli the
Bashaw has erected a Fortification to protect his Cruisers as they
run along shore - The Mercht vessels in this port are
vizt One under the Ionian Flag bound to Leghorn
One under the Imperial do bound to Trieste
Two vessels bound to Malta
Two do--------,,-to the Levant and one expected from
Leghorn in a few weeks - This is all I have to communicate to you
worth your attention - Should any thing interesting occur, you
may epend upon receiving information by the earliest opportunity

A Zebeck of

d

d

[Stephen Decatur Col.]
To John Gavino, U. 8. Consul, Gibraltar, from James Simpson, U. 8. Consul,
Tangier, Morocco

TANGIER
lgth Septr 1803
DEAR
SIR Sincemy last to you of 15t@I
have received your Esteemed
favours of the 13tP (2) 14tQ& 16q for which I thank you. - The

declaration of the Moorish Captains on subject of the treatment they
received on board the John Adums & Philadelphia is very satisfactory,
to men of sense it certainly could not be necessary, but to the generality
in this Country, and to stop the malignant reports most industriously
propagated by Alcayde Hashash on the Occasion, - they were
mdwpensibly requisite, and I trust they have had their full force. Yesterday I had occasion to send an Express to the. Minister, to
whom I gave full information on the subject that he mrght acquaint
Hie Majest .Commodore Preble & Commodore Rodgers have been here, the
latter gives me very ample information respecting the Meshouda, &
such M if I had been possessed before, matters respecting her, would

63

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

have been in a Ve difEerent State,to what they are; I dont write,
either of these Gen emen as I conclude they are not with you, besides
we have not had the least novelty, worthy of imparting wee my last
letter to them of Saturday, save that b one I received yesterday
from a private friend near the Emperor, f f m d His Majesty does not
leave Mequmez until1 Fnday next, so that probably, i t will be fourteen
days from this day [beflore we shall see him. Hashash has orders, to
meet him a t the River Ayesha, a day & a half from hence. I advised Commodore Preble of orders having reached Mogador
on the 4t@I n s f for Seizing all American Vessels and Pro erty, might
be a t that Port, and the Brig Hannah of Salem Capn d
i
s
m
m
slately
arrived from thence, was taken possession of with her Cargo consisting
of 75 Bales Cotton 10 Chests Tea some Iron, & a few Bales of Piece
goods. - The Cap? & Crew were given up to Mr Court on his
Security to be Answerable for their appearance. This has been a
deep laid Schem, but I trust they will yet ay dearly for it. Two guards continue a t my door and a tho, the Justice of my cause,
and the Em erors favourable disposition manifested on more than
one occasion ately towards myself, gives me hopes no further Violence
will be offered me, yet as there is no dependence on any thing in this
Country, I have thou ht best to send back the forty Loaves Sugar,
as I have not*been tab e to h d a purchaiser for them st any price they are Shipt but whether on Athalaya or the Misticoi, Very h e
has not come to tall me, and our friend is about to Seal his letter; I
will write you two lines by Mr9 Miller and tell you. - I thank God Mr*
Simpson keeps up better than I expected what may be attributed to
her having by the merest chance met a sabfactory nurse, for her Child
[LC.EPP, Vol. 6,1803.1

iK

P

P

f

To Lieutenant Richard Somers, U. S. Navy, commanding U. S. Schooner Noulilus,
from Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Navy

UNITEDSTATESFRIGATE
Constitution
Gibralter Bay 19tWepr 1803
SIR Immediate1 on our arrival in this Bay, you will Victual, and
Water your vesseT(ms%ng your re uisitions on John Gavino EB ULe
for that purpose with whom I have eft orders to supply you) an sail
without delay to the Westward. Look into Tanger Bay, and if you
do not find me there, proceed off Larach, Sallee & Moggadore. and
cruise off Moggadore three weeks - speak e v e 3 A m e r k m Vessel
ou meet with, and inform them, the Emperor of orocco's Cruisers
gave orders to capture American Vessels; and that He has detained a
Brig in Moggadore and made prisioners of the crew belonging to
Salem -You will send into this Bay all the Vessels you may meet with
belonging to the Bashaw of Tripoh, the Emperor of Morocco or their
subjects a t the expiration of three weeks you are to return to this
Bay, and wait my further orders.
You are a t all times as far as may be in your power to succour, aid,
relieve, and free, any American Vessel attacked by the Enemy, or m
their possession ;but always to respect the ri hts of Nations, with whom
we are a t Peace, and not to capture Vesse within the Jurisdictional
limits, or under the protection of such Nations.
The Officers of your Vessel may receive payments of money from
time to time, but no advance beyond what is due them.

2

9

k

64

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1803 TO 1804

In all your Bills, should you have occasion to draw any, you are to be
careful to mention the purpose for whch they were drawn and to
forward letters of advice with them. You are to draw on the Secretary
of the Navy, when it can be done, and when it cannot, you may
draw on Messrc MoEenzie & Glenni of London, or on Messr*Degan
& Perviance of Leghorn Write me by every Opportunity (care of Johq Gavino Esquire
Gibralter) and keep me informed of all your proceedmgs
[LC. EPP, Order Book, 1803-1805.1
To Lieutenant Charles Stewart, U. S. Navy, commanding U. 8. Brig Siren, from
Captain Edward Preble, U. 8. Bevy

UNITEDSTATESFRIGATE
Constitution
Gibralter Bay 19th Sepr 1808
SIR I have directed this to be hand'd you immediately on your
arrival in this Bay, and you are in 12 hours after the recelpt of it, to
sail to the Westward, if your vessel is in a situation to do so. You
will look into Tanger Bay, and if you do not find me there, proceed
with all possible dispatch off Larach, Sallee, and as far South as
Moggadore, and stretch from thence to Cape Spartel Keep a good
look out for a ship of 30 Guns and 150 Men called the Momona
[ M a i m m ] ,Admiral Hach Tacher [word illegible] belonging to the
Emperor of Morocco. She is out for the purpose of capturing American Vessels, and if you meet with her bring her into this Bay for examination. She is about 350 or 400 Tons, Mounts 11 six pounders on a
side on the Gundeck, and 4 four pounders on her Quarter Deck has very poor quarters is slovenly about the rig&g & sails, has a
Biiet-Head Turpentine Waist (ve dirty) Black Bends & Bottom
Stern rather high, with two large p ain mouldings, one about two feet
below the other. No fore top gallant-mast up, her Fore & M a i n
Topsails a p e a t hoist and square by the head with only two reefs in
them - A Mizen Topmast m t h a very short pole head, and three reefs
in the Mizen Top Sad - a small storm Mizen -no Spanker-boom Yards all the colour of the wood - I met her off Cape St Vincent on
my passage hither. examined her passports, which were fair and proper;
and not knowing the Emperor of Morocco had made War on us, let
her proceed to Lisbon whither she was bound She is, I understand,
soon expected to return to Sallee. I t is probable some alterations
will be made in the appearanFe of the ship a t Lisbon, that she may
not answer the above descri t~on. I t will be a glorious thing for you,
to take her; You can easily c fo it, if you meet with her; and, my orders
are, that you make the attempt.
You will inform all the American Vessels you meet with, of the
hostile disposition of the Emperor of Morocco. - Cruise between
Cape Spmtel and Moggadore ten days, and if you do n o t meef,with
me, return to this Bay, and prepare your vessel for a crume m t h all
possible expedition and sail to the Eastward. Cruise from Cape de
Gat, to Cape Martin 10 days, and if you do not meet with any Tripoline or Morocco Vessels, you will proceed to Malta, and may stay
there 24 hours to Water, and gain information from thence proceed off
Tripoli to w i s t the Philadelphia and Vizen in the blockade of that
lace. You are to capture all Vessels of the Bashaw of Tripoli and
k s Subjects, and to annoy them by all the means in your power.

7

-

65

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

-

You are also to capture any vessels attempting to enter that p l m
while we are Blockading it - and should you meet with any of the
Vessels of the Emperor of Morocco, or of his subjects, you will send
them to this lace for examination - Cruise off Tripoli as long as the
Season will a low you to do with safety and then Harbour at Malta but I do expect that you do go out occasionally and shew yourself off
Tripoli even in that season when the Weather is most severe, as it will
have a good effect.
If you have occasion for money, for the necessary expences and
supplies of your Vessel you will draw on the Secretary of the Navy,
when it can be done, and when it cannot you are to draw on Messr+
MFKenzie & Glenni of London or on Messr? Degan & Purviance of
Leghorn. And always forward your letters of advice, with your Bills
mentioning therein, the purpose for which they were drawn.
You will respect the rights of all Nations with whom we are a t
Peace. and not capture Vessels within the Jurisdictional limits, or
under the protection of such Nations.
The Officers of our Vessel, may receive payments of money from
time to time, as it ecomes due, but not any in advance.
Make your requisitions for Provisions a t this place on John Gavino
Esquire, and he will supply you.
You will as often as opportunity offers inform me of all your proceedings.

P

g

[LC. EPP, Order Book, 1803-1805.1
To Lieutenant Stephen Decatur, Jr., U. 5. Bavy, commanding U. 5. Brig A r g q
from Captoin Edward Preble, U. 8. Havy

UNITEDSTATESFRIGATE
Constitutwn, GIBRALTER
BAY
1gt$ September 1803
SIR On your arrival in this Bay, you will prepare the Argw for
Sea with all possible expidition make your requisitions on John
Gavino Esquire for what provisions &c you can find room for, and if
the Enterprize should arrive before you are ready to Sail, you are to
exchange commands with Lieutenant Hull; but if she does not, you
are to proceed with all possible dispatch to the Eastwg pass near
Cape de Gatt, Cape Palos, and Cape Martin, and proceed from thence
to the Blockade of Tripoli. You will cruise off that place, untill the
season makes it dangerous; and you may then Harbour in Malta.
But you must even in the very worst Season, go out and shew you:self off Tripoli occasionally if only for a day or two a t a time, as 3t
will have a good effect, by convmcing those Barbarians that them
Vessels are not safe in l e a r n Port at any season of the Year - You
are to Capture all Vessels be onging to the Bashaw of Tripoli, or his
subjects and to annoy the Enemy by all the means in our power.
You will detain and send to this place for examination a the Vessels
of the Emperor of Morocco, or of hi Subjects, which you may fall
m with untill further orders. You are not to suffer the Vessels of
any Nation to enter or to have commerce with Tripoli but have a
rqht to treat as an Enemy whoever may endeavour to enter that
place or carry anything to it whilst Blockaded by us - You are to
respect the nghts of Nations with whom we are a t peace, and not to
capture Vessels within the Jurisdictional limits, or under the protection of such Nations: You are a t all times as far as mrry be m your

f

d

66

NAVAL OPERATIOhTS FROM 1803 TO 180L

power, to succour, aid, relieve, and free, any American Vessel attacked
by the Enemy or in their possession
The Officers of the Argus may receive payments of Money from
time to time, but no advance beyond what may be due them Should you want Money for the necessary expences of the Argus,
you will draw on the Secretary of the Navy when it can be done,
expressing in the Bills the purpose for which they are drawn - When
you cannot draw on him, You ma.y draw on Messr? MCKenzie &
Glenni of London, or on Messr! Degan & Perviance of Leghorn, and
letters of advice must accompany your Bills You will write me by e v e q opportunity care of John Gavino
Esquire Gibralter and keep me Informed of all your proceedings.
Lg Commandant S. DECATUR[*]
[Substituting "Enterprize" for ",4rqus" and "Hull" for "Decatur", similar
instructions were sent to Lieutenant Isaac Hull, U. S. Piavy, on 19 September.
On 22 September 1803, these orders to Lieutenarh Decatur and Hull were
countermrtnded, and new ones issued.]
[*An officer commissioned Lieutenant in the U. S. Navy, when in command of
a Ship of War, was often addressed as Lieutenant Commandant.]
[LC. EPP, Order Book, 1803-1805.1
To Secretary of the Navy from Lieutenant Stephen Decatur, Jr., U. S. Navy

NEWPORT,U. S. BRIGArgus Septl 19@1803
SIR,YOUwill perceive bv the letter I had the honor of wrtg you on
the ninth. I left president Roads on that day, for the first two days
after leaving the port we had fresh breezes increas? from the Northday we entered the Gulph in Lat. 40'
ward &: Eastward, on the
40 the gale becomeing heavy from the h' E with a remarkable heavy
sea going, I hove to under a close reefed main topsail, reefed fore
sail, & storm main staysail, a t this time we had got the top gallantmast,
flying Jibboom, & spritsail yard on deck, with the Jibboom rigged in,
a t 8 A h i sprung our bowsprit & got her before it to secure our foremast, after securing the fore mast had the bowsprit surveyed by the
Is$ Lieu: hiaster, Boatswain & Carpenter, the result of which survey
I enclose you, the opinion of those gentlemen agreeing with my own,
the short distance we had progressed, the certainty of loosing our fore
mast should we meet with another blow, &. knowing the difficulty
of procureing spars in the Medeteranian, induced me to put back
for the first port we could fetch, I arrived here last night and am
informed by the agent he will be able to get me a new bowsprit in
four days. The Argus sails fast. is very stiff & scuds well, but in lying to sh"
pitches remarkably heavy. [NDA. Officers LB, 1802-1805.1
Extract from Memorandum Book of Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Navy, on board
U. S. Frigate Conrfifufion, 19 September 1803

Sent the Philadelphia and Vixen to blockade Tripoli and placed
both vessels under immediate orders of Captain Bainbridge.
[LC, original.]

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

67

Extract from log book of U. 8. Frigate Constitution, Captain Edward Preble, U. 6.
Navy, commanding, Monday, 19 September 1803

Laying to in Gibraltar Bay, a t 2 fill'd and stood in for the anchorage/ parted company with the Philadelphia and the Vixen/ a t 3 came
too with the small bower/ in 20 fatbweerd to a cable Europa point/
SbE, the North Extreme of the old Mole EbN. nearly two miles/
in this situation we was about one mile from the Rock/ and three
cable lengths, with in us. ther was 10 fath6 sandy bottom Captain
Otway of the Royal Navy, now Commissioner at Gibraltar waited
on Commodore Preble. * * * on our anchoring here [Gibraltar] yesterday we found here the United States Ship A7ew Pork,
Commodore Morris who has Hauld down his Broad pendant/ the
two prizes i mentioned on our first arrival belonging to the Philadelphia and John Adams still continue here/ we sent an officer and a
party of men on boardl the Philadelphias prize, to strike Lower yards
and Topmasts.
[NA. ND original.]
To Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Navy, U. S. Frigate Comlitution, from William
Kirkpatrick, U. 6. Consul, Malaga, Spain

MALAGA
20 Sept 1803
DEARSIRI wrote to you on the 18 Inst, by the Schooner Nautilus,
that as Capt Somers did not find himself Authorised to remain for
the Vessels then loading for the United States, He had determined
to return, and I consequently requested you would have the goodness
to either send him, or another back to arrive on the Thursday when
I expected if the Feather kept favorable, they might be in readiness;
This I now Confirm, altho' some of the Ca.ptains have come to tell
me that Until1 Friday or Saturday they will not be despatched by
their Consignees, if you could therefore allow the Schooner to remain
48 Hours to take the whole at once, it would prove more agreeable, in
the Event of her getting back on Thursday as T expect.
Yesterday at Midday Capt Bainbridge, 8 Smith gave us a call,
they proceeded on, in the afternoon, as no Vessel offered for the Eastwa
I repeat my best Wishes for your Health, and Success in your
undertakings, and in hopes of your giving us a call on pour way up
I remain very truly
[LC. EPP,Vol. 6, 1803.1

[20 September 18031
To James Simpson, U. 6. Consul, Tangier, Morocco, from the Secretary of State
of the Emperor of Morocco
Translation of a Letter from Sidy Mahammed Ben Abd-Salem Selawy. Praise be given to God alone. -

There is no Power or Strength but in the Great and Almighty God.To Consul Simpson the American - Health. We have received your Letter and we see Hashash had sent for you
5ut that you were unwell, and that he wished to compel1 you. - Our
Master whom God preserve orders that you shall not go to Hashash,
but that you remaln in your House quiet, respected .and honoured
as the other Consuls, for you are still respected by hun, and Peace

68

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1803 TO 1804

remains as before untill the affair of these Vessels shall be determined,
when things will be as they were.
Here you have what Hls Majesty whom God preserve writes you
on your concerns- and he leaves you the same as the other Consuls: If you should hear of one of your Vessels being detained a t Mogadore i t is perhaps they have detained her because of the Tripoline Ship she will be in perfect security untdl that matter be finished and then
she shall be sent to her destination - there shall not be the pairing
of a Nail lost of her, therefore you have nothing to fear respecting
that Vessel.
2
9 of Chemade (the second) 1218 - doth Septr 1803
MUHAMMED
BEN ABD-SALEMSELAWY[LC. EPP, Vol. 6, 1803.1
To Captain Edward Preble, U. 6, Navy, from John Oavino, U. 6. Consul, Gibraltar

GIBRALTER
90t@September 1803
DEARSIR This day arrived a boat from Tanger that left it last
night - With her some of Mr Simpson's Servants who have been
expected some days ago. - I understand the Emperor had left Tetz
[sic] and that 150 Soldiers had gone from Tanger to meet him on the
mad so that he must be near a t hand - The Boat goes tomorrow a t
Midday for Tanger should you have anything thosay. - As yet I have
no letter from M r Simpson I herewith annex you copy of a letter from Mogadore [5 September]
received by the Boat from Tanger. If any Vessel could be spared
for that service, I think would be useful1 The Cargoes they bring
in general are valuable, ns they chiefly consist of India Goods
[LC. EPP, LB, 1803.1
Correspondence between Hadge Alcayde Abde-Rhaman Hashash, Governor or
Minister of the Emperor of Morocco, and James Simpson, U. 6. Consul, Tangier,
Morocco

My Answer to the foregoing Letter Dated 21 "4 Septr 1803

HADGEABDE-RHAMAN
HASRASH.
I have received Your Excellyq Letter and I have seen Sidy Mohamet,
Emfadal. - The American Commodore came to this Bay for purpose of treating on the affairs of his Nation with whosoever might be
authorised to that effect by His Majesty Muley Soliman (whom God
preserve) but when we received the news of the Governour of Mogadore
having seized an American Brig a t anchor in that Port, together with
all her Cargo and made the Master and Seamen prisoners, he put to
Sea and has not since returned. - The said Governour declared he
had orders to do the same by eve American Vessel might arrive a t
Mogadore. - I submit to Your xcy9 consideration whether these
be Acts of Peace or War. signed JAMES
SIMPGON
-

%

[LC. EPP, Vol. 6, 1803.1

To James Bimpson, U. 8. Consul, Tangier, Morocco, from the Governor or Minister
of the Emperor of Xorocco
Hadge Abd-e-Rahman Hashash's answer to my Letter of 21.t

Septr [I8013

In the Name of the only God. -

69

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

HADGEABDE-RAHMAN
H[ASHASH]
to J SIMPSON
American Consul. This is the same as the Letter I sent you by Mohamet Ernfadal who
will be a Cheif Assistant in this busyness. - Your Letter we recieved
by the Express in which ou tell me the Governour of Mogadore had
stopt an American ~ e s s ~ fWhatever
may be stopt a t Mogadore or
any of the Emperours Ports you will not lose any thing of. - I shall
be answerable for the whole. - Whatever I do with any Consul the
Emperour wdI approve of. - When the Commodore arrives he may
come on shore to talk on the Public busyness, or if he chuses to come
to Tetuan he will be very wellcome, as in Tetuan he also will be very
safe. - We are in Peace the same as before this busyness. - Let
those matters remain between us untill all be settled. - You tell
me the Christians are Prisoners at Magodore - They will not be kept
Prisoners, they are only stopt - If you know certainly the people
are in Jail let me know and I will send a Letter to get thom out. 4 &made (Zd)22g Septr 1803 [LC. EPP,Vol. 6, 1803.1
Extract from log book of U. 8. Prigate Conrtitulion. Captain Edward Preble, U. 8.
Xavy, commanding, Wednesday, 21 September 1808

Laying at single anchor in Gibralter Bay &d cruising Between the
Barbary C o a t and Gibralter winds Vble from the Westwd
* * * a t 3 anchored Here the united States Schooner Enterprize1
Leiutenant Hull/ who waited on Commodore Preble/ Lieutenant
Hull came a long side of the Constitution but he did not come on
board/ a t 5 PM. we weighd and made Sail in order to work out of
Gibraltar Bay/ * * * We was becalmd of[f] uropa point till 10
in the Evening at which time a which time a breeze sprung up from
the WSW we fill'd and stood over for Ceuta.1
INA.

ND original.]
To Secretary of the Navy from Captain Edward Paeble, U. 8, Navy

(1)

U S SHIPCow! a t Sea off the Coast of Barbary near
CEUTA.- Sept 2Zq 1803. -

SIR I had the honor to write you the 20" and inclose you various
dispatches as pr list since which in consequence of information from
Moggadore that several valuable American Vessels were expected
there and that two Gallies which the Emperor of Morocco has a t
Tanger were about moving, I have thought proper to countermand
the orders for the Argus and Enterprize, the latter Vessel is now along
side taking in Provisions for rt cruize 08Maggadore to revent our
Vessels from entering that Port, & falling to the hands o the Moors
and to watch the Moorish Crussers the Enterprize will have to touch
at Gibralter for a few hours for additional stores I am in great want
of the Argus & Siren, a t the present moment & hope they may !eon
amve, the Nazctilw has not yet returned from Mallva the v d s
have been contratry which has prevented her from cormng dpwn mth
the convoy, I want her to watch the two Galle s and a s h p l o e e d
m t h Moorish pro erty a t Tanger & prevent t em from escapew,
until I can learn &e em erors d e t e r n a t i o n , I understood that the
Vessels a t M a l a p were se ready to sail & hsd been wuting some time

f

E

70

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 180.9 TO 1804

before I sent the Nautilus, of course I gave Lt Somers orders to wait
a t Mallaga only 24 hours, & return to Gibraltar with what vessels he
could find ready by that time. I have been endeavoring to reach
Tanger Bay since the 20t@but find i t impossible to beat through the
Straits with a lTesterly wind. however I am still striving and shall
not anchor until I reach it. Col? Lear agrees with me that it would
be imprudent for me to leave this Station for Algiers, Tunis or Trip01
a t present and has written me a letter to that effect which you
find among my dispatches,
As the winter is fast approaching I conceive there will soon be very
little danger from the Tripolines until the spring opens in the mean
time Caps Bainbridge will be able to keep them in check with the
Philadelphia, and T'ixen, I shall send another vessel up as soon she
can be spared from this station, to convoy a vessel to Malta with
provisions of which by the way there is no great stock at Gibraltar, I
enclose you a list of all the Consul has on hand. S p t 33d -

i

Last evening I fell in with the Adams from Tunis with Consul
Cathcart on board, Cap? Cammel and A P C. came on board the
Constit&ion, The Bey of Tunis has refused to receive M r Catchcart,
and positively demands a frigate, should that demand be acceeded to,
it will require another Frigate on our own account to watch her motions. I suspect the demands of the Barbary Powers will increase,
and will be of such a nature as to make it imprudent for our Government to comply with, all of them excepting Algiers appear to have a
disposition to quarrel with us unless we tamely acceed to any propositions they chuse to make, I believe a firm and decided conduct in
the first instance towards those of them who make war against us
would have a good effect
The Emperor of Morocco has no doubt long been meditating War
with the U S. he has only been waiting for some pretext, and the
Capture of the Messuda by Cap! Ro[d]gers I suppose he will alledge
to be a sufficient one altho I think he has no cause of complaint on
that score, the Christian powers will have no chance m t h these
people until they determine never to pay tribute or supply them with
military or naval stores or ships but[?] to destroy every thing they
can belonging to them. - They send out their Cruisers, and if they
prove successfull, it is war, and we must purchase peace, - suffering
them to keep a11 they have taken, but if they are unfortunate and we
capture their Cruizers before they have taken any thing valuable it is
not war altho the orders for Capturing our vessels are found on board,
and we must restore all we take from them, which enables them to
commence again. I know not how long we shall be obliged to submit
to this sort of treatment, the Moors are a deep designing artfull
treacherous sett of Villains and nothing will keep them so quiet as a
respectable naval force near them I think Gibraltar should never be
left without a frigate and two Brigs or schooners, as they can effectually prevent any cruisers from aloft passing into the Atlantic and
a t the same time keep the Moors in check The wind has the appearance of changing in favour of reaching
Tanger, and I must for the present conclude, Mr Cathcart will forward dispatches to the Secr?of State by the Adurns and inform him of
his proceedings a t Tunis.

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

71

I have been ve much engaged since I came on the station & have
only written a few ines to Mr Maddison refering him to my dispatches
to you for such information or documents as belong to the State
department.

7

[LC. EPP, Vol. 6, 1803.1
To James Simpson, U. S. Consul, Tangier, Morocco, from Captain Edward Preble,
U. S, Navy

UNITEDSTATES
FRIGATE
Constitution
at sea o$ the rock of Gibralter September dtnd 1805
SIR Adverse winds keeps me from Tanger Bay. I am endeavouring to reach it, but I k d it hard striving against wind & Current.
however I shall keep a good look out, and not go into Port before I
visit it, I feel disposed to accomodate our differences with the Emperor
on fair and honoraye terms, and if he arrives at Tanger before I do,
you may so inform him - I have sent three vessels off Mogadore,
Sallee, and Larach, and one off Tetuan [LC. EPP, LB, 1803.1
To Lieutenant Stephen Decatur, Jr., U. S. Navy, commanding U. S. Brig Argw,
from Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Navy

U. S. FRIGATE
Constitution cruising off the Rock of
Gibralter 22" Sept 1805
SIR,I find it necessary from the information I have this day received
from John Gavino Esquire Consul at Gibralter to countermand my
Orders to you of the 19 instant You are immediately on your Arrival in Gibrdter Bay, to prepare
the Argus for Sea, making your requisitions on Consul Gavino at that
place for what rovision &c"ou may want; and sail without delay, to
the westward, 001; into Tangier Bay, pass cape Spartel, and stand to
the Southward look into Larach, Sallee, and Moggadore, Cruise off
the latter place three weeks unless sooner relieved by some of the
Squadron under my command Speak with every American Vessel you may meet with, and inform
them that the Emperor of Morocco's cruisers, have Orders to Capture
American Vessels; and that he has detained a Brig in Moggadore, and
made prisioners of the Crew, belonging to Salem You will send into this Bay, all the Vessels you may meet with,
belonging to the Bashaw of Tripoli, the Emperor of Morocco or the$
Subjects and at the expiration of 3 weeks you are to return to thrs
Bay, and wait my further Orders

f

*

*

*

*

*

*

*

[LC. EPP, Order Book, 1803-1805.1
To Lieutenant Isaac Bull. U. S. Navy, commanding U. S. Schooner Enbprize, from
Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Navy

UNITEDSTATES
FRIGATE
Constitu.tion cruising off
the rock of Gibralter 2Pe September 1805 SIR, I find it necessary from the information I have t'hii day
received from John Gavino Esquire Consul at Gibralter to countermand the Orders I gave you the 19'h inst, you will immediate1 proceed
possible
to Gibralter, and prepare the Enterprize for Sea, m t h

d

72

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1803 TO 1804

expedition - making your requisitions on Consul Gavino a t that
place for what provision &c* you may want, and sail without delay
to the westward, look into Tangier Bay, pass Cape Spartel, and stand
to the southward, look into Larach, Sallee and Moggadore cruise off
the latter place 15 days unless sooner relieved by some of the Squadron
under my command - speak with every American vessel you meet
with, and inform them that the Emperor of Morocco's cruisers have
Orders to Capture American Vessels; and that he has detained a Brig
in Moggadore, and made Prisioners of the crew, belonging to Salem You will send into Gibralter Bay all the Vessels you may meet
with, belonging to the Bashaw of Tripoli, the Emperor of Morocco or
their subjects, and a t the expiration of 15 days you are to return to
this Bay, and wait my further Orders -

*

*

*

*

*

*

*

[LC. EPP, Order Book, 1803-1805.1
To Lieutenant John Smith, U. S. Navy, commanding U. S. Schooner
Captain William Bainbridge, U. S. Navy

V h ,from

COPY

UNITEDSTATESFRIGATEPhiladelphia
a t sea 22"* Septem. 1805
Alicant bearing N. N. W. 15 leag
SIR Should we unavoidably be separated, you will be pleased to
proceed with all expedition to Malta, taking the Island Lapidosa in
your way, to examine the harbour for Tripolitan cruisers. On your
arrival at Malta, if the Frigate Philadelphuz has not been there, you
will fill your water as soon as possible to be ready for a cruise; and
after waiting six days, and receiving no news of me, you will proceed
on a cruise off Tripoli, where I shall join you.
[LC. EPP, Vol. 6, 1803.1
Extract from log book of U. S. Frigate C o d u t i o n , Captain Edward Preble, U. S.
Navy, commanding, Thursday, 22 September 1803

Employd working to the Westwd Between Gibraltar and the Barbary shore/ at % past 12 we had a squall from the h'orthwd/ at % past
12 the weather cleared up/ we saw a strange sail in shore with her
Topmast, carried away/ we Bore up and Boarded her/ Shee was an
English manawar Brig, Lieutenant Bolton/ who sent an officer to
waite on Commodore Preble/ Requesting assistance for His Majestys
Brig the Childres/ we Took her m Tow/ about 5 or 6 lengus to the
Eastwd of Europa point, and made sail over for the Barbary Shore/
we continud Running over for the Harbour of Tetuan with fresh
breezes/ till 5 P. M. a t which time it fell a dead calm/ We cast her
off, Leutenant Bolton/ who is the commandin officer/ of the ChildresJ
waited on Commodore Preblel at sundown la g becalmd between
Ceuta and Tetuan nearly three leagues to the astwd of the land

r

[NA. ND original.]
Presumably to Secretary of State from Captain Edward Preble, U. 8. Navy

U S. F C[onstitutwn] Cruising off the
~
Coast Barbary 23M S E P T1803
SIB I have been very much hurried in pre a
my dispatches
for the Navy department - and, altho severa of t e papers apper-

f-%

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

73

tain more immediately to the Department of State I have not had
time to make duplicates to forward by this conveyance and beg
leave to refer you to the Secv of the Navy for such papers relative
to our situation with Morocco as more immediately concerns your
Office. I have issued orders to all the Captains under my command
to capture Moorish vessels & bring send [sic] them to Gibralter for
Examination, in consequence of the Emperors having given orders to
his cruisers to capture American property and one of them having
actually captured the Brig Celia of Boston Cap: Bowen and of his
having detained the Brig Hannah of Salem Joseph W Williams
Master, a t Mogadore for the whole of which Transactions I must
refer you to the documents enclosed to the Sec? of the Navy. [LC. EPP, Vol. 6, 1803.1
To John Giavino, U. S. Consul, Gibraltar, from Anthony Terry, U. S. Vice Consul,
Cadiz, Spain

(COPY)
CADIZ,23* September 1803.
SIR, I have now to inform you with the utmost sorrow, the information given in the Consular Office by Capt. John Appleton,
[of Schooner Columbia] arrived here yesterday evening from Oporto,
and declared "That on the 21't inst. a t 11 o'Clock, he fell in with the U. S.
"Frigate *Adams, the Commander informed that he had spoke an
"English vessel, who advised him of having met a Moorish Frigate,
"with four American Vessels, prizes, of which 3 were Brigs, & that
"agreeable to the course he gave him, the *Adams was in search of
"the Moor & expected to be up with him the same evening; The
"Pilot that brought CapUppleton in told him that he had seen
"2 Galleys off Cape Trafalgar & was most certain they were Moors."
I request you will make this as public as possible, that your trade
may not suffer (* meaning the John Adam.)
[Similar letter sent to William Jarvis, U. S. Consul, Lisbon, Portugal.]
[NA. SDA. CL, Algiers, Vol. 6, Jan. 1801-Dec. 1803.1

To Lieutenant John Smith, U. 6. Navy, commanding U. S. Schooner V h , from
Captain William Bainbridge, U. S. Navy

UNITEDSTATESFRIGATEPhiladelphia
At Sea latitvde 38'40' &Vlong 3'90' E
Septem. 2dtQ1803
SIR By our parting company we shall be more likely to intercept
any Tripolitan Cruisers that ma be in our rout; you will therefore
make the best of your way to Kalta Via Lapidosa, and attend to
the Orders you received from me on the 22" inst.
[LC. EPP, Vol. 6, 1803.1

[24 September 18031
To James Simpron, U. 8. Consul, Tangier, Morocco, from the Secretary of State of
the Emperor of Morocco

Translation. Praise be given to the only God. There is no Power or Strength but that proceeding from the Almighty and Great God. -

74

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1803 TO 1804

To Consul Simpson - the American - Health. We have received your Letter and understood what you say
therein. - His Majesty whom God preserve now orders that you
may cease to speak with Hadge Abd-e Rahman Hashash on these
affairs and altho' he should wnte you Letters on an subject dont
answer them. - The conclusion of these affairs wi be when His
Majesty shall be at Tangier. - What I encharge and recommend
to you is, if i t be necessary for you that your Treaties of Peace and
Friendship remain as they were, with Our Master whom God preserve, that you dont allow Our Master to reach Tangier before that
the Ship of Arraiz Ibrahim Lubarez be there with your two Frigates - let them keep at Sea until1 Our Master arrives. - There wdl
be nothing for your people but what is good if you do tllis, and if
you can make them bring also the Tripoline Ship it will be a proof
of disposition to fulfil the engagement you made, let them come
soon, - and then His Majesty will see your word fulfilcl, and you
will have a testimony in aid of what you may ask, and it will altogether be a great support for you with His Majesty, whom God
preserve. - If His Majesty does not find there the Arraiz with
his Ship, I dont l a o w what he map not do. - I have advised you
of this of myself by way of admonition - beware of delays for this
will be a great matter for you and for all those who support you and
speak well of you here - dont be slack or deficient in this matter
of consequence for yourself. Written the 6tP Chemadi the second 1218 -- 2-lthSeptr 1803.
The departure of Our Master whom God preserve uill be after
the day of the date hereof MAHAMMED
BEN ABD E SALEMSELAWY

9

[LC.EPP,Vol. 6, 1803.1

To Lieutenant Richard Somers, U. S. Navy, commanding U. S. Schooner Nautilus,
from Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Navy

UNITEDSTATESFRIGATEConstitution GIBRALTER
BAY

ZdtQ SppF 1805 SIR, M' Gavino will deliver you my Orders to proceed to the westward and Southward and cruise off Moggadore for the purposes
therein mentioned. - While you are in this Bay victualing and watering, you will Anchor the Naufi1u.s rery close to the prize Slup Messuada
to protect her, as she has a great number of prisioners on board, and
i t is to be apprehended they may if opportunity offers endeavor to
rise upon our Men, and run the Ship on shore This Order I expect you will particularly attend to [LC. EPP, Order Book, 1803-1805.1
&tract from letter to Zilpah Wadsworth, from Midshipman Henry Wadsworth,
U. S. Ravy

[Sept] 2 4 t h 1805 Gibraltar.
[Written to Zilpah Wadsworth]
The Adams has arriv'd & Comre Morris sails for America tomorrow
Adieu I am just oin on board the New 170rk-to deliver my packet
dc bid adieu to k& &rris LC- - HENRY
WADSWORTH
[Copied by 5. Picking from H. W. L. Dana Col.]

75

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

Extract from letter to Nancy Doane, from Midshipman Henry Wadsworth, U. 8.
Navy

.

Constitution 44 Sept. 24tQ1803
CSibraltar Bay
DEARCOUSIN[Xritten to Nancy Doane]

*

*

*

*

*

*

*

I can't leave you without giving you the News of the Morning:
The Enterprize was order'd to get under way & chase a ship which
appear'd in the Straits. We suspected her to be the Danish Ship
laden with valuable Moorish property, which we saw two days ago
under the guns of Tangier: & if it does not prove to be the same, we
are oing to Tangier to cut her out, this very day. The Active Capt
Hul was under way in 8 minutes after the Signal was made. They
are now both becalm'd in the Gut about 5 miles from us & two miles
apart. We have 12 Moorish Officers on board. The Capt named
IBRAHIM LOUVERAIS a princely fellow inrites me (after the War)
to o home to Sallee with him & says he will give me four wives. Porn! Morris told me he should sail this ever for America. I am
very agreeably situated in this ship & meet many acquaintances . . .

f

*

*

*

*

*

*

*

Mr. Warrington a Mid. of the Vixen 14 told me he saw Samuel in
Richmond . . .

*

*

*

*

Your cheerful Cousin
Miss NANCY
DOANE.

*

*

*

HEXRY
ITADSWORTH

[Copied by S. Picking from H. W. L. Dana Col.]
Extract from log book of U. S. Frigate Conslitution, Captain Edward Preble, U. S.
Navy, commanding, Saturday, 24 September 1803

at 3 past 12 sllortened sail und Brought to with the main Topsail
to the mast/ in Gibraltair Bay/ we saild from here on wednesday last1
in order to proceed over to Tanger Bay/ after Beating in the Straits
for three days, we was well convinced that a passage from Gibraltar
to Tanger Bay cannot Be made Except with a leadiug wind in consequenc of which we bore up and Run into Gibraltar Bay/ we found
here the united State Frigate New Yorkl the late Commodore hlorrisl
the Enterprise1 Leiu tenant Hull/ Leiutennnt Chuncy oi the New
York and Leutenant Hull of the Enterprise] waited on Commodore
Preble Mr Cathearthi who was appointed Consul at Tunis/ also waited
on Commodore Preble at 3 anclld here the united States Frigate
Adams Captain Campbell/ who waited on Commodore Preble a t 4
we came to of[fj the old Mole/ Gibraltar side in 18 fathn heard Bottom/ * * * Joined the Constitution Leiutenant Dent/ Leiutenat Jenckes, was this day Removed from the Constitution] to the
Adams
[NA. ND original.]
To Captain Edward h e b l e , U. S. Navy, from James Simpson, U. S. Consul,
Tangier, Morocco

AGAIX26 Sept' 1805 DEARSIR The enclosed Sheet was begun this morning when a
Schooner, was in the oiling a t day break, brought to - but the
Moors were so tardy in geting a Boat. ready she bore sway.

76

NATTALOPERATIONS FROM 1803 TO 1804

After the Emperours Freindly assurances it can scarce be supposed
there would now be dmger in your landing, but as I said before we
cannot have full reliance on these people, and as the return of my
mentioned Express must be near at hand I think it is as well excuse
it untill he comes - if this answer be such as to render it perfectly
safe for you t o land with a Flag, or rather soy send one, I will shew
the blue American Jack, - which you will be pleased to direct being
answered by the same Flag at either of the Top Gallant Mast heads;
for after the insults our Flag has met here, I do not see it consistent
to hoist i t for any other purpose than I have mentioned, untill matters
be accommodated, or that the Emperour desires it.
The Emperour we hare every reason 60 believe left Fez on Friday
Afternoon - if so he may be here tomorrow week - a t present I
think i t highly proba[b]le the Minister will not go to Tetuan but
come here direct to treat with us, that the busyness may be finished
before His Majestys arrival, - by the Express we shall know the
precise. I beg my best respects to Coll Lear if with you, and that you will
be assured I am with great respect
[LC. EPP, Vol. 6, 1803.1

T o James Simpson, U. S. Consul, Tongiar, Xorocco, from Captain Edward Preble,
U. s. Navy

UNITED
STATEB
FRIGATE
Constitution
Tangier Bay 25 September 1805
SIRI am hong with your dis atches of this date and shall partitularly attend to them. I shal have no hesitation in giring u the
Mirboka, and releasing all the Moors in our possession upon our eing
assured from proper authority that the Emperor did not himself Issue
the order to capture American vessels at Sea, or to detain the vessel
a t Mogadore but we s h d expect that he will punish those who did,
and r e l e w the property which he has sequestrated.
I have given orders to the Ships of my squadron to capture Moorish
Vessels, but d l withdraw those Orders, and restore to the Emperor
everything that may fall into our hands, he doing the same by us, and
consenting to rat,ify the treaty of 1786. I shall be off Tangier again
in two or three days, and will att4 to your Signal.
We ought not to consent on our part, that Hashash shall be the
person with whom we are to treat; it d l be more satisfactory to our
Government if the Emperor should a point some other person.
Peace, and a good understanding etween the United States and
His Imperial Majesty is the wish of our Government,, and I sincerely
hope it will soon be permanently established The Capture of the M i s h o d , I presume the Emperor will allow to
be just, and of course will make no demand of her without a proper
com emation !A the Moorish officersare on board the Constitution, and are well
in Health and well treated. The Captain and Priest live with me in
the Cabin P S: I have enclosed the certified Paper you wish Col: Lear is not
on Board -

P

g

g

{LC.EPP, LB, 1803.1

77

UiARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

125 September 18031
To James Simpson, U. 8. Conaul, Tangier, Xorocco, from Secretary of State of
the Emperor of Morocco
Tmslatlon.

-

Praise be given to God alone. To C o n d SIMPSON
the American - H e d h . Take care - take care that you be not tardy in what I have beforehand told you of in writing, on subject of Lubarez Vessel being
brought, and that Our Master whom God preserve may find her in
the Port; for truely such would be for your good and for Ours. - I
am with you, - take care take care that you be neither tardy nor
deficient m this. Written YtQC%emadi the second 1b18-d5th Septr 1803
MAHAMED
BEN ABD-E SALEMSELAWY
[LC. EPP, Vol. 6 , 1803.1
Extract from log book of U. 6. Frigate Gmfr'MIm.Captain Edward Preble, U.8.
Navy, commanding, Sunday, 25 September 1803

Laying a t single anchor/ in Gibraltar Bay, and Running through
the Straits to the Westwg! winds Variable from NW to ENE
Leeutenant Elbortt, [Samuel Elbert] was this day orderd from the
Constitution on board the Moorish Ship/ prize to the Frigate PA&
delphia/ and to Take charge of her/ M Reed/ Mate/ and hlr Morris
Midshipn was allso orderd cm board with him/ the sail in the offig/
which the .?hte~pPi2i?was orderd this morning to chaceJ anchd here
this afternoon/ She is an americtln Ship from Baltimore put in here of
Convoy/ Toward the Evening we welghP the kedge and Hove short
in order to pmced to seal a t 9 a Breezes sprung up from the E a t w e
Veerd to a haIf a cable/ Commodore Preble/ whent on board of the
two prizes/ belongin to the Frigate Philedelphial and the John A h
the Moorish Ship!
[Mesh&]/ was captured by the John
Adams/ the Moorish/ Ship/ Mirboka] was captured by the Philadelphia] we Recied from the Misswlai five Moorish officers/ Colonel
LearJ did not come to sea with us this time/ He was left a t Gibraltar/
a t 5 in the morning weigha and came to sail/ We left a t Gibraltar
the Frigate John Adams and the Newjork We Run from Gibraltar
over for Ceuta

his&

[SA.N D original.]
To Secretary of State from Anthony Terry, U. S. Vice Consul, Cadis, Spain

CADIZ
26Q Sepr 1803 SIR. I have the honour of confirming what I had the pleasure of
addressing you p? Duplicate on the 4'h July, 20t9 & 31. August &
l o t h instant; and at same time to adrise you with the utmost regret
of the DecIaration given in this Consular Office by John A pleton
Master of the American Schooner Columbia arrived in this ay on
the 22 inst from Oporto & which is as follows - [See 23 September

$

18031

1n' consequence of the foregoing the Masters of Vessels ready in
this Ba fearing to Sail, re uested I should forward a petition (Copy
herewit ) to Commodore b o r r i s requesting Convoy, 8 which was

K

78

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1803 TO 1804

forwarded this very day to Gibraltar; the results I shall have the
honour of acquainting you in due time.
In absence of Ms J. YZNARDY
ANTHONY
TERRY
[SDA. CL, Cadiz, Yol. 1, 1793-1805.1
LEnclosurel

To Captsin Richard V. Morris, U. S. Navy, from Joseph Yznardi, U. 6. Consul,
Cadiz, Spain

CADIZ2G. Sqtemb~r1803.
We the undersigned Masters of Vessels in this Bay ready for
Sea, but fearing to Sail on account of the Declaration given by Cap!
John Appleton of the Amer? Schooner Columbia arrived on the 22
ins? from Oporto Copy inclosed - We request that you will be so
good & obliging as to order one of the U. S. Frigates under your Command to come round to give us Convoy as far as you may think convenient - Relying on your protection to our just re uest - We have
the honour to be with the most profound respect -%ir Pour most ob? hble Servt"
BENJAXIN
Mssoh--Master of the American Brig Concord JOHN
APPLETON-_ _ _ - - - _ __._ _ _ _ _ _ - - _ - - Schoon?Columbia
JAMES
BUFFINGTOX.
_ _ _ -- - _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ - _ - Schooner - Eliza
N A T HBISSEL
~
_ _ -.. _ _
_ _ _ Ship - Eliza
ALEXANDER
KOOD
_
_ _ _ _ _ _ _ Brig - M a y
PHILIPKEAN-- - _ _ - _- _ _
_ Brig-Ann
&? Mary
[SDA. CL, Cadiz, T'ol. 1, 1793-1805.1
To Secretary of State from John Gavino, U. S. Consul, Gibraltar

K ?132

GIBRALTAR
26Q September 1803

SIR I beg leare to Confirm my last K? 131 under date 9*Vnst since then arrived Cornodors Morris & Prible, with the latter Collonel Letlr to all
have made every Communication. and as said
Gentlemen now fully informs you &. the Hon! Secretary of the Navy
of every Occurrence I think it needless to enter into Repititions, and
only trouble you with an annexd Copy of a Letter from Mr Ant?
Terry the Yice Consul at Cadiz dated 23d Instant which is truely
may fall in with the
displeasing, and it is to be hoped Cap"odgers
Vessels in question Consul Simpson Continues arrested in his house with Sentrys over
him [SDA. CL, Gibraltar, Vol. 11, April 1796-Xov. 1804 ]
To Secretary of the Navy from Tobias Lear, U. S. Consul General, Algiers

GIBRALTAR
Septr d6@1803
DEARSIR, The co~nmunicationswhich you will receive by this
conveyance from Commodore Preble, are so full and complete that
I can add nothing to them that is interesting excepting the enclosed
copy of a letter received here yesterday after (after Come Preble's

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

79

departure for Tangier) by Mf Gavino, from the consular house a t
Cadiz.-the information contained in this letter is of a very disagreeable nature; but even if it sh* prove true, I think the measures which
have been taken to guard the Coast of Morocco, on the Atlantic, will
prevent either the prizes or cruizer from getting in. - The New York
sails this day to releive the John Adums, and will probably remain on
that Station, until the arrival of the Brigs, which is anxiously & hourly
expected-I presume that ComVreble informed you of his intention
to touch a t Tangier Bay merely to see if Mr Simpson had any thing
new to communicate, and proceed from thence out of the St[r]aits,
and run along the affrican coast for a few days, untill the Emperor's
arrival at Tangier, which is expected on the 36 Octr when he will return
to this place to see if this unpleasant business cannot be settled by
negociation. He went out yesterday morning with a h e wind from
the Eastwd
I should have gone out again in the Constitution, as I have already
been out twice in her since my arrival; but the arrival of Mr Cathcart
in the Adams, From Tunis makes it necessary for me to remain here to
receive from him such communications as he has to make respecting
our affairs with Tunis $ Tripoli. - Our first trip to Tangier was on
the 16th inst. the second day after the arrival of the John Adams in
the Bay - The zeal of Commodore Ro[d]gers to do every thing in
his power either to settle this disagreeable affair with the Emperor
& q or to take the best possible measures to protect our commerce, did
not allow him to hesitate a moment about going down to Tangier
with his ship in company with the Constitution; altho he was not prepared for being out but a few d a p , and had had no oppertunity of
writing to the Nary Dept after hls arrival here. - Indeed when we
went down we had no expectation of being gone more than two days;
but the information rec* there from Mr S i p s o n (the full of which
you will have with ComVreble's dispatches) made i t necessary to
guard the Atlantic Ports of Morocco without a moments delay; and
as Come Preble was obliged to return here to give additional orders to
the Phila&? & T7izen previous to their going up the Mediterranean,
Come Ro[d]gers with A zeal & alacrity which must do him credit,
determined to go into the Atlantic & cruize as long as his provisions
and water lasted, of which he had not more than 12 or 15 days allowance. - Before we parted he requested I would state to you his reasons for not having written to you; which were, that he recvdhis instructions to take charge of the Ships returning home, only two days pprevious to his arrival in this Bay - and that the short time he continued
here, was occupied without the loss of a moment, in making the necessary despositions in consequence of the charge in the homeward bound
ships - and in concerting measures to guard agamst the evils which
might result from our unexpected difference with the Emperor, or
terminate them by a negotiation.-And his going into the Atlantic
insteed of returning here immediately from Tangier, as he expected,
must totaly deprive him of the oppertunity of writing by the Adam. The full communications from ComWreble will inform you of every
event which has taken place with respect to Morocco, and the return
of the Adums will, undoubtedly give, full information of the operations
of the other Squadron previous to their arrival here; so that Commodore Ro[d]gers will have the satisfaction of knowing that you will
receive all the intelligence on these points that his letters could have

80

NAVAL OPERATIOh7S FROM 1803 TO 1804

given and he feels fully persuaded that the part which he has taken
in this unexpected and critical state of our affairs with Morocco, wiU
be more approved by the President than if he should have corn lied
with the strict letter of his instructions & returned immediate y to
the U. S., when i t is probable that the continuance of his ships for a
short time on the coast will be attended with very happy effects.Indeed nothing but Patriotism and a deep sence of the duty which
he owed to the interest of the U. States could have prevailed upon
him to take the part he has in this business when the term of service
and his instructions directed him homewards and under these impressions he has entered into it with his usual ardour and alacrity. The Zeal activitv and intelhgence of Come Preble must afford
satisfaction to our i'fovernment. - and I flatter myself the President
will have good cause to be pleased with the conduct of this Officer
who so far as I can observe, seems actuated only by a wish to render
the best services to his country, and make them acceptable as well
as useful. - He has undoubtedly stated his ideas of the necessity of
an additional force in these seas, even if we should make peace with
Morocco, for i t would not be strange if Tunis should break out, upon
hearing of our differences with the Emperor, and knowing that we
were not expecting it, & of course, not provided against it. I hope on the return of the Constitution she will be able to proceed
with me to Algiers, whither I am anxious to go; but I trust the present
state of our affairs here will be a sufficient justification of my delay. We have not heard any thing of the store ships sent to Algiers. Mr Cathcart informs that he heard from Algiers when he was a t
Tunis, and that all was well there as it respected the United States. Mr%ar desires her best respects and regards may be given to your
good Lady, to which I beg leave to join mine.

P

[Stephen Decatur Col.

KD.4 photostat, Book A.]

To Secretary of State from Tobias Lear, U. 8. Consul General, Algiers

NQ1.

GIBRALTER,
September ISth 1805. to September 26" SIR,I had the honor of writing a few line to you on the 5 $ h ins!
which was put on board the Brig Jack, Captq Hashill, from Cadiz to
Cape Ann, o f f Cape St Vincents. - We then flattered ourselves with
being in this Bay two days afterwards; but the easterly winds and
unfavourable weather baffled all calculations, so that we did not
reach this place 'till the 12t@
As the information which we received on our arrival here of the
hostile disposition and conduct of the Emperor of Morocco towards
the ZIT. States, has opened a new & unlooked for scene of operation for
the Squadron under Commodore Preble, and has caused a pretty
active succession of events, I shall take the liberty of stating those
things which occurred to myself, or within my knowledge, from day
to day, as noted in my diary. On the 6t@of SeptT between Cape St Vincents & Cape St Mary's,
we fell in with a Frigate [Maimma] belonging to the Emperor of
Morocco, mounting 30 Guns & carrying 150 men; bound, as the Commander said, from Sallee to Lisbon. Neither her appearance nor
conduct discovered anythmg hostile towards us: indeed so little did
she appear like a suspicious Vessel, that the Commodore would not

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

-

-

-

81

have thought it worth whiIe to notice her particularly, had she not
discovered a wish to s eak with us; & finding she was a mooriah ship,
he then sent his boat &ng side, with an OBoer to make eve requisite
examination and en uiry respecting her. On his return an reporting
to the Commodore at her passport $ 9 from our Consul, Mr Sim son,
wss correct, and nothing appeared suspicious about her, the 8ommodore, who was anxious tbat we should be placed upon as much
certainty as possible respecting her, requested, that, as I was
acquainted with Mr Simpson's handwrit' & signature, I would go
on board with the Officer, and examine t e passport &? - This I
most readily consented to, and according1 repaired on board with
the first Lieutenant and a Midshipman, w en I found everything as
stated in my re ort to the Commodore, on my return on board, a
Copy of whch have the honor to enclose, (NP 1). Altho' everything appeared so clear & correct on board this Vessel, that there
could be no pretext for detaining her, and the Commodore wss f d - ~
~at~isfied
tbat he could not do it with propriety; yet such wss bus
anxiety & uneasiness lest there should be some dece tion, that
might o erata vainst the Am. Commerce, that I rea iy beleive,
had she een in s~ghtnext morning, he would have ventured to detain
her.
From this time 'till the 12tQ,we had strong easterly winds, or calms,
which revented our reaching the Straits. On $ morning of the 12'9, we entered the Straits, and stwd inta
the Bay of Tangier, with a light breeze from the westwq, hoisting the
w l o m and firing a signal for the Am. Consul to send or come off,
if he had any communications to make, and the Commodore being
very desireous of seeing him, to know, if possible, the destination of
the frigate before menboned. - Upon standing in near the Town of
Tangier, we saw the Consular flags of other nations hoisted; but not
that of the U. States; and no boat corning off, we then felt a retty
strong assurance that all was not right with the Emperor. 8eeing
no probability of a communication with the shore, we stood over to
Gibralter Bay, where we came to Anchor about 3 o'clk P. M.
Upon our arrival here the business with Morocco was explained; for
we found the U. States Frigate Philadelphia, with her prize, a cruizer,
belonging to the Emperor, called the Mirboka, commanded by
Ibrahun Raiz Lubarez, one of his principal Captains. - Captg Bairnbridge immediately came on board the Constibubion, and communicated to Commodore Preble the particulars of the Capture.
It ap ears that, on Capt-aimbrid
e's arrival here from the U.
States, e r e d intelligence that two ripoline Cruizers had been
seen off Ca e De Gata and he immediate1 went in search of them. That in l o o k g for them, he fell in with ttis Moorish Ship of 22 Guns
& 90 men. After examining her papers & passport from the Am.
Consul, and findin them correct, he was about to let him depart;
which
,
appeared to be in company with the
but seeing an ~ r n . p 8 r i ~
Crui7,er, he was led to some enquires respecting her, and their answers
creating suspicion, he had her examined, and found she had been
captured by the Cruizer, and was then in her possession; the Am.
CaptP & Crew having been put below. Ca tp B. then took ossession
of the Cruizer & her prize and brought tlem in here.
hejrize
was delivered u to the Master to proceed on his voy
an the
Cruizer d e t a i n J - The Moorish Captain produced h%era from

7

8

y
E

f

E

-

1

b

-

82

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1803 TO 1804

Alcady Hashash, the Governor of Tangier & that coast, to ca ture

P

am. vessels and send them into the Ports of Morooco; and a so to
ca ture Sweeds, Danes, Dutch, Russians, Prussians $ 9 - These
o'.la, written in the Arabic language, were not signed; but the
Captain af6rmed and certified, that they were the same which he
rec* from Hashash; under a sealed cover, with directione not to open
it until he shQbe at sea; and that, when he came out, he had no idea
that he was to cruize agt the Americans. - These orders were faithfully translated into English here, and the Moorish Consul, Hammet,
of this place, saw the Original, and declared i t was the handwriting
of Hashash, or his Secretary, as he had letters from him written in
the same hand.
The Moors had been remarkabl well treated since their capture,
and acknowledged it with gratitu e. - The Capt? of the Am. Brig
which had been taken by the Moors, said he and his crew had been
very well treated by them, and were only obliged to go below when
any vessel appeared in sight which was suspected to be an Am.
Shlp of War.
A Salute was fired by the Constitution, and returned from the
Garrison, with an equal number of Guns. TUESDAY
SEPT~
13t@
In the forenoon I went, with Commodore Preble, on board the
Philadelphia, and from thence on shore, where we paid our respects
to the Governor, Sir Thomas Trigge, who received us with great cordiality & politeness. He expressed some anxiety on the subject of
our rupture with Morocco, as he said the Garrison of Gibralter was
wholly dependent upon the Moors for supplies of fresh provisions in
time of war, and he was very apprehensive lest they should refuse
those supplies, when they found we were permitted to bring their
Vessels in here as prizes. - This, however, was conveyed in a delicate manner, and without intimating that we should meet with any
obstruction contrary to our Treaty with Great Britain.
The U. States Frigate, New Yo&, arrived here from a Cruize up
the Mediterranean - And the Schooner Vixen,from Baltimore.
Dispatches were prepared by Commodore Preble to send over to
Mr Simpson, by a dispatch boat this evening. I wrote to Mr Simpson by the same conveyance (Enclosure NQ2)
I prepared Lodgings on shore for Mrc Lear & myself, and in the
afternoon we took up our quarters on shore.
WEDNESDAY,
14'9
SEPT~
Last night the U. S. Frigate John Adams, and the Schooner Nautulus arrived from a cruize, They brought several Am. Vessels under
their convoy from Malaga, Alicant $ 9 &q - The John Adams also
brot in a prize; the Ship Mishouda, Capt Raiz Amaz [Omar], which
she had captured attempting to enter the port of Tripol, under the
flag of the Emperor of Morocco, altho' in her passport from MI
Simpson, blockaded ports were excepted, and she had on board a
uantity of naval & military stores, which she took in after she left
&ibmalter, and had on board a Tripoline Captain, and a number of
Tripolines more than she took from Gibralter. (This is the same
ship which had been the Tripoline Admiral, and had been so long
blockaded in Gibralter by our Vessels)

B

83

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

T H ~ D ASEP@
Y 16Q
Dined at the Governor's, with the Commodore and Commanders
of the Am. Ships of War. The Nccddua sailed for Malaga, to bring
down a convoy of 18 sail of Am. Vessels, laying there, bound down.
FBIDAY
SEPT~
16tP
This forenoon the dispatch boat sent to Tangier, arrived with
letters from Mr Simpson, which I immediately carried on board the
Commodore, in which our apprehensions of a serious rupture with
the Emperor, are c o h e d ; but still a hope of accommodation remains. - After perusing, and considering these dispatches, it was
determined by Commodores Preble & Rodgers, that they would sail
immediately with the Constitution & John Adam for Tangier Bay, to
have further communications with hD Simpson, and endeavour to
terminate this di
eeable business by negociation. -They both
express a strong wis and desire that I would go over to assist at this
negociation (if it should take place) to which I consented, after stating
to these Gentlemen, that I had no powers vested in me to interfere in
any affairs with the Emperor of Morocco; but that my wish to be
useful to my Country, would lead me to give any aid I could in this
business. And as this unexpected event w'J make it necessary for
Commodore Preble to remain on this station until something could be
done to give Security to our Commerce, I wrote him a letter (Enclosure NQ3.) on the subject of my going to Algiers.
I went on shore, made my Cong&to the Governor, and after lacing
M" Lear under the kind care of Miss Gavino (Sister to our onsul)
I returned on board the Constitution at 7 P. M. - At midnight
weighed Anchor & stood out of the Bay.
SATURDAY
SEP@17'Q
At day light the John Adam was to leeward, standing over for
Tangier and we, being to windward, stood in, under eas sail, and
about half past seven, both Ships came to Anchor in the ay, about
two miles from the Town; with a White flag at the F. T. G. mast head
of each ship.
There were on board the Consfitution the Ca t"
six officers of
the Mirboka, and on board the John Adam, the oorish & Tripoline
Captains of the Mushowla.
Soon after the Ships came to Anchor, a boat came from the Town
rowed by 4 Spaniards, who brought an open slip of paper from Mr
Simpson, sayin the boat was permitted to come off to bring on shore
an letters the%lag of Truce might have to sand.
&mmodore Rodgers came on board the Coditution, where a joint
letter was written by him & Commodore Preble to Mr Sunpaon,
that they had come here to see if the differences could be
settle by a negociation. - That the Captains &g of the two prizee
were on board, and the papers so certified and established as to place
everythin in its true light - requesting that a roper person might
be sent o to examine the Officers $9 engaging &, security, - and
urging the necessity of a personal interview with Mr Simpson himself,
if ossible. also wrote a few lines to Mr Simpson, expressive of my feelings for
his situation, and of my desire to be useful; but tellin hun I was not
instructed by Govt to do an thing in the &airs o Morocco, and
therefore could not act offici y in them. About 4 o'clk P. M. another boat, rowed by Spaniards (not the same
which bad been offbefore) came on board from the Town. and brought

7
Y

8

6

ffi

1

f

d

B

84

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1803 TO 1804

answers from Mr S i p s o n , stating that he could not come off, as he
had guards set over him in his own house; and as the Govr of Tangier
was then a t Tituan, the Officer commanding a t Tangier, would not,
or wuld not, permit him to go off. He had sent an Express to the
Emperor immediately on receiving the Commodores' letter, expected
an answer from him on Monda , and that the Emperor was expected
at Tangier on fridcly next. - esired that the Constiszltion might be
off Tangier on Monday or Tuesday, when he expected the Emperor's
Answer, and would endeavour himself to come off to the Ship. He
recommended not to send any boat on shore from the Ship. - The
foregoing is the purport of the letter which was subject to the examination of those h a m g power over him; but he slip'd under the same
cover, another letter, stating that we must look to a higher source
than Hashash, for the orders given to the Moorish Cruizers - That
an Am. Brig, the Hannah of Salem, Josh W. Williams master, which
was in the Port of Mogodore, on a trading Voyage, had been seized
on the night of the 4tQinstant, the Cargo taken from the Consignee's,
and lodged in the Custom House, and the Capt? & Crew delivered to
the Consignee upon his responsibility for their appearance. Mr S.
still
.
hoped matters might be accommodated; but those hopes were
faint. In his letter to me (Inclosure N94) he says he will open to me, when
we meet, a scene of deep deceit - which will astonish me. After perusing these letters, and writing a short answer to Mr S.
informing him that the John Adams wd go on a Cruize, and the
Constitution return to Gibralter, to be back again to Tangier on
Monday or Tuesday; it was determind that the John Adams should
proceed along the Western Coast of Morocco, as far down as Mogodore, to intercept cruizers and warn an Am. Vessels she might meet
with, of their danger; and that the dkstifution should proceed to
Gibralter, for Commodore Preble to give some additional Orders to
Capt? Bambridge, in consequence of the late information obtained a t
Tangier, previous to his oing up the Mediterranean.
Commodore Rodgers eft the Constitution about sunset, and a t
8 o'clk, both Ships got under way, for their respective destinations,
with a light air.
Commodore Preble offer'd ~ermissionto anv of the Moorish Officers
on board his ship to go on shore & relate thk circumstances of their
Capture & treatment; but they all declined; saying they did not dare
go while their men remained prisoners. - They all appeared very sad,
when theIy] found there was no probability of an accommodation a t
present.
After dark large fires were made on all the Mountains along the
coast, to give the alarm, and prevent a landing being effected from
the Ships, as the Moors on board said.
The Fort above the Town, and the Batteries in front, appear formidable; but i t is said they are in a bad condition as to thev
and
not furnished with Engineers or Gunners. - There was in t e Bay a
Ship with Danish Colours, said, b the Boats which came off, to be a
rize to a French privateer whic lay along side of her, recaptured
had taken her going into a French Port. - All
Prom the ~ n g l i s hwho
,
the Moorish Gallies & boats were hauled close in shore, under the
- The Flags of the English, French, Spanish,
Guns of the Bat*.

3

4

-

E

y,

WARS WITH BABBARY P 0 W . S

85

Danish, Sweedish & Portuguese Consuls were kept up during our
continuance in the Bay.
SUNDAYSEPT~
lStQ
Having had little or no wind all night, we were not far from Tangier
Bay in the mo
; but havin got into the Current we went fast to
the ~ a s t w a r d . y h John
~ & was
m at a distance standing out of
e
the Straits.
A breeze springing up we ot into Gibralter Bay about 11 o'clk,
where we met the Ship ~ h d e ~ ~&hSchooner
i a
Vzun standing out,
bound up the Mediterranean. Upon signal from the Commodore,
Capt-anbridge & Lt Comdt Smith came on board the Constitution,
where they rec* orders from the Commodore. The Ship Port Mary,
Captq John Collins, of Charleston S. C. from Hull, bound to Messina,
was under their convoy. - At 2 P. M. we came to Anchor in the
Bay, just above the New Mole. In the afternoon I went on Shore. MONDAY
SEPT~
1gLQ
The Commodore having determined to go down to Tangier this
evening, or in the mornin ,to meet Mr Simpson's further Communications, as he had desired; e requested me to go with him; and in the
Evening, I accordingly accompanied him on board; but the wind
being too light to get under way, we waited until morning. The Commodore brought from Gibralter, a Jew Interpreter of the
name of Manna, who speaks the Moorish & English languages well,
to facilitate any communications we may have with the Moors. In the evening the Commodore & myself had a long conversation
with the Moors on board; particularly with Ibrahim Rais Lubarez,
who appears to be a sensible, considerate and well informed man. He is personally well known at Gibralter, has been two years Ambassador from the Emperor to Madrid, and is a person of consideration
at home.
We endeavoured to impress them with the injustice, as well as the
impolicy of the Emperor's making war upon us, particularly in the
insiduous manner in which it has now been done, where the passport
of the Consul was obtained, which sh* be held sacred, and never
violated - That, altho' we wished for peace, yet, if forced into a war,
we should be found formidable & terrible to the Moors, as they
might well know, from what they have seen of our force - That the
kind treatment which they had r e d was not the effect of fear; but
proceeded from principles of humanity and manliness which the
Americans always exercrsed towards their enemies when they had them
in their power - That the Emperor w* be much more benefitted by
our Commerce, than he could by a war with us - That our Commerce
extended to all nations, which would enable us to c a q to the Moors
every thing they could want; besides what was roduced in our own
Country; and that we should take from them suc things as they had
to dispose of, which w*be very profitable to the Merchants, as well as
productive to the Revenue of the Emperor - That our Shipping was
very numerous & powerful - That we wg strive all in our power to
keep peace with them upon ro er & honorable terms; but if we were
obhged to go to war, we s o d not only destroy all their Vessels,
which w'J not re uire much of our force to do; but we should send
ships and batter own every Sea Port Town in the Empire

%

g

I
L
f
'

1

86

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1803 TO 1804

These observations appeared to make a deep impression upon them,
and brought tears into their eyes. - They acknowledged it was all
just and true, and Capt-ubarez observed, that the present Emperor
was one of the best Princes they ever had, that he was just and considerate; but that he was surrounded by bad advisers, particular1
b Hashash, who had given Orders for capturing Am. Vessels. ago declared, that if ever he got to his own country again, he would
see the Emperor, face to face, (to whom he was personally known) and
would tell him those solid truths, let the consequences to himself
be what they might. That he was full? persuaded the Emperor only
wanted to be justly informed of the dwposition of the Americans to
agree to every thmg that was right; and that the kind and generous
treatment they had experienced since their capture, would make a
lasting impression on their minds, and they would, on their return
home, endeavour to inculcate the same feelings on their Countrymen. We told him the conduct of Hashash had been so outrageous &
wicked towards us, as well as unjust towards the Emperor, that we
would never treat with him;nor with the Emperor, unless he inflicted
condeign punishment upon him, if he had acted without his orders. The acknowledged this would be right. ~ g Commodore
e
proposed to send four of the Moors on board the
New Pork, until his return from Tangier, as the captain and two others
were as many as was necessary to carry over, and such a number in
his Cabbin & a t his Table, were inconvenient to him. - They received
this with submission; but when the four had collected their things,
and were preparing to depart, they were found in Tears, at the idea
of leaving the Ship, and the Commodore humanely permitted them to
remain on board. TUESDAYSEPTEMBER
20tb
The light airs of wind and calms, did not permit us to get under
wa 'till about dark, when we weighed with a hght breeze from the
S.
to beat out of the Ba . In the Afternoon the Sc ooner Enterprize, arrived from a cruize,
when the Commodore ordered Lieu$ Comdt Hull, to follow him
tomorrow to Tangier WEDNESDAY
SEPT218t
In the morning we found the current had set us above the Rock of
Gibralter, the wind having been light & variable through the night. Stretched over under the African Shore. - About 11 Oclk A. M. off
Cuta, a sudden s uall came on, which struck an English Brig near us,
standing u the%editerranean, with all her sails set, and carried
awa both fler Topmasts. - The Commodore immediately hauled up
for er to give her assistance. She sent her boat on board, with an
Officer, who informed that she was His B. M. Brig the Childers, commanded b Sir George Bolton, from Eng'J with dispatches for Lord
Nelson. &e had touched a t Gibralter, to leave letters for the
Governor, and came out this morning. - The Commodore offered
every assistance in his power, and as the Officer said Sir George wished
to go into Tituan, where there was an English Frigate which would
take his dispatches up immediately., the Commodore sent his boat on
board with a hauser to take him m tow, & carry him into Tituan,
which was then in sight. The wind freshening, we towed her a t the
rate of ten knots per hour: but soon after falling calm, Sir Q. B. came

d

-

k.

E

E

WARS WITH BARBABY POWERS

87

on board, and after expressing his warm acknowledgemtr for the
assistance he had met with, stud, as the weather would now permit
him to get up other Topmasts and make sail, he wg do it in preference
to go%to
Tituan,, and proceed on his way. The Commodore
offered
spsrs, rig= or anything he might want; but he said ha
had eve thing on board he stood in need of. - About sun-set we left
him, wit one Topmast on end, and the other going up, and stood
with a light wind from the Westward, over to the Spamsh Shore.
THURSDAY
SEPT~
22"4
The wind still continuing to blow from the Westward, and the
current setting strong to the East, we could make no progress through
the Straits. - In the forenoon the U. S. Schooner Enterprize ~ a m e
out of Gibralter Bay and stood for us. - C a p t a d came on board
the Constitution, when the Commodore gave him Orders for his immediate Government, and she returned to Gibralter to take in water
&q for a cruize of a few weeks off Larache, Sallee & Mogodore.
In the afternoon saw a Ship coming from the Eastwg, which proved
to be the U. S. Frigate Adam, Capta Campbell, from Tunis, which
place he left on the 9"J instant. - In the evening the two Ships having
stretched in back of the Rock of Gibralter, Capt"ampbell
came on
board with Mr Cathcart, whom he had taken from Leghorn to Tunis,
by order of Commodore Morris: But Mr Cathcart not having been
received by the Be of Tunis, as Consul from the U. States, he was
proceeding to Gibr ter in the Adams.
I delivered to M' Cathcart a letter I had for him from the Secr of
State; and Commodore Preble also delivered to him some dispatches
with which he was charged. - Mr Cathcart delg to Commodore
Preble, for his and m perusal, a copy of his proceedings at Tunis,
which he had prepare for the Seer of State; which states his arrival
& receiption - the Bey's reason for not receiving him as Consul,
and his dispute we Dr Davis, left at Tunis by Commodore Morris, in
charge of our Affairs. Mr Cathcart informed me that he had laid out about eleven thousand dolly of the money he had r e d for the Consular presents at
Algiers, in watches, Jewelry 1 9 - which were at Leghorn, where was
also the balance of said cash, ready to be vested in other Articles for
the present; - and tbat he had there also a large sum (I undemtood
him 24,000 dollars) which he had obtained on his own credits, for the
U. States, to negotiate affairs with Tunis, and which he should account for to me. - He had left Mrq Cathcart at Leghorn, which
would oblige him to return thither, as well to bring her awaz, as to
take up, and deliver to me the Present & Cash deposited t ere. FRIDAY
SEPTEMBER
234
We were this morning near the Rock of Gibralter, with a light
wind, which soon left us, and we lay becalmed 'till near 12 o'clk,
when a breeze sprung up, and the Commodore stood into Gibralter
Ba ,to put his &patches on board the A d a m
'$he foregoing detail of events, as the took place, will fully inform
you of m proceedings since our arriv at Gibralter; and also give a
e n e d i ea of the operations which have taken place with respect to
horocco. - Commodore Preble writes so fully to the Secretary of the
Navy on this subject, and every
else which relates to the Navy
Department, that it would be to y u n n m , even if it were

3

ti

i

J

J

%

88

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1803 TO 1804
to add anything thereto. His communications will
made known to you, that you will be enabled to see

of this business.
Permit me to add, that the Zeal of Commodore Preble to promote
the interest of our Country, can be equalled only by his activity and
diligence to carry into effect such measures as appear best calculated
to restore a good understanding; or, in the event of a decided rupture,
to best protect our Commerce and injure our Enemy. - I flatter myself the President will find in this Officer prudence & good jud ement,
joined with h e s s , activity and a real wish to promote, a in his
power, the best interests of the U. States.
At any rate i t may be highly proper to have some force on this
Station, even if we should t e m a t e this affair amicably, as the late
deceitful conduct of these people proves that they are not to be trusted
to the obligation of Treaties. - The addition of one Ship and two
Brigs or Schooners, would be the least that could Keep a watchful
eye over the Coasts of Morocco on the Atlantic & Mediterranean;
but on this subject I must submit to the opinion of more competent
Judges.
i presume that M' Cathcart will send by this Opportunity, his
dispatches relative to the Business at Tunis. - He will remain here
until an opportunity offers of his going to Leghorn in one of the U.
States Vessels, so that I shall have full opportunity of communicating
with him on the subject of our affairs at Tunis & Tnpoli.
I have not heard a word from Algiers since my arrival here; i t is not
known whether the Store Ships have arrived there or not; The have
not touched here; and the communication between this p ace &
Algiers is not very fre uent, particularly a t this moment, when the
Dey has sent off the %nglish Consul, on account of some ersond
difference with him. - He is now a t Gibralter, and having ha several
opportunities of being in Company with him, I understand he expects
to return to his Post again, as he says he has received an order from
his Court to repair to Lord Nelson, now before Toulon, who will
receive orders to take him to Algiers and oblige the Dey to receive
him. Whether this will take place or not is, I confess, uncertain to
me. - Mr Cathcart says he heard from Algiers while he was a t Tunis,
and that all was well there with respect to the U. States; but he could
not tell if the Store Ships had arrived. SUNDAY
SEPTT25tb
This morning the Constitution went out with a fine wind from the
East, for Tangier, to touch there for inte ence from M' Simpson,
and then proceed to the Atlantic, and run own the Coast as far as
Mogodore, and return again into the Straits in 7 or 8 days, when the
Emperor is expected a t Tangier. The Enterprize will keep a look out
along shore for the gallies to prevent their taking any Am. Vessels in
the Straits. The enclosed copy of a letter from the Consular office in Cadiz to
Mr Gavino (NP 5) r e d this day, brings unpleasant intelligence - But
I have strong ho es, that if the Vessels there mentioned have been
captured, they
be retaken before they reach their ports of destination, and that the Frigate also (which is undoubtedly the Mahmm)
will be taken; for besides the John Adam, there will be the CM18titution out this day - and tomorrow the New York takes the same

fi

3

J'

9

&

COUlge.

'

89

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

SEPT26'b
I must now close my long, and I fear tedious, narrative, as Commodore Morris informs me he shall get under way in an hour. - I
hope the President will ap rove of the step I have taken to remain
here until something can e determined, with certainty as to this
business with the Emperor, rather than to take one of our Vessels
from the coast a t this moment. - Whether this affair be speedily &
amicably concluded with the Emperor will depend upon hs success
or our's. - No doubt remains on my mind, of the Orders for capturing
Am. Vessels having proceeded from him; and if his Cruizers shs be
successful, he will avow it; if otherwise he may deny it, and readily
place things upon the footing they were before. But another evd
may spring from this. - It is not unlikely but Tunis, hearing of our
differences with Morocco, may break out upon us, either with or
without a retext. - When the Adam left that place, there was
nothing in&ating this disposition; but we know that these people
only wait a favourable opportunity of making heavy captures without
re ard to treaties or promises.
%
he' return of the Frigates New York t John Adam will afford another Opportunity of writing in a short time, when I pray we may
have something more pleasing to communicate
Accept the Assurance of hlgh respect and Sincere attachment, with
which
I have the honor to be
Sir,
Your obliged & Obnt Servt
TOBIASLEAR.

g

[NA. SDA. CL,Algiers, Vol. 6,Jan. 1801-Dec. 1803.1
To Secretary of State from James Simpson, U. S. Consul, Tangier, Xorocco

NQ64. - Triplicate. SIR
*
*
*

TANGIER
26t'?Septemr 1803. -

*

*

*

*

It was very fortunate Captain Bainbridge met his Cruizer with
the captured Vessel in actual possession, as that put the question
of their intention out of all doubt. - Be that as it may the Emperour
is now most undoubtedly much disposed for Peace, as I foresaw that
I recommended to Commodore Preble to meet him on that ground,
which he has readily assented to inasmuch as it can be done on
honourable terms. - That Gentleman came to this Bay on the
17tQ Inst for purpose of entering upon a Negotiation, but as there
was not an person here sufficiently authorised to that effect by the
Emperour Ea returned same Evening to Gibraltar. - The day
following I sent a Messenger to the Minister to notify our having
closed with the wishes expressed in His Majestys Letter of the 9'4
Inst whose return I expect tomorrow. - Commodore Preble called
in this Ba yesterda and is now run to Leeward of Cape Spartel as
the Wind glows har a t East. I trust my next will hand you intelligence of matters being a t least
far advanced towwd a re-establishment of Peace with this Country,
in the mean time entreat you will excuse my writing in such haste,
but not to lose so favourable an o portunity of conveying my Letter
.
speedily to Lisbon is the motive of'~ t-

$

[NA. BDA. CL, Tangier, Val. 2, 1803-1810.1

90

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1808 TO 1804

To Tobias Lear, U. 6. Consul General, Blgiers, from Captain Richard V. Morris,
U. 8. Navy

UNITEDSTATESFRIGATE
Adams
Gi;brdtar Bay i?6tQSepfr 1803
SIR, MI Henley has just presented your letter of yesterday expressing a deaire of Mr Henley's procurmg my perrmssion to join the
Fngate Constitzction with an enclosed Letter from Commander Preble
consenting to receive him under his command, provided he wuld
gain my consent to leave the Adams; I think i t d be of advantage
to hlr Henley to be in active service, and he has my leave to remam
in the Meditmranean

-

[Stephen Decatur Col.]

To William Jonas Keen from Lieutenant Richard Somers, U. 8. Bavy

UNITED
STATESSCHOONER
Na.tltilu.s
Gibralter Bay SepE i?6tQ1803
DEARBROTHER
I have just arrived from Malaga, to which place
I went for to convoy all American vessels that were ready to come
to the Westw'd, having only one, & with her a tedeous time. Head
wind, calm, & a current setting two nots per hour. On the seventh
day out was five leagues to the Eastw'd of Malaga - & in twelve
hours tow'd him into the r o c b the Pheoniz of Phila - Capt.
Partemon.
I have just receiv'd orders, soon as provision'd and water'd, to take
s transon[?] station for this ocasion of the year to cruise off Magadore
on the mTestern mast of Barbaria against the Emperor Morrocco.
He has commencd hostilities, & taken four of our American vessels he has got one thirty gun ship. What small vessels, I do not know.
I hope I shall have the pleasure when I write you again to inform
you of bringing some of his vessels in to port. I should be much
pleased with the station if summer time for drawing the strong gales
from the Westw'd begin to set in. I have but little time to write.
Commodore Morris sails for American in the Adarns. Commodore
Preble is on a cruise. Commodore Ro[d]gers likewise is on a cruise.
Commodore Bainbridge is on a cruise of[f] Tripoli. The rest I cant
say when not knowing. Cspt Bainbridge has a separate command
having the Schooner Vizen Capt. Smith, under him; so must be
stiled s t present. We have no less than three Broad pendants flying
in the Straits - M o d , Roldlgers Preble. Capt Rogers was to
have] been the Command until Preble arrived of Commodore Morris'
Squadron, but the Emperor of Morrocco cornmiting depredations on
our commerce is the cause of the Capt. Rogers, for so I must stile
him, never asauming the command what few hours I was under him
in the presence of Commodore Preble, though an older officer remaining out here. I am now going on shore and will bid you adieu. I
[space] re et the time I have lost in convoying this ship down.
Give my
t respects to all friends. I expect'd to have receiv'd a
line from you by Capt. Benbridge of the Philadelphia
M r Wq JONAS
KEEN
Merchant Phila ATarth Water 8 No 88

L

m
r
n a copy in pencil received from the Esrle Bepburn Col.]

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

91

Extract from log book of U. 8. w t e Conrlritdlon Captain Edward Preble, U. 8.
Bavy, commantlurg, Yonday, 86 keptember 1&OS

Stanging [sic] of[fl and on in Tanger Bay/ We saw flying at Tangier/
seven different National flags/ the Americans/ was not Hoisted/ a t
1 PM a dispatch Boat come dong side with dispatches for Cornmodore Preble/ from Tangier/ the Boat continued a long side till
three P MI a t which time the Boat was ordeQawa / we then Bore up
we came by Cape
and Run along the Coast to the westwd/ at 5 P
Spartel nearly one mile from the shore/ in Hauling Round the SW
side of Cape Spartel we saw two/ Ketches at anchor in a small Bay/
we saw Breakers/ from the North Extreme of the Cape/ nearly two
cable length from the shore/ and white water some distance from
the shore/ We hauld in Towards the two sail at anchor/ and sent an
armd Boat to Examine them/ they were two Spanish Vessels Emoyd in the Coasting Business Between Cadiz and Malaga we then
ore up to the southwd and Boarded the Spainish Brig Rosettul Empd
in the same Business

d

9'

[NA.

N D original.]

To Secretary of the Navy from Lieutenant Stephen Decatur, Jr., U. S. Bavy
U. S. BRIG&9?h8 at 88&- off RHODE
ISLAND
light.

Septr 27* 1803
SIR, I have the honor to inform you that the repairs of the Argw
was yesterday corn leated, $ have also to inform you we found the
old bowsprit very efective; there were four large knots in the wake
of the spring that extended nearly to the heart of the stick, & two
of those knots we found rotten, this spar was made before I joined
the Argvs & was objected to by Commv Prebble who afterwards
concluded it might do. -

f

[NDA. Oficere LB, 1802-1805.1

[27 September 18031
Beceipt for articles received from James L. Cathcart, appointed U. 8. Comtul,
Tunis, by T o b h Lear, U. 6. Consul General, Algiers

(COPY)
Received from James L. Cathcart Esq. three ublic Seals, vizf
two appertainin to the U. S. Consulate of 'I!ripoE and one to the
U. States Cons ate of Algiers; also forty five Tops of Mediterranean
passports, and a number of blank consular passports, and blank
consular Bills of Health - and blank consular Certificates of Prbs,
all appertaining to the U. States Consular Oflice of Tripoli. GIBRALTAR
Sep; &7* 1803

3

[Stephen Decatur Col. NDA photostat, Book A.]
Extract from log book of U. 8. Rigate ConrHtutfon, Captain Edward Preble, U. 8.
Bary, comm.ndmg, Tuesday, 27 September 1803

Sailing b chart/ Between Ca e Spartel and the Rocks near Cape
Trafalgarl k i d s Vble Between E and ESE

Ri

[NA. ND0righaI.l

92

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1803 TO 1804

To James Leender Cathcart, appointed U. S. Consul, Tunis, from 1Pichoh 0.
Hissen, Danish Consul, Tripoli

TRIPOLI
Septl 8Ph1803.
SIR, Yesterday arrived here from Malta a fine brig of 16 Guns &
another vessel under the command of Cap4 Agostino loaded with
timber for Ship building and Stores of that kind navigating under the
British$ag the brig is the property of the Bashaw of Tnpoli and is
intended for a Cruiser, theJyJ were both sent from Malta by the
Bashaw of Tripoli's Agent there. Pray Sir is Great Britain at War with the U States of America,
that their flag is ermited to protect the Cruisers & maratime &
military stores be onging to the enemies of the United States of
America? if this is permited we may soon expect to see the Cruisers
of Tripoli, capture American vessels under english Colors & conduct
them to Malta for sale. Make what ever use you please of this intelligence but do not implicate me nor say you receiv'd it from any person at Tripoli, it is a
fact as well known at Malta as here. SIGN'D. N. NIBSEN.JAMES LEA^ CATHCART
Esq! Leghorn.
[Stephen Decatur Col. and LC. EPP, Vol. 7, 1803.1

f'

-

To Secretary of State of the Emperor of Morocco from Jamea Simpeon, U. S.
Consul, Tangier, Morocco

COPY-

TANGIER
28+ Septr 1805. SIR I have had the honour of receiving both your Letters of the
2 g and 6" this Moon, - translation of the first and of the papers it
accompanied have been sent the American Commodore, but as he
continues a t Sea because of bad weather I have not yet received his
answer to the particular points they treat upon. I will now only say respecting the Meshouda, that she was represented to all the Consuls here as a Ship belonging to His Im erial
Majesty at the time the Passports were applied for, as you .wl 1 see
by the paper I send you with this.
I also enclose a copy of the Orders Arraiz Lubarez had for takeing
not only American JTesselsbut also the property of Americans on
board of Neutral Vessels. Notwithstanding all this as a proof of the sincere desire of the
American Nation to maintain Peace and Friendship with His Imperitd
Majesty, I am ha py to tell you that the Commodore is highly disr d to gratify d s Majesty in the accommodation of the differences
as arisen between the Nations, and that the Restitution of the Ship
Mirboha with all the Moors in his possession will not be a barr thereto, - when His Majesty shall be pleased to restore the American
property detained at Mogadore or elsewhere and Ratify the Treaty
made between the United States and his Father of Glorious Memory,
that perfect Freindship may again subsist between us. - As we
cannot believe His Majesty authorised the breach of Peace we have
experienced, it is but Justice to both Nations that whoever h e been
the cause of the present differences be exemplarily punished to deter
others from doing the like a t any future day.

T

-

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

93

I am hap y to say the Captaina and Seamen of the Mirboha and
Meshowta
- - $? continue to enjoy good health.
Ls

SIDYMAHAMMED
BEN ABD-E SALEMSELAWY
Secretary of State of His 1rnperia.J Majesty
&P &P &P

[LC.EPP, Vol. 6,

1803.1

Extract from log book of U. 8. Frigate Gnstitdion, Captain Edward Preble, U. 8.
Ravy, commanding, Wednesday, 28 September 1808

Cruising Round Cape Spartell and Laying too Seven or Eight
Leagues to the Westwd of the same Cape/ winds Variable from ESE
to SW
* * * a t 3 past 11 spoke with two americanl the Ship Trent and
the Brig Hanah [Rajah?] from Salem bound to Gibraltar and Malaga/
they Reqq that Commodore Preble would convo them through the
Straits! the Commodore answered them in the drmative,'
[NA.

ND original.]

To Degen, Pnrviance & Co., Leghorn, from James Leander Cathcart, appoiuted
11.8. Comul, Tunis

GIBRALTAR
Sepfr 2 9 1803.
GENTLEMEN.
I arrived here on the 23* ins? & found the Constitzttion
Comodore Prebble, & Col! Lear who is appointed Consul gent for
A1 'em, he proceeds to that place as soon as circumstances will permit,
& r a m awaiting the arm'd brig Argus to proceed to Leghorn in order
to ship on board of said bri the jewels & cash which I rnin possession
of, or responsible for. - therefore take this opportunity to inform
you that the cash belonging to the United States in your possession
will be demanded on her arrival & in order to prevent inconvenience
to you in procuring it, I have judged it expedient to give you this
timely notice.
According to my prediction the Emperor of Morocco has declared
War against us, & captured a brig which was recaptured by Captn
Bainbndge with the Cruiser which took her mounting 20 Guns &
180 men she is now here, Comodore Prebble on his passage out fell
in with the Emperor of Morocco's Admirals Ship, but she having
Mr Simpsons passport he immediately let her go, since which she
has taken *four Sad of Americans & Cap's Rodgers is in quest of her
& the Prizes in the western Ocean it is supposed they were bound to
Lisbon I hope he may fall in with them. *This re ort was forwarded officially from Mr Anthony Terry American Vice

8

Coneul at 8 s d h to M TGavino s t Gibraltar but was afterwards contradicted.
[NA. SDA. CL, Tripoli, Vol. 2, 1801-1805.)

Watt from log book of U. 8. Rignte ComNtulIon, Captain Edward Preble, U. 6.
Navy, commending,Thursday, 29 September 1803

* * * a t r ~ 12~ we
t bore up for Cape Spartel/ with the Shi
T r d l Captain 8 8 t h Kimble and the Brig Ra ah! Emneul war$
Master/ under Convoy/ from noon till K past 3 M we had frequnt

f.

squalls and showers of Rain/ a t 4 we parted company with the Convoy
and Hauld on a wind into
Bay/ st % set 4 we Teckd nearly in
the WN I?/ we sounded in stays 33
the center of the Bay/

94

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1803 TO 1804

fa&' we saw at anch in Tangier BayJ one arm" Brig and Schooner/
d colours/ at 5 we
they Hoisted french colom] one clump ship/ d
ssw a strange sail to the westwd of Cape Spartal/ out two Reef from
the Topsails and stood Towards her/ a t 6 Joined company the united
Ststes Frigate John Adamsl Commodore Ro gem who we parted cornany with ten days ago/ the John Adam/ as been c m i n g to the
of Cape Spark1 this nine or ten days/ for the Moorish Admiral/ which was Boarded by the Cmstituiirm on the 7 September
last at 7 in the Evening we stood into Tangier Bay1 in compan with
the John Adams and made the necessary arrangmenta for anc oring
[NA. ND originaI.1

\

best+

1

To Tobins Lear, U. S. Conad General, Algiem, from Captoin Edward Reble, U. 8.
Ban'

U.S. F Constitdim GIBRALTAR
BAY

Septr bO* 1803 DEARSIR After s short and most uncomfortable cruise I am again

a t Anchor in this Bay, a shght indisposition deprives of the honor of
rsonally paying my respects at Gibraltar to day, I hope tomorrow
t h r weather & better health will enable me fo see ou on shore,
I have had correspondence with M' Simpson sh i dmake you fully
acquainted with the present state of affairs with our Morocco friends
as soon as I see you, present me respectfully to your Lady & to Mr &
Miss Gavino.

c

[Stephen Decstur &I.]

[30 September 18031
To Jamer Shipson, 0. 8. Consul, Tangier, from the Secretary of State of the
Emperor of Mo~occa
Translation.

-

Praise be given to God alone. There is no Power or Strength but in the Almighty and Great God. To C d SIMPEON
the American - Health. We have received your Letter with a copy of His Ms'estys Order
was on board the Tripoline Ship and cop of a Letter rom Bshash
to Lubarez, and we have understood the w ole. - His Ma'esty whom
God preserve will be at Tangier, and he will only do all &at is good
with your Nation. The Vessel detained at Mogadore is in all ~ecurity,you have
nothing to fear and you may be perfectly easy respecting her. What I have to ench e you is what I have written you before,
which is that you make a haste to have the Vessel at Tangier readily,
for i f His Majesty finds you delay he will suppose you are inclined
for War and then he may do something but if he meets the Vessel he
w i l l be certain ou desire to remain in Peace.
He who has e m the cause of all this you will see his punishment,
and you wdl hear how His Majesty in hiB great Wisdom will act with

H

I

9

x

him. -

Make haste that the Vessel come in order you may secure the good
will of and give setisfaction to His Ma'esty. W&m i h 1 P &nuzdi fhsccond (!!PQ
Septr 1803)
MAHAMED
BENABD-ESALEM
SSELAWY

-

[LC.EPP, Val. 7, 1803.1

95

WARS WITa BARBARY POWERS

To Lieutenant barn Hull, U. 8. Bavy, commuadiry U. 8. Schooner EnbcrP.Izc, from
Captain Edward Reble, U. 8. Nary

U S. SHIPCmtitution, at Anchor in GIBBALTEB
BAY
30tp September 1803
SIR, I have just received information b a Vessel from Salem that
several Vessels were to sail about a Mont since from that place for
Moggadore of course it will be necessary for you to keep a good look
out in sight of the land off that port, and to continue on that Station
the 15 days mentioned in your Orders, Notwithstanding the Arrival
of the NautiJua
[LC. EPP, Order Book, 1803-1805.1

E

-

Extract from log book of U. 6. ?gate

GndMdian. Captain Edward Reble, U. 8.
Bavy, commandmg, Friday, SO September 1803
Cruising Between the Rock of Ca Trafalgar and Cape Spartell
Running throu h the Straits of Gibr tar and laying with two anchors
a head in gibr tar Bay

8

S

[NA. ND original.]

To Seoretary of the Bavy from Captain Edward Reble, U. 8. Navy

U S. SHIPConsbitufh
Gibraltar Bay Octr 1 1803 SIR I had the honor to enclose you by the U S Ship Adarns C a p

Morris, two letters - a monthly Muster Book, and 34 other ISpatches relative to the Squadron and our affairs with Morocco, and
also a letter to the Sectr of State. I now enclose you a coppy of the
arrangment of dispatches, together with Copies of sundry letters that
have passed between the Emperor of Morocco, his Ministers, Mr
Simpson & myself, since that period after a perusal of these papers
ou will be convinced that the Ship [Meshoudaj Captured b Cap5
godgem was a Tripoline and ought not to be given up, and t at the
Emperor is very desirous of Peace as his cruizers have been unsuccessfull, I have no doubt but he would have discovered a different disposition if they had been otherwise our squadron arriving so opportunely
has disconcerted their plans & prevented a great mischief to our
commerce,
I arrived here last night from a cruise along their coast was in
Tan er Bay three times m the course of a week, they find themselves
so c osely watched that it will be for their interest to have
which I have no doubt will be established in a very few days. ut to
prevent any of our vessels falling into their hands which would render
lt more difficult to make terms with them, I have sent the Enferprize
& Nautdua of[fl Moggadore, where several of our mercht vessels are
momently expected to arrive $ the Siren which arrived this day will
sail for the Western cosst in 48 hours, several vessels are here waiting
for Convoy for Leghorn & other PorB aloft, the moment the Atgocs
arrives she shall sad with them but it would not be rudent for me to
send a vessel up until then, The Emperor with
Court are expected at Tanger next Tuesday,, I shall endeavour to be them &
shall cooperate with Mr Simpson m all such measures as are necessary
Q proper to the reestablishment of eace, the Cruiser [Mitboka] taken
by Cap;.Bainbridgeis such a misera le piece of naval architecture that

<

f

r-'

fh

E

96

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1803 TO 1804

I do not believe we have an m c e r in our service that would be willing
to attempt to cross the Atlantic in her for ten times her Value. I have
concluded to restore her to the Emperor together with all his
in our ossession and to withdraw the o;ders I have given
turing .boorish Veasels, on certam condihons which my
2ljt@UltP to MT Simpson {a copy of which is inclosed) will explain to
you, the Emperor of Morocco has such an extensive sea coast on the
Atlantic, and is so advantageously situated on the Straits for annoying our commerce that i t is very much for our interest to be on good
fermswith him, Kis 30 gun ship [Maimona] which I met on my passage here arrived a t Lisbon has not trtken any thing and is ordered to
remain there until peace is restored. The threat I made on my arrival
to sink that ship or any other of hls cruizers, that I might meet with &
the active Vigdance of our squadron has had a good effect on the
Moors. I have no doubt but this quarrel will eventually be for our
advantage, as I do not believe his Imperial Majesty will be disposed
to War with us again, & we shall get clear of having any thing to do
with Ashash the former Governor of Tanger who has ever been
opposed to our Interest. - The John Adams & New York will
remain a few days longer until all is settled & I hope by the last of
this week to transmit to you by those ships sattisfactory accounts of
our situation relative to Morocco. Doctor Boy'd is very much out of health & not expected to recover,
of course I have ordered Doctor Weems to the Argus on her arrival.
Lt Dent is with me, Lt Jenks is in the Adams, & Lc Cox in the New
York.

The Enberpria has been new coppered a t Malta, & I shall new
Rigg her here as soon as she returns from off Moggadore. I am watering at present & expect to sail tomorrow evening, - for
Tanger. [LC. EPP, Vol. 7, 1503.1
To Captain Benjamin Xason and others from Captain Edward Preble, U. 8. Bavy
UNITEDSTATES
FRIGATE
C0728b&Lfi072

I& October 1803. GIBRALTAR
BAY.
GENTLEMEN
- A letter directed to Commodore Morris has come
to my hand, and as Commodore of the Mediterranean Squadron I beg
leave to observe that there can be little danger in your proceeding to
the United States, as there is two of my Sguadron cruislng off Mogadore, Salleo, & Lnrache, will prevent thew cruisers from putting to
Sea. The Moorish Frigate is now a t Lisbon, & has orders not to go
out until peace is established between us & the Emperor. A sloop
of War, however, I have ordered to take a Convoy from this Bay, &
pass near Crtdiz that you may take advantage of her Convoy. She
will sail the first East Wind. There is no truth in the report the
Moorish Frigates having taken four American Vessels.
MABON
& Others.
To Capt. BENJAMIN
[NDA.

A-4, Seville ConauLte Archivea.1

from journal of Midshipman F. Cornelius degmfft, U. 8. Navy, in U. 8.
Brig Sim of 18 guns, Lieutenmt Charles Stewart, U. 8. Navy, comm~ndfng,
Batnrdoy, 1 October 1803

-act

Light winds & pleasant, saw a ship ahead at 2. At K ptaat 2 bent
the larboard bower anchor. a t 5 shortaned s d and spoke the above

97

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

ship, proved to be his Britanic Majesty's frigate Am hion, At K
past 5 made sail & stood on our course. At % past 6 ca 'd all hands
to quarters & loadened the great guns fore & aft with ape; run them
out & secured them. Midnight pleasant with a fine reeze from the
We At 2 saw land ahead to the northward of Cape Trifdgar, At 8
Cape Trifr bore N. N. E distant 3 leagues. At 9 bent the larboard
cable & prepar'd for coming too, At K past 10 saw the rock of Gibralter, At 11 discover'd several American vessels lying in the ba .
At 1 came too with the larboard bower. St Roque, bearing N b
Eumpa point S X W. The above vessels proved to be the
S:
Frigates Cmstitubwn, John Adums & Schooner Nautilus. 3564 miles Distance run by Log from cape Henlopen to cspe
Spartell. -

I

f

d I5

[NDA.]
To Captain Edward Preble, U. 8. Navy, from famea Simpson, U.8. Consul, Tan&?,
Yorocao

TANGIER
$9 October 1803. DEAR
SIRThe accompanying Letter for you was put up on thursday
in hopes I might have found means of conveying it to ou - but the
meet you in
Weather has been such since then I conclude this
Gibraltar Bay. Enclosed ou have the Ministers answer to what I wrote him on
Wednesday ast - in order you may receive dl these papers before
an Easterly Wind, I send t h s Boat on purpose with them, that you
may determine how far you may consider it proper to meet His
Majestys earnest desire of having his Ship brought to this Bay. The excessive bad Weather has delayed his Journey exceedingly,
on Friday my Express found him encamped at a short distance on the
other side of Alcassar River, and Hashash on this side of it, but their
communication perfectly cut off the River being im assable, but on
Rafts supported by Goat Skins filled with Wind. Man passed
and was brought back in that way. As we had very little Rain after Friday at Sunsett I conclude the
Emperour will have been able to pass the River yesterday Afternoon
and that we shall see him on Tuesday. - I wish l k n to be here before
you whether you bring the h4irboh.a with you or not - if you come
without her we shall have a violent dust with him, for His Majesty
is allowed to be as positive a Gentleman & strong headed as any
Man can be. - However on this occasion we must not be an attom
less strenuous for securing a permanent Peace to the United States,
so far as any engagements of these people can be deemed security. By the enclosure with this, you will see the Minister threatens vengeance on the author of these troubles, and he well deserves i t ; - most
probably tomorrow we shall know his fate As you will now meet his Majesty here, I submit to you whether it
will not be well to shew him all your force; and as he has disavowed
any intervention of War with the United States, ou will be the best
judge how far it will or not be consistent to pay
honours a t our
first arrival in the Bay; - perhaps it might be well to send in a s r i g
or Schooner first with a Flag of truce & let her Boat bring me a Letter
from you in answer to which I shall immediately acqutunt you what
farther may have occurred, which will be some guide to you. - I

A

7

by

L

98

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1803 TO 1804

hasten to send the Boat off that she may if possible reach you tonight The Emperour does not go to Tetuan, he comes here direct. [LC. EPP, Vol. 7, 1803.1
To Lieutenant Charles Stewart, U. S. Bavy, commanding U. S. Brig Siren, from
Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Bavy

Constitution [2] O C T1803
~
SIR, I t is my orders that you sail from this Bay tomorrow Pr Signd
and take under your Convoy all the American Vessels ready by that
time to proceed to the Eastward I t will be proper for you to see
them safe, into the ports to which they are bound as far as Leghorn
which port you are to stop a t a few days. M' Cathcart will embark
on board the Syren for Leghorn and on his arrival there, will deliver
into your charge, money and other property of the United States,
which property you are to proceed to Algiers with, and deliver i t to
the order of Tobias Lear Esqe Consul General residing at that place You will then proceed to join the Squadron off Tripoly -If you do not
fall in with any of our Ships after remaining 6 days on that Station,
You will proceed to Malta for orders I t is expected that you do not make any unnecessary delay a t any
port you may touch at
P. S. I shall make the Signal for you to make the Signal for the
Merch! Ships to get underweigh about 8 o'clock tomorrow morning E P.
[LC. EPP, Order Book, 1803-1805.1
Extract from log book of U. 8. Frigate Constitufion, Captain Edward Preble, U. S.
navy, commanding, Sunday, 2 October 1803

Riding with the Two bowers a head in Gibraltar Bay/ winds from
the WNW/ at 3 anchored here the united States Brig Syrenl Lieutenant Stewart
[NA.

E D original.]

To Richard O'Brien, U. S. Consul General, Algiers, from Tobias Lear, appointed
U. 6. Consul General, Algiers

GIBRALTAR
October Sd 1803
SIR,I have the honor to inform you that I arrived at this place on
the 12t4 Lltimo in the U. States Frigate Com5tution bound to Algiers;
for we Regency, you have undoubtedly been informed, I am appointed to succeed you as Consul Genl of the U. States in compliance
with your repeated applications for emission to return home
Our unexpected differences with horocco has prevented the Conittitutwn from proceeding to Algiers for the present; but I hope they
are now in a train of adjustment, as the Emperor has expressed a
readiness to settle them upon proper & equitable grounds.-I shall
proceed to Tangier this evening m t h Commodore Preble, where the
Emperor is expected tomorrow, and I flatter myself we shall terminate
this &agreeable affair satisfactorily.
I have been peculiarly anxious to reach Algiers as soon as possible
on your account that you might have taken advantage of our Ships
going to the U. States for your return ; but i t wg have been commiting

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

99

the peace of our Country with Morocco, if Commodore Preble had
left this Coast before an adjustment of the difTerences with the
Emperor. I have dispatches for you from the Departmt of State, which I
must retain untill I can have the pleasure of seeing you; as there is no
direct, or safe conveyance from t h place to Algiers, and I commit this
letter, by post to the care of Rob1 Montgomery EsqT our Consul a t
to take a chance of a conveyance from thence. Alicant
I have my wife with me, who desires her best respects may be
presented to Mr*OBrien to which I beg leave to add mine - As we
shall wish to get settled as soon as may be after our arrival, I must
depend much on your fri[e]ndly adtice $ aid to put us in the best way
of accomplishing that object. We have brought no furniture except some Beds, Bedding &p we have some stores necessary for house keeping; but as we were totally
ignorant of what we m g h t be able to procure in that way at Algiers,
we did not know exactly what to lay in. I hope the store ships with the two Years Annuity have arrived
before this time, and I shall come provided with the means of furnishing the consular $ Biennial presents and such parts of them as have
been procured by M' Cathcart - a t Leghorn, will be sent over to meet
me at Algiers. We are happily now very strong in these seas, there are the Frigates,
Consfitution Philadelphia N. York & John Adams, two Brigs of 18
twenty four pounders, cannonades, and three Schooners of 16 and 18
Guns. Hoping to have the pleasure of meeting you soon. I have the
honor to be
R r c d OBRIENEsqr
Consul G e d o j the U.S. Algiers

-

[Stephen Decatur Col. N D A photostat, Book A]
Circular to U. S. Consuls from Tobias Lear, U. 6. Consul (+enera&Algiem

GIBRALTAR
019'QQ 1803
SIR,I have the honor to inform you that I arrived at this place, on
the lZtb Ultimo in the U. States Frigate ConsbitzGEion, bound to
Algiers; for which Regency I am appointed Consul Genl with a
superintending power in the Affairs of the U. States over the other
Barbary States. Oour unexpected differences with the Emperor of Morocco has
prevented the Constitution from proceeding to Algiers for the present,
but I hope they are now in a tram of adjustment, as the Emperor has
expressed n readiness to sottle them upon w o n a b l e grounds, and I
shall proceed this evening to Tangier, with Comq Preble, where the
Emperor is expected tomorrow, and I flatter myself we shall terminate this disagreeable affair satisfactorily
I have the happiness to inform ou that Mr Simpson is liberated
from the guard set over him, and as the strongest assurances from
the Emperor, of rotection & friendship. - It will afford me great
pleasure to hear rom you a t Algieq and I will feel peculiarly happy
if it should be in my power to render you, or your friends, any Sellrlce

g

P

100

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1805 TO 180.4

(Circular To .)
WmKIRKPATRICK
Esq
JOHN
JARVIS
ES
U . S. Conslcl at MQlaga
Esq
ROB*MONTGOMERY
Josh IZNARDI
Esq
U . S. Con.su,l at A1lzcant
U . S. Consul at Cadiz
P. S. to Mr Montgomery's letter.
I take the liberty of committing a letter to your charge for Mr
OBrien, as there is no oppertunity of writin from this place directly
to Ngiers, 8 I am informed a Packet safs from Nicant for that
place. [Stephen Decatur Col. N D A photostat, Book A.]
To Captain C. P. Schomberg, Boyd Havy, H. B. P.5. Modrw, from Captain
William Bainbndge, U. S, Bavy

UNITEDSTATES
FRIGATE
Philadelphia
Malta Harbour ST?Oct. 1803
SIR Having several spare spars on board the US: Frigate Philadelphia which I wish to land at Malta, I shall esteem i t as a articular
favour if you will give permission to receive them in His bajestY9s
Yard at this place [LC.EPP, LB, 1803.1
[3 October 18031
To Captain William Bainbridge, U. S. Bavy, from Captain C. M. Schomberg, Royal
Navy, H. B. M. S. Mudrau

SIR Immediate orders shall be given for the reception of any Stores
belonging to the United States at His Majesty's Arsenal, as also to
render the Philadelphia any assistance she may stand in need of
Mcldrass 10 AM 3'* Oct 1803
[LC. EPP, LB, 1803.1
To Lieutenant Charles Stewart, U. S. Navy, commanding U. 8. Brig Siren, from
Captain Edward Preble, U. 8. Bavy

IT. STATESFRIGATE
Constitution

S'g October 1805 Gibraller Bay
SIR, You will sail from this Bay a t 6 o'clock, and convoy the
American Vessels ready to sail by that time 20 leagues west of Cape
spartel, and return to join me in Tangier Bay as soon as possible
[LC.EPP,Order Book, 1803-1805.1
To Lieutenant Joseph Tarbell, U. 8. Bavy, on board Prize Mirboka, from Captain
Edward Preble, U. 8. Bavy

UNITED
STATES
FRIGATE
ConstitUtim 3'4 O C T1803
~
Gibralter Bay
SIR,You will get the Mirboka, prize to the U S. Frigate Philadelphia
under way tomorrow morning, and follow me with all possible speed
to Tangier Bay [LC. EPP, Order Book, 1803-1805.1

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

101

[3 October 18031
To Tobias Lear, U.8. Consul General, Algiers, fiom Captain Edward Preble,
U. 8. Navy

[U. S. FRIGATE]
Qo&d&b?&
DEARSIR I have r e d dispatches from Mr Simpson, & wish to
consult you immediately. be so good as to come in the Boat whicb
brings you this, as I cannot leave the ship at present. 1 s h d sail

this afternoon. Sept [October] 36 1803
[Stephen Decatur Col.]

Extract from Diary of Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Navy, on board U. 8. Prigate
Constituiion, Monday, 3 October 1803

Two of the Watering Party deserted - recs dispatches from Tanger
on Public Service and answered them - ordered the Mirboka to be
rig ed and sails bent ready for Sea. The Nautilus sailed on a cruise,
orhred the Sires to convoy the Amerieon Trade 20 Leagues to the
Westward of Cape Spartel and to return and join me in T a q e r Bay.
Ordered Lt Tarbell and 10 Men on board the Mirboka to sad her to
Tanger Bay [LC. EPP, Diary. 1803-1804.1
Extract from log book of U. S. Frigate G d f d o n , Captain Edward Preble, U. 8.
Navy, commanding, Monday, 3 October 1803

* * * laying in gibrdtar Bay watering ship/ the Twelve Moorish prisoners/ who Joined the Constitution the 18 and 25 September
last/ was Rec[e]ived on board as Gentlemen/ and for some time messd
a t the Commodores Table/ after this they messd under the half deck
and had the Commodores Servants to attend them/ * * * the
Commodore/ i am Told RecivQdespatches this morning from the
Emperoure of Morrocco/ a Leutenant and 20 men was sent from the
Constidubion on board the Merbokol to sway up her topmasts and bend
her sails
[NA. ND original.]

Extract from journal of Xidahipmm F. Corneliur deKr&t, U. 8. Navy, in U. 8. Brig
Sfrm of 18 guns, Lieutenant Charles Stewart, U. 8. Navy, commanding, Honday,
3 October 1803

Pleasant weather, wind from the Ns Hands employ'd stowing the
Hold & getting ready for sea. - Sent on shore a number of sails, an
anchor & cable, a number of spans & kentledge, chests of tea & boxes
of sugar. At 3 P. M. the Captains of 6 American vessels (which were to sail
under our Convoy) came on board for their Instructions. At 4 the
U. S. Frigate Constitution got under way & stood out of the harbour
to the Wa At
past 5 we fired a gun for the convoy to pre are
to get under way, hoisted in our boats brought too & prepar'8for
heaving up. At 6 hoisted up our 'olly boat astern - At
past
6 hoisted 3 lights at the Peak & fire a gun for the convoy to w
stand out of the bay, hove up our larboard bower & stood out o the
bay in Company with 6 American vessels under a convoy, Light winds
& pleasant.

d

Yh&

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1803 TO 1804

102

At 10 P. M lower'd down our jolly boat & sent her on board the
Commodore with dis atches. At day light little or no wind, convoy
about
vI3 Leagues to the Wg of the bay, saw a
all in si h t - At 9 &
Galley !rmg a t an American Schooner, made sail in chase of the galley,
on the discovery of which she hove about, mann'd her Sweeps, &
pull'd in under the S h s h shore which render'd our getting a t Her
meffectual. Call'd tdhands took in sail for the convoy to come up. Meridian light winds & pleasant weather. INDA.)
To James Simpson, U. 8. Consul, Tangier, Morocco, from Captain Edward Preble,
U. S. Navy

U. S. SHIP Constitution OCT?4 t h

1803
6 oClock p m, Tang: Bay
SIR I am h o d with your communication of this evening I shall
not sand a Boat on shore until I have the Emperors permission, but
shall wait your communications by a shore Boat.
As you think i t will gratify his Imperial Majesty, I shall salute him
& dress ship, and if he is not disposed to be pacific I wid salute him
again.
P. S. I shall attend to the Sig?
[LC. EPP, Vol. 7, 1808.1
To James Simpeon, U. 6. Consul, Tangier, Morocco, from Captain Edward Preble,
U. 6. Navy

U S. S. ~[onstdzL2ion].O C T4th
~ 1803

Tangier Bay
SIB I yesterday had the Mirboka's sails bent, & put on board an
Officer & men to bring her here, a Change of Wind will prevent her
arrival for the present as she is but an indifferent sailer, indeed I
cannot conceive what advantage to us or to the Emperor it can be to
have her here previous to settlement of our affairs and a re-establishment of Peace, as immediately on that event taking place, I shall
deliver her up in as good or better order than when detained by us,
together with all the Moors in our possession - & I certainly shall
not deliver up either vessel or people previous to a renewal & ratification of our Treaty. I wish exceedingly to see you on board if only for
a few minutes neither his Imperial Majesty or his Ministers can have
any ob'ection to your visiting me for the purpose of our consulting
on the est means of bringing about a speedy & happy termination of
all our difTerenc88.
With the charge of the squadron resting on me, I cannot think of
leaving my ship a t present particularly as bhey have not themselves
the liberality to allow you to come on board, if the J wish a hostage
the Officer who bringa this will remain on shore, unt' your return, but
I should presume that they can not require any other security than
your family.
Please inform me when the Emperor may be Expected &C. EPP, Vol. 7, 1803.1

b

B

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

103

To Captain Edward Reble, U. 8. Bavy, from James Simpeon, U. 8. Conad, Tangier,
Morocco

TANGIEE
dt@October 1803 DEARSIR I have both your Letters of this date. - Before Hia
Ma'esty can arrive here tomorrow I shall ac uaint him of your having

6

anc ored, and I have every hope he will &ect your being well received, - the moment I have h s answer you shall be acquainted with
the particulars. Untill I can either have an interview with him, or receive such
assurances of his Freindly disposition continuing, I think its just as well
you excuse landing yourself, but I sincerely think there can be no sort
of danger in your sending a Flag, with injunctions however to the
Officer not to land, or approach the Gallies. - At His Majestys
arrival tomorrow I cannot excuse hoisting the Flag of the United
States, and if you think well to Salute and dress Ship it will be a ood
time after the Garrison has finished firing, as then His Majesty w% be
up in the Castle and in view of the Ship I understand the Garrison fires a triple Salute - when the Emperour reaches the Castle I will besides the Flag, shew the btue Jack, for
your information. [LC. EPP, Vol. 7, 1803.1
To Captain Edward Preble, U. 6. Navy, U. 6. Frigate GN(i(ldion, from Captain
William Bainbridge, U. S. Bavy

UNITEDSTATES
FRIG-~TE
Philadelphia
Malda Harbor 4" October 1803
SIR I have the honor of informing you that we arrived in this port
on the 3'q inst, after a passage of 14 days from Gibralter; in conformity to your orders, I called a t Malaga to take our trade under
convoy, but found no American Vessels bound to the eastward; after
remainin there five bours to water the V h n , we proceeded along the
Spanish oast as far as Cape St Martins speaking all Vessels we saw,
but learnt no news of any Tripolitan cruizers; between the Cape and
the Island of Ivica [Iviza], on the 22q ultq we parted with the Ship
Port Mary, and passed to the southward of Majorca & Minorm. On
the 27th ultq made the Island of Galitta, on the African coast; and the
same day passed the Bay of Tunis, saw no Vessels but the Schooner
Vixen who I ordered to separate on the 24tb the copy of my orders for
her separation, as also to pass b the Island Pedusa I herewith enclose.
On the 2gt4 ultQabreast of irgintas, in the Island of Sicily, gave
chase, brought to and examined a Tunissian cruiser of 22 Guns & 120
men; she had George Davis's Esqr Charge des aflairs passport dated the
- from that day to the 2"q inst. experienced a very
21'1 b ow from
1803 the eastward.
heavy
Immediately on my arrival here I made application to the Commander afloat for permission to land my spare spars, which was
olitely granted. M letter of soliciting and his reply I have the
have landed a quantit of Boatswains, Cargonor of enclosing.
penters & Gunners stores in the Magazine of oseph Pdos Esqr, and
under whose charge they are placed. Having from 20 to 30 s c k on
board, this number with 13 left a t Gibralter has reduced the force of
our shi considerabl was a powerful reason for me to clear my ship
as muc as powiibe &fore I attempted the bad mast & ill climate of

6

8

AuYt

5

t

J'

104

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1803 TO 1804

Tripoli; this measure I hope will meet our approbation. I transmit
you the state & condition of our ship [ age 1778, of below-mentioned
source.].
Your Orders ran to remain but twenty four hours in this Port; I
find with every exertion, my spars & storm cannot all be landed before
this evening, when, if the wind permits, I shall proceed immediately
on the Coast of Tripoli.
B the return made to you of provisions on hand, you will find them
near y expended in December.
The Schooner Vixen, Commandant Smith, this morning arrived,
who wiU proceed with the Philadel*.

6

T

[LC. EPP,Vol. 7, 1803.1
[Endosure I]

To Captain C. M. Schomberg, Boyal Navy, from Captain William Bainbridge,
U. S. Nary

UNITEDSTATESFRIGATE
Philadelphia
Malta Harbor Sr?October 1803
SIRHaving several spare spars on board the United States Frigate
Philadelphia, which I wish to land at Malta, I shall esteem it a particular favor if you will give permission to receive them in his Majesty's
Yard a t this place.
Cap$SCHOMBER~
of His Britanick Majestys Ship Madras.
[LC. EPP,Vol. 7, 1803.1
[Enclosure 21

[3 October 18031
To Captain William Bainbridgtt, U. 6. Navy, from Captain C. I.Schomberg, Boyal
Navy

COPY
SIR Immediate orders shall be given for the reception of any stores
belonging to the United States, a t His Majesty's Arsenal, as also to
render the Philadelphia any assistance she may stand in need of.
Sign? - C. M. SCHOMBERG
Madrass - 10 A. M. 3'd Ocr 1803
[LC.EPP,Vol. 7, 1803.1
Extract from log book of U. 6. Frigate CohdituLIon, Captain Edward Preble,
U. S. Navy, commanding, Tuesday, 4 October 1808

Laying a t single anchor in gibraltar Bay/ Running through the
Straits to the Westw? and working into Tangier Bay/ Winds Variable
from NW to E b S * * * The Schoone[r] NautiluR Leiutenant
Smith mild from here on a cruse/ the second of October in the afternoon/ the Frigate John A&m Commodore Roggers mild yesterday
in the afternoon at 4 PM. we hove short/ a t 5 we wiegho and came to
d/
G u t e n a n t Tarbell of the Constitu2ion is order? with 8 seaman on
Roarde the rize Merbocka Luitenant Elbert/ who has had cha e of
the Merboc a/ for this ten or twelve da s/ is orderd on ~ o J t h e
CMZgtit.ution/ MI Reed/ Mate/ and Mr b o n i s / midshipman/ Both
belonging to the ConatitzLbion/ are orderd to Remain on board the
Me+%ocka/Tobias Lear Es r/ the american counsel enera11 came on
Board/ from ~ i b r a l t a rthe
l 8onstitutim this aftemoon$he -mpanyes

P

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

105

Commodore Preble over to Tangier i mentioned in the fore noon/ of

P-

we saw a sail to the Northwg with the Schooner Nautilus] &tin
ing flag out/ we we made her signal to come within hail/ a t 9 in oats
and and spoke with His B/ T/Majestys Sloop Tetmaganb/ Ca fain
Stewart/ a Little after nine a fresh breezes sprung up from the $SW/
in To gallant mils/ the ships company Employe worbjng ship Round
~ a ~ e % a l a b aint order to Enter Tangier Bay Between nine and ten
in the morning there was in sight 21 sail on Merent Bearing/ passing
and Repassing the strights
[NA. KD original.]

Extract from journal of ldidahipmpn P. Cornelius deKrafft, 0. S. Bavy, in U. 8.
Brig Siren 18 guns, Lieutenant Charles Stewart, U. S. Xavy. commanding,
Tuesday, 4 October 1808

Commences with warm & sult weather, light breezes from the
uropa point bearing E by N 5 N.
Eastward. Ceuta bearing S
to the Wq the convoy being
At M past Meridian wind ha
unable to stem the current, with contrary winds, the signal for making
a harbour was made, when all made the best of thelr way into Gibralter ba agsin. At 2 P. M. came too with the larboerd Bower to the
I dr
& the stream to the N' d: El in 6% fathoms water. St.
Rocque bearing N by E Europa point South. A Schooner from
Salem anchored in the bay, the Caps of which inform'd us that the
U. S. Brig Argus was to have sail'd 1 day previous to his Departure
from Salem, but did not & was expected to sail in s day or two. -

%

[NDA.]

106

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1803 TO 1804

To Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Navy, from James Simpson, U.S.Consul, Tangier,
Morocco

TANGIER
6 f b October 1803 4 P M SIRI received this morning the favour of your 3d Ins: from Gibralter
and that of last Evening. His Majesty a t comeing in took a different Route to what was mentioned yesterday - he was expected by the Beach and came on the
West side of the Town and entered the Castle by a back Gate - his
Brother Muley Absolam, and a favourite Queen arrived late last
night. The minister Sidy Muhammed Selawy has been dispatched to
Tetuan two days ago, to bring from thence some money and Effects
Alcayde Hashash acquainted His Majesty was there belonging to
His Majesty - this is unexpected, i t remains to be seen if such public
property d be found. Yesterday the Friends of Hashash circulated a Report that the
Command of a11 the Army with the Emperour had been conferred
on him - but we have seen His Majesty arrive & Hashash follow
some time after and go to his House in Town where he Remains The Letter I wrote Muley Soliman met him on the Road, and was
not delivered, the Messenger erroneously thinking it must pass thro'
the Ministers hands -however that is of little consequence. -Most
probably I shall hear from His Majesty in the course of this night,
If I do not I shall tomorrow morning find some mode of communicating with him, and send you notice of what may be the Result my first application will be to Represent your being here, and for
what purpose, but as he must be fatigued I would not wish to hasten
the matter this Afternoon [LC.EPP, Trol. 7, 1803.1
To James Simpson, U. S. Consul, Tangier. Morocco, from Captain Edward h e b l e ,
U. S. Navy

U. S . SHIPConstdution
Tunger Bay Octr 6'@ 1803 6 p m
DEARSIR I am hona with yours of this afternoon, and shall wait,
until tomorrow t,o hear the result of your communication with the
Emperor, If Hnshash is continued in favour with additional honors
wnfered on him, we cannot have any thing friendly to ex ect, of
course I shall be under the necessity of .employing my who e force
in the best possible way for the protection of our commerce, & to
revenge the Insult and indignity offered our flag. I however still
hope that every thing will be amcably adjusted
[LC.EPP,Vol. 7, 1803.1

P

To Miss Hash Tash, from Midshipman Henry Wadsworth, U. S. Navy

TANGIER
BAY,point Nam-shot[?] from the
Batteries Ocdobet 6th [I8031
DEARHASHYou undoubtedly wish to hear the particulars of the
Moorish War of 1803: to begin then, when in the Newyotk we
an-iv'd a t Gibraltar from the eastward on the 13'b day of last month,
we found there the Philadel hia 44 [guns] Capt Bainbridge; he had
taken some time before the %wrish ship Merboko of 22 guns, Capt

-

---

--

-

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

107

Ibrahim huberais off Ca e di Gatt & retaken the Celia Brig of
The CoMiirution was likewise at
Boston a prize to the &om.
Gibraltar with the schooner V k n just from America. Comq
Preble off Cape St Vincent fell in with the Moorish Admiral[?] of
32 guns, the passport being regular & not knowing of the War she
was permitted to proceed, being as they said bound to Lisbon, to
recieve a promised present from Portugal: we have since heard of
their arrival via the Portugese Admiral stationed at Gibraltar. The
Emperor finding that his cruisers sent in no prizes, & losing the Merboka, & the ConstitzLtion Newyork & John Adarns with the Nazctilua
Enter rize & Brig Siren constantly on his coast which not only
woulcf endanger hLs remaining cruizer, but prevent any prizes getting
to his ports: again considering all this he is desirous of Making Peace,
& disavows making War at all, or giving his Corsairs orders to go
out, laying it all on Hash Hash Gov. of Tangier. Hash denies giving the Captains orders to go out, & the Captains declare that Hash
did give the orders, but it is thus Hash gave the Capts Sealed orders,
& when they arrived at the place where they were to be opened,
there was no signature to the orders Why then did they obey the
orders by taking the Brig? I think we may conclude them all to be
in Plot, & not meeting with success - they wish to clear off, knowing our Frigates all to be aloft & our trade m this Quarter unprotect
ed, the dam'd rascals sent their damn'd rascally cruizers out, but the
fortunate arrival of Corn Preble's Squsdron prevented the sequel
they expected Mr Simpson our Consul here was st first confined, he
is now r e l e d & the Cornr?invited to Tangier, where the Emperor
is to meet him to conclude a Solid Peace. An American Brig from
Salem, being at Mogadore when the War began, became a bon[?]
prize & the crew Slaves, but they were treated very well indeed. Comr Morris sailed for America about the 20th inst. The Philadelphia & Vixen have been dispatched to watch the State Affairs in
the Levant. - The Argus expected daily from America. Siren
just arrived. - Comr Ro[d] ers is removed to the Newyork & has
the command which Comt orris had before his recall. [H. W. L. Dana Col.]

M"

btraet from log book of U. 8. Frigate Co~fituffon,
Captain Edward Preble, 0.8.
Navy, commanding, Wednesday, 6 October 1803

Employ4 working Ship to windw4/ to the Eastwe of Cape Tangier/ at

% past 12 spoke with the Schooner Nautilus Leut Smith/ in working

into Tangier Bay/ we saw seven fla flyin in different parts of the
Town] which we supposd/ hoisted y the orighen Counsels/ distinguishing there different Nation/ the American flag was flying amoung
them at past 1 P M, came too with the Best bower in Tangier Bay
in 13 fath" over a Sandy Bottom/ Veerd to two thirds of a cable and
furld sails/ the following Bearing are Taken by compass/ under the
imediatel inspections of Commodore Preblel the Town of Tan 'er]
Bore W $s/ about two miles distance] the Tower E/ t: N/ the w& of
old Tan 'er SbEl the white forte at the Bottom of the Bay SE/ Cape
~ a n g i e r % V bLower"
~/
down the Jolly Boat, the Schooner Na.Lditw/
anchored in company/ Lieutenant Summers waited on Commodore
Preblel on our lesvin Gibraltar Ba last Evening i Mentionedl of
our leaving the unite States Brig &?en there/ i W ~ mistaken]
E
for

f

d

108

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1805 TO 1804

shee sail the same Evening with a number of Americanl in order to
convoy them through the Straits of Gibraltar and clear of the Barbary
Coast] as q e are to continue a t anchor d night in Tangier Bay] and
within gun shott of the forte/ the Commodore orderd the ship cleard
for action and the guns all primedl the shi s company to be kept at
Quarters during the night] after 8 P MI t$ day hghght the ships company was ordeP to sleep at Quarters in sub divisions the Kight was
plesent with light Breezes from the Westw$/in the course of the afternoon yesterday Commodore Preble Recvg different despatches from
the shore How frendly they might bee i know nothing off] but the
C ~ m m was
o ~ very
~ ~ attentive to there Manoeuvrin on shore and
kept the ship a l l night in a perfect state of Readiness or action/ from
daylight till noon] we saw more then ten Thousand of the Moorish
inhabltance marching in from different parts of the Country] they
formed in differ& detachments on the sandy beach which is a little
to the ~astw'%fthe T o w 1 We suppose them to be waiting] in order
to recive there Moorish Magesty/ which is momently Expected to
anive from the Country] there manoeuvring there diEerent Squadrons
of Hers/ was Very pleasing1 Commodore Preble orderd the Const&lion compleately dr[e]ssed with colours and flags/ but not to be
l%istedJ till the arrival of the Emperour was anounced which was to
be by a Salute from the fortes1

B

[NA. ND original.]
Krtrnct from Diary of Captain Edward Preble, U. 8. Navy, on board U. 8. m e t e
Comiihtion, Thursday, 6 October 1809

At Anchor in Tanger Bay, wind from the Eastward - Light breezes
and pleasant Weather, a Body of about 5000 Troops consisting of
Horse & Foot encamped opposite the Ship - preparing to dress ship,
at 2 P M the American, and other consular Flags were hoisted on
shore as a Signal that the Emperor had arrived and was in view of the
Ship. I ordered the Ship dressed and a Salute of 21 Guns fired in
compliment to the Emperor which was returned - I recd dispatches
from the Consul and returned Answers -All hands Slept at quartersAt 4 AM. the Frigates New York $ John Adams amved, and
anchored in a line of bearing to the Southward - At 8 AM I fired the
Signal for the other two ships to Salute the Emperor, which FFMdone
with 21 Guns from each Ship, and returned with an e ual Number st 11 Consul Simpson came on board by permission o the King. He
informed me, that the Emperor's Minister had not yet arrived, but
that he was momently expected, and as soon as he appeared we could
open a Negotiation for Peace, and that h e Emperor was Paciicaliy
inclined, at noon the Consul returned, Saluted hun with 3 Guns !LC.EPP, Diary, 1803-1804.1

4

-act

from Memorandum Book of Captain Bdwrrd Preble, V. 8. Xavy, on board
U. 8. Fngate Com~luilon,8 Ootober 1803

The Emperor of Morocco with 2500 troops arrived at Tangier.
[LC, original.]
W P c t from iog

book of U. 8. Rigate 6Nitt&on, Captain Edward Prebls, U. 8.
lfavy, commanding,Thursday, 6 October 1809

Moderate Breezes from the Westwd/ Laying in Tangier Bay/

Moored a half a cabIe Each way with the Best bower and stream/ a

109

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS
'

little after one P M/ the different detachments formd/ collectively]
they Extended from one End of the Beach to the Other/ which is a t
the least two and a half miles they were all mounted on Horse/ a t %
ast one P M. they Commenced there march/ with innumerable VolB of small arms/ Towar[d]s the Town and Castle/ a few minutes
a ter two P M the American Colours was hoisted in the Town of
Tangier] they then saluted from the lower Battary Eighteen guns/ we
imediately dressd ship and RetuP them an Eaquel number/ Toward
the Evemng the Commodore Reivd dispatches from the shore at 7 in
the Evening Musterd st Quarters1 and cleard ship for action] at 8
Musterd the starboard Watch] and fired the Evening Gun/ the ships
sleptd at Quarters in Sub div[ilsions during the neght at
three A I the weather was Very clear and plesent we saw two ships
standing in To the Bay/ at 4 we answerd the united States Frigate/
John Adoms private signal Towards daylight anchored here in Tangier Bay the united States Frigate/ John Adurn] Commodore Roggers and the united States Frigate Newyorkl Capt Campbell imeadetely after the John Adams came to an anchor] Comm" Prebble
waited on Commodore Roggersl at Eight in the morning we fierd a
Gun/ imeadetely after the John Adams] and Newyork saluted the
Moorish Garrison with sixteen guns Each/ the salute was Returnd
from the Moorish Garrison with 33 Guns/ in the cours of the fore noon
Commodore Roggers waited on Commodore Preble] after which he
Ho[i]sted his Broad pendant,on board the Nezayork Captain Campbell/
was Removed from the Neuryork] to the command of the John Adam
the Emperour of Morrocco continus in Tangier MrSimpson t h e h e r i can Consul/ at Tangiers this forenoon] waited on Commodore Preble
he came on board b the convayance of a Shore Boat/ he went away
andIwas saluted with three guns1
a little after a 11 A %

&9

c0mpan5!l

[NA. ND original.]
To Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Navy, from James Simpson, U.6. Consul, Tangier,
Morocco

TANGIER October 1803.DEARSIR That your Boat might not meet detention, I had a few
lines ready to put in the Officers hand when I went to receive that
expected from you. - By that you will have seen the reason I do not
find myself a t llberty to o afloat this morning; besides the ossibility

E

t

of the Consuls together eing called up to the Castle, the mperour
may either send for me, or make me some communication, - in either
case it would not be well in me to be absent. - The two Spanish
Gentlemen who translate Arabic papers for me being attached to
their Consulate, they would not like to be seen taking part so far in
our concerns just at this da , as to go on board for the purposes you
mention - but if the Tri o%ne Captain wdl make a wntten deelaration of what you may te him by your Interpreter you wish to be
proven on any point, I will get it translated. - If this and any
other Arabic papers can be got ready against tomorrow morning, I
will then wait on ou to receive them: - the earlier the better for
me, so if you thin - well of this mode I shall be read to step into
our Boat a t seven O'clock, in order I may be on s ore again by
&he. -

E

1

g

110

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1803 TO 1804

The mark I mentioned to yon of His Majestys attention to the Squadron, may fairly be taken as a proof of IS pacific dis osition he will not certainly transact busyness with us m e d i a t e y himself,
and as we know his Minister may be said a t least not to be inimical
to us, I must beg to say I am of oppinion i t would not be adviseable
to press the matter immediately, as we might thereby throw it info
hands, we would not wish. I am concerned you should have given yourself so much trouble to
explain on subject of the Salute - with some Nations it is customary
to ay that mark of attention to Consuls - to tell you the truth I
hacf' believed it was not so with the Ships of War of the United States,
as I did not see i t on board the Philadelphia -Essex or Chesapeake Whatever Vegetables or other necessarys you may be in want of
beyond what you will fhd in the intended Present, I will now feel
no DiEculty in desiring permission to purchase and send you [LC. EPP, Vol. 7, "I03.1

P

[7 October 18031
To Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Navy, from James Simpson, U.S. Consul, Tangier,
Morocco

DEARSIR Nothing could have been more apropos than your
Salute just finished - His Ma'esty you no doubt saw, was on the
lower Battery at the end of the d o l e - he went there for the purpose
of viewing the Frigates with a stand Tellescope, and I am persuaded
must have been gratified by the unexpected addition of the firing. This may yet overtake the Boat carrys the Cattle.Friday One O'clock
7" October [180]3
[LC. EPP, Vol. 7, 1803.1
To Captain Edward Preble, U. 6. Navy, from James Simpson, U.6. Consul, Tangier,
Morocco

TANGIER
YtQ October 1803
DEARSIR I have satisfaction in acquainting you the Emperour
was last night pleased to order a Present to be sent the Squdron this

morning in his name to consist of ten Bullocks - twenty Sheep and
some other lesser articles of provision. It is now geting ready and will be sent off in a Moor Boat - Commodore Rodgers and you will determine on the quantity for each
Ship, which had better be trtken in their own Boats. yet of the Minister - it is still very probable His
No
Majesty
not see the Consuls until1 his arrival, but as I must
be in the way I am compelled [to] deny myself the intended pleasure
of seeing Commodore Rodgers and Captain Campbell thm 'forenoon. -

tidx

[LC. EPP, Vol. 7, 1803.1

[7 October 18031
To Captain Edward Preble, U.S. Navy, from Jamer Simpson, U.6. Consul, Tangier,
Morocco

DEARSIR The bearer of this my Interpreter waits on you to
deliver the articles of provision noted at foot, which His Imperial

111

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

Ma'esty has been pleased to order to be sent in his Name, as a Refres ment for the Squadron of ships of War of the United States now
a t Anchor in this Bay TANGIER
rtQOctobe~1803
10 Bullocks
20 Sheep
4 Dozen Fowles
[LC. EPP, Vol. 7, 1803.1

h

To James Simpson, U. 8. Consul, Tangier, Morocco, from Captain Bdward PrebIe,
U. S. Navy

U S. SHIPConstd1Lfion

Octr Tt@ 1803

DEARSIR I am honored with your favours & the E m rors

r I
presents, for which I beg you to present my thanks, The Sa ute
meant as a compliment of respect to His Imperial Majesty on his
appearance at the Forts. I am gratified that i t was received by him
as such My Boat as I before observed will attend you tomorrow a t 7
clock [LC.EPP. Vol. 7, 1803.1
To Bobert B. Livingston, U. S. Minister to Paris, France, from Thomas
Appleton, U. S. Consul, Leghorn

LEGHORN
Y t @of October 1803
SIR I have duly received the letter you did me the honor to write
under date of the 5 t@ of September. - Since my last no event worth
of relating respecting the war with Tripoli, has come to my know[
edge. - Mr Cathcart after having been rejected by the Dey of Algiers
as Consul from the U. States near that regency, was named by the
President as consul for Tunis, with certain powers to negotiate towards
an accomodation with Tripoli, to this end he embarked on board of
one of our frigates to proceed for his destination, but on his amval,
I am informed, was unconditionally refused admission, although he
was the bearer of the accustomed presents on reception - we must
therefore presume, that the same reasons which influneed the Dey
of Algiers, have actuated likewise the Bey of Tunis. - inclosed you
will find the Copy of a letter I hare just received from the american
Consul a t Malaga, by which ou will percieve Sir, how alarming is
our situation with regard to M?orrocco. I have been verbally advised
that three american Vessels have been captured, the truth of this
information I cannot vouch for. - i t is in Conjecture alone I can find
any cause for these outrageous acts of Violence, so I therefore attribute
them to the capture of the Tripoline admiral by ComQMorris. this Vessel was sold to the Emperor of Morrocco, and suffered to
depart from Gibraltar on this express Condition, that she should
proceed no farther than Tunis, but having been overtaken in the
waters of Tripoli, was viewed as an infraction of the Stipulation, and
therefore captured. - the rinciple for which we contend with
Tripoli, is a principle, if esta lished, would strike a deadly blow to
the political existance of all the barbarg regencies: i t is for this reason,
they will avowedly, or in a more concealed manner, make i t a general
cause. - not knowing the address of my brother, I have taken the
liberty to inclose a letter for him.[NA. SDA. CL,Leghorn, Vol. 1, Oct. 1793-Dec. 1806.1

!

112

NAVAL OPERATIOATS FROM 1803 TO 1804

Extract from log book of U. 8. F+te
CondiMion, Captain Edwerd Preble, U. S.
Navy, commandmg, Friday, 7 October 1803

Moderate Breezes from the Eastward/ Moored in Tangier Bay/
the Neuryorkl John Adams and Nautilus in company/ we have nothing
meteriel going on in the shi / we musterd a t Quarter a t 8 P M the
ships company continue to s eep a t Quarters in sub divisions/ during
the night/ from daylight till 7 in the morning the ships com any
emphcrubbing Hammocks/ from our arrive1 of[fl Tangeir gay/
121 1803 we stood well in with the Town/ we hoisted the American
co ours/ and fierd a Gun/ this signal is well known to all the furrin
Consuls of Residue in the Moorish dominions/ Commodore Preble/
and Tobias lear/ Esqr who was a passanger on board the Constitution
as Consul general to the Barbary powers was a little surprised a t not
seeing the American colours/ Ho[iJsted with the other Nahonal Colours
a t Tangier/ we anchord in Gibraltar Bay the same day/ and soon
lear[n]t that the Moorish Crusers was out against the Americans/ and
Consul Simpson/ in Tangier was confined/ this news was Very disagreeable to Commodore Preble/ perticular as we had boarded the
Moorish Admiral/ on the 7 September last/ the perticulars of wich is
in that days log/ in a few days after this inttelegence we proceed from
gibraltar to Tangier/ w[h]ere a correspondance was carried on by
flag truce/ between Commodore Preble and Consul Simpson/ from
our first arrivel a t Gibraltar/ September the 131 1803/ Commodore
Preble/ has Been Very attentive in Restoring eace Between America
and the Emperour of Morrocco and should ommodore Preble succeed/ i t must be a pleasing Reflection1 in the Evening of his days
a t 7 this morning Commodore Preble sent an officer and a boats crew
on shore/ this is the first Boat sent from the American Squadron/
sunce the commencement of war Between the two nations a t 9 in the
morning the boat Returnd with dispatches for Commodore Preble/
as the Commodore immedately whent on board the/ different ships
of the squadron/ one of which wieghd an anchd near in Towards the
fort[?]/ 1 Exspect the Commodore did not meet that Reply which
national faith and Justice demands/ the Emperour of Morrocco still
continues a t this place/ his incampment Extends/ from one End of
the Bay of Tangeir to the other/ which is nearly three Miles/ by the
survey of John Josep Allezard/ who was survarer general to the
Emperour of Morrocco

P

"I'

e

[NA. ND original.]

To Captain John Gore, Royal Navy, from Lieutenant Charles Stewart, U. 8. Navy

U. S. SLOOPOF WARSiren [*IQibraltar bay Octr 7 1803
Caps JOHN
GORE- Comrn: of
his Majesty's Ship Medussa
SIR Three men named Joseph Dunbevan James Pearcs and John
Coxe, have deserted from the Ship Mabockah [Mirboka] prize to the
United States Frigate Philadelphia, and as I am inform'd have claimed
protection onboard his Majesty's Frigate Medusa under your Command - I have to request that ou will deliver them to the OfEcer
who hands you this, upon your gee satisfied thqv are the persons
above menboned, I cannot think i t IS your intention to violate the
laws of Hospitality, toward a Nation m Amity with his Britannic

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

113

Majesty, and contrary to the good Disposition he has Shewn and
express'd in the Treaty, by detaining the above named persons,
whom I demand as Fellons & Deserters [*The Siren was a brig. It i~ believed "sloop of war" n-as used in a broad sense
and not to indicate a change in the charncter of the brig Siren.]
[LC. EPP, Vol. 7 , 1803.1
To Lieutenant Charles Stewart, U. S. Navy, from Captain John Gore, Royal Navy

Medussa GIBRALTAR
BAYOctober gt!' 1805
Captain STEWART
Comm? of
the United States Sloop of
w a r SirenSIR,I have received your letter of yesterday's date requesting that
I would deliver up the Three men named in the Margin [Jae Dunbervan J a q e a r c e John Cox], being deserters from the United States
Man of War
I n reply to which I have the honor to inform you that there is no
such man as Joseph Dunbervan in. his Majesty's Ship under my
command, and that your request is madmissable, for those men are
subjects of his Britanic Majesty and have returned to their duty and
allegianceI beg leave to assure you that i t is neither my intention or inclination to Commit any Act of violence upon the laws of Hospitality or
infringe upon any treaty wlJch may exist between the States of America and his Majesty and I hope to find the same disposition in the
Officers Commanding the American Men of RTw,which I am fully
informed hare a large proportion of British Subjects on board as
Seamen, who ha.ve enter'd for them during the time of Peace, the
Officersknow-ing them to be such, and finding now that their SOT-ereign is engaged in a serious War with an inveternte Foe, uish to
return, to their own Flag, but are detain'd by force, and as such
Conduct is a violence against the laws of Nations, I must presume i t
Cannot be the intention of yourself and other Officers Commanding
the Ships of the United States to persevere in it
I have the honor to be
Sir
Your very humble Servant
Sign'd JOHN GORE

I

!LC. EPP, Vol. 7, 1803.1
To Secretary of State from Frederic Hyde WoUaston, U. 6. Consul, Genoa

GENOA8 October 1805
SIROn the 17th August, I had the honor to enclose a Copy of my
respects of the 25 July & then suggested the Idea thnt this Government might be induced to pay a part of the Expences of the Squadron
in these Seas agninst the Barbary Powers, or might purchase from
the Un: States some of the Government Vessels laid up
The evident difficulty of maintaping Peace with the Barbary
Powers on the one Side 8: the encreasmg trade from the United States
to these Seas & to the Levant on the other has suggested to me the
Idea that a Treaty of Amity & Comme~cewith the Grand Signior
might be effected with ease & with pecuhar advantages to the trade

114

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1803 TO 1804

. navigation
&
of the United States, especially during the present War
in Europe-

Being particularly acquainted with that Country especially with
its mercantile ressources in the course of several Voyages & tl constant
Traffic there until my appointment to the Consulate in this Port, I
have corresponded much on this subject with my worthy & estimable
friend Monsr Anselme Roubaud De Ponteves at Constple a french
Gent1ema.n & very able Negociator who has passed his whole life in
the Levant, who is intimately acquainted in the Divan & with all
the Ministers & their intrigues, & who mould, 1am confident, by his
knowledge of the Country, his abilities in Negotiation & his experienced probity, be of essential service in the success of a Treaty
which might very greatly contribute to make the Barbary States
more faithfully observe the stipulations of the Treaties with them I have the honor to enclose you the result of my Correspondence,
in a memorial on the subject which I request you will lay before the
President for his mature Consideration - I should esteem myself
really happy were I deemed trustworthy of so important a mission;
I dare not make a boast of my abilities, but what would be deficient
on that score, would most assuredly be most amply replaced by my
exertions to do honor to the Office entrusted to me & impressed as I
am with the Consequence & Importance of the subject there would
be no danger of my transgressing the powers confided to me, in forming the Treaty in question, which would be modelIed on those of the
most favored Nations & would at all events be subject to the Ratification of Congress - * * *
Xothing of any importance having occurred here since my last
worth your notice, I remain with due Respect & the highest Esteem
[NA.

SDA.

CL, Genoa, Vol. 1, March 1799-Oct. 1836.1

To Secretary of State from James Simpson, U. S. Consul, Tangier, Morocco

Nq 66. - duplicate TAXGIER
8Q' October 1803.SIRI have the honour of acquainting you the Emperour reached
this place on Wednesday last, but the prime Minister Sidy Muhammed
Selawy having been sent to Tetuan on some busyness His Majesty
has not yet given audience to the Consuls or any other Christian.Commodore Preble anchored in this Bay on tuesday with the Nautilus
Schooner. On Wednesday night the New York and John Adams Frigates also
arrived and they all remain here. - This Squadron has paid every
respect to His Majesty and on his part he has shewn equal marks of
Friendship. - On Thursday evening His Majesty was pleased to
send me notice he had ordered ten head of Cattle, twenty Sheep and
some Fowles to be sent in his name for the Ships, which was done
yesterday. - This morning I wrote His Majesty a Letter of acknowledgement for this mark of attention, translation of his answer I have
just received you will find with this, which request you will have the
goodness to lay before the President. You have also herewith translation of the order mentioned in that
Letter for release of the Brig Hannah and her Cargo detained a t
Mogadore. -His Majesty having thus so readily given up that
Vessel, is a fresh proof of his desire for Peace, for the furtherance of
which it is the Commodores intention to give up the Mirboha and

115

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

Crew, when His Majesty shall by an Act in writing declare himself
a t Peace and Friendship with the United States and ratify the Treaty
of 1786, all which I have not a doubt but he will readily do.I n my oppinion no fixed determination can properly be taken respecting the hleshouda untill the pleasure of The President be known on
the subject, which I trust will soon appear. - Monday being not
only appoint,ed for Commodore Preble and myself to have an Audience
of the Emperour, but that all the Consuls shall also see him, we conclude the Minister will be here tomorrow. -

*

*

*

*

*

*

*

[NA. SDA. CL, Tangier, Vol. 2, 1803-1810.1
To Captain Edward Preble, U. 6. Navy, from James Simpson, U.S. Consul, Tangier,
Morocco

TANGIER
gtQOctober 1803. DEARSIR The signal was made for me in consequence of His
Majestys answer to my Letter of this morning having been sent to
my House. -I t has been read to me but not yet translated, it is very
Friendly and as a proof of his sentiments being such, he sends me at
same time an order under his private Seal, and signed by himself, to
the Governour of Mogadore for the release of the Brig detained there,
with her Cargo and Crew. His Majesty appoints Monday for giving us audience, the hour is
not mentioned, but as he has fixed on ten that morning for seeing the
Body of Consuls,its probable we shall not be wlth him before twelve.I shall endeavour at geting this point settled and give you advice. I cannot excuse takeing the most speedy means of giving you this
intelligence as i t is no doubt a strong proof of what we all wish. [LC. EPP, Vol. 7, 1803.1
To Captain Edward Preble, U. 8 , Navy, from James Simpson, U.8. Consul, Tangier,
Morocco

TANGIER
gtQOctober 1805
SIR,By the translation of papers I have had the honor of transmitting you, you will have seen the desire his Imperial Majesty has
repeatedly express'd of remaining at peace with the United States,
than which, I am persuaded few things of that nature can be more
desirable to our Government, or more necessary for cherishing the
Extensive commerce of our Country, to this quarter of the world,
free from that burthen of heavy insurance, which is ever its bane I t was on this principle I have so much recommended to you readily to meet his Majesty on this pacific disposition - for the furtherance of that desirable issue to the present misunderstanding, the
restitution of all captures on both sides can only extend to deprive
you of the miserable vessel the Mirboka, whilst you are certain of
releasing a Brig with a pretty valuable Cargo to a Citizen of the
United States - we have beside the chance in our favour of other
vessels having arrived at Mogadore, & these his Majesty also promises to restore, to whatever extent the may be I t is no uncommon thing amongst ations to agree to restitution
pf Captures on both sides to bring about accommodations - in this
?stance it appears we have a rospect of the advantage being on our
side, and in point of National gonor, since his Majesty has so repeat-

KT

116

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1805 TO 1804

edly disclaimed having given authority either for Captures of the
Celia, or detaining the Hannah a t Mogadore, he thereby endeavors at
an acknowledgement of the fault You have Also seen the Anxiety his Majesty expresses for the
restitution of the Mishouda; when I received in June last the first
notice of that Vessel's being detained I was authorised by Commodore
Morris to say to the Emperor that if the attempt to go into Tripoly,
was an act of the Commanders unauthorized by his Majesty - that
the ship should be released - I made that Communication immediately to quiet his mind, as we were a t the eve, of his cruisers going to
Sea, and the Straits totally destitute of Vessels of War of the Un~ted
States for the protection of our commerce I t has fully appeared that his Majesty left the sole direction of this
Ship to that Abominable Character Alcaydi Hashash, and as his
Majesty did not himself give the Orders to Arraiz Omar, or Issue the
passport given in his name, stating that the Ship was his: - we may
equally suppose he was Ignorant of the prohibition stated in my passport for the Ship, against her entering blockaded ports If Commodore Morris saw cause to release the Ship on it's being
roved the fault lay with Omar, and authorized me to say so to the
Emperor, he may expect an equal Friendly part from us: - on the
blame's resting with the Governor These are arguments for the Ship's being restored; but however by
no means conclusive. So it may be argued that the occasional suspension of the blockade of Tripoly takes away that consequence
stamp'd on regularly maintained blockades by the Law of Nations,
and the Declarations of the chief powers of Europe on that subject,
in the year 1780.
What I have now most to recommend to your serious consideration
is, that in every other point we have seen his Majesty disposed to a
perfect reconciliation with the United States, and when I quote to
you the following paragraph of a letter written to me, by the Secretary
of State 21" of Octr 1802 -you will I'm fully satisfied say with me,
that the restitution of this Ship to the Emperor (under the special
condition that neither the Vessel nor any part of the stores on board
of her, shall be sent to Tripoly during the Continuation of the present
War, between the United States and that Regency) should not be
suffered to stand in the way of so desirable an event, as peace with
this Country - The Paragraph is as follows
l'Should money or it's equivalent be found an indespensable agent
"in fixing the Emperors disposition to peace, you already know
"that Commodore Morris has a small fund on which you may
"draw; - be as sparing of expence however as possible; both from
"a regard to Oconomy, and to the policy of keeping down the
"hopes, and pretentions of these mercenary powers, In no event
"you are to exceed Twenty thousand Dollars; nor to go as far as
"that sum, unless it shall produce a firm peace, and an express or
"Tacit relinquishment of the claim set up to prese?$s at stated
"periods, which are another name only to Tribute -

I made no calls on the fund here alluded to; - neither have I expended a Sixpence of money in consequence of that Authority, because I saw no opening for its being done, with solid prospect of
attaining the object in View
Circumstances appear to have been most happily combined for
our now obtaining a ratification of the Treaty of 1786 by which all

W A R S W I T H BARBARY POWERS

117

claim to periodical presents will be most expressly relinquished; as
the demand to that purpose made last year, was founded on an
erroneous Idea, that an arrangement was made posterior to that
period promising presents I beg to Submit these sentiments dictated by a sincere desire of
seeing peace restored to your Consideration and to assure you I am
K?18 A Copy N. MORRIS
EDWDPREBLE
Esq: Commodore
and Commander in Chief of the
S q d r o n of the U S. in the Mediterranean
[LC. EPP, Vol. 7, 1803.1

[S October 18031
Concerning Order issued by the Emperor of Morocco, releasing American Ship
Hannah, at Mogador
Translation Praise be given to the Only God.
May God be propitious to our Master Mohamet and t,ohis Family Private
Seal
In his Majesty's handwriting - Soliman - mny God make him
happy To our Servant the Governor hfuhammed Ben Sbd el Sadak -God
assist you and keep you. Peace and the Mercy of God be with you Then we order that you set at liberty the American Vessel detain'd
tilere, with all her Cargo, and everything else. Take care that
nothing be lost was in her, and peace be with you.
P. S - Wlatever you may have landed belonging to the Christians,
let it be put on board agnin, and let them have ererytlling they may
be in need of, and send them away in a good state, and in the best
manner
20tQChemadi (2@)- gtQ October 1803

[LC. E P P , Vol. 7, 1803.1

[S October 18031
To James Simpson, U. 6. Consul, Tangier, Morocco, presumably from the Emperor
of Morocco
Trsnslation

Praise be to the Only God
AMERICAN
CONSUL,
We have r e d your letter - There is nothing
between us, but what shall be to your satisfaction in the continuance
of Peace and Friendship - We have ordered the Gorernor of Mogadore, that he set at liberty your Vessel to her Owners - What has
happened we will not attribute to your delays with us; what we will
believe is, that if your Enemy had come under our protection, you
would have spared him for our sake. K h a t your Sea captain has done
he is not to be blamed for; it was but what he ought to have done You shall see nothing from us, but what is Just. On Monday please
God you will bring with you your Admiral to meet with us -

118

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1803 TO 1804

You will receive with this the mentioned letter that "vou mav send
it yourself
Date should be gt@ October 1803 The two preceding translations were made from Arabic to Spanish
by Dr Manuel de Baccas, and from Spanish to English by JAMES
SIMPSON
Tanger loth Octr 1803
[LC. EPP, Vol. 7, 1803.1

(8 or 9 October 18031
Declaration of Peace between the United States and the Emperor of Morocco
Translation

Praise be given to God Alone
May God be propitious to our Master Moharnet and to his family Imperial
Seal
Know all those d o shall see this noble writing, all our Governors
those encharged with our affairs, and Captains oi our Vessels: that
the American Nation are still as they were in peace and Friendship
with our person exalted by God - their Vessels are safe both sea and
in port, and so are their Merchants, & you are not to disturb the peace,
between us and them What has happened with their and our Vessels, has been an affair
among the Vessels but the said Nation continues respected, as they
were with us, and under all security and equally so their Vessels Wherefore we hereby Order that all those of our Governors, those
encharged with the Command of our ports, and Captains of our
Vessels who shall see this writing, that they act in all respects for the
fulfillment of this Order, and that they do not deriate therefrom
Those wbo shall contravene it, will bo punished with a severe
punishment.
This Order was given on the 21" Chemadi
(the second) in the Year 1218.

Octr 1803.

And a t last we are in peace and Freindship, with the said American
Nation as our Father (to whom God be Mercifull) was, according to
the Treaty made the first day of Ramadan in the year 1200 The foregoing translation was made from Arabic to Spanish by
Doctr Mannual Baccas, and from Spanish to English by JAMES
SIMFSON
Tangier l o t @Octr 1803
[LC. EPP, Vol. 7, 1803.1
To James Simpson, U. 8. Consul, Tangier, Morocco, from Captain Edward Preble,
U. 8. Navy

gtQO C T3~ p m [I8031
DEARSIR I am this moment honored with your much esteemed
favour of this date,
The order for the release of the Vessel [Hannah]at Moggadore is an
act of justice on the part of the Emperor & augurs favorable things
to US. -

WARS W I T H BARBARY POWERS

119

I shall be ready to pay my respects to his Imperial Majesty the
moment you give me notice that I shall be favorably received & that I
shall not be detained on shore one moment contrary to my wishes.I ardently wish this business may be speedily settled. [LC. EPP, Vol. 7, 1803.1
To James Simpson, U. 8. Consul, Tangier, Morocco, from Captain Edward Preble,
U. S. Navy

UNITEDSTATES'FRIGATE
Constitution,
Tangier Bay, October 8th, 1803.
SIR: I am honored with your favor of this date, and have duly
considered its contents, and think your arguments so far conclusive,
that I shall not hesitate in giving up the 2llurboka, and am authorized
by Commodore Rodgers to assure you that he will do the same by the
Meshouda, on the emperor's renewal and aclcnowledgement of the
treaty of peace and friendship, entered between the Emperor, Sidi
Mahomet, his father, and the United States, in the year 1786, and the
fulfilment of his promise to release all American property and citizens
he may have in his possession.
I am fully aware of the happy combination of circumstances which
has facilitated that so much desired object of our Government, without the agency of money, or even the promise of any future tribute or
present, either of which must have degraded us in the eyes of these
barbarians, and would only have been a prelude to greater insolence
and demands.
If the arguments adduced in favor of the restoration of the Murboka
and Meshouda should appear rather specious to the Secretary of State,
I feel confident they will give place to the importance of the object
accomplished thereby. Indeed, your extract from his instructions
assures to us his approbation of the measures we have taken for the
security of our lar e and increasing commerce to this part of the
world, by the estabkshment of an honorable and permanent pence.
[Am. State Papers. Nev. Bff., Vol. 1.1
Extract from log book of U. S. Frigate Consfifufion. Captain Edward Preble. U. S.
Navy, commending, Saturday, 8 October 1803

* * * the Squadron continues a t anchor in Tangier Bay/ Winds
from the N N E in the course of this day several letters have passq and
Repassd Between Commodore Preble and the Emperour Morocco and
Consul Simpson/ in Consequence of which a suddinp change has Taken
place/ Between one and two this after noon the Emperour marched
down on the Beach accompanied By his Court several persons of the
first distinction and a Numerous crowd of spectatores/ he came down
to View the american Squadron/ Commodore Preble immedestly
saluted 21 Guns/ the Emperours Band immedeatly playd the march
of Olestor/ which signifys peace and friendship/ during this interview
Between Commodore Preblo and the Emperour/ the hole shore was
crowdd with the inhabitance as fair as the Ey could Extend/ the Emperour immedeately sent of[q to the Constitution/ as a present to
Commodore Preble Ten Bullocks Twenty Sheep and four dozen of
fowles/ Commodore Preble orderd on board the Constitution four of
those Bullocks Six Sheep and one dozen of fowles/ the others was

120

NAVAL OPERATIOATS FROM 1803 TO 1804

Eaqually dirided on board the Newyork John Adams and Nautilus the
Convayer of the present was/ Captain Malamortal an officer in the
Emperours Service/ he had with him two Moorish Boats and Twenty
men/ on his going ashore he was saluted with three guns from the
Constitution/ i t is perhaps unnecessary for me to mentione during our
stay here which is four days the Constitution has been kept perfectly
clear for action and the Hammocks has not been piped down till thEvening * * * at 7 in this morning Commodore Preble sent hls
Barge a shore to Bring hlr Simpson/ the Consul a t this place/ a t %
past 8 A M. he came on board the Constitution after this Mr Simpson
whent on board the New York and John Adamsl the Emporour still
continues a t Tangeirl his incampments, Extend from one End of the
Bav to the other/ his Body Guard which is now a t this place/ consists
of Eight thousand light Horsmen/
[NA. KD original.]
To Captain John Gore, Boyal Navy, from Lieutenant Charles Stewart, U. 8. Navy,
commanding U. 6. Brig Siren
hT9

2.

Copy-

October gtQ1805

U. S. SLOOPOF WARSerin GIBRALTAR
BAY
GORECommander of
Caps JOHN
his Majesty's Ship Medusa
SIR, I received yours of the St?' Ins! in Answer to my Note of the
7th - I have to inform you that the Officer Commanding the Pnze
Ship Mabocka saw the person named Josh Dunberran on board his
Majesty's Ship Medusa - You must therefore be deceived by the
Man's having changed his name
I have the honor also to inform you, that those men enter'd voluntarily in the United States to serve Two Years and a t a time when
they knew his Britanic Majesty was engaged in a war and not during
the peace as you have been informed - All persons onboard our Vessels of War are enter'd in the same manner and we only require of
them a performance of their engagements, therefore we by no means
"do a violence to the law of Nations by forcibly detaining them" as
you have asserted, but on the Contrary, You, by detaining those men
whom I have demanded "as Deserters $ Fellons" assume the Violating hand and deny us the Justice which is the basis of that Law,
While Sir I assure you, that you will always find on our part a desire
to render you ev'ry just claim and to give you in.every instance all
the satisfaction in our power that is Consistent m t h Reason & propriety, permit me to hope it will be reciprocated by the Commanders
of his Majesty's Ships of War. [LC. EPP, Vol. 7, 1803.1
To Lientenant Charles Stewart, U. S. Navy, commanding U. S. Brig Siren. from
Captain John Gore, Boyal Navy

Medusa GIBRALTAROctober gth 1803
Capt. STEWART
U. S. Sloop of War Siren
SIR I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your 2" letter,
and am Sorry you should have thought it necessary to write i t much
more to adopt such a Style of recrimination, equally unworthy of us
both - Whether the mens names is Joseph Dunbevan or Jos. Perry

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

121

is very immaterial - He and the other two men are subjects of his
Britanic Majesty, were known to be such when they were enter'd as
part of the Philadelphia's Crew, and having again placed themselves
under the Flag of their Leige Soveraign cannot possibly be given up
either to the United States or any other Foreign power, whatever engagments they may have enter'd into, whether their own Nation was
at peace or whether it was a t War; and as I had the Candour in the
first instance to read one Maratime law upon that subject to one of
our Officers, I could not have expected that you would attach such
ranguage to my Conduct as you have thought proper to do; and as a
further instance of my Candour, I assure you had the three men in
question been Subjects of the United States, neither myself or any
s
Ships would have hessitated restoring
other Captain of h ~ Majesty's
them
As you are the Senior Officer of the Men of War of the United States
in this Bay, I have to re uest, that you will order the Officer Commanding the Ship Maboka , prize to the Philadelphia to discharge into
his Britanic Majesty's Ship under my command the two men named
in the Margen [Tho? Graham J a w o x ] being Subjects of his Britanic
Majesty and wishing to return to their Duty and Allegiance
[LC. EPP, Vol. 7, 1803.1

1

To Captain John Gore, Royal Navy, from Lieutenant Cherles Stewart, U. S. Navy

N Q3 - Copy -

U.S. SLOOPOF EAR
Siren GIBRALTARBAY

SIR In answer to yours of
that there is no Authority
Officer in the Navy of the
belonging to our Ships of
Complied with
[LC. EPP, Vol. 7, 1803.1

Octob' gt5 1805
this date, I have the honor to inform you,
vested in me to discharge, or Order any
United States to discharge, any persons
War, therefore your request cannot be

[9 October 18031
To Captain Edward Preble, U. 6. Navy, from Lieutenant Charles Stewart, U. S.
Navy

V. S. SLOOPOF KARSiren
SIR- I h a w the honor to inform you that during your Absence from
Gibraltar, sereral Men belonging to the prize Ship Mabockah deserted
and Carried with them the boat belonging to that Ship - The Officer
Tioutenant Tarbell Commq that prize hearing they were on board
his Britannic hilajesty's Ship Medusa (after satisfying himself of the
Truth thereof) made application to me to have them retunled to
their Duty - In consequence of which I made a demand of them as
you will perceive by the Co y of my Note to Cap! Gore on that
subject - Enclosed you will a so receive, copies of all the Communication I had with him, by which you will perceive, that we are liable
to great inconvenience and contention with the O5cers of the British
Navy, as, many of our men may be claim'd on the same principle - I
therefore solicit your instructions on that head, that I may know in
future, how to conduct in similar Cases should they occur. - My
Conduct in that affair, I hope will meet your approbation, as I assure

'f

122

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1805 TO 1804

you the only inducement was m duty to prevent as far as in me lies,
any loss or injury towards my ountry P. S. - Cap! Gore sent a verbal message by one of my officers, that
he had Orders to demand all persons, subjects of his Britanic Majesty,
that were on board of all foreign vessels, and that if they were not
given up civilly to take them by force

6'

[LC. EPP, Vol. 7, 1803.1
To Lieutenant Richard Somers, U. S. Navy, commanding U. S. Schooner Naufilur,
from Captain Edward Preble, U. 6. Navy

Constitution T A N G I EBAY
R
gt? Octr 1803
SIR,I have parted a Cable, cut of[f] by the rocks as the ground is
foul I shall get under way before night and stand off and On, until
morning, and return to the Bay again if the wind will allow me to You will get under way when I make the Signal, but only for the
purpose of examining your Cable, and shifting your birth further in
shore, and nearer the Dane, where you will have clear Ground - as
the weather is boisterous you will lay there in safety as it respects
any attack in the night; but if the weather Moderates much it will be
well for you to keep under way in the night and anchor in the morning,
for the purpose of receiving communications, from Mr Simpson for me.
If you will come on board I will give you the marks and directions,
for Anchoring - you must remain near this Bay until 1return
[LC. EPP, Order Book, 1803-1805.1
To Secretary of the Navy from Lieutenant Charles Stewart, U. S. Navy

UXITEDSTATESSLOOP
OF WARSiren
Octobr l o t h 1803. at Sea

SIRI have the honor to inform you of our Safe Arrival at Gibraltar
after a passage of 28. days from the Delaware, all hand in good health.V e are now proceeding with a convoy as pr Inclosed.
This morning about 11 OClock the United States Frigate hTew 170rk
Cap? Rodgers, hove out a Sig! to speak us with which we complied,
but on thier bearing down she ran Aboard of us, and carried away
every thing from our bows, even to the Anchor which was broke in
two, fortunately no person's was hurt on board the Siren except one
man who I fear will loose his hand by t.he unfortunate circumstance The New York lost her lower yards and what other damage I do not
know.
[NDA. Officers LB, 1802-1805.1

123

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS
[Enclosure]

A list of Merchant Shi s & Vessels under the Convoy of the U. S. Sloop Siren
Chr &&wart Esqr Commander from Gibraltar
Date

Vessels Names Mastem Names

Where bound

Owner's Names

-George Hedges- Nichols Hodges &

cv

Barzillai Good- 0 & B Qoodrich
rich.
of &
#hip.
Brig Hector-. -. John Allen ..... E & J Allenof&..
Ship Monsoon. David Nicker- W. Hayden J
Banter [or BaxSOU.
terl & J Tate of Boston
Richard Bowen. Amaze Thayer of
Boston
E l i s Grant - . Abiah & H Wood.

I

[NDA. Officers LB, 1802-1805.1

/ 1
To whom

Consigned

Lading &9

Brandies
To Newyork.. .....--.-.
to Newyork-.. ......-.-.Wine & Fmit

FNit
to Salem. ..... ........ . ~
.......... Wine & Fruit
to London --.-

to Alexandria. .......... Wine & Fruit

to k i t h .-.-...
. - - - - -Fruit
----

CH)STEWART

To Captain Edward Preble, U.S. Navy, from James Simpson, U. S. Consul, Tangier,
Morocco
TANGIER
l o t h October 1805

DEARSIR The Weather rendered it impossible for me to make you
any communicntion yesterday. At Ten the Consuls wait on His Majesty together, as there matters
of general concern to be treated upon. - that cannot be of long duration, so I reckon our particular audience may be about twelve. I am perfectly satisfied you are in no sort of personal danger,
therefore hope you will not hesitate at comeing on shore. - You will
please let me know by the bearer, at what hour you will land, and who
will accompany you to His Majesty as we have a short way to ride. Mrf Simpson hopes for the favour of your Company - Coll Lears,
and whoever else may come with you, at dinner today. [LC. EPP, Vol. 7, 1803.1
Extract from log book of U. 6. Frigate Constitution, Captain Edward Preble, U. S.
Navy, commanding, Monday, 10 October 1803

The Squadron continues a t anchor in Tangier Bay/ * * * at
10 in the Morning Commodore Preble and Colo Lear whent ashore a t
Tangeir to wait on the Emperour * * * a t 11 AM arriv'J here
the prize ship Merbokal
[NA. ND original.]
Extract from journal of Midshipman F. Cornelius deKrafft, U. 6. Navy, in U. S.
Brig S i r m of 18 guns, Lieutenant Charles Stewart, U. 6. Navy, commanding,
Sunday, 9 and Monday, 10 October 1803

Commences with heavy squalls of wind from the W@& rain. At
6 P. M got a range of cable on deck, 7 the wind begining to moderate.
At % past 3 AM the wind haul'd to the N N. E blowing a fine breeze.
made a signal for the convoy to get under way & stand to the westward,
hove up our larboard bower & stood out under topsails. At 9 hove
too for the convoy to close in with us. At 11 abreast Tangier, saw

124

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1803 TO 180A

lying in the bay the Frigates N. York, John Adam & schooner Enterprize Meridian pleasant weather. (NB) these remarks include 36 hours)
[NDA.]
To Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Navy, from James Simpson, U. S. Consul, Tangier,
Morocco
TANGIER
11 th October 1803 -

DEAR
SIR I am happy to tell you I have at last overcome the
many objections made to puting the addition I required to the paper
sent me last Night, and that by tho enclosed translation thereof you
will see the Enlperour has ratified the Treaty made with his Father,
of consequence I hope you will now put Arraiz Lubarez in possession
of his Ship, that His hlajesty may see his Flag flying on her. - I
am promised a Letter for the President more fully to express the
Emperours resolution of maintaining Peace with the United States,
but the Minister said in order that he might be able to state in it a
good reason for that dete~minationit would be expected His Majestys
request of having the Meshouda put in his possession would be
granted. - The arguments I urged yesterday to you and Collonel
Lear in support of this measure have still their full force in my mind,
and now we have got the Emperour in a good humour with us, assuredly it cannot be well to hazard loseing what we have been for years
striving to gain, for such a trifling object - but I would still advise
that if this Ship be given up it shall be on the express condition that
she remain in one of the Ports of this Country during continuance of
the War between the United States and Tripoly. [LC. EPP,

Vol. 7, 1803.1

111 October 18031
To President Thomas Jefferson and to the Senate of the United States, from the
Emperor of Morocco
Translatron -

I n the name of the clement, and most Merciful God,
In him we have put our trust, and he is our best protector
There is no power or strength, but in the Great God.
From the servant of God. Prince of the Believers.
He who has put his trust in the Lord of all thc
Creation - Soliman Ben Mohamct, Ben Abd allah Ben Ismael descended from the Prophet from Hassan and from Alli May God magnify his charge, and may his Sun and full Moon
shine in the highest Heaven with splendour Imperial
Seal
Impression - Soliman Ben Mohamet, Ben Abd-allah - May God
be merciful to him In Six Angles - God, Mohamet, Abuleker, Omar, Ottaman, Alli Around the Seals God alone directs me. in him I trust and to him
I turn To the President of the Americans. a Prince, and to all the Senate Health -

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

125

&ow ye that between some of Our Vessels rendered victorious by
God, and some of Yours - some enmity has happened at sea, and the
affair became so serious, as that some Vessels of each party were taken
So soon as we heard of this we felt concerned at it, as we were still
in peace and friendship; and we desired that all the Vessels might be
brought to Tanger, which is under the protection of God. When we
had seen what had happened between the Nations, we found it was a
matter of little consequence, and such as demanded no great attention, we sought to accornodate it, and we succeeded - And we make
known to you what has happened that ou may know we continue
upon that Peace and Friendship you sett ed with our Lord and Master, and Father (to whom God be merciful) in the Year 1200, and
the same which you settled with us, (exalted by God) when we renewed
that Treaty in the Year 1210.
And know Ye that all the Treaties entered into between the two
nations, remain as they were, and that they shall not be altered or
changed This you are all to understand and be assured of with aU certainty,
and you are to hold to this This has been written to you at the Port of Tanger. (which God
surrounds) on the 24th Chemadi the second in the Year 1218 which
corresponds to the European Date the fast of September in the Year
of the Messiah 1803 Memo)
The Moors reckon by the old Style the date corresponds to the
llt@
Octr 1803
The foregoing translation was done from the Arabic (and in my
presence revised) by Dr Manuel di Baccas to Spanish and from
Spanish to English (Mr Baccas also assisting, by JAMESSIMPSOX
Tangier l Z t h Octr 1803

7

[LC.EPP, Vo1. 7, 1803.1
111 October 18031
To the Governor and Ofacere of Mogador from the Emperor of Morocco
Translation

-

Praise be given to the Only God. May God be propitious to our Master Mohamet and to his
Family. Imperial
Seal. Our Servant the Governour Ben Abd el Sadak and all the Officers
of Our Port of Mogadore - May God assist you - Peace with
the Mercy and Blessing of God be with you. Xow know ye that the Almighty having reconciled what had
happened with the American Nation because of the Acts of the
Vessels, and that we are now as we were before with them, in Peace
and Friendship as settled with Our Father to whom God be Merciful.
- Take care - take care that none of you do any thing against
them or shew them an disrespect or disregard, for they are as they
were in Friendship ann8in Peace, and we have encreased our regard

126

N A V A L OPERATIONS FROM 1803 TO 180.4

for them in consequence of the Friendship they have manifested to
Our person which God has exalted. - And we order that you be
carefull and be diligent in all their concerns, and we order that you do
well with their Vessels and with their Merchants. - Peace be with
you all. 24Q Chemadi the second, 1218 (1 lt'! October 1803)
The original of the foregoing was translated from the Arabic to
Spanish by D? Manuel de Baccas, and from Spanish to English by
JAMESSIMPSON
Certijied at Tangier 1 Yt@ October 1805
[XA. SDA. CL, Tangier, Vol. 2, 1803-1810.1
To Mxs. Ralph Izard, Sr., South Bay, Charleston, S. C., from Midshipman Ralph
Izard, D. S. Navy

TANGIER
B - 4 ~U. . S. Constitution 11t h October 1803. We have been cruizing in Streights of Gibraltar for these 2 weeks
without meeting with any success. We returned to Gibraltar &
after remaining there two days came here for the purpose of accommodating matters with the Emperor of ;Clorocco. Hash hash the
Governor of Tangiers gave orders to his vessels to cruize against all
Americans, after having procured passports for his ships from our
Consul Mr Simpson. By which means whenever one of his men of
war fell in with one of ours they produced these certificates & of
course were allowed to proceed without molestation. The Philadelphia fortunately fell in with an Amer-rig
[[Ceia]that had been
captured by one these vessels & recaptured her. He also fell in with
the captor [AIitboka]which he took also. Hash hash as soon as he
heard of the capture of this vessel confined M' Simpson & would
undoubtedly have put him to death had not the Consuls of the
European powers interceded in his behalf & wrote on to Fez informing
the Emperor of this outrage. He came to Tangier the other day
with an army of fifteen thousand men. On the gt5 instant Commodore Preble went on shore accompanied by Col. Lear, one of our
midshipmen & myself. We were introduced to his Majesty with
very little ceremony. I had connected with the idea of Emperor of
Morocco, something grand, but what was my disappointment a t
seeing a small man, wrapped u in a woollen heik [haik] or cloak sitting
upon the stone steps of an o d castle in the middle of the streets,
surrounded by a guard of very ill looking blacks with their arms
covered with cloth to prevent them rusting. We stood before the
Emperor with our Caps in hand & the conversation was carried on
by means of an interpreter. The Emperor said he was very sorry
that his Governor had behaved so much amiss & said he should
punish him "more than to our satisfaction". That was his expression.
After having assured us of his ignorance of Hash hashs proceedings,
he promised not only to ratify & confirm the treaty made between
the U. S. & his Father Muley Soliman [sic], but to write to the President of the U. S. that altho' the treaty made by his father was to have
effect but for 50 years he will consider i t as bindmg for ever. Wa
then made our bow & the Comrg Col [Tobias] Lear & M' Simpson
had a private conference with the prime minister who is an intelligent

P

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

127

man $ to all appearance very much our friend. - The prize is given
up & the Emperor has issued an order to the Governors of the different
districts of his Empire to release all vessels that may have been
detained in any of his ports & henceforward to receive all American
vessels as becomes a favored nation. The Comr goes on shore every
day for the purpose of settling all Merences. The Emperor departs
to day with his army & leaves his prime minister to manage things as
shall seem best to him. Hash hash goes with the Emperor, it is
supposed, to be executed. Tangier is a very inconsiderable place &
the natives are excessively savage. It is matter of astonishment to
me that a people living so near a civilized nation as Spain should not
imbibe some customs less barbarous than such as they have been
accustomed to. We shall shortly go to Algiers from thence to Tripoli
& then take up our quarters for the remainder of the winter a t Malta.
I am affraid that we shall have some diiificulty with the British.
Several of our men have deserted & have taken up their abode on
board some of his B. M. Ships, & the Commanders have refused to
deliver them up, & threaten to take from us as many British sub'ects
as we may have on board of an of our vessels. I think they a d not
find it the most agreeable j o they ever entered upon. I should
have no objection to that sort of thing, if they would in return give
up to us all the poor Americans they have impressed. I am affraid
i t will be a business not easily effected. For i t appears to me a matter
of impossibility to draw a proper line of distinction, by which we
may know an American from a British Seaman. Mr Smith sent the letter I gave him for you by the Adams Commre
Morris. You will get one I wrote ou afterwards at the same time.
home with the first Frigate
This goes with Mc Smith who
that sails. The ATew York, & John Adams & schooner Nautilus are
with us here & the natives mere trembling in their shoes for fear we
should batter down their tom, which can very easily be done. For
you can have no idea of the miserable situation their batteries are in.
They have several Guns i t is true but the carriages they rest upon
are so rotten that three times firing will render them perfectly useless. I shall write to George shortly & to Harry Barelay. The Argus
has not arrived yet. I expect several letters by her. As our cruize
will be long I presume I may want a small supply of h e n . If it is
not inconvenient I will be much obliged to you my dear Mother to
send me a few shirts by some of our vessels that may be coming out
here next Summer. Christopher is well & desires to be remembered.
My best love & duty to my Father, & be assured my Dear Mother of
the constant duty & dection of
Your Son
RA: IZARD
junr

g

Ago

[NDA. A-4.1
To Lieutenant Colonel Commandant William W. Burrows, U. 6. Xarine Corps,
from Secretary of the Navy

NAV.D E POctr
~ 11. 1803
It having become unnecessary to. send out the Essex you will
consider my order to ou for the furnlshmg a detachment of marines

g

to that Vessel as here y countermanded
[NDA, GLB, Vol. 6, 1802-1803.1

128

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1805 TO 1804

Extract from log book of U. S. Frigate Conatifulion, Captain Edward Preble, U. 8.
Navy, commanding, Tuesday, 11 October 1803

Tangier Bay. * * * the Convoy we saw in the o f b g / we learnt
was under the united States Brig Syren from Gibraltar Bound to
america/ the S p e n was orderd to convoy them clear of the land/ we
observed the Frigate New Yorkl which saild from here about one
Hour Beforel with her fore and main yard carried away/ the wind
continued fresh from the N E all the afternoon/ Commodore Preble
and Col? Lear came on board Towards Evening/ the Newljork Re
anchored here again/ with her fore and main yard carried away/
* * * a t 9 A M/ Commodore Roggers waited on Commodore
Preble/ the Business of yesterday/ Between the Emperour and Commodore Preble/ was not Totaly settled the Commodore whent a shore
this fore noon a t 10 AM/ Col? Lear did not accompaniy the Commodore on shore today/
[NA. ND original.]
Extract from journal of Midshipman F. Cornelius deKrafft, U. 6. Navy, in U. S.
Brig Siren of 18 guns, Lieutenant Charles Stewart, U. S. Navy, commanding,
Tuesday, 11 October 1803

Commences with fresh gales from the Eastward. The Xew York
got under way from Tangier bay & stood out for us under her topsails
& jib. a t 1. A. M. the wind increased, the weather thick & unpleasant, At 7: past 1 the N. York made the signal for speaking us,
we hove too with our head to the Sq in a suitable situation for speaking
the h7.Y. we lay expecting she would heave too some small distance
to windward of us, but she nun within twice her length of our gangway,
the dangerous situation in which we were plac'd required an Immediate manoevre, the N Yorks helm by her steerage must have been
hard a starboard & then hard a port, in this manner the N. York came
within once her length of our gangway a t which t,ime the Helm was
put to Starboard with an intention if possible to shoot ahead of us,
but instead of bracing the yards to the wind they were left in their
original position; (Square) the rapidity of her coming too in a few
moments, brought them flat to the mast, and there being a very heavy
sea forc'd her broad side on our larboard bow, & brought her with a
dreadfull crush on board of us. In this critical moment the distruction of the brig appear'd inevitable. Orders was issued from Lieu!
Stewart to put the helm up & shiver the after sails, by this well tim'd
manoevre we only lost our jib boom, spritsail yard, Larboard cathead
& bow anchor, the New York sustaind much more damage having her
fore, main & spritsail yards broke in the slings, in this situation she
sent her boat on board of us with a packet for Lt Stewart to send by
one of the convoy to America. At 4 made the signal for speaking one
of the convoy, a t the display of which the Ship Friendship hove too,
we lower'd down our boat & sent i t on board with our dispatches for
America when the boat returnd we hoisted her up. At 6 left the
convoy haul'd our wind & stood to the N. E. lid [tacked] occasionally,
made & took in sail as the wind would permit.
Meridian fresh gales & squally with rain.
[NDA.]

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

129

To Captain Thomas Tingey, Superintendent, Navy Yard, Washington, D. C.,
from Secretary of the Navy

NAVED E POctr
~ 12,1803 *You will immediately charter if practicable at this place or Alexandria a Vessel of a suitable size to carry the 100 Gun-Carriages to
Morocco. You will report to me as soon as you shall have informed
yourself whether you can procure a Vessel for this purpose or not. *The schooner Citizen, Cap* Lawaon, was engaged and sailed from Washington
Novr 15, 1803 [NDA. Barbary Powers LB, 1803-1808.1
To Captain John Rodgers, U. S. Navy, on board TJ. S. Frigate Nuo Ymk. from
Captain Edward PrebIe, U. S. Navy
TANGER
1ZtQOctq 1803

SIRPeace between the United States ck the Emperor of Morocco is
re-established I conceive the John Adams can Ieave this station
without injury to the service - whenever you think proper to order
her away.
[F. D. Roosevelt Col.]
To Lieutenant Isaac Bull, U. S. Navy, commanding U. S. Schooner Enfcrprilr, from
Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Navy

Constitution TANGIER
BAY

1 P QOct' 1803
SIR,I have the pleasure of informing you of the re-establishment of
peace, between the United States and the Emperor of Morocco You will therefore consider your Orders t.o Capture Moorish Vessels
of no effect, and wiil immediately on the receipt of this, repair to
Gibralter, and wait my further Orders
You will be very carefull to treat all Moorish subjects you may
meet wit,h, in rt, friendly manner [LC. EPP, Order Book, 1803-1805.1
To Lieutenant Charles Stewart, U. S. Navy, commanding U. S. Brig Siren, from
Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Navy

Co~~stitution
TANGIER
BAT
1?P Ortr 1803.

SIR, I have the pleasure to inform you of the re-establishment of
peace between the Unit,ed States and the Emperor of Morocco; you
will therefore Consider the Order I gave you, to Capture Moorish
Vessels as invalid, and will treat the Vessels and people of that Nation
as friends You will proceed immediately to Gibralter and prepare for going
up the Mediterranean with rt Con-i-oy, give notice to the American
Vessels bound up to prepnre themselves, and you d l delirer them the
necessary signals and instructions
But you are not to sad until you have further Orders from me, as I
expect to be at Gibrdter in a dny or two [LC. EPP, Order Book, 1803-1805.1

130

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1803 TO 180L

To Lieutenant Richard Somers, U. S. Navy commanding U. S. Schooner Ncndilur,
from Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Navy

Constitution TANGIERBAY
l P ? Octr 1803
SIR, It is with pleasure I inform you of the re-establishment of
peace, between the Emperor of Morocco, and the United States
You d l immediately on the receipt of this, Sail for Mogadore,
charged with a packet directed to Peter Guyn Esquire containing an
Order for the release of the American Brig Hannah, her Cargo, and
Crew, also a declaration of Peace, and mauy other papers of Consequence you will therefore take particular care, that they are safely
delivered, you w i l l on approaching the town of Mogadore, hoist your
Colours & a white Flag, heave too, and send your boat in, as a flag,
d t h the dispatches under charge of a Lieutf, after which they will no
doubt permit you to go in with the Nautilus
You will wait there 48 hours for any Communication they may
wish to make, either to Consul Simpson or myself; and then return to
Gibralter Bay, after stoping long enough to send your boat on shore
a t Tangier, to deliver such letters as you may receive for our Consul You will be very carefull to treat all Moorish Subjects in a friendly
manner [LC. EPP, Order Book, 1803-1805.1
To William Jarvis, U. S. Coneul. Lisbon, Portugal, from James Simpson, U. 6.
Consul, Tangier, Morocco

TANGIER
12'5 October 15'03 COPY
SIR, I am happy to acquaint you, Peace is fully re-established
between the United States and the Emperor of Morocco and that of
consequence our Vessels are no longer in danger of meeting interruption from his Cruisers.
I pray you to make this known to all Citizens of the United States,
or others within your District, to whom it may be interesting.
[NA. SDA. CL, Lisbon, Vol. 2, 1803-1805.1
Extract from log book of U. S. Frigate Constifution, Captain Edward Preble, U. S.
Navy, commanding, Wednesday, 12 October 1803

* * * the Newyork, John Adams and Nautilus still continues at
anchor in Tangier Bay the hour of investiture or Restoring the Ship
Merbocka to the Moorish officers was this afternoon at 2 P MI Liuteniant] Tarbell and the men sent on board of her at gibraltarl dus
not leave her till tomorrow/ She is now laying at anchor alongside of
the Constitution with Moorish colours there is Twelve Moorish officers
this day sent from the Constitution to the Morbackal seven of them
was recid from the Fri ate Pheledelphial the 17 September last/ and
five of them was recig rom the Mersuda the 25 September last/ the
Mersuda is a prize to the Frigate J0h.n Adams Ca tured under Tropiliton Colours/ and is now a Prison ship a t Gibra tar/ the ships company or the Prisoners Taken in the Merbocka is now on board the
Mersuda/ at Gibraltar1 Commodore Preble who has been all day on
shore with the Emperour did not come on board till nearly seven in
the Evening a t whlch time it blew nearly a galel * * * this is
the third day the Commodore is had interviews with the Emperourl
the General Report of this Eventful war between america and Mor-

f

F

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

131

roccol is that it originated by, a Govenor Residing at Tangier/ by the
name of Hash/ Hash/ but this Report1 i suspect/ Commodore Preble
thinks will beare Questioning1 as the Commodore is on shore with no
other attendance Except a private secretary1 there is but little doubt
he is well convinced of there friendship Toward Him
[NA.

ND original.]

Extract from Memorandum Book of Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Bevy, on board
IT. 6. Rigate Conrtitulion, 13 October 1803

Peace re-established with the Emperor of Morocco and the Treaty
of 1786 ratified and confirmed.
[LC,original.]
Extract from log book of U. S. Frigate ComtituNon, Captain Edward Preble, U. S.
Navy, commanding, Thursday, 13 October 1803

Moored in Tangier Bay. Moderate Breezes from the EastwGl the
Newyorkl John Adarns and Arau.tilus in company/ this afternoon the
wind shifted by degrees to the Northwg/ the Moors that was on board
the Newyork was this afternoon sent on board the Merbock[a] Lieutenant Tarbell, the two officers s k seaman and two Marines, Regained
the Constitzllion] when the Constitution left Gibraltar last for this Bay,
the Commodore orderd three officers Eight seaman and two Marines]
to the Aerboctcal to Navigate her to this Bay/ two of the seaman
deserted a t Gibraltar1 namely] Joseph Dunbeaver and James Pierce1
the Emperour this day left Tan 'er Commodore Preble came on
board between three and four P / the first intelligence of war Between America and Morroccol was communicated to Commodore
Preble the 12 September last/ from that periord to the present date
Commodore Preble has Empg the following men of war1 Either as
convoys or stationed them along the Moorish Coast1 the John Adamst
Syrenl Enterprise1 Vixen, and the Nautilus/ the Newyorkl Commodore
Roggersl has been aiding andlsssisting/ but he has not been a shore
there is now a perfect and friendly peace between America and Morroccol the Exampler conduct of Commodore Preble in this undertaken/ i senciarly hope will be hearfater mentionedl Toward the
Evenin the Brig Syren stood into the Bay and Saluted the Moorish
forte ghee was immediately dispatched with the ATautilus, with
Commodore Prebles despatches to call in all Cruisers the 21Tezoyork
and John Adams wieghg and stood out the Bay/ the Newyork Re
anchq per signall Commodore Preble waited on Commodore Roggersl
we had fresh Breezes and Variable during the night/ we Recied from
the Merbockal Twelve men beIon ng to the Philadelphia Names as
followes/ Jesse Tuttle] John St' wwelI[?]/ John Morgain John MPCrakenl John Cherry/ John Hassanl D a d Warren1 'FF+ Raiden1
James Fainsworth/ Wg Johnson/ and Charles M%inleyl this morning several of the Constitution officers whenlt] a shore on liberty]
Commodore Preble and Cornr?/ Roggersl when[t] a shore

dl

P

[NA. ND original.]

132

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1803 TO 1804

Extract from journal of Midshipmen F. Cornelius deKrafft, U. 6. Navy, in U. 8.
Brig Sirm of 18 guns, Lieutenant Charles Stewart, U. 6. Navy, commanding,
Thursday, 13 October 1803

Fresh gales from the E'J with rain, making short tacks to windward
for Tangers bay, overhaul'd a range of Starbe Cable. At 4 spoke the
Commodore who sent his boat on board for Lt Stewart. At past 5
the John Adams & Schooner Na?;tilus got under way & stood out of
the bay. At 6 Lt Stewart returne'd: fill'd away & stood out to the
Ng & Ea At
past 6 cape Spartel bore W by S. distant 3 Leagues.
At 8 double reef'd the topsails, handed square main sail & tack'd to
past 11 close reef'd the topsails & wore to the
the Sd & Ed. At
Nc & Ee saw a sail supposed to be the John Ahms. Midnight fresh
gales with thunder & lightning. At % past 12 double reef'd the after
main sail At 1 tack'd & sprung the m a n boom near the sheet blocks,
Wore ship every four hours the remainder of the night. At 7 made all
sail, tacking to windward for Gibralter. At 12 the bay in sight. At
5 P. M. came too with the Starbd Anchor in 17 % fathoms. Europa
point bearing S ?,$ E. St Rocque N by E. At 10 the John Adams
(frigate) came too m the bay. Midnight fresh breezes from the E'J [NDA.]

[I4 October 18031
To President Thomas Jefferson from the Dey of Algiers

Copy by Translation
T b s letter of Mustaphn Pascha dey of Algiers
To The Great of The Govt of The Divan of America. If you are my friends and wish to remain so and wish to preserve
your treaty with me you will send to me 10 Guns Brass 24 pounders
with Cariages $ 9 and allso 5 Brass Guns 18 pounders with Cariages
&?- Guns long for Batteries.
I request you will not forget our friendship I have spoken to your Consul on the subject and he is not inclineable to write although I consider him as Equal to one of yr
divan - and therefore request for our friendship and our treaty That
you will not write me evasive to my demand - as any favour demanded on your part I shall comply therewith. whether your demand
is great or small this letter by order of Mustapha Pascha dcy of Algiers & with his
great Seal. The 26t!' of The Moon of Grimad Alahar 1218 - Corresponding with The 14t@of October 1803 Certified to be The substance or
translation of the deys letter
wrote in Moorish OBRIEN
NB The dey further requires 60 Thsq Bricks for furnaces
[NA. SDA.

CL, Algiers, Vol. 6, Jan. 1801-Dec. 1803.1

To Captain Edward Preble, U.6. Ravy, from Captain John Rodgers, and Lieutenant
Isaac Chauncey, U. 6. Navy, and Tobias Lear, U. S. Consul General, Algiers

CNITEDSTATES
FRIGATE Neuyork, TANGIER
BAY,
October 14, 1803.
SIR; Agreeably to your request that we would examine the
Moorish Ship Mirboha now in this Bay, prize to the United States
frigate Philadelphia, and state to you what we consider the real value
COPY

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

133

as she now lays, we have the honor to inform ou that we have ex-

dl

amined said ship, and consider that her H , Masts, Spars and
rigging, Cables, Anchors, Cannon, Military stores and other Articles
belonging to her are worth ten thousand dollars. signed
Commov PREBLE.
[NDA.

JN? RODGERS
TOBIAS
LEARISAAC
CHAUNCEY
-

{

Cong. LB, Vol. 1, 1798-1811.1

To Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Navy, from Lieutenant Joseph Tarbell, D.6. Navy
TANGIER
BAYOct. 2 dtQ 1803
SIR. Agreeable to your order I took charge of the prize ship
Mirboka, with ten men from the Constitution. found on board
Messrs Reed Morris & McDonough, Midshipman, and 15 men I gave
orders to the above mentioned officers to keep EL regular watch on
Oct. 4tQ Mr. McDonough having the morning watch, took the boat
with 6 men went on shore to get provisions for the ship, while he was
procuring it, the men left the boat, Viz. Thorn? Green, WmHughes &
John Cox., on the 5. Mr McDonough, again being on shore, while he
was absent from the boat, John Tuck[?], left the boat. on the morning of the 6. Mr. Reed having the middle watch & Morris the morning
watch, between the Hours of 4 & 5. A. M. in Morris watch, a t daylight
discovered the boat was gone which was moored a stern, in mustemg
the men, found, James Pierce 8: Jos Dunbevin, missing, I borrowed n
boat, sent the officers on shore a t the old Mole, found the boat taken
up by a Spanish Latteen boat, by reason of the Centinal not suffering
them to land without a permit. by information they got of the
sergeant of the guard s t the landing, concluded they had proceded to
Algesiras I then borrowed a boat and sent the officers to that place,
who returned the same evening, without having been able to obtain
any information of them. the next morning I sent Mr. McDonough, &
Morris on shore a t the old mole, with orders to look through the
Town, $ to search the shipping at the new mole and to enquire of the
officers of the Medusa Frigate if they had received any men on board
within a Few days, accordingly at the ragged staff, they enquired of a
Midshipman belonging to the Medma for them and found that two
men had Joined her the day before, they then proceeded to the new
mole to get a passage on board, on their way thither, they saw Green,
Cox,& Hughes pursued and overtook Green &- Cox, conducted them
to the nearest centinel, requested the centery to take charge of them
which he did, they could not cetch Hughes then, but got information
of his having gone up to the new mole, they prosued after him, where
they found him with an officer, and boats crew belonging to the
Medusa, he claimed protection from under his flag as a british subject,
from whoom they demanded him as beIonging to the service of the U.
States which demand he refused to compl with, and requested them
to go on board, with Hughes on board the fedzcsa, and demand him of
the commanding officer of the ship as he should not give him up,
Accordingly they went on board, & found two others, Viz. Pierce
& Dunbemn, and demanded the three as belonging to the U S. Navy,
the commander refused to give them.u because they had come on
board and claimed the protection of b %hjestys Flag an British sub-

a:

134

RTAVALwOPERATIONSFROM 1803 TO 1804

jects. Mr. Morris & Mc.Donough, returned on shore, to take the
other two, which they had placed under the care of the Centinel, on
comming to the box was informed, the Cap%of the guard had liberated
them, they could not be found. they then returned on board and
made their report. I then went on board the Medusa, and again
demanded them of Cap! Gore, but without affect. I then immediately reported it to Lt. Stewart commanding the Brig Syren. the above is a true statement. [LC. EPP, Vol. 7, 1803.1
Extract from log book of U. S. Frigate Gmi%ttfon. Captain Edward Preble, U. 8.
Navy, commanding, Friday, 14 October 1803

we continue at anchor/ in Tangeir Bay/the Newyork in company/
a t 3 past 1 P M Commodore Preble come on board/we had fresh
Breezes all the afternoon the shipes compan Empd airing and drying
sails/ Towards the Evening saild the uniteci?~tatesFrigate Newywkl
when she was standing out the Bay sbe saluted the Moorish garrison/ the garrison Returnq the salute/ after the garrison saluted we
cheeard ship which was answered by the Newyorkl there is now no
American ship in Tangier Except the Constitution the Merbocka
stills continues here
[NA. ND original.]

[15 October 18031
To Secretary of State from Richard O'Brien, U. S. Consul General, Algiers
Supposeing you would think i t best at present to send or procure
the 10 - Guns 24 pounders & 10 ditto 18 pounders Cariages Ramers Spunges ladles - & 2 Thsd Shot. - & 30 Thsg Bricks - I
should suppose this Commission would be executed in London for 20 or 25 Thsa $ - and the dey to take these Guns, for one yearshnuityas he sayes he will pay the cost. or am! - this business could thus
be managed here by the Consul - that is if the Present Dey - should
exist if not & the Guns to be forwarded - The new dey might insist
on them as presents - as this dey did on the Corsair tack - this
would take a time of 2 yrQr 18 months - As the dey has wrote on
the business of the Guns but one letter - and its fate of arriveing safe
is uncertain. the Govt might say that the did or did not receive it,
and the new Consul might say that the 01 Consul made no mention
or representation on the business of the Guns to the Govt of the U
States.
Should yr an# be as I have presumed to sketch i t will be
necessary that the Consul should be apprized some months before
hand in order that he should concert his Plans for his own Personal
Safety & allso - yr gaurding our Citizens & their property from any
sudden surprize - and allso - to have a force ready and ade uate to
act - in case the dey should make war - therefore ou sho d write
a t least 3 different letters - differing in words &Q & eave all three to
the Judgemg of the consul which should be the most proper to give
the Dey as an ansr for it will be difficult to say - that when you
wrote said letter - you might consider one thing but had the same
erson to deliver said letter & had the ower to act he perhaps would,
gave given them a different ansr - hose Extra Events mll finally
Bring us into difficulties with All Barbary - we should therefore

d

-

I'

.p

9

135

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

directly build the 74 Gun Ships - and 6 more large frigates - We
shall have to do it a t last - if some great Event of Europe does not
Curb the pride avarice & System of Barbary Respectfully Sir
Y' Most Obl Servt

OBRIEN

SECRETARY
OF STATE
[LC. EPP, Vol. 7, 1803.1
Letter suggested as an answer to the Dey of A.lgiers

Suposed DEPARTMENT
OF STATE
Highness dated the
I have received and perused The letter of
26Q of The Moon of [Grimad] Alahar 1218 andrbas to inform you in
And that we have not brass Guns for your use. which An$ we gave on
a former application on this Subject which our Consul personally
communicated to you
We wish to preserve the friendship of your highness. agreeable to
the treaty we made with your Regency. but will not admit of any
extra demands. or over acts. our regard for peace made us throw a
veil. over your exacting from our Consul. The largest of the three
Corsairs - notwithstanding yr Predecessor. had given a document
with his Seal thereto. That The amount of Said Corsairs would cost,
should be paid for by yc Govt - or regency - but after This mark of
our patience and friendship you wounded our feelings by obligeing our
Public Ship to go on your affairs to Constantionople -we Cannot help
reminding your Highness of yr gaurantee of our treaty with Tripoli That your Highness of great infl~ence~with
The states of Barbary
should admit The Pascha of tripoli to infringe Said treaty. and do
away y: gaurentee. and in defiance thereof declare war against The
U States. and your highness make no Effort to have your gaurentee
respected. The same time my Passport issued by y' Highness on any
occasion is respected by The Said Pascba. of tripoli - add to this yr
demand for Passports. for Sending the crews of tripoline corsairs to
tripoli. y: admiting the corsairs of tripoli to Bring american Vessels and
crews into your ports. and granting The corsairs of tripoli Supplies and allso insisting on sending cargoes to tripoli. The said port
being in a state of BIockade - add to this your demand for 5 - or 6
of yl: suposed subjects captured in a tripohne corsair - We cannot
avoid calliig These Circumstances of The infringement of the treaty
to The recollection and consideration of yr highness - not doubting
but you will Perceive that you have thus Voilated the treaty on your
part. whereas on ours for all the articles sent on The Annuities you have
given or allowed for said articles the prices you thought proper -and
on which we have been The sufferer - add to This that we have
stipulated to pay to The amount of 12 Thsg Sequins in money or
Stores and if you do not take The stores a t The pnces they cost. you
will accept of The cash - this is The light of equity in which we view
or consider The treaty Stipulation - But beyond its limits. we give
consular presents. Bennial presents Extra &Extrsordinarypresen ts therefore we wish to keep to The treaty on terms ?f equit & Justice.
but we have too great a regard to our Honor & dignity hen to con-

1'

136

NAVAL OPERATIOOhTSFROM 1803 TO 1804

descend and acquise to all The Unjust and Extra demands of your
Highness -

JEFFERSON

Suposed Ansr of The PRESIDENT
To The Meditteranian Don Quixotte
NB The dean Swede dutch $ spanish consuls has acquised to The
deys demands on the business of The Guns their amount is to be deducted out of The Annuities of Powder & Cables prices no doubt
or gdless then The Value of The Guns - If The goy5 of The
U States. should acquise to Search [?I for The guns required by the
dey, it would be best. to write to London and know what Sums Said
guns carriages &v would cost. and to forward said prices or Values to
The consul a t Algiers if The dey was content to have Them on Said
terms well if not he might do as he had a mind OBRIEN
ALGIERSThe 1 P h of October 1803

xth

[ N A . SDA. CL, Algiers, Vol. 6, Jan. 1801-Dec. 1803.1

[15 October 18031

Vessels Convoyed by U. S. Sloop of War Stren

A list of Merchant Ships & Vessels under the Convoy of the U. S. Sloop of War Siren, Char Stewart Esqr Comdr from Gibraltar

Guns-p

Numbcr n i
Date

Vessel's Names

Master's Nerncs

OwnrLr'sNnmes

Where bound

T o whom Consigned

Lading & c

Men

18W
octr ll'b

-.

Bhip Pelapaco. ....... Rap! Meeiek .....
Brig Fame ........... Lew* KIcbolson..
Bchr Equalitv ......... Atriei Burgkiss. ....
Sh? Osaipce.. ....... Benj: Hutchins-.
" Hihernia.. ...... J m Leach .........
" !Ben!. .......... Natl Kinsman.. ..
" Qenl Wayne ... Thor Bpires - ....
.

[LC.EPP, Vol. 7,

1803.1

Smlth & Buchanan.. . of B a l t ~to Leghorn. ..
Ow: Stile- .......... of d9 to ditto .....
........ of Snlom to
d? .....
Loring & Curtis - ... of DostontoMarseilles..
Jos) Taylor - ........ of d9 to
dr> ....
WI Gray .......... S ~ l r mt,o Lcphorn.. .
Jnq M. Forbes. .......
New York to Zmt..
A. Butgiss

-

Dapan & Purvinnee ...
Josb Stile..............
A l311r~iss...........
Jrremb Lee. ..........
Jnp Emery ...........
Nst. Kinsman. ......Jnv Nowbold ..........

--

-I

-

Coffee Sugsrs Flour & q
110
dv Pepper & c
Fish & d?
Pepper
Smnx Coflcc Pepper & 9
Su srs
n B%mr

138

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1803 TO 180L
To Secretary of State from Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Navy

UNITEDSTATESFRIGATEConstitution
a b r d t e r Bay lbtQOct: 1805
SIR It is with pleasure I announce to you the renewal of Peace
between the United States & Morocco. The enclosed documents will
inform you that the Treaty of 1786 is ratified by the present Emperor
I hope and trust that this important object bas been effected on as
favourable grounds as was anticipated b our Government. I offer
for your consideration, not only the enc osed papers, but beg leave
to refer you to the Secretary of the Navy whom I have advised of the
most m u t e transactions before, and during our negotiations with
His Imperial Majesty Enclosed is a letter from the Emperor to the President of the
United States. I t seems that His Majesty is very desirous of a correspondence Indeed he appears very much hurt, that he has not
recQany letters from the President. I beg leave to suggest whether
the answering this letter, and afterwards to send him one annually,
might not have a good effect, for as far as I am capable of judging
the native deposition of these Barbarians I think them highly susceptible to attentions of this kind - I however submit thu matter
to your better Judgment
[LC. EPP,LB, 1803.1

i

Extract from Diary of Captain Edward Preble, U. 8. Navy, on board U. 8. Frigate
Constitution. Saturday, 16 October 1803

Wind E N E fresh Gales and Rain - a t 5 PM weighed & Sailed for
Gibraltar Saluted the Moorish Garrison with 13 Guns which was
returned with an equal number a t 7 AM the Wind shifted to the
Westward a t 10 Gibraltar Town bore NEbN. diste 6 Miles Steering
into the Bay a t 11 AM anchored in 15 fathoms Water - Col: Lear
landed (LC. EPP,Diary, 1803-1804.1
Extract from log book of U. S. Frigate Constitution, Captain Edward Preble, U. 6.
Navy, commanding, Saturday, 16 October 1803

we continue a t single anchor in Tangeir a t 3 the Commodore and
Conoler Lear came on board a t 5 past 4 P M. weighd and came to
sail/ under the following sail/ three Reef"
the fore and main Topsail
close Reefd Mizen Topsail/ Saluted the Garrison with 13 Guns/ an
Equal number was Returnd from the garrison/ we set the fore sail
and stood out int,o the Straits in order to worke up to Gibraltar1
* * * by 6 in the Morning we was well up with Ceutal which is
the Eastern land of the Straits on the Barbary side/ between 7 and 8
in the morning the wind shifted Round to the SW/ Squared away and
steerd for Gibraltar Bay a t which place we came to with the Best
Bower a t 96 past 10 in the forenoon/ the deepth of water 13 fath8
hard Bottom/ Europa-point South 5 E. the old Mole SEbE. nearly
two miles] we found here a t anchor the Newyork John Adams and
the Brig Syren Commodore Roggers and Captain Campbel waited
on Commodore Preblel
[NA. ND original.]

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

139

Extract from journal of Midshipman F. Cornelius deKrafft, U. 8. Bavy, in U. 8.
Brig Siren of 18 guns, Lieutenant Charles Stewart, U. I. Navy, commanding,
Saturday, 16 October 1803

[Gibraltar Bay] * * * * * At 9 the launch which had been
sent on shore for the larboard Anchor, return'd, got the Anchor on
board & stow'd it. Att 11 &-red & anchor'd the U. S. Frigate
ConstitzLtion CornmodQPrebble from Tangier, after affecting an honorable peace with the Emperror of Morocco. Hands employ blacking
spritaazl yard &c &. [NDA.]
To Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Navy, U.8. Frigate Gmfifulion,from Tobias Lear,
U. S. Coned General, Algers

(COPY

GIBRALTAR,
OCF l B C h 1805.
SIR, As Mr. Cathcart informs me that he has a t Leghorn, Jewelry
& Cash, to a considerable am; belonging to the U. States, which he
is directed to deliver over to me, on account of the Consular present,
&c. to be made to the Dey of Algiers - I beg leave to suggest, whether
it might not be proper, and conducive to the interest of the U. States,
that Capt. Stewart of the U. S. Brig Syren, which you are about to
send with a convoy to Leghorn, should take on board Mr. Cathcart,
who is now at this pIace, proceed with him to Leghorn, & there receive
the cash & such other articles as he may put on board, belonging to
the U. States, and from thence go to Algiers, where I may expect to
be, previous to his arrival, and deliver the same to me. As the Consular present will be necessazy for my regular establishment a t AIgiers, and as that, and the cash a t Leghorn, is of considerable value, I conceive it would not be prudent, either as relating to
time or security, to trust it to a casual conveyance; I am therefore
persuaded, that you will give such orders on this subject, to Capt.
Stewart, as will best effect the object & promote the interest of our
Country.
[NA. SDA. CL, Algiers, Vol. 6, Jan. 1801-Dec. 1803.1
Extract from log book of U. S. Frigate Conslifution, Captain Edward Preble, U. S.
Navy, commending, Sunday, 16 October 1803

Laying in Gibraltar Bay/ Newyorkf John Adams and the Brig
Syrenl
[NA. ND original.]

[5 to 17 October 18031
Presumably to Secretary of the Navy from Captain Edward Preble, U. S, Navy

UNITEDSTATEB'
FRIGATE
ConsbitUtion,
Tangier Bay, Oclobes 6,1803.
SIR: I have the honor to inform you that I arrived here this day,
and ?s the Nautilus was4in s%ht to the westward, I made her signal
to joln me, considefing ~t of unportance to displsy as respectable s
force to his Impenal Majesty's view as possible. Several letters
passed between Mr. Simpson and myself. Among my despatches you
will find arranged aU my correspondence since I have been on this
station.

140

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1803 TO 1804

October 6th. Mr. Simpson paid us a visit on board the ship; informed
me that the Emperor was momently expected.
The New York and John Adams joined company. Our ships are
constantly kept clear for action, and men sleep a t quarters.
I sent a boat on shore with a letter to the Consul. The letter was
delivered, a r ~ dthe boat returned without molestation. At 2 P. M.
the Emperor arrived, and in consequence of his declaration that he
was pacifically inclined, I ordered the ship dressed, and a salute of
twenty-one guns, as a compliment to his majesty. The morning
following he received a salute from the other ships. All our salutes
were returned.
October 7th. The Emperor sent a present of ten bullocks, twenty
sheep, and four dozen of fowls, for the squadron, as a token of his
friendship.
October 8th. The Emperor appeared on the beach with his court
and army, for the purpose of viewing the squadron. I saluted him
from the ship, and was complimented with a return.
October 9th. The Emperor gave an order, under his seal, for the
release of the brig Hannah, her cargo and crew, detained a t Mogadore,
and appointed Monday next to grant Mr. Simpson and myself an
audience. The proofs which the Emperor has given of his pacific
disposition, since his arrival, inclines me to believe that our differences
will soon be adjusted, and peace full restored. The weather has
constantly been very stormy for severa days past.
October 10th. The prize ship Mwboka arrived here from Gibraltar
by my orders. I gave those orders to enable me to restore her to the
Emperor as soon after the adjustment of our differences as possible,
to get clear of the trouble and expense of the crew.
The Syren passed to the westward with a convoy of seven sail of
American vessels. I landed at Tangier about 11 o'clock in the forenoon, accompanied by Colonel Lear, Mr. Morris, as Secretary, and
two midshipmen. At one P. M. with the addition of Mr. Simpson to
our company, we were all conducted to the castle, and were soon
ushered through a double file of guards, and conducted into the
presence of the Emperor. Mr. Simpson and myself were desired to
advance close to his majesty; the other gentlemen were kept back.
We conversed with him by means of an interpreter. He expressed
much regret that any differences had arisen between the two nations;
disavowed having given any hostile orders, and declared he would
punish those of his Governors who had. He said he w?s a t present
a t peace with the United States, and wished to contmue so. He
promised to restore all American property, and release all our citizens
that have been or may be detained in consequence of ofders from apy
of his Governors. We assured him, on our part, that lt was the wlsh
of the President of the United States to be on terms of peace and
friendship with his majesty; and I promisod to deliver up to him the
Murboka, and all other vessels of hls nation that may have been detained by any of the vessels of my squadron, and to recall the orders
I had given to capture Moorish vessels; and observed to him that I
was authorized by Commodore Rodgers to say he would restore the
Mesh&,
but that we expected his majesty to ratif the treaty made
by his father in 1786; this he promised most sacred y to do, and said
his friendship for the Americans should last forever, and increase in
strength in consequence of our disposition to oblige him. At two

i

i

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

141

o'clock, Colonel Lear and the other gentlemen, not admitted to the
audience, returned to town. Mr. Sirnpson and myself finished with
the Emperor, after his having assured us that whatever his prime
minister should do with us, should be sanctioned by him, and receive
his seal; and that he would authorize him to do whatever we pleased
to a& of him, as a proof of his declarations. We were then conducted
to a building in the castle, where we had a long conversation with the
minister. I endeavored to impress on his mind the advantages of a
free commercial intercourse which they might have with all nations;
and that the revenues of the Emperor arising from that source, would
be much greater than any thing they could expect if at war with us;
as I should immediately blockade all his ports, and not suffer a vessel
of any nation to enter or pass out; this appeared to have its full weight.
He assured us every thing should be settled perfectly to our satisfaction. I ordered his majesty's colors to be hoisted on board the
Murboka to gratify him.
October 12th. I received the orders of the Emperor, addressed to
all his Governors and ofiicers, for the release of the Hannah, at Mogadorc, and all other vessels, &c. detained; his declaration, or proclamation of peace, and his ratification of the treaty, all with the imperial
seal. I this day delivered up the Jdurboka to the Moors, agreeable
to my promise, and Mr. Simpson and myself had an audience with
the prime minister, who delivered me a letter from his Imperial
Majesty to the President of the United States, expressive of his
friendship for our nation, and his ratification of the treaty. The
ori,&mal Arabic and translation of the letter, and translations of all
the other papers relative to the treaty, I shall forward to the Secretary
of State, under cover to you, and shall send you copies of the whole,
a t the same time, in my despatches.
October 13th. Peace having been re-established, I despatched the
Nautilus to hlogadore, to carry the news, and the order for the release
of the brig Hannah and crew, and to recall the Enterprise, cruizing off
that port, m d sent orders countermanding those for capturing Moors.
The passage to Mogrrdore is fourteen days by land, and not more
than forty-eight hours by water, with an easterly wind, which is now
blowing a fresh gale. The Syren entered the bay; I immediately
despatched her for Gibraltar, and sent letters to pou and to our
Consuls at different ports in Europe, with the n9ws of peace, and
ordered the Syren to prepare for convoying a number pf merchant
vessels from Gibraltar to Leghorn, which have been waiting several
days for the settlement of our affairs with Morocco. The John Adams
left the bay for Gibraltar.
October 14th. Commodore Rodgers, for the first time, landed with
me, and, on our return, Colonel Lear accompanied us on board the
Murboka, to estimate her value, and I hope the United States will
make some allowance to the ship that captured her, as an encouragement to the officers and men. In the evening the New York left the
bay for Gibraltar.
October 15th. Having settled every thing here, a t six in the evening
weighed and sailed for Gibraltar, saluted the garrison, and had an
equal return. In the whole of this business, I have advised with
Colonel Lear, Mr. Simpson, and Commodore Rodgers. I am confident we have all been actuated by the same motives - the good of
our country; and I hope the President will approve our conduct.

142

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1803 TO 1804

I lost one of my heavy anchors, and a part of a bower cable, in the
bay, and, as the buoy rope arted, I could not recover it, although
several trials were made; I a o lost half my stream cable; both were
cut by the rocks.
October 16th. Arrived a t Gibraltar, and anchored. The Syren
getting ready for Leghorn; and the New York and John Adams for
America. I shall wait here a few days for the Enteqwise, Nautilus,
and Argus; and proceed to Algiers. The Nauiilm mll go with me;
the Enterprise will follow, as soon as she is new rigged, and has s convoy to take up: The Argus, Lieutenant Hull, I shall leave on this
station this winter, and until she can be relieved by some vessel from
the United States; as i t absolutely necessary that one vessel, a t least,
should always rendezvous a t Gibraltar, and show herself in Tangier
Bay, and along the Morocco coast, occasionally. If this is done, we
shall always be good friends with the Emperor. Mr. Simpson can
give notice of any unfriendly appearance. I beg leave to recommend,
in the strongest terms, the necessity of sending out, in addition to the
present squadron, one of the small frigates and a brig or schooner, to
remain on this station. I could call the frigate to my aid, if Tunis
should threaten, and the schooner or brig would always be ready to
come with despatches, while the frigate could remain here, if Morocco
should again break with us. However, I do not believe they will;
but it is best to look out for them.
While I was absent from this bay, four men, belonging to the
Philadelphia, and two to this ship, deserted from on board the prize
ship in this bay; three of them got on board the British frigate Medusa,
Captain Gore, and were refused to the officer of the prize, who went
and demanded them. The Medusa is now a t sea, but expected in a
few days. I have a letter prepared for the captain, which, I think,
w i l l bring the men back. I shall write you more of this business when
it is concluded. Mr. Cathcart is here, and will proceed to Leghorn,
in the Syren, to deliver the public property to Captain Stewart, to
be transported to Algiers for Colonel Lear. I shall, agreeably to
Colonel Leafs request, ve Captain Stewart orders for that purposes.
1 expect to be able to eave this bay in eight days, for Algiers, and
from thence off Tripoli. I do not expect to do much this winter, but,
when the s ring opens, I hope to convince the Bashaw of Tripoli
that it will e for hls interest to have peace with us on our own terms.
I am confident that more active exertions have never been made by
the same number of ships and vessels, of any nation, than have been
made by the ships and vessels of the United States on this station,
within these four weeks past. I have much pride and pleasure in
making the assertion, as it adds reputation to our navy in the o inion
of other nations. The ships sail this evening for the United tates.
My time is ve much engaged in the various duties that call for m
attention, and hope you will excuse any want of information whic
I may have neglected to give you.
October 17th. The ships not being ready to sail, I kept my letter
open, and have the pleasure to acquaint you that the ship Betsy
Wallcer, which loaded a t Norfolk, for Algiers, has delivered her c
there, and anived here this da . Every thing stands fair and frien y
a t that regenc , but I much ear some accident has happened to the
other ship loa ed a t Norfolk, as I have not heard any thing of her.

fs

P

f

d

'S

B

2'

E

T

143

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

I have sent home, by the New York and John Adam, eight invalids,
belonging to the Philadelphia, and eight belonging to this ship; also,
the acting boatswain and gunner which I brought out, neither of
which being competent to their duty; and have also taken the boatswain of the New York, and the gunner of the John Adam, to 6ll
their stations.
I t is absolutely necessary that every article of the provision, &c.
composing our rations, should be sent from the United States, as well
as wood and coal, as they cannot be procured in this count
sequence of the war between France and England. I wo d in
inform
you that Mr. Gavino has but a small quantity of provision on btmd.
I t is probable that we shall fix on Malts, for our deposit of provisions; i t is, however, impossible to determine on this till I go there
myself; i t would, therefore, be advisable to charter the provision
ships to go to Gibraltar, stipulating that they should proceed to Malta,
if required.

,'?I

[Am. State Papers. Nav. Aff., Vol. 1.1
To Captain John Gore, Royal Navy, from Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Navy

UNITEDSTATE'SSHIPConstitution
17th. October 1805
SIRCaptain Stewart of the United-State's Brig Siren, has reported
to me, that Joseph Dunbeavan, Thomas Pierce, and William Hughes,
deserters from the United-States' Squadron under my command, are
detained on board his Britanic Majesty's Ship Medusa, under your
command. The above named deserters, are subjects of, and have taken
the oath of allegiance to the United-States; and I now demand them
as such, and have n right to expect, that you will deliver them up to
the Officer who will hand you this.
Your Officers committed an unjustifiable outrage, by forcibly
detaining a deserter from the Service of the United States, a t one of
the landing places in Gibralter; protecting him from the Midshipmen
who were sent on shore to recover him,and transporting him to the
Medusa; and I regret that I have reason to suppose, this conduct of
your Officers to have met with your approbation. On your part,
this is so very extraordinary, and different from anything that any of
our ships have heretofore met with, on this, or any other Station, that
I must confess myself a t a loss to account for the sudden and inhospitable change of conduct towards us. I presume i t cannot be authonsed
by your Government. If so, I wish to be informed of it. If you
decline satisfying me on this head, I must apply to the Admiral, and
a t the same time, I shall make a representahon to my Government.
The Officers of our Navy, have invariabl given up deserters from
the British Navy or Armies, on the first app 'cation; and have a right
to expect the same liberality on your part.
I am not willing to believe i t is your intention to encourage desertions from our Shps, by affording your protection to every one who,
has an opportunity to claim it; if it should be, i t will throw into our
Ships, every man who, has conducted improperly, and has teen
treated according to his demerits, who has an opportunity to desert.
I now take the liberty to inform you, that I know of no such person
as s British Subject, on board of an [of] the Ships of the S uadron
under my command : I know them o y as Oifizens of the Unite States,

I

d

2

144

N A V A L OPERATIONS FROM 1803 TO 180L

who hare taken the Oath of Allegiance to our Government, and have
volunteered their Services.
I presume this notice will induce you to give such orders, as will in
future prevent any of your Officers from attempting to entice, or
forcibly take from, any of the United-States' Officers, the Men placed
under their charge, either in Boats or Prizes; as I shall consider every
such attempt, in a National point of View. It is my duty, and that
of every Officer in our Service, as carefully to avoid the commission
of, as the submission to, Injury or Insdt.
[LC. EPP, Vol. 7, 1803.1
To Captains Edward Preble, Hugh G. Campbell, and Lieutenant Isaac Chauncey,
U. S. Navy, from Captain John Bodgers, U. S. Navy

U. S. FRIGATE
New York,
Gibraltar Bay October 1Yt+ 1803,
Gentlemen, The iliashouda Tripoline Ship being ready to proceed to
Tangier with the first fair Wind, and then to be Delivered up to the
Emperor of Morocco, in consequence of his Ratifying the Treaty between the United States and his Empire of 1786. As the most Interested persons in this Business, and for the good of the Parties
concerned, I have to request that you will appraise the Mashoud~
with her Cargo and everything belonging to her, as the Laws of the
United States direct and furnish me with a Certificate of her valuation
for my exoneration,
[LC. EPP, Vol. 7, 1803.1
117 October 18031
To Captain John Bodgers, U. S. Navy, from Captains Edward Preble and Hugh
G. Campbell, and Lieutenant Isaac Chauncey, U. 8. Navy

SIR,Agreeable to your request of this date to us directed, we have
taken a surwv of the Ship A4esshouda for the purpose of estimating her
value, and it is our unanimous opinion that the ship together with her
guns & stores of every description and Merchandize on board as pr
Inventory presented to us by you, would be worth m the United States
$17,189 agreeable to the foregoing statement. ED^ PREBLE
signed. - H. G. CAMPBELL
I. CHAUKCEY.
To CommoP JN? RODGERS
U. S. frigate New York Gibraltar Bay. Octr I?'. 1803.

I

[NDA. Cong. LB, Vol. 1, 1798-1811.1
Estimate of Value of Prize Ship Muhouda

Estimate of the value of the Ship Messhouda 5 prize to the United
States frigate John Adams [captured 13 May 18031
The Ship with her Boats, Masts, Spars, Cables and Anchors,
Sails and Rigging, Water Casks, Colours, Compasses and
$6,500
---other Ship Chandlery - - - - - - - _ - - - 20 pf Cannon m t h Carriages, Tackles, Bntchings, Worms,
Ladles, Rammers & Spunges &q &' complete _ - - _ - - - _ _ - - 5,000
1, 136
Muskets, Cutlasses, Pistols, & boarding pikes - - - - - - - - - - - - -

145

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS
30 bbls powder & all the Shot on board a eeable to Inventory
Merchandiee on board estimated at rime Cost to be delivered up with the Ship- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -

3=

[NDA. Cong. LB, Vol. 1 , 179&1811.]

Drr

1,000
3,553

17,189

Extract from log book of U.S. Frigate Comlitufion, C ~ p t a hEdward Preble, U. 6.
Navy, commanding, Monday, 17 October 1803

Moored in Gibraltar Bay/ winds Variable from WNW tb ESE
on our arrival here the 15 of this month i was informed that the
Mesouda was to be given up to the Emperour of Morocco/ perhaps it
may be necessary to mention some of the perticulars about the
hiesowla/ Shee was Blockaded in Gibraltar sometime ago/ by Commodore Dale afterwards by Commodore Morris/ as one of the Cruisers
Belonging to the Bey or the Bashaw of Tripoly/ on application from
the Bey or the Bashaw of Tripoly to the Emperour of Morrocco/ Shee
was permit-ed to sail from Gibraltar/ under the immedeatly order of
the Emperour of Morrocco/ Shee not being navegated agreeable to the
Emperours directions/ Shee was captured by the Frigat John Adams/
and is now in Gibraltar/ Agreeable to the Treaty Between Commodore
Preble and the Emperour of Morrocco Shee is given up to the Emperour of Morroccol the M e s o d proceed from gibraltar with all the
Men Taken on board of her/ to the port of Sslle/ Shee is there to
be hauld up and never to go to sea again/
[NA. N D original.]
TO Daniel Bedinger, Navy Agent, Norfolk, Va., from Secretary of the Eavy

Nav. D E POctr
~ 18. 1803
agreeably to the information given you in my letter of yesterdays
date I have ordered shipments of Pork and beef to be made to you from
Baltimore, Philadelphia New York and Boston, the whole of which
together with what you have on hand is intended to be sent to the
mediterrsnean for the use of our Squadron in that Sea
I wish you to provide in Season a Vessel to carry 300 barrels of Beef
250 dQ-----Pork
90 dQ-----flour
,5,000 ib- - - - - - - -Bread
15,000-- - - - - - - - -Rice
300 Bus beans or peaee
The Beef and Pork you will have in Store - the flour, Rice, beans
or pease & 45,000 'Q of Bread you will proede on the best terms in your
power - The Bread must be baked twice and sent out in Barrels or
Hogsheads - Be pleased to be particularly attentive to this article llTeshdl send you 30,000 ' b f Bread from Alexandria. The Vessel must be engaged so as to be ready to take in her cargo by
the time the Beef and Pork arrives at norfolk.yhleh we presume will
be about the lFjthof next month - The promsions are to be sent to
Gibraltar and probably thence to malta - I will thank you to mcertain as early as may be practicable the terms on which you can engage
a Vessel to carry the Provisions to Gibraltar and also on what terms her
o m e r or Owners would engage that she shall proceed thence to malts
1

146

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1806 TO 1804

with the cargo - I t will be proper if practicable to en age her conditionally to proceed to malta - this however must be le t to the option
of the Government and must be determined by John Gavino Esqr
at Gibraltar on the arrival of the Vessel at that place - The cargo
must be ensured Value $14195 I t will be agreeable to me to hear from you that you will experience
no inconvenience in the Execution of these instructions [NDA. GLB, Vo1. 6, 1802-1803.1

I

To Secretary of State from Tobias Lear, U. S. Consul General, Algiers

Nq 2.
GIBRALTER
October l g t @1805
SIR, My last (duplicate of which I have the honor to transmit by
this conveyance) was down to the 26 of Septr - On that day the
U. S. Frigate New 170rk,left this bay on a Cruize off Larache, Mogodore & C - On the 2gth the U. S. Frigate John Adam returned
from her cruize, without having met the Moorish Frigate Maimona,
which was the object of her search - At the same time our Consul,
Mr Gavino, r e d a letter from Mr Jarvis, our Consul at Lisbon, informing him that the said Frigate had arrived at Lisbon on the 13tQ
ultimo, without having captured anything, so that we were happily
releived from our anxiety occasioned by the report from Cadiz of her
having taken 4 Am. Vessels.
~ U. S. Frigate Constitution came into the
On the 30t@OF S E P Tthe
Bay, the weather having been so bad for some days past as to make
her continuing in the Straits, not only useless, but even hazardous.
Commodore Preble stated to me the information he had reca from
Mr S i p s o n relative to our affairs when the Constitution was off
Tangier. - The Emp' of Morocco denies having given orders to capture Am. Vessels - has liberated Mr Simpson from his confhement ordered him not to have any communication with Hashash, nor attend
to any directions he might give - expresses a strong wish to be at
Peace with the U. S. agreeably to the Treaty of 1786 - proposes
that what has been taken on both sides shall be given up - and that
the affair of the Mwshouda, taken off Tripoli, under his flag, be investigated and decided upon equitable principles. - He is expected
a t Tangier on Tuesday, when the commodore intends going down
with the Constitution to meet him, and requests that I will accompany
him,which I readily consented to do. I n the afternoon of this day (Octr l e t ) the U. S. Brig Syren, Cap'
Stewart arrived from Philad*
On the 2s' the U. S. F. John Adams sailed from Gibralter Bay to
go off Larache &p to meet the New York, and return with her to
Tangier Bay to join the Constitution, and display before the Emperor
a respectable force, and be able, in the event of decided hostility, to
shew him that we were able to injure him more than by capturing
his Vessels. On the 3QCommodore Preble recQ dispatches from Mr Simpson,
enclosing his further correspondence with the Emperor & his Prime
Minister on the subject of our Affairs; stating that the Empr was
sincerely disposed to eace, and desired that the Ship Mirboka shg
be brot to Tangier to f e del' up to him, in the event of an amicable
adjustment of our difIerences - that he had given an order for the
release of the Am. Brig. Hannah, Crew & Cargo detained a t Mogodore,

147

Ji7ARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

wh shQbe delg up without loss -and earnestly desired the Commodore
might meet him a t Tangier. - M' S i p s o n recommended that the
Mirboka she be brot down, agreeably to the Empr'q wishes; which
the Commodore determined to comply with, and accordingly sent
a Lieut. and 20 men from his own Ship to put her in order and take
her over to Tangier when the Constitution she sail, wQ wd be this
evening. And orders were given to Cap! Stewart of the Bri Syren
to sail at the same time, with a convoy of Am. Vessels boun to the
Westward, and proceed with them 20 leagues out of the Straits. We got under way about 7 o'clk with a light air of wind. - The Syren
&. her Convoy got under way at the same time; but without much
prospect of getting out of the Bay with this light wind. -The Mi~boka
not being quite read7 the Lieu? on board was ordered to follow the
Commodore to Tanger as soon as ossible.
On Tuesday the 4'9 we reached $angier Bay, and came to anchor
about 12 o'clk, within a short distance of the Forts. - At the same
time the U. S. Schooner Naululus, Capt Sommers, came to Anchor
in the Bay - we having met him off Tangier, and the Cornd?giving
him orders to that effect. A boat was got ready to send on shore from the Ship, to bring off
any communications wQMr Simpson might have to make, when her
going was rendered unnecessary by a Spanish boat coming off with a
letter from him to the Comd%a;ving that the Empr wd be here tomorrow, and request5 that the ComdWould, if agreeable to his own
ideas on the subject, dress ship, and salute the Empc on his arrival,
as he conceived such a complimt wd be attended with good effects. The Cornd' readily agreed to it. After sun set, all hands were called to quarters, and every thing
prepared for Action; which continued so through the night; the men
sle~pingat the Guns. (The same order was observed every night
until our affairs were fully settled with the Empr) This was a very
proper and judicious measure to prevent the possibility of a surprize
by an attnck from the Forts, if they shd be disposed to annoy us; and
it had a most excellent effect on the Moorish Capt" Officers on board,
by convincing them that the Ams. wg never be taken by surprize or
unprepared.
On Wednesday the st@the Empr arrived at Tangier about 2 o'clk
P. M, when the Commodore saluted him with 21 Guns & dressed
Ship. - In the evening a boat come of7 with a letter from hlr S i p s o n
to the Corn* saying that the Empr had sent his prime Minister to
Tituan on business, and that he wq not give nn Audience or enter into
m y negotiations until his arrival
nork] & JG Adam
Early in the Morns of the 6t@the U. S. F~"ew)
came to anchor in the Bay; and at 8 they saluted with 21 Guns each,
which was returned by the Forts, with a like number of Guns for
each Ship.
In the forenoon Mr S i p s o n came on board the Constifutwn for
the first time. - He observed that the Empc had sent him word that
he might either go off to our Ships, or the boats might come on shore
with perfect safety, and that all things are, as they were before. This permission was given without any application on the part. of
Mr Simpson, - MT S. expressed a full expectation of everything berng
perfectly adjusted; but that nothing wg be done until the arrival of
the Minister from Tituan; and indeed he expressed a wish that the

d

148

2LTAT'AL OPERATIONS FROM 1803 TO 180L

-

Empr might not be pressed to an attention to our affairs until the
Minister's arrival, lest he shd authorize some other person to adjust
the differences, who might not be so well disposed towards us as he
knew the Prime Minister to be. FRIDAY
OCT:Tth
In the morng the Comd%ent a boat on shore, with a flag to carry
a letter to M' Simpson. - At noon the Empr appeared on the Battery,
for the purpose of having a better view of the Ships. The Cornd"
upon seeing him there, saluted him with 21 Guns, which, it appears,
had a very good effect upon him. - In the afternoon he sent off to
the Ships a present of 10 Bullocks 8: 20 Sheep, which was considered
as a strong evidence of his wishes for an accommodation, as it had
never been customary heretofore to send presents of this kind to
Men of War, until after the Commanders had landed and had an
audience. SATURDAY
O C TstQ
~
Mz Simpson came off this morn5 to Breakfast, when we had much
conversation with him on the subject of settl! our differences with
the Emperor. - On his return on shore Mr S. found a letter for him,
from the Empr enclosing an Order for the release of the Vessel, Crew
& Cargo detainded at Mogodore, signed by himself B sealed with his
private seal, without any conditions annexed to it; and appointed
12 o'clk on Monday for an audience to be given on the subject of our
affairs. SUNDAY
O C T9.
~
The weather was too bad to admit of any communications with the
shore. A strong gale of wind from Wr with heavy squalls & violent
rain, continued all day. The Ship's cable was cut off by the Rocks,
and finding her birth very bad, the Comd"ot under way in the afternoon, stood out of the Bay, & retd again to a new birth. MONDAY
OCT' 10t@
At 11 o'clk A. M. Commodore Preble & myself went on shore,
having recd satisfactory assurances of safety & permission to return
on board. - On reaching Mr Simpson's House, the Sweedish, Danish,
Dutch, French & Spanish Consuls called to pay their compliments.
At 12 07clk,a message came from the Castle that the Emperor was
ready to receive us. We repaired thither, and after waiting a short
time, were conducted through a narrow passage flined with the
Emperor's guards) leading to a pair of large folding doors, which
appeared to open into an interior apartment of the Castle. - When
we had got wthin 20 paces of the folding doors, the Empr made his
appearance, from a side passage, near these doors, and seated himself
on the Steps of them. - The Moors bowed to the Earth, and we, as
requested, uncovered our heads. - After this ceremony the Empr
sent his Prime Minister (who had arrived this morn$ from Tituan) to
Mr Simpson and the Commodor, to assure them of his friendly dispositions towards the U. S. - his regret a t what had happened, wh
he declared was without his Orders, and his readiness to do whatever
might be desired to restore harmony and a good understanding. He hoped that his Ship wh had been captured by the Phil-wd
be
restored, together with his subjects in our possession, as he had given
orders for the restoration of the Vessel &F detained a t Mogodore: and he also expressed a wish that the Ship Mishouda, wh had been
taken e n t d the Port of Tripoli, with his flag, might be given to him

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

149

as a favor, declaring that if the Capt. had attempted to go to Tripoli,
it was contrary to his orders, and he shq answer it with his head. He acknoudedged that her attemptr to enter Tripoli made her a good
prize to us; but he requested her restoration as a favor (and particularly as Cornr$ Morris had, upon her being captured in May last,
written to Mr S i p s o n , saying, that if it was shown that the act of
her going to Tripoli was without the Empr'Mrders, she shd be restored
to him. The purport of wh lettar had been communicated to the
Empr) and declared that if she shQbe given up she shg never go beyond
the extent of his own dominions while we might be a t war m t h
Tripoli.
In answer to this the Empr was told, that we were equally desireous
of peace & friendship with him, provided it could be received on a
permanent & solid foundation; - that we only wanted a Solemn &
formal ratification & confirmation of the Treaty made with his Father
in 1786, with the best assurances the nature of the thing w* admit,
that i t shq not be violated or altered, on his part, during the term for
which it is to continue - That what we had done was only in consequence of the conduct of the Commander of his Vessel, which he had
disavowed - that we were perfectly ready & ~ d h to
g give up his
Ship Mirboka and his subjects, upon a ratification being made, and
a certainty that all Am. Vessels we had been, or might be detained in
his Ports, or captured by his cruizers shc be given up with their
crews & cargos, without loss; but that the restoration of the Mishoada
wG be a subject of further considerstion. - To all this tbe Empr
readily assented, and then desired that the Cornd$ & Mr Simpson
might advance nearer to him, which they did, within a few paces. While there, they had a further conversation on the foregoing subjects;
when the Empr assured them he wd grant all we had nslied, and wg
empower his prime Minister to settle the business immediately, to
our entire satisfaction. - Mr Simpson informed the Empc of the
unworthy treatmt he had re& from Hashash, the Govr of Tangier,
who had confined him without just cause, and contrary to our Treaty
made with his father, which he considered FLS a high indignity offered
to the Eation which he represented, as well as to himself. - The
Empr declared it was done without his order or knowledge, that i t
was an aggression improper & unmerited, and that i t shQ never
happen again. - The Comd"nfornled him that he had his Ship
Mai[m]orna,with his high Admiral, in his porver, but had let her pass
in friendship, finding she had the regular passport from our Consul;
but that we could have no confidence in future in passports, or any
other documents, if the late instance of them was not disavowed &
corrected. - He also expressed to him,in strong language, the superior
advantages which he wg receive from a full & secure commercial intercourse with the U. 5. n + ~ ,tho' prepared for war, and always ready
to meet it, if necessary, yet preferd peace & commerce. The Empr attended to these obserrations, again repeated his strong
desire to be on the best terms with the U.S. and his readiness to ratify
& confirm our treaty of 1786, in evidence of this disposition. - He
said the Ship ii4aimona had no orders to capture Am. Vessels, wp was
a proof that what had happened with the other Vessels was a mistake,
and could never have been sanctioned by him. - He said he shd m i t e
a letter to the President of the U. S. confirming all he had said. After the audience was broken up, the Prime Minister took the

150

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1803 TO 1804

Cornd?& Mr Simpson into an apartment of the castle, when he had
a conversation m t h them on the points before stated, and promised
that the letter to the Presidt of the U. S. the order for the restoration
of all Vessels wh had been or might be detained or captured, and the
other documents shq be made out without delay. The Ship Mirboka arrivc in Tangier Bay while we were with the
Empr and anchored near our frigates, which afforded the Emp: an
opport? of maks a comparison between his ship & ours as to size. At the same time the U. S. Brig S y ~ e npassed down the Straits, with
her convoy from Gibralr - We dined a t Mr Simpson's, and retd on b'J
the Constitution after dinner. - The Moors, as we passed through the
Town, expressed by their words & looks, the high satisfaction they
felt on the prospect of o w differences being amiccably settled. TUESDAY
O C Tl~l t h
Comde Preble went on shore this forenoon to have a further conference with the Prime Minister on our Affairs. - He had the letter
fm. the Empr to the Presidt of the U. S. and two orders prepared (one
to go by sea and one by land) for the release of the Vessel a t Mogodore,
and all others W Q had been, or might be taken or detained. - I t was
intended to have been made a point with the ComdWhat in future no
passport for a Cruizer shg be demanded of our Consul, but in writing,
under the seal of the Emp' to prevent his Governors from obtainf
them as had been lately done: But as this was a subject in wh the other
Consuls were also deeply interested, and as they had determind to
make a joint application to the Empr thereon, i t was tho? best to
waive it, for the present, and unite with them in this business.
The subject of the restoration of the Ship Mishouda to the Empr
was again mentioned a t this meeting; when finding it was requested
as a favour, and under the restrictions before ment? - and seemed to
to be a thing W Q wg be highly gratifying to the Empr who had already
shewn so earnest a desire of being upon the best terms with us, and
especially too, as Come Rodgen, (under whose controul she was since
the departure of Cornd$Morris) had, this morning, very readily consented to release her, if it could be productive of good to us, particularly
after the letter WQ had been written to M' Simpson by Come Morris Come Preble did not hesitate to say she shg be restored. - This was
r e d with strong marks of sensibility & satisfaction. The Empr ordered that the U. S. Ships of War shg be furnished with
20 Bullocks - 50 Sheep & 100 doz of fowles, which was a very extraordinary supply. WEDNESDAY
OCTS 12f4
I went on shore early this morn5 with Comd"reble. - R e found
the Empr on the point of departing for Fez, and his prime Minister
was soon to follow him; but, previous to his going, he sent for the
Cornd?& Mr Simpson, to whom he recapitulated the Emperor's strong
assurance of peace & friendship, and his readiness to evince this disposition by every means in his power; - and expressed the high satisfaction of the Empr on being assured that he shg have the ship Mishouda
restored to him; and again declared that the Moorish Captn of that
Ship sh'J lose his head for daring to disobey the Empr:' orders in
attempting to go into Tripoli.
We retd on board after an early dinner, when the U. S. Brig Syren
corning into the Bay, the Comde did not permit her to anchor; but
put on board her letters to be forwarded to our Consuls a t Malaga,

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

151

Cadiz, Lisbon, Bourdeaux, London &F $9 and to the Secretaries of
State & Navy Departmtq - and ordered her to Gibralter to get
ready for tak! under her convoy, such Am. Vessels as might be bound
At the same time he dispatched the U. S. Schooner
up the Mediter"
Nautulus to Mogodore, with one copy of the Emp: order for the
release of the Am. Vessels &9 - and dxected Capt Sommers to return
immediately to join him a t Gibralter. - The U. S. F. JnQAdam, left
Tangier Bay the same time for Gibralter. THURSDAY
O C T13tQ
~
I went on shore with Commodores Preble & Rodgers. - The
letter from the Emp' to the Presidt of the U. S. was copied & translated, and the other papers prepared. - In the Even4 the U. S. F.
N. Yk got under way for Gibraltar. Information was r e d from our Consul a t Gibralter that a yellow
fever of a very malignant nature had appeared a t Malaga; in consequence of wh all communication with that place & other Ports of
Spain was cut off - and adviseing against having any communication
with Vessels from there. FRIDAY
OCT~
14t9
I went on shore in the forenoon with Com'Jf Preble, when all the
business with the shore was ultimately closed. We retd on b'Jin the
afternoon & got under way for Gibralter, - salute the Fort, w@was
retd with an equal number of Guns.
SATURDAY
OCT: 15tQ
We anchored in Gibralter Bay about 10 o'clk A. M. where we
found the I?.S. FQ?
N . T'k & JnQAdams & Brig Syren.
1 have now, Sir, given you a detail of occurrences up to the 15'0
of Oct: and for a more full & satisfactory acct of the transactions with
the Empr and the ultimate adjustmt of our differences with him, I
must refer you to the copies of the various letters & documents of
every descnption, W Q will be transmitted to the Secy of the Navy &
yourself, by Commodore Preble, who is as indefatigable in furnish4
full information of every thing wh occurs, as he is active & able in
- - events, wQ may render such communications necessary &
producing
agreeable.
I trust the President will receive, with full satisfaction, the news of
our differences wQMorocco being settled almost as soon as he will hear
of their have5 assumed a serious aspect. A concurrence of fortunate
events put into our hands one of the Emp'P frigates, and about 160 of
his subjects; and the juncture of the outwq & homewg bound Squadron,
a t this place, in a critical moment, gave an opp? of displaying a large
force - effectually protecting our trade - and striking no small
terror into the inhabitants of the coast. -The activity of the Squadron
was equal to its unexpected appearance. - Every Seaport in the
Empire, from Mogodore to Tituan, had one or more crumers off, to
prevent the entrance or departure of any Vessels. - The Emp: came
to Tangier. - Our frigates were drawn up ready toedestroyhls town,
if he shg be determined on hostilities. - The unpression was strong; and, the Emp: not only disavowed, in the most positive manner, every
thing that had been done on his part of a hostlle nature; but offered
anything we could ask. - A very important point with us was to
obtain a full & une uivocal ratification of our Treaty made with his
s a t once complied with, and not a demand
father in 1786. - ~ B i was
or intimation of the expectation of a present from us, either in a gross

152

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1803 TO 1804

sum, or by way of annuity. -Thus was that business, which threatened
serious evil to the commerce of the U. S. in these Seas, happily terminated in a few days.
In giving up to the Emp' his Ships & subjects, he had an evidence of
our readiness to oblige him, and to cultivate a further good understands; a t the same time it was not injuring or disobliging ourselves in
any degree; for the ships were scarcely worth tak5 to the U. S. and his
subjects were an espence & burthen upon us. - I t is, however, presumed that, as they were acknowledged to be fair prizes, the U. S. will
pay to the Captors accord5 to their valuation, as a due encouragemt
for exertion, and a reward for the readiness with WQ they were resigned
without a reservation. I n giving up these Vessels we can only be said to give a quid pro
quo; for we understand that the AIR. Brig detained at hlogodore, had
a valuable Cargo, mostly of India goods, wh n-Qam; to considerably
more than appraisemt[?] of the ships. Before I close this subject, I must do justice to the active & judicious
as well as the disinterestedness
measures pursued by Comd"reble,
with wh he appears to act on all occasions, by sa ling that the spirited
& determined manner in wh he wrote to Mr irnpson, on his first
arrival, request5 that the same might be communicated to the Empr and his subsequent conduct corresponds with that determination,
has been productive of very happy events. - The disposition made
a t Tangier had, undoubtedly the good effect to prevent any intresgues
being used to turn the Empr from his purpose of a satisfactory accommodation of our differences; for the best Houses in the Touv belonged
to the Consuls individually, or nationally: and their being fully persuaded that the town wQhave suffered, probably have been destroy'd,
in case the business shd issue in a complete avowal of hostilities, kept
them a t least quiet, perhaps might have influenced some to endeavour
to promote an accommodation. - Com*e Rodgers deserves great
credit for the cordiality $ activity wh wQhe has cooperated in such
measures as were intended to promote the best Interest of the U. S. And, indeed, the conduct of the commanders of the Vessels engaged
in this service, appeared to be influenced by the same desire to terminate this business speedily & happily, that actuated the person who
conducted it. But notwithstand6 this business has been brol to this favorable
issue, and has terminated in a way that astonished all persons here,
acquainted with Barbary Affairs; particularly as the Empr has lately
tho! proper to increase the tribute on some nations, wQ has been
acceded to; Yet I still entertain the opinion I had before, vizt, that if
they shd have captured a number of Am. Vessels, before their Cruizers
were stop'd, and their ports blockaded, the thing wd not have been
disavowed; but if we had been solicitious for a peace, it could not have
been purchased on any tolerable terms for less than 50,000 doll?and perhaps on no terms wd our former treaty have been ratified &
confirmed; for it is considered by far the most favorable that any
nation has with the Empr - And I am also fully of opinion that this
Coast shQnever be left entirely destitute of armed Vessels, while it
may be tho$ any ways necessary to keep a force in these seas. I have no doubt but we are perfectly secure agt molestation from
them, for some time to come; and, in the meantime, Come9 Preble
will make such arrangetF for security here, as his present force will

2

WARS WITH BARBARY POWEBS

153

permit, consistent with his other objects; but if all the force now here,
be wanted a t Tripoli, and addition [sic] will become necessary for
this coast.
In conversation with M Simpson, he mentioned to me repeatedly,
with deep regret, that the Emp' had never been noticed by our Govt
for many years past, even so much as to have written him a letter,
and he has reason to think that this is considered as a pointed neglect;
and that the long-promised gun carriages have never been furnishd,
confirms the idea of our hold6 him in contempt. - Our peace is now
renewed & confirmed, as far as the forms of these people ever confirm
mything, and not a word has been said, by them, about the Gun
carriages, or an intimation of a present. - This may be considered
as leave it optional as to the fulfilm! of the former promise; but wg
not good policy dictate the propriety of fulfillq it now, and maks
it appear as a new obhgation? - For I presume these people never
forget the non-fulfilmt of a promise, however justifiable a nation may
be in not complying with their engagemt* to them. - M' S. also
laments that he hears so seldom from the Departmt of State, as to be
left almost without instructions; and a t a loss to know whether his
conduct be approved of or not. - He complains of the lowness of his
salary, nnd that he has repetltedly informed Govi that be could not
continue in his place unless it sh'J be increased; and particularly as
he has no house furnished him as is the case wlth other Consuls a t
Tangier. He now has a few inconvenient rooms in part of a house
belonging to, and occupied by the Sweedish Consul. His own House
in the Country is a pleasant & convenient summer residence; but in
winter it becomes necessary to reside in Town, to be at hand to receive
or give informntio~lto Vessels
1am persuaded, Sir, you will not consider the foregoing observations
as an officious ititerference in matters + d o not come immediately
under my cognissnce; but place them, ns they truly ought to be, to
the met of my desire of giving you all the informstion in my power,
on subjects wh relate to your departmt and w@you may not be likely
to receive from another source.
The U. S. Brig Syren will sail immediately with a convoy for Leghorn, - h.ir Cathcart takes passage in her, and
send by her to
Algiers, the Consular present, Cash &q - I have the honor to enclose
copies of Mc Cathcarts letter to me, my answer thereto, and my letter
to ComdePreble on this subject (Enclosures NQ 1. 2. 3.)
The Ship Betsy M7alker arrived her yesterday from Algiers, where
she landed the stores shipd on bortrd her. - hlr Gavino has a letter
from M' OBrien (a copy of wb he will probably transmit you) by this
ship; but it mentions nothing of importance relating to our affairs at
Algiers. - He says the Dey wants some of his subjects wQwere in
the Tripoline Ship. - If there were any such we wrll take them up
in the Constitution; but I have never understood there were any of
that regency on board. We shall sail for Algiers in a few days - The Cornd* merely
waits the arrival of the Schooners Enterprize C Xautdm, w@may be
expected every day. - The Brig Augm is anxiously looked for from
Boston * * *
[NA. SDA. CL,Algiers, Vol. 6,Jan. 1801-Dm.1803.1

154

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1809 TO 1804

To Captain William Bainbridge, U. 8. Navy, commanding U. 8. Frigate Philadelphia,
from Captain Edward Preble, U. 6. Navy

Constitution
O C T1803
~
SIR, I have the pleasure to inform you of the re-establishment of
peace between the United States of America, and Morocco: - this
object has been effected by the restitution of all captures on both
sides, and the acknowledgment and ratification of the Troaty of 1786
&c* the particulars of which, I hope to communicate Verbally in
a very short time, as I shall sail from this to Algiers in 8 or 10 days,
and from thence off Tripoly After the receipt of this, you will cease to act under that part of
your Orders which extend to the Capture of Moorish Vessels: - you
will take care that Lt Corndl Smith IS advised of this [LC. EPP,Order Book, 1803-1805.1
Extract from Diary of Captain Edward Preble, U.6. Navy, on board U.S. Frigate
Constitution, Tuesday, 18 October 1803

Compleated my dispatches - Sent home in the New York & John
Adums Eight Invalids belonging to this Ship, and Eight belonging to
the Philadelphia. Discharged the Acting Boatswain & Gunner into
the New York to do dut,y before the Mast, and r e c h n board the Boatswain of the iVew York & Gunner of the John Adums and Nine Men
and a Boy - two Men, John Plover & William Brown deserted from
this Ship they swam off. Mr Lewis Pilot of the Newyork Joined this
Ship [LC.EPP, Diary, 1803-1804.1
Extract from log book of U. 6. Frigate Constitution, Captain Edward Preble, U. S.
Navy, commanding, Tuesday, 18 October 1803

We continue a t anchor in Gibraltar Bay/ the Newyorkl John Adams
and Syren in Company/ we this afternoon invalided from the Constitution to the Newyorkl fifteen Seaman and two Marines/ Eight of
those men we Recid from the Merboka Belonging to the united Stlateti
ship Philadelphial
[NA. ND original.]
Extract from journal of Midshipman F. Cornelius deKrafft, U. 6. Navy, in U. S.
Brig Siren of 18 guns, Lieutenant Charles Stewart, U. S. Navy, commanding,
Tuesday, 18 October 1803

!Gibraltar Bay] * * * * * At 4 P. M. the U. S. Frigates, New
York & John Adams got under way & sail'd for America. Itec'J on
board 33 barrels of bread likewise the sails & rigging that had been
landed the 36 instant, Ends with the wind from the E@& pleasant
weather. [NDA.]
To Captain Button, of the Boyal Navy, from Captain Edward Preble, U. 8. Navy

UNITEDSTATEB
SHIPConstitution
Gibraltar Bay 19" Octr 1805
SIR I am informed that two Deserters from this Ship, John Plover,
& Willkm Brown, are on board H: B: M Ship Amphion, under your
command. I beg leave to inform you that, they are both citizens of

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

155

the United-States of America, and largely indebted to the Ship; and
Plover, has left an allotment of half hi Monthly pay to his sister residing in Boston. It has ever been the practice of the commanding
Officers of Ships in our service to give up Deserters from the British
Navy, or Army, on the first application; and 1 have a right to expect
the same Iiberality on your part. You will oblige me, by ordering
the men to be delivered to the Officerwho will hand you this, that they
may return to their duty.
EDWARD
PREBLE
Commodore of the U: 8:Squadron
in the Mediterranean
[LC. EPP, Voi. 7, 3803.1

TODegen, Purviance

& Co., Leghorn, Italy, from Captain Edward Preble, U.6. Havy

UNITEDSTATES
FRIGATE
Constitution GIBRALTAR
BAY
19th October 1803
Gentlemen I have the pleasure to announce to you the restoration
of Peace between the United States and Morocco. and of the renewal

& ratification of the Treaty of 1786 -

I have ordered Cnpt,ain Stewart of the Brig Syren, to take charge of

a convoy for Leghorn; and James L Cat,hcart Esquire, takes passage

with him, for the purpose of delivering certain presents the property
of the United States, in his possession, for the Dey of Algiers. I have
to request that, you will lend Captain Stewart your assist?nce in
facilitating his departure from your Port in case of quarantme &c.
as it is of the first importance that the Presents above. mentioned
should arrive at, -4lgiers as soon after Col: Lear (the Amencan Consul
General to that Regency) as possible. Col: Lear takes passage with
me in 8 or 10 days [LC. EPP, LB, 1803.1
Extract from log book of U. 6. Frigate Con.dit&on, Captain Edward Preble, U.6.
Navy, commanding, Wednesday, 19 October 1803

Moored in Gibraltar Ba-j-. Towards the Evening saild the united
States Frigates, Nezuyork and John Adams and the Mesoudal they
were to stop at Tangier Bay and give up the Meso& to the Emperour
of Morrocco they than will proceed for America/ * * * during the
night/ anchord here the united States Schooner Interprise Leutenant
Hull/ who waited on Commore Preble/ the Interprise has returnd
from her station to the westwd
[NA. N D original.]
To Captain George Hart, Royal navy, H. 3.M. 8. Monmoufh, from Captain Edward
Preble, U. 6. Navy

U S FRIGATE
Constitution
C4ibraltar Bay 20tQOct . 1805

is lodged in the Secretary of States Office.

156

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1803 TO 1804

Three of those men are detained on board His Britanic Majesty's
Ship Medusa. In my absence from this, they were demanded of
Captain Gore by the commander of the United States Brig Syren and
refused to be e v e n up. If the Medusa arrives before I put to Sea,
I shall make a further demand of the deserters previous to making a
representation to the British Admiral, or to my Government.
I am informed that John Plover, and William Brown deserters
from this ship are on board the Amphion now in this Bay. If this
information is correct, you will oblige me by directing them to be
given up to the Officer who will hand you this.
The Officers commanding our Ships of War have invariably given
up deserters from the British Kavy or Army, on the first application
and hope I shall not be disappoint.ed in expecting the same liberality
on your part.
[LC. EPP, LB, 1803.1
Extract from log book of U. S. Frigate Condilution, Captain Edward Preble, U. 9.
Navy, commanding, Thursday, 20 October 1803

We continued a t anchor in Gibraltar Bay/ the Syrin and Ente~pria
in Company/
[NA. ND original.]
Extract from journal of Xidshipman F. Cornelius deKrafft, U. S. Navy, in U. S.
Brig Siren of 18 guns, Lieutenant Charles Stewart, U. S. Navy, commanding,
Thursday, 20 October 1803

At 2 came too in 24 fathoms Europa point bearing S )h E SI
Rocque N \Ti E. Harlds employd in making up spare sads & stowing
them below. [NDA.]
To Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Navy, from Captain George Hart, R. I?.

HIS MAJESTYS
SHIPMonmouth
New Mole Gibraltar 21" October 1803
SIR I had yesterday the honor of receiving your latter respecting
the seamen therein mentioned, who you say have deserted from the
ships of your Squadron; You assert "they are all Citizens of the
United States of America, have taken Oaths of Allegiance &Q to your
Government: that three of those men are detained, on board His
Majestys Ship Medusa, and that two more are on board the Amphion
a t present in this Bay"; after receiving your letter I went on board
the Amphion; Cap: Sutton says that two Seamen did come on board
his ship to enter as Volunteers declaring themselves Englishmen, and
that he did enter them accordingly, being first convinced, from a
strict enquiry that he made, of their being Englishmen; the other
three you mention that are on board the Medusa I can say notlling
of till I see Cap t Gore. I beg leave to inform you that it is the Orders & Instructions of our
Government, on our meeting with Ships of any forei Nation whatever to demand all such British Seamen that may appen to be on
board them. I am informed there are a t present several of that
description on board the Constitution, however being well convinced
that it is far from the intentions of our Government to distress yours

P

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

157

in the smallest degree by Obliging any of our Seamen to quit your ships
when it may be of the smallest Injury to your service; If however any
British Seamen (when you are convinced they are such) wish to return
to their own Service I trust you d l Comply as far as in your power
with their request; and we on our parts are ready to dehver to you
all Seamen of the United States on an Application being-made and a
promise on our part of a like number of British Seamen m return.
UNITEDT.4TEB SHIPC07i&&di0lz
Gibraltar Bay
[LC. EPP, Vol. 7, 1803.1

-

d

[21 October 18031
To Lieutenant Charles Stewart, U.S. Bavy, commanding IT. S. Brig Siren, from
Surgeon Samuel S. Marshall, U. 8. Bevy

SIR Influenced by a desire to erase from your mind any unfavorable
impressions which might have been received of the conduct of the
officers of the brig Syren,, whilst on shore, on the lQt?
instant; I concieve i t a duty, I owe to them and myself, to assure you, :bat no riot,
or other improper conduct, took place in the street, or m any other
situation.
We spent the evening, with some British officers, in a prieate room
of Bernards tavern, and altho' some misunderstanding did occur
between them and us, it was confined to the room in which it o*nated, and has since been amicably and honorably adjusted. - I beg
leave to assure you, that I feel as warmly interested in the honor and
respectability of the service, as an7 man, and that.1 shall never give
countenance to improper conduct in any place or srtuatlon. U. S. B. Syren 21et Octobr 1503
[LC. EPP, Vol. 7, 1803.1
To James Duff, His British Majesty'e Consul, Cadiz, Spain, from John Hunter,
Madrid

Circzclar
MADRID
21 October 1803
SIR,I n Consequence of instructions which T have this day reciered
from Vice Admiral Lord Nelson Commander in chief of his Majesty's
Fleet in the Mediterranean; I am to acquaint you that the Ports of
Genoa & Spezzia have been declared in a state of Blockade; & you are
hereby requested to communicate this information to all the Consuls
or Vice Consuls of Neutral Powers in the Ports of your residence or its
district, in order that, they may give notice to the Vessels of their
respective Flags.
A11 Neutral Vessels attempting to enter the Ports of Genoa &Spezzia after the reciept of this Notification or found on the Coast
between Leghorn & Cape Delle Melle mill be stopped by his Majesty's
Squadron & sent into Port of adjudication.
(Signed) JOHNH~TNTER.

JAMESDUFF
ES
H M Consul Cadiz.

2;

[LC. EPP, Vol. 7,

1803.1

158

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1803 TO 1804

To Captain George Hart,Royal Raw, H.B. M. 8. Monmoufh, from Captain Edward
Preble, U. S. Havy

U. S. FRIGATE
Constitution
Gibraltar Bay 22" Oct: 1805
SIR I am honored with your letter of yesterday in answer to mine
of the 20th. insf.Cap-utton acknowledges having received two men
on board who say they are Englishmen. They were seen on board
the Amphion by an m c e r I sent to that Ship to make some enquiry
respecting them; their names are John Plover, and William Brown,
and both belong to this ship. Plover has alloted half his monthly pay
for 18 Months to come to his family resident in Boston. They are
both Citizens of the United States, and as such I demand them. As
you are the Sen? Officer of H:B:M Ships in this Bay, it is from you
that I hare a right to expect an order for them to be given up to me.
I was not willing to believe that it was the intention of the Officers
of the British Navy, to encourage desertion from our Service, until1
CapQutton avowed to a Lieu+of the Constitution,his determination to
afford his protection to every man who has an opportunity to claim it,
and will say he is an Englishman; and that he had given orders to the
Ofhers of his Boats to that effect. This declaration will undoubtedly
throw into your Ships every man who has conducted improperly on
board ours, and has been treated according to his demerits and that
may find an opportunity to desert, as every such man will say whatever
he finds necessary to screen him from punishment.
This treatment is so very different from anything we hnve heretofore
met with on this or any other Station that I must confess myself a t a
loss to ncct for the sudden and inhospitable change of conduct towards
us. "You say that it is not the intention of your Government to
dist,ress us", and yet the most direct means have been taken by
Captains Gore and Sutton for that purpose. I take the liberty to
inform you that I know of no such person as a British Subject on board
the Constitution. They were all considered Citizens of the United
States, when they en[g]aged with our Service, and I have not encreased
my compliment by impressing Englishmen, or receiving Deserters, of
course I have it not in my power to make the exchange you propose;
although I am ready to receive any Americans who have not voluntarily entered your service, that you are willing to discharge into this,
or any of the United [States] Ships of War.
Captain Gore has asserted, that he is convinced that if Lord Nelson
was here, he would demand every man on board our Ships whom our
deserters say are Englishmen, and ij not given u , would take them by
force. I am confident from the exalted opmion I ave ever entertained
of his Lordship from the character he has established in the world
for magnanirmty and justice that he would not demand them; and
that he will not approve the late conduct towards us.
I enclose you Circular Orders to the Captains of our Navy, which
are still in force. As they have been published in England, I presume
they must be known to most of the Bntish Commanders, who of course
will not attempt to take by force our men unless they have orders from
your Government to commence hostilities against us, which I presume
is not, and I hope never will be the case. I am confident the U:S. as
they now are so they wish to continue a t peace with Great Britain
and that the best possible understanding should exist between the
two Nations.
[LC. EPP, LB,1803.1

2:

159

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

To Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Navy, from Captain George Hart, Royal Havy

Hf MAJ?SHIPMonmouth

new Mole Gibraltar 22 Octobs 1803
Capts Hart presents his respectful Compgnto Commodore Preble &
has ye honor of acknowledging his letter of this days date with y Q
enclosed Copy of his Orders signed B. Stoddart for which he is much
obliged.
Captg Bart is sorry he cannot add any thing to what he did himself
the honor of statjng to Commodore Preble yesterday in Answer to
his of the same date respecting the Seamen he Complains of being
detained by Cap$ Sutton but will as soon as possible acquaint Lord
Eelson (the Commander in Chief) with the circumstances & take his
Lordships Orders respecting them, and in the mean time Communicate
the contents of Commodore Preble's letter to Capbain Sutton.
[LC. EPP,Vol. 7, 1803.1
To Captain Edward Preble, U. 6. Navy, from Captain William Bainbridge, U. S.
Navy

UNITED
STATESFRIGATE
Philadelphia
At Sea o$ Tripoli 22QOctr 1805
SIR It being so very uncertain of Leiut Commands Smith falling
in with the Constitution, makes me brief in this letter to you.
The Frigate PhiEadelphia & Schooner Vixen left malta in the m o m
1119%made the Coast of Tripoli on the 7tQand have remained
of the
on this solitary station without the good fortune of seeing our enemies
except under the refuge of well fortified works. I shall remain off here
if the weather will permit until1 the 20t@of next month: after which
I presume i t would be dangerous Cruizing; in fact I conceive i t so a t
present; but fervent zeal in the cause of m Country and desirous of
giving you satisfaction in my conduct wdinduce me to perservere
to the last.
T o Leiut Command$ Smith I refer for perticulars of our cruize.
[LC. EPP, Vol. 7, 1803.1
To Lieutenant Stephen Decatur, Jr., U.S. Navy, commanding U.S. Brig Argus, from
Captain Edwsrd Preble, U. S. Navy

U . S. S H I P Constitution

Gibrder Bay Odor $2" 1803
SIROn your arrival in this Bay, you will not take on board an additional Stores of any sort, exceptmg such, as are necessary for immediate use, and waite here for my Return, The Enterprize which you are
to take command of sails and is to Return with me, when you will
Exchange with Cap' Hull,
[HS of Pa. Mrs.F. H. GetcheU Col.]
To Secretary of State from Anthony Terry, U. 8. Vice Consul, Cadie, Ppah

SIR.

*

CADIZ
2.34October 1803.

*

*

*

*

*

*

You will have heard of the Sikness that has lately taken place in
Mahga, which is reported to be the Black Vomit, the last accounts

160

NAT7AL OPERATIONS FROM 1803 TO 1804

mentions that i t wasmending as the number of Dead disminished daily;
but thanks to the Almighty it has not spread out of Malaga, and in this
part of the Country we enjoy the most perfect health, which you will
please make publick that our trade may not suffer by ungrounded
reports.
In absence of Mr J. Yznardy
ANTHONYTERRYVice Consul.
Governmt Notes . . 39+ a 40%.
[SDA. CL,Cadiz, Vol. 1, 1793-1805.1
To John Gavino, U. S. Consul, Gibraltar, from Captain Edward Preble, U. 6. Navy

U S: FRIGATE
Constitution
Gibrdtar Bay Oct 2Pd 1803
DEARSIR YOUmay venture to reserve all the Beef &- Pork on hand
for t,his Ship. All the other prorisions after the Nautilus is supplied,
I wish you to send to Syracuse or Malta, as may be most convenient
in consequence of the late inhospitable conduct of some of the British
Ca tains towards us here. I have determined on Syracuse for a genera? rendezvous L deposit of Stores; but as they can easily be transported from Malta, you can ship them to that place if opportunity
does not offer to the other before I return.
[LC. EPP, LB, 1803.1
Extract from log book of U. 8. Frigate Comtitution, Captain Edward Preble, U. 8.
Navy, commanding, Saturday, 22 October 1803

we continue at anchor in gibraltar Bay/ the S p i n and Enterprise in
Company/ Within this Seven or Eieht days, several Seaman have
deserted from our Squadron/ and joind the English/ there is a fellow by
the name of Bartel a Midshipmen on board the Constitution/ who has
been detected in the most rascally correspondence with the English/
the Monmouth 64 Captain Sutton/ who is the Commnnding officer at
this port has two men belonging to the Constitutiono/Commodore
Preble demanded them/ Captain Suttons Refuses to give them up/
his plea is he has legal power for Retaining them as they are English
Subjects/
[NA. ND original.]
To Secretary of the Xary, from Captain Edward Preble, U. 6. Navy

URITEDSTATES
FRIGATE
Constitution
Cadiz Bay dSrd October 1803
SIR, The New York & John Adams sailed from Gibraltar Bay with
a strong East Wind the lgth Ins; for the United States. By those
ships I wrote you very fully relative to the settlement of our affairs
with the Emperor of Morocco; and the disposition of the Squadron
under my command. since which nothing material has taken place
excepting the loss of 8 of our men by desertion a t Gibraltar. Their
having received 4 Months advance leaves them as yet in debt to the
Ship; and every one who receives punishment for crimes, deserts if
opportunit offers. This they would not dare to do if not encouraged
by the dec aration of some commanders of the British Men of War on
the Gibraltar Station particularly Captain Sutton of the Amphion &
Captain Gore of the Medusa frigates; that they would protect every

i"

WARS U71TH BARBARY POWERS

161

man who would claim their protection if he would say he was an Englishman. This of course every deserter will do to screen himself from
punishment.
I enclose you the correspondence between Captain Hart of the
Monmouth of 64 Guns and myself on the subject of the Men detained.
This conduct of the British in affording protection to our Deserters
will a t once ruin the discipline of our Ships if we frequent their Ports,
as every man we punish will desert if in his power, and at Malta the
Ships lay so near the shore that it will be impossible to prevent i t
which has determined me to make Syracuse the deposit of all our
provisions & Stores and the general rendezvous of the Squadron. It
IS an excellent harbour, safe and easy of access: To be sure it does not
offer the Public amusements & rare curiosities of many other ports;
but I trust we will find amusement enough in the necessrtry duties of
our Ships.
The wind still strong from the Eastward has prevented the Sven
from SaiIing with the convoy for Leghorn & Naples; and has prevented
the arrival of the Argw, and return of the Nautilw from Mogadore.
A change of wind to the Westward w
ill I trust make everything right.
In consequence of the Yellow Fever a t Malaga all communication
is cut off between Gibraltar and the Spanish Territories near it. This
prevents us from watering a t Algeciras, or the watering place without
the Rocks; and the scarcity at Gibraltar, and number of British to
be supplied, rendering i t impossible for us to water there, induced
me to come to Cadiz with the Constitution & Enterprize; to fill up
our water, and to procure a Stream Cable in lieu of the one we lost
in Tanger Bay; & a Bower Cable in lieu of an old one which we have
twice parted and has occasioned the irrecoverable loss of one Anchor
which I shall also have to replace here. Both the Cables & Anchor
can be procured on better terms here than any place in this quarter;
and as the wind is still from the Eastward, we are not losing time
I had one more object in view, in coming here, which was to shew
ourselves in Tanger Bay, and to give Mr Simpson a call on our return,
to let the Moors know that we have not forgot them Everything
however a p ears to be quiet in that Quarter and I am still of opinion
that we sha have peace with Tripoli in the Spring or ensuin Summer
I wrote you that I should leave the Argus on the Gibraltar tation to
watch the motions of Morocco until1 the Spring, I have made choice
of this Vessel more particularly on acct of the judgment prudence
a n d firmness of her Commander Lieu: Commandant Hull on whose
discretion I rely with confidence. All the Provisions that the
have on board, and all on hand at Gibraltar, will be expende by the
first of April next. If a supply does not arrive from the United States
by that time, it will distress me very much; as it will retard my
operations against Tripoli, by obliging me to seek the provisions a t
the season most proper to rtct with effect on the Tripoline Coast.
If our Provisions could be sent out in a good sailing Ship of about
Four hundred Tons, armed with Guns & Men sufficient to protect
her, and directed to proceed immediately to Syracuse, it would in
my opinion reach us with more certainty in less time and at Iess
expence to the Government than if shipped to Gibraltar; and reshiped
from thence; and if I could be allowed to detain such vessel as a Store
& Hospital Ship, i t would be preferable to landing our provisions or
men, as the men will often desert, when they recover, and no ship in

E

Yadmn

162

NAVAL OPERA4TIONSFROM 1805 TO 1804

Port to receive them; and the Casks and Provisions are liable to
injury by being too often transported
I forgot to inform you in my former communications that Six of
the Philadelphia's men deserted from the Prize Ship, while in Gibraltar Bay; none of which have been recovered. I shall sail from
this as soon as my Cables are made, and my stock of water compleated,
which I expect will be in three or four days, and shall remain in
Gibraltar not more than 24 hours just to take Col: Lear and family
on Board, and sail immediately for Algiers, and from thence off
Tripoli M y Ship's Company are healthy. I wrote you in a former
letter, that I had sent some Invalids belonging to this Ship, and some
belon-oing to the Philadelphia home in the New York and John Adams;
that I had dismissed the Acting Boatswain and Gunner as unfit for
their Stations and that the Gunner of the John Adams & Boatswain
of the h'ew 170rk, had taken their places in this Ship They are both
good Officers. I was also supplied with 10 Men and a Boy from those
Ships but the Deserters and Invalids sent home still leave me short
of the number I brought out which was far short of my complement
I am now 40 Able & 9 Ordinary Seamen short of the complement
allowed; which makes it necessary to call all hands so often in stormy
weather and we have had no other since we came on the Station that
duty has been very hard and fatigueing. I shall be able to procure
a few men here as several have applied already to enter.
Oct. 30. We were obliged to perform quarantine 3 days after
our arrival which with the tardiness of the Spaniards in making our
cables has detained me longer than I calculated on. They make their
rigging in the open field; of course in rainy weather they cannot work.
And as i t has rained every day since our arrival, we shall be here two
or three days longer.
I have not yet heard of the arrival in these Seas of the Argus. -hope
no accident has happened to her. I shall enclose you from Gibraltar
a copy of the orders I give Lt Hull for his governrnent on this Station
when she arrives, and also a copy of the official declaration of the
Blockade of Tripoli, in consequence of the European War.
All kind of Canvas is very high Russia-Duck 28 to 30 Dollars
pr Bolt. It is probable some of the Squadron mny want some within
12 Months Will i t not be well to send some of different numbers
out by the first Store Ship?
Our Trade to the Mediterranean is valuable and encreasing.
While it has protection i t will continue to encrcnse, if not destroyed
by French prohibitions and English Blockades. The French prohibit
English Manufactures, and the English have Blockaded the Ports,
Toulon, Genoa, and Spezzia. and the coast between Leghorn and
Cape Delle Melle; and I think i t probable they will extend i t to other
Ports.
I shall write you again by a Vessel that is to Sail in a few days
from Gibraltar.
[LC. EPP, LB, 1803.1
Extract from log book of U. 6. Frigate Gmlilution, Captain Edward Preble, U. 8.
Navy, commanding, Sunday, 23 October 1803

We continue a t anchor in Gibraltar Bay/ the Syren and Enterprise
in company the ships Company Employq as necessary/ at 5 in the

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

163

afternoon we wieghq and stood out the Bay we made the Enterprises
Signal to follow/ we had fresh breezes from the E a s t d l we continued
steering out the Bay till we pass$ Cabretta point we than gradually
bore up and Enterd the Straits/ the Evening was clear and we could
see the land on both side/ by j4 past 9 in the Evening we was up
with Cape Spartel/ we than hauld to the North+ in order to proceed
to Cadiz/ by 10 P M. it blew strong close Reef* the Topsail/ by 11
the wind had Encreased to a gale, down Top gallt yards and Reefa
the foresail/ a t 5 past 11 spoke with the Enterprise a t little after
this wore and came to the wind on the Larboard Tacks to the SE/
parted company with the Enterprise
[NA. N D original.]
Extract from log book of U. S. Frigate Consfifufion, Captain Edward Preble, U. S.
Navy, commanding, Monday, 24 October 1803

Standing off and on Cadiz/ light House waiting for a pilot we wore
and Tackq as necessary as to keep clear of the land/ at 2 P M. a pilot
came along side in a sail Boat/ the laws of the Quarentine will not
allow the pilot to come on Board the Constitution we Took the pilot
Boat in Tow/ the pilot stayd in the Boat and gave the Necessary
orders and direction for working in to Cadiz/ * * * at % past
9 P M. we came to with the Best Bower1 nearly abreast of the senter
of the T o m /
[NA. ND original.]
Extract from journal of Midshipman F. Cornelius deKrafft, U. S. Navy, in U. S.
Brig Siren of 18 guns, Lieutenant Charles Stewart, U. S. Navy, commanding,
Monday and Tuesday, 24 and 25 October 1803

Light breezes from the Ed At 1 A M. calm. at 8 condema 12%
1b of bread 3 qts of rum being the bottom of a cask: calm & pleasant.
At 1 P. X.1 brought too on the starboard cable. At 3 weighed the
starbd anchor. ,4t 4 hove short on the larbd cable hoisted in our
boats & made the signal for the convoy to get under way. At 7 hove
up & stood out of the bay, in comp? with 7 sail of American Merchantmen under our convoy bound up the hlediterranian - At 9 light
airs from the VC* - Mr Cathcart came on board, he going in the brig
to Leghorn Midnight light airs & pleasant. At 10 Ah1 the center of
Gibralter bore N.W. Ceuta West - At 34 past 10 made the signal
for the convoy to heave too At 11 made sail & stood to the eastwq
made & took m sail occasionally Meridian pleasant all the Convoy
in sight. [NDA.]
To Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Navy, from James Simpson, U. S. Consul, Tangier,
Morocco

TANGIER25*Q October 1803. DEARSIR On the morning of the 1gt@Ins: the iVew York and John
Adams Frigates with the Meshoudu appeared rtt Anchor in this Bay. The Frigates got their supplies of firewood and stock, and sailed in the
Afternoon with a most favourable Gale. - Commodore Rodgers
delivered up the &leshouda to Arraiz Omar of Tetuan, and she went
round to Larach on the 22@,leaving however that Man here; - he
has been severely bastinsdoed and now lays in the Castle loaded with

164

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1805 TO 1804

Irons. - Alcayde Hashash sent me notice this was done bv the
Emperours order in consequence of Omar having received on board
the Ship Stores and Passengers a t Algiers and Tunis. - I forbear
comments on such conduct, as you are too well acquainted with circumstances not to see it in its true light. On enqulry I find there was but two Algerines among the Passengers on the hfeshouda, and that they are gone to Salle with some
hlerchandize they landed from that Ship. I am told the Salle Ship [Maimonn] was at Lisbon is arrived a t
Larach, but I have not any Letter on the subject. Alcayde Hashash set off for Tetuan at two OClock on Sunday
Morning, i t is generaly believed in consequence of His hfajestys
Orders, and that we shall have but little of his Company here. There has not been any Partridges for sale since you left this, the
Rainy Weather has prevented any being caught, besides these Birds
after tasking the young grass w-ill not eat dry seed so as to feed upon
it I shall now hourly expect the LVautilus,by her you will receive the
Cabbags and Pumpkins you desired - I should have told you that
no supplies of any sort can be sent from hence on trading Vessels for
Ships of f a r At &fogadorethere was not any thing new on the 3Ot?last Month. I beg you will be assured I am with great respect
[LC. EPP, Vo1.7,1803.]

[25 October 18031
Payment for Piloting U. S. Frigate Conslitulion into Cadiz Harbour
[Trnnslationl

No. 2
DON JOAQUIN
FIDALGO,
Knight Pensioner of the Royal and distinguished Spanish Order of C&rlos III, Captain of the Royal
Armada and of this Port, Deputy of the Board of Health.
The pilot, Francisco Cesezo, has piloted the American frigate
Constitution from the sea (into the) Bay.
Please order payment of 64 silver reales for one trip in accordance
with the Royal Orders of 3 January 1755, 9 March 1793, and Article
36 of the Regulations of this Harbor-master's Office.
Office of Harbor-master of the Port of CBdiz, 24 October 1803.
Also 60 copper reales for the boat which came alongside.
s / JOACHIN
FIDALGO
CONSUL
OF THE CNITED
STATES
Paid 25 October 1803
[Maine HS.

NDA photostat.]

To Captain Edward Preble, U. 6. Navy, from Josef Yznardi, U. S. Consul, Cadiz,
Spain

C?ADIZ 2bth October 1805.
SIR- Being Decreed to admit to Pratick the two United State
Vessels under your Command this Evening; Tomorrow morning
between 9. & 10. I will do myself the pleasure calling on board, to
accompany you to the House of his Exc? the Governor; a Ceremony

W A R S WITH BARBARY P O W E R S

165

established by this Governmt for all foreign Chiefs or Officers; when
I shall have the honour of Personally congratulating you, on your
Safe arrival.
JOSEF Y ZNARDY
[LC. EPP, Vo1.7, 1803.1

125 October 18031
To Josef Yznardi, U. S. Consul, Cadiz, from Thomascee Morta, Cadiz, Spain

Not being in my power to Answer the Salute Gun for Gun that the
American Vessels of War the Constitution & Enterprize (wishes to
make) that arrived in this Port on the 23 ins? and haring no Royal
Order communicated me in which they give instructions respecting
the American Republick; I can only answer the Salute with Two Guns
less, in conformity of the general orders that actualy exist - I am to
observe notwithstanding for your government that I have sent u
Copy of your Office to Court this very Post, with the view that they
should determine what his Majesty thinks proper Signed THOMASCEE
MORTA
CADIZ2iStQOctober 1808.
JOSEFYZNARDY
Esq!
[LC. EPP, Vo1.7, 1803.1
To Lieutenant John B. Dent, U. S. Navy, from Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Navy

Constitution 25rh O C T ~1803.
SIR, The Surgeons Mates are esclusively to Occupy the Cockpit,
excepting they chuse to admit one or two of the Masters hlates or,
Midshipmen You will please to attend to this Order and take care that it is
carried into effect
Given on board the Constitution
this 25th Octc 1803 - E. PREBLE
[LC. EPP, Order Book, 1803-1805.1
Extract from log book of U. S. Frigate Constitution, Captain Edward Preble, U. 8.
Navy, commanding, Wednesday, 26 October 1803

K e continue under Quarentine with the Entcrpl-ise in company
Cadiz Bay
* * * a t 11 in the forenoon the health officer came on board
and gave us pratique after being in Quarentin 66 Hewers/ Mr Yzn[a]rdi
the American Consul waited on Commodore Prebble and lieutenant
Hull of the Enterprise waited on Commodore Preble/
[NA. ND original.]
To Secretary of State from Josef Yznardi, U. S. Consul, Cadiz, Spain

CADIZ
2YtQOctober 1803 SIR. Notwithstanding tlmt since my arrival from Madrid, I generally keep a t my Country Seat on account of m bad state of health;
immediately on advice of having arrived to this g a y the United State
Vessels Const[it]utionCommodore Edwg Preble, &. Schooner Enterprize
Cape Isaac Hull; I cam over without loss of time to assist them with

166

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1803 TO 180L

every thing they might be in want of; wbich is Sea Stores & Cables,
and expect to have e v e 7 article in readiness in the course of Eight
or Ten days, when they Intend to go to Sea immediately. Agreable to what I promised you respecting the instructions you
called for, I am only waiting for those I called for, from the agents
under my district, which when received I will with out loss of time
forward you in the most correct manner possible.
As I had the honour to mention to ou, that I had made to this
Court a representation regarding the S ute due to our Flag on arrival
of our State Ships, and as nothing is determin'd on this point; I have
presented to this Governor an Official Letter * * * respecting
the Salute to be made to Commodore Preble, to which he answer'd as
you d l be informed by the annex'd Copy [25 October]; in consequence of which Commodore Preble has determined before he salutes
to wait for the results from Court.
Authentic Letters from Malaga of the 2 2 ins$ mentions that the
Sickness was daily encreasing, and the Yellow Fever had penetrated
thro all Malaga, the number of Dead were as follows. On the
lgth--- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 51 Persons
20 - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - . - - - - -46
D?
21 - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 71
DO The Rich Merchants
chiefly had retired to their Country Houses & shut up their Stores.
The Last Letters from Madrid dated the 21" mentions that this
Country will remain perfect neutral in the actual contest between
France & England; and a sign that it is generally believed, is that
Paper hlonev m-hich last week was loosing from 42. to 44%. are now
down to 34y0.

J

*

*

*

*

*

*

*

ISDA. CL, Cadiz, Vol. 1, 1793-1805.1
Extract from Diary of Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Navy, on board U. S. Frigate
Constitution, Thursday, 27 October 1803

Strong Gales from the Eastward, and clear weather - Went on
shore and rode to Point-all to view the making of our Cables &
Hawsers and to give directions. All the Ship's Crew engaged taking
on board Water, repairing & refitting rigging &. Blocks &c%c"
Our Ship's Company remarkably healthy.
[LC. EPP, Diary, 1803-1804.1

[28 October 18031
To Secretary of State from Eiselen & Borne, Alexander Webster & Co., and Mayer
6 Brantz, Baltimore, Md.

SIR The Owners of the private armed Ship Wawen, commanded
by Lewis Brantz, intending to send that ship on a Voyage into the
Mediterranean, beg the favor of you to request the President of the
united States to grant a Commission to said ship under the act of
congress of 6th February 1802, together with such instructions as the
President will deem proper to enjoin.
The ship is about three hundred and ninety Six Tons burthen,
mounts Ten Carriage Guns and will be manned with twenty four
men. She is owned by the Subscribers Citizens of the united States
residents in this City, Charles Venn to be first and John Deal, Second
Lieutenants.

167

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

As we are not exactly acquainted with the necessary forms in such
cases, we presume you will forward the Commission to the Collector
of the port of Baltimore, where the Ship will take her Clearance about
the 5th November ensuing, with instructions to deliver the same to us
on giving the requisite Securities. Shou'd any further formalities be
necessary we beg you to inform us, in order to avoid any delay in the
Ships departure.
We are respectfully
Sir
Your obedient Servants
EISELEN& HORNE
ALEXANDER
& CO
WEBSTER
MAYER& BRANTZ.
BALTIMORE
28th October 1803.
if you shou'd have occasion to reply to the above, it will be sufficient
to dlrect to either of the Subscribers.
[NDA. Misc. LB, 1802-3-4.1
To Captain Thomas Tingey, Superintendent, Navy Yard, Washington, D. C., from
Secretary of the Navy

NAVYDEP! 29. Octr 1805 Be pleased to procure & Ship with the Gun-Carriages, six Tierces
of Rice. If you should not be able to stow so many awa , procure
only so many as you can stow in the Vessel. Be partic ar in procurmg that of the best kind.
[NDA. Barbary Powers LB, 1803-1808.1

J

To Secretary of the Navy from Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Navy

U S SHIPConstitution
Cadiz Bay October SOt) 1803.
SIR In consequence of an imprudent promise made by Commodore
Morris to the present Crew of the Enterprize, entered at Gibraltar
~
although they
last May, that they should be discharged in s i months
must ship for twelve; much difficulty has arisen, however they have
in consequence of a small adrance to each, [agreed] to remain until1
the expiration of the time they shped for, whch will expire next
April. She will then a t the time when I shall most want her services
be left destitute of st least half and I think probable more than that
proportion of her crew, as many of them will insist on returning home;
and I do not see any probability of procuring men m the Mediterranean
to replace them. I therefore think it is absolutely necessary that 50
Men at least should be sent out for the purpose of compleating her
crew. If an Armed Store Ship should be sent out, those Men would
add much to her security.
[LC. EPP, LB, 1803.1
Extract from Diary of Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Navy, on board U. S. Frigate
Comtitution. Sunday, 30 October 1808

At Anchor in Cadiz Bay - Wind from WNW to ENE - receiving
Water on Board from St Maries by Spanish Boats Six Men on the
Sick List and Seven Convalescent [LC. EPP, Diary, 1803-1804.1
2 1 2 9 6 M L 1 2

168

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1803 TO 1804

To James Simpson, U. 6. Consul, Tangier, Morocco, from Secretary of State

DEPARTMENT
OF STATE,
October 31.' 1803.
SIR. I acknowledge the receipt of your letters from Nv 56 to N9 60,
both inclusive. By this conveyence of the Schooner Cifizen you will
receive the so long expected gun carriages. From the pains which
have been taken in getting them ready, it is hoped that they will
prove an acceptable present to the Emperor, and you will not fail to
make use of the occasion to confirm him m sentiments most conducive
to a continuance of that friendship & peaceable intercourse which has
so long subsisted between us. If a few casks of rice can be procured
in season for this conveyance it is in tended to ship them: they may be
presented to him with the carriages, or if you think proper they ma
be retained for some future occasion which may call for such a smn 1
token of attention.
In expectaticn of soon hearing from Commodore Morris his intentions with respect to the Ship Afeshouda and in hopes that your advice
& representations would induce her redelivery, a definitive order has
not before been given for that purpose: but least any difficulty may
arise on the subject the commanding Officer of our Squadron 1s now
instructed to deliver her up, provided that your opinion of its expediency remains unchanged, and you shall signify it to him accordmgly. In that case you may, if you find it necessary, give immediate
assurances to the Emperor that she shall be returned a t the time and
in the manner you may concert with him & the commander of our
Squadron. In taking this step you will as far as is prudent give it the
appearance of a gratuitous and voluntary surrender of an indisputable
right to our desire of conciliating his esteem & obtaining n reciprocation of good offices. To guard against future claims referring to this
transaction as a precedent, it may also be observed that as it constitutes the first occurrence of the sort, which has happened between
the two Nations, we were unwilling to take advantage of tho culpable
conduct of the Captain of the Meshouda to the injury of the Emperor,
more especially as we were fortunate enough to arrest the mischief
meditated against us before it took effect, and that this act of liberality
is further influenced by the persuation that care will be taken by hls
Officers to provide against a repitition of similar infractions. You did
well to refrain from urging compensation for the freight of the Brig
Mary as suggested by the Supercargo, but you will not omit any
opportunity presenting itself, a t a more favorable season to procure
for the owners all the justice which may be attainable.

r

[NA. SDA. Disp. to Con., Vol. 1, Oct. 1800-Feb. 1817.1

THE CAPTURE OF THE

U. S.

FRIGATE

PHILADELPHIA.

169

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

[1803]
To Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Bavy, from Junior OiBcers on board the U. 8.
Frigate Constitution

Commc EDWARD
PREBLE
SIR Having formed ourselves into two Messes, and purchased our
stores; if agreable to you, we should wish to remain so during the
cruize We are with Respect
Your ObeQtlumb%r"
DAVIDDEACON
HETHECOAT
J. REEDJOHNDAVIS
ALEXANDER
LAWS
FRAKCIG
C. HALL

D A XS~DEXTER
CHA"ORRIS it-rn B C R R O W ~

RAILPHIIZARD
J. M. HASWELL
[LC. EPP, Vol. 8, 1803-1804.1

[31 October 18031
To Officers of U.S. Frigate Philadelphia, from Captain William Bainbridge, U.S. Bavy

GENTLEMENAs I am about informing the Government of our
Country of our late unfortunate event; and the opinion of the Officers
on my conduct in the distressing circumstance, may be desirous to be
known by the President of the United States; you will be phased to
give me your opinions thereon; a certificate from Officers whom I
esteem will in some measure alleviate my feelings which are beyond
description
Your unfortunate but faithful Commander
W" BAINBRIDGE
To the Officers late of the
United States Frigate Philadelphia
[HS. of Pa. Gratz Col. NDA photostat.]

I31 October 18031
To Captain Willism Bainbridge, U. 8. Navy

SIR:We, late officers of the United States frigate Philadelphia,
under your command, wishing to express our full approbation of your
conduct concerning the unfortunate event of yesterday, do conceive
that the charts and soundings justified as near an approach to the
shore as we made; and that, after the ship struck, every exertion was
made, and every expedient tried, to get her off, and to defend her,
which either courage or abilities could have dictated. We wish to add,
that, in this instance, as well as every other since we have had the honor
of being under our command, the officer and seaman have diselieve us, sir, that our misfortunes and sorrows are
tinguished you.
entirely absorbed in our sympathy for you.

%

170

NAVAL OPERATIOATS FROM 1805 TO 180L

-

We are, sir, with sentiments of the highest and most sincere respect,
your friends and fellow sufferers,
DAVID
PORTER,
Lieutenant,
J. JONES,Lieutenant,
THEODORE
HUNT,Lieutenant,
BEN.SMITH,Lieutenant,
WM.S. OSBORN,
Lieutenant Marines.
JOHN
RIDGELY,
Surgeon.
KEITHSPENCE,
Purser.
WM.KNIGHT,Sailing Master.
Surgeon's Mate.
JONA.COWDERY,
NICH.HARWOOD. do.
BERNARD
HENRY,
2lIidshipman.
JAMES
GIBBON,
do.
BENJAMIN
F. REED,
do.
WALLACE
WORMLEY, do.
ROBERT
GAMBLE,
do.
JAMES
BIDDLE,
do.
do.
RD. B. JONES,
D. T. PATTERBOP;, do.
do.
WM.CUTBUSH,
do.
SIMONSMITH,
JOSEPH
DOUGLASS,
Sailmaker,
GEORGE
HODGE,
Boatswain,
RD. STEPHENSON,
Gunner.
JAMES
RENSHATV,
Adidshipman.
R-M. GODBY,
Carpenfer.
[l November 18031
[Am. State Papers. Nav. Aff. Vol. 1.1

[31 October 18031
To Lieutenant John Smith, U. S. Navy, commanding U. S. Schooner Vixen, from
Captain William Bainbridge, U. S. Navy

TRIPOLY
1!t hT0vember 1803
SIR The enclosed letter to Commodore Preble which I leave open
for your perusal will inform you of the unfortunate event of the loss
You
of the United States Frigate Philadelphin under my commandwill please to take the Dispatches which I send to the care of Consul
Pulis, and carry them to the Commodore a t Gibraltar, or wherever he
may be On your arrival a t Gibraltar should the Commodore not be
there, you will deliver those letters for America in charge of John
Gavino Esqr our Consul, to forward them in the most direct manner
to the United States I t is unnecessary for me to urge dispatch, You
can readily conceive the importance of giving Congress the earliest
information.
Glory and happiness attend you! and may you never experience
what I have, since parting, is my present wish.
[LC. EPP, LB, May-Dec. 1803.1

-

-

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

171

[31 October 18031
To Captain Edward Preble, U. 8. Navy, from Captain William Bainbridge, U. 8.
Novg

TRIPOLI14* Nocember 1805
SIR This letter conveys to you, the distressing information of the
loss of the United States Frigate Philadelphia under my command, by
being wrecked on rocks about four and a half Miles from the town of
Tripoli For particulars of this unfortunate event I refer you to the
enclosed copy of my Lettar to the Secretary of the Navy, which you
will be pleased to accept as full information to owself - the distressed
state of mind must plead an excuse for the re erence. Had I not sent
the Schooner from us, the Accident might have been prevented: If
not we should have been able to have extricated ourselves from Barbary Prison, but my Motives of ordering her off Ca e Bon, was to
grant more efficient protection to our Commerce, t an I could by
keeping her with me.
I hope that you will consider the Arrangement as judicious, and
done with the best of intentions; although it has proved unfortunate.
It is with sincere pain, I reflect on my Services under your Command,
in which I had promised myself much pleasure, has been so short and
cruelly terminated.
We are left entirelv without the least change of cloathing: Negotiating Bills here for k.loney will be attended with difficulty and loss:
We shall rely on your aiding and assisting us, as much as lays within
your power
May Success attend the Squadron under your Command is the
wish of
Sir
Your Most Obedl Semi
WmBAINBRIDGE
PREBLE
Commodore EDWARD
Commanding the United States Squadron
i n the Mediterranean
Mr Nisson the Danish Consul who has rendered us every assistance
in his power and is very instrumental in alleviating our distresseshe thinks a Credit on Tunis would be the most proper place to meet
our wants TI- I3

9

R

[LC. RPP, Vol. 7, 1803.1

[31 October 18031
To Secretary of the Navy from Captain William Bainbridge, U. S. Navy

(COPY.)
TRIPOLI1st h7ovemr 1803
SIR, Misfortune necessitntes me to millie a communication, the
most distressing of my life, & it is with the deepest regret that I inform you of the loss of the United States Frigate Philadelphia under
my command by being wrecked on Rocks between 4 & 5 Miles to the
Eastward of the Town of Tripoli; The circumstances relating to this
unfortunate event are: At 9 A M about 5 Leagues to the Eastward
of Tripoli, saw a Ship in shore of us, standing before the Wind to the
Westward, we immediately gave chase, she hoisted Tripolitan Coulors
& continued her course verry near the shore; about 11 Oclock had
approached the shore to 7 fathoms Water, commenced firing a t her,
which we continued by running before the Wind untilill half past

172

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROAI 1803 TO 1804

Eleven, being t-hen in 7 fathoms water and finding our fire ineffectual
to prevent her getting into Tripoli gave up the pursuit & was beating,
off the land when we ran on the Rocks in 12 feet water forward &
17 feet aft. Immediately lowered down a Boat from the Stern,
sounded & found the greatest depth of water a stern, laid all sails
aback, loosed top Gall! Sails and set a heavy press of Canvass on the
Ship, blowing fresh to get her off, cast Three Anchors away from the
Bows, started the Water in the hold, hove overboard the Guns except
some abaft, to defend the ship against the Gun Boats, which were
then firing on us, found d l this ineffectual, then made the last resort
of lightning her forward by Cutting away the Fore Mast. which carried
the Main Top Gall! mast with it, but labour & entcrprize was in
Vain; for our fate mas direfully fixed. I am fully sensible of the loss
that has occurrd to our Country & the difficulty which it may further
involve her in with this regency, and feel beyond description for the
Brave unfortunate Officers & h e n under my command, who done
every thing in their power worthy of the character & stations they
filled, & I trust on investigation of my own conduct that I will appear
to my Government and my Country, consistant to the station in which
I had the honour of being placed.
Striking on the Rocks was an accident not possible for me to guard
against, by any intimation of Charts, as no such shoals was laid down
in any on Board, and every careful precaution (by three leads kept
heaving) was made use of in approaching the shore, to effect the
capture of a Tripolitan Cruizer, & after the Ship struck the Rocks,
all possible measures were talien to wet her off, and the firmest detere up asfong as a possible hope remained;
mination made not to g i ~ her
although annoyed by the Gun Boats, which took their possition in
such a manner as we could not bring our Guns to bear on them not
after cutting away part of the Stern to effect it, when my Officers
& self had not a hope left, of its being possible to get her off the
Rocks; & having withstood the fire of the Gun Boats for four hours
& a reinforcement coming out from Tripoli, without the least chance
of injureing them in resistance, to save the lives of Brave men, left
no alternative but the distressing one of hauling our coulors down &
submitting to the enemy whom chance had befriended - In such
a Dilemma the Flag of the United States was struck however painful1
i t will be to our fellow Citizens to hear the news, they ma be assured
that we feel in a National loss equally with them, Zeal o serving our
Country in doing our duty, has placed us in that situation, which can
better be conceived than described & from which we rely on our
Countrys Extricating us. The Gun Boats in attacking fired rincipally a t our Masts, had the directed their shot at the H$ no
doubt but they would have kil ed many.
The Ship was taken possession of a little after sun set & in the
evening myself and all Officers with part of the Crew were brought
on shore carried before the Bashaw who asked several questions from
the Palace the Officers were conducted to the House which Mr Cathcart lived in, where we lodged last night & this day t'he Minister has
arantee to the Bashaw for us Officers and we have given
become
paro e of honour - Enclosed you will receive a list of the Officers
our
and a few of the People to attend on them, who are quartered in the
American Consular House and we are to be provided for by such
ways & means as I can best adopt, which will be on as equinonomical

r

i

?!

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

173

a plan as possible, the remainder of the Crew will be supported by
t h s Regency.
We have all lost every thing but what we had on our Backs &
even part of that was taken off, the loss of the Officers is considerable
as they were well provided for a long station - Mr Nisson the danish
Consul has been extremely attentive, 8: kindly offers every service
of assistance I trust Sir, you will readily conceive the anxiety of mind I must
suffer, after the enclosed Certificate from the Officers on my conduct,
should you be pleased to express the Opinion of Government, you
will much oblidge me
P. S. Notwithstanding our Parole we are not at liberty of leaving
the house, or going on the Top of it, they have prevented our View
of the Sea which they allowed at first. [LC. EPP, Vol. 7, 1803.1

[31 October 18031
To Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Navy, from Captain William Bainbridge, U. S.
Navy

TRIPOLIBARBARIE
6t@Xov. 1805
SIR, I wrote you on the Is! inst. informing of the distressing event
in the loss of the United States Frigate Philadelphia on the Rocks
off Tripoli; since then, owing to the assistance of their Gun boats,
and a strong Resterly wind that came on about 40 hours after we
struck, which raised the Sen, so as to enable them to get her off; this
still adds to our calamity, but feel conscious that it was morally
impossible, situation as we were, to effect it: however distressing it
is to us, we feel some consolation in knowing that it is not the first
instance where ships have been from necessity (of running aground)
oblidged to surrender, and afterwards got off by the enemy, which
could not have been effected by the ships company; - witness the
Ilanibal at Algesiras, the Jason off St Maloes, and several others.
We are confined to the American Consular House, notwithstanding
our having given our parole of honor.
When a vessel of the United States appears off here, if she hoists
a white Flag at the Fore & fires a Gun, and should the Bashaw hoist
a white Flag 8: fire a Gun in answer, I presume a Boat with an Officer
would be safe to come on Shore; - this I am told is their method.
Negotiating Bills here; for money udl be attended with a great loss
Present my best respects t,o Col? Lear, who must excuse my not
writing him at present.
Every wish attend you for glory & success, but I am doubtful of
the Field
PTm BAINBRIDGE
[LC. EPP, Vol. 7, 1803.1

[ 3 1 October 1803]
To Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Navy, from Captain William Bainbridge, U. S.
Navy

TRIPOLIBARBARY
1Ph NOD'1805
SIRI had the Honor of writing to you on the In$ & 6t@Ins! from
this place giving an account of the loss off the United States Frigate
Philadelphia late under my command: I now transmit you the

174

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1803 TO 1804

Particulars of that unhappy event; The following bearings were
taken from the Place where the Ship grounded - The Westennost
of the small rocks which form the Harbor W b S 112 S; The Steeple
of a Mosque near the Danish Consuls flag staff S W b W; Fort English
to the East of the Town S W: bearings taken by point of compass When the ship grounded her head was N E - After giving up the
chase in pursuit of the cruizer, striking on the rocks was as unexpected
to me as if it had happened in the middle of the Mediterranean Sea:
Immediately laid all sails aback, ran all the guns aft; Sounded and
found a sufficient depth of water astern, and a small distance from
Each Side: a consultation of the ofFicers was called when it was unanimously agreed to heave the guns overboard and start the water;
this was done as expeditiously as possible and a fire kept up a t the
Gun boats from our stern and Weather Quarter Guns: In firing the
lower stern chasers the stern caught fire which was put out without
much confusion: the gun boats carrying brass 18 and 24 Pounders
were keeping up a fire a t us but directed their shot at our masts.
Finding that the Guns & water did not lighten her sufficient the
Officers were of opinion that the foremast should be cut away which
was done but without the desired effect. A reinforcement of five
more Gun boat coming upon our lee Quarter where it was impossible
for us to fire a gun except down in the water; and the Veather Guns
could not be depp[dessed sufficient to heave within the distance of
the boats; At 4 P. M. every hope was fled of our being able to get
her off, and not the GsSt power whatover of injuring our enemies,
and saw no alternative but our eventually becoming prisoners tf
Tripoli; A Council of Officers was called when they were unanimously
of opinion that it was impossible to get her off the rocks; ,4nd that
continuing in our present situation would be only a sacrificing lives
without effecting our enemy or rendering the least service to Our
Country; In such a dilemma too painful to relate, the Flag of the
United States was struck I trust that a want of Courage can never
be imputed where there is no chance of resistance - distressing
indeed to brave minds to be obliged to surrender without having had
an opportunity of defence - Some Fanatics may say that blowing
the ship up would have been the proper result. I thought such conduct would not stand acquitted before God or Man, and I never
presumed to think I had the liberty of putting to death the lives of
306 Souls because they were placed under my command, And those
persons who argue thus to have been in our situation would no doubt
have had very different Ideas. I have zealously served my Country
and strenuously endeavored to guard against accidents, but in spite
of every effort misfortune has attended me through my Naval life. Gaudaloupe and Algiers have witnessed part of them, but Tripoli
strikes the death blow to my future Prospects, M[t]hough I am conscious that my conduct will bear the nicest investigation, but I am
no stranger to the censure of an ungenerous world & the regrets &
mortifications which are incident to a change of public opinion which
does not always follow meritorious exertions And an accident although
occasioned by circumstances which no prudence could foresee or
valor countroul may weigh against years of Arduous Services P e t
I have consolation in believing that my friends are too sincere to lot
adversity of fortune change their opinion
[LC.EPP,Vol. 7, 1803.1

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

175

[31 October 18031
Extract from Diary of Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Navy

THURSDAY,
Nov. 24th. [I8031
At 9 A. M. spoke His B. M. ship Amazon on a cruize the CapQf
which gave me the melancholy and distressing Intelligence of the loss
of the U. S. Ship Philadel hia. He said she ran on shore near Tripoly
in chase of an Algerine sc ooner, that the Officers and Crew were made
prisoners and the ship got off by the Tripolines and Towed into Tripoly.
The loss of that ship and capture of the Crew with all its consequences
are of the most serious and alarming nature to the United States; and
if it should not involve us in a war with Tunis and Al ers in conse1 protract the
quence of the weakness of our squadron, yet still it
war with Tripoly.

f

3

[LC, original.]

[31 October 18031
To Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Navy, from Captain William Bainbridge, U. S.
Navy

TRIPOLIBARBARIE
26 Novem. 1803
SIR,Since the first instant I have-written you seven letters announcing the unfortunate loss of the Umted States Fn ate Philadel* under
my command, on rocks 434 miles distant from t 's place, which are
not laid down in any Chart; presuming that you must get the information before this can a e v e to you, makes me forbear particulars on
the distressin event, havlng already detailed them to you.
I severely eel the loss which my country has Sustained; but feel
conscious that no impropriety in truth can be attatched to me, and
have not a doubt on investigation but it will appear so to my Government. Still I am no stranger to the censures of an ungenerous World;
and the premature opinions, which are too hastily formed on the m s fortunes of the unfortunate: but I trust that an accident occasioned by
circumstances which no prudence could foresee, or valour controd,
will not weigh against years of zealously serving my countqy. Every
imaginable precaution was made use of to avoid the danger, and when
it was encountered, all which Seamanship could possible dictate, was
acted upon to be relieved from it. Courage had no chance of resistance, the ship laying Six feet out of water on rocks, and creening in
such a manner as to make ever Gun useless. I hope Sir, that you will
do me the justice in believing t at I neither wanted firmness or courage
in the distressing situation: I trust no act of my life will eyer justify
such an opinion. The only alternative left of becoming prisoners to
Tripoli, was that of blowing the ship up; - some Fanatics may say
that was the proper one to have pursued; had they been placed in our
situation (which never can be concieved but, by those who may sadly
experience it) I doubt not but they would have thought very different.
I never resumed to think that I had the liberty of putting to death
306 Sou s because they were placed under m command.
The Gale of Wind which came on about orty hours after we surrendered to the rocks raised the waters on this Coast so as to get the
ship off much damaged, her keel &C, broke; this added to our distress;
but feel conscious that it was morally impossible for us to have effected
~ tWe
; were not Gods to foresee the Wind, and to know that the Sea

L

f

E

f

9

176

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1803 TO 1804

would so rise; and had we bee^ apprised of it all, it could have availed
us nothing; for in far less time than that period, ten Gun boats carrying
18 & 24 pounders, besides several Vessels, which could take their Station on each Quarter; and not a gun of ours could be brought to bear
on them, certainly would have cut us all to pieces. Had we been able
in our situation to have injured our Enemy in the least, never would
I have surrendered while such means was in my power; but alas! fortune deprived me of a chance of convincing my Country the Veneration
I have for their Flag.
I wrote ou on the 15t"forming
that myself and Officers was confined one ay to the loathsome prison of our Crew, without any thing
to eat, on account of letters said to come from the Tripolitan pnsioners
a t Gibralter, mentioning that they were cruelly treated; by the Ministers interference for us to the Bashaw, we were permitted in the
Evening to return to our quarters, where we are still confined. The
crew are employed a t their respective trades; - the Officers have not
yet been made to work, - myself never will; - my life is in their
power, but my Soul is above their command.
The Seamen are much in want of cloathing; what measure am I to
pursue to cloath them. There is some infamous characters among
them who even rob the last Jacket from their ship mates, to sell for
liquor to get drunk on. I believe there never was so depraved a set
of mortals as Sailors are; under discipline they are peaceable & serviceable; - divest them of that, and they constitu[t]e a perfect rable.
A Sweecl who we had on board (cockswain of my Barge) a most infamous character (his conduct I mentioned to you in my last letter)
by his rascality. I think that it is probable he will be permitted to
leave this; if he should and any of our Vessels of War meets him, I
hope they will apprehend him as a deserter, to answer several capital
charges which I shall bring against him.
If Government negotiates a ransom or peace, they would find advantage by having a mediator; F. & E. are the nations most dreaded.
VFhile we have Commerce in this Sea, a Treaty with the Ottoman
Forte will be found useful.
We trust that my Country [will'Tsoon'relieve [us !from !this land of
Bondage, and hope they will reflect that serving our Country, doing
our duty as Officers has placed us here.
WmBAINBRIDGE
P. S. An ordinary Seamen & Boy has turned turks -

B

[LC. EPP, Vol. 8, 1803-1804.1

[31 October 18031
To Tobias Lear, U. 6. Consul General, Algiers, from Captain William Bainbridge,
U, S. Navy

TRIPOLIBARBARY
8tbFebruaq 1804
(red 21 Ap! 1804)
Dr SIR, Your much esteemed favor of the 16th Decem last this
moment came to hand, which gave all of us much leasure and particularly myself as it convinces me that my friends ave not deserted
me in misfortune; the sympathy which you express for our unfortunate situation, and the kind assurances of your service to alleviate
it, claims our warmest acknowledgements.

g

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

177

I presume before this period that my letters to my Friend 0,Brien
must have reached Algiers; in them I have detailed the particulars
of the loss of the United States Frigate Philadel" by which you will
percieve that she struck on rocks (not laid down in any Chart) between
3 & 4 miles from this place, tho' every precaution was used to avoid
the danger of shoals; I had given up the pursuit of a Tripolitan Cruiser,
and was bearing off shore, going between 7 & 8 knots, when very
unexpectedly ran into 12 feet water forward & 17 abaft; this happened
about 12 oClock, when 9 Gun-boats were sent from the Harbour to
attack us. All that seamanship could dictate was acted upon to
relieve us from the rocks, but proved in Vain! The Guns were hove
over-board, except a few to defend us against the Boats, - the anchors
cut from the bows - the water started in the hold - the Foremast
cut away, and the Main Top Gall$ Mast lost; and the ship creen'd
in such a manner as to make the few Guns reserved become entirely
useless: all possible hopes being fled of getting the Frigate off, and
having withstood the fire of the Gun-boats for upwards of four hours
without any power of resistance. In such a situation a Council of
Officers were called, who were unanimous of Opinion that the ship
could not be got off, and to continue in our exposed situation would
only rove a sacrifice of lives without injuring the Enemy or serving
our 8ountry, for our fate must inevitably be to fall in the hands of
the Tripolitans; - In such a dilemma, the most painful of my life,
was the Flag of the United States under my command struck, which
event has left an impression on my feelings that time will not be able
to erase, altho' I feel conscious of the rectitude of my own conduct
and of those I had the honor to command; but the ever distressing
reflection of being obliged to surrender without a chance of resistance
will be a perpetual sting. The report of their having ca.rried us by
boarding is incorrect, would to God the attempt had been made, we
should then have had a chance of convincing our Country that an
opportunity and not courage was wanting, and we should have considered i t glorious to have resisted as long as we could have destroyed
her enemies; but unfortunate for us they gave no such a chance,
and possessed too much prudence to try that mode of conquest, but
by t,aking their stations in their Gun-boats in such situations that
we could not bring a Gun to bear on them, pursued a more effectual
plan, and without any danger whatever to themselves; in fact a just
comparison of our situation, is one man. tied to a stake attacked by
another with arms. - believe me that it cannot be fully concieved
but by those who may sadly experience. We had none slain on board,
owing to their directing their shot altogether a t the masts; had they
pointed a t the Hull the slaughter must have been great, for with their
heavy metal they could chose any distance out of musket reach.
About 40 hours after we struck, a gale from the westward raised
the waters on this coast and made such a sea as floated the ship off;
we were not Gods to forsee the wind and sea, and if we had, our fate
must have been the same, for in far less time she would have been cut
to pieces; and verily believe that nothing less than the assistance of
the Elements could have got her off. Before I surrendered, had the
magazine drowned, and many articles of value destroyed: we were
taken possession of about 6 oClock, and in the course of the night was
brought on shore, robbed of all articles except the cloaths on our backs,
and a part of them were taken - for further particulars I refer you

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1803 TO 1804

178

to my .letter written the l l t h l t P , since which nothing particular has
transpired.
I have not yet received a line from Commodore Preble and am a t a
loss to account for his long silence, particularly as I have wrote him
many letters and pointed out the safe channel of conveyance. I
hope to hear from you by every opportunity - your letters will give
infinite pleasure.
My respective friends a t Algiers in commiserating my misfortune
does justice to that regard which I possess for them, - please to
remember me to them all. The kind prayers of Rlr8 Lear are truly
appreciated by myself and Officers - tender her my best respects &
sincere wishes for her happiness.
Altho' our acquaintance, my dear Col!, has not long commenced,
with i t began friendship I trust of a sincere duration; for your early
attention to our situation as an Officer of the United States I return
you thanks, and as a friend accept of my prayers for your happiness.
A

[Stephen Decatur Col.]

[31 October 18031
To Susan Bainbridge, Perth Amboy, N. J., from Captain William Bainbridge,

U. S. Navy

TRIPOLI,
November Ist, 1805.
MY DEARSUSAN,
With feelings of distress which I cannot describe,
I have to inform you, that I have lost the beautiful frigate which was
placed under my command, by running her a-foul of rocks, a few miles
to the east of this harbour, which are not marked in the charts. After
defending her as long as a ray of hope remained, I was obliged to
surrender, and am now with my officers and crew confined in a prison
in this place. I enclose to you a copy of my official letter to the
secretary of the navy, from which you will learn all the circumstances
in detail, connected with our capture.
My anxiety and affliction does not arise from my confinement and
deprivations in prison - these, indeed, I could bear if ten times more
severe; but is caused by my absence, which may be a protracted one,
from my dearly beloved Susan; and an apprehension which constantly
haunts me, that I may be censured by my countrymen. These
impressions, which are seldom absent from my mind, act as a corroding canker at my heart. So maddened am I sometimes by the
workings of my imagination, that I cannot refrain from exclaiming
that it would have been a merciful dispensation of Providence if my
head had been shot off by the enemy, while our vessel lay rolling on
the rocks.
You now see, my beloved wife, the cause of my distress - my
situation in prison is entirely supportable
I have found here kind
and generous friends, such as I hope the virtuous will meet in all
situations; but if my professional character be blotched - if an
attempt be made to taint my honour - if I am censured, if it does not
kill me, it would a t least deprive me of the power of looking any of my
race in the face, always excepting, however, my young, kind, and
sympathizing wife. If the world desert me, I am sure to find a
welcome in her arms - in her affection, to receive the support and
condolence which none others can give.

-

-

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

179

I cannot tell why I am so oppressed with apprehension - I am sure
I acted accordi to my best judgment - my officers tell me, that my
conduct was fau tless - that no one indeed could have done better,
but this I attribute, (perhaps in my weakness) to a generous wish on

f

their part to sustain me in my affliction.
I hope soon to hear that your health is good, and although grieved
at my misfortune, are yet surrounded by dear and condoling friends,
who will in some measure assuage your affliction. Perhaps, too, you
will be able to tell me, that I have done injustice to my countrymen that so far from censuring, they sympathize, and some even applaud
me. God grant that this may be the case - and why should it not?
The Americans are generous as they are brave. I must stop, my
dear wife, for I see I am disclosing my weakness - these are the mere
reveries which daily pass through my heated brain.
I beg that you will not suppose our imprisonment is attended with
suffering- on the contrary, it is, as I have already assured you, quite
a supportable state.
Your ever faithful and
Affec tionate husband,
WILLIAM
BAINBRIDGE.
Mrs. SUSAN
BATNRRIDGE,
Perth Amboy.
[NR&L. Bn' B 162 H.]

[31 October 18031
To Thomas L. Bristoll, Philadelphia, Pa., from Sailing Master William Knight,
U. 6 . Navy

TRIPOLP
A70v1 I@, 1803
Friend THOMAS,
I fake this oppertunity of informing you concsrning the Malencholy Loss of the Philadelphia on the Rocks off t r i p o l ~
distance from the T o m 3 Miles - on Monday at 6 ,4 31 octr 31Ft
being between 30 R: 40 miles to the Eastd of Tripoly discorer'd a sail
close in with the land - gave chase - a t 10 bro't
within Gun Shot commencd firing she being a small
Kept very close in shore, the wind being from the East
Run the ship within 1 % miles of the shore soundings from
to 10 fathoms firing as we coulci get the Guns to
e
on her - at 12. finding we could not cut her
U
Q
2
the town nor run her on shore - ceas'd firing being
2
fathoms, put the Helm down to stand off - & direct
3
of a reef of Rocks the above distance - 1M miles
E
Nearest shore - all hands starting water 8: heaving
.A
(I)
the Guns - running them aft. cut away 3 anchors
&
Bows & hove every article over that would lighting
at this time 6 Gunboats came off from the Town
firing on the ship keeping directly on our Quarter
made i t impossible for to get more than four Guns
on them & them by cutting away part of the Stern
at 2. Cut away the Fore mast in hopes to make
float - st the same time all hands employ'd heaving every heavy
article overboard (except the Men employ'd a t the Guns) found d l
impossible - a t 3 Capt. Bainbridge cdld all the oEcers aft to consult
what was to be done to which we all answer'd that all was done

-

180

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1805 TO 180.4

nothing remaind to be done but to give the ship up a t % past 3 hauld down the Colours a t which time she had 4 feet water in the
Hold. out of water at least 5 feet forehead, run on the Rocks going 6
knots - a t 9 the same evening the water was up to the Orlop deck I was put in a boat at 6 oclock the same evening with 20 fellow
sufferers & conducted to the Palace or rather Castle as we were going
they began to Rob us of waches cravats money some of their coats the Cap! treated no better than other officers - every article taken
but what t,hey stood in - When in the palace we were arra.ingtd
before Bashaw he gave us some supper & sent all the officers to a
house where our Consul formerly liv'd in being in all 24 officers he
kept in the pallace or prison - [the Bashaw] is a very handsome Man
at present we are [treated] well much better than I expected for but [? knows] how long it will last & he will not tel us [I under-]
stand he Dont talk to people at this time on [this subject] we are all
young and I hope will out live it IWe all] expect to be Redeem'd in the
space of 3 or 4 years [We have a] house to live in plenty to eat at
present will [be given permission] to walk out in a few days explore
[the country] & so forth in fine spirits all hands & [are] well [the
English] consul is keeping the Vessel on account of [word mutilated]
Father &. Mother must excuse me for not [u~iting]two letters, tel
Mother not to grieve s t my [plight I] live in hopes to see her again a great loss [to the] U. S. cant be help'd all is over - [there were on
board] of the Frigate when given up - 311 souls I will thank you to
give this letter to my Mother after Reading it - Give My Compliments to all my Acquaintance tell them of my Captivity
Your humble Servant at
Present - a - Slave to the
Bashaw of Tripoly WILLKNIGHT
THO*L. BRISTOLL
[NDA. A-4.1

[31 October 18031
Concerning the participation of the ketch Mastico (subsequently captured and
renamed Intrepid) in the capture of the Philadelphia
[Translation]

Recieved in this royal Vice Admiralty Court of this most faithful
City of Syracuse on the Second day of February 1804 (Signed) D!
Salvadore Partesano

R MAST?Not?

Testimony recieved and examined in the Royal Vice Admiralty
Court of this most faithful City of Syracuse a t the Petition and
instance of Edward Preble Esqr commanding the Anglo American
Frigate called the Constitution actually anchored in this Port by the
Order and mandate of the respectable doctor of Both Laws Don
Nicholas Thomas Fucile Judge of the said Court in force of his Provision made at the foot of the chapter or Article proved b the said
Commandant Edward Preble Esquire in the said Royal ourt presented, in which it is said - "Let there be presented and be recieved
the Witnesses in Order that they may appear in future" -

6

WARS WITH BARBARY POWEBS

181

(Signed) Fucile Judge of the Vice Admiralty and by me Royal
Master Notary of the said Ro a1 for the Information of any other
Court whatsoever or O%ce or ribunal, or Magistrate and thus word
for word i t follows.
Salvador Catalano of the happy City of Palermo being a t this time
in this most faithful City of Syracuse, existing present and known; of
the age of thirty two years or thereabouts as he the above said and
as from his look it appears, a sworn Witness interrogated and recieved
on the Article probationary of the said Commandant Edward Preble
Esquire in the said Royal Court presented upon the same he said (or
Swore) that he the said Witness being in the latter end of October of
last year one thousand eight hundred and three in the City of Tripoly
on one of those days he not exactly recollecting the particular day,
That an Anglo American Frigate struck on the rocks of Tripoly, after
which he heard her named the Philadelphia: That there was at that
time in the Port of Tripoli among other Vessels the Martegana
[Mastieo]commanded by Mustapha Rais under Ottoman Colors which
were then flying. However as soon as the said Frigate struck or, the
aforesaid rocks, that the said Martigana struck her Ottoman colors
and hoisted the Tripolitan flag. That also many Tripolitans a t the
same time armed with firelocks and Sabres embarked on board the
said Martingana and finally slipped the Cables by which she was
anchored, Made Sail towards the Frigate; but the said Martingana
having arrived near the Rocks of Tripoli, there came to an anchor
where she remained untill the evening of the same day when they then
embarked in the launch of the said Martingana the Same in which
they had embarked from the shore together with biustapha Rais all
armed they went on board the said Anglo American Frigate and made
her a Prisoner and forthwith began to transport the Americans of the
said Frigate on shore to Tripoli as Prisoners and the Said Mustapha
Rais with great eagernees executed this removal of the People and he
himself conducted the ,4mericans prisoners unto the palace of the
Bashaw and this the Deponent knows, declares and deposes to have
actually happened in the exact form and manner in which it is here by
the aforesaid witness declared and for the knowledge of facts and
the confirmation of his Attestation has here undersigned
CATALANO
confirmed as above.
(Signed) SALVADOR
Confronted with the Original which is preserved in the royal vice
Admiralty Court of this most faithful City of Syracuse.
,%-RACUSE Second day of February 1804.
PARTESANO
roy' Mast! Not?
(Sign$) SALVADORE
Here follows a formula in Latin attesting the truth of this and
Signed by the prothonatary of Senate to which also is affixed the Seal
of the Senate of Syracuse.
We the undersigned do hereby certify to all whom this may concern
that the above is a true & faithful translation of the deposit.ion given
by Salvadore Catalano and conformable to the Original copy deposited
in the V. Admiralty Court of this City.
GOULDFRANCIS
LECKIE
Wm DENXSON
SYRACUSE
12'4 Feb? 1804

4

&C.

EPP, Vol. 9, Jan.-Feb. 1804.1

182

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1808 TO 1804
[31 October 18031

To the Danish Consul, Yaraeilles, Prance, from Nicholas C. Pisaen, D m b h Consul,
Tripoli

TRIPOLY
2QN O U1805
~
SIR "I embrace the opportunity of an English Vessel bound to
"Malta to send you this thro Naples, h inform you of the deplorable
"event happend on the 31" October Ult? to the U. S. frigate Philad*
"CapWnimbridge 44 Guns & 307 Men which touchd Ground on the
"Point of Tasoura near this Port at X Past 11 OClock A. P. in chsising
'(a Cruiser; after useless efforts to put her a float again &- having
after
i 4 OClock P. hL the frigate surrenderd "bravely fought till +
"There is no need to mention the advantage this Bashaw will draw"from so rich n Capture and of so many prisoners, amongst whom
"there are more than 23; Officers, the Bashaw sent them in the U. S.
"house on their Parole of honour and their treatment is as soft as
"possible, but the Populace here stripd them of every thing as soon as
"they came on shore, & before they were carried into the Castle, so that
"they have nothing but what they wore on, as the U. S. house is con"tique to the one of De[n]mark I am doing all what I can to render
"their situation supportable - in heast yours (Signed) NISSEN[NA. SD.4. CL, Gibraltar, Vol. 2, 17961804.1

[31 October 18031
Services rendered to the United States by Nicholas C. Nissen, Danish Consul,
Tripoli

Mr. Clark, from the committee to whom was referred a letter from
the Secretary of the E a r y , communicating the nature and extent
of the services rendered to the captive crew of the late frigate
Philadelphia, by his Danish Majestf~ consul at Tripoli, submitted the following report:
That, at the time of the unfortunate loss of the late frigate Philadelphia, off Tripoli, commanded by Captain William Bainbridge,
Nicholas C. Nissen, Esq. was his Danish hlsjesty's consul residing at
that place. As soon as this disastrous event was known to him, he
generously offered his services to obtain the necessary supplies for
Captain Rainbridge, his officers, and crew, which he most faithfully
continued to do for nineteen months and three days, the period of
their captivity. This interposition was not only humane, but greatly
beneficial to the captives, in supplying them with the necessaries and
comforts of life, which, in some instances, were beyond their limited
resources, except through this friendly agency. Consul Nissen took a
prompt and feeling interest in the welfare of the American captives,
and administered to their wants, by sending to them provisions and
bedding from his own house, and ameliorating, as much as possible,
their truly unpleasant situation; and his benevolence never suffered
the least abatement during their continuance at Tripoli.
One trait in the conduct of this worthy gentleman, is too remarksble
to be passed over without notice: His house was much exposed in the
attack Commodore Prehle made on the town of Tripoli; but such was
his zed for the accommodntion of the American prisoners, and his
anxiety to be near them, that he refuesed to seek a place of security,

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

183

although urged so to do ;and by remaining at home, greatly endangered
his life. From the most correct information of Consul Nissen's disinterested conduct, the committee are of opinion that he deserves well
of the American Government, and, therefore, recommend the following
resolution:
Resolved by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United States of
America i n Congress assembled,
That the President of the United States be requested to cause to be made
known to R'icolas C. Nissen, Esq. his Danish Majesty's consul residing at
Tripoli, the high sense entertained by Congress of his disinterested and
benevolent att.entions manifested to Cspt.ain Bainbridge, his officers, and
crew, during the time c ~ their
f
captivity in Tripoli.
[Am. State Papers. Mav. Aff., Vol. I.]

[31 October 18031
A list of OBcers and Men quartered at the American Consular House at Tripoli

Cap! WmBainbridge
David Porter Lieu*
Jacob Jones
Ditto
Theodore Hunt, ditto
Benje Smith
ditto
RTm S. Osborn L*Marines
John Ridgely, Surgeon
Keith Spence Purser
Wm Knight Se Master
Jon Wowdery Surg" Mate
Nicholas Harwood d?
Geo: Hodge Boatswain
Bernard Henry Midshipman
Dan1 T Patterson d?
dQ
James Gibbon
Ben. F. Read
d?
W* Cutbush
dQ
Wallace Wormley d Q
Robert Gambel d'
Richd B. Jones
d?
James Renshaw d ?
James Biddle
d9
Simon Smith
dQ
Jog Duglass Sail Maker
(LC. EPP, VoI. 9, Jan.-Feb. 1804.1

Richd Stephenson, Gunner
W+ Godby Carpenter.
T'ITm Anderson Caps Clk
Minor Fountain Mast? Mate
James C. Morris Ships Stewart
Otis Hunt Sarp! Marines
David Irving D?
Leith, Ships Cook
James Casey Arrnourer
Peter Williams
John Baptist
Lewis Hecksner
Fredk Lewis
Charles Mitchell
Peter Cook
Leonard Foster
'STmJames
W* Gardner
W* Temperfelt
43
264 Men & Boys in the Bashaws

Palace
307 Total of Crew

184

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1803 TO 180.4
[31 October 18031

Extracts from List of part of Crew of U. S. Frigate Philadelphia. Captain William
Bainbridge, U. S. Navy, commanding

Abstract of Balances due to sundry persons, part of the Crew of
the United States late frigate Philadelphia, commanded by William
Bainbridge Esqr. Rank

1

4 -.-..-...
Theodore Hunt
3 4 Lieu$
5- - - - - - - - - Benjamin Smith- - _ _ _ _ . _ _ _ 4. Lieut
___-------6 - - - - - - - - - William Knight
Sailr Mastr
Barnard Henry
Midship~
14
Rich4 B. Jones
15- - - - DQ
18- - - - - - - - Simon Smith
DQ
22 - - - - - - - - William Godby- - - - _ - _ - _ - - - Carpenter
26 - - _ - - - - - James Cassey
Mar a t arms
John Stretch
27
Cooper
2 8 _ _ _ _ _ _ - John
.
Garrabrandt [Died a t Sea 14 June 0. S.
1805.1
29- - - - - - - James Barwell- - - - - _ - _ - - __ _ _ - _- - - _ - -- - - .
3 0 - - - _ - _ - - Jacob C h i s r i o - - - - _ - - - - . _ - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - .
31- - - _ _ _ - - Benjamin Manleaf - - - __ - - -.- _ - _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ .
32 - - - - - _ - - Thomas Conner - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - . - - - .
33- - _ - - _ - - William Crandle . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34 - - - - _ - - - Peter S yres
......................
DQ
35- - - - - - _ - David 6ilsoi: I I .. - _ _ _ - - - - - - - - _ - - - - - _ - - Qr Mar
39..---_--- John J u n o r - - - _ _ - _ _ . _ _ - - - _ - - _ _ - _ _ _ _ - _ - - DQ
40----.._-- John
41 - - - _ - - - - John Wolf - - - _ _ - - - _ - _ - _ _ - - - D.
-----------42 - - _ _ - - - _James Stanford -----..----.
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Bo: Mate
- - _ _ - l _ _

T

0s

Qr Mar
S

s
-

"

0s

49 - - - - - - - - Henry Johnson - - - - - _ _ . _ _ _._Qr. _
___-.--__
Gun?
50 - - - - - _ - - Patrick Turner _ _ - _ - _ _ - _ _ _
0s_ - - - - - - - - - . 51 - - - _ _ _ - -James M~Laughlin
- _ _ _ _ _ _ _ - 0s
---------...-52 - - - - - - - - William Ruddock - - - - - _ - _ _ _
- -- BOY
_---------.
53- - - - _ - - - Robert Bukerton
0s
54 - - _ _ _ _ - Alexander
0s _ _ _ _ _ - - - Tyms - _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _
55- - - - - _ - .. John M~Donald1st [Died a t Tripoli, 7 Sep- S
tember 1804.1
57----..--..
John B a x t e r - - - _ - - - _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ - _ - - _ -0s
___-_
58- - - - - - - - Benjamin McElwain _ _ - - _ _ _ _
- - -_
-_
_- _
_ Sh.
__
.
Cons!
59- - - - - - - - George Carson - - _ _ - _ _ . - _ _ _
S _----------60-------- Hugh A n d e r s o n - - - - - - - - - - _ - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 0s
61- - - - - - - - William M~Laughlin-__.
_ _ _ - - - - - -- - - - - - - - 0s
62 - - - - - - - - James Holms - - - - - _ -. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
S
63- - - - - - - - George Percival- - _ - - - _ _ - _ _ _ _ _ _ _ - - _ - 0s
_--__
64---..__-- John W r i g h t - - _ . _ _ _ . _ _ _ _ . - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - Bo: Mate
65-------- Samuel C a l m - - - _ _ - _ - _ _ _ _ _ . _ - - - - - - - - - . - -S
66--..----- John B r i a r d - - - - - - _ _ _ _ _ _ - - _ _ - _ _ _ _ - - -3_ _ - _
67--_-_--.. John G o l d s m i t h - - - - _ _ _ - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - Q r Gunr
69 - - - . - -Adam
- - Kayer [or Kaiser]- - - _ _ _ - - - - _ - - - - - - Carp* Mate
TO-------.. David D u n b ~ r _ - _ _ _ - - - - - - - _ - - - - - - - - - - - -371-------- John K y s l e y - - - - - - - - - _ - - - - - - _ - - _ - - - _ - _ - - DS
72-------- Sam1 Woodruff-.-----------------------Q r Gunr
73- - - - - - - - William MFKee . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
DS
74 -------- William Murrain . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3s
76- - - - - - - - Sam1 Johnson-- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - BOY

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

185

1803.1

John Morrison [Died at Tripoli, 24 April
1804.1

S

Henry MClaskey ----OS
John Thompson - - - - _ - _ _ _ - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 1 Qr Gur
Samuel Hale- - - - - - _ - - _ - - - - _ - - - - - - - - - - - - - S
James M~Donaldl * t - - - - - _ - - -- - _ - - - - - - - Carp~Gunner & OS
Caieb Manfield - - - - - _ - . - - - - - - - -OS
---------John G. Jones _ - _
..
.-.
.------ -- - -Qr
-Gu n-~
John Spyres - - - - - - - - . . - . - - - - OS
-----------Jacob Immell--------_ _ -_ _ - - - - - - - - - - - - - - OS
Thomas Clighorn - - _ - - _ _ - - _ - - - - - - - -S
John MpDonald 24 -------- _ - _ _ - - -.- - - - - SJohn Johnson----..---------------------S
Thomas Smith 14t [Turned Turk, 15 Janu- S
ary 1804 .]
John Taylor . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
S
Elisha Wharton . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
OS
John Smith 1.i . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Bo:Mate
David Lockwood . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
S
John Clark- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - Boy
Arnoldus VanRissen- - - - - - _.
- - - - - ..----- - - BOY
John A plidon
0s
David Eavis_-1:1::::~::::1~~11~1~~~~~~~ S
Edward Gooman [Died a t Tripoli, 15 Octo- OS
ber 1804.)
John Mellin - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - OS
Nich* MqLaughlin-. - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - OS
John Francis---------------------------S
Jacob Dowerdisher- - - - - - - - - - ..- - - - ....- - - - S
- L

186

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1803 TO 1804
Rank

137------- John S i l b y - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - s
S
138- - - - - - - John Thays . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
139- - - - - - _ William Roth . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
140- - - - - - - David C r o l l _ . - _ - - _ - - - _ - - _ - - - - - _ - - - - - - - - 141------- Timothy F i l b y - - - - - - - - - - - _ - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 0s
142- - - - - - _ John Cherry [Sent home as an invalid.] - - _ - - Carp:Mate
1 4 3 _ - - _ _ - _John Smith 2 @ - - - - - - - _ _ - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - . 0s
M u n r o - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 0s
1 4 4 _ _ _ _ _ _Henry
_
147-_----- James H o g g - - - _ - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - Qr Mar
......................
148- - - - - - - James F r ar
Bo:Peom~
149- - - - - - - John F. f?hr$d&-~ - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - s
150- - - - - - - James Dougherty . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
0s
151------_ John Hilliard [Died a t Tripoli, 4 June 0s
1804.1
152- - --- - - Thomas Smith 24 -------- - -- - - - - -- - - - - - - 153- --- - - - John MqMullin ------ - - - - - _- - - - - - - - - - - - -.
154------- John Flint--------------------------_--155- - - - - - - Lewis Garlinger . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
156-----..- David J o n e s - - _ _ - _ - - - _ _ - - _ - - - - - - - - - - - - - 157------.. John M i t c h e l l - - - - _ - - _ _ _ _ - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - s & Qr Mar
158- - _ - - _ _James Francis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
0s
160- - - - - - - Mich! Walsh - - - - - - - - - _ - - - _ - - - - - - - - - - - - - - s
161- - - - - - - C o n ~Colthoon
Carp:Mate
162..------ Joseph Nicholas------------------------s
163- - - - - - - John Hassin [Sent home as an invalid.] ----.0s
164- - - - - - - Thomas Oddy --_--- - - -.- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - S
165- - - - - - - Thomas Davis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
S
166- - - - - - - Dan! Pattengale . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
S
---------.
167- - _ - - - _ William Ciemens - - - - - - - - - - - - - -0s
.
168-- - _ - - - Charles Sille - -- - _ - - - - - - - - - _ - _ - - - --- - - -0s
169- - - _ - - - John W mer
- - - - - - - - _ - - - 0s
-.-------170.. - - - - - - George f e w i ~ l I: I - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - Boy
171------_ John H e n d r i c k s o n - _ - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 0s
172---..-..- Jacob F a r m a n - - - - _ _ _ - - _ - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - s
173- - - - - - - Peter Connolly--- _ -- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - S
- - - - - - - - - - - 0s
174- - - - - - - James Grimes--- - - - - - _
176- - - - - - - Thomas Farr- - - - - _ - _ _ - _ - - _ - - - - - - - - - _ - - - S
177------- Jar Ware . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Sail-makers mate
178------- John Grimes----_----------------------S
179- - - - - - - George Griffith ----- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - Gunmate
180- - - - - .- Rudo$hphStun~-~gh- - -- .....- - .....- ... 0s
.......................
S
181-----_- John mlth 3 l
182- - - - - - _ Daniel Davis - - - - - - - _ - - - . . - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 1 8 3 _ _ - - - - - John B u r t o n - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 185- - - _ _ _ _Thomas Higgins - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - . _ - - 186- - - - _ - - John Mills . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1 8 7 - - - - _ _ - John Nihell----------_-----------------S
188- - - - - - - Peter Lee . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
190------- John D o m y n - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - Loblolly boy
S
191- - - - - - - William Carsan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
0s
192- - - - - - - Sylvester Parker-- . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
193- - - _ - - - Robert Bowen [or Bower] - _ - - - - - - - _ - - - - - - 0s
1%- - - - - _ - Christopher Simmons . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
SP
S
195- - - - - - - U'illiam Jones . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
196------- John H e m m e n - - - - - - - - _ _ - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - Gr mate
197----..-- John F r y e r - - - - . _ - - - - _ - _ _ - - - - - - _ _ s.
198 - - - _ - - - William McGowan _ - - - - _ _ _ _ _ _ _ - ------ -- - - L
200 - - - - - - - Hugh MCartney . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
204------- Rich4 Thompson-----------------------205 - - - - - - - Calvin Weatherby . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
206- - - - - - - John Green [Claimed aa a French Citizen at
Tripoli.]

8'

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS
Names

1

James Anderson 24- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -- - - - - OS
John R a r v m e n - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - S
Thomas Lidley------------- ---- ---- - - - - OS
James White---------------------------- 0s

Rank

188

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1803 TO 18OL

I

Names

I

Rank

Serg*

Corpl
Fifer
Drumr
Private

DQ
Dv
D
Q

D9
dQ
dP

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

189

[31 October 18031
Court Enquiring into the Loss of U. S. Frigate Philadelphia

Proceedings of a court of inquiry on the conduct of Captain William
Bainbridge in the loss of the late U States frigate Phi8adelphiaU STATESSHIPConstitution
Syracuse dgtQJune 1806.
SIR, I am authorized by the Honorable the Secretary of the Navy
to direct that on board the U States frigate President, under your
command, ou commence a court of enquiry on Captain FFilliam
Bainbridge ate commander of the U. States frigate Philadelphia for
the loss of said frigate, and that you report to me in proper form the
whole extent of the enquiry of said court, with its decided opinion
thereon, in order that I may transmit the same to the Navy Department of the U. States.
The court of enquiry will consist of three members, yourself, &
Captains Hugh G Campbell & Stephen Decatur jr
I have the honor to be
Sir,
Your Obed t hum: serv:
JNQ
RODGERS
BARRON
Captain JAMES
Commanding the U S. frigate President.

T

In conformity to the foregoing order the court convened on board
the U States frigate President, at anchor in the harbor of Syracuse, at
ten oclock a. m. June 2gth 1805. present the President and members of
the Court and William Eaton Esq. acting Judge Advocate, and being
opened according to law Captain Bainbridge was notified that they
were ready to proceed to business; he attended and the Court entered
upon the enquiry by examination of witnesses
Lieut. David Porter, of the late frigate Philad"
Lieu! Jacob Jones,
Lieut. Theohre Hunt, Lieu+Benjamin Smith - Mr William Enight,
sailing master, Lieu! William Osborn of the marine corps, M' Keith
Spence, pmser - Daniel T. Patterson Benjamin IF. Read and James
Gibbons masters mates - Midshipmen James Biddle James Renshaw
& [space] Anderson - Richard Stephenson, gunner - George Hodge,
boatswain & William Godby, carpenter, all of the said frigate were
sworn and improved as witnesses LIEU! DAVIDPORTER
testified, that on the 31t of October 1803
about eight o'clock in the morning, the ship Philadelphia, then under
the command Captain William Bainbridge and cruising off the port
of Tripoli, the wind from the eastward, and the frigate standing in
and along shore, discovered a sail on her weather bow, running to the
westward, to which she gave chase. The sail was soon distinguished
to be an enemy corsaire standing into the port of Tripoli. The
Philadelphia continued the chase until she came into about eight
fathom water keeping up a constant fire on the enemy with her bow
guns, until it was found impossible to come up with her without
danger of approaching too near the shore; consequently she hawled
out to gain an offing - She had constantly three leads going, one
dipsey and two hand leads; a lieutenant tending the dipse and a
mldshipmm or master's mate a t each of the hand leads. 8he ship

190

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1803 TO 180.4

had about eight nots way upon her. This witness was ordered into
the mizen top to look into the harbour of Tripoli and observe if any
cruisers were in port. At this instant the water shoaled and the healm
was put dowc. He had gotten about half way up the mizen rigging
when he felt the ship strike He immediately returned on deck - All
sails were instantly set to endeavour to force her over the bank. Finding this did not succeed, Captain Bainbridge asked the witnesse's opinion what could best be done? Who requested him to consult his
officers generally - The lead had been hove under her bows in about
twelve feet water. The ship lifted a t times abaft and the healm was
then clear. The enemy's gun boats were already seen coming out of
port, nine in number, as nearly as the witness recollects - A boat
was sent out to sound around the ship and deep water was found a
stern. The officers, being consulted, were of opinion that endeavors
should be used to back the ship off by a press of sail; and, if that should
not succede, to run the guns abaft: both were done, and at the same
time the anchors cut from the bows: but to no effect. I t was then the
opinion that the guns should be hove overboard, reserving only
enough to resist the gun boats: this was done. In the meantime the
enemy passed under the fire of the frigates stern guns and took a
osition on the starboard and weather quarter where no guns could be
%rought to bear on them by reason of their advantageous position
and the deep heel to port and fixed posture of the ship - Captain
Bainbridge now called another counsel of the officers, who were of
Opinion that the water should be started in the hold and pumped out,
and all the heavy articles hove overboard; if that should not succede,
that, as a last resort to save the ship, the foremast should be cut away:
all these were done to no effect - Orders were then given to the carpenter to go down forward and bore holes through the ships bottom;
and to the gunner to drown the magazine by turning the cock and
securing the key: the witness heard the gunner report that he had
executed this order. Orders were then given to destroy every thing
on board which could be rendered useful to the enemy. I t had now
already been determined that the flag must be struck, as no hopes
remained of saving the ship and no possible means of defending her.
The Colours were accordingly struck, and the enemy took possession.
I t was now about sun down, and the ship had grounded about half after
eleven in the morning, as nearly as the witness can recollect, during
which time she was exposed to the constant fire of the gun boats, but
suffered only in her spars and rigging - The ship was lost about
three miles and a half from the town of Tripoli, and one and a half
from the nearest point of land, which bore south.
QUESTION^ BY THE COURT.
Had you any boats sufficient to carry out an anchor?
Ans. I t is my opinion we had not: but had this been otherwise the
enemy commanded the ground where it would have been necessary
to drop anchors.
What water did the ship draw when she went on shore?
As nearly as I can recollect she drew about eighteen feet forward
and nineteen and a half abaft.
QUESTION
BY THE JUDGE
ADVOCATE.
During the transactions and disaster of that day did ou notice
any thing of remissness or neglect in her commander w ch could
tend to the loss of the Philadelphia?

H

WARS WITH BARBART POWERS

191

Ans. I did not: On the contrary, I noticed in Capfain Bainbridge
great coolness and deliberation.
LIEU$JACOB
JOKES
was called into court and examined. He
confirmed in every thing the testimony of Lieu1 Porter, without
variation LIEU$THEODORE
HUNTKas examined before the court - and
varied only in his testimony from the two preceding witnesses in the
draft of the Philadelphia's water when she went aground, which he
stated to have been ei hteen feet six inches forward and about twenty
feet six inches aft, m ich he had ascertained from observation the
day before t,he misfortune - And also, in answer to the first question
by the court t o Lieu* Porter, he adds that in the river Delaware he
made an experiment in carrying out an anchor in the Philadelphia's
launch, when she was obliged to be buoyed by casks LIEU; BENJAMIN
SMITH,corroborates the testimony of the preceding witnesses without adding any material circumstance M: Wm KNIGHT,sailing master, was examined He c o n h s the
testimony of the witnesses before recorded - And adds that he was
positive the ship was pierced forward by the carpenter as ordered,
for he heard the water running into the Auger wholes - When
asked why the ship did not fill, he said he expected she would have
filled, as he was sure there were suflicient wholes bored for the purpose; but he conjectured they must have been stopped in some manner.
Mc KILLIAM
OSBORNE,
Lieu* of marines, on examination, confirms
the testimony of the preceding witnesses RiIr KEITH SPENCE,purser, varies in nothing material from the
witnesses gone before him.
BENJAMIN
F. READ,Masters mate, states facts as recorded in
Lieu$ Porters testimony, and adds that, in order by every means to
render the Ship useless after it was determined to strike her colours,
cannon shot were thrown into the pumps.
JAMES
GIBBONS,
masters mate, says nothing more than what goes
in corroboration of the preceding testimony
DANIELPATTERSON,
master's mate, confirms the foregoing testimony ; but adds nothing JAMESBIDDLE,A4idshipman, states facts as recorded from the
testimony of the preceding witnesses JAMESRENSHAW,
Midshipman, states facts generally as the preceding witnesses have done: and adds that he was the bearer of
Captain Bainbridge's order to drown the magazine, after i t was
determined to leave the shi , and knows i t was executed.
8-er,
testifies that he knew nothing of
REHARDSTEPHENBON,
the transactions on the Philadelphia's deck the day she was lost,
being confined to the magazine until he received an order to tufn the
cock and drown the magazine; which he did and went on deck with
the keys in his hand - The ship was then on her beam ends, the
water running in a t the ports, and such of her guns as were not thrown
overboard, rendered totally useless GEORGE
HODGE,
boatswain, states facts, so far as they come within
his knowledge, in exact conformity to the testimony of Lieu5 Porter;
but adds nothing.
WILLIAM
GODBY,carpenter, was examined concerning the scuttling
of the ship - He testifies that, when it was determined to abandon
the PhiZadelphia, he received Captain Bainbridge's orders to scuttle

t

192

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1805 TO 1804

her, which he executed by calling to his assistance his two mates and
iercing her bottom with chizels and augers in sufficient
Ee thouoht to fill her, and then reported to the proper o&%bu&;
the TU&, he believes, got on board in season to stop the holes and
prevent her filling Mr WILLIAMKNIGHTwas called in and asked by the court if ever
he had a chart in his possession which laid down a shoal where the
Philadelphia grounded? Mr Knight answered - No!
Mr PATERSON,
a midshipman, was called into court, and being
sworn, testified that he destroyed the mumerary si nal book of the
Philadelphia by Captain Bainbridges orders before Teaving her Mr ANDERSON
was examined concerning the disposition made of
the Philadelphia's signal books, who declared that he saw Captain
Bainbridge tear them both up and hand them to some officer to be
burned or thrown overboard At the opening of the court Captain Bainbridge laid before them
the following statement ('GENTLEMEN,
Having to account to Government for the loss of
the United States frigate Philadelphia, then under my command, it
is a consolatory circumstance to see that it is before an inquisition,
which, by its nautical knowledge, will be so fully adequate to form a
correct opinion of the affair and to give that decision on my conduct
which both the public and myself must be assured will be just.
In my narrative of this unhappy event, I shall mention my sending
the United States schooner to cruise off cape Bon, and the causes
that lead tlo that circumstance, which increased the misfortune that
afterwards befel us, and then detail the incidents that took place on
the day of our grounding, from the time of giving chase in the morning
till surrendering to the enemy We left Malta the 34 of October, to repair to our station off Tripoli,
and to blockade that port according to the orders of Commodore
Preble. We arrived there on the 7'Q and continued to cruize off the
town, with the Vixen in company, without meeting any occurrence
of consequence till the 19@ when we spoke an imperial brig, as she
came out of the harbor of Tripoli, which informed us that two of the
cruisers of that regency were out upon a cruise. In consequence of
this information, and thinking it most probable that they were to
the westward I ordered Lieu! Commandant Smith of the Vixen, to
Cape Bon, and cruize there as the most likely place of falling in with
them should they be returning from that quarter, and a t the same
time a safer situation for the schooner than off Tripoli at that season
of the year, where the gales blow with great violence on shore, attended
with a heavy sea. On the 20'4 the Vizen accordingly left us. The
234 of the month we had a very heavy gale from the northward and
westward, which drove us several leagues to the eastward of our
station. On the 31%of October, being about six lea ues to the eastward of Tripoli, at 9. a. m. we saw a sail in shore an standing to the
westward; we ave chase, and a t 11 oclock came near enough for our
shot to reach er; and the soundings not allowing of our running in
shore we continued to chase along the land, hauling on and off shore
as we found the soundings from 7 to 9 & 10 fathoms, in expectation
of either disabling or driving her on shore, in which case we should

%

f

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

193

hare captured or destroyed her - At half past 11 when within a
league and a half from Tripoli, seing no probabilit of preventing
the chase from getting into port, we ceased firing and auled off shore,
then having eight fathoms water. We had not gone more than two
cables length before we suddenly shoaled, and the next moment the
ship struck forward, and having 8% nots way, shot up as far on the
rock as to bring it to the after part of the fore chains where she stopped.
Her stern being at this tune clear of the ground, the anchors were cut
immediately from the bows (except one) the guns run aft, and alI the
sails laid aback, in hopes of pressing her off, as it blew a strong breeze;
but the wind being on our starboard beam, and the sea setting with
i t directly upon the rocks, soon hove our stern upon them in 17 feet
water, where we lay with our larboard port sills at the waters edge.
The ofher who had been sent to sound upon our first grounding,
returned with information that there was s a c i e n t water astern and
off the larboard quarter, upon which I consulted my officers respecting
the most probable means of getting the ship into it. I t was the unanimous opinion that the only method in our power was to lighten the
ship as much as possible b starting the water, heaving overboard the
puns, resen-ing as many on y as would be necessary to defend us against
the enemy's gun boats which were taking their station on our stern
and quarter, and to endeavour to press her off the shoals with the sails
aback. We could not in addition to this avail ourselves of an anchor,
as we had no boat capable of carrying one; and if we had had such
sufficient for the purpose, it would ha\-e been impracticable to have
have laid it out, as the enemy occupied almost the ground it should
have been placed in The gun boats having taken a station on our Starboard quarter,
commenced a firing, directed principally at our masts and rigging,
which we returned with two guns from our main deck and three of
our quarter deck cannonades, which, from the very great heel the
ship had, took no effect. The guns we got out abaft were rendered
intirely useless from the same cause, although we cut away the stern
as much as could be done to any purpose; for by endeavouring to give
them a direction to bear upon the enemy, they could not be run out
far enough to avoid setting fire to the ship, which they once did, but
it was soon extinguished without difficulty or confusion. After finding it impossible to press the ship off the rocks by lightning her, and
seeing every prospect of getting her afloat at an end, I ordered the
foremast to be cut away, in order to right her in some deqree, if
possible, and to render our guns more manageable; but this produced
no effect, and seeing the ship immoreably grounded on rocks, having
but 12 feet water forward and 17 abaft, I concieved any further
attempts as eridently useless.
After h a ~ i n gtried every expedient that couid be thought of to
contribute to our relief, and exerting ourselves to the utmost from
the time of our grounding until half past four p. m. in tndeavoring
to get the ship afloat and a t the same time in resisting the enemy,
but finding all hopes of the first vain, and not being able to bring
our guns to bear to effect the latter, I called a council of officers to
consult them on the subject of a further resistance or the necessity
of surrendering to the enemy. Upon a deliberate consideration of
our situation, it was the unanimous opinion that i t was impossible to
get the ship off, and that all further resistance would be but unneces-

I

9

194

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1803 TO 1804

-

sarily exposing men in a situation where neither perseverance nor
fortitude would be of any benefit to our Country or ourselves; ctnd
i t was unanimously agreed that the only thing left for us to do was to
surrender to the enemy, which was accordingly done, after drowning
the m a g a h e , and destroying as many articles as possible, that might
be of use to the enemy Having stated to you, Gentlemen, a narrative of facts, which you
will find rerifyed by the evidence to be heard I shall conclude after
making one observation.
The usage of nations appears, that where there is no probability
of successful defence, and all means of escape have been tried, the
Jlag may be struck without injuring the commander's honor - These
tacit but admitted regulations are founded on principles of humanity,
and a nice and delicate attention to national and individual honor.
If under such circumstances a commander's honor be preserved,
how free from censure must it appear when placed in a situation
n-ithout being able in the least to injure the enemy, and no means
whatever of extricating himself -

PTm BAINBRIDGE

29 June 1806. -

The Court h a m g deliberated on the evidence deduced from the
testimony of the witnesses, heard m this case, are decidedly of opinion,
that Captain William Bainbridge acted with fortitude and conduct
in the loss of his ship, the U States frigate Philadelphia on the 31 a!
Oct. 1803, and that no degree of censure should attach itself to him
from that erent

JAMES
BARRON
President
WILLIAM
EATON
acting Judge Advocate.

[KDA.

C M R , KO.25.1

[I November 18031
To Captain Edward Preble, U. 8. Navy, from Richard O'Brien, U. S. ex-Consul
General, Algiers

Customary a t Algiers on a Ship of War Comeing in Sight, being
Visited Anchoring & Departure1" That any Ship or Ships of war of the united States, Comeing
in Sight of algiers, to hoist her Ensign - Pendent and Jack a t the
foretop Gal! mast head, and fire a Gun to leward, but for none of the
U States Ships of war, to hoist the red flag a t any of their mast heads this Custom or Signal was in use for the Merchant Vessels - of the
united States, with the annuities for Algiers, and Tunis, said red flag
denoted that the Vessel that hoists it, has stores. or recruits - on
bomd for this Regency, hut by our ships of war holsting their American Jack at the fore will show, they are on the business of the United
States, and wants to speak or confer with the Consul 2d Should the wind be favourable, the ship should lie off & on untill
they perceive the Algerine boat with the Consular flag Comeing off The Ship should not salute under sail i t would not be returned, by
Algiers. The ship should not anchor if Posible, untill they first speak
with the Consul, if the Consul does not come off - he might be sick
or in the Country or detained by the Regency, under this suspicious

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

195

idea, of no boat Comeing off - The requisite precautions is to be used
a sharp look out and ready on all tacks 3e If you are by calms or light winds obliged to Anchor take Care
you do it in time, before you Come within reach of Shot of the Castles,
As soon as you Anchor the marine batteries of Algiers fires a salute
of 21 Guns - which is a s much as to Say welcome - You return the
Salute with the same number of Guns - in Case you should Anchor
and not be Saluted, it indicates your nation has some difficulties xith
Algiers 4tQ Your best Anchoring ground is to the S E of the light house of
the marine to anchor at the distance of 4 - or 5 Miles from the Batteries in about 22 - or 30 fathoms. between November and March
there is often Strong Bt severe Gales from the N E, K d 9: NW, a Vessel
t o Anchor in the Bay of Algiers, Should allwayes be ready to get under
sail and to be in order for Action - NB. every night there E a light
lit at the Marine batt'ery
Sth The first Question for the Captain of the Ship of war of the U
States, to ask the Consul on his Comeing adjacent, is if a t Algiers,
we have health, or Clear of all Contagious disorders, if any Sickness.
Then for the Consul with the boat of Algiers to drop under the frigates
Stern - and by a rope made fast from the frigate to the Algerine boat
for the Consul and Captain to Confer if not to lie on their Oars and
the Captain & Consul talk on requisite affairs if there is no Sickness
in the Country and the Consul with the Algerine boat Comes along
Side it is customary with a11 other nations to Salute the Consul with
5 - or 7 Guns - on his going on board or on his departure from the
Ship 6 t h On the Consul going on board he nil1 inform the Captain of
the situation of the affairs of the U States with this Regency, and all
other Particular news & affairs - The Consul will inform the Captain
when it will be proper for him to land in order to see the dey and
ministry The Captain - at his landing the Algerines Salutes him
with 5 - or 7 Guns. The Ship of the U States returns an Equal
number Should the regency Send off any Presents to #he Ship such as oxen
Sheep fowls & $9 On receiveing Said Presents on board to Salute
with 3 Guns - This miserable present is Paid for by the Consul at
the rate of 20$ to those that Carries it off & attends therewith
7th The rowers in the Algerine boats is not to be admitted on board
without first Speaking to the Consul, and they are never to Enter or
Come out at the Ports, further none of the Crew of the United States
Ships is to be permitted to have any Conversation with any one of
the Algerines, from this Circumstance often occurs misrepresentations
and difficulties - and should be Avoided as much as possible St; On the Captain going off to depart Algiers on his Entering his
boat (after his leave or audience with the dey & Minister of Marine)
the Algerines Salutes him wi%h 5 - or 7 Guns - The Ship on this
Occasion returns the Salute 9th Should any slaves belonging to the Regency made their Escape
and get on board - the Captam of the United States Ship is to inform
the Consul and the Slave or Slaves - are to be given up - neither
Christians Moors or Jews, that iIIegaIIy gets on board is to be kept.
fridays is turks Sunday - The marine and City Gates is Shut, every

196

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1803 TO 1804

Evening one half hour before Sundown - and no Communication
with the City untill day light All officers & Marines of every description in Passing in kont of
the deys Palace is to Keep their hats off RICH^ OBRIEN
ALGIERS
The 1 @ noziembr 1803
P. S The algerine Salute to a ship of war of the U States Costs 76$
[or 7 5 $ ] - this is Customary allso with the Swedes deans & dutch with the British french & Spanish the Salute Costs 60$ Each time the Consul goes off in an Algerine boat, or sends a boat
off - Each trip is pclid for by the Consul 8 dollars, allso feese to the
Cap6aport and drogerman - attending with the Consul, as Customary
with all nations as I supose the minister of Marine of the United States has furnished Comodore Preble with a Copy of these observations. This
Copy is intended to gaurd or serve against an Omission - on this
Tack [LC. EPP, Vol. 7, 1803.1
To John Stricker, Navy Agent, Baltimore, Md., from Secretary of the Navy

NAV.DEP?A7m. 1qt 1805
Enclosed you will receive under a cover directed to Messr! Eislen 8:
Home a commission and instructions for the private armed ship the
Warren - which cornrnission & instructions you will delirer to the
owners after you shall have obtained their Bond with two responsible
securities disinterested in the Vessel agreeably to the accompanying
form and the act of congress which is also enclosed and which you may
also deliver to the owners of the T.TTarrcn You will be pleased to
transmit the Bond to me [NDA. GLB, Vol. 6, 1802-1803.1

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

197

To Eon. lichsel Lieb, House of Representatives, from Secretary of the Navy

NAVY
DEPARTMENT,
November 4,1805.
SIR: The following statement exhibits answers to the queries which
you have ~ r o ~ o s ein
d , vour letter of the second instant, in relation
io the ma&neAcorps. * *

IE
The acts ot CongrW of July 1798 March 1799 and April
1800. which eonstltuted t i e mdrine m&s. a;thori%ed.l.
1
The corm IS not complete; them is a deficiency of..............
We have now in service in the Mediterranean ,. ...............
But, tho frigates, New '~ork. Adam. and Jobn Adarns
whose return is shortly expected will brmg........... l- .....
01 which It is intended to dischar;e,-. ..........................
There wi!l then be in service, in the Mediterranean ,..-... .....
And we shall then have on shore, and in the vessels in
ordinary ,...............................................
1
There are on shore szven marine stations vir: barrack3
navy yards at Weshindon NorIoIk, ~hiiadelphla,N&
York, Boston, and ~ortsm'outh.
We have a t berrach, a t present, including staff, music,
1
armomrs, artificers,servants. sick, dc.. .................
But. on the arrival of the Ncw York, A d a m , and John
Adam, we shall have ...................................
1
Of which guards will be supplied for eleven ships In ordlnary. kach ship having, agreeably to the law ol 3d
March, M I , onr eergeant, or corporal, andeight marinm)
and o i which guards for the barracks. qnd for the nsvy
yard at Washiugtan, ail1 also bv supplted.
Wc have a t the navy yard at Norfolk.. .........................
at Philadelphia......................
at New York-none
at Boston ............................
a t Portsmouth-none
There are belonging to the corp-oftleers ,................. 1

We have in actual service The Constitution, of forty-four guns; the Philadelphia, of forty;
tbe New York, of thirty& guns.
The Adams, a.nd John Adams, of thirty-two guns, each.
The Syren and Argus, of sixteen u s , each.
The Enter rise, Vixen, and Nazlti w, of twelve guns, each.
But, as before oxserved, the frigates New York, Adorns, and John
Adarns, are expected home shortly.

f

There will then remain lo service in the Mediterranean,

2
2
1 ......
1
2
The frigate ConWuibn, having on board
2
2
.---.-I --..-. 2
fiiladdphh, havlngon board ,-..--..-.-.-.----.
1
.....
2
2
2
& ~ m ,having on board ,...................................
2 ......
1 .....
2
Argw, havingon board, ....................................
I
i
Enlerprkc. baring on board............................................
1
Vken. bevlng on board .................................................
2 ......
1
Naufilw, havlngon board, .............................................
,-.-.---..---BTBTBTBTBTBT

Js 8erP1ce In the Medltemean, as Wore stated,

---1

3

1

40
35
21
27

9
11
13

n j T a %

The annual amount of the pay and emoluments of the commanding
officer of the marine corps is one thousand seven hundred and twentytwo dollars ninety cents.

198

N A V A L OPERATIONS FROM 1803 TO 1804

I have the honor to be, respectfully, sir, your most obedient servant,
RT. SMITH.
MICHAEL
LEIB,Esq.
Chairman of a Committee of Congress.
[Am. State Papers. Kav. Aff., Vol. 1.1

[4 November 18031
To Secretary of the Navy from Eiselen & Horne; Alexander, Webster & Co. and
Mayer (or Meyer) & Brantz, Baltimore, Md.

SIR. The President's cownission for the private armed Ship
Warren, has been delivered us by the Navy agent of this City according to your directions, on giving the requisite Bond and Security. I n
consequence of the rumors and their subsequent confirmation, of the
hostile disposition of the Emperor of Morocco, which have transpired
since our application for the above commission, we have been induced
to enlarge the armament of the Ship R'arren to the number of Sixteen
&ns and Twenty jive men.. - We take the liberty of returning this
commission again to your department for the purpose of having the
alterations made therein conformable to the armament as above
mentioned ;
EISELEN
& HOVAL
& CQ
WEBSTER
ALEXANDER,
MAYER
&: BRANTZ.
BALTIMORE
4th hTovember1803.
[NDA. blisc. LB, 1802-3-4.1

To James Simpson, U. S. Consul, Tangier, Morocco, from Secretary of State

DEPARTMENT
OF STATE
Novr dtQ1803.
SIR. Since my last (of the 31" ult.) I have r e d from Mr Gavino,
a copy of Cap! Bainbridge's letter to you, of the 2gtQof August last,
in which he relates the capture of the Imperial Cruiser Mesboha
[Mirboka],and the recapture of her American prize the Celia of Boston.
Notwithstanding the perfidy with which hostilities have been thus
commenced by the Emperor, as it is important that the dispatches
intended to be landed at LIOrient should be immediately forwarded,
and as the gun-carriages are already prepared, the Schooner Citizen
will proceed to Gibraltar with her Cargo: and if the turn which our
affairs with Morocco, has assumed permits their being presented as
first intended, without too much condescention on our part, and it
will contribute to any object commensurate with their value, you will
not withhold them. Should they not be wanted for such a purpose,
you will be pleased to inform Tobias Lear Esqr our Consul General at
Algiers of it. But if they can be safely and conveniently stored, it will
be best not hastily to decide u on their not being wanted for the
Emperor, but if they should not e immediately given, to wait a suitable time in order to observe the course our affairs may take in relation
to him.
The President will probably this day, communicate to Congress the
information received respecting the aggression above alluded to, and
they will doubtless make provision for meeting the exegency in a manner suited to its nature. As soon as the result is known I shall com-

E

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS
municate it [to] you with such instructions as may grow out of the
measures they may think proper to adopt.
Novr loth.The Citizen having been detained by objections made
by her crew founded on their apprehensions of danger from the
Emperor's Cruizers, your letter of the 5 t h Septc has come to hand in
the interval. The President has as above intimated, communicated
Cap1 Bainbridge's letter to Congress, who have not yet come to any
determination respecting the measures proper to be taken. They will
doubtless be only recautionmy, and if in the mean time, the Emperor
of Morocco is w&ng to disavow the hostile acts which have taken
place, and to consider the peace as continued, notwithstanding what
has happened, the President is willing that his ships & subjects should
be restored, provided the accommodation shall not appear to you to
to be a feint calculated merely to obtain them with a view to further
acts of perfideous hostility. The Emperor should also cause some
satisfaction to be given for the insult offered to your official character
by the detention of your person at the house of the Governor of
Tangier. If therefore an arrangement can be brought into train, on
the principles above indicated, you will connect with it a demand for
such satisfaction in the form suggested, by a prudent regard to the
honor of the United States. Commodore Preble is ordered to deliver
up the ships & their equipages on your signifying to him that your
negotiations require it.
[SA.

SDA.

Disp. t o Con., Vol. 1, Oct. 1800-Feb. 1817.1

To Secretery of State from James Simpson, U. S. Consul, Tangier, Morocco

N Q70. - Triplicate

TANGIER
4 t h l%-ove?nbe? 180s. SIR KOB68 and 69 having been forwarded by so good a conveyance
as the Xew York Frigate sailed from hence on the 19@ last Month,
I do not conceive it necessary to trouble you with any copies of them.I have now the honour to advise return of the Schooner Nautilus to
this Port on the 30'h from Mogadore with advice from Mr Gwyn that
on the 1Ste Vlt? at receipt of Eiis Majestys Order for that purpose, the
Governour there immediately set the Crew of the Hannah at liberty
and put Captain IDillitt~nsin possession of his Vessel with every
article of Cargo and private property had been taken out of her. The Meshouda has been sent to Larmh Hiver, she has been entirely
dismantled and the Cargo was on board of her landed there. - I have
much satisfaction in seizing the earliest opportunity of giving you
this intelligence of His Imperial Mnjcsty having so far carried into
effect the engagements he came under to the Unlted States at the
restoration of Peace, and I Crust in God Government will experience
a t his hand better faith than we have for some years past. - His
Majesty has sat down at Mequinez. -

*

*

*

*

*

*

*

Immediately on my delivering up the papers of the Meshouda left
with me by Commodore Rodgers for that pu ose, Arraez Omar of
Tetuan who had commanded her was seized 'gy Alcayde Hashash,
severely bastinrtdoed and lodged in a dungeon loaded with Irons on
his Legs and Neck, where he remains to this hour; - thc Governour
sent me word this had been done by order of His Majesty as punish-

200

NAVAL OPERATIOhW FROM 1805 TO 1804

ment for having taken on board Stores and Passengers a t Algiers and
Tunis for Tripoly, contrary to orders. -The Emperours Ship Maimona
has arrived a t Larach from Lisbon after having been supplied there
with a Sett of Cables, a new foremast and Rigging. I have the honour to repeat the assurances of respect with which
I am
[NA. SDA. CL, Tangier, Vol. 2, 1803-1810.1
Extract from Diary of Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Navy, Commodore of U. 6.
Squadron in the Mediterranean, Friday, 4 November 1803

[Cadiz] Winds Vb!"resh gales. received on board a 12 Inch Stream
Cable, two 8 Inch Hawsers and Sevent fathoms of 7 Inch Shrouding - We have encreased our crew 28 en since our arrival here [LC. EPP,Diary, 1803-1804.1

t

To Eon. Joseph Hopper Nicholson, United States Congress, from Captain
Alexander Murray, U. 6. Navy

PHILAD+
hT0zvr 6th1803

Dr SIR I n the multiplicity of momentous circumstances that a t
present must employ your mind, it may possibly be deem'd intrusive,
to call your attention to further discussion, but by late intelligence
from the Mediterranean, respecting the unpleasant state of our Commerce, I am induced to give you my Ideas on that head, being well
acquainted with the disposition, & locality of hlorocco, & be assured
that none of the powers on the coast of Barbary can annoy us equal
to that.
They wanted but a slight pretence to commence their depredations,
& that pretence hath been but too fully justified by the delay in sending on the gun carriages, promised long since; with some other irritating circumstances, clashing with the policy of that nation, & I am
much mistaken if we have not to pay dear for it, but to obviate the
evil as far as existing circumstsnces will a d u ~ i &
t the resources of our
Country can justify it certainly will be expedient to reinforce our
Squadron in those Sens, in which no time ought to be lost, as our ships
cant be got down the Potowmac in the TTinter, & 'tis more than
probable that we shall have to wage war with all the states of Barbary
ere long, but with respect to Morocco, the ships destined to repel
their aggressions, should be station'! principally along the Atlantic
sbores, from Cape Finistere to cape Cantin as most of their naval
ports are on the Atlantic, such as Tangier, which is a t the cntrance
of the Streights, and coud see any Vessel that goes in, & out, there are
also Sallee, Magadore, Rabat, Arzille & several others, contiguous &
if our ships once enter the streights & the Westerly winds should set
in which often prevail there for several weeks in the fall, and Winter,
they cannot get out through the rapidity of the current setting up,
till an Easterly wind prevails, as was the case with me last Wmter,
when I was detained six weeks a t Gibralter; so that those Pirates may
cruize without, unmolested I may be deemed presuming, or an interested adviser, but I declare
my real sentiments, and am under a firm conviction that nothing
but coercive Measures can controul those Pirstical States & they
will commit hostilities against us whenever the whim takes, & the
more we pay the more are they emboldened, and i t would be less

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

201

degrading, $ more honorable, never to pay them a Cent but give
tribute from the mouth of our Cannon
I find we stand much in need of some powerfull friend in Congress to
save us and our families from a state of ruin, 'tho we ere to bear the brunt
upon all these commotions; i% fain would ask your patronage in behalf
of myself & our Officers generally, to put us upon a better establishment 1 have, & I beleive many others have, also, spent the greater
part of their substance in the public service our commands are respectable & must be supported with expence, & being ever liable to be
called into service precludes us from turning our attention to other
pursuits, being so few in number, & 'tis hard to be confined to half
pay for those intervals, when out of service, a t least our one helf
rations ought to be annex'd to half pay - this with some other
reforms I hope you will find meet to assist us in, when other more
weighty concerns have been decided
1 beg you will present my respects to M' & Mr9 Gallatin & accept
of my assurances of esteem & with great regard
[NDA.

A. Murray's LB, 1799-1805.1

Extract from log book kept by Sailing Master Nathaniel Haraden, U. 6. Navy, on
board U. 6. Frigate Constitution. Saturday, 5 November 1803

Light airs from the West* - We continue a t Anchor in Cadiz
bay - the Enterprize in CQ The Ships Company employed as
necessary - Towards the Evening we Veered to a half cable &
ran out a kedge to the North4 in order to steady the ship from fouling
her anchor - At 6 in the Evening a Spanish launch came along
side with an anchor - This Anchor is in Lieu of the bower anchor
we parted from in Tangier bay - This Anchor is said to have been
left here at the time of the American & English ITar by one of the
U. S. Frigates - The Anchor is very rusty & has no mark shewing
the weight but I suppose it to be between 32 & 37 Cwt - The
Stock is p e r f e d y sound & appears fit for Service - The Night was
moderate with breezes from the N. N. W. - At day light the Pilot
came along side in order to carry the Consf itution to Sea - We Weighed
the kedge By 7 in the M o r ~ i n gwe had Variable Winds from the
East* & rain - John Bartele Seaman w-ho was an acting midshipman on board the Constitution was this day discharged for unoEcerlike conduct a t Gibraltar - A passage is provided for him on board
a n American Vessel bound to New York - We had heavy rains
& thick weather all the forenoon - The Pilot continues on board in
order to carry the Constitution to sea when Wind & Weather permits At Noon thick weather winds from the N E. - We have no Communication with the shore this day - Surgeons report is 5 sick & 10
c~nv'+~~
[LC. EPP, Log Constitution, 1803-1804.1

Ta James Simpson, U. S. Consul, Tangier, Morocco, from Captain Edward Preble,
0.6. Nsvy

I?:S: SHIPConst2ution
off Tunger Bay P 4 ATmr1805
DEARSIR I send an Officer to receive any communications you
may have to make. Has the ATuutilus returned from Mogadore, or
has the order for the release of the Hannah been complied with?

202

NAVAL O P E R A T I O N S FROM 1803 T O 180.4

I left Cadiz last evening. Nothing new in that quarter.

* * *

[LC. EPP, LB, May-Dec. 1803.1
To Captain Edward Preble, U. 6. Navy, from James Simpson, U. 6. Consul,
Tangier, Morocco

TANGIER
6tQhTovember 1803. DEARSIR The Nautilus came off this Bay the 30tQUltQ & after
sending the Letters from Mogadore on shore proceeded for Gibraltar
without Anchoring; - the Hannah was restord with every sixpence
worth of property had been landed from her. - I sent Mr Gwyns
Letter to me on the subject to Mr Gavino for your perusal. - The
Meshouda was sent round to Larach and has been dismantled. So far the Emperour has carried his engagements to us into effect,
with all good faith. Arraiz Omar lays in Tangier Castle loaded with Irons, in a letter I
wrote you to Gibraltar, I advised the punishment had been inflicted
on this man, but I did not then expect they would have made him
suffer so long. As many of the articles as can be collected have been sent down. [LC.

EPP, Vol. 7, 1803.1

Extract from Memorandum Book of Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Navy, on board
U. S. Frigate Comfilution. 6 November 1803

Sailed from Cadiz for Gibraltar.
[LC, original.]
Extract from log book kept by Sailing Master Nathaniel Haraden, U. S. Navy, on
board U. S. Frigate Constitulion, Sunday, 6 November 1803

Moderate Breezes & thick Hazy Weather - Winds from the
East# - We continue at Anchor in Cadiz bay - At :i past 2 P.
M. the weather cleared away At 3 P. M. We Weighed & came to
Sail in order to proceed to Gibraltar - Enterprize in Company As we came thro' the Narrows we passed his Catholick Majesty's
Ship Bonaeenturo Admiral Lobas do Payta - At 4 we discharged
the Pilot - by J4 past 4 we had Strong breezes from the S b E down
top gall! Yards & double reefed the topsails a t Sundown we saw
Cadiz light house bearing E N E nearly 10 Miles - We parted Company with the Enterprize she being Ordered to make the best of her
way to Gibraltar - We were in Cadiz near 13 days, 3 of which we
were under Quarantine At ji past 8 A. M. Tacked to the Southd
Out 3d reefs from the Topsails - At Midnight moderate Breezes
from the Northd - At % past 3 judging the Ship to be nearly up
to Cape Spartell we hauled on a wind to the E N E - At % past 4
we saw Cape Spartell bearing S E nearly 10 or 12 Miles - We tacked
to the Westd - At 6 or a little after day light we tacked to the
Eastd & stood in for Tangier bay - the Enterprize Joined Company
At 8 up top gall$ Yards & out second reefs from the Topsails - At
9 A. M. fired a gun, hoisted our Colors & bro't too off Tangier bay We sent a boat on board the Enterprize - She then bore up & ran
into Tangier bay - We Continued standing off & on Tangier till M
past 11 A. M. at which time we fired a gun as a Signal for the Boat. At noon we had light breezes from the NorthwG - The Enterprize

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

203

has our boat in Tow standing out of Tangier bay - Surgeons report
is 7 Sick - 10 Convet & 1 discharged from the Sick list - At Noon
Sailing by chart thro the Streights of Gibraltar
[LC. EPP, Log Constitution, 1803-1804.1
To XUen & Horne; eexander Webster & Co. and Meyer (or Xayer) & Brsntz,
Bdtlmore, Xd., from Secretary of the Bovy

NAV.D E P ~
NOP.7, 1803
I have received your letter of the 4t'='y0u will herewith receive a
commission for the private armed ship the U7urren made out in
conformity to the armament & crew stated by you to be on board
[NDA.

GLB, Vol. 6 , 1802-1803.1

To Lieutenant Stephen Decatur, Jr., U. S. Navy, commanding U. S. Brig Argus.
from Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Navy

U , S , S H I PConstitution
Oibraltur Bay Yt+ No@ 1808
SIR YOUare on receipt of this to take command of the United
States Schooner Enterprize now commanded by Lieu! command!
Hull who will relieve you in the command of the Argus, make the
necessary arrangements for the Exchange with dl possible expedition, as the Enterprize must sail to the Eastwttrd the gt@inst in the
morning, [HS of Pa.

Mrs. F. H. GetcheU.J

To Lieutenant Stephen Decatur, Jr., U. 6. Navy, commanding U. 6. Schooner
Enterprize. from Captain Edward Preble, U. 6. Navy

UNITED
STATES
FRIGATE
Constitution GIBRALTAR
BAY
7 Nozlember l8OS
SIR YOUwiU sail from this Bay with the first fair wind, and convey
to Syracuse the provision ship Traveller -Billips -Master Loaded on
account of the United States with provisions for the squadron under
my command be carefull not to chase out of sight of her on any account
but Afford her all the protection in your power, as it is of the utmost
importance that she should arrive safe, Remain at Syracuse to new Rig and put in good condition the
Enterprize, and if I should not arrive by that time, you will proceed
off Tripoly, and join the Frigate Philadelphia, and Schooner Vixen in
the Blockade of that place, and take care and inform Cap$flakbridge
of the arrival of the Provision Shi in Syracuse, Cont.bue to cruize before Trqo y until the season makes i t dangerous, and then you must harbor m Syracuse, but you must even in the
worst season go out, and shew ourself off Tripoly occasionally if only
s day or two a t a time, as it w d h a r e s good effect by convincing those
Barbarians that there Vessels is not safe, in leaving port at any season
of the ymr. You are to capture all Vessels belonging to the Bashaw of Tripoly,
or his subjects, and to annoy the enemj7 by all the means in your
power, you are not to Suffer the Vessels of any nation to enter or have
commerce with Tripoly, But if any Vessel bound in, who might not

P

204

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1805 TO 1804

have been informed of the Blockade, it would be well to order her off,
and if detected in making a second attempt, you will send such Vessel
into Syracuse for adjudication
You are to respect the rights of Nations with whom we are at peace,
and not to capture Vessels within the Jurisdictional limits or under
tbe protection of such Nations, you are a t all times (so far as may lay
in your power) to succour d d relieve and free any American Vessels
attacked by the enemy, or in thelr possession, The Officers of the Enterprize may receive pa ents of money from
time to time, but no advance beyond what may e due them, for which
and other necessary purposes, you may immediately make a requisition on me for Two thousand dollars, to prevent the necessity of your
drawing Bills, which cannot be done without great loss to Government,In all cases of expence, observe the strictest Ecconomy, and keep
me regularly informed from time to time of all your proceedings, -

gm

[HS of Pa.

Mrs. F. H. Getchell.]

[7 November 18031
To Midshipman (acting as Lieutenant) Jonathan Thorn, U. S. Navy, from Captain
Edward Preble, U. S. Navy

By Edward Preble Esquire
Commander in chief of the
United States Squadron stationed
in the Mediterranean.
To MF Jonathan Thorn hereby appointed Lieutenant of the United
States Schooner Enterprize.
BY VIRTUEof the Power and Authority to me given, I do hereby
constitute and appoint you Acting Lieutenant of the United States
Schooner Enter rize Willing and requiringyou forthwith to go on board
and take the c arge and command of Lieutenant in her accordingly.
Strictly charging and commanding all the Officers and Company belonging to the said Schooner, subordinate to you to behave themselves
jointly and severally in their rcspecti~eemployments with all due
respect and Obedience to you their said Lieutenant. And you likewise to observe and Execute as well the general printed Instructions
as what orders and directions you shall from time to time recieve from
your Captain or any other your superior Officer for the United States
Service: hereof nor you, nor any of you may fail as you may answer
the Contrary at your Peril: And for so doing this shall be your Warrant. Given under my hand and Seal on board the United States
Ship Constitution Algeziras bay this 7Q day of November 1803 and in
the 28Q Year of the Independance of the United States of America Signed, EDWARD
PREBLE
(L s.1

g

[LC. EPP, Order Book, May 1803-June 1805.1
To Lieutenant Isaac Hull, U. S. Navy, commanding U. S. Brig Argw, from Captain
Edward Preble, U. 8. Navy

UNITEDSTATES
FRIGATE
Constitution
Oibraltar Bay Yt'J Novr 1803
SIR Being convinced that the interests of the U: S: will be promoted by leaving a force on this Station, I have selected the Argw,

?VARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

205

for this service; relying with the greatest confidence on your Zeal for
the Honor and Interest of your Country Experience has taught us that, implicit faith cannot be placed in
Treaties with any of the Barbary States; you will, therefore, as often
as possible, appear on the coast of Morocco; and communicate with
Consul Simpson at Tanger. If you learn that any of their cruisers
are fitting for sea; you will inform yourself of the object of such equipment; and take care that, you repel the first aggression on their part,
with the greatest promptitude; as an ascendency can only be obtained
over these, or any other Barbarians, but by a determined mode of
conduct towards them.
When any considerable number of American Vessels are collected
here, for the purpose of procuring Convoy to the Eastward, you will
proceed with them as far as Cape Martin, or farther, if in your opinion absolutely necessary. Keep a good look out about Cape De Gatt,
and cruise there occasionally.
You are to Capture all Vessels belonging to the Bashaw of Tripoli,
or his Subjects; and to annoy the Enemy by all the means in your
power. You are to respect the rights of Nations with whom we are
a t peace, and not to capture Vessels within the jurisdictional limits,
or under the protection of such Nations. You are at all times (as
far as may be in your power) to succour, aid, relieve &free,m y American Vessel attacked by the Enemy, or in their possession
As it is impossible for me to anticipate every situation in which
you may possibly be placed; & owing to the distance I am from you,
and the difficulty of communication, much must depend on your own
judgment and prudence; you will however keep me advised of all
your proceedings by every opportunity, and write frequently to the
Navy Dep. In case of any event of an important or alarming nature, you will send me notice, by hiring a small swift Sailing Vessel,
with an Officer in charge of the Dispatches, if you cannot consistently
leave this Station in the Argus.
You will rendezvous occnsionall in this Bay, a t Csdiz, and hlalaga;
and frequently visit the Bay of %anger. I expect one of the small
Frigates from the United Ststes on this station early in the Spring
to watch the motions of the Morocco Cruisers. When she arrives,
you will immediately take such dispatches as she may have for me,
and join the squadron in the Blockade of Tripoli.
The Officers of the Argus may receive payments of money from
time to time, but no advance beyond what may be due them; for
which, and other necessary expences, you may immediately make a
requisition on me, for Three thousand Dollars, to prevent the necessity of your drawing Bills, which cannot be done without great loss
to Government. You will make all your requisitions for Provisions
on John Gavino Esqr ConsuI at Gibraltar; and be will supply you
with sucb as belong to the U: S - Such articles as he has not, you
must purchase, but in all cases of expenditure you n-ill make use of
the greatest economy.
In case a provision ship should arrive, you d consult Mr Gavino,
and exercise your best judgment respecting the safest, and most
expeditious manner of conveying the provisions to Syracuse
[LC. EPP, Order Book, 1803-1805.1

206

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1805 TO 180.4

To Lieutenant Richard Somers, U. S. Navy, commanding U. S. Schooner NauUlus,
from Captain Edward Reble, U. S. Navy

U: S: SHIPConstitution
GIBRALTAR
BAY
7" N O P1803
~
SIR On Signal from the Constibution, ou will get under weigh,
and proceed in company with her to the B ockade of Tripoli. But if
it so happen, that we should part company you will make the best of
your way & join the Frigate Philadelphia and Schooner Vixen off that
place; and continue to cruise ther until1 the season makes i t dangerous;
and then you must harbour in Syracuse. But you must even in the
worst season go out and shew yourself off Tripoli occasionally if only
a day or two at a time, as it will have a good effect by convincing
those Barbarians, that their vessels are not safe in leaving port at
any season of the year.
You are to capture all vessels belonging to the Bashaw of Tripoli
or his subjects and to annoy the Enemy by all the means in your power.
You are not to suffer the vessels of any Nation to enter or to have
commerce with Tripoli, but if any Vessel bound in who might not
have been informed of the Blockade, it would be well to order her off,
and if detected in making a second attempt, you will send such vessel into Syracuse for adjudication
You will respect the rights of nations with whom we are at peace,
and not capture vessels within the jurisdictional limits, or under the
protection of such Nations. You are at all times (so far as may be
in your power) to succour, aid, relieve and free, any American Vessel
attacked by the Enemy or in their possession.
The Officers of the Nautilus, may receive payments of money from
time to time; but no advance beyond what may be due them; for
which and other necessary purposes, you may immediately make a
requisition on me for Two thousand Dollars to prevent the necessity
of your drawing Rills, which cannot be done without great loss to
Government.
In all instances of expencc observe the strictest economy, and keep
me regularly informed from time to time of all your proceedings[LC. EPP, Order Book, May 1803-June 1805.1

9

Extract from log book of U. S. Frigate Consfilulion. Captain Edward Preble, U. S.
Navy, commanding, Monday, 7 November 1803

by Sundown we was up to the shiping a t anchor at gibraltarl we
was Visited by the health offcier from Gibraltar1 we found here a t
anchor the united States Brig argusl leiutinant Decatorl the schooner
Nautilus1 Leeutenant Sommersl and His B. T. Magestys Ship donnegal and Agincourt a little after sundown we filld and set the Courses/
in order to work over to the western shore or the algiseraces side
[KA. ND original.]
Extract from log book kept by Sailing Master Nathaniel Haraden, U. S. Navy, on
board U. S. Frigate Consliiulion. Monday, 7 November 1803

Moderate Breezes from the W. N. W - We continue our course
t h o ' the Streights of Gibraltar - At 1 we made all plain sail &
hauled over for Taniffe - We brot Euro a point to bear N E b E >I E
by compass - We kept the bearings !t i we opened the Marks of the

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

207

Pearl Rock Those marks are always attended to by ships of heavy
draft -When we opened Gibraltar bay the wind set nearly out of the
Bay - We worked in on Gibraltar Side by Sundown we were up to
the Shipping at Anchor We were Visited by the Health Officer at
Gibraltar We found here a t Anchor the U. S. Brig Argw Lieutt
Decatur, The Schooner Nautilus Lieutr Sommers - &: H B M Ships
the DonnegaU & Agincourt - A little after Sundown we filled $ set
the Courses in order to work over to the Western Side - After dark
up Courses 8: in T Gall: Sails & worked up to the Anchoring ground
under Topsails - This Precaution was necessary in order to obtain
regular Soundings - ,4t 36 past 9 P. M. We came to with the s m d
bower in 21 fath*soft Muddy bottom Veered to 70 fathe - The Town
of Algeziras 17 S VF nearly 2 miles - The fire Tower on Carbaritta
Point S S W 4 miles - Furled Sails & mustered the Larboard Watch
as an anchor Watch - Lieutt Somers & Lieutr Decatur waited on
Commodore Preble - At 9 A. M. Veered away on the Small bower
& moored Ship a cable Each way the best bower to the S S E in 22
fathoms of water We had light airs from the Eastward all the forenoon; we sent down the fore &. main Futtock Shrouds & shortened
them in - Unbent the Main sail - Sail makers employed altering
the main sail set the foremast forward by the fore runners & staying
the Masts - part of the Ships Company employed scraping between
decks [LC. EPP, Log Constitution, 1803-1804.1

To Captain Thomas Tingey, Superintendent. Navy Yard, Washington, D. C.. from
Secretary of the Navy

NAV.D E P ~
iWou. 8, 1803
The Schooner Citizen must sail as early as she can be prepared We shall not detain her a moment for dispatches - Let me know
when she will be ready to sail
[ND-4. GLB, Vol. 6, 1802-1803.1
To Commanding Omcer of the U. 8. Squadron in the Mediterranean from Secretary
of the Navy

NAVYD E P ~
Novr 8. 1803
By dispatches from Cap! Bainbridge, t,he capture of the hlerboha
and the re-capture of her prize [Celiu],
by the frigate Philadelphia,
has been announced to us. We approve Cap! Bainbridge's conduct.
The vigiIance and foresight exercised by him in the whole conduct of
this business and the rapid movements he subsequently made to
arrest the hlischief intended us, entitle him to our thanks, which
The President has charged me to convey to him through you. [KDA.

LB, 1799-1807.1

To Commanding Officer of the U. S. Squadron in the Mediterranean from
Secretary of the Navy

NAVY
DEP~

NOV
8.~1803. It is the command of the President of the United States, that you
deliver up the Meshouda and the Mesboha [Mirboka]to the Emperor

208

IVAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1803 TO 1804

of Morocco, provided that Mr S i p s o n our Consul at Tangier shall
deem it expedient and shall signify the same to you. The time and
manner of delivering up these vessels must be concerted between you
and Mr Simpson. [NDA. LB, 179!+-1807.1
Extract from Diary of Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Navy, Commodore of U. S.
Squadron in the Mediterranean, Tuesday, 8 November 1803

Went to Gibraltar, waited on the Governor & principal Officers of
the Garrison and took leave. B t 10 AM the iVauti1u.s and Argus
joined company. Ordered Lt Hull to take command of the Argus,
and Lt Decatur to take command of the Enterprize: & Doctor Weems
to the Argus [LC. EPP, Diary, 1803-1804.1
Extract from log book kept by Sailing Master Nathaniel Baraden, U. S. Navy, on
board U. 8. Frigate Constitution. Tuesday, 8 November 1803

Moderate Breezes & cloudy - We continue a t Anchor of[f] Algeziras
with the Enter rize in CQ- Commodore Preble waited on the Governor of Gibra tar - We have no communication with the Shore on
Algeziras Side - The Ships company employed setting up the T o p
mast & Top Gall! rigging - Towards Evening we sent down the Top
Gall; Yards - We this Afternoon We reeved new main top sail Haulyards the old ones being unserviceable - At 10 in the Evening the
U. S. Brig Argus & Schooner Nautilus anchored along Side of the
Constitution - We had moderate Breezes during the Night till 7
I n the morning when we had fresh Breezes from the S W. At 10 in
the forenoon we saw an American ship near Gibraltar with the Signal
of distress flying in her main topmast rigging - We Immediately sent
an officer & a boats crew with a Hawser & kedge to her assistance by 11 A. M. the S. W. Wind had increased to a Gale - Commodore
Preble went on board the schooner Nautilus - She made sail toward
Gibraltar - The Ships Company employed birthing Hammocks &
Overhauling the rigging The Surgeons report to the Commodore is
7 sick & 7 Convalesccents - At Noon fresh Breezes & rain Winds
S W b S - We have now here in compz the Argus, Enterprize &
Nautilus -.
[LC. EPP, Log Constilution, 1803-1804.1

P

To Commanding Ofacer of the U. S. Squadron in the Mediterranean from
Secretary of the Navy

NAVY
DEP~
Novr 9. 1808
The subject of the communications from M' Simpson & Cap!
Bainbridge relative to the movements of the Emperor, having been
submitted by the President to the consideration of Congress, it is
expected that such provisions will be made as will authorize our
proceeding agai~lsthim in any manner that will tend most effectually
to the preservation and protection of our commerce. A hope however
is entertained, that an adjustment of our di5culties with the Emperor,
may be obtained and peace effected on terms agreeable to us. But
should the authorized negociations fail of producing so desirable a

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

209

result, an additional Frigate will be sent to you with such further
powers and instructions as may be deemed expedient. In the mean
time you will capture and destroy his armed vessels wherever you may
meet with them on the high seas, and use such other means of vigilance and precaution as may appear to you the most effectual to the
protection of our commerce and Seamen in that quarter. It is a
primary object with us to be at peace with the Emperor: we must
create a corresponding disposition in him, which can best be effected
by coercive means. [NDA. LB, 1199-1807.)
To Secretary of the Navy, from Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Bevy

U; S . SHIPConstitution
Gibraltar Bay 9th Norr 1803
SIRI arrived here from Cadiz the 6 t h Ins' On my way I stoped at

Tanger Bay and sent a boat on shore. Everything is quiet in that
quarter. The Emperor has complied strictly with his promise as far
as he has had opportunity. The Captain of the Mishouda has been
severely punished; and the moment the NazLtilus arrived at Mogadore
with the Emperor's orders, the American Brig Hannah, which had
been detained there, was released and the Craw set a t liberty. The
weather has been so stormy since I came into this Bay that i f .has
not been possible for Col. Lear with his family to embark I hope
they will be able to come on board to day - The Argw is arrived
and is without exception the handsomest vessel of her rate that I
have ever seen. She is very much and very justly admired by every
Officer: - The order she is in does great credit to her commander Lt Decatur has delivered me the 30,000 Dollars mentioned in your
letter of the 22nd of August which I now have the honor t.o acknowledge the receipt of and shall attend to its contents - L' Hull has
exchanged commands with L? Decatur The Nautilus & Enterprize
are both here. The Store Ship from BaltQ has arrived - I t is
necessary the provisions should go to Syracuse as soon as possible;
and as no vessels can be obtained to carry them there, except we
trust them in the Vessels of Nations at War I have advised Mr Gavino
to bargain with the master of the Traveller to carry the cargo up,
which be has done, and is to pay 3000 Dollars. This is 800 Dollars
more than the customary freight in English Vessels, if they could be
had, but they cannot, and the expence of landing and storing the
Cargo and re-shipping it, and the damage and loss the provision
would sustain in such removals would make more than three times
that difference in the expence and as English Vessels would be liable
to capture by the French Privateers of whch there are a great number
out we might be disappointed in our supplies. I have advised Mr
Gavino to give him that Sum, as he found the Captain determined
not to take less. The best way in future will be to freight the Store
Ships for Syracuse, to stop a t Gibraltar for orders I regret that She
has not brought out any Cheese, Butter, Molasses, or Candles, as
those articles are extremely dear here. The Enterprize goes direct to
Syracuse to convoy the Provision Ship - The Argus with a convoy
to Mersaillcs and back to this Station; and the Nautilus accompanies
me to Algiers, and from thence off Tripoli. I enclose copies of all
their orders for your perusal. I shall only remain off Tripoli myself

210

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1805 TO 1804

a t present a day or two, as I must go to Syracuse to make the Necessary establishments and arrangements there, but shall not remain
long in port - You may rest confidently assured, there shall not
be an idle Vessel m my Squadron, I shall sail the moment the wind
and weather will allow me to The Store Ship had 2 Men im ressed and taken out of Cadiz by
the British Frigate Meidstone, (!!?aptn Elliot The British make a
practice of taking from our Merchant Vessels every man that has
not a Protection, and very often those who have- What would be
said if our Ships of War were to take by force even Americans out of
English Mercht Ships? it would make a bustle in America as well
as England! and why have we not as good a right even to impress
from their Ships English Men when destitute of Protections, as they
have Americans from Ours? They certainly have no more right to
presume every man without a protection on board our Merchant
Ships to be English than we have to consider every Englishman in
the same situation on board their Vessels an American - However,
this is a matter for the Government - I shall take care that they
do not go so far as to take mine by force with impunity The Argus
is so fine a Vessel, and so well calculated and armed for the service
I shall want her for before Tripoli, that you will pardon me for again
urging the necessity of sending out a 32 Gun Frigate for this Station
to take her place that I may have her Services. I am still of opinion
that a Schooner or Brig with the Frigate, will be necessa to watch
the Straits of Gibraltar and the Coast of Morocco, a n 7 to afford
Convoy to our Mercht Vessels bound up the Mediterranean.
If a quantity of good Slop Clothing could be sent to Syracuse in
the first Store Ship that comes out, it would be of advantage to the
Service, a quantity of Canvass and Twine will be wanted and cannot
be purchased here, without paying a most enormous price for it Lt Dent is an officer of uncommon Merit Active, Steady, Intilligen t,
and ever attentive to his duty. I find great relief since he joined the
Ship, and hope his exertions on all occasions to promote the good of
the Service will entitle him to the notice of the President e're long,
and gain him the promotion of Lieutenant Commandant But at the
same time I hope I shall not be deprived of his services in this Ship
while I command her The Officers generally have conducted well.
I am sorry however to inform you that Lt Livingston of the Argus did
while in Boston conduct very improperly, and in a manner disgraceful
to himself as an Officer; and that there is not any probability of his
amendment - He is extremely intemperate and exposes himself to
observations on board and on Shore. I have forbid Lt Hull from
suffering him to go on shore to disgrace the Service; and the first
formal complaint that is made against him, I shall arrest and order
him home- this will be a painful task to me, but the Service requires it.
I have on board the Constitution many remarkable h e young
men whose conduct promises great things to their Country I t is necessary that as many Mediterranean passes be sent out as
there are Vessels in the Squadron that each one may have a check on
any Barbary Cruiser should they have false Tops - which it has
been hinted to me they can procure [LC. EPP, LB, Mag-Dec. 1803.1

WARS WITH BARBARY POVERS

211

Extract from journal of U. S. Brig Argus. Lieutenant Isaac Hull, U. S. Navy,
commanding, Wednesday, 9 November 1803

(-4t Anchor off Algnziras.) A, M, Moderate Weather at 8 weighed
the anchor sent up top Gall; masts hove short with the best bower.
Isaac Hull Esq' came onboard and took Command, Stephen Decatur
Esqr went onboard the United States Schooner Enterprize also Mr
Bainbridge At 3 P, M, Weighed and stood over towards Gibralter the wind at
S, S, W at 4 came to with the best bower in 10 fathoms Water Veered
away and Moored [off Gibraltar] with the small bower to the K,E,
Best bower to S, W, continual Showers of rain. Doctor Weim came
onbonrd as Surgeon. A, M, Struck lower Yards
[NDA photostat.]
Extract from log book kept by Sailing Master Nathaniel Haraden, U. 6. Navy, on
board U. S. Frigate Conslilution, Wednesday, 9 November 1803

Strong breezes & rain - We continue at Anchor under Algeziras The Ships Company Employed working up Junk & cleaning between
decks - Sail mnkers & carpenters employed in their different departments Towards the Evening the S. W. Wind had nearly increased
to n gale - Launched Top Gallt Masts & bitted a range on the sheet
cable - At 7 in the Evening the Wen ther became more moderate Commodore Preble returned with the Schooner Nautilus - The boat
which was ordered to the Ship in distress return~d;the officer reports
tcheship in distress to be bhe Sheperdess of Boston Cap! Alex! Hodges from 9 P. M. till 3 A. M i t blew a perfect gale from the S m- b b We had smooth water all the gale - TTe are about l h miles from
Algeziras which makes a weather shore - From day light till 7 A. M.
we had light Airs & Variable which gate us a foul hawse which was
immediately cleared as the weather had the appearance of n gale from
the Eastd - The T i n d from the Eastd blows on shore on Algeziras
side $ has a reach of near 6 miles - Tbe Anchorage ground on this
side being Very Extensive & the bottom good it is judged much safer
than Gibraltar side - At 10 A. M. bent the Main Sail Lieut$ Hull
& LieutJ Somers waited on the Commodore At Koon Rinds from the
Northd with rain - Thp Surgeons report this day is 9 Sick & 6

Convects

[LC. EPP, Log Constitution, 1803-1804.1
To Mr. McCreery, United h t e s Congress, from Captab Alexander Murray,
U. 6. Navy

PHIL)N O V1Ot@
~ 1803
Dr SIR I am happy to find that you have taken your station in
Congress, Battering myself in the hope of an acquisition of one more
friend in Congress, to keep up the spirit of our P t ' a t ~ and
,
to put us
upon a more permanent footing than we are at present. I have written to my friend Mr Nicholson on this subject, & can
assure you that thew are but few- of the Officers, belonging to Nary,
who have families that have not nearly ruined them in the service,
for how is it possible that we can rnemtain ourselves, when out of
commission, upon our half pay, not bang even allowed half Rations?
'tis well known, that to keep up s decent ship, and to carry with us
that respect which our Rank, & stations require, every Cant of our

212

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1803 TO 1804

pay is only sufficient t o meet our expences on ship-board; and when
we considcsr that being ever liable to be called into service, it is impossible to turn our attention to other objects, for a livelyhood in the
intervals. As the cheif revenue of the U. States arrives from its commerce,
which must have at least an apparent protection, surely our Countrymen cannot be so ungenerous as to suffer her O5cers to be ruined, or
very much embarrassed, especially as there are so few of us, but I
fear that the object of keeping up that rigid Economy absorbs every
other consideration. It is often found expedient to appropriate a little money to save a
good deal, & the eyes of Europe are now upon us, watcliing our deportment towards the states of Barbary, & badly as our arrangements have
been executed, we have spread no small degree of terror among them,
but like a Dam to impede a rushing torrent, often when least expect~d,
forces its barrier, and ruin and desolation is the consequence, so, be
assured that when ever those Barbary states find us ofl our gaurd
that they will commit serious mischief upon our Commerce, the seeds
of Discord, & Envy, are now sowed and especially with Morocco and
we ought to keep a vigilant lookout in that quarter. I feel happy in seeing your name annexed to the Committee, t o
enquire into the e-spediency of coercive measures, & when we recollect
that Tripoli, & Morocco are nearly 1500 miles apart, & those seas so
uncertain in traversing up, & down, a seperate division should be
provided in case of emergences notwithstanding it may clash with
Financial arrangements & should it be deem'd necessary I hope the
Seer of the Xavy will give me the preference to command, for altho'
high on the list of Rank I have nerer yet been honor'd with the charge
of a division, for what reason I know not, but if I have not merited
such a trust I am unconscious of my errors
[NDA. A. Murray's LB, 1794-1805.3
To Secretary of the Navy from Lieutenant Stephen Decatur, Jr., U. S. Navy

UNITED
STATESSCHOONER
Enterprize

Gibralter bay h o r n loth1803
SIR I have the honor to inform you I arrived here on the first of
this month after a passage of thirty four days, twenty five of which
we had the winds easterly; the A r g w sails well and possesses a number
of excellent qualities, yesterda I delivered the Argus to Lieu5 [Isaac]
Hull and relieveed him in the ommand of the Enterprize. Agreeable to Your instructions I inclose you Commodore Preble's
receipt for the thirty thousand dollars I brought out -

8

[NDA. Officer8 LB, 1802-1805.1
To whom not indicated, from Midshipman Henry Wadsworth, U. 8. Navy

ALGESIRAS
NOV10th. 118031
DEARSIR The Constiti~tionthe A r g w Enterprise & the NazLtiZzcs

are here in company a t Algesiras: if you ask why we have deserted
our old moorings a t Gibraltar - whp it is because the English
commanders have treated us with great indignity have protected our
Runaway Seamen, have refused to give them up, when demanded,
have anchored close to us in order to give our men an opportunity of

WARS WITH BARBARY POWEBS

213

swimming on board of them. Capt Gore of the Medusa & Capt
Ispace] of the Termagant have done this. The Gov. Col Trigge disapproves it & we h o w it to be contrary to the orders & wishes of the
British government - which are to give us all the assistance in their
power, & keep up a good understanding.
The Argus has just arriv'd from America & brings me a letter from
my much lov'd friend M' [Peter?] Thacher: * * *
The Nautilus has just arrived from Mogador where she has been to
witnrss the delivery of the American Brig seized a t the commencement of the disturbances. * * *
[H.W.L. Dana Col.]
Extract from journal of U. S. Brig Argw. Lieutenant Isaac Hull, U. S. Navy, commanding. Thursday, 10 November 1803

[Off Gibraltar] P, M, a t 1 departed this life James MYKinIie Marine
committed the body ol the disceased to the deep [KDA photostat.]
Extract from Diary of Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Navy, Commodore of U. 8.
Squadron in the Mediterranean, Thursday, 10 November 1803

[Off Algesiras] Wind S E and rain. delivered orders to L' Hull of
the Argus for this station but previously to convoy the Trade from
this to Mersailles and Leghorn, and take the Trade down with him Gave orders to L' Decatur of the Enterprize, to convoy the Store Ship
Trawllet Geoc Billups Master to Syracuse and orders to Lr Somers of
the Nautilus t.0 accompany the Constitution to the Blockade of
Tripoli. The Argus and Enterprize sailed for Gibraltar to R a t e r and
take in provisions & Stores. In the Night the Brig Frances of and
from Salem Captain Chapman ran on the rocks near Carbrita point
8r Bulged with a Valuable cargo on board. sent Boats to his assistance
[LC. EPP, Diary, 1803-1804.1
Extract from log book kept by Sailing Master Nathaniel Baraden, U. S. Ravy, on
board U. 6. Fr~gateConsi~lufcon,Thursday, 10 November 1803

Moderate Breezes from the W S W with rain - We continue a t
Anchor a t illgeziras with the En.terprizeArgus & Nautilus in company Lieut Hull was this day ordered to the command of the Brig
Argus & Lieutr Decatur to the command of the Enterpt-ize - By
2 f.M. the wind had Veered to S S E with a constant rain - Apphcation was made to Commodore Preble for a boat to assist in FTeighing
the Anchors of the Shepherdess - At 4 P. M. the Weather became
more moderate - The Argus & Enterprize Weighed 6: stood over
Gibraltar Side - At 7 in the Evening we had heavy squalls from
the W S W which continued by Intervals till 3 A. hl. a t which time
we had a dead calm & r a i n The Eddy & Counter Currents have
given the ship a foul hawse - The Necessary duty of cleaning decks
in the Morning prevents the clearing Hawse - A t day light the
Commodore Ordered an officer 8: boats crew to the Assistnnce of
the Shepherdess - At 9 A. M We had fresh breezes from tbe S W
b W - The master of the American brig [Francis]belonging to Salem
came along side of the Comtitution in the Brigs boat with his mate
& 5 men - He reports that last Evening a t 7 P. M. H e ran ashore

214

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1803 TO 1804

in a heavy Squall from the Westd on the reef of rocks near Carbaritta
Point This Point is the Testern Side of the Entrance of Gibraltar
bay - The Master of the Brig acknowledges it was an Error in his
Judgment which caused his running ashore - Commodore Preble
immediately ordered an Officer with a boats crew to her Assistance
with a Kedge &- Hawser - The Commodore also recommended
the Master Immediately to Employ a number of Spanish boats to
t&e out her Cargo - She is in sight from the Constitution - Her
situation does not Appear Very alarming while the Westerly Winds
continue - She is on a reef about a cables length from the shore At 10 loosed sails to dry - Surgeons report is 12 sick &: 6 convalescents - At Noon strong breezes from the Westd - We attempted
clearing Hawse but as the Ship rides by both cables we found i t
unsafe [LC.

EPP, Log Constitution, 1803-1804.1

To the Eon. William Eustis, United States Congress, from Secretary of the Navy

NAVYD E P ~

Novr 11. 1803.
I n answer to your letter of the 10 ins: I have the honor to inform
you, that we have a t present in the Mediterranean and adjacent
Seas, the following Vessels of war employed for the protection of our
commerce in that quarter. - The Frigates Constitution of 44 Guns;
Philadelphia of 40 Guns; ATewyork of 36 Guns; Adams and John
Adams of 32 Guns each; the Brigs Siren and Argus of 16 Guns each;
the schooners Enterprize, Vixen and Nautilus of 12 Guns each. But
the Frigates h7ewyork, Adams 8r; John Adams, are ordered home,
and their return is expected in the course of the present and the
ensuing month. There will then be left in the Mediterranean,
The Frigates, Constitution - 44 Guns. Philadelphia - 40 "
Brigs,
Siren
of 16 e*
Argus
Schooners Enterprize
of 12 e"
Vixen
h7autllus
[KDA.

1

Cong. LB, Vol. 1, 179&1811.]

Extract from journal of U. S. Brig Argus, Lieutenant Isaac Hull,U. S. Navy, commanding, Friday, 11 November 1803

At 3 furled sails the Commodore came on board people employed
as Necessary - Moored off Gibralter
[XDA photostat.]
Extract from log book kept by Sailing Master Nathaniel Haraden, U. S. Navy, on
board U. S. Frigate Consfifulion, Friday, 11 November 1803

Fresh breezes & cloudy - We continue a t Anchor at Algeziras with
the Schooner Nautilus in company - The Argus & Enterprize a t
Anchor in Gibraltar - At 4 P. hl. We had moderate breezes Cleared Hawse & furled sails - Towards the Evening Tobias Lcar
Esquire the American Consul a t Algiers came on board the Constitution
from Gibraltar with his Attendance & baggage - At 7 in the Evening the boat which was ordered to the Assistance of the American

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

215

brig (on the rocks off Carbaritta Point) returned -The Officerreports
it to be the Brig Francis, Cap1 Chaplain belonging to Salem loaded
with Fish, Butter Cheese Candles Salt provisions & some dry goods When Our boat left her a little after Sundown the Brig was full of
Water - We had frequent Squalls from the North0 with rain during
the Night At 2 A. M. the Boat returned which was ordered to assist
in weighing the Anchors of the Shepherdess We recieved the Kedge &
Hawsers we lent her - At day light the Commodore ordered another
boat to the assistance of the Brig Francis - At 9 A. M. loosed sails
to dry - The boat returned from the Francis - She is now a complete wreck with her masts standing - We supplied her yesterday
with a five inch Hawser of 120 fathoms, 40 fathq of which were lost
among the rocks - At 11 A. M. the Weather became squally Furled sails & swayed up Top Gall5 masts - Made the necessary
Arrangement for unmooring ship - Cap' Hull of the Argus & Lieut'
Decatur of the Enterprize waited on Commodore YrebIe - During
our stay here we have had no communication with Algeziras S ~ d eSurgeons report is 17 Sick 6 ConvVt% one discharged from the Sick
list - At noon me had moderate breezes from the W N W & light
rain [LC. EPP, Log Constitution,

1803-1804.1

To Lieutenant Stephen Decetur, Jr., U. S. Navy, commending U. 8. Schooner
Enterprize, from Captain Edward Preble, U. 6. Navy

UNITEDSTATESFRIGATE
Constdution GIBRALTAR
BAY
1 Ztb Novem: 1808
SIR I enclose you a copy of the declaration of the Blockade of
Tripoly, which has been sent to the direct courts of Europe you will
please make the purport thereof as public as possible, [HS of Pa. Mrs. F. H. Getcheil.]
To Tames Monroe, U. S. Nhister to London, England, from Captain Edward Preble,
U. 6. Navy

CIRCULAR

U: S: SHIPComtibulion
Gibraltar Bay ISth Novr 1803

SIR %%ereas the United States of America and the Regency of
Tripoli, are in a state of War and actual hostility with each other I
have thought proper in order to distress the Enemy by preventing any
supplies from reaching him to Blockade the Port of Tripoli by a detachment of Ships of War, acting under my orders: and you are hereby
requested to communicate this information to the British Government.
To aU the Ministers and Consuls of Neutral Powers a t London, and
to the Consuls for the United States at the ports in England; to be
communicated by them to the Consuls of Neutral Powers residing
there, that they may warn the vessels of their respective Flags, that
all Neutral Vessels that attempt to enter the Port of Tripoli, or are
met with on the coast near that Port after this notice is received by
such Neutral Powers, wiU be stoped by the Squadron under my
command and sent into port for adjudication
Copies of the foregoing Circular letter have been sent to the American Ministers at the Courts of Madrid & Paris; and Bo the Consuls for

216

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1809 TO 1804

the United States residing a t the following places Viz - Mersailles,
Barcelona, Cadiz, Allicani, Malaga, Leghorn, Naples, Lisbon,
Gibraltar, and Tanger [LC. EPP, LB, May-Dec. 1803.1
Extract from journal of U. S. Brig Argus. Lieutenant Isaac Hull, U. 8. Navy, commanding, Saturday, 12 November 1803

[Off Gibraltar] At 8 P M unmoored ship, Rob+ Murray seaman
attempted to desert by Swiming towards the DonegaU British ship
of War Confined him in Irons
[XDA photostat.]
Extract from Memorandum Book of Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Navy, on board
U. 6. Frigate Constitution. 12 November 1803

Declared Tripoli in a state of blockade.
[LC, original.]
Extract from Diary of Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Navy, Commodore of U. 6.
Squadron in the Mediterranean, Saturday, 12 November 1803

Wind Westerly, wrote to our Ministers at the different Courts in
Europe and to our Consuls in those countries - where Ministers are
not resident notifying them of the Blockade of Tripoli, and desiring
them to notify to the Ministers and Consuls of the diierent Neutral
Nations of the same
[LC. EPP, Diary, 1803-1804.1
Extract from log book of U. S. Frigate Constitution, Captain Edward Preble, U. 8.
Navy, commanding, Saturday, 12 November 1803

we continue a t anchor a t algesiras with the Schooner Nautilus in
company the argus and Enterprise at anchor at gibraltar Captain
Chapline of the Brig Franeais came and Took away, the chists and
orther articles that was left on board the Constitution Thursday
last] * * * the Brig Francais now a wreck of[f] Caberetta point
belonges to M' Reess [or Russ]] Merchant in Salem] Every assistance
and advice has been given by Commodore Preble conserning the saving
her cargo/ the Reef shee is on is intierly oppen to the Eastwd and a
gale from that Quarter will Tottaly destroy her/ in consequence of her
situation the Commodore has Recommended the Taliing out her cargo/
[NA. ND original.]

-

Extract from log book kept by Sailing Master Nathaniel Haraden, 0.8. Navy, on
board U. S. Frigate Constituiion, Saturday, 12 November 1803

Moderate Breezes & cloudy - We continue a t Anchor a t Algeziras
with the Nautilus in corn? - The A r m & Enterprize a t Anchor a t
Gibraltar Cap3 Chaplin of the Brig Francis came & took away the
chests & other articles which were left on board on Thursday last At 3 P. M. We Veered away on the best bower & unmoored ship We hove into a cable on the small bower
Stowed the
best bower - We had moderate breezes from the West$ all
the Afternoon with showers of rain - From Sundown till midnight light airs & Variable from the North'J - The Brig Francis now
off Cabaritta point belongs to Mr R w Merchant in Salem - Every

-

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

217

Assistance & Advice has been given by Commodore Preble concerning
the saving of her cargo - The reef on which she is, is entirely open
to the Eastd and a gale from that Quarter will totally destroy her In consequence of her situation the Commodore has recommended the
taking out of her cargo - At day light we hove short on the Small
bower & up top GslIt Yards - The Weather to the Westg is foggy
with light Airs from the North"
We stowed the sheet anchor in
order to have all clear for sea as soon as a breeze sprang up - At
9 A. hl. the Weather in some measure cleared up - Loosed Studdf
Sails to dry - Ships company employed Cleaning Ship -By 10 A. M.
we had light rain & Variable winds from the Eastward - For these
last 4 weeks we have had a great Quantity of rain & damp weather The Sails not bent are more or less Mildewed although every opportunity which has offered for drying them has been attended to - The
Surgeons report to the Commodore is 16 sick 7 convalescents & one
discharged from the Sick list - At noon a light breeze Sprang up
from the S S E - The brig Francis is now in Sight & we can percieve
two or three hghters taking out her cargo. [LC. EPP, Log Constitution, 180.3-1804.1
Extract from journal of Midshipman F. Cornelius deKrafft, U. S. Navy, in U. S.
Brig Sfnn of 18 gnns, Lieutenant Charles Stewart, U. S. Navy, commanding,
Saturday, 12 November 1805

[Convoy duty since leaving Gibraltar 25 OctoberJ Commences
with fresh breezes & heavy sea. The Pdapsw & Fame dose under
our stern. At Jipast meridian hove too & spoke the aforesaid
vessel she prov'd to be a (Ragusa) Brig from Leghorn bound to
Alicant, out 4 days. At X past 1 boarded main tack. At 2 haul'd
up main sail. At % past 2 close reef'd topsails & sent down top gall+
yards. At % past 3 reef'd fore sail & handed main sail. At 5 hove
too under close reef'd topsails. Cape Corso bearing S. E dist. 6
leagues. At 3 past 10 fU'd away & made the Island of gorgona.
Midnight moderate - Gorgona bearing N E by E 2 leagues distant.
At 1 AM hove too for the ccnvoy. At % past 1 Ul'd away E N E.
At 2 hove too Gorgona bear6 NW. made signal for the convoy to
heave too with Starboard tacks on board. At 6 sent up top gall%
yards. At M past 6 made signal for the convoy to keep their course,
same time fill'd away & stood in for the port of Leghorn. got the
anchors ready for coming too & overhaul'd a range of cable. At 9
came too with the convoy in Leghorn bay in 7 fathoms water. Cape
Nero bearino S M E light house S E by S Marona W. N. W. At 10
hoisted out goats, sent down top gall1 yards & overhaul'd a range of
the larboard cable. - At I1 launch'd top gall1 masts a t % past 11
barge went on shore with M? Cathcart. At meridian gave 50 fathoms
more cable to the 1'5 scope. [NDA.]
To Captain Edward Preble, U.S. Navy, fromTobiasLear, U.S. ConrrulGeneral,Algiers

UNITED
STATEB
FRIGATE
Comtifutwn
Gibraltar Bay, Novr 1 StQ180.9.
SIR, AS you have been necessarily and usefully detained in this
part of the Mediterranean, in consequence of our difference with the

218

N A V A L OPERATIONS FROM 1803 TO 1804

Emperor of Morocco, until the season is so far advanced as not to
admit of active or permanent operations before Tripoli until next
Spring; I have concluded that it would be most proper for me to
remain at Algiers during the winter, and not proceed to Tripoli, to
endeavour to enter into any negotiations for a peace with that Regency
(which I am impowered to do by the President of the U.States) untd
the season will admit of pushing, with vigour & activity, such operations as you may judge will be most effectual for reducing our Enemy
to the necessity of malcing peace, if he should not be disposed to do it,
upon proper and admissible terms, before that time. Should this arrangement meet your approbation, I will be ready to
proceed t.o Tripoli whenever you will be pleased to advise me that the
season is proper and your arrangements made, and will join you off
that place in such Vessel as you may send to Algiers for me. [LC. EPP, Vol. 7, 1803.1
To Tobias Lear, U. S. Consul General, Algiers, from Captain Edward Preble, U. S.
Navy

UNITEDSTATES
FRIGATE
Con~titution
Gibraltar Bay ISt@N O O1803
~
SIR,I am honored with your letter of the 13t@inst: Your proposition
to wait at Algiers until the Spring I think prudent and proper, as the
season is now too far advanced for active operations, against Tripoli
with any prospect of success, I shall Order a respectable force early
in the Spring to accompany you to Tunis previous to your joining me
off Tripoli
[LC.

EPP, LB, May-Dcc. 1803.1

To Lieutenant Isaac Hull, U. S. Navy, commanding U. S. Brig Argus, from Captain
Edward Preble, U. 6. Navy

U S SHIPConstitution
Gibraltar Bay ISt@ Novr 1803
SIR YOUmay make the best of your way for Leghorn with the
Vessels you have under Convoy pass near Cape de Gatt where i t
is probable you will meet with me - You will attend to your
Como and take no notice of my motions, unless I make a signal for
ou, %hen you return to this Station, you mill not convoy any
herchant Vessels excepting they are loaded for acct of the U: S above
Cape Martin, but attend to the other part of your instructions [LC. EPP, Order Book, May 1803-June 1805.1
To Captain William Bainbridge, U. 6. Navy, from the Minister of the Bashaw of
Tripoli
rTranslation]

TRIPOLI,November lSth, 1803.
Captain BAINBRIDGE,
former Commander of the frigate Philadelphia
of the United States of America.
Yesterday I sent ou my Secretary and a t the same time I requested
Mr. Nissen, Consu General of His Danish Majesty, to inform you
of the letters which the families of the risoners, which are at Gibraltar,
I
is Excellency was, and of his
had received, of the rage in which !

f

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

219

dispositions. T o d a y to my great suprise I learned all that has been
done by order of His Excellency, assuring you that I am very much
concerned a t not knowing what to do to have you and your officers
again undisturbed in your house, for the advice which I a m able to
give you is to oblige His Excellency by returning t o him his subject,^,
without loss of time, and for this purpose to write to Commodore
Preble, explaining your situation to him. If the latter consents,
you will have fulfilled your obligation, and if he does not agree to
your request, a t least you will have gained all the time until a reply
is received, during which you will not be interfered with. If what
I have told you is agreeable to you, send your reply in French, and
on your account I shall go to the Castle this evening in order to do
my best to persuade His Excellency.
Your humble servant.
Signed in Arabic.

MAHOMED
DGHIES.

[Trandator's Note: Thie letter is in poor French (badly misspelled in places),
Some of the statements are not very clear, which make8 a closely literal translation
impracticable. A somewhat free translation is given in some cases, but true to
the intended meaning, to the translator's best judgment.]
[LC. EPP, Vol. 7, Sept-Kav. 1803.1

Extract from journal of U. S. Brig Argus. Lieutenant Isaac Hull,U. S. Ravy, commanding, Sunday, 13 November 1803

This day beings with light airs from the Southwd a t 8 A. M. the
Commodore made the Signal to prepare for sailing, cleared the deck
and hoisted in the launch a t 9 made the Signal with a Gun for the
Convoy to weigh, weighed and made sail with the Ship Alexander
Hodgdon of Boston & Schooner Hazard of Salem in Company, the
Commodore and Nautilus weighed a t Algaziras and stood out of the
bay (Sailing out of Gibraltr Bay)
[SDA photostat.]
Extract from Memorandum Book of Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Navy, on b o d
U. 6. Frigate Corwiitufion. 13 November 1803

Sailed for the coast of Tripoli.
[LC, original.]
Extract from log book kept by Gailing Easter Nathaniel Earaden, U. S. Navy, on
board U. S. Frigate Constitution. Sunday, 13 November 1803

Light airs &- rain - We continue a t Single Anchor at Aigeziras
perfectly clenr for sea as soon as the wind permits - The Schooner
Nautilus in company At 3 P. M. lighted the small bower - found
it foul - Let go the best bower & Veered to a third of a cable Stowed
the Small bower - Lieutt Somers of the Nautilus waited on Commodore Preble - We had no communicution with the Shore all dav
except one boat Sent to Gibraltar - I n the Evening Lieutl H U ~
of the Argus waited on Commodore Preble - We had light airs
from Noon till 9 in the morning a t which time a light breeze sprung
We Weighed & came to Sail. We have been
up from the Northghere a t Anchor Seven days; the gre~ltestpart of the time we have had
rainy Weather. We have recieved no supply of any h d during our

220

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1805 TO 1804

stay here - Yesterday we recieved from t;he U. S. Brig Argus Daniel
MFAllean & Edward Madden marines who now belong to the Constitution - We sent from the Constitution to the Argus Simeon
Saunders marine - On Friday last we supplied the brig Argus
with a Quantity of Junk supposed to be 1500 CWt We also supplied
the Schooner Nautilus with a small quantity of Wood - When we
weighed a t 9 this morning the light breezes continued till 10 A. M.
After that till noon we had a dead calm We continued over Algeziras
Side on Soundings with the best bower clear in case it should be
wanted - We have now on board the Comti.tution 90 Leagurs 76
Butts & 56 Gang Casks of Water which is 41385 Gallons - At Noon
a dead calm We are off the Town of Algeziras nearly 2 miles from the
Shore in 28 fathoms of Water - The Surgeons report to the Commodore is 19 Sick & 8 convalescents The Marine O5cer reports to
the Commodore 7 Marines Sick - 2 Marines confined & 3 on Extra
duty - Lieutt Decator of the Enterprize waited on Commodore
Preble - The Ships draft abaft this day is 23 f t 4 I n forward - 21.6
which is 22 Inches difference
[LC.

EPP, Log Constitution, 1803-1804.1

To Secretary of the Treasury from Secretaries of State, War, and the Navy

NAV.DEP.

Nov. 14, 1803
To avoid the expence to which we are exposed for the rent of
Houses for the messengers of the Departments of State, War and
navy - General post office and of the accountants of the War and
navy Departments - & to provide against accidents of fire to the
Buildings occupied by these Departments we conceive that it would
be expedient for Congress to make provision for building Six small
brick Houses with necessary buildings attached to them & for purchasing two fke engines and erecting Pumps &$ we therefore submit
the following Estimate of monies necessary to effect these objects
and request that you will lay the same before Congress
Six small brick dwellings
. . a 1000 each- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 6000 other necessary Buddings-- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 1200 Fire Engines . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
- - - - - - 1400
Pumps . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
350
Buckets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
200

9150

GID-RANGER.

J A M EMADISON
~
H. DEABORN
Rp SMITH.

[NDA. Treasury, Vol. 2, 1803-1821.1
To Lieutenant John Cassin, U. S. Navy, Navy Yard, Washington, D. C., from
Secretary of the Navy

NAVYD E P ~-

Novr 14: 1803. You will proceed with all practicable dispatch to put the General
Creene in a state of complete repair. [NDA. OSW, Vol. 6, 1802-1805.1

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

221

To Captain Edward Preble, U. 6. Navy, from Tobias Lear, U. 6. Consul General,
Algiers

UNITED
STATES
FRIGATE
Constitution
At Sea, November l d t Q 1805.
SIR, If you can with propriety, and without injury to the Service,
permit Mr Robert Henley, a Midshipman on board the Constitution
to remain with me at Algiers this Winter, I shall feel highly gratified
by the indulgence, as his services may be useful to me in the discharge
of my public duties there. Should this request be granted, Mr Henley will hold himself ready
to join the service at any moment he may be called upon.
[LC. EPP, Vol. 7, 1803.1
Extract from log book of U. S. Frigate Comtilulion. Captain Edward Preble, U. S.
Navy, commanding, Monday, 14 November 1803

Laying Becalmnd in Gibraltar Bay, a t $4 past 12 a light Breeze
sprung up from the Southwd we filld Towards the Rock/and Tackd
as necessary to clear Europa point, at 4 P M. we weatherd Europa
oint and Made Sail to the Eastwd/in order to proceed as far up the
Rfediterrnnean as algienlthe Brig Argus and the Schooner Navtilua
are in Company, with two american Vessels under convoy/latitud
ob 36. 28
[NA.

KD original.]

To John Gavino, U. S. Consul, Gibraltar, from Secretary of the Navy

NAY.DEP

Nov. 15. 1805
Daniel Bedinger Esq navy agent at norfolk will transmit to you
Bill of lading and invoice of the cargo of the provision ship the WiUiam
and Mary the freight is to be paid here - The Captain of the William
and Marp is directed either to land the Cargo a t Gibraltar or to proceed with i t to hlalta as he may be advised by you on his arrival
a t Gibraltar - In forming your determination on this point you will
consult the convenience of our Squadron - Should you send the
William and M a y to malta you will give the Captain the necessary
instructions with respect to the Disposition of the Cargo
INDA. GLB, Vof. 6, 1802-1 803.1
To Captain Edward Preble, U. 6. Navy, from Secretsty of the Navy

NAVYDEP?
Nocc 16.1803

-

Enclosed you will receive copies of my letters to you of the 8*
inst The originals mere sent by the schooner Citizen Cap! Lawson,
which vessel sailed from this port with 100 Gun carriages for the
Emperor on the 13* instant. P. S. The Citizen goes to L'Orient first, then to Gibraltar. [NDA. LB, 1799-1807.1

222

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1803 TO 1804
[15 November 18031
To President Thomas Jefferson from Richard Farquhar, Malta

MAYIT PLEASEyou^ EXCELLENCY
In consequence of not r e c e i ~ n gan answer to a Letter, which I
forwarded to you from His Excelency Cidy Hamet Carmile Bashaw
of Derna I send you the other copy whith His Seal & Signed by His
Secretary
In which he requests the loan of forty Thousand Spanish Dollars
with Guns Powder 8 9 he will give the United States any Security in
his Power G z by Putting American Troops in Possession of one of the
forts in Tripoli when ever it is taken until1 that sum is repaid
Should the City of Tripoli be taken by Storm he the said Bashaw
of Derna will then have Plenty of Cash &- the American Troops will
receive their Share of Prize Money,
the Bashaw of Tripole has been a t War with a great Kation
of Arabs but has come to some terms with them, but has lost many
of his Troops also with his Brother the Bashaw of Derna who has
defated him, altho in want of every thing, but finding his Brothers
Troops daily arrive from Tripoli & no assistance from America he
thought Proper to leave Derna for the Present.
Therefore the United States will consider whither i t is better to
assist this said Bashaw of Derna to be Bashaw of Tripoli or to pay the
Present Bashaw his unreasonable demand of three Million of Dollars
and then not certain of keeping Peace with him one year afterward
if the United States assist the Said Bashaw of Derna to be Bashaw
of Tripoli they are certain of being successfull and it will be the means
of keeping America a t peace with all the other Barbary States
I understand your late Consul a t Tripoli has been the cause of
this War &' he has recommended to be your Consul in Malta a Mr
Poulis who was latly Consul to the Present Bashaw of Tripoli which
does no good to your Affairs. as I was a witness to the unfortunate
loss of the Frigate Phzladelphia and was of great Service to the
Officers who was stript of every thing I also advanced CaptQ~ninbridge t h e e Hundred Spanish Dollars. I have done the United
States many Services & will do them more ns I send off a Small
Vessel t o Tripoli to get InteUgence which I will give to the American
Comodore or any other Officers who may come hear
MALTA
NOP'1 1803
[LC. EPP, Vol. 7, 1803.1
To Secretary of State from John Gavino, U. 8. Consul, Gibraltar

GIBRALTAR
16'QNovembr 1803
SIR Deprived the honor of any of your Commands I beg leave to
refer to my last Respects NP 135 Accompanp Copy of one from
Consul OBrien of Algeir under date 14tb Sep' last.
Coll! Lear in the Constitution left us with the Nautilus the 13Q
Inst for Algiers, as did said day the Brig Argus with two Vessels under
her Convoy for Leghorn Yesterday mild the Schooner Enterprize Cap$ DeCature for Cyracuese with the Victualler ship Traveller, for the use of the Squadron A few days ago four sparush ships the Line past this from the East,
hvo got to C a b , the others s u p p o d to have gone for F e d

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

223

The Contagiouse Disorder still Continues at Malaga, & altho one
half the Inhabitants quited the T o m , and the Governour suspended
all Communication 1~1ththe Mole & Harbour, 70 to 100 were b our
last acc0unt.sof St@Inst canied off daily; The Governour of this lace
admits no Vessels to anchor in his Bay from the intermediate Coast of
Spain, bet+een Alicante & Cadiz, and from those Ports & others
beyond them, they are subjected to quarantine in Conformity to the
Accounts that the Health office may have of the state of Publick
health, when they arrive
As to Barbary Occurrencys have nothing new, yet referr to the
Inclosed from Consul Simpson of Tanger. - On the 2e Inst: arrived
the ship Old Tom Cap! Cormick from Norfolk with stipulations for
Algier; was Quarantind having no Bill of health, he proceeded the
6th A few days ago arrived a Convoy from England with Stores for this
Place and Malta. Admiral Nelson Continues off Toulon, has 11
Sail the Line and many frigates, three of the former now here for
Provisions & Stores, one is Stationd oFCadiz.
The British Consul Falcon who was sent away from Algiers some
time ago, has gone by orders from Goverment to ad! Nelson, who is
to return him there, and if refused has (it is sayd) Discretional orders
to act ns may think best for the honour of Dhe Nation; the Admiral
owes that Regency an old Grudge. -

6

[NA. SDA. CL, Gibraltar, Vol. 2, 17961804.1

To Captain Edward Preble, U. 6. Navy, from Captain W i a m Bainbridge, U. S.
Navy

TRIPOLI
BARBARIE
16Q fioel180$
SIR Owing to letters said to be received from the Tripolitan
Prisoners in Gibralter, taken in the Ship Miso.tldra ~A4mhouda],to
their families in this place; mcntioni~gLhat they mere cruelly treated,
the Bashaw of this Regcncy had myself and Officers taken from our
Quarters, and carried down to the loatl1some prison of our Crew,
amongst whom we were confined the whole day without any thmg to
eat; in the Evening the Minister got us removed to our Quarters,
where I received a letter from him, a coppy of which I enclose you &
my reply to it.
About 10 OClock a t night was sent for by the Minister, who I saw,
and erticularly explained to him that the information must be false,
and e must be sensible that I did not command the Commodpre and
could not & would not come under any obligation respect~ngthe
return of the Tripolitan subjects here; be requested that I would write
and give you this information; which I conceve i t my d u t . ~to do.
You will find by the Ministers letter that he has interrested hunself in
our situation it was to him th?t we gave our parole wbich obtained us
the Quarters of the late Amencan Consular house.
Our People are kept employed a t various branches of their profession
and labour; the Officers as yet, have not been made to work, myself
never will
A seamon belonging to the Crew who was my Coackswain (& a
favorite) by the name of John Wilson a Swede, has behaved in a most
infamous manner; by t e r n the Bashaw numerous lies to exasperate
him to treat the ~fhcera& Men with severity myself he hm impu-

g

224

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1803 TO 1801

dently insulted, and expects to take protection under the Sweedish
Consul; as i t would be grateful to the feelings of myself, Officers, &
Men to have the rasscall returned [?] with us, to answer for his villninous conduct; you will much oblige the unfortunate, by writing to
the Sweedish Consul a t this place re uiring his desisting in any manner
to claim the said Wilson, as he will7.3 e considered a deserter from the
service of the United States. The Consul's character prevents my
having the least communication with him on the subject. my situation is such that I cannot treat him as he justly deserves
P. S. you will please to address all your letters for me to N. Nissen
Esqr Danish Consul [LC. EPP, Vol. 7, 1803.1
To the Minister of the Bashaw of Ripoli, from Captain William Bainbridge, U. 6.
Bavp

TRIPOLI
BARBARIE
16Q Novr 1803
SIR I've the honor of receiving your letter respecting the treatment
which myself and Oflicers have this day experienced said to be by
His Excellency's order on account of some letters received from the
Tripolitan Prisoners a t Gibralter captured in the Ship Misoudra,
mentioning their being cruelly treated; the information must be incorrect, as it is directly contrary to the Naval laws of the United
States and to the known humanitv of the Americans to treat their
prisoners ill.
I shall write to Commodore Preble and state the demands of his
Excellency the Bashaw, and feel sensible of your politeness in the
buissiness
MOHAMMED
DGHIES
Esqr
Minister to his Ex. the Bashuw of Tripoli
[LC. EPP, Vol. 7, 1803.1
Fatract from journal of U. S. Brig Argus. Lieutenant Isaac Hull, U. 6. Navy, commanding, Tuesday, 15 November 1803

at 5 Malaga bore NKE distance 9 Legues mede & shortened sail
as occasion required to Keep Company with our Convoy At 7 A, M, the Barbary shore in sight and 4 strange sail in sight
standing to the Westwa
At 10 the Commodore and Schooner out of sight Convoy in Company :
Latitude Observed 36'29' N.
[NDA photostat.]
To Tobias Lear, U. 6. Consul General, Algiers, from Captain Edward Preble, U. 6.
Bavy

UNITEDSTATES
FRIGATE
ConstitUtion at Sea
16'4 November 1803
SIR, Enclosed is a permission for Mr Henly to remain at Algiers with
ou agreeable to your request, and should it be disagreeable to Mr+
f e a r ta part with her Brother, during your absence in the spring, he
may remain a t Algiers, 'till your return, and then join the Squadron [Stephen Decatur Col.]

WARS R'ITH BARBARY POWERS

225

Zxtrect from journal of U. 6. Brig Argus. Lieutenant Isaac Huil, U. S. Navy, commanding. Wednesday, 16 November 1803

These 24 hours Commence with moderate breezes and Cloudy
Weather at j6 past 3 P, M, bore up for the ship and Schooner they being considerably astern. a t 4 Mod14 bore N. dist. 5 leagues saw a
large sail to the Eastwg made the signal for the Ship to close in which
was not answered At 6 took the Schooner in tow she sailing dull
and made sail
Latitude Observed 36'23' N.
[NDA phot.ostat.j
Extract from Diary of Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Bevy, Commodore of U. S.
Squadron in the Mediterranean, Wednesday, 16 November 1803

Nautilw returned from her chase and reported one vessel to be a
Latine Spanish merchant Vessel from Cadiz for Leghorn and the Brig
a Dane from Tetuan for Tunis with Six Blgerine Passengers on boad;
Wind from the Eastward: Tacked ship occasionally:
[LC. EPP, Diary, 1803-1804.1
Extract from log book kept by Sailing lYIeeter Rathaniel Haraden, U. S. Navy, on
board U. S. Frigate Ccruliluiion. Wednesday, 16 November 1803

Moderate Breezes & pleasant Weather - We continue Standing
towards the land, till M past 5 a t which time we tacked from the land
Grenadine Mountains bearing N. E. We are at this time nearly Six
Miles from the land to the Eastq which is just in Sight in the night
& supposed to be near point Sacraftil [Sacratif] bore East nearly 5
leagues Towards the Evening the Weather became cloudy with fresh
breezes from the E S E - I n second reefs in the T o p s d s & down Top
Gallant Yards - In the course of the Afternoon We punished Edward
Madden Marine with 48 lashes for refusing duty, contempt of a Commissioned OfEcer, Insolence to a non-commissioned Officer 8: attempting to desert This Marine is a very Notorious character & was
recieved on Sunday last from the U. S. Brig Argus in Irons - Punished
Thomas Jones Seaman Thirty Six lashes for Drunkeness Insolence to
his superior Officer & Neglect of duty - Punished also James Butler
seaman with 24 lashes for drunkeness &. neglect of duty - From 5
P. M. till midnight we continued standin to the south9 at which time
we tacked to the N.E. by 4 A. M. The #*;od
had shifted by degrees to
the S S E - At 6 A. M. We saw the land bearing from N E b N to
E b N The weather bein Hazy & the clouds hanging over the land
makes our situation doubt ul but from the distance ran from Our bearings last night we suppose the land within us to be point Adera & the
land E b N to be Cape De Gatte At K past 6 A. M. We out reefs &. up
Top G d r Yards. After 7 A. M. till 9 A JMwe had light Breezes with
calms & rain - By Intervals after this till noon we had fresh breezes
& rain with frequent Squalls from the West$ - At jh past 10 A. M.
in tlrird reefs in the Topsails & down Top Gall! Yards - Surgeons
report 18 Sick & 6 convalescents. -

f

[LC. EPP, Log Constitution, 1803-1801.J

226

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1803 TO 1804
[17 November 18031
To Eon. William Eustis, United States Congress, from Secretary of State

The Secretary of State presents his respects to M' Eustis, and has
the honor to enclose to him a statement of the Naval force of Morocco
as far as known.
JAMES
MADISON.
OF STATE
DEPARTMENT
1r t h N O V
1805.
~
@nclosum]

The following is an account of the Naval Force of Morocco, as far
as is known, exclusive of the two frigates captured by the Vessels of
War of the United States.
A Ship of 30 Guns and 150 Men,
Two gallies built last year.
Another galley was getting ready a t Tatuam in August, and the
Governor of Tangier at that date expressed his intention of arming a
two masted boat lately seized there under Genoess colours. In the
month of September last passports were issued by all the Consuls at
Morocco, except the American, for another Frigate which was to
proceed to Cadiz, Lisbon or elsewhere to be coppered and repaired.
[KA.

SDA. Dom. L., Vol. 14, Mav 1802-May 1805.1

To Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Bavy, from James Leander Cethcart, Leghorn

LEGHORN
Novr 1Ytb 1805
SIR, I have the honor to communicate to you the intelligence contain'd in the following extracts from the letters of Mr Nissen his
Danish Majesty's Consul Gen! at Tripoli in Barbary and must request
that you will a t all times avoid mentioning the source from whence you
gain your intelligence as it might have serious consequences and might
even tend to place Mr Nissen's life in Jeopardy, should the Bashaw be
inform'd of his friendly interference, this Gentleman has been of great
service to the U. States, he is candid sensible & above the mean intrigues of those Consuls, who prefer their own Interest and ease to the
honor of their Country As such give me leave to recommend him as
the most proper person to be employ'd, should a negotiation commence
on your arrival off Tripoli I am with sentiments of perfect respect Sir Your &c
LEA^ CATHCART
(Signed) JAMES
[For enclo~uressee documents dated 15 July, 19 and 28 September, 1803.1
[Stephen Decatur Col.]

To Daniel Bedinger, Bavy Agent, Aorfolk, Va., from Secretary of the Navy

NAVDEP
novem 18@1808
I am honored with your letter of the 13'5 ins$- If you can procure
in season 10,OOO!b more of bread at norfolk be pleased to do so otherwise the Vessel must sail with the quantity already supplied - I
hope the rice will arrive in time - it is an important article and cannot
be procured in the mediterranean but on extravagant terms - Be

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

227

pleased to add to the Cargo if they can be stowed away in the vessel
the following articles V'1z 3000!" of Butter firkin
10,000 " of Suet
8,000 " of Cheese - good New England
1.300 Gallons of Melasses
1; 300 Gallons of Vinegar
50 Boxes of Candles of wh
20 must be Spermaceti
If the Urdliam & May will not receive the whole of the additional
articles but part you will in that case proportion the quantity of each
to the whole amount directed to be put on board As the omers or crew of the U7ilEiamand ~ k b may
y in consequence
of the late intelligence from the mediterranean entertain fears of her
capture by the Moors I deem it proper to inform you, that you may
quiet such fears if entertained - that there are now cruising northward & southward of the rock of Gibraltar the following Vessels The Constitution 44 Guns
Brig's Syren & Argus 16 - 24 pd Caronades
Schr Ente~prize& Nuuti$z~12 G u s each
The frigates New York of 36 Guns and John Adurns of 32 Guns
were also in the neighborhood of Gibraltar in September last and i t is
presumed they would remain there untill their cooperation in the
protection of our commerce should have been considered unnecessary The frigate Philadelphia of 40 Guns and the Schooner Vixen of
12 - 18 pQCarronades are cruising Eastumd to protect our commerce
against the Enemy up the mediterranean Be pleased to deliver the accompanying letter addressed to Mr
Gavino to the Captain of the R7dEiam and Mary
[XDA. GLB, Tol. 6, 1802-1803.1

To Ceptain Edward heble, U. S. Navy, from Secretary of the Navy

NAVYD E P ~
Noz??18: 1803.

Commodore PREBLE.
- Mediterranean.
I have received your dispstcfies by Commodore Morris. T h e di~tribut~ion
which you have made of the force committed to
you, is judicious - your construction of your authority is correct your orders to your Officers are Soldier-like - in a word Sir, your
conduct presages a complete fulfilment of our expectations, & justifies
the high confidence reposed in you. - The President has charged
me to convey fo you h s thanks - be pleased also to accept mine. [NDA. LR, 1794-1807.1

228

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1805 TO 1804

To Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Navy, from Charles Pinckney, U. S. Minister to
Madrid, Spain

MADRID
1at4 November 1805.

DEARSIR,I received yesterday a letter from the french Ambassador
a t this Court in which he mentioned to me that some Deserters from
the french Marine had taken refuge on board the United States frigate,
the Constellation, & requests, that I would, in compliance with the
good understanding which subsists between our two Governments,
use my endeavours to have them delivered up to the french Commissary at Cadiz. - In consequence of this request I take the liberty
of recommending to you not to suffer any french Sailors to be shipped
by the Officers under your command - The present situation of
the United States with respect to their Commerce & Flag is so happy
& valuable a one, that it can never be prudent in us to risque a dispute
witb either of the belligerent Powers for the sake of obtaining a few
Stlilors - We surely have Sailors enough of our own to prevent this
necessity - In short, the state of affairs requires that we should be
very exact indeed in our conduct, & as the French have, I am told,
given u several American Sailors who had entered their serwice, I hope
you w$ enable me to say that we have done the same.
You will let me hear from you on this subject as soon as possible, &
I should be obliged to you to write by duplicate, as there is a probability that one of your Letters may miscarry, unless indeed you should
happen to be in a Spanish Port at the time you write.
[LC.

EPP, Vol. 7, 1803.1

To Captain Edward Preble, U. 6. Navy, from James Leander Cathcart, Leghorn

LEGHORN
2L70vr 18t@1803.
SIR. I have the honor to inform you that we arrived here on the
12t@Ins: and on the 1 4 t V got practique, the brig by an accident was
quarantined for some days longer. Enclosed is the latest intelligence from Tripoli by which you will
be inform'd of the whole marine force of that Regency, & that several
of their Cruisers are at Derna where they will undoubtedly remain
until the Bashaw of Tripoli subdues his brother Hamet, in order to
prevent the latter from receiving supplies from Malta, this will take
up a considerable time to effect, & it occurs to me that the[y] would
fall an easy prey to any of our vessels of war that would attempt the
enterprize. - Uerna is the eastermost Yort or Bay of the Regency of
Tripoli, it is defended by a small fortification of 8 or 10 Guns the
water is not deep, but sufficiently so for our Schooners when lighten'd
for the purpose. You will likewise receive copys of two letters from me to Comv
Morris ~ h i c hwill give you my unalterable opinion relative to the
manner of negotiating with Tripoli, their is nothing formidable in
that Regency but 10 Gun boats & the Bashaws obstinacy; the first
must be destroy'd; & the last subdued by force of arms before we will
be able to effect any thing, unless overnment thinks proper to comply
with all his demands, which wil furnish the other Elegencys with
pretext to encrease their demands upon us & their will be no end to
their exactions depredations & insolcnce; we had better be at war with
all the Barbary States at once than to be treated by them as a subdued
nation, which We certainly shall be, if we condescend to comply with

f

- - - -

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

229

the Bashaw of TripoLi's demands; all Europe as well as Barbary hadl
view'd our conduct in silent expectation, since the war with Tripoli
commenced, the former with an intention to follow our example if
worthy imitation, & the latter to know how to rank us among the
nations of the earth, whether to class us with Great Britain and
France the only nations who make themselves respected, or with the
northern nations whose miserable pusdnnimous acpnomy has so far
preponderated in their Councils as to induce them m many instances
to sacrifice their national dignity merely because it cost's them something less to bribe those Hegencys to confer the honor of permiting
them to navigate the mediterranean sea, than i t would to maintain a
Squadron in the Mediterranean: it is true t.hey have an excuse for so
doing that we have not: they say the act is by no means consider'd
as national, the Chamber of. Commerce defrasing the expences
occasioned by an intercourse wlth the Barbary States: and say they,
if the merchants finds that i t is to their advantage to pay those sums
for the enjoyment of a trade (by no means secure) in the mediterranean why should we go to a considerable expence to oppose them, when
the King pays nothing; it is different with us the money comes out of
the public treasurg and is appropriated by a public act of the legislative
body of the nation which makes i t the more dishonorable. I shall remain here until May, in the mean time if I can be of any
use either in procuring Gunboats or accomplishing any thing conducive to the good of the service, I am always ready at a moments
warning; I mention Gunboats because I am con-Finced that with two
mortars mounted on the brigs & eight or ten Gunboats that the force
under your command is sufficient to reduce Tripoli to ashes & propably
to effect a revolution in that Regency favourable to our interests in
the whole of the Barbary States, it would st least in the sentiments
of the heads of the other Regencys which would insure us more respect
in future, as we must at some period adopt energetic measures, the
sooner the better as it will be attended with less fxpence. 1 would thank you to inform me where you %dlmost propably find
any communication that I may have
my power to make you, as
M' Kissen & others communicates intelligence to me with less reserve
than they would to a stranger. If any thing worth your attention should occur before the departure
of the &%en it shall be the subject of another communication, wishing
you success in all your enterprizes, I remain with the greatest
respect. ILC. EPP, Vol. 7, 1803.)

+

Extract from log book of U. S. Frigate Collsli1utlon, Captain Edward Preble, 1J. S.
Navy, commanding, F'mday, 18 November 1803

we are now Running to the Eastwg with the Barbary Coast in
sight/ in order to proceed to algiers/
Latitu'J obd 36. 56 8 9
[NA. ND original.]

230

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1803 TO 1804

To Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Navy, from Lieutenant John Smith, U. S. Navy,
commanding U. S. Schooner Vixen

MALTANOD'19th 1803
SIR, I have the honour to inform, that agreeable to Cap! Bainbridge's letter of the 1st I left Malta on the 15th with dispatches for
you, after having m[any] Calms on the 17th Gozo bearing S. S. E. 39
Miles, I e-qerienced a heavy Blow from the N. W. which compelled
me to return to Malta, speaking at the same time a Convoy from
Gibraltar to Malta, having in Company a Ship with Provision, by
which I received letters for Cap+Bainbridge & myself, mine not informing me of your situation, I conceived that the nature of the service rendered it consistant to read of those from you to Cap' Bainbridge, in order to preclude the possibility of not falling in with you
on my way to Gibraltar.
Herewith I take the liberty of enclosing my letter from Cap3 Bainbridge, with a copy of his to the Secretary of the Navy - I have left
one letter in the hands of the Consul of this place from Cap! Bainbridge for you - I shall leave this place to day on my way to Gibraltar, keeping the southern shore on board in order to meet with you which should I not effect, I shall proceed to the before mentioned place,
depositing in the hands of M: Ga.rino the letters to be forwarded by
the earliest conveyance to America, from whence I shall repair with
all possible dispatch to join the Squadron, trusting that you will view
my arrangement as consistant as my situation will admit of
P S. Coinceiving it probable that you may wish some communication with the Town of Tripoli; I have directed the Cap? of the English
Vessel that carries my Letters to that Place, should he be there on
your arrival, that on yr hoisting an English Jack at the Fore Top Gall9
Mast head to come out to you
JOHN
SMITH
[LC. EPP, Vol. 7, 1803.1
To Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Navy, from William Kirkpatrick, U. S. Consul,
Halaga

MALAGA
19 NOZ,
1803
DEARSIR, I have the Pleasure to reply to your esteemed Favors
2. 10 & 12 Ult? Whereby I learn with much Satisfaction the restablishment of Peace with the Emperor of Morocco, and ratification of
the Treaty made with his Father, This pleasing Intelligence I have
communicated to the Citizens of the U. S. that happened to be in the
district of this Consulate, and in other respects given it every possible
publicity, I consider it a most fortunate circumstance for our Trade
and rejoice that you have been the Instrument of rendering such an
essential Service to the United States, in conjunction with Mr Sirnpson. I was extremely mortified the Sickness in this Place rendered it
unsafe for you to pay us a visit. I would have been happy in seeing
you before you went up the Mediterranean, and having an opportunity of renewing our old acquaintance, I however hope on your return you will give us a Call, Here you can water & procure every thing
you stand in need of much better than a t Cadiz, or Gibraltar, and it
IS quite in your way, therefore I hope you will not pass without see-

231

WARS T ~ ~ I TBARBARY
H
POWERS

ing us, Give my best respects to our good Friend Bainbridge who I
presume you will meet with off Tripoly. Tho Yellow Fever has made very considerable ravages in Town,
and tho' it has within these few days somewhat abated and the
Physicians are of opinion it will be all over in the course of this Month,
still a great number are daily carried off. It is thought above 6000
have died to this day, notwithstanding that more than 5 of the Inhabitants have retired to the Country, my Family I sent out to my
Country House Six Miles from Town on the 4 @ UltQ I afterwards
used to go in every day Untill the 15 When I found such numbers
going off that I determined to Join them, and have not since gone
back, M Gruegnee & his Family is also here, having shut up our
Counting House, we dispatch what Business offers from hence, We
have been fortunate in escaping hitherto, tho' we have lost Two Aunts
St an Uncle and many Friends no Symptoms whatever of the Sickness have reached this Village tho' at a neighboring One some few
have died, so soon as every thing is over, and we can With Safety
return, I uill again write to you, In the mean while I wish you every
possible Success against the Tripolines, and flatter myself you may be
fortunate in bringing them to terms of accommodation;
We are under great apprehensions this Country will be soon involved
in the War, I have a few Lines some Posts back from your Brother Henry,
He has defered his departure to America till this Spring.
[LC. EPP, Vol. 7, 1803.1

U. S. Navy
UNITEDSTATES
SHIPCon.stit~fion
Algiers Bay 1gt@Noz r 1803
SIRIn consequence of a representation made to me b the Surgeon
of this Ship, that a quantity of fresh Meat and Ve etab es are wanted
for the use of the sick, and to preserve the healt of those that are
well. You will, therefore, purchase the following supply for that
purpose, or as near the quantity as can be procured.
fifty bushels Potatoes, fifty bushels Onions, four hundred heads
Cabbage, one thousand Lemons 8: Oranges, six dozen Fowls and
four bushels Barley.
To Purser James 6. Deblois, U, S. Bevy, from Captain Edward Preble,

k,

r'

[LC. EPP, Order Book, May 1803-June 1808.1
Extract from journal of U. S. Brig Argur, Lieutenant Issac Bull, U. 6. Navy, commanding, Saturday, 19 November 1003

These 24 hours commence with moderate breezes and Clear pleasant
Weather the Schooner [Hazurd] still in Tow, the Ship [Alezandm
Hodgdon] astern with all sail set, set and took in sail as Necessary Latitude Observed 41' 20' N.
[On 21 November cast off the schooner.]
[NDA photostat.1
Extract from log book kept by Sailing Xaster Nathaniel Haraden, U. S. Navy, on
board U. 8. Frigate Conrliiufion,Saturday, 19 November 1805

We continued working into Algier bay till noon a t which time we
brot to with the Main Topsail to the mast about four Miles from

232

ATAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1805 TO 1804

Cape Coxine - Consul Obrien & Consul Lear with all his baggage
& Attendants were landed by the Conveyance of a Shore Boat - On
Consul Obrien & Consul Lem leaving the Constitution we Saluted
them with 7 Guns - On their landin they were Saluted by the
Garrison with 5 Guns - We returne the Same number - By
Noon the Wind had fell to a calm - The Surgeons report to the Commodore is 18 Sick & 8 convalescents -.
[LC. EPP,Log Constitution, 1803-1804.1

cf

120 November 18031
To Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Navy, from Anthony Terry, U. S. Vice Consul,
Cadiz, Spain

CADIZ2gth November 1805 DEARSIR On the other side please to find copy of what I had the
honor of addressing you on the 2 1st Ins! via Gibraltar.
By orders of Mr Yznardy I have to inform you that the American
Archer chartered by the United States Govl
Shi Sally Capt".
wit Naval Stores for the Regency of Algiers was lost the 20th Ins!
on the sands near the Bar of St Lucar the Vessel is entirely lost. M'
Yznardy was luckly at his Country House of Rola and used all his
activity in trying to save some of the Cargo
I give this information likewise to Messrq OBrien and Lear that
they may inform the Dey of this Novelty that he may not imagine
that the American Government has neglected sending the Naval
Stores. My next will give you further intelligence on this important
matter

g

[LC. EPP, LB, Dec. 1803-April 1801.]
To his Father from Midshipman Henry Wadsworth, U. S. Navy

ALGIERS
Nov. 20th l8OQ- Eveg.
SIR - The squadron separated a t Gibraltar the Constitution &
Nautilus arriv'd here yesterday the Argus - gone with a convoy to
Marsailles & Leghorne, Enterprize to convoy the store ship to Syracuse.

*

*

*

*

*

*

*

*

Nov 24th 1803 Morning. South end of Sardinia in sight.
Spoke the English Frigate Amazon: the Capt. informed us that the
Philadelphia Capt Bainbridge had ran on shore off Tripoly in chase:
had been captured, got off & carried into Port.
25th West point of Sicily in si ht.
Spoke & Boarded a Tunisan ebeck of 16 guns out 50 days, &
taken a Neapolitan & a Sardinian had the crews on board. Constitution under English Colors. -

i

[H.W.L. Dana Col.]
Extract from Diary of Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Navy, Commodore of U. 8.
Squadron in the Mediterranean, Sunday, 20 November 1803

Light Southerly winds and Pleasant Weather. At 1 P. M. three
boats came from the shore for ColQLear, his family and bag age:
At 2 P. M. they embarked: Mr Obrien accompanied them - Sa uted
them with 7 Guns as they left the ship On their landing ColQLear
was saluted by the Algerine Gsnison with 5 Guns which I returned.

f

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

233

At 6 P. M. anchored in the Bay in 22 fathoms water muddy bottom Moderate all night. At 7 A M we hoisted our colors: the Garrison
saluted us with 21 Guns which we returned with an Equal number Our position in the bay appears to be a very good one - The Mole
head a t the Town bearing W N W about 5 Miles - Cape Coxine N
5 W seven miles - Cape Matifora, E Y N. 5 miles, The rivers
mouth S S W five miles - White fort in the bottom of the Bay E S E
three miles At 10 A. M. I left the ship in the barge to go on shore:
At 11 landed under a salute of 5 Guns from the Algerine M&e
Battery and was immediately conducted to the Genera1 of Marine
where I was politely recieved and treated with Coffee and Sherbet:
from thence I was conducted to the board of Admiralty and treated
in the same way, Visited the City, and the Dey's palace, gardens &q*
Stables and dined with our consul and at 4 P. M. returned on board Was saluted with 5 Guns from the Admiralty Battery on leaving the
Shore: I did not see the Dey as he was a t his Palace in the country
[LC. EPP, Diary, 1803-1804.1
To Commanding Ofacer of U. S. Frigate Adam, Nary Yard, Washington, D. C.,
from Secretary of the Navy

NAVYD E P ~
hTwrdl, 1808 The Adams must be dismantled and the Crew paid off without
delay. Be pleased to send up your Purser immediately to receive
the necessary monies. [NDA. OSW, Vol. 6, 1802-1805.1

To Secretary of the Navy from Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Navy

UNITED
STATESSHIPConstitution

Under sail in ALGIERSBAY
21 Nov: 1805
SIR I haye the honor to i ~ f o r myou that I arrived and anchored
here the 19th Ins$, with the Nautilus in company; but the m6nd
shifting suddenly from S S W to N l4' and a prospect of a gale made it
prudent to get under Weigh last night and stand out to Sea - I am
now stretching into the Bay to receive a present of Bullocks, Sheep,
Fouls, and Vegetables provided by order of the Dey to be sent off
to us; and shall immediately after make sail for Tripoly - Col: Lear
has been favourably r e d The Usual Salutes were passed between
the Constitution and the Garrison on anchoring - I was on Shore
esterday and received under a Salute of Cannon from the Marine
!Lattery; and treated with politeness and attention I believe our
Nation Stands as high with this Regency as any of the European
Nations, and perhaps hi her.
The two Ships the jetsea, Walker, aod the OM Tom loaded on
account of the United States have both arrived safe- and the Store
Ship the Traveller loaded with provisions for the Squadron, passed
this plare the day before yesterday, under convoy of the Enter
for Syracuse - M' OBrien thinks i t necessary that we shou d a t
all times have one of our strongest Frigates full manned a t Gibraltar
and a Schooner or Brig to prevent either of the Barbary Powers from
passing through the Straits to capture our Merch' Vessels in case of

f"=

234

NAIrAL OPERATIONS FROM 1805 TO 1804

any sudden rupture; and I cannot but agree with him that i t is necessary, as there is not any dependence to be made on these capricious
Tyrants - A force known to be stationary near the Straits will
make our peace more secure with them all. I enclose you some
remarks of Mr OBrienls on the Regency of Algiers in his own words The Dey is now in the Country a t his seat & expected in Town
tomorrow but previous to his going out he left orders for Col: Lear
to be received by his Prime Minister, and to be acknowledged as
Consul. The Col I suppose will give every requisite information to
the Secretary of State - I t is the custom of all the European Nations
to salute their Consuls with 7 Guns on their first visiting and leaving
their Ships of War arriving in any of the ports in these Seas - I
think we should not respect our Consuls less than other Nations do
theirs, as it has an unfavourable effect on the Barbary Powers particularly - I have therefore saluted on such occasions; and I submit
to you whether it will not be proper for an order to issue from the
Navy Dep' to all the Commanders to this effect.
[LC. EPP, LB, Msp-Dec. 1803.1
Extract from journal of Midshipman F. Cornelius deXrafft, U. S. Navy, in U. 8.
Brig Siren, of 18 guns, Lieutenant Charles Stewart, U. S. Navy, commanding,
Mondag., 21 November 1803

[At Leghorn] Commences with fresh breezes from the Sd & Wd
Hands employ'd on necessary duty. At 3 recd on board 10 casks of
water. (At 7. 5 bales & 1 trunk of sundries came on board as presents
for the Day of Algiers) Ends with moderate breezes from the S@&
Ed. R e d 120 Ib fresh beef, a quantity of vegitables for the hands, &
some bread for the sick. 2 men came on board with an intention to
ship as seamen, they being englishmen, prisoners at Leghorn. [NDA.]

[22 November 18031
Impressment of American by H. B. M. S. Doncgal

CONSULAR
OFFICEOF THE U. S. OF
AMERICA
AT GIBRALTAR
On this Twenty Second day of November 1803 Personally appeard
in my Consular Office James Norman Comander of the American
Brig Sophia of Baltimore and after being Solemnly sworn did upon
Oath Declare, That he saild from Triest on or about the Twenty second
day of October last with a Cargo of sundry Merchandize for Baltimore
aforesaid in the U. S. of America, That he proceeded with Variouse
Winds &: Weather untill Yesterday that he was obliged to enter this
Port of Gibraltar, having met with head Winds.
That he Anchord yesterday Evening in this Port when was admitted
to Prattick - That imediately after he was boarded by a Boat belonging to His Brits Majestys ship of Warr Dunegal Commanded by Sir
Richard Straughan, who Pressd John Felt a Citizen Mariner belonging
to the said Brig Sophia, whose Wages is Demanded by the Commander
of said ship of Warr Wherefore he the said James Norman hereby Protests against the
said wind and weather that obliged his puting into this Port, as well as
against the mid Sir Richard Straughan for Impressing the said John

WARS WITH BARBARY P O ~ T E R S

235
- -

Felt, as well as all others whom it doth or may Concern in any ways
for all and singular the Damages, Deteriments Losses Detentions
and Oother Occurrencies in Consequence thereof, already happend or
that ma hereafter happen, and for remedy and redress in a due
course o Law.Thus Sworn, Declared and Protested
before me a t Gibraltar the Day and Year
KCTORMAN
first within written Witness my hand
Seal of Office- - _ _ _ - _ - _ _ - - -- - - - - - - _ - -_
JOHN
GAVINO
C o d of the C. S. of America -

P

INA.

SDA. CL, Gibraltar, Vol. 2, 1796-1804.1

Extract from journal of U. S. Brig Argus, Lieutenant Isaac Hull, U. S. Elavy, commanding, Tuesday, 22 November 1803

These 24 hours commence with strong gales at J; past Meridian
close reeft the topsails and launched top Gallt masts at 8 P, M,
Veered ship to the N. W. At 2 AM more moderate swayed up the
T. G. masts a t ji past 5 made the Island of Gorgona bearing E N E.
distance 5 or 6 leagues, got up T. G. yards made sail. the shi in sight
a t 8 AM, Gorgona bore N b W distance 2 or 3 leagues Eght airs
Inclinb!" to Calm tacked ship Leghorn light house bore E b N N.
At 7 brought too with the Starboard Anchor in 6 fathoms Water
ood bottom found here the U, States Brig S y ~ e nLieu$ Stewart, the
h i p Alexander Hodgdon 6: Schooner Hazard our Convoy anchored
in Shore of us At Meridian fine pleasant Weather [NDA photostat.]
Extract from log book of U. 6. Frigate Comtilution. Captain Edward Preble, U. S.
Navy, commandmg, Tuesday, 22 November 1805

At K past 6 P M. we filld and made sail to the NE. with pleasant
Breezes from westw+/ Cape Caxine W )i; S nearly nine miles/ Cape
Matifora SEbE X E nearly the same distance/ me continued steering
the NE during the night with light Breezes and pleasant weather/
Latitud obd 37. 33 N Q
[NA. ND original.]
Extract from journal of U. S. Brig Argus. Lieutenant Isaac Hull, U. S. Navy, commanding, Wednesday, 23 November 1805

(Moored in Leghorn Roads - ) At 8 AM. Moored ship Starboard
Anchor to N W, and larboard anchor S. E.
At 9 hoisted out the barge the Protique boat came off the Captain
went on shore being informed by the Protique boat we were put under
Quarantine and returned on board a t 1 P h4 bent one of the Starboard
Cables to the sheet Anchor and prepared for letting it go.
[NDA photostet.]
Extract from Xemorandnm Book of Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Navy, on board
U. S. Frigate Cmtitulioh 24 November 1803

Spoke the British Frigate Amazon and received information of the
loss of the ,Philadelphia on the coast of TripoIi.
[LC, original.]

236

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1803 TO 1804

Extract from log book kept by Sailing Master Nathaniel Haraden, U. S. Navy, on
board U. 6. Frigate Constitution. Thursday, 24 November 1803

Moderate breezes from the West@- We continue our course to the
East$ with the Nazltilus in company in order to proceed between
Sardinia & the Island of Galite - Towards Evening we in studding
Sails in order that the Nautilus might join company At Sundown we
judged the ship to be nearly 12 or 14 leagues from the S. W. part of
Sardinia, but the Horizon was much contracted by a light haze; to the
north we could not see the land - We continued Steering to the Eastq
during the night with pleasant breezes from the Westg - We made
and shortened Sail as necessary for the Nautilus to keep company A little after day light we saw a sail to the NorthQ- We hauled on a
wind towards her cleared ship for Action - At 8 A. M. Shortened
sail & spoke her - She was his Brittanic Majesty's Ship the Amazon
who communicated to Commodore Preble the Intelligence of the capture of the U. S. frigate Philadelphia - He reported that the Philadelphia ran on the Shoals near Tripoli & in succeeding days was got
off & towed into Tripoli - At )h past 8 A. M. We bore up to the
East'J & made Sail - Made the Signal for the Nautilus to come within
hail - We continued Steering to the Easta till noon when we observed
in 38.15 North - A Haze to the North prevents our seeing land to the
northq - Latitude by Account & observation agrees We Judge the
S. E. part of Sardinia to bear nearly North Ten or Twelve leagues The Surgeons report to the Commodore is 17 Sick 11 Convalescents
& 5 discharged from the Sick list.
[LC. EPP, Log Constitution, 1803-1804.1
To Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Navy, from Joseph Pulis, U. S. Consul, Halta
Translation

MALTALA VALETTE
2'6th Novr 1803
SIR I have the honor of transmitting to you several letters by Lc
Dent, one of which I received from Captain Bainbridge a few days

since which will inform you particularly of the misfortune that has
happened to him - I have not delayed answering his order for
three hundred Spanish Dollars which will save his wants as well as
those of his Officers - He has demanded several medicines which I
have ordered to be prepared to be sent by the first opportunity that
Offers for Tripoly I now give you what information I have in my
power - The Bashaw has written to Malta to Conts Gatine Consul
for Tripoly to negotiate for the sale of the Frigate Philadelphia because
he has i t not in his power to mann her properly.
The Schooner Vixen Lt Smith left here six days ago for Gibraltar The news that I have been able to learn respectin
the Bashaw is fitting out a Schooner built at. Tripoly
Builder. She will carry 16 Guns -There are three
viz One Brig, One Polacre & one Xebec all of which will sail shortly.
The Bashaw's brother was was Bey of Derne has fled He has been in
Alexandria in Egg t dreading the loss of his head as his brother the
B e h a w of Tripob ad dispatched some Troops by land to seize him T b news was broupht by a Vessel which arrived 4 days ago from
Tripoly - Eight days since a Vessel arrived here loaded with pro-

%

WARS WITH BARBARY POWEBS

237

vision for your Squadron but it is consigned to an English Merchant
here M? Higgins who is now discharging the provision. This affair
surprizes me much as Consul Gavino has not consigned them to me
who am the National Consul a t Malta wherefore I am obliged to request you will order Mr Higgins to consign them to me that I may put
them all together in the Store where are all the Sails, Cables, &c* of
the Philadelphia and Schooner Vixen.
[LC. EPP, LB, May-Dec. 1803.1
To Lieutenant Charlea kewart, U. 6. Navy, commanding U. S. Brig Siren, from
Captain Edward Preble, U. 6. Navy
UNITED
STATESSHIPCon~tituiion

a t Sea off Malta Harbou~
26th Novr 1803
SIROn your arrival at Malta, you will gain what information you
can respecting the affairs of Tripoli, Tunis, and Algiers - Take on
board all the provisions you want from the stock on hand belonging
to the United States, and sail immediately for Syracuse where you
will receive orders for your government you are not to delay one
moment of time s t Malta but what may be absolutely necessary [SimiIar letter sent to Lieutenant John Smith commanding U. S. Schooner
Vixen.]

[LC.

EPP, Order Book, May 1803-June 1805.1

TO Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Navy, from Lieutenant Isaac Bull, U. S. Haw

U. STATE^ BRIGArgus

Leghorn 86 Nov' 1803
SIRI beg leave to nc uctint you of my arrival here after a passage
of nine daps from Gibrn ter, without any thing occuring worth notice
with the ship and schooner under my Convoy.
The morning after our arrival we were visited by the health Officer,
and by what I could learn from fiim our Quarentine would be but
short, I Iikewise went on shore in order to get Mr Appleton and Messr?
Dagen and Purviance, to make what interest they could for our
being soon admited to Prottigue, but the weather being very bad
and a hard gale of wind from the westward, i t Prevented my heamg
from them for four days past, till this evening a boat from Messr@
Dagen and Purviance came off, and informed me the time of my
Quarentine was fixd a t eight days,
I immediately sent Mr Blake on shore to the health officer, to
know the reason of our being obliged to perform a longer Quarintine
than the Syren, she being from the same port and under the same
Circumstances, they gave for answer that they did not know when
the Syrcn arrked of the fever at Malaga, or she would have been subject to the same Quarentine,
The letters that I had in charge were sent on Shore but they would
not receive them, I shall send them on board the ship that came
under my Convo ,so that in four or five days they will be forwarded,
there are a num er of American ships in this port, but none bo~md
to the westward under ten or fifteen days, and perhaps uot more than
two or three within twenty,

3

i

238

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1803 TO 1804

I have heard from Mersailles by an American ship from that port,
and find there are no american Vessels there that will be ready for
sea under ten or fifteen days, and then but one or two, As that is the principal port for commerce and so few Vessels there,
and the season being so far advanced which makes it dangerous keeping the north shore, oweing to the South west and west winds which
blow almost the whole time,
I have determined to make the best of my way to Gibralter without stoping a t any port, unless I am forced in by contrary winds or
some accident, and hope the steps I am about to take may meet your
approbation,
The Syren is here and I believe she sails the first fair wind, the
weather has been such that I have not been able to see C f ~ ~ t a i n
Stewart, but have been informed that he was ready for sea, - *
[LC. EPP, Vol. 8, 1803-1804.1
Extract from journal of U. S. Brig Argus. Lieutenant Isaac Bull, U. S. Navy, commanding, Saturday, 26 November 1803
(Moored in Leghorn Roads - ) a boat came off from Messr"agen

& Purviance & informed us our Quarantine was Extended to 8 days
sent a boat with an Officer to know the reason as the Syren under
S i a r Circumstances got Protique in 3 days they gave for Answer
they had not heard of the fever a t Malaga when the Syren Arrived
At % past 3 swayed up lower yards & Top Gallant masts at Sundown the Center of the Island of Elba bore S W b S % S people
Variously Employed [XDA photostat.]
Extract from log book kept by Sailing Master Nathaniel Haraden, U. S. Navy, on
board U. S. Frigate Constitution, Saturday, 26 November 1803

Fresh breezes from the N N W - We continue the chase to the
- We fired 2 Guns - Shortened Sail & Spoke her - She
was an Emperial brig from Sousa[?] bound to Marseilles - We
immediately bore up & gave chase to a strange sail in shore - We
shewed her English colors - In answer t.he chase hoisted red At
j4 past 2 P. M. cleared Ship for action & boarded the chase - An
armed ship belonging to the bey of Tunis on a cruize - While we
were Examining this vessel the Nautilus returned from chase - She
reported to the Commodore that her chase was a Spanish man of war
brig on a cruize - At )h past 3 P. M. we bore up to the S E b S with
fresh breezes from the Northd with pleasant Weather - At 5 P. M.
we took our departure from the middle of Maritimo bearing by comass north 7 leagues - The Middle of the Island Favognana N E )h
- 9 Leagues. These two Small Islands are situated four or 5 leagues
from the Western part of Sicily - Towards the Evening we double
reefed the Topsails in order that the Nautilus might keep company We had strong N N W breezes during the night -Towards the morning we passed a sail on the Starboard Quarter - At 7 A. M. We spoke
an Hamburgh Ship bound to Pernso: B 8 A. M. we had run from our
departure (Maritimo a t 5 P. M.) 120 h e s S E b S by compass At % past 8 A. M. saw the Island of Gozo which is situated 3 or 4
leagues to the N W of Malta - Our distance ran from our departure
perfectly agrees with the land-fall in the Morning which was S S E

N N E

E

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

239

b compass nearly 20 miles - By 10 A. M. we were abreast of the
Pi! W. End of the Island of Gozo -We steered along the East Side
of this lsland with an offing of 4 Miles in order to proceed to Malta From the N W extreme of the Island of Gozo to the harbor of Malta is
nearly 26 miles - This distance we ran along shore with an offing
of three or four miles Steering between S E b S & S S E by compass At Noon the Harbor of Malta bore S S E nearly 4 or 5 Milesdown
top gall? Yards - The Surgeons report to the Commodore the same
as yesterday - 117 Sick & 11 Convalescents]
[LC. EPP, Log Constitution, 1803-1804.1
Extract from journal of Xiashipman F. Cornelius deKrafft, U. S. Navy, in U. 15.
Brig Siren of 18 guns, Lieutenant Charles Stewart, IT. S. Navy, commanding,
Saturday, 26 November 1803

[At Leghorn] These remarks include 36 hours
At Midnight the breeze veer'd to the Northwd still blowing a heavy
gale, weather clear & cold. At 1 weigh'd the larboard anchor. at 2
being more moderate, the barge return'd with Lieu! Stewart. got
top gall! masts on end & sway'd up lower yards, reed by the barge 7
small boxes of money & 1 trunk; intended as presents to the Dey of
Algiers. Geo. Gillingham a seaman came on board & entered, likewise a
boy nam'd Francisco. - At 6 sighted the larboard anchor & lett it.
go again. - giving about 35 fathoms cable, sent up top gall! yards &
hove up, the wind hauling west, made sail & beat out of the harbour
or bay, with all sail ~ e tleft
, in the Roads the U. S. Brig Argus & several
American vessels riding quarantine. At 74 past 9 AM took in top
gall1 sails &c. At $6 past 11 reef'd topsails & sent down top galls
ards, Hands employ'd stowing anchors &c. At Meridian Gorgina
gore N W by W 6 leagues, Catrera W. by S. Elba W S W. Latt: Obs: 43*101 N.
[NDA.]
Extract from journal of U. S. Brig Argus, Lieutenant Isaac Bull, U. S. Navy, commanding, Sunday, 27 November 1803

(Moored in Leghorn Roads - ) This day begins with light winds
a t % past 5 AM, unmoored and proceeded to sea the U. S. Brig
Syren unmoored also and proceeded after us, the wind hauling to the
Westward with an Appearance of blowing hard at $4 past 6 tacked
and stood into Anchorage found we outsailed the Syren at 8 AM
brought too and Moored with the Starboard Anchor S. \.V and Larboard dp N W, Leghorn bearing S E )6 S, Cape Nero S jh E IsIand
of Elba S-enter
of Cabrera S S W )h W, the Consuls boat and a
boat with provisions came off on our Anchoring Arrived a french
armed brig with a small Genoese Vessel in tow [NDA photostat.]
Extrect from Memorandnm Book of Captain Edward Preble, U. S. navy, on board
U. S. Frigate Co~wtitution,27 November 1803

Arrived off Malta and sent in a boat which brought me a letter from
Captain Bainbridge dated Tripoli advising me of the loss of the
PhWelphia.
[LC,original.]

240

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1803 TO 1804

Extract from Diary of Captain Edward Preble, U. 6. Navy, Commodore of U. S.
Squadron in the Mediterranean, Sunday, 27 November 1803

past noon sent L' Dent in the Jolly boat to Malta for letters
At
and Intelligence; Lay off and on untill4 P. M. when the Boat returned
and brot me off letters from Cap! Bainbridge confirming the loss of
the Philadelphia and informing me of the following Particulars respecting that unfortunate affair V i z V h e Philadelphia fell in with a
Tripoline cruizer to the Eastward of Tripoly about 5 leagues on the
morning of the 31" of October, the Cruizer being to the S W in shore
of the Frigate ran for Tripoly; the Frigate in chase keeping as near
the coast as possible: At 11 A. M. she had approached the shore
to 7 fathoms water and commenced firing at the Corsair At % past
11 A. M. finding the shot did not reach, and considering it imprudent
to venture any nearer the shore, hauled off an gave up the Pursuit In beat,ing off shore the Frigate ran on a rock about four or five miles
from the Town, Threw over most of the Guns, cut away the Foremast,
and three Anchors from the Bows to lighten her forward without
effect. The Gun boats and Cruizers went from Tripoly and kept a
constant fire on the Frigate without her being able to return it with
effect as the ship lay over too much; And at 4 P. M. she surrendered
to the Tripolines by striking her Colors. .The whole of the Officers
and crew 307 in number were made Prisoners - At 4/2 past 4 P. 11.
wore off Shore and stood to the Northward by the Wind under low
sail bound to Syracuse in in Sicily; the wind blew hard all night:
At 7 A. M. Cape Passari N N E 6 Leagues - Our run over from Malta
N E b E 33 miles - At Noon Cape Passari S W b W % W distance
3 leagues - Late observed 36' 38' NO
[LC. EPP, Diary, 1803-1804.1
Extract from log book kept by Sailing Master Nathaniel Haraden, U. S. Navy, on
board U. S. Frigate Consiilulion, Sunday, 27 November 1803

Strong breezes from the N N W - We continued running for the
Harbor of Valeta till 3.i past 12 noon, when we were off shore abreast
the Harbor of Valeta - The out Mole about 2 cables length - Lieutt
Dent & a boats crew went on shore - The Nautilus was Ordered by
the Commodore to keep close in with the Harbor in order to tow off
the boat - We continued Standing off & on the Harbor of Valeta till
4/2 past 4 P. M. at which time Lieutt Dent returned with dispatches
for the Commodore which confirm the loss & capture of the U. S.
Frigate Philadelphia - At
past 4 P. M we wore off shore & came
to the Wind under close reefed top sails & reefed courses - At
5 P M we took our departure from the N. E point of Malta bearing
S W b S S nearly 10 Miles - The Town of Valeta W S W nearly
nine miles - By 6 P. M. the wind had increased to a perfect gale Handed the Topsails & launched top gall$ Masts - I t blew a Violent
gale from the N W b N from 7 in the Evening [to] 3 A. M. We
continued standing to the N E during the night under reefed courses
& storm staysails till day light at whch time it became more moderate - At 5 A M we set close reefed topsails - At 5 past 7 in the Morning we saw Cape Passari which is situated on the S E point of the Island
of Sicily bearing N N E nearly 7 leagues -Our distance ran from our
departure Valeta perfectly agrees with the land fall in the Morning Our course corrected from our departure last night till we saw

WARS WITH BARBARY POWEBS

241

Cape Passari this morning was N E b E distance 33 miles At 8 in
the morning out one reef from the topsails and turned out the reefs
of the courses - We split the foresail Bent another - By 11 the
weather became moderate with a smooth sea - Swayed up Top
Gall$mast, & up Top Gail; Yards - At Noon fresh breezes from the
N N W We are about four leagues from a small town which is situated
between Cape Passari &- the Harbor of Saragosa or Syracuse - Cape
T
W nearly 3 leagues Passari bears S W b \IM
[LC. EPP,Log Constitution,1803-1804.1
To Daniel Ludlow, Navy Agent, New York, N. Y., from Secretary of the Navy

NAV.DEP
~ o u . 8 . 1803
-

Your resignation of the appointment of Kavy agent at New York
is now accepted - I n thus closing your official transactions with
this department I beg leave to Offer my acknowledgements for your
Services and to express my regret that Circumstances have induced
you to resign your appointment
[KDA. GLB, Vol. 6, 1802-1803.1
To Henry Rutgers, appointed Navy Agent, New York, H.Y.,from Secretary of the

Raw

NAVY
DEPARTMENT

NOV.
1808 Reposing especial confidence in your internpityand zeal for the public
interest I have appointed you navy agent to act for and in behalf of
this Department As a compensation for all your serrices of every kind you will be
allowed a commission of two p' cent on all sums of money paid and
expended by you on the public account, a commission of 1 p: cent
on all sums of money received by you for public property sold, and a
commission of one half pr cent on all sums of money paid by you for
the purposes of recruiting paying off a crew and the like Services
Instructions on the subject of accounts and the forms to be observed
in keeping them will be sent you by the accountant of the Navy and
ou will from time to time receive particular instructions from this
epartment as Circumstances may arise t o create them [NDA. GLB,Vol. 6, 1802-1803.1

6

To Captain James Barron, U. 6, Navy, Hampton, Va., from Secretary of the Navy

NAVYD E P ~

NOV'
68.1805 When I had last the pleasure of seein you a t this place, you expressed to me your wish to build a gun- oat for the department. I
shall be very glad if your avocations will now ermit you to undertake
it, and I request that you will inform me. 1Pit is convenient, I will,
on hearing from you, write you an official letter on the subject. I understand that the New York has on board the Model or Draught
of a un-boat on the construction of those at Naples. As i t may
proba%ly afford you some information, I request that on the arrivd
of that Vessel in the Roads, you will go on board aad examine it. -

f

[NDA. OSW, Vol. 6, 1802-1805.1

242

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1803 TO 1804

Extract from journal of U. S. Brig Argus. Lieutenant Isaac Hull,U. 6. Navy, commanding, Monday, 28 November 1803

a t 8 P. M. unmoored got under way and made sail a t midnight
Le horn light house bore W b Tu' 3 leagues
fatitude Observed 43' 23' N.
Longitude Observed 9" 53' W.
[NDA photostat.]
Extract from Xemorandum Book of Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Navy, on board
U. 6. Frigate Conslitulion. 28 November 1803

Arrived and anchd. a t Syracuse.
[LC, original.]
Extract from log book kept by Sailing Blaster Nathaniel Haraden, U. 6. Navy, on
board U. S. Frigate Conslilulion. Monday, 28 November 1803

Moderate Breezes & pleasant weather - Winds Variable between
N N E 8. E N E - We are now working to the Korthg along the East
Side of Sicily between Cape Passari & Saragosa with an offing of 5
or 6 miles from the shore We sounded with this offing several times
60 fath? no bottom - At 3 P. M. joined company the U. S. Schooner
Enterprize, Lieutj Decntur, who waited on Commodore Preble The Enterprize parted company from the Constitution on the 12Q of
this month with a convoy from Gibraltar to Saragosa - R4r [Seth
Cartee] the Sailing Master of the Enterprise came on board the Constitution in order to assist in piloting the ship into Saragosa - At ?4 past 3
P. M we passed an English convoy of sixteen sail from Saragosa
bound to Malta. From 4 P. M. till 6 P. M. we had a favorable
breeze from the west^ We ran along the coast till the light house
which makes the Starboard entrance to the Port or Harbor of Saragosa
bore W N W. Six or Seven miles We then shortened sail by double
reefing the Topsails & handing top Gall! sails At 8 in the Evening
the harbor of Saragosa bore west by compass distance 5 miles We continued working towards the Harbor till 10 P. hl a t which time
i t was two or three miles off - We then up courses & bro't to with
the main Topsail to the mnst: as the wind was ofl shore our fore
reaching was to the N N E which was nearly parallel to the shore We continued in this situation till day light when we tacked in shore
& made sail for the harbor which bore W S W nearly nine or ten
miles - At $4 pas 8 in the morning we hauled round the Outer point
which makes the North Entrance - We pass round this outer North
point about one cables length from the shore - Our sounding was
from 8 to 5 fathoms - We worked into the Harbor under Easy
sail - The Entrance is about four cables length wide - Our soundings
were from 9 to 16 fathoms soft Bottom - At 10 in the Forenoon we
came to with the small bower in 7g fathoms sticky bottom in the
port or harbor of Saragosa which is situated on the East Side of the
Island of Sicily - The Entrance to this Harbor offers no danger I t is well fortified to the North with a strong fort - Our situation
now is half a mile from the West Side of the Harbor and about 3
cables length from the Town which is to the N E - The Two
extremes which make the outer entrance to this harbor bears S E 36
S - One half mile between those two bearing to the EnstQhis Port
is open to the Sea - I t is land locked from every Wind except the
four abovementioned points We found here the Nautilw & Enterprise

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

243

from whom we parted company last evening - At noon moderate
breezes from the N E.
[LC. EPP,Log Constitution, 1803-1804.1
Extract from journal of U. S. Brig Argus. Lieutenant Isaac Hull, U. S. Navy, commanding, Tuesday, 29 November 1803

This 24 hours commence with moderate breezes and fine plcasant
Weather Eastem' brig in sight appears to be standing for us. at j&
past 1 she hoisted english Colours a t 2 Spoke her, she proved to be
his britannic AVnjestysBrig Chdders a t 4 P M being a beam of the
other brig Exchanged Signals & found her to be the Syren At 8
moderate and clear the Syren on our Weather Quarter a t 10 saw the
land and a strange sail under our lee bow at 12 Veered to the N, W,
and spoke the Syren 5 strange sail in sight. find B-eeasily outsail the
Syren saw 2 strange sail on our lee Quarter at day light one of them
hoist English Colours and f i e a Gun they appear to be a 74 Gun Ship
and frigate & in Chace of us at 7 hoisted our Colours and the Syren
made Signals Latitude Observed 43' 29' N.
Longitude Observed 8' 19' W.
[KDA photostat.]
Extract from Diary of Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Navy, Commodore of U. 8.
Squadron in the Mediterranean, Tuesday, 29 November 1803

[Syracuse] Landed and waited on the Governor who reciered me
politely and offered me the use of Magazines Gratis to dcposite any
provisions and stores for the Squadron and expressed himself desirous
that we should make this harbor our rendezvous as it would be the
means of protecting the coast from the depredations of the Barbary
Cruizers - returned on board in the Evening. At 8 A. M. Ordered
several men punished for breach of trust and Drunkenness. At 10
A. M. Saluted the Garrison, which was returned by an Equal number
of Guns - Was visited by ,he Nobility and Gentlemen of the Place
with offers of their friendship and services. Surgeons report f 8 Sick
& 10 ConvBpt
[LC. EPP,Diary, 1803-1804.1
Extract from log book kept by Sailing Xaster Nathaniel Haraden, U. S. Navy, on
board U. 8. Frigate Corufiiufion,Tuesday, 29 November 1803

Moderate Breezes & pleasant Teather - K e continue at single
Anchor a t Saragosa [Syracuse] with the U. S. States Schooner Enterprize and Nautilus in company - On our anchoring here we found the
Ship Trawller employed as a store ship from Gibraltar to this port The cable which was condomned some time ago in Cadiz was coiled
down under the small bower We roused up the small bower cable &
bent the best end as a best bower - ?Ve made the necessary arrangements for bending a new fore & main top sail - Lieut! Somrners of the
Nautilus waited on Commodore Preble - Towards the evening we ran
out a kedge to the West@in order to steady the ship from her anchor At 8 in the evening mustered the Starboard watch - At 9 P. M. the
wind shifted from N N E to N W We had pleasant weather during
the Night. The Ships company employed setting up the rigging fore
& aft - Punished Mark Clark Seaman with three dozen for drunk-

244

NAVAL O P E R A T I O N S F R O M 1803 TO 1804

eness, Neglect of duty & stealing rum from tho ships stores - Punished John Smith, John C. Smith, John Shaw & Mathew Brophy for
drunkeness & stealing rum from the ships stores - At 9 A. M. we
saluted with 17 Guns - An Equal number was returned from the fort
The carpenters and sail makers employed in their different departments - Several of the OEcers had liberty on shore - We loosed the
fore & main Topsails to dry as they are ordered to be unbent - The
Ship is surrounded uith bum boats but the duty of the Ship will not
permit them alongside - They offer nothing for sale but fruit - The
surgeons report is the same as Yesterday 18 Sick & 10 convalescents At Nooil moderate breezes from the West@- .
[LC. EPP, Log Constitution, 1803-1804.1
Extract from Memorandnm Book of Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Navy, on board
U. S. Frigate Constitution, SO November 1803

[At Syracuse] Mr. [Purser James S.] Deblois died.
[LC, original.]
Extract from log book kept by Sailing Master Nathaniel Haraden, U. 6. Navy, on
board U. S. Frigate Constitution, Wednesday, SO November 1803

Moderate Breezes & clear Weather - We continue in Saragosa uith
the Nautilus & Enterprize in company Unbent the foresail - The
Ships company em loyed overhauling the rigging - Reeved new
reef Tackle The o d ones being unserviceable - The Comodore
ordered Vegetables for the ship's company - they are plenty in this
port & very cheap - Towards the Evening the weather to the
East@had the appearance of a gale - The Top Gall! yards were sent
down - The weather however continued moderate & pleasant during the night - We this day supplied the U. S. Schooner Nautilus
with 18 fathoms of cable Junk (22 Inch) supposed 18 Cyt - At 8 in
the morning departed this life Mr James S Dublois Purser. - His
burial took place this forenoon in one of the Ancient burial places a
little out of the town - The funeral procession was composed of the
officers belonging to the Ship -At 9 A. M. We had strong breezes from
the West@- Veered away on the small bower to half a cable - By
11 A. M. it blew nearly a gale - Let go the best bower underfoot in
order to have the ships decks convenient & cleared as much as possible of Lumber - The Commodore ordered a number of the spars to
be landed - They are ordered under cover in a place of safety. We rafted the spars but it blows too fresh to send them ashore - The
ship's company this day had a large had a large portion of Vegetables
served out Extra - At noon strong breezes from the N W b W. [LC. EPP,Log Constitution, 1803-1804.1

f'

To Lieutenant Stephen Decatur, Jr., U. S. Navy, commanding U. 8. Schooner
Ederprize, from Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Navy

U S FRIGATE
Constitution
Syracuse Harbour 1 't Decer 1806 [I80311
SIR The articles you have requested to be supplied the Enterprize
are ready to be delivered to the proper Officers, as soon as they apply
to receive them And I request you to have the Ederprize ready for
Sea, as early as possible for a Cruize,
[HSof Pa, Mrs. F. H. Getcheu.]

-

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

245

To lieutenant Stephen Decatnr, Jr., U. 8. Navy, commanding U. S. Schooner
Enterprize. from Captain Edward Preble, U. 6. Navy

UNITED
STATEB
FRIGATEConsfitutwn

Syracuse Harbour 1 st Deeem' 1803
SIB Your men on shore for the purpose of fitting your Rigging,
were this Afternoon most of them drunk, - This must undoubtedly
have happened in consequence of the negligence of the Officers in
charge of them, I request you to make the necessary enquiry respecting this Neglect on their part, as I shall most certainly take notice of
it, - One of your men is in Irons on board this ship. For irnpertinence to me, [HS of Ps. Mrs. F. H. Getohell.]
Extract from log book kept by Sailing Master Nathaniel Haraden, U. S. Nuvy, on
board U. 8. Frigate Comtifutution,Thursday, 1 December 1803

Strong breezes & cloudy weather - The Ships company employed
stowing the booms & cleaning between decks - By 3 the weather
became more moderate - We sent a boat to tow the spars on shore,
which were rafted in the forenoon In the forenoon we sent into the
Tops the Topsails & bent the rigging & got All in readiness for bringing
them to the yards - We did not bend them in consequence of the
wind being fresh - We fitted new fore tacks, The old ones being u d t
for winter service - Lieutenants Somers & Decatur waited on Commodore Preble - Commodore Preble waited on the Governor in
order to make the necessary arrangements for landing the stores
from the American Ship TraveUer - Mr Morris, Chaplain, is appointed
purser in the room of hP Dublois deceased - M r Gadsden a Midshipman is sent to the Sick quarters at Saragosa - This afternoon
arrived at this Port the Egolize an English Privateer from Gibraltar Through the night fresh breezes & clear weather - At j4 past 7 A.M.
weighed the Cadge Anchor - At 9 bent a new foresail - Most of the
People employed getting Water Casks out of the hold to send ashore At 10 in the forenoon we rafted 13 butts in order to send them ashore;
but the North wind blew too strong to tow them - Towards noon
we hoisted them in on deck - Part of the ships company employed in
getting a number of stores to hand which are ordered to be landed
a t this place for snfe keeping - The Commodore went on shore in
order to make the necessary arrangements for landing the stores and
provisions from the TraceUer Store Ship - The Surgeons report to the
Commodore is 17 Sick & 7 Conralescents - At noon strong breezes
from the North4 Veered away to half a Cable on the best bower in
order to ride by the two bowers
[LC. EPP, Log Constitution, 1803-1804.l
-

-

To Secretary of State from Tobias Lear, U. 8. Consul General, Algiers

Duplicate. Nq 3.
ALGIERS,December 2"e 1805.
SIR,I had the honor of writing to you on the 18'Q of October from
Gibr~ltar,by the U. States Ship New York, in which I informed you
that I expected to sail in a few dtlys for this place; but on the 2 2 4
Commodore Preble sailed in the Constitution for Cadiz, to get a cable
and sundry Articles of which he stood in need, and which could not
be procured at Gibmltar. - He expected to return in a few days;

246

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1803 TO 1804

but contrary winds detained him until the 6th of Novr when he came
back to Gibraltar, where he was detained 'till the 13tQwhen we sailed,
in company with the U. S. Schooner Nautulus, and the Brig Argus,
which was to take a convoy to Leghorn, and return again to the Straits,
which will be her stat.ion for the winter. On the 18@ we entered the Bay of Algiers, when Mr OBrien came
off, and as the wind was too light to permit of the Ship's getting to
the anchoring birth, he remained on board all night. And the next
day, about noon, I went on shore with him, and was received, on my
landing, with the usual friendly salute of seven Guns. - The Dey
being at his Country House, and not expected in the City 'till Thursday, the 24th, I could not have an Audience 'till that time; but he
sent to inform me that he should receive me with muchp1easure.On the 30th the Conlmodore came on shore, (the Ship having been
saluted with 21 Guns on her anchoring) and returned on bonrd in the
afternoon, after having made arrangements for sundry articles of
fresh provision &$ & $ which he might want, over and above the customary present which had been sent on board. - On the 2la$he
got everything he wished; and sailed, with the Nautdus, for Tripoli. I was much disappointed in not finding here the U. States Brig
Syren, which left Gibraltar on the 24tQ of October for Leghorn, to
bring over the Consular Present which Mc Cathcart had provided a t
that place: And as the Dey had been informed of my having been at
Gibraltar some time since, and was daily expecting me, with the
Consular present, he would be highly disappointed at not receiving it
with me, and might make some difficulty in receiving me, on that
account, especially too, as all the annuities had not arrived, and had
been so long promised. As he had been favourable impressed towards me, and appeared to
be very friendly disposed towards us a t present, I thought it would
be highly impolitic to do a n y t . h g which might give a different aspect
to our Affairs; and therefore determined to make an arrangement for
the present here, if those from Leghorn should not arrive in time. I
found that the House of Bocris & Busnach were always provided
with those articles which it was customary to give on such occasions;
and upon a full communication with M' OBrien and others, on the
subject, it was strongly urged that our affairs would be placed upon a
much better footing to take the Presents from them, and to use their
influence therewith, with the Dey (which seems to be great) if it shd be
necessary to continue his patience for the Balance of the Annuities,
and as the Articles from Leghorn mould always sell here, if necessary,
for their cost there. - I accordingly Agreed with them, that they
should furnish the present, to the entire satisfaction of the Dey &
Regency, for twenty thousand dollars; and that they should undertake fully to satisfy him for any deficiency in the annuities which wore
due on the 5th of September, at the rate of thirty thousand dollars
per year, in Cash, for what might be wanting. - After some negociation I effected this: And on Thursday Morning the Dey sent to inform
me he was ready to receive me. I went to the Palace about 9 Oclock,
with Mr OBrien and the Drogerman &$ &$- The Dey received me
with great apparent satisfaction, and had the President's letter interpreted to him, with which he seemed much pleased. He expressed
strong iriendship for our Nation, and paid me many compliments,
saying he should depend upon me to hold the balance fairly between

WARS WlTH BARBARY POWERS

247

him m d my Country according to our Treaty - That he liked a

Consul with a clean face, and that I might always be assured of his
protection, and of everything his Country afforded. He also expressed
his satisfaction with the conduct of my predecessor since he had been
here. - The audience lasted about half an hour. - At eleven oclk
we returned to the Palace with the presents for the Dey, carried in
form. - He examined them with much attention, seemed highly
pleased, and expressed his happiness in being on good terms wi$h the
Unit-ed States. In the afternoon I went to visit the heads of Departments at their
severai Houses, in the follouing order - The Prime hiCinister - The
Aga, or General of the Turks. - The Hogia de Cavallor, or General
of the Horse - and the JTickelhadge,or hlinister of Marine. - To
each of these a present was carried, as is customary. - They all
appeared highly pleased, paid me many compLimFS and repeated,
again and again, the pleasure they should take in shew-hg their
friendship to the U. States, and tbcir readiness to render me any
service. The foIlou-ing day was spent in sending the presents to the inferior
Officers; none of whom were visited by me in form, as it is not customary for Consuls to pay particular attention to any but the high
Officers. On thc 27'h I went, with Mr OBrien, to the Minister of Marine,
and informed hin~of our intention to change our Medittmanean
Pmports, and shewed him one of the new Passports; at the same
time informing him, agreeably to my instructions, of t,he time which
wQ elapse before the new one shg be alone in use; and in the mean
timc, that either the old or the new should be considered as sufEcient; - but instead of nineteen months being allowed for the full
exchange, I mentioned two years, (consisting of twelre Iunar months
each) in order to give ample time for the exchange to be made by all
-4merican Vessels. - Tlis tinle was readily acceded to, and the business being fully explained, the minister esprcsscd his full satisfaction,
with assurances tliat it shd be ~articularlyobserved. - As this is
a businrss entirely in the marine Dtlpartment, the communication
was properly made here. - I ~ishrdto have made it in writing;
but hlr OBricn and the other Consuls assured me it was never done. This fomial communication, in presence of the Drogerman, bcing
aU that is required, and that notes are made of it in the Department. On the 289 b e n t , by the Drogernlan, a fornxnl message, announcing
the Blockade of Tripoli, agreeably to the Official information thereof,
given me by Commodore Preble.
The nine Cruizers wiJch sailed from this Port on the 3d of October,
on a cruize on the Coast of ISaples & Sicily, returned Into Port yesterday, bringing about 150 Captivcs whom they bad tukon from the
land, and out of small coasting craft. - They brouglit no prizes in
with them. - They consist of one frigate of 44 Guns, budt here another of the some force, taken by the former, some time since, from
the Portuguise - the Crescent, built in the U.States three Xebecks
from 20 to 30 Guns - the Brig & two Schooners b d t in the U.
States.

-

-

248

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1805 TO 1804

The Biennial Present had been made by Mr OBrien, before my
arrival, out of the 30,000 dollars in his hands. - This amounted to
16,000 dollg. 4000 more he says he has taken to his own account
and for Consular Expenccs - and 10,000 is to be paid to the Jews
on account of the Consular Present &F aid to the Dey, at the time I gave him the Consular present,
six t ousand eight hundred dollars, for the Ransom of Capt"Andrew1
Morris & crew. - The Debt of fifteen thousand $ seventy five dollars,
due to the Jews, is to be paid when I pay them for the Consular
present, which will be done as soon as they furnish their accounts.
Mr OBrien yesterday received a letter from Dr Davis, at Tunis, a
copy of which is enclosed. - I shall write to Dr Davis to take care of
our Affairs a t Tunis until I see him in the Spring, and in the mean time
to keep me fully informed of every thing which relates to us in that
quarter.
As I have been here so short a time, you will not, of course, expect
I can go into any detail of our affairs from my own knowledge. Every thing appears a t present very favourable to us; and I think it
justice to Mr OBrien to say that he seems to have conducted our
affairs with great adroitness, to keep the Dey in good humour, when
we have been so tardy in our annuities; and must add that he appears
to be very willing and able to give me full information on every
point. - I must here express my astonishment to find, that even if
the other Ship should arrive with the Timber &q we shall be so far
from being in advance to the Regency, that there will be a very considerable sum due to make up the deficiency to the 5'Q of Se e
last. - The first Ship which arrived brought a Cargo for the
amounting only to about 11,000 dollars - and the Second (The Old
Tom,by which this letter goes) brought but 3000 dollars. - The Ship
expected will not probably, from her size, have more than the last;
in which case we shall still be in debt more than one year for the
Annuities. - How tbis has happened I cannot tell; but it is certainly
very unfortunate; and I fear very much for the Ship expected (The
Sally, Capt-cher)
as CaptQCornick of the Old Tom, now here,
says she had put back to Norfolk, with the loss of her foremast, - was
repaired, and expected to sail from thence the day after he came
out; - and that she was so old and so bad a ship that no person in
Norfolk would insure upon her. - Should we fall so much behind
hand as I expect, and the Dey insist upon an immediate payment of
the balance, I shall be drained of all my money, and have no resources
for our business a t Tripoli or Tunis, should any arrangement take
place with the former; but I cannot help entertaining a hope, from
my knowledge of Commodore Preble, and from some other circumstances, that we shall lower the haughty tone of that Regency. I have the honor to enclose the copy of a letter from Commodore
Preble, and his answer, on the subject of my going to Tripoli in the
Spring. From the little I have had an opportunity of learning and observing
here, I should not apprehend much difficulty in keeping fair with this
the stipulations
Regency, provided we are punctua2 in complyin
in our Treaty, and proper measures are taken
Consul here to
keep on good terms with the leading men; but
is observed, and the Consul has the power or means to meet any
sudden or unforeseen storm, I presume we shall always be in danger

'K

Qt&!:f

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

249

of a Rupture, and the situation of a public Agent here very precarious
and unpleasant. - I shall not fail to keep in view the several points
mentioned in my instructions, and push them, as I may find fair &
f avourable opportunities.
The English Consul, Mr Falcon, who was sent from hence last
summer, by the Dey, leit Gibrdtar some time before I sailed from
thence, to go to Lord Nelson, off Toulon, who, it was said, was ordered
to see him restored to his Post; but they seem to laugh a t the idea
here of his being forced upon them.
At the close of the present month, I shall make up my accounts
and forward them to you, when I hope to be able to give you a more
minute detail of our affairs in this quarter.
[XA. SDA. CL, Algiers, Vol. 6, Jan. 1801-Dec. 1803.1

[2 December 18031
Certiilcate given to Captain John Cornick, by Tobias Lear, U. S. Consul General,
Algiers

Copy of a Certificate give to Cap' John Cornick December second,
eighteen hundred $ three. Be it known to all whoom it may concern, that this Second day of
December 1803, personally appeared before me Tobias Lear, Consul
General of the United S. of America a t Algiers, John Cornick, Master
of the American Ship Old Tom, now laying in the Harbour of Algiers,
who declared, that, four of the crew belonging to said ship had left
her in this place, and that no other Seamen could be obtained here to
supply their place, and that the said ship is now navigated by eleven
persons, including the Captain. Given under my hand and Seal of Office at Algiers this Second
day of December 1803. [Stephen Decatur Col. KDA photostat, Book A.]

To Honsieur Dubois Thainville, Charge d'dffaires and Commissary General of the
French Republic, Algiers, from Tobias Lear, U. S. Consul General, Algiers

ALGIERS
2@Ded 1803. CITIZENCOMMISSARY
GENERAL,
I have reccived the letter which you did me the honor to write on the
gt? fremaire, enclosing a certificate for Capt. Cornick of the American
Ship Old Tom,and two letters, one for the Charge d'affairs of t,he
French Republic a t George Town, and one for the Commissary at
Norfolk. Thc certificate has been delivered to Cap' Cornick, and the letters
committed to his charge. As soon as the Old Tom shall have sailed, and some affairs dispatched
by me, wQequire my immediate attention, I shall have t,he honor
to pay my pe~sonalrespects to you. As a man of business, I am persuaded you wdl impute my not having paid my respects to you before,
to the pressure of affairs on my first arrival, and not to a want of
that respect and Esteem which I feel for you.
I n the mean time I pray you, Citizen Commissary General to accept
the assurances of high consideration and regard with which I have
the honor to salute you.
[Stephen Decatur CoI. NDA photostat, Book A.]

250

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1803 TO 1804

To Daniel Bedinger, Navy Agent, Norfolk, Va., from Secretary of the Navy

NAVD E P ~
Decem' SQ1803
I am honored with your letter of the 27@ ult? - The rates of
Insurance upon the cargo of the WiUium and Mary are much too
high - They are I presume founded upon the belief of our being in
a state of Warfare with the Emperor of Morocco - Thls however
is not the case Commodore Rodgers has just arrived in the New York
with the intelligence that peace is made and that our ships will experience no molestation from the Cruisers of that power - In consesequence of this information the high rates of insurance to the
mediterranean must fall Insurance I have no doubt can be effected in Baltimore a t much
lower rates than these you have given me If you find that you cannot make the insurance upon the peace
premiums a t Norfolk you will be pleased to write to Col. Stricker
and request him to insure the Cargo of the William and M a y in
Baltimore
Agreeably to your letter of Requisition I have this day directed you
a remittance of $4,500 under the following appropriations
Provisions 4421.52
Contingent - 78.48
4500 [NDA. GLB, Vol. 7, 1803-1805.1
To Sir Thomas Trigge, Lieutenant Governor of Gibraltar, from Tobias Lear, U. S.
Consul General, Algiers

ALGIERS
December SQ1803. I take the liberty of informing your Excellency, that this morning
the Dey sent in great haste for M' OBrien, my predecessor, and myself

to the Palace. - When we went there we found him in a great rag(.,
threatening to put to death some of the Captains of his Cruizers which
had lately been out, for having taken a Vessel from Malta, which was
under the protection of the British, and had Sir, Alexr Ball's pnssport,
and carried her into Tunis, where she had been sold. - He said he had
sent for us to give us an evidence of his justice towards the British that, altho' he had sent the Consul out of the Country last summer, it
was an act of mercy on his part, as he had so far violated their laws
that he would not have been safe from the outrages of the people &c that notwithstanding this, he considered himself bound by his Treaty
with the King of England, whose friendship he most highly valued and that he was very desireous of having a new Consul sent to rcnew
& confirm his friendship &c - that i jhe (tho Dey) should permit the
former Consul to return he would not be safe from the violence of the
Moors. - He requested Mr OBrien & myself to write to your Excellency, or any other of the British Governors or Commanders who would
be most likely to let his disposition towards the British Nation be
known to the Government. - At the intercession of the Ministers
&F - the Captains were saved, but were all dismissed from the De 's
service. - If any good should result from a communication of t is
disposition on the part of the Dey (let it proceed from what course it
may) I shall feel peculiarly happy in having been the organ of it. - In

K

WARS U71TH BARBARY POWERS

251

any event I shall be gratified in having so good an oppertunity of
expressing the sence which I have of the polite and friendly attention
which M r G e a r & myself recd. from your Excellency & Lady Trigge
while we were at Gibraltar, and to offer my best services if they can a t
any time be made useful to Your Excellency. Mrg Lear is in good health and much pleased with the appearance
of the Country. She tenders her best respects to Lady Trigge, to
which I beg leave to join mine. NB. First by Ship Old Tom, Cap1 Cornick
Second by Spanish Courier via Alicant
(Stephen Deeatur Col. NDA photostat, Book A.]
Extract from log book kept by Sailing Master Nsthaniel Earaden, U. S. Bavy, on
board U. 6. Frigste Coruiifution. Saturday, 3 December 1805

Strong gales & cloudy weather - We continue a t Anchor in Saragosa /Syracuse] - The Ships company employed as necessary - As
M' Morris the late Chaplain is appointed Purser it is necessary that
there should be a chaplain and the Commodore has accordingly ordered
34' Peter Leonard to that duty [LC

EPP, Log Constitulion. 1803-1804 ]

To Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Navy, from Lieutenant Stephen Decatur, Jr.,
U. S. Navy

U.S. SCEOONER
Enterprize

Syracuse harbour Deer C t h I803
SIR,The disapeeable task of stateing the extreme impropriety of
Mr Boyd a midshipman under my command is imposed on me On the 2C of this month, Mr Boyd having permissipn to go on
shore, went where he became inebriated, & while in t h s state maltreated several of the inhabitants; Lieu3 Thorn (who was present)
told him his conduct was extremely improper & ordered him on
board; he replyed to Lieut. [about two lines of MS mutilated] he
would comply with, but continued his abuse to Lieu: Thorn 7Leu1
Lawrence then took him by the arm for the purpose of carqmg
to the boat when Mr Boyd collered him & a t the same tlme drew hs
his dirk, Lieu; Lawrence disarmed him & again ordered him to the
boat The conduct of hli: Boyd was represented to me by M' Lawrence,
M' Thorn, & one of the inhabitants who was treated ill, precisely as
I have stated it to you, I n consequence of which I arrested him, a
coppy of his arrest & charges I inclose you. -

+

[LC. EPP, VOI. 8, 1803-1804.1
TO whom not indicated, presumably from Midshipman Henry Wsdsworth,
U. S. Navy

[U.S. FRIGATE]
Constifution44

SYRACUSEDecember 4th 1803
DEARSIR,A second time you see. I have the pleasure of addressing
you from Syracuse where we arrived after going off Malta &sending
a Boat in to Port in order to ascertain the truth of the report respectmg
the Philadelphia, which alas is but too true. * * *
10th December. V i x e n Lt Smith arrived, having been out 19 da
&prevented from getting to the westward of Sardinia, by the Wester y

r

252

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1803 TO 1804

Gales has been into Cagliari to wait a fair wind: a t length weared
with the length of the gale & supposing the Cornre must have passed
Eastward he bore up for Malta thence to this place. * * *
[H. W. L. Dana Col.]
To Midshipman Christopher Gadsden, Jr., U. S. Navy, from Captain Edward
Preble, U. S. Navy

Constitution Syracuse Harbor.
Decemr 4 t h 1803
SIR Agreeable to your request you are Permitted to return home
for the recovery of your health. You will be charged with two Setts of dispatches for the Navy
department which you will keep with you, and deliver yourself at
the Navy Office or forward by Mail immediately on your arrival.
You have also a packet for Mr Yznardi which you will deliver to M:
Garino to be forwarded to Cadiz by the first mail; and one for Mr
Gavino which you will also deliver to him - I wish you a speedy
restoration of health and i t will afford me pleasure to see you return
to Service with Promotion.
[LC. EPP, Order Book, May 1803-June 1805.1
To Lieutenant John Smith, U. S. Navy, commanding U. S. Schooner Vixen, from
Captain Edward Preble, U. 6. Navy

U. S. SHIPConstitution
Syracuse H ~ T ~ O4UDec;
T 1803
SIROn your arrival here, you will immediately prepare the Vixen

for a cruise. Make your requisitions for such provisions as belong
to the United States on Mr George Marcellin; and let your purser
purchase such as he cannot supply you with, and remain in port until1
further orders.
[Similar letter sent to Lieutenant Charles Stewart, U. S. Navy, commanding
U. S. Brig Siren.]
[LC. EPP, Order Book, M a y 1803-June 1805.1

To Captain Edward Preble, U. 8. Navy, from Midshipman Walter Boyd, U. S. Navy

U. S. SCHOONER
Enterprize
Syracuse Harbour Deer 6'h 1803
SIR It is with the utmost regret that I am under the necessity of

addressing to you a letter on so disagreeable a subject, as my late misconduct on shore; confiding however to your mercy I hazard to make
the request of obtainin your pardon. My superior officers whom I
must confess I shamefu y offended have granted me their forgiveness,
and agreeably to the information of Captain Decatur, it rests entirely
with you to extricate me from the evils arising from my folly. Give me leave Sir to assure you, that I will not only avoid to deserve your displeasure or t,hat of my superiors in future but the sole
aim of my conduct shall be to convince you of the most sincere
gratitude. -

b

[LC. EPP, Vol. 8, 1803-1804.)

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

253

To Commanding Offtcer, of U. 6. Frigate Nuo Yort from Secretary of the Navy

NAVYD E P ~

Dee' 5, 1808 The Neuryork must be paid off without delay. Be pleased to send
up your Purser immediately to receive the necessary monies. Same t o Commanding Officer of the John Adams. -

[NDA. OSW, Vol. 6 , 1802-1805.1
To Captain Edward Preble, U. 6. Navy, from Captain William Bainbridge,
U. 6. Navy
TRIPOLY
IN BARBARY
5QDecem' 1805

SIR I had the honor of Fmiting you on the l!jtQ
Ult? giving a Cypher,
which would enable us to correspond without any danger of our private communications benefitting this Govermt, in case of detection.
For fear that said Cypher may miscarq, I now send you another on
the same plan, but alphabetically varied. Your letters which does
not contain any private matter, had best be directed to the care of
the British Consul, and those of a private nature, you had better get
the Danish Consul a t Malta, to enclose to his colleague in this place.
The greater part of our crew consists of English subjects, not
naturalized in America; Suppose Lord Nelson was to claim them, and
to enforce his demand, would it not be policy in the United States,
to accede to such a measure? Interest, and Humanity, would (in
my opinion) sanction an acquiescence.
This day, two Gallies returned from a cruise, and brought in 13
Sardinian, and 3 Sicilian persons. The Marine force of this Regency
(as near as I can learn, being confined to the house, prerents giving
accurate informntion,) consists of one folacre Ship, 1 New Brig proper
rigged 14 Guns, - 1 Schooner ready for launching, rery tant Masts,
10 Guns. - 5 Gallies latteen Sails; 4 6: 6 Guns 50 to 60 Men - 12
Gun Boats, two of which, are small, the others carry heavy Metal,
all in port, and 1 Xebeck at Derne.
The unfortunate Frigate lies moored in the Harbour, with all her
Guns. They took them up from off the rocks in the depth of 12 8:
14 feet Water. I think it very practicable with six or Eight good
Boats well rnrtnned, and determined OEcers to destroy her, and their
Cruisers, particulady if the thing was attempted without giving them
much warning; for all their Gun Boats at present, are hauled up on
Shore, and I am told, that there is only a four Gun Battery badly
mounted, that points towards the Harbour, which could be easily
silenced, after gctting possession of the Ship. Powder and Shot should
be brought in one of the Boats, to sup ly the Guns on board the Frigate. By chartering a Merchant Vesse , and sending her into the Harbour, with the men secreted and steering directly on board the Frigate,
i t might be effected without any or a trifling loss. I t would not be
possible to carry the Fri ate out, owing to the difficulty of the Channel. I beg that you wi not consider me too officious, in giving my
ideas on a conjectural practicability.
The Harbour of Tripoly is fortified by nature; they have a number
of Guns on their Batte , pointing to the Southwq which will prevent
Frigates ~ c t i n geffectua ly on the Town. A blockade bas, and ever
will be found a wrong system to pursue, with this Regency; it is only
barding a great risque (aI have fatally expsriencexf) without the

7

lf

7

254

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1805 TO 1804

least effect, except the Interest of a few Jewish Merchants. The
Country abounds with plenty, and every super-fluous supply can readily
be got from Tunis bv Land. The situation of their Harbour, and coast
is such, that their smrtll cruisers which are the most dangerous, can
always go to Sea, and return into port in s ite of the most viaailant
cruisers stationed off here. The passage etween Cape Bon and
Sicily is an important place to gunrd; and our small Vessels to cruise
on the coast of Italy, Spain, and Sardinia, would probably detect
their Cruisers, which endangers our Trade and which in general
should have convoy given it. This System I verily believe, to be
the best to pursue; had it fortunately been the case, 1should not now
regret the loss of my services to my Country.
Whatever measures my Commodore you may pursue, patriotism
to my Country, and sincere friendship to yourself, will cause me to
offer my fen-ent prayers for their success. I know they nil] be
actuated by the purest motives, and dictated by a eomprehensire
mind. Would to God! I was this moment under its inhence.
I hope that you and Col. Lesr, will feel yourselres justified to ask
the demands of the Bashaw immediately, so that we may be able too
form some opinion of the probability of our Government complying
with them. France would be found a good mediator, but not to be
negotiated thro' their Consul.
(Signed) wmBAINBRIDGE

,'f

[The original of this letter includes the cypher of Captain Bainbridge.]
[LC. EPP, LB, Dec. 1803-April 1804.1
To Lieutenant Colonel Commandant William W. Burrows, U. S. Xarine Corps, from
Captain John Hall, U. S. Marine Corps

SYRACUSE
'P D~cel1 SO$
SIRI now enclose you Cloathing Return for the Month of Nover
with the signatures of each Man, as also grnerol return of Cloatlring
Issued since my arrival in the Medit~rranian,in which you will see my
want of Cloathing, there are none that I can hear of either at Gibraltar
or Malta - I am sorry to inform you that the Philadelphia is now
rt Prize in Tripoli & the whole of her Crew made Prisoners, three
hundred & seven in number the Officers are closely confined in the
French Consuls House & the Men put t.0 hard Labour, & their daily
allowance is eight oz: of Bread & a little bad Oil Sergr Hill is now in Irons on board the Schooner Nazldalus for
Insolence to Lt Decator the Comarehas promised to get him on board
this Ship if possible, but fear he must undergo a Court Martid, I
think he is treated ill, but cannot say positively until1 I hear both
sides of the question the other Detachments are well & in good order.
I have the honor to be [MCA. LR, 1803.1
Extract from Diary of Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Navy, Commodore of U. S.
Squadron in the Mediterranean, Wednesday, 7 December I803

[Syracuse] Moderate. Landed provisions from the Store Ship: The
Magazines where we deposit the Provisions and Stores and the
b e n d where our Spars, boats &Q are lodged are very convenient and
supplied me by the Gpvernor free of expence - A. M. commenced
and
watering - a party &scharging the store ship -- The Enfe~p?-ize

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

255

Nadilzls nearly ready for sea; the Enterprize has been new rigged
since her arrival here and they have both been compleatly fitted for
winter cruiaing - Punished several men for getting drunk [LC. EPP, Diary, 1803-1804.3
To the Eon. John Bandolph, Jr., United States Congress,from Secretary of the Bevy

NAVYD E P ~
Dec' 8. 1803 -

In answer to your inquiry of the 6'9 inst I have the honor to enclose
you a statement shewing the number of Clerks employed in this
department with their respective salaries. The hours of attendance at this office are from 9 till 3 O'clk, but I
beg leave to state that when business requires it (which is frequently
t,he case) the attendance is not confined to particular hours. [Enclosure]

Number of Clerks Employed in the Navy Department with their Respective Salaries

Clerks employed in the Navy Department with their respective
salaries. In the Secretary's office, 3 Clerks. Chief Clerk - salary p? Annlim-. - - - - - - -- - - - - - _ _ --,
$1,800
[I
@ $1,000 ea - , - , - - - - -2,000
------Two dQ
$3,800

In the Accountant's office - 9 Clerks. - viz?
1

1

@

$1500
1200

"

1 '[
1 "
2 @
2 @
1 @

1120
900
850

1115
1800
1700
600

t$9,035

tIn the above is included the 15 pr Ct additional allowed by the Act
of last Session making appropriations for t-he support of the Governmen t for the year 1803. [NDA. Cong. LR, Vol. 1, 1798-1811.1
To George XcIntosh, Norfolk, Va., from Secretarg of the Navy

NAV.D E P ~
Decem. 8. 1803

I have received our letter of the la!instant The Betsy Wal deposited her cargo a t Algiers and returned to

I

Gibraltar October 17 - 1803 since which time we have no information
concerning her [NDA. GLB, Vol. 7, 1803-1805.1

256

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1803 TO 1804

To Captain George Billups, commanding American Ship Traoclkr,from Captain
Edward Preble, U. 13. Xavy

U S SHIPConstitution

Decem' 9Q' I803
SIR,I t is necessary that your ship should be discharged to day as
I shall go to Sea tomorrow evening with the Squadron; and if you
wish for Convoy you can then tn.ke the benefit of one. Your freight
money is ready as soon as the Cargo is delivered.
[LC. EPP, Order Book, May 1803-June 1805.1
Extract from Diary of Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Bsvy, Commodore of U. 6.
Squadron in the Mediterranean, Friday, 9 December 1803

[Syracuse] Wind W N W: Strong breezes. Supplied the English
schooner Magddena Tender to the ship Madrass Guard ship at Malta
with a barrell of beef and a barrel of Pork - Ships company employed in preparing for sea. taking in water, discharging the store
ship and stowing the provisions in the Magazine on shore; We have
found i t necessary to new Pickle eyery barrell of salted Provisions in
order to preserve it. Mr George Marcellin and M' Charles Morris I
have appointed to remain a t Syracuse in charge of the Provisions and
Stores of the Squadron.
ILC. EPP, Diary, 1803-1 804.1
To Secretary of the Navy from Captain Edward Preble, U.13. Navy

UNITED
STATES
SHIPConstitution
Syracuse Harbour 10tQDecember 1803
SIRI had the honor to write you from Algier's Bay, after landing
Col. Lear and family, since which, no opportunity has occurred
until1 now. I left that Ray on the 22nd November, to proceed off
Tripoly, with the Nautilus in company; and on the 24 t+ off the S W
end of Sardinia, spoke an English Frigate from Malta, the Capt of
which, informed me of the loss of the Philadelphia on the rocks off
Tripoly, but was not able to give me the particulars of the distressing
intilligence, which induced me to steer for Malta, to gain further
information - On the 26th between the Island of Maritimo and
Cape Bon, chased and boarded a Tunisine Xebeck of 18 Guns on a
cruise, with the passport of George Davis. American Charge des
affairs at Tunis, and permitted her to proceed - dTtQ arrived off
the Harbour of Malta, and sent in a Boat with nn O5cer on Shore,
who returned with letters from Captain Bainbrid e dated a t Tripoly,
stating the particulars of the capture of the f%iladelPhia by the
Tripolines, without a man on either side having been killed or
wounded; with the mortifying circumstance that she was in the
Harbour of Tripoly. - This affair distresses me beyond description,
and very much deranges my lans of operation for the resent. 1
fear our national character
sustain an injury with t e Barbarians. - Would to God, that the Officers and crew of the Philadelphia,
had one and all, determined to prefer death to slavery; it is possible
such a determination might save them from either - Enclosed is
Capt. Bainbridge's account of tho business; with sundry other papers
as p? list. I shall not hazard an opinion on the subject of the loss. You can form as correct a one from Capt. Bainbridge's own letters of

&

g

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

257

the 1st and 6th m t o , as i t is possible for me to - Soon after the
Boat returned from Malta, a heavy gale of Wind came on from the
N. W. The sea was tremendous in the charnel, and the ship laboured
much:-I stood across to the Northward, under reefed courses and
Storm Staysails, and fetched under the lee of Scicily; where I had
smooth water; and on the 29th the gale subsided.
I fell in with the Enterprize Lt Decrttur, who informed me, that the
store Ship Traveller was a t Syracuse. I accordingly made sail for,
and entered the port, the next mornv. I immediately waited on the
Governor for permission to deposit our Provisions & Stores, which
he not only readily granted, but assigned me the use of the Arsenal,
with compleat covering for our Boats and Spars, and v e q excellent
Magazines that will contain five thousand Barrels of provisions; and
all these free of expence! - He considers himself under obligations
to us, for making this port our rendez~ous,as it will prevent the
Tripolines from cruising on this part of the coast of Scicily. - This
Harbour is one of the best in the Mideterranean, and the country will
afford us fresh Meat, Vegetables, Fruit, Candles, and Rice, cheaper
than they can be purchased in America. The Inhabitants are
t
In fact,
extremely friendly and civil, and our Sailors c a ~ o desert,
I think it by far the best place for the Squadron to rendezvous at.
The almost constant hea$y gales of Wind, and extreme bad weather
since our arrival here, has prevented us from compleating our Stock
of Wnter, and finishing landing the cargo of the Store Ship, untill to
day. I have bent a new suit of sails - The Enterprize is new rigged,
and the Nautilus in fine order. We sail tomorrow for the coast of
Tripoly, and are we1 prepared for a Winter's Cruise. I shall remain
off the coast, as long as it is possible for any of their cruisers to keep
out; but I do not think it w i l l be possible to cruise all Winter without
hazarding too much; for should any accident happen to this ship,
and any of the other Barbary Powers should break out upon us, the
Consequences may be dreadful to our commerce in these Seas. - On
my arrival near Tripoly, I shall send a fltlg on shore, to h o r n the
present situlttion of the Captives, and learn the Bashaw's disposition
and expectations, and to establish a necessary supply of Money for
the comfort and health of the Officers & Crew, and by this means, I
shall learn the present disposition of their Kaval force. - I suspect
the demands of the Bashaw, since he has the Philadelphia and Crew
in possession, will be enormous; of course, Government will feel the
necessity of sending out an additional force, to supply the loss of that
ship. - One Ship never ought to cruise alone on the Coast of Tripoly,
if it can be avoided. If two Ships are in company, and an accident
of running on shore happens to one, the other can protect her whilst
getting off - and the same protection would be wanted, in case of
losing a Mast, by engaging the Batteries.
If it had not have been for the Capture of the Philadelphia, I have
no doubt, but we should have had peace with Tripoly in the Spring;
but I have now no hopes of such an event - If you send me another
Frigate or two, and a Frigate to relieve the Argw a t Gibraltar, so
that I can have the services of that Bri , I will so compleatly Blockade
Tripoly and annoy the Coast, as to essen the Bashaw's demands,
more than double the expence of the reinforcement, and perhaps
oblige him to sue for peace.

'i

258

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1803 TO 1804

I do not believe the Philadelphia will ever be of service to Tripoly;
I shall hazard much to destroy her -it will undoubtedly cost us many
lives, but i t must be done. I am surprized she was not rendered use-

less, before her Colours were struck.
I am sorry to inform you, of the death of Mr Deblois purser of this
ship. he was sick for about three weeks, and died soon after our
arrival here. The service has sustained the loss of an Officer of Merit
in his station. I have appointed Mr Noahdia[h] Morris (late Chaplain) as his successor, and Mr P. Leonard (late Capt" Clerk) I have
appointed Chaplain, who will also continue to do the duty of a clerk I hope the President will do me the honor and favour, to confirm the
appointments - If he knew their merits as well as I do, he would
not hesitate.
The Beef sent out in the Store Ship, and branded George Tou-n, I
Krouse & C ? is miserably poor, and badly put up: - Indeed, nothing
but absolute necessity will induce the people to eat it. Most of the
Casks are the worst sort of fish Barrels, and very few of them full
hooped; in consequence of which, the Pickle has leaked out, and the
provisions spoiled. - Several bbi8 have been condemned and thrown
overboard, being too offensive to be retained in the ship. - I believe
it will be for the Interest of Government, to ship all the Beef from
Boston, or Connecticut. The Pork, Rice, Flour, Bread &cGs good,
but the Casks are in very bad order. A quantity of Bread, and other
Provisions and Stores, have arrived at Malta from Gibraltar, sent up
by Mr Gavino. - Mr Pulis complains of their not having been consigned to him, but to an English Mercht I shall settle the business,
by taking the whole of them over here, as I return from my present
cruise. As we have no consul or Agent here, and I do not chuse to
trust our Provisions & Stores in the hands of Strangers, I have placed
Mr George Marcellin and Mr Charles Morris, Midshipmen, in charge
of the Public Stores untill I return. I take the precaution to leave
two, in case of accidents.
Mr McDonough a Midshipman belonging to the Philadelphia, that
%as left by her prize a t Gibraltar, and afterwards joined this Ship, I
have ordered to join the Enterprize, Notwithstanding we are well
accomodated here for Magazines to deposit our Provisions & Stores,
Yet, still, a ship that would Answer for a Store and Hospital Ship,
would be much preferable, for it is uncertain how soon we may be disturbed by the Frencb or English taking possession of this Country.
I shall write you immediately on my return from this cruise, and hope
to be able to give you more correct information respecting our affam
with Tripoly, than I can at present. If a Frigate comes out to reinforce the Squadron, will it not be well for her to stop at Algiers and take
Col. Lear on board? as i t will prevent the necessity of my sending a
vessel after him in the Spring. Mr Gadson whose health does not permit him to attend to duty, has requested leave to return to the United
States, and I have charged him with my dispatches - Z sent ou a
memo of such Stores as it will be in our power to procure here, an such
as i t will be necessary to send out, - I shall take the earhest opportunity to survey the Islands of Pantelaria and Lampedosa and ascertain what advantages the Squadron may derive from those places. I
have an opinion, that we can make one of them our general rendezvous
in Summer, with more advantages than any other place, as thcy are
situated so near the Coast of Barbary, and directly in the track of

1

W A R S WITH BARBARY POWERS
-

259

Vessels to and from Tripoly. The Articles which I can purchase here
upon terms that will make it more for the Interest of the United States,
than to send them out, are Rice, Wood, Candles, Vinegar, Wine, Hats,
Shoes, & Summer clothing. I t will be necessary to send out Rum
sufEcient for the S uadron for about 4 Months in the Year, the other
8 months, Wine
be most serviceable; and Winter clothing, such as
blue Jackes -Trowsers and Blankets only. The articles of provisions
which cannot on any terms be rocured here, are Salt Pork, Beef,
Bread, Flour, Butter, Cheese, Mo asses & Pens or Beans. In about 10
Weeks, we shall be entirely out of Molasses, Butter, Cheese, & Rum.
I t will also be necessary to send out two or three Frigate's Bower
Anchors, and as many Stream with Oak Stuff for Stocks. - Thick
or thin Duck cannot possibly be procured here; it will be necessary to
send out some of that Article, and a few thick & thin Oak plank and
boards. And if one or two lower yards for a large Frigate can be sent
here, it will be well, as we have not one in the Mediterranean, and in
case of an accident to one, it could not at present be replaced

A

P

C0n8titu*ion}~ettingunder Feigh for a cruise off Tdpoly;
Enterprize
Nautdus - TOconvoy the Store Ship down, and cruise off C: Bon.
Vben - Gone to Gibraltar with Captain Bainbridges dispatches, to
return here immediately.
Syren - Went from Gibraltar to Leghorn for money & presents, to
take to Algiers; and proceed off Tripoly, where I expect to
fall in with her. A ~ g u s- Gone from Gibraltar to Marceilles & Leghorn, with Convoy. - To return immediately to Gibraltar, to watch
the motions of Morocco, and occasionally Cruise off Cape
de Gatt, Cape Palos, and along the Coast of Spcin.
12th. December. The weather has been such as to prevent me from
Sailing. The Vixen Lt Smith has just arrived. She sailed from
Malta the 19th UltQwith dispatches for you from C[aptain] Bainbridge
giving an account of the loss of the Philadelphia - Lt Smith states,
that he has made use of every exertion in his power, to reach Gibraltar,
but in vain; for after having bd'etted the Seas for 22 days, experiencing nothing but constant Gales of Wind, and excessive bad weather,
he has been compelled to return. He touched at Malta on his return,
and brought me a letter from Captain Bainbridge, dated the 12th
UltQwhich throws more light on the loss of his ship, and the situation
of himself, his Officers and Crew. - Would to God, I could release
them. I t also enables me to enclose you a letter from a M' Farquhar
a Merchant at Malta, (of whom, by the by, I know very little) He
states the expectations of the Bashaw, to be ridiculously extravagant.
I hope when the season admits of our keeping close to his Cortst, with
safety, I shall be able to make him feel the force and Weight of our
shot so effectually, as to check the extravagance of his expectations.
I shall take every proper means of endeavouring to make the situation
of Capt. Bainbrid e, his Officers and Crew, as comfortable as circumstances will possib y admit of. I ho e to be able to second the views
of the Bashaw's brother, who has ately gained a victory over the
Bashaw's Troops near Derne - Government will determine whether

7

P

260

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1803 TO 1804

it will give him any other aid than that of our forces - I shall readily
with them assist him against Tripoly
I hope soon to be able to give you more correct information relative
to this part of the World, and the affairs of it, than I can at present.
PS. I have ordered Lt Somers of the Nautilus, to sail immediately
for Gibraltar, with these dispatches, to be forwarded by different
conveyances from thence; as I am aware of the necessity of their
reaching you, while Congress is in Session, or as early as possible. Lt Smith, has lately lost an Anchor, and Lt Somers another. I t
will be well to send out a few from about 8 to 9 Ct with Iron Stocks,
as we are obliged to pay a quarter of a Doll. p: pound here. - E: P
[LC. EPP, LB, Dec. 1803-April 1804.1
To Captain W i a m Bainbridge, U. S. Navy, from Captain Edward Preble, U. 6 .
Navy

UNITEDSTATESFRIGATE
Constitution
Syracuse Harbour lot@Deer 1803
DEARSIR, I have r e d your letter of the 15t@Ult? respecting the
Tripolitan subjects taken in the Mishouda - I have only to observe,
that they were well treated while I had the command of them; and I
have every reason to believe, they were, before I arrived at Gibraltar.
They all declared to Hamet the Moorish Consul, that they had no
cause of complaint.
You may inform the Minister, Mahomet Dghies, that on the settlement of a peace with the Emperor of Morocco, I voluntarily gave up
to the Emperor, the Ship Mishouda in the same order she was taken,
together with all the Guns, Military Stores, and Merchandise found
on board her; and all the Moors, Algerines, and Tripolitan Subjects
found on board her, were landed a t Tanger, and set a t full liberty,
to sell their Merchandize and effects, and return to their respective
countries. I hope when His Excellency the Bashaw, is made acquainted with this generous treatment of his subjects, and of our generosity
in restoring the ship Mishouda to his friend the Emperor of Morocco,
notwithstanding we could not but know she belon ed to Tripoly,
that he will show his magnanimity, by ordering yourse f, Your Officers
and Crew, to be treated in the most liberal manner
I beg you to present in behalf of my Government, my thanks to
the Minister, for the Interest he has taken in your unfortunate
situation.
[LC. EPP, LB, Dec. 1803-April 1804.1

f

To Lieutenant Stephen Decatur, Jr., U. 6. Navy, commanding U. 8. Schooner
Enterprize. from Captain Edward Preble, U. 6. Navy

UNITEDSTATESSHIPConstitution
Syracuse Harbour 10 Decer 1805
SIR YOUwill proceed in com any with this Ship on a Cruize off
Tripoly, should we unavoidably e seperated, approach the coast so
as to reconnoitre the Harbour and situation of the Philadelphia, After
which endeavour to fall in with me. If you should fail in this, you
will cruize between Lampedosa and Cape Bon two or three weeks,
if the weather should prove such, as to make it dangerous to the
safety of the Vessel, and then Return to this port, Fill up your water,
take in provisions get all ready for sea, and waite for orders,
[HS of-Pa. Mrs. F. H. Getchell.]

I

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

261

To Lieutenant Isaac Hull, U. S. Navy, commanding U. S. Brig Argur, from Captain
Edward Preble, U. S. Navy

U. S. SHIPConstitution

Syracuse harbor Deer 10tQ1803
SIR Before you recieve this you will have heard of the loss of the
Philadelphia with all the distressing and mortifying circumstances.
I shall want your Services in the Spring and hope you will be relieved
so as to Join me early in Spril. I have made an establishment in this
place which I find well calculated for it.
Write me often, Send me all the News and newspapers; Tell me how
Morrocco stands affected and what condition her cruizers are in:
Direct your letters to me a t Malta and keep a good look out on your
Station.
[LC. EPP, Order Book, May 1803-June 1805.1
To Joseph Pulis, U. 8. Consul, Malta, from Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Navy

U. S. FRIGATE
ConStituiion

Syracuse Harbor Decemr 1 OtQ1803
SIB I have recieved your lctter of the 26tQNovernr by Lt Dent and

thank you for the Information i t contains
You have done right in sending C a p Bainbridge three hundred
dollars for himself Officers and crew and if it had been three thousand
I should be answerable for the supply. You have done right in sending the medicines he required.
I expect soon to be a t Malta and will then Settle the business
between you and Mr Higgins by ordering all the Provisions and Stores
to be shipped for this place
I shall sail from this place tomorrow for the Coast of Tripoli where
I have now- some vessels cruizing - You will percieve by the enclosed
that Tripoli is at present and will continue to be in a state of blockade.
[LC. EPP, Vol. 8, 1303-1804.1
To Secretary of State from Josef Yznardi, U. S. Consul, Cadiz, Spain

CADXZ
lo* December 1803.
DEARSIR. I had the honour of writing you on the 22c Octobr
& 30 ult? whereof the inclosed are Copys.
I have now to inform you that the American Ship Sdy Cap!
John R. Archer loaded by Government with Naval stores for the
Regency of Algiers, was lost on the 2Ot+ ult? on the sands of Torre
del a Higuerilla u-ithin a 11. Leagues of the Barr of S' Lucar; the
Vessel is entirely lost, and I am apprehensive that what has been saved
of the Cargo will hardly pay the expenccs of it; I have duly acquainted
this misfortune to Edward Preble Esqro Commodore of the U, S, Squadron
Richard OBrien Consuls at Algiers Tobias Lear
that they may acquaint the Dey of it, that he may not be under m y
apprehension missing the Naval stores, and as the Salvage u d be
so expensive in such a far distance & bad roads, I have determined
to sell it on the spot at Public Auction, & whatever may be the Neat
Proceeds for account of Government I shall duly inform you of it
with proper Documents.

1

262

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROhl 1805 TO 1804

Inclosed I have the honour of remitting you Copy of a Letter
received from Comm? Edw* Preble concerning the Blockade of Tripoli
& of my answer to him.
The Sickness in Malaga continues with great force & inclosed is
a note of its Situation on the 6t@instant.
By all appearances this Country remains perfect neutral in the
actual Contest between France & England; but as yet Government
has not made it public, sundry Spanish Vessels carried to the Ports
of England by Privateers are put in liberty, and the Privateers condemned in paying some part of the damages.
I have the honour to be with the most profound respect and
veneration.
[Enclosure]

Malaga 6t4' December 1803 -

To Eon. B. K. Moore, United States Congress, from Captain Alexander Murray,
U. S. Navy

PHIL^ Deer 11 1805
DEARSIR The very unpleasant situation of the officers of the navy
now on the half pay establisment induces me to intrude upon such
Members of Congress that I have the honor of an acquaintance with
& hope by their influence with others (as my acquaintance is very
confined among that honorable body) that they will make an effort to
get our Rations annexed to our half pay, trusting that there will be
found a majority of the house in favor of making such an extension,
and I take the liberty of craring your Patronage in our favor I t would be trespassing upon your time to urge many Arguments on
this head, 'tis well known that our rank, & respectability while in
service unavoidably urges us to keep up a certain state of expence
that absorbs all our emoluments and nothing can be left for our families on our return to the private walks of life, many of us have large
& expensive families & our half pay is found insufficient to pay our
house rent few of us have independent fortunes and the pride and
dignity of Office will not (but upon dire necessity) brooke the descent
to menial occupations nor would it be to the credit of the U States
that we should be found retailing bunches of Onions &c. from Drogers
in forts where we had held high commands - I t may be alleged that
we are better paid than the Officers of the british naky but let it be
remembered that they are mostly men of high birth & Fortune &
they have many priviledges that we have not We cannot extend our views to any schemes of life that will require
time to mature-had we even capitals to do it, being ever liable to
be called into service and which might happen at a time when our
serious attention was the most required in short we should ever be
in readiness for active service possibly we may now be considered as
an useless appendage of expence to government the Temple of Janus

WARS WITH BARBARY POTWRS

263

being about to close its doors, but a county like ours should ever be
on its gaurd I have written to my old Friend h@ MFCrery on this subject who
with others I flatter myself will exert their influence in behalf of us
[NDA. A. Murray's LB, 179S1805.1
To John Gavino, U. S. Consul, Gibraltar, from Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Navy

Constitution Frigate
Syracuse Harbor Decr 11 th 1805
SIR I have paid Cap! Billups one thousand dollars on account of his
freight from Gibraltar to this place you will please to pay him the
other part of his freight amounting to two thousand dollars and charge
the same to the navy department
[LC. EPP, Order Book, May 180SJune 1805.1
To General William Allen from Midshipman William Henry Allen, U. S. Navy

On board U.S. FRIGATE
J. Adams
Navy Yard City [ofl Washington.
December 12th. 1805*
DEARFATHER Kith Pleasure I Embrace the first moment which
the hurry and Bustle of our Ship affords to Inform you of our arrival
here (after a passage of 50 days from Tangeir not more agreeable
than can be conceived, yesterday the President with all the heads of
Departments payed us a visit with nearly all of Both Houses of
Congress, the hTewyork was dressed on the Occassion; the Yards
were manned, Salutes fired, and every other mark of respect paid lini
by Both Ships, preperation for this has employed every moment
since I wrote you those hasty Lines - * * *
(*"Of9' inserted after "City" and date altered to "11th" in another
hand.)
[Huntington Librap- Quarterly.]
To George Davis, U. S. Charge d'Affalres, Tunls, from Tobias Lear, U. S. Consul
General, Algiers

N Q1 .

ALGIERS
Deccmbcr lgtQ1803
SIR I have the honor to inform You that I arrived a t this place
on the 1 9 t k l t i m o , in the U. States Frigate Constitution, Commodore
Preble, and am now in the exercise of my functions as Consul Gent
of the U. States in this Regency. In order that You may see the
relation in which I stand with respect to the Consuls of the U. States
a t Tunis & Tripoli, (when ever we may be at peace with the latter)
I enclose an extract of nly instructions from the Department of
State, on that head. As Mr Cathcart has not been recieved by the Bey of Tunis, and
You remain charged with the aflairs of the U. States in that Regency.
I will thank You to furnish me, by the first oppertunity with n full
statement of affairs there, and such observations thereon as will lead
me to form an opinion of what we may expect from that quarter. At
the same time You will be pleased to add such information relative
to our Affairs with Tripoli, as You may have been able to obtain, and
upon which any reliance can be placed. -

264

NAVAL OPERATIOhW FROM 1803 TO 1804

Our Government has thought proper to change our Mediterranean
Passports, and has furnished me with one passport and a number of
Tops for each Consul in these Regencies. I embrace this oppertunity
to forward a passport to You & sixty tops, and add a copy of the
instructions given to me by the Sec? of State relative to them. I
have given information to this Regency of the intention to change our
passports, and insteed of the term of 19 months for the full exchange
of the new for the old, as mentioned in the instructions, I required
two Years (consisting I presume, of 12 lunar months each) for that
operation, which was readily acceded to. This will give more time
for the full exchange, and if You obtain the same terns i t will be
desirable; and when notifled to the Regency, You will be pleased to
give information to the Secv of State, as directed in the instructions.I have also the honor to enclose a letter for You from Commodore
Preble, notifying the blockade of Tripoli by the U. States Ships of
war. Commodore Preble has put into my hands Your letter to Commodq
Morris, dated, onboard the U States Frigate Adams, September 8t'J
1803, together with a letter from the latter to the former, stating,
that as Mr Cathcart had been appointed Consul for the Regency of
Tunis, he had requested hiessrs Degen & Purviance not to advance
You the 2000 dollars for which he had given You credit with them. How far this was proper or otherwise, I shall not now undertake to say;
but presuming it must have placed You in an unpleasant ~ituation,
1 shall forward to You the like sum of two thousand Spanish dollars,
either by this oppertunity, or by land, as I may find it most safe and
expeditious, upon enquiry on the subject. - 173th respect to the
4,000 dollars for which you have become responsible on account of the
claims for Tunisian property vended a t Malta, I can only observe,
that when I have the pleasure of meeting You next Spring, as I hope
to do a t Tunis, this matter will be considered and justice done in the
case. Mr OBrien has favoured me with your letters to him of the 3G of
July & 15Q October, the former enclosing an extract of Tour letter to
the Sec? of State, of the same date, and sundry documents relative to
the redemption of Demoiselle Anna Porcile d' 1' Ile di' St Piere left
in Your charge by M' Eaton. - K i t h respect to the redemption of
this Young woman, I do not hesitate in giving my opinion that she
ought to be redeemed; and especially as you add there is no reciept
or document of any kind left in Tour hands to shew that the p a p l e n t
had been made for her by hfr Eaton; or that there was any ohligation
to pay him for her liberation as You say, in Your letter to the See?
of State, "that if commode Morris should acquiese, You should feel
yourself perfectly authorized to relinquish the further prosecution of
the claim, fully satisfied that you have no longer reason to hope for
the recovery of any part of the sum"
I trust you will not experience the evil, which you suggested as
possible to arise to you, from our naval Commanders not giving full
credence & respect to Pour passports, as I informed Commodore
Preble, that I should consider you as charged with the affairs of the
U. States a t Tunis untill we should have further advices from our
Government, and he in consequence, wrote the enclosed letter. I hare not been here long enough to form any correct judgement,
from my own observations, of the situation in which we are likely to

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

265

stand with this Regency; but I have the satisfaction of finding Mr
OBrien most erfectly ready and able to communicate to me so much
of his valuab e stock of information respecting every thing here as
will be very essentially useful to me in my public Agency as well as
in my individual accommodation; and I am also pleased to add that
he will remain here during the winter. We have satisfied the Biennial & Consular presents, and have received two cargoes of Timber from the U. States towards paying the
two Annuities due on the 5tQof September - Another ship has been
expected for some time; but we now almost dispair of her arri-ral Should she not come, we must endeavour to make an arrangement to
pay the balance, which may be due in Cash. - The Dey & great
Officers appear to be in good humour, a t present, with the U. States;
but in these Latitudes we have no right to calculate upon a long spell
of favorable weather - I only wish I may be able to keep as good a
helm in the squalls & Gales, as my predecessor appears to have done;
but he is an experienced navigator in these Seas. I am happy to inform You that our difl'erences with the Emperor
of Morocco were satisfactorily adjusted early in October. - A concurrence of fortunate events put into our hands one of the En~peror's
frigates, and about 160 of his subjects; and the junction of the outward and homeward bound squadrons a t Gibraltar, in a critical
moment, gave nn oppertunity of displaying a large force - effectually protecting our trade - and striking no small terror into the
Inhabitants of the Coast. -The activity of the Squadron u-as
equd to its unexpected appearance - Every Sea port in the Empire,
from Mogadore to Tituan, had or more [sic] cruisers off, to prevent
the entrance or departure of any TTessels.The Emperor came to Tangier with his Army. - Our Frigates
were drawn 11p ready to destroy his Town, if he should determine on
hostilities. - The impression was strong; and the Emperor not only
disavowed, in the most positive manner, every thing which hail been
done on his part of a hostile nature; but offered anything we could
ask - a very important point with us was to obtain a full and
unequivocal ratification of our Treaty made with his Father in 1786. This was a t once complied with; and not a denland or intimation of
a present from us, either in gross sum; or by m y of Annuity. TTe gave him up his ship & subjects as a gratuity. Thus was this
business, which threatened serious evil to the commerce of the U.
States in these seas, happily terminated in a few days. - Commodore
Uorris had returned home in the Adams before this event took place,
and lio[d]gers who Commanded the homeward bound Squadron,
behaved with patriotism and his usual activity. This event, I thinli, augers well with respect to the operations
which may be carried on against Tripoli nest season. If daring
intrepidity, united with the full esperien[c]e of a seaman, escellent
judgement & pro er prudence, can conlmand success, 1 presume
Commodore Preb e will gain Laurels for himself 6- honor for his
Country.
I have this moment received a most unpleasant piece of intelligence.
My Ilrogerman informs me that the Minister of Marine has just
directed him to tell me, that un Algerine arrived from Tunis, brmgs
accounts that one of the American Frigates off Tripoli in chasing a
Tripoline cruizer, going into Tripoli, had run on shore - that they

P

P

266

2LTAT/ALOPERATIONS FROM 1803 TO 1804

threw overboard twenty Guns in order to get her ofl; but without
effect. - that the Tripoline Gun boats went out and took her in this
situation, and afterwards got her off, and that the command of hir was
given to a Rais, formally of Algiers called Genoa.
However painful this intelligence is to me, I cannot give it credit;
for I know that no vessel has arrived in this port for 12 days past;
and if the news came by land (as they say it did) from Tunis, that You
could not have delayed a moment in forwarding to this place information of so important an event, should it have been known there; and
besides David Bocri, the Jew, informs me that he Yesterday reed
letters from Tunis, which do not mention such an event.
I t is possible notwithstanding, that i t may be true; and if i t should
be so, I think it must be the Philadelphia, as the Constitution left this
Bay on the 22d of Kovember & could not have reached Tripoli soon
enough for information of such an event to be received here. - I
pretend to give m, kind of credit to the tale, and assure them here, that
even if it could be true, it would be attended with good effects in the
end, as our Govt would see the necessity of keeping a larger force in
this sea, than may be necessav for immediate operations, to guard
against accidents of this kind; and that if this ship sllould be lost,
her place would be immediately supplied with two more. I have this day paid to David Bocri, the Jew, two thousand Spanish
dollars, for which he is to place a like sum a t Tour disposal, on account
of the U. States, in Tunis; and has given me the enclosed letter for his
correspondent Seigr Soloman Azuly, at Tunis, which he says contains
an order for a credit on him, in your behalf for two thousand dollars;
and that another letter to the same effect, will be forwarded by the
land Courier in two or three days. Enclosed is a letter which I brought from the U . States for Anthony
Nyssen Esqc Consul Gen! of the Batavian Republic
I beg the favour of you to deliver to that Gentlem
respects; also a letter from Air OBrien to You. [LC. EPP, Yol. 8, 1803-1804.1
To Nicholas C. Missen, Danish Consul, Tripoli, from James Leander Cathcart,
Leghorn

LEGHORN
Dec? IdfL1803 Dr SIR. On my return from Gibraltar in the United States Brig
Siren I found your esteem'd favors of the 15t'?of July & 19 & 2gt'!
of Septr copys of which I forwarded to the Department of State
immediate1 , & for which I return you my most sincere thanks. This ins.d I receiv'd your distressmg accl of the loss of the Ud States
& have taken the requisite
Frigate the Philaddphia Capt"ainbridge
steps to alleviate their sufferings, by furnishing them with an immediate supply, I have for that purpose wrote to Mr Williams Higgins at
Malta to send to you three thousand spanish dollars in cash, which
you will please to distribute to the sufferers in the most economical
manner, you & Captwainbridge can devise & to prevent miscarriage
I have furnish'd you with a credit upon the house of Frederick Degen
& C? of Xaples should you find it more convenient to draw upon them
for any part of the above Sum, or you may draw upon me a t Leghorn
taking care that the whole ammount may not exceed four thousand
Spanish dollars. -

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

267

The rent of the Consular house is paid until May 1804 as will appear
by Ciddi Mohammet ben Luna's receipt & Farfara's which I left at
Tripoli, you will please to renew the lease on the best terms you can
& appropriate the house for the use of the prisoners, & I request you
to make their situation as comfortable as possible. - By a vessel
which sails tomorrow for Algiers I will inform our Agents there of this
unhappy event, & requesthlrLear to furnish you with a more extensive
credit than I have in my power at this moment, in the mean time I
hope the small supply you receive from me will answer the present
emergency. By the first opportunity I will write you more fully & in the mean
time, I request you & Capt? Bainbridge to give me every information
in your power, relative to the Bashaw's sentiments on this change of
position & what are his pretensions in come uence thereof. - I
will write Capt? Bainbridge by the next post to%aples & remain very
respectfully. P. S. Tomorrow I will endeavor to engage two suits of apparel for
the seamen, the Offiicers would do well to specify their wants as soon
as possible; when the said cloaths are ready I make no doubt but some
conveyance will offer for their removal to Tripoli. [NA. SDA.

CL, Tripoli, Vol. 2, June 1801-Sept. 1805.1

To Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Navy, from John Gavino, U. 6. Consul, Gibraltar

GIBRALTAR
12th December 1803.
DEARSIR I wrote you the 14th Ulto pr the Ship Traveller who went
for Syracuse with provisions and a Bill of lading of said Cargo and
a list of which went to Malta addressed to M' Wm Higgins in the absence of the Commander of any of our state Vessels, since when
I have not heard from you. I now enclose four letters from Cadiz
&c* The Ship SaUy Captain Archer with part of the stipulations
for Algiers from the United States was totally lost off Rotta. A
little of the Cargo will be saved. By a vessel arrived this day from
Baltimore in 50 da s. I fmd Captain Steritt was engaging men to
come this wa in t e Essex. The only news we have here is, that a
declaration o War may be every moment looked for from England
against Spain and Portugal. At Malaga the disorder continues.
I do not find that any answer is come regarding the dispatches
sent to England by the Commander afloat here on the subject of
your affair regarding seamen; if it has, it is kept to themselves.
I have been told in confidence by a friend, and I hand i t you in
same manner, that an order is come out from King and Council and
also sent to Governor Ball at Malta to take up and try Step+Decatur
and young Bainbridge for an affair that took place some time ago
I believe a t Malta in a Duell where Decatur was Bainbridge's second,
and his opponent was Killed on the Spot. [See 14 February 18031.
They represent the case, in a state which might go hard against them.
Let this serve for your Governmt and take such steps as you may think
prudent on the subject.

3

B

[LC. EPP, LB, Dec. 1803-April 1804.1

268

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1803 TO 1804

To Lieutenant John Smith, U. S. Navy, commanding U. S. Schooner Vixen, from
Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Navy

U. S. SHIPConstitution
Syracuse Harbor, Decr l R t Q 1803
SIR, YOUwill sail on or before the 15tQIns! and take under Convoy
for Gibraltar the Store Ship Tra~elltrGeorge Billups master: Should
you be separated & no prospect of falling in with the Traveller, proceed to hlalta; gain what Information you can respecting our aflairs
a t Tripoli; Take on board as much of the Philadelphia's & other
public Stores as possible & return to this place. Put the Vben in
Order for a Cruize with Water, Provisions & Stores and wait for
Orders.
[LC. EPP, Order Book, May 1803-June 1805.1
To Lieutenant Richard Somers, U. S. Navy, commanding U. S. Schooner Naulilus,
from Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Navy

U. S. FRIGATE
Constitution
Syracuse Harbor Decr 1Rt@1803.
SIR YOU will immediately Sail from this harbor for Gibraltar,
On your Arrival there deliver the dispatches with which you are
charged to John Gavino Esquire and return to this place without
delay - Should you want provisions hlr Gavino will supply you Return by that rout which you shall deem best calculated according
to Information you may recieve to fall in with our enemies Cruizers Enquire of Lieutt Hull and M r Gavino for letters for me and gain
what information you can respecting our Barbary Affairs On your Arrival here fill up your Water Take in provisions,
t Orders
get ready for a Cruize and u ~ a i for
N. B. The dispatches are of Importance to our Government and
require exertions on your part to get them forward, which I am
Confident you will make.
[LC. EPP, Order Book, May 1803-June 1805.1
Extract from log book kept by Sailing Xaster Nathaniel Haraden, U. S. Navy, on
board U. S. Frigate Cohttrfuf~on.Monday, 12 December 1803

Moderate Breezes 6: cloudy weather. We continue a t anchor in
Saragosa with the A1uutilu~and Enterprize in company. The ships
company employed as necessary Three officers and a party of men
are employed ashore s t o ~ i n gauay the stores landed from the Traveller - Towards the Evening i t was a dead calm Hove up and down
in order to keep a clear anchor I t remained calm all night with hazy
cloudy Keather: B t li in the morning the U. S. Schooner lTi;eenappeared
without the harbor. As it was a dead calm, the Commodore ordered
pr Signal the boats of the squadron to assist in towing her in: She anchored here a t 9 A. M. Lieutt Smith waited on the Commodore; He
reports that he sailed from Malta nearly three weeks ago in order to
proceed to Gibraltar where he expected to Join the Commodore: I n
consequence of the strong Westerly winds he did not pass to the Westd
of the Island of Sardinia. The ships company have been employed
this forenoon and [in] restowing the booms. JTe continued up and
down all night and until1 11 A. h/I. a t which time a light breeze sprang
up from the S. TV. We veered to one third of a cable. The Commo-

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

269

dore this forenoon ordered a boat to sound off the North Part of the
Harbor. The Surgeons report to the Commodore is 12 Sick, 9 convalescents and three discharged from the Sick list. The ships company yesterday & this day have had salt provisions served out as
fresh could not be got. At Noon light airs from the S. W. We are
a t Single Anchor with the 2\Tautilus,Enterprize & Vixen in company
[LC. EPP, Log Constitution, 1803-1804.1
To Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Navy, from Captain William Bainbridge,
U. S. Navy

TRIPOLI
BARBARIE,
l3'QDeer 1805
SIR By this conveyance you will receive two letters from me givin
perticular information of our Situation and also informed you of our
want of money, I have this day received from the Minister of Foreign
Affairs five hundred dollars, for which I have given him Bills on Leghorn a t fifteen percent loss to the drawer. If we do not get money
occasionally sent us from Malta or a Credit on which 1 can draw a t
Tunis, we shall be much nesseciated for means of subsistence.
In my former letters I mentioned that our Crew was kept employed;
the mechanics a t their respective Trades, the others a t various work.
We had on board a smart Gang of Carpenters, who are employed in
working on a new Schooner. Mr Godby [?] our head Carpenter (has
not been ordered to work before this day) has received orders from
the Bashaw to build a Gun Boat; if there is not a possitive order given
to order Crew, and perticularly to the Mechanics; Tripoli will receive
great advantage from their labour and they cannot reccire much
worse treatment than they do, for they are only allowed bread scarcely
sufficient for them to subsist on, and the Interest the Bashaw has in
their lives ill prevent him from starving them entirely. I do not
conceive it policy in me to give the order, and was I to do it; it would
not have the same weight as if come from you.
Should they persist for the fear of more severe treatment I think
they should be considered as having aleinated themselves from the
United States; if they prcfered turning hlahomettans the choice was
free.
There has already turned the following persons
John Wilson, a Swede, Quarter Master
Lewis Hacksener, a German, Ordinary Seaman
Thomas Prince, - - - Boy
Peter West - an American - Carpenters Crew
BAINBRIDGE
[LC. EPP, Vol. 8, 1803-1804.1
Extract from log book kept by Sailing Master Nathaniel Haraden, U. S. Navy, on
board U. S. Frigate Comtitulion, Tuesday, 13 December 1803

Moderate Breezes & cloudy weather. We continue a t Anchor in
Saragosa with the Enterprize, Nautilus and Vixen in company. The
Ship's company employed in scraping down the topmasts working up
Junk and stowing the Booms. Towards the evening the S JV Wind
died away nearly to a calm. We continued short a t single Anchor
during the night - At day light out boats and sent the large cutter
watering - I n the course of the forenoon she bro't two loads - 30

270

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1803 TO 1804

Gan Casks - It was a dead calm all the forenoon till 11 A. M. a t
whit time a light breeze sprang up from the EastP. The Signal was
made for the Nautilus and Enterprize to unmoor - Towards noon

%

the Signal was made for all captains who accordingly waited on the
Commodore: The Ships company have been employed this forenoon
in scraping between decks, relashing the Jeer Blocks, repairin the
cat falls and foretopsail sheets. The Nautilus is ordered to hol herself in readiness in order to convoy the Commodores dispatches from
this Island (Sicily) to Gibraltar; I mentioned yesterday the Arrival
of the U. S. Schooner Vixen: She was in Malta when the Intelligence
of the loss of the Philadelphia was reciered in that Island She Immediately put to sea in order to proceed to Gibraltar a t which place she
expected to Join Commodore Preble: After being out 20 days being
short of Provisions and not bein one third of her passage down she
a
For these last 30 days the
bore up for Malta and from ~ a f t here;
prevailing wind has been from the West$ and sometimes heavy gales
from the North - And it is very propable that no Intelligence of
the loss of the Philadelphia has yet arrived a t Gibraltar At Noon
this day we had light airs from the East$ - The Surgeons report to
the Commodore is eleven Sick, ten con~alescentsand two discharged
from the Sick list.
[LC. EPP,Log Cons2ztutim1 1803-1804.1

f

Extract from log book kept by Sailing Master Nathaniel Baraden, U. 6. Navy, on
board U. S. Frigate Constilution, Wednesday, 14 December 1803

Moderate Breezes and cloudy Weather. We continue a t Single
Anchor with the A7autilus Vixen & Enterpriz in company - We arc
perfectly clear for Sea and are waiting for a wind The Ships company
employed working up Junk and restowing the Warranted Officers
store rooms By three P. M. the light airs from the EastQhad entirely
died away and by 4 P. M. we had light airs from the S. W. The
cutter was sent this Afternoon to sound off the South Side of the
Harbor: We continue a t Single anchor during the night with light
airs and Variable from the Westd. I t was moderate and cloudy all
the forenoon: The Ships company employed in cleaning ship; All
the birth deck and every part below the Gun deck is scraped invariably every forenoon. This method of cleaning ship is recommended
by the Surgeon during the winter Season: It is very Evident that
the necessary duty of cleaning between decks can never be dispensed
with over two or three days But so frequent a repetition of scraping
is very Injurious to the decks, Yet it is my opinion that frequent
washing between decks is worse than scraping. The Innumerable
inlets between decks which lead the water to every part of the ships
frame may be considered (in my opinion) as a reason why all the
Ships of our Kavy have become rotten At daylight the large cutter
was sent on the watering service in order to complete our daily
Expenditure - The Surgeons report to the Commodore is 12 Sick,
8 convalescents &- 3 discharged from the Sick list. At 10 A. M. the
cutter returned with 9 Gang Casks of Water - At noon light breezes
from the Wests and cloudy Weather.
[LC. EPP, Log Cmatitution, 1803-1804.)

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

271

To Eon. William Eustis, United States Congress, from Captain Alexander Murray,
U. 6. Navy

PHIL*Decl 15th 1805
DEARSIR Through the medium of my friend Captc Nicholson who
hath just left this on his return to Boston I have taken the liberty
of introducing myself to you, as a friend to the navy requesting your
patronage to obtain for the Officers the price of their Rations in
addition to their half pay I half written to my friends Messre Nicholson MacCreery & Moore,
on this subject hoping by our united influence with other Members
of Congress that you
befriend us so far as to bring about so
necessary & desirable an acquisition 'tis well known to every liberal
& generous mind that the rank we hold while in actual service unavoidably leads us to keep up a stile of expence that requires the whole
of our pay to entitle us to proper notice while abroad and to support
the respectability of the Navy, our acquiantance being or ought to be
among the first class of society whereever we go as well as the necesEfiquette on ship board and table expences generally "?hat
then is to become of our families in the intervals on the
present half pay regulations? few of us have independent estates
& the circle of our acquaintance in the private walks of life ought to
be respectable, is it t.hen consistant with the dignity of the U. States,
thus flourishing in its Commerce & render'd in a measure secure by
our little navy, that their officers should be compelled either to seclude
themselves from the eyes of the world or fly to the donnde resort,
of accepting of menial Commands in the private sea service when to
be obtained & to expose themselves to the view of Foreign nations
vending their wares where they had held high & distinguished commantis, for my own part I never was ashamed of an honest occupation, but I should feel for the dignity of my Country upon such an
occasion I will not trespass upon you with any further considerations
flatering myself that you will readily suggest Ideas more forcible than
any I can point in conjunction with my other friends above alluded to
Pt I beg the favor of you to have the enclosed letter to my niece
11" Mason forwarded to her.

wd

[KDA. A.Murray'8 LR, 1799-1805.1
To George Davis, U. S. ChargB d'bffaires, Tunis, from Tobias Lear, U. S. Consul
General, Algiers

N Q2
ALGIERS
December 15t9 1805
SIRMr OBrien has this moment received Your letters of the 16@
& 17th ultimo announcin the painful intelligence of the loss of the
U. States Frigate ~ h i l a d e f ~ hand
i a captivity of the crew at Tripoli.
This confirmation of the report which I mentioned in my letter of
the 12's having been received here, is distressing indeed; but we must
lose no time in making the best arrangements we can for the support
of our unfortunate fellow citizens in captivity, and for preventing a
greater an extension of evil from this unhappy event. In order that
the first ob'ect may be attained with all possible expedition, I hereby
authorize 3 0 u to obtain on the credit of the U. States in Tunis, d
possible a sum not exceeding 10,000 dollars - and apply the same in
the best manner You can to releive the immediate wants of our un-

272

hTAVALOPERATIONS FROM 1805 TO 1804

fortunate fellow Citizens. I shall, without delay, make arrangements
on this subject, and forward the same to You - and, in the mean time
shall dispatch letters, in various directions, to give the earliest information of this event to our Govt This nill go by the Vessel St Antisirno which carries my dispatches
of the i2'Q inst She is under way, but the wind is so light that a
boat will be sent off to her w-ith the letter.
[LC. EPP, Vol. 8, 1803-1804.1
To Secretary of State from James Leander Cathcart, Leghorn

LEGHORN
15th Decem: 1803.
SIR. The enclosed papers will inform you of the loss of the United
States Frigate the Philadelphia, of the deplorable situation of the
Officers & crew, & of the steps ~ h i c hI have taken to alleviate their
present sufferings until provision is made for them by government. I have not a word to offer in estenuation of this fatal accident, it
envolves incalculable consequences & changes our position not only
with Tripoli, but the whole of the Barbary States. How glorious i t would have been to have pcrish'd with the Ship,
but how apt are we all to prefer a precarious, nay un ignominious life
of slavery to a glorious death which would transmit our names to
posterity & have establish'd a national character which time could
not efface; while humanity recoils a t the idea of launching so many
souls into eternity, every thing great glorious & patriotic dictates the
measure, & our national honor & pride demanded the sacrifice. I n compliance a i t h your orders of the 16tQof last July I have deliver'd cash & effects to Mr Lear & to his ordcr to the ammount of
32,000 dollars which with the bills I accepted drawn by Mr Katon
while he remain'd a t Tunis, the credit 1have forwarded for the relief
of the crew of the Philadelphia & my own salary & expences ammounts
to a sum considerably greater than that deposited in my hnnds for
public use, exclusive of the cost of two suits of cloathing which 1 am
preparing for each of those unfortunate men, I therefore request you
to forward me cash or a credit on London to the ammount of ten thousand dollars to answer my engagements & for which I will hold myself
accountable until final setlement. The provision necessary for the crew of the Philadelphia while in
captivity will ammount to about 2000 dollars pr month, if sent out in
cash in any of our vessels of War, Malta is the most proper place for
its deposit on account of its proximity to Tripoli, if a sum is to be
negotiated for that purpose Leghorn is the only piace in the mediterranean where it can be done to advantage, Exchange upon London is
this day a t 51g for one pr da 8/r or Leghorn current dollar. If Government concludes to redeem our fellow Citizens immediately
& sue for Peace on the Bashaw's own terms, i t will cost us three
hundred thousand dollars a t least, exclusive of Consular presents &
an Annuity of ten or fifteen thousand dollars, & if a Frigate is not
given gratuitously to Tunis we will have a War with that Regency
the succeeding year to the conclusion of a Peace with Tripoli, & it is
not very probable that A l ~ e r swill view those concessions with
indifference, to carry on the War to any effect i t will be necessary to
keep constantly two or three Frigates besides the light vessels now
in this sea & ten gunboats which may be built in this Port or in
N? 16.

273

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS
-

-

-

Naples in about five months & will cost about fifty thousand dollars,
therefore viewing our present situation in any point of view we have
little to expect but difficulty & an enormous expence, it remains for
government to determine which mode of procedure will be most
conducive to our interests.
If coercive measures had been pursued on the commencement of
the war with Tripoli we should not a t this moment be reduced to our
present humiliating situation, if an accomodation for cash should
now be determined on, it wou'd be adviseable to send it on board the
vessel that takes the negotiator to Tripoli, any sum in dollars may be
procured in Leghorn for bills upon London provided suf6cient time
is given to procure i t in, otherwise as in the purchase of Bullion in
general advantage will be taken & its price will raise in proportion to
the exigency of the demand. I have not heard of Comodore Prebble since he was on his passage
to Algiers, on his hearing of the above melancholy event, the first
idea that he will conceive as an Officer will undoubtedly be to proceed
off Tripoli with the small vessels & endeavor to entirely destroy the
remains of the Frigate if he finds their is any possibility of the Tripolitans heaving her off the bank, in order to prevent them from useing
her against us which would render them considerably more formidable
& consequently render it necessary to keep a greater force upon their
coast. I send copys of this communication & enclosures to different parts
of the mediterranean in order to facilitate its speedy arrival, & I
request you to acknowledge its receipt as soon as possible. With grief as poignant, as any of the sufferers can possibly feel for
this most unfortunate event, I have the honor to continue very respectfully. [NA. SDA. CL, Tripoli, Vol. 2, June 1801-Sept. 1805.1
Extract from log book kept by Sailing Master Nathaniel Hsraden, U. S. Navy, on
board U. S. Frigate Gnrtitution, Thursday, 15 December 1805

Moderate Breezes from the Westg. We continued a t single Anchor
in Saragosa with the Vixen, Nautilus and EiLterprize in company.
The Squadron is all ready and perfectly clear for Sea when an opportunity offers - All the afternoon the weather was gloomy and overcast with a continual succession of heavy clouds from the West? &
by 4 P. M. the weather had the appearance of an approaching gale
from the West'?. The Nautilm Schooner Lieutr Smith sails this
afternoon with the Commodore's dispatches for Gibraltar. Mr
Gadsden a Midshipman who is the bearer of the dispatches is to
remain in Gibraltar in order to convey them to America by the first
opportunity - Towards the Evening we bent the sheet cable and
unstowed the Anchor - The cutter was sent after sand and holy
stones - She returned in the evening with a quantity of each. Of the
salt provisions recieved from the Traveller Store Ship we opened seven
barrells this afternoon before we could find one barrell fit to serve
out - These Provisions wered [sic] headed up and stowed a t hand for
surveying By 10 in the evening the Weather cleared awa and the
Wind Veered to the W S W. At )i past 10 the Brig Se
an
English Privateer from Guernsey arnved here - We boarded her
for Intelligence but recieved none - The latter part of the forenoon

hhx

274

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1805 TO 1804

we had moderate breezes from the S. W with hazy weather - The
ships company employed scraping between decks and puddening the
Anchors M' McDonough a midshipman whom we recieved on
board the Constitution from the Moorish Ship Merboka was this day
turned over to the Enterprize - The Surgeon reports to the Commodore 9 sick 11 convalescents and 4 discharged from the sick list A t noon moderate breezes from the W. S. W. and Hazy Weather The Vixen is ordered to hold herself in readiness as a Convoy from
this Port to Gibraltar.
[LC. EPP, Log Constztutzon, 1803-1804.1
To Midshipman (acting as Lieutenant) Daniel C. Heath, U. S. Navy, from Secretary
of the Navy

NAVYD E P M ~
Decr 16, 1805 The Committee of claims to whom was referred the petition of
David Valenzin, has called upon me for official information on the
following points in relation to the imperial Polacre [Paulina]captured
by order of Commodore Morris. As you were Prize-Master of the
Polacre, i t may be in your power to furnish the information required,
which I request you will do. 'FChat disposition was ultimately made of the Polacre? 1
2 g For what purpose was Valenzin sent a Prisoner to this
country?
3 U n whose possession are his papers if any were taken from
him a t the Time of his capture? [XDA. OSW, Vol. 6, 1802-1805.1
To Captain William Bainbridge, U. S. Navy, from Tobias Lear, U. S. Consul General,
Alglers

ALGIERS,
Deer 1fitb1805.
DEARSIR, ITe yesterday received from Tunis, the painful intelli-

(COPY)

gence, of the captivity of yourself, officers &: crew, and the loss of the
Frigate Philadelphk. - Unexpected and severe, as this blow is, we
must not despond; but use our best endeavors to remedy the evil, as
far ns possible. I cannot tell you, what I feel for yourself, and others
of my countrymen in captivity; but I can say, that you may depend
upon every means in my power, to soften the rigor of your situation
and give every comfort it will admit of; and that jour liberation, will
be one of the first objects of my exertion, the moment we can receive
advices from our Governmmt. In the mean time, I place full reliance
upon that fortitude, which so eminently distinguishes our countrymen, to bear their hard fate, like men, who look forward to better days.
Mr. Davis, our Charge dlAffairs, a t Tunis, has forwarded copies of
his letters to you and to Mons. Beaussirr, the Commiwuy-Gmrral,
of the French Republic, a t Tripoli, requesting his friendly assistancc,
to alleviate, as much as possible, the unfortunate situation of yoursrlf
and company. - I fully approve of this conduct of Mr. Davis, and
have authorised him to procure money, for supplying such things as
may be necessary, for relieving the wants and affording such comforts,
as their situation will admit of, to our unfortunate fellow-citizens.
I am desirous to learn the particulars of this business - as we have
only learned, that, on 30'0 of Octr in the afternoon, the Philadelphia,

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

-

275
-

chasing a Tripolitan Corsair, ran aground, about 2 mile from Tripoli
that part of the cannon, &c. were thrown overboard, to get her off, but
without effect - that in the night, eight Gun boats went out from
Tripoli, and anchored near the frigate 'till day-light; when they began
an engagement wit11 her, which continued 'till 4 P. M. when the frigate
was carried by boarding - and afterwards got off - We therefore,
apprehend, that many lives have been lost on bc the frigate, before
she was boarded.
If it can be any alleviation of your misfortune, to know, that every
one here, takes a deep & fecling interest in your situation - you will
enjoy that satisfaction in the highest degree; for no Citizen of the U. S.
has had a better opportunity than yourself, of making favorable impressions here; and none could have done it more effectually. Mons.
Thainville & his family, are sensibly afflicted with your misfortune.
He tells me, he shall write to you, by this courrier, and also, to hlons.
Beassicr, in behalf of our Countrymen.
I shall dispatch, immediately, to our Govg copies of the communications from Mr. Davis, in various directions, so as to ensure as early
a conveyance, as the season and circumstances will admit; and I
flatter myself, that the acc'%ust be on their way to the U. S. before
this, from other quarters, where they have received earlier intelligence
of the event, than we did.
Commodore Preble. left this Bay on the 21" of Novr and intended
to go off Tripoli, before he proceeded to Syracuse; so that I presume,
vou must have heard of him. The U. S. schr iVautulus, was in company with him.
I have been received here, by the Dey & Regency, with great cordiality, and they seeem to be in good humour with the 1:. S.
Mr. OIBrien, my predecessor, will remain here, 'till next spring, on
acc' of the situation of his lady - This is a pleasing circumstance to
me, as I shall hare an opportunity of profiting by his knowledge and
experience in affairs here, as nvll as in other Regencies. I presume,
he will write to you a t this time.
Mrs. Lear, sympathises most sincerely, in the misfortune of yourself and our Countrymen, she sends her prayers, and best wishes for
your & their health & deliverance Assure yourself, My Dear Bainbridge. of everything, I can do for you and my Countrymen, in their
misfortunes - Tell them, I shall not forget them. The channel. thro' which this letter oes to you, will point out a
safe rommunication with me - and I s all expect to hear from you
by every opportunity.
Adieu - may God bless you all - and have you in his holy keeping - prays

i

[XA. SDA.

CL, Algiers, Vol. 6. Jan. 1801-Dee. lS03.1

To Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Navy, from Purser Noadiah Morris, U. S. Navy,
of U. S. Frigate Constilulion

U. S. FRIGATE
Consfifution
Syracuse Harbor 16Q Derr 1803
SIR, On broaching the beef and Pork which came from on board
the Store Ship Traveller I find a great proportion of it stinking & unfit
for men to eat. I have therefore to request that you will order a
survey thereon - .
[LC

l'PIJ Order Ruok, May 1S03-Junt. 3805.1

276

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1803 TO 1804

Extract from journal of U. S: Brig Argus. Lieutenant Isaac Hull, U. S. Navy, commandmg, Friday, 16 December 1803

(Moor'd in Carthagena harbour) These 24 hours Commence with
moderate Breezes and Clear pleasant Weather a t % p a t 2 P M,
brought to in the harbour of Carthagena and moored with the Starb'?
Anchor S W and the larb'J Anchor N E the Consular boat came
alongside and informed Pratique might be Obtained
Consuls boat Came alongside again a t 10 AM, At meridian hoisted out the barge
[XDA photostat.]
Extract from Memorandum Book of Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Navy, on board
U. S . Frigate Constitution. 16 December 1803

The Nautilus sailed with dispatches for Gibraltar to be forwarded
from thence to the U. S. Navy Office.
[LC, original.]
Extract from log book kept by Sailing Master Nathaniel Haraden, U. S. Navy, on
board U. S. Frigate Constitution, Friday, 16 December 1803

Moderate Breezes and cloudy. We continue a t Anchor in Saragosa
with the 'Crixen and Nautilus in company: The Guernsey Privateer
Brig which stood into the harbor in the Forenoon stood to Sea in the
aftenloon and towards the Evening she stood into the Harbor and
anchored abreast of the Constitution - This strange Manaeuv'rin~
we could not account for: The ships company was employed this
afternoon making mats & puddening the anchors. By 5 I n the Afternoon it was a dead calm and by 7 in the Evening we had a light
breeze from the S W with light rain - By 11 the weather cleared
up - After 11 P. M till day light light airs and Variable from the
KestQ At 7 in the morning mustered a t Quarters Punished Patrick
Tool & ll-" Killiams Seamen with 24 lashes each for drunkexless and
neglect of duty - Punished John Russell senman for neglect of duty
and for leaving the boat without liberty with 24 lashes - Punished
John Rowe Marine for being asleep on his post At day light we made
the necessary arrangements for getting under weigh with a light
breeze out of the Harbor but before we hove short it was a dead
calm - We have been perfectly clear for sea these three weeks
waiting a n opportunity of going out of the harbor which cannot be
attempted with prudence without a leadir~gwind - The ships
company have been employed this forenoon in scraping between
decks, stowing the sheet and best bower anchors - From % past 7
till noon we had a dead calm - We continued up and down on the
small bower all the forenoon with eve thing in readiness for weighing
should a leading breeze favor us - %e Surgeon reports the same as
Yesterday. A t Noon a dead calm.
[LC. EPP, Log Conalitution, 1803-1804.1
To George Davis, U. S. Charge d'AfTaires, Tunis, from Tobias Lear, U. 6. Consul
General, Algiers

ALGIERSDecember l Y t 4 1803. SIR, YOUwill receive, herewith co ies of my letters to You No 1
& 2 dated the 12tt and 15tQbsr
as the emel wh~chcarried the originals

N? 3.

e

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

277

has had a favourable wind since she left this, on the 15Q I flatter
myself they will reach Your hands in a few days. I fully approve of the step which You took in writing to Monsr
Beaussier, Commissary Gen! of the French Republic a t Tripoli, in
behalf of our unfortunate fellow citizens in captivity, and I have no
doubt but he will do everything in his power to make their situation
as comfortable as their unfortunate lot will permit - I shall do
myself the honor of writing to him by this oppertunity, confirming
the wishes & sentiments expressed in Your letter to him on this
subject
hlonsr Thainville, the Commissary Gen! of the French Republic
here, feels deepply interested in in the fate of Captain Bainbridge, as
he considers himself under great obligations for his friendly aid in
taking off himself and family, together with the other French citizens
here, when Cap! Bainbridge was a t this place in the [Qeorge] Uashington, a t the time when they were ordered to quit the Regency in 48
hours. - He is also highly esteemed by the Great men here, on
account of his Voyage (tho' a forced one) to Constantinople, with the
Regalia from the Dey, particularly by the Minister of Marine, who
went up and returned with him. I have therefore the satisfaction of
believing that measures \till be taken in various quarters, to make
the situation of himself, his officers, &- crew, as comfortable, as can be
expected in a state of captivity, untill we know what measures our
Govt will persue in this unfortunate affair. As this event took place
the last of October, I trust that information of i t is by this time far on
it's way to the U. States through the channel of Commodore Preble,
or some of our Consuls on the European Coast, who must have had
intelligence of it before i t reached this place, and who would not fail
to forward it to our Govt by the earliest and safest conveyances. - I
shall, however, forward letters to Alicant by the Spanish courrier,
which arrived yesterday & sails again in a few days, and others to
Oran, to be sent over to Gibraltar or Malaga without delay. We wait anxiously for further particulars of the capture - there
is reason to apprehend that many lives were lost in the engagement
from day light till 4 P. M. - As we can do nothing more in this
business untill advices are received from our Government, than to
endeavour to alleviate, as much as possible the bonds of captivitv
and slavery, with which our unfortunate countrymen are oppressed;
and obtain every information in our power respecting the views &
expectations of the Bashaw of Tripoli relative to the captives & the
ship; I must beg You will not fail to keep me informed of every particular on this subject, so far as You may be able to obtain information of anything which can be useful. - As the harbour of Tripoli
will not admit a Ship drawing the water of the Philadelphia, I presume
the Bashaw will dispose of her to some other power - on this point
You will be pleased to get what information You can; as well as mha t
are his expectations on the score of redemption of the captives. Information on the latter point must be obtained in an indirect
manner, and without seeming to seek for it. -

I expect David Bocri will furnish me with another letter t,o Seig'
Azuly, relative to the two thousand dollars, with which he is to supply

278

N A V A L O P E R A T I OIL'S F R O M 1805 TO 1804

You; and I shall also endeavour to make arrangements with him
to have a part, a t least, of the ten thousand dollars which You are
authorized to procure in Tunis, by my letter of the 15'Q ins' furnished
by him, in case you should not have obtained it from some other
quarter. For this purpose I shall keep this letter open to the last
moment before the departure of the courier. l g t Q of December.
I have this moment had a conversation with Darid Bocri, on the
subject of furnishing the ten thousand dollars in Tunis. - He says
they have no money there and that money must be sent for the
purpose kc - so that I find, upon the wholc, he is determined to
throw obstacles in the way to obtain advantages which he ought not
to have. - I therefore pray You will draw upon me for five thousand
dollars; if you cannot obtain money by other means, and I will answer
the dft a t ten days sight; if longer it would be better. - I should
have desired you a t once to have drawn upon me for the wholc;
but have been disappointed in some money which has been expected
here from Leghorn, but has not yet arrived. - Bocri says the two
thousand dollars for which you was to have credit on Azuly, were
sent on by land to Tunis two days ago.
[LC. EPP, Vol. 8, 1803-1804.1
Extract from Memorandum Book of Captain Edward Preble. U. S. Navy, on board
U. S. Frigate Comtilution. 17 December 1803

Sailed on a cruise off Tripoli the Enterprise in company.
[LC, original.]
Extract from log book kept by Sailing Master Nathaniel Haraden, U. S. Navy, on
board U. S. Frlgate Constilulion. Saturday, 17 December 1803

[Syracuse] At day light hove short: A t 7 in the morning we
weighed and came to sail with light airs from the W. N. W. - We
out boats and sent them ahead wit,h the tow rope - We came out
in company with the Enterprize - The V i x e n Lieut' Smith we lef[t]
a t Anchor in Saragosa. She is ordered as a convoy to the Traveller Store
Ship from Saragosa to Gibraltar
[LC. EPP, Log Conslitulion, 1803-1804.1
To Secretary of the Treasury from P. Muhlenberg, Collector of the Port of
Philadelphia

Extract from a letter from the Collector of PhiladQatcd 19: Decemr
1803.
Permit me further to request, your directions, with regard to American Vessels arning in this port (in part) &: as the owners ailedge,
mercly to defend themselves against the Brigands. The Antelope was
built here hy Contract and finishtld in a very short time - as she was
not built for burthen, but exprcssly for the purpose of fast sailing it
was conjectured, that the owners intended to sell her, in the West
Indies. I t appeared however, that she was chartered for a voyage
to the West Indies and to return - On her clearhg out, I found she
had four Cnrringe Guns mountred, and that she had some Cutlasses
and afew Musketson board - with about ten rounds of Alumunition.-

~ ' A R SWITH BARBARY POWERS

279

I consulted the District Attorney on the occasion whose opinion
I beg leave to enclose.
Honble. ALBERTGALLATIN.
[NA. SDA.

Misc. L., Jan.-Dec. 1803.1
[Enclosurel

[l December 18031
Opinion of Hon A. J . Dallas, concerning arming of American Vessels for Defence

There is no statute of the United States that prohibits an American
Citizen from arming his Vessel, for self defence in a voyage exposed
to hazard and it has been often done on voyages to the East Indies
and to the hlediterrenean.
But generally considered, it is not regular for a Merchant Vessel
to Arm in the time of Peacc; and as the Government is responsible
for tlie Conduct of its Citizens, the object of the Armament ought
certninlg to be satisfactorily ascertained to be a lawful one.
The Armament of the Vessel in question is considerable; but the
royape is, I beleive deemed hazardous by our Merchants. - As
therefore the Charter party is corlformable to usage; as
Hollingsworth nssures you that there is no intention to sell the Vessel abroad or
to employ her in any offensive or illisit operations whatsoever I do
not think it would be proper to detain her.
But in giving this opinion; I beg to be understood as assuming no
responsibility, it is n case that merits the attention of the Government,
in order to fis a general rule operating throughout tlie United States
(signed) A. J. DALLAS
Philad@Decr 1: 1805.
[NA. SDA.

Misc. L., Jan.-Dec.1803.1

To Nicholas C. Nissen, Danish Consul, Tripoli, from Captain Edward Preble,
U. S Navy

UNITEDSTATES
SKIPConstitution
off 2llalta 19th December 1805
SIRI beg you to accept my best thanks, for your humane, generous,
and polite attention to Captain Bainbridge, and his Officers, since
thcy have been prisoners in Tripoly. Your noble exertions to lighten
their captivity, does you infinite honor; and merits the approbation
of all good Men. I shall represent your conduct to my Government,
and am convinced, thcy will take proper notice of it; and reward
SOU accordingly, by some public testimony of their approbation. I wish exceedingly to see you. Come off to me if ou can, when I
appear with the Squadron before Tripoly. I will oist a red flag
a t the Fore top Gallant Mast head, as a signal by wluch you ma know
this ship. - I wish to establish funds for the supply of Zaptain
Bainbridge, and his Officers. And now assure vou that, any adrances
necessary for their support and comfort, which you have in your
power to make, shall be readily repaid by me, on account of my Government. I beg you to receive this short letter, as a token of my high
respect for your character, and to believe me most Sincerely

T,

[LC. EPP, LB, Dec.1803-April 1804.1

280

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1803 TO 1804

To Captain William Bainbridge, U. 8. Navy, from Captain Edward Preble, U. S.
Navy

UNITEDSTATES
SHIPCon8tifution
off Malta December 19th. 1803
DEARSIRI am honored with your several favours of the 1" ttQ
12t@& 1 P @Ultv with their enclosures. I feel most sensibly for the
misfortune of yourself, your Officers, and Crew - Your situation
is truly distressing, and affects your friends too powerfully to be
described. Your misfortune, has occasioned your Country the loss
of a Frigate, and for a time, of a valuable commander, Officers and
Crew. I have not the smallest doubt, but that you have dl done
everything which you conceived could be done, to get the ship off.
and extricate yourselves from the unhappy situation in which you
were placed; and I most sincerely regret, that your exertions were
not attended with success. The necessity of yielding to an Enemy
of any description, must be painful indeed, but how extremely so, to
a Nation who knows not how to respect the unfortunate.
rest assured, that in me you have a friend, whose exertions
You sha 1
never be wanting in endeavours to relieve you; and in the mean time,
you may command such supplies of money, for the comfort of yourself, Officers and Crew, as you may require. I hare only to request
your requisition for such supplies, and certificate that your Officers
and Crew, were obedient to Orders while on board, and that they
still continue to be so, as far as their situation will admit of; and to
make known to me, from time to time, for the information of the
Navy Dep: any improper conduct on the part of any of them, in
order that their pay may be checked

mar

*

*

*

*

*

*

*

God bless and preserve vou! - May you have health, and live to
enjoy the smiles of the Gckle Goddess! I shall write you often,
under Cover to the Danish Consul. Let me know if any other person
at Tripoly can be of service to you, that I can by any means make
our friend. - Consul OBrien, recommended to me a M' Bryan
bl~onou~
athTripoly, as a person who could be serviceable in any
negotiation with the Bashaw. Perhaps it will be well to make him
your friend. I suppose Cash will be necessary for this purpose. Conscious yourself of having done your duty, and the certificate
of your Officers approbating your conduct, and exertions on the day
the ship was lost, must afford you consolation amidst your misfortunes P. S. The Mirboka was valued by Col. Lear, Cap$ Rodgers, and
Lt Chauncey a t 10.000 Do119 & the Valuation sent home
EP
[LC. EPP, LB, Dec. 1803-April 1804.1
To the Swedish Consul, Tripoli, from Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Navy

UNITEDSTATES
SHIPConstifution
Off Malta 19th Ded 180s.
SIR I understand that a Seaman by the name of John Willson,
late belonging to the United States Ship Philadelphia, has, or intends
to claim your protection as a Swede. I now inform you, that he is
a naturalized citizen of the United States of America - that he has
taken the Oath of Allegiance to that Government, and has volun-

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

281

tarily engaged his services for two years in our Navy. - And I now
warn you not to take under your protection the sald John Willson,
or in nny way whatever to claim or countenance him, as he will most
certainly be considered as a deserter, in case we should make terms
with the Bashaw, for the ransom of the Officers and Crew of the
Philarlelphia; and he should be missing. The moment I learn that
he is actually protected by you, I shall make a representation to the
President of the United States, and to our Minister at the Court of
Sl James London, in order that your conduct may be complained of
to the King your Master - I am told that the aforesaid Willson,
has conducted himself improperly, by abusing his Officers in expectation of your protection. - I hope & trust Sir, that you are not so
far lost to every sense of honor & humanity, as to support a scoundrel
in the abuse of Gentlemen, merely because they are unfortunate.
[LC. EPP, LB, Dec. 1803-April 1804.1
To Lieutenant Stephen Decatur, Jr., U. S. Navy, commanding U. S. Schooner
Entcrprirc, from Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Navy

UNITED
STATES
SHIPConsti.=tution

off Malta l g t @Decemr 18051
SIR Proceed to Malta land Mr Dent gain what information you
can respecting our friends in Tripoly, and soon as Mr Dent has finished
my business in the morning take him on board and Join me agam,
I shall remain off the Island to Night
[HS of Pa. Mrs.F. H. Getchell.]
[19 December 18031
To Lieutenant John H. Dent, U. S. Navy, from Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Navy

SIR Go on board the Enterprise, proceed to and land a t Malta Wait on the Governor, acquaint him with my object in coming off the
Island - Bring off Mr. Higgins, Mr. Pulis, Mr. Farquhar and the
Bashaw's Doctor - Enquire what Vessels are trading to Tripoiy and
if Clothing etc. can go safe - Bring off all the Letters for the U. S.
unless an opportunity offers for Gibraltar soon - Return on board
as early tomorrow as possible. U. S. S. Constitution
Dec. 19th. 1803
[ N H F . Dent's LB.]
Extract from journal of U. S. Brig Argus. Lieutenant Isaac Hull, U. S. Navy, commanding, Monday, 19 December 1803

at 4 AM, unmoored ot up Top Gall$yards a t 6 weighed and made
sail out of Carthagens arbour

1

[NDA photostat.]

[20 December 18031
To the Commanders of the Ships of War of the U.S. Squadron in the Mediterranean
from Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Navy

Permit the bearer of this with his vessel to pass from Malta to
Tri oli with dispatches from the Consul of his Danish Majesty a t
Ma ta to the Danish Consul a t Tripoli - The Vessel is not to carry

f'

Cargo of any sort excepting stores for the Consul's family. The
memorandum of stores will be made in an open letter. -

282

ATAVAL OPERATlOATS FROM 1803 TO 1804

Given under my hand and Seal on board the Constitution off Malta
this 20t9 day of Decr 1803.
(Signed) EDWARD
PREBLE
[LC. EPP, Order Book, May 1803-June 1805.1
Extract from Diary of Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Navy, Commodore of U. S.
Squadron in the Mediterranean, Tuesday, 20 December 1803

P M. Light breezes and clear weather: TTorliing in with the Island
of Malta: At 3 passed over a bank off the Harbor of St Pauls; Sounded
from 10 to 17 fathoms hard bottom, could see the ground plain. At
4 P. M. the wind being light I sent L t Dent on board the E i z t e ~ p ~ k e
with Dispatches for Tripoly and ordered Cap! Decatur to make sail
for Malta and land him,and return tomorrow morning - Lay off and
on under short sail all night.
A. &I. At 10 Consul Pulis came off in a shore boat: Gave h i ~ n
official information of the Blockade of Tripoly to be communicated
At 11 the Ente~prizereturned. Li Dent informed me that a vessel
has lately arrived from Tripoly and bro't letters for me from Cap"
Bainbridge which have been sent to Symcuse. The Cruizers of the
Bashaw were all in Port when that vessel left i t 8 days since M'
Higgins a merchant of Malta came off - I gave him Orders to purchase some necessaries for the officers of the Philadelphia and directed
the consul to hire a small vessel to carry them with my dispatches to
Tripoly and granted a passport for that purpose
[LC. EPP, Diary, 1803-1804.1
Extract from log book of U. S. Frigate Conditulion. Captain Edward Preble, U. S.
Navy, commanding, Tuesday, 20 December 1803

Curuising along the North Side of Malta and Standing of[f] and on
the Harbour of Valeta Rinds Variable from SSE to SW
we Run in with in two or t h e e miles of the Harbour and wore of[f]
Shore, a t 10 in the forenoon Consul Pulis waited on Commodore Preble
a t 11 in the forenoon Joined company the Enterprise, Leutenant Dent
the Barer of the Commodors Dispatches
[NA.

ND original.]

To Captain John Rodgers, U. S. Navy, Havre de Grace, Md., from Secretary of the
Navy
NAVYD E P M ~

Deer 21. 1803 The President having determined to build two Gun-Boats, I have
to request that you will undertake the superintendency of one, to be
built a t the Navy Yard a t this place. We conceive that Gun-Boats
can be employed with great eflect, in the protection in times of war,
of our Sea-Port Towns, and we are strongly fortified in this opinion
by the observations of practical gentlemen. We have determined to
build two by way of Experiment and as models - and having great
confidence in your judgment, we shall not fetter you by any particular
instructions as to model, dimensions, or the kind of Timber with which
to build her. On these points we leave you to be guided entirely by
your own judgment. We will only observe that she must be constructed to carry 1 long 32 pound cannon. We do not wish you to
hasten the building of the Boat to her detriment - take time - have

WARS U71TH BARBARY POWERS

283

the materitds prepared in your own way and have the Boat made as
perfect as possible. You will enter into Contracts for the Timber &q on the best terms
in your power. M' Steele who is employed by thc government as
hlaster Carpenter of the Yard, will superintend the building under
your directions. Money will be deposited with Cup! Thomas Tingey
subject to your orders. You will exercise your discretion in drawing.
Small advances may, if necessary, be made. Cap-ingey
will make
payments to ahe Contr~lct~ors
and others upon your orders, and will,
ultimately settle their accounts. [KDA.

OSW, Vol. 6, 1802-1805.1

To Captain James Barron, U. S. Navy, Hampton, Va., from Secretary of the Navy

NAVYDEP!
Decr 21, 1803 The President having determined to build two Gun-Boats, I have
to request that you will undertake the superiritendency of one to be
h i l t at the Navy Yard a t Gosport, or a t Portsmouth [Va.], or Norfolk, whichever may be found the most convenient. We conceive
that Gun-Boats can be employed with great effect in the protection in
ti~nesof war of our Sea-Port Towns, and we are strongly fortified in
this opinion by the observations of practical gentlemen. We have
determined to build two by way of Experiment and as Models, and
having great confidence in your jud,ment, we shall not fetter you by
any particular instructions as to Model, dimensions, or the kind of
timber with which to build her. On these points we leave you to be
guided entirely by your own judgment. We will only observe that
she must be constructed to carry 1 long 32 pg Cannon. So soon as I
receive a draft of the hlodel of the Naples Gun-Boat, I will send it to
you that you may examine it. Useful ideas may possibly be gathered
from it. I t is for this purpose and not to control you in your opinion
that I shall send it to you. We do not wish you to hasten the building
of the Vessel to her detriment - take time - have the materials
prepared in your own way, and have the Vessel made as perfect as
possible. and building on
YOUwill enter into contracts for the Timber
the best terms in your power and with such person or persons as you
may judge the best qualified to perform their engagements with
fidelity. Mone will be deposited with D! Bedinger Ekqr subject to
your orders. ?ou will exercise your discretion in drawing. Small
advances may if necessary, be made. R l r Hedinger will malie payments
t o the Contractors and others upon your orders in their favour and
wdl ultimately settle their accounts. YOUwill let me hear from you frequently. - The enclosed are the
dimensions of the Gun-Boats to be built a t this place under the
Superintendency of Cap$ Rodgers. [NDA. OSW, Vol. 6, 1802-1805.1

-

To Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Navy, from Richard O'Brien

ALGIERSg l s t December 1803
the 13th Ins5 the report reached us of the
loss of the Philadelphia, and that the crew were in bondage in Tripoly
this great event was confirmed a t Algiers on the 15Q Instant Consul Lear has wrote to Mr Davis to aid our Country Men a t Tripoly

ESTEEMED
FRIEND On

284

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1805 TO 1804

in temporary supplies until1 the will of our Government should
further direct. -

278 Mariners at 6OO$ each is. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
166. 800$
29 Officers Captain included at
116.000
4000s each is------------ - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -.
Supposed Ransom - , - - - - _ - -$282.800
-_-------

I

That is if the Bashaw would admit they would be redeemed independent of a peace; if not, I suppose that peace would cost us one
hundred thousand dollars, but those terms would be giving Algiers
and Tunis a bounty to demand extra terms, and would convince
Tripoly that we could not contend with them. I t would be giving
Tripoly a bounty to wrangle with the Swedcs, Danes, Dutch, &
Spaniards, and after they bowed to his caprice it would be our turn
again. The result of course will be more Frigates in this sea. 'CTe
should have some floating Batteries built to carry heavy cannon to
enter the port of Tripoly to attack, fire on the Toun, rake the Marine
Sea Battery, and flank the Bashaws Yalace or Castle. The same
time the Frigates with all their heavy Guns mounted on the attack
side, also we should have three or four thousand men to take possession of the Town [or Tower?] Battery when silenced by the floating
Batteries, Frigates & Gun Boats, and should you be able to procure
the Gun Boats of Kaples with this mentioned force, I tl~inl;Tripoly
will be brought to American terms. I should suppose you would
strictly Blockade Tripoly until you hear further on this tack from
our Government. You m i l l further observe how requisite it would
be for Govl to have built 4 or 6 Whale Boats on a large plan to have
each a Brass 12 pounder to row and sail with great swiftness: they
would with the Frigates and small corsairs destroy the Coasting
trade of Tripoly, at times surprize their Gun Boats, cut out Corsairs,
attack small ones take the Corsairs in tow, reconnoitre, gain i[n]ttlligence, and be of the most essential service. They should be 50 feet
Keel: they should have capital crews, and occasionally be slung over
the quarters of the large Corsairs. Experience has now convinced us
that separate corsairs should not be employed on the Coast of Barbary Our Ships should be capitally and extra manned. Well
barricadded and all calculated for Bow & Stern chaces from the Main
Batty
At Algiers the Government of Portugal has offered for Peace and
ransom of 380 captives to the amount of One Million, two hundred
thousand dollars. Should this sum tempt the Dey, the Corsairs of
this regency will have no obstruction to the VITesternOcean, and the
regency is a t Peace with two many Nations for any of the smaller
Ones to consider their Peace as durable. Some one will have to look
out for squalls. In my opinion we have no time to lose in building
the 74 Gun Ships, and 6 more large Frigates we should make a great
National exertion, and Tripoly should get what it merits from the
United States. You no doubt will have true soundings from Captain
Bainbridge. Captain Stewart arrived here this day in 24 days from
Leghorn. And also this day I have an addition to my family in the
birth of a Son. this event will permit me shortly to set out from
here on my return to the United States where I trust my information
to the heads of Dep: will be in some respects favorable to your mission
to this Sea. I t is evident we must fight, or pay, or withdraw our
sffairs from this Sea, and with a small division at Gibraltar we give

W A R S WITH BARBARY POWERS

285

our commerce in the Western Ocean security & is clear of Tributes
and homage to Barbary. You will excuse the purport of this random
letter I presume there is not an idea hinted at, but what you must
have considered fully. One thing morc, as the port of Tripoly has
not sufEcient depth of water for the Philadelphia, that is, should the
Bashaw get her off and save the Ship, under this consideration I have
no doubt but Tunis or Algiers will consider of purchasing said Ship.
if so she should not be admitted to a pass or passage as either a Tunisian
or Algerine property. God I trust will aid and assist you is the sincere
wish of Sir
(Signed) RICHQOBRIEN
[LC. EPP, LB, Dec. 1803-April 1804.1
To Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Navy, from Tobias Lear, U. S. Coneul General,
Algiers

ALGIERS,Deer 21't 1805
DEARSIR,As I see a Brig off, which I suppose is the S y ~ e n ,I
prepare a few lines for you before I go on board; and am sorry to
commence our correspondence by saying, that on the l5lh ins? we
received the painful intelligence, from Mr Davis, a t Tunis, of the loss
of the U. S. Frigate Philadelphia, and capture of her crew &q by the
Tripolines. - You m w t undoubtedly have known of this disastrous
event long before this, and I feel anxious to hear what measures you
intend pursuing in consequence. - I have authorized Mr Davis to
give to our unfortunate fellow Citizens all the relief that their situation will admit of, and have also written to Monsr Beaussier, the
French Commissary Gen! a t Tripoli to do everything in his power, to
alleviate their misfortlmes, which I have no doubt will be done. I
wrote to Capt Bainbridge a t the same time, and forwarded letters to
him & to the French Comm? Gent from Mon* Thninville the French
Charge dlAffairs here, who feels deeply interested in the fate of
Capt? Bainbridge & from the services which he renderd him & his
Itation when here in the [George] M7ashingfon. - I have had much
conversation with the Jews & others here, who are acquainted with
those officers, respecting the Ransom of our Countrymen; but i t
seems to be n general opinion that it cannot be done, without blending
a peace with that transaction. Should this be the case, we must
wait orders from home, before any steps can be taken in the business. - The Jews Estimate is five hundred thousand dollars for
Ransom & a peace; but this is out of the question. The Sweedish Consul tells me that when they made peace with
Tripoli they redeemed about 150 captives, which, with the peace,
amounted to 150,000 dollars, and tbls was thought extravagant. The Dey & Regency here appear a t present in good humour with
us; but this unfortunate event will have an effect on all our Barbary
affairs. - If the Tripolines have got the Philadelphia off, they cannot
use her in their port, and must sell her to some other power, and, in
that case, I think the Dey will endeavour to get her. I am sorry to inform you that one of the Ships which has been
expected here with the Annuities, was lost on the 20tP ultq on the Bar
of St Lucar, near Cadiz. M' Iznardi writes me that the Vessel is
totally lost, but he hopes some of the cargo will be saved. - This is
peculiarly unfortunate a t this moment, especially as the two cargoes

286

NA'C7AL OPERATIOhW FROM 1805 TO 1804

received here will not pay one of the Annuities due here last Septr and we shall owe a balance of more than 30,000 dollr on that a c d I was obliged to employ 20,000 doll9 of the money I brought here in a
Consular present, as the Dey had been long expecting me; more,
perhaps, on account of the expected present, than on any other, and
as he had been disappointed in the Annuities which had been so long
promised, he might heleive we intended to deceive him on every
tack, if the present did not accompany me. I am rejoiced that I did
so, since we hare heard of the fate of the Philadelpllia, as he has now
no fair pretext to be hard upon us, as he wd be disposed to take
advantage of it, a t this moment, if he had. - I have always been
fully of opinion, in which I flatter myself you cordially join with me,
that we sh* be jaithjul & punctml in all our stipulations with these
people however unpalatable it may be; and we sh'J then be able to
repel any extra demand nlth a good face. The Cruizers of this Regency returned into port on the 2StC ultimo,
without any prizes. They sold one, a Maltise, a t Tunis; but as she
had a protection, the D r y ordered her to be restored, liberated the
Crew, and broke some of his Captains.
The English are out of credit here, a t present. Mr Falcon has
not make his appearance; but I think if Lord Xelson could come u ith
his Ships, he wd have all he could ask. The Cruizers are strip'd & laid up for the minter. - They consist
of 2 Ships of 44 Guns - 1 of 36 (the Crescent) 3 Xebecks from 20 to
30 Guns 2 Polacres of 20 - 1 Brig of 18 - 2 Schooners of 16 & 18
Guns, the three last American built. Capt-tewart
has had a long passage of 24 days from Leghorn, &
some very bad weather. He takes in some water & fresh provisions
here & \ d l proceed to Syracuse. MrBLear enjoys good health, and unites with me in respects & best
wishes for yourself and the O6cers of your Ship. - I am anxious to
hear from you & to know what measures you propose to pursue in the
Spring. - The Argus left Leghorn with the Syren.

*

*

*

[LC. EPP, Vol. 8, 1803-1804.1
Extract from journal of Midshipman F. Cornelius deKrafft, U. S. Navy, in U. S.
Brig Siren of 18 guns, Lieutenant Charles Stewart, U. S. Navy, commanding,
Wednesday, 21 December 1803

[20 December, standing in for Port of Algiers] Midnight calm,
until1 6. AM when a light breeze sprung up frnm the Nwd Algiers bearing W S W. wore to the S. W a ship standing out from the Port of
Algiers. 3: past 7 brac'd about the yards & stood in for Algkrs. At
11 Mr T. Lear (American Consul) came on board & inform'd us that, the
frigate'Philadelphiawascaptur'd by the Tripolians on the 20tb [31] October. Meridian came too in 28 fathoms. At 1 AM the fort a t Algiers
saluted us with 21 guns, which we return'd with the same Number.
At 2 Lt Stewart went on shore with the barrclls & boxes &c for the Dey.
the lighhouse a t Algiers bore East f $ past 4 the ba e return'd with Lt
Stewart. hoisted in boats. At 5 sent down top%allr yards. Midnight loos'd main top sail in order to ride clear of the Anchor
(These remarks include 36 hours)

-

[KDA.]

W A R S W I T H B A R B A R Y POWERS

287

To Daniel Bedinger, Navy Agent, Norfolk, Va., from Secretary of the Navy

NAV.D E P ~
22'4 Decr 1805
We wish to send to the Mediterranean for the use of our Squadron
400 barrels of Beef
350 d9
Pork
Flour
120 do
18,000 Ibs
Suet
Bread
120 000 1bs
0000 lbs [sic] Butter
30,000 lbs
Rice
400 bushels of Beans or Peas
1300 Gallons Vinegar
1300 Gallons Melasses
8000 lbs of
Cheese
If you have not a sufficiency of Beef and Pork on hand, let me know
immediately and I will send you from this place as many barrels as
will make up the Quantity required - all the other articles stated
above you will purchase on the best terms in your power - the Bread
you will engage immediately - it must be baked over twice and great
care must be taken in making it and packing it for Shipment - make
your requisition for the nectlssary monies on me You will engage a Vessel to sail about the 1" of Feb? - she must
proceed to Gibraltar and if required by the Consul there thence to
m d t a - As the Betsy Walk has a mediterranean pass probably you
can engage her on good terms - I have directed Captain Cassin to
ship to you (the freight of which you will pay) 1: tons assorted Cordage which is also to be sent for the use of the Squadron - Let me hear
from you immediately on receiving this letter [KDA. GLB, Vol. 7, 1803-1805.1
Receipts to Lieutenant Charles Stewart, U. S. Navy, from Tobias Lear, U. S. Consul
General, Algiers

ALGIERS
December 22'4 1805. Received from Captain Charles Stewart, of the U. States Brig
Syren, the articles mentioned in the Invoice sent by James Leander
Cathcart Esquire from Leghorn, in the said Brig Syren, to the underwritten in Algiers, on account & risque of the U. States of America,
and for which Caps Stewart has given his receipt dated Leghorn
November 22'4 1803. (Signed) TOBIASLEAR
Consul Gen! of the U. States at Algiers.Received also a t the same time, from Captain Stewart two chests
of Tea, sent by Mr Cathcart, as above mentioned, and not included
in the Invoice before stated. (Signed) TOBIAS
LEAR
Consul Geni of the U. States at Algiers The above is a copy of Receipts given by T. Lear to Cap' Stewart,
for Articles brought from Leghorn Decr 2 l s ? 1803. [Stephen Decatur Col. NDA photostat, Book A.]

288

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1803 TO 1804

Extract from journal of Midshipman F. Cornelius deKrse[t, U. 6. Navy, in U. S.
Brig Siren of 18 guns, Lieutenant Charles Stewart, U. 8. Navy, commanding,
Thursday, 22 December 1803

Commences with light airs from the N Eg & hazy weather. At
past 3 handed main topsail. day light hoisted out the boats At
4 hoisted in the launch & barge Lr Stewart went on shore in the
cutter - Meridian hove up the Anchor & got under way. Lying
bye under topsails in the bay of Algiers unbent the sheet cable &
Stow'd the anchor (NB these remarks include 12 hours)

$4

[NDA.]
To Captain Edward Preble, U. 8. Navy, from Midshipman Henry P. Caaey, U. 8.
Navy

U, S, FRIGATE
Constdution December 230 1803 SIR,I hope, I may take the liberty of addressing you in hopes of
being released from the present disagreeable situation you have
plased me in, which you would have had no occasion for, had i t
not been my middle watch, & not being perfectly asleep before all
hands were called, I t not being a rule in the other ships I have been
attached to, to turn out when it was my middle watch, but I hope
you will look over my present negligence to your orders, & depend
in future of my strict Obedience I am, Sir,
[LC. EPP, Vol. 8, 1803-1804.1
Extract from log book kept by Sailing Master Nathaniel Haraden, U. 6. Navy, on
board U. S. Frigate Constifution. Friday, 23 December 1808

After day light till % past 8 A. M. we continued running to the
South0 - We then answered the Enterprize Signal for seeing land to
the S. W. and a strange sail in the same quarter - We made all
plain sail and gave chase - The Wind was a t this time free, but in
the act of setting studding sails the wind veered to the S. W. which
bro't the chase dead to wind0 - The chase continued steering
towards us till 10 A. M. At which time she was bro't to by the Enterprize about two miles in sight from the Constitution We made signal
to the Enterprize to bring the chase to the Commodore - The Wind
from this time till noon was light & variable from the S. At )h past
11 the chase came within hail - She was ketch ri ged with Tripolitan
Colors [Mastico, renamed Intrepid] - We sent a oat for the Captain
or commanding officer and examined her under English Colors - She
shewed about 20 men who seemed to confer together waiting the
Issue - When we hauld down the English & hoisted American
Colors the People on board the vessel appeared to be in the greatest
confusion The Commodore gave orders for taking charge of the
Vessell At Noon moderate breezes from the S E - The Town of
Tripoli W S W nearly 9 miles - Enterprize in company
Latitude obsq 32' 58' North:

%

[LC. EPP, Log Constitution, 1803-1804.1

[23 December 18031
To Midshipman Hethcote J. Reed, U. S. Navy, appointed Prize Master of Tripoline
Prize to U. 8. Frigate Conttitulion. from Captain Edward Preble, U. 8. Navy

SIR YOUare hereby directed to take Charge as Prize Master of the
Tripoline Galliot prize to the Unitmi States Ship Constitution under

T H E BURNING

O F THE U. S . F R I G A T E PHILADELPHIA.

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

289

my command and proceed with her to Syracuse and wait my orders -

reporting yourself to the Commanding officer of the United States
Ship in that f o r t .
Given under my hand on board the U. S. Ship
Constitution off Tripoli 23" Dscemr 1803.
PREBLE
(Signed) EDWARD
[LC. EPP, Order Book, M a y 1803-June 1805.1
Extract from Hemorandurn Book of Captain Edward Preble, U. 8. Navy,on board
U. S. Fngate Camtitulian. 23 December 1803

Captured the Turkish Ketch called Mastico with about 70 Tripoline~
on board.
[LC, original.]
Extract from journal of Midshipman F. Cornelius deKrafft, 0.S. Navy, in U. 6.
Brig Siren of 18 guns, Lieutenant Charles Stewart, U. 8. Navy, commanding,
Fndey, 23 December 1803

Commences with fresh breezes & cloudy Lying bye off Algiers.
At 2 PM L+Stewart return'd, hoisted in the cutter & made sail to the
NEC ,4t 5 cape Caxene bore West, cape Matifore S. by W, Algiers
WSW
[NDA.]

---

124 December 18031

To the Hon. William Eustis, United States Congress, from Secretary of the Navy

The S e c r c t a ~of the Navy presents respects to Doctor Eustis and
informs him that under the existing Law of 3Qhiarch 1801,
A Captain in the Kavy on half pay receives annually- - - $600
A L i e u t e n a n t - - - _ - _ _ - _ _ - - _ - - - - - - - _ - - - - - - - - - - - _ - - _240
-A S u.r.g e o n - - - - - - _ _ - - _ - _ - _ - - - _ - - - _ _ - - _ _ - _ - _ _ - - -300
_---A S a h g Master-- - - - - - - - - - - - __ - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -- - 240
A Purser - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - _ - -- - - - - - _ - - - - _- - - _ - - 240
A Surgeon's
. . Mate- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 180
A h l ~ d s h i p m a n - - - - - . _ _ - _ _ _ - _ _ _ - _ _ _ _ _ _ - - - - - _ - _114
---_-A Boats" Gunner, S! Maker or Carpenter-- - - - _- - - - - - - 120
and that by allowing rations to the Officers of the Nary when thay
are on half pay, the additional compensation would be,
To A Captain-- - - _ - - - - -.- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - _ - - - - - - - - $584
To a L i e u t e n a n t - - _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ . - - _ - - - - _ - - - . - - - - _ - - - -219
---To a S u.q. e o n - - - - - _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ - - - - - - - - - - - - -_-_- -- - 146
To a Salllnghfaster - _ _ - - _ - - - _ - - _ . - _ 146
- - - - - _ _
To a Purser- - - - - - - - - - _ -- -.- - - - - - .. - - - - - - - - _- - - - - - - - 146
To a Surgeon's h h t e - - _ - _ - - __ - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - _- - - _ - - 146
To a Midshipman - - - - - - - - - - - _ - - -- - - - - - - - - _ - - - - - - - - 73
To a Boatswain, Gunner, S! Maker or Carp!- _ _ - - _ __.- - 146
SATURDAYDeer 24: I803 [NDA Cong. LB, Val. 1, 1798-1811.1
_-

290

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1803 TO 1804

To Anthony Merry, British Minister to the United States, from Secretary of State

DEPARTMENT
OF STATE,

Decr 2dth 1803.
SIR.I have received from the Collector a t one of our Ports a copy
of an American Ships Register, on which is endorsed as follows:
"Every port in the Island of St Domingo being in a state of blockade
by His Britannic Majesty's Squadron, you are hereby warned off
from that Island, and if seen or found within three leagues of tbe
land after the date of this, you will be made a prize off. Given under
mv hand on board His Majesty's Ship Bellerophon off Cape Francois
26" Octr 1803, (signed) John Loring" -, on t h face
~ of the document
and t h o u g h its contents is written the same notice in substance signed
by the same Commander.
In case of a real blockade, and of a customary warning thereof to
h'eutral Vessels, it might justly be expected that more respect would
be shewn to so solemn and so permanent an instrument as the Register
of a Ship, than to select it for such a purpose, and particularly to
deface i t in such a manner. Other papers of the Ship, the clearance
for example, u.hich could not be safely destroyed with a view to
surpress the intended proof might certainly be substituted with more
propriety, and with sufficient effect: And there would be the greater
reason in committing the notice to an occasional document, as the
notice itself might be limited to thr occasion: whereas if attached to
a permanent document, i t might subject the neutral Vesscl indefinitely
to interruptions, neither warrantable nor contemplated. But you
will readily perceive Sir, that these remarks do not touch the primary
object which demands attention. Here is another and still more
extraordinary instance in which a blockade is pretended and declared
by a few Ships against a u-hole Island, of n s t extent and abounding
with ports and places of commerce. Persuaded that so gross a violation
of the rights of neutrality will sufficiently speak for itself, and rncl;~
its own appeal to the justice, the honor and the friendly dispositions
of your Government, I forbear to malie any comment on it, fartller
than to refer to that contained in my letter of the 27t? October last
to Mr Thornton, on a sin~ilarproceeding against our commerce with
the Island of Aiartinique and Guadaloupe. I must request, howerer
that in addition to thc communications which you will doubtless
make to your Government on this subject, you will take such other
steps as will be most likely to remove without delay, a source of so
much injury and irretation, not only in this last case, but in the one
preceeding which is not known to have been discontinued.
I cannot dismiss this subject without calling pour attention to u.
circumstance which is no inconsiderable aggravation of the principd
wrong. The American Vessel is informed that if found, after the
notice given, within three Leagues of any port of the Coast, it will
subject her to the consequences of violating the blockade. If it
were the intention to extend the Territorial Jurisdiction of the Island
three leagues from the shore, it might be aslied on what authority this
distance is prescribed? it might be asked on what pretext any Territorial jurisdiction could be assumed by those who do not occupy a
single foot of the Island? If it were intended that the mere appearance
of the Vessel within the given distance should be taken for proof of
her steering for a blockaded port, the question not only recurs as to
tbe reality of the blockade, but it might be asked with what colours

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

291

such a proof could be drawn from a circumstance which might result
either from the casualties of the weather and seas or from a Voyage
to otber Islands or places, for which such a course is known to be often
most convenient, and even absolutely necessary. In making this
communication to you Sir, which is done by an express charge from
the President, I feel a perfect confidence that you will do justice
equally to its importance and to its motives. Our two Nations have
eTery reason to cultirate the good understanding which subsists
between thcrn, and the cordiality with which it continues to be promoted on the part of the United States has been too thoroughly
manifested to be called inbo doubt. They have the best grounds
therefore to expect and to claim in return every proof of justice and
respect which is due to the example on their side, and to the interests on both sides: They look for those returns more particularly
in the case of their maritime rights, because it is in the case of these
that they hare hitherto had most ground of complaint; because it
is in the case of these that their sensibility is a t this moment awakened; and because in the srtme case therefore a reciprocity of justice
and of respect will contribute most to consolidate the friendly and
beneficial relations to which the two Nations are respectively united.
[NA. SDA.

Dom. L., Vol.14, May 1802-May 1605.1

To Commanding Officer of the U. S. Squadron in the Xediterranean, from Sir
Alexander John Ball, British Civil Commissioner, Malta

MALTA,2dth December 1805.
SIR, It having been notified to me by the Consul of the United
States of America a t this Island that the Port of Tripoli is a t this
time declared, by the Commodore Commanding in these Seas, to be
in a state of blockade, I have to acquaint you that the sending supplies
t'o that Port will be discouraged and hereafter prohibited as much as
possible by this Gorernment. As there is nour in Tripoli about One thousand Bullocks which
have Iatcly been purchased for the use of the Inhabitants of this
Island, I must therefore beg Ienve to request that you would be pleased
to g!-itire such directions to the Ships and Vessels under your command
a s in your judgement may seem proper, in order that the Vessels, on
~vhichthe said Bullocks may be embarlied, may be permitted to proceed w<thout molestation: - ,4nd I presume to hope from the friendship and good understanding subsisting betwcen the United States
nnd Great Britain that no difficulty can arise from your compliance
with tllis request.
ALEX.JN? BALL
His Briiannic Majesty's Cizd Commissionerjor the
a f i i r s gf Malta
[LC. CPP, Vol. 8, 1803-1804.1
To Secretary of State from Tobias Lear, U. S. Consul General, Algiers

N? 5. (st'!Copy)

ALGIERS
December 24th 1803
SIR The letters and papers u-hich I have now the honor t.o enclose,
will inform you of the unfortunate fate of the U. States Frigate
Philadelphia, and the captivit,y of her crew by the Tripolitans, 8 s
well as of the steps which have thus far been taken in consequence
of that disastrous event. - ITe h a w had no accounts since the

292

SAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1803 TO 1804

letters of D' Davis of the 16th & 17th of Novr excepting, that the
Danish Consul here, says he has received a letter from the Danish
Consul at Tripoli, informing that the Frigate had not been got off;
and that Cap: Bainbridge & his people were well treated &? - I
have taken all oppertunities of endeavouring to learn, by every
indirect manner, what might be the expectations of the Bashaw of
Tripoli with respect to Ransom; and I find i t is generally believed,
that unless a peace is effected, with a Ransom, the latter will be high,
if attainable. - The estimate is as follows. Ransom of 307 persons @ 1000$- - - - _- _ - - - - 307,000
- - - - - - - - _ - - - - - - 100,000
Peace- - - - -,
Presents on the Occasion - - - - _ - - _ _ _ - _ _ -43,000

But this is certainly too high, as the Bashnw has hitherto receired
but 5 or 600 dollars per man, from other powers when they have
redeemed their subjects and made peace. - We must, however wait
for illformation from Tripoli, to know what impression this event
bas made there, before we can form anp just opinion on the subject. And all I can do w i U be to obtain the best information in my power,
to enable me, or any other person, to act in this business, when ever
the orders of our Government may be received relative to rt. - I
have not heard from Commodore Preble since the News of this event;
but am anxious to knoK what steps he means to pursue in consequence
of it. ,4s this event will have its effects on all these regencies, with respcrt
to the U. States, as they may see the measures which will be talicn in
consequence of it,; it remains with the Governmf to decide, whether
they will send a force into this sea, not only equal to finishing the
business with Tripoli; but to keep the other Regencies in awe; - or
expend in Ransom and a peace nearly 500,000 dollars. with a certainty
of having demands increase upon us from the other p o w r s ; - or withdraw our Trade entirely from the Mediterranean. - Should this last
measure be determined upon, I must add, that it would be necessary
to keep nearly, or quite as many Vessels to guard the Straits, and prcvent Cruizers from going into the Atlantic, as to effect the first; especially too, as I am well informed that the Portuguise are upon the
point of concluding a peace with this Regency, which mill open to
their Cruizers the whole range of the Atlantic, from which they have
kept them for so many years. - I n addition to this Misfortune, I
receivd letters from the Consular House a t Cadiz, dated Nov' 2Sth
informing me of the loss of the Ship Sally, on the Bar of St Lucar, on
the 20th of Nor' with a cargo of Timber &F on board, ns a part of our
Annuities due the 5th of Septr. The TTesselwas Iost and i t was uncertain whether any of the cargo would be saved or not. - This will
render our settlement with the Regency more difficult than if she had
arrived, as we shall have a much larger sum to pay in cash, even if
they consent to receive it. - I wait to here further from Cadiz, if any
part of the cargo has been saved, to make i t worth while to ship it
round here; before I press the settlement for cash; and especially as I
have not all the Cash in hand (which would be a great ob'ect) and
must depend upon the Jews for a part of it, with whoom I wis to have
as little to do as possible.

h

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

293

The U. States Brig Syren arrived here from Leghorn on the 20th
ins! whin Cap! Stewart delivered to me from Mr Cathcart, the amount
of nineteen thousand, five hundred & ninety three dollars & 3 cents in
articles which he had prepared for the Consular present, and Twelve
thousand Doll"
cash. - The copies of these accounts, and of Mr
Cathcarts communications, shall be forwarded to you by the nest
oppcrtunity. - Capt. Stewart was obliged to remain one day in port
to deliver the articles &$ and the next sailed with a fair wind to join
the Commodore. - He had a boisterous passage of 24 days from Leghorn and had not heard of the loss of the Pldadelphia before he
arrived here. - The broad cloths which he brought, as part of the
consular present, had received considerable damage on board the Brig;
the Bales having been wet with sea water in a gale of wind, which
obliged him to open them on board.
On the 27th of Novr I communicated to the Regency, the intention
of our Government to change the Mediterranean Passport, and fixed
the term of two years (of 12 lunar months each) for the full exchange;
and in the mean time either the new or old passport should be respected. - I have sent Dr Davis, a t Tunis, sixty Tops and one new
passport, with directions to make the like communications there. The cruizers of this Regency are stript and laid up for the winter.
Dmr 26th. The Minister of the Marine sent for me this morning. and
put into my hands the Inclosed Invoice of articles required by the Dey
from the United States on their next Annuity. - I received it, and
told him it should be forwarded; but gave him no assurances that it
would be fully compli'd with - The non arrival of the Annuities due
on the 5th of Septr last which were almost entirely of Timber &-c is
one principal cause of this heavy Invoice of other Articles a t this time;
for, he observes that vhen Invoices are given for Timber, plank, and
other wticles, the production of the U. States, they are neither not
sent forward; or it requires so many Vessels to bring them, that some
are lost on the way; and that he may, therefore, as well give orders for
articles more vnluable and less bulky. - I felt, a t this moment all the
evils, and disadvantages of our want of punctuallity in fulfillin,r~ our
Stipulations, and could not repel this exorbitant demand in the manner
I should otl~crwisehave done; and have, therefore, sent it as I received
i t ; but, in the mean time, I shall seek oppertunities to reduce it, and if
some part of each of the high Articles sh'J be sent, together ~ l t more
h
plank nnd Timber, of a good quality, and a quantity of small spars for
Top Mast, Top Gallant masts, and Steering sail booms - and stuff
for the handles of rammers, S p u n g ~ s& Laidles for cannon of different
calibers, from 4 8 to 6 pounders, they w? be received. - Should part
of the Cables & cordage be sent, it would perhaps be best to contract
with some hfcrchant in the U. S, engaged in the Baltic trade, to deliver
them here a t a fesed price.
There is a S ~ a n i s hPacket established between Allicant and this
place, which pn'sses once a month, and I believe, one from thence to
Tunis also. - The time for passing by land, from this place to Tunis,
in the Winter is 30 days - from thence to Tripoli 15 days. - Very
few Vessels pass in the Winter Season. - In Summer thc land convey
ance is about 15 days to Tunis & ten from thence to Tripoli. Notwithstanding the unhnppy loss of the Philadtlphia & captivity
of the crew, and the loss of t,he Annuity Ship, I do not dispair of

ATAVAL OPERATIOATSFROM 1805' TO 1804

294

seeing our affairs in a respectable situation in this Sea, if we act with
Vigor and decision. Mom' Thaincille, the charge d'affairs and commissary General of
the French Republic here, takes a deep interest in the fate of Cap:
Bainbridge & our Unfortunate Countrymen. - He has just sent me
a copy of a letter he has written to his Government on the Subject,
expressive of his feelings. My best respects attend the President and I pray you to assure him,
that my best exert.ions shall not be wanting to prornote the honor and
interest of our Country here, so far as it may be in my power.
[KA. SDA. CL, Algiers, Vol. 6,Jan. lSD1-Dcc. 1803.1
Extract from Diary of Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Navy, Commodore of U. S.
Squadron in the Mediterranean, Saturday, 24 December 1803

Moderate breezes and pleasant weather: Laying to with head off
shore examining the chase: She is rt Ketch rigged Vessel of about 60
or 70 Tons - Sailed from Tripoly last evening and the Captain says
bound to Bengaza under Turkish Colors from thence to Constantinople she is armed with two cannon and some Muskets, Pistols &ca
has on board a Turkish Master, Seren Greeks and lour Turks, Sailors,
a Turkish Officer, Two Tripoline Officers, Ten Tripoline soldiers as
passengers and forty two negro men, women, and childr~nwhich the
master says was taken on board a t Tripoly on account of the Bashaw
and given in charge of the Tripoline officer to prescnt to the Cap!
Pacha a t Constantinople: She had on board also two cannon in the
hold and was to take on board other presents at Bcngnza: her papers
written in Arabic but no passport from any of the Consuls a t Tripoly.
The Turkish Officer alone had a Passport from the E~lglishVice
Consul specifying that he was to take Passage in a T. esscl with Turldsh
Colors but neither the name of Vessel or Master was mentioned in it.
An Italian doctor who came on board at Malta and who was in
Tripoly when the Philudelphla was captured personally hiem- the
Tripolie Officers and assured me that one of them nms a principal
Officer of the Bashaw and that the other held high rank in his troops.
And that the Tripoline soldiers belonged to the Gun boats were all of
them engaged in the capture of the PhiZudeZphia. He also informed
me that the captain of the Vessel was on board one of the Gun boats
that ca tured that ship: and that he was among the first that boarded
her an was extremely active in taking the Officers out and carrying
them to the Bashaw of Tripoli, as well as plundering them of their
cloathing. Concieving i t improper to let her pass under all these
circumstances with officers, soldiers, Guns and other Property all
belonging to the Bashaw of Tripoly and bound from one off his Ports
to mother of his Ports, I ordered all the crew and Passengers on
board excepting the negroes and two TripoIines to cook for them &
take care of them, and sent on board two Midshipmen and several
sailo[r]s to conduct her to Syracuse for farther examination and have
her papers translated - At 4 P. M. sent off the Prize under convoy
of the Enterprize. Wind S. E. Stood in Towards Tripoly. At sun
set we were about 7 Miles from the Town beari~lgS 'C"F b S. We then
shortened sail and Stood to the S E untill midnight, then wore Ship
to the S W. Wind from S S E to West, w r y variable until 10 A. M.
when the wind came from the N W b .
'h Steered W b S untill 11,

f

295

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

then wore ship and stood to the E N E , wind North and every indication of a gale: carried all Sail to endeavour to gain an ofling. At Noon
observed in Latr 33' 22' Tripoly bearing S 47 W distance 38 Miles.
[This prize Was the Mastico, renamed Intrepid.]
[LC. E P P , Diary, 1803-1804.1
Extract from log book kept by Sailing Elaster Nathaniel Haraden, U. S. Navy, on
board U. S. F~igateConstitution, Saturday, 24 December 1803

Sloderate Breezes m-ith pleasant weather: We are laying to with
our head oft' shore about 9 or 10 miles to the Eastd of Tripoli examining
the chase which is Ketch rigged belonging to the bashaw of Tripoli
cl; sailed from Tripoh this morning bound to Constantinople At 1
1'. 51. out large cutter - Sent Mr Reed Masters Mate & Mr Lewis
Midshipman with seven seamen on board the chase with orders to
proceed to Saragosa in the Island of Sicily - We recieved from the
\ressell between 25 & 30 Prisoners & a number of Servants belonging
to them - Three or four trunks were reciered from her - The Prisoners %-ereput under the half deck under the charge of two centinelsThe cloathes which were recieved were great coats and bedding
which mas laid down before them and every person was allowed to
to take his own - A small quantity of small arms was recieved such
us hluskets, Pistols and Swords: The Vessel had a number of Black
pysons on board as a present from the Bashaw of Tripoli to the
Grand Signior - Among the Prisoners were several Tripolitan
Officers of Distinction whom the Commodore took to his own table We continued the main Topsail to the mast with moderate
breezes from the East* till 4 P. If. a t n-hich time we bore up to the
S 11- FT; parted company with the Prize 6: the Schr Enterprize who is
ordered to convoy the Prize from this place to Saragosa - We continued steering to the S W till sun doKn a t which time the Town of
Tripoli bore S W b 11- nearly 7 miles - JTe shortened sail and came
to the JTind S E b ,"; till 1 A 31. ~ r i t hmoderate breezes from the
S E. We then Taclicd to tht. S I T - from this time till day light we
21ad moderate breezes k variable frorn the S E to W PI: W. We
wore as necessary to get in shore and a t 8 in the Mornin u. breeze
sprung up from tllc N 11- - We made all plain sail in towar s Tripoli,
The \Vind Veered to the Korthd & by 11 in the forenoon the weather
to the North'! became ore^-cast with heavy clouds & had every appearnnce of a gale from that Quarter - T e Judge ourselves a t this time
between 25 & 30 Miles from the Town of Tripoli We immediately
taclied to the EastQ and came close on a wind to the E N E. At noon
we had moclcrato breezes from the North with a swell setting from
the N N E with heavy clouds to the North* we suppose the ship to
be nearly 24 miles N E b N from the Town of Tripoli The Reather
is overcast 6: wc cannot see the land JTe are under all plain sail in
order to obtain an oning - Latitude obsQ3 3 O 22' Korth

8

[LC. E P P , Log Constitvtzon, 1803-1804.:
Extract from log book kept by Salilng Master Nathaniel Haraden, U. S. Navy, on
board U. S. Frigate Constitulion. Sunday, 25 December 1803

Moderate brcezcs 6: cloudy weather. MTe are between 20 & 30
Miles N N E of Tripoli 11-ith moderate breezes 6: ~ a r i a b l efrom the
Puorthd - The weather has every appearance of strong breezes from

296

N A V A L OPERATIONS FROM 1803 TO 1804

the Northd A heavy gale from the N E or N N E would make our
situation very disagreeable as i t would expose us to an enemys coast The angular position of which to the Northd & West* makes i t
necessary to avoid that part; by standing to the East* we could only
lay the coast along and of course afford no drift or lee way - The
Horrors of ship wreck added to irretrievable Slavery make the
coast verj- dangerous in the winter - The wind was variable all the
afternoon - We tacked as necessary to take every advantage in
order to obtain on offing - Towards the Evening the weather became
squally with light showers of rain We double reefed the Topsails
& sent down top Gall! Yards - At 6 in the evening we tacked to
the Eastd on which tack we continued during the night in the first
part of which we had frequent squalls & rain - mTe up Mainsail
& clewed up the Topsails three times in the Middle watch & set them
immediately after the squalls were over - At 8 A M we had a heavy
squall from N+ b E. After it was over we tacked to the North* We got up the Fore runners 6- tackles & set up the belly stay in
order to ease the bowsprit - Sent down the studding sail booms fore
&- aft & the fore & mizen top gall! masts; rigged in the Jibb boom
&- reset the fore runners - We had frequent Squalls all the forenoon
We handed the close reefed topsails two or three time in the course
of the forenoon - The Sun did not make its appearance until1
about ten minutes before noon - We had an observation between
the squalls which agrees very nearly with our dead reckoning 67 miles
to the Xorthd of Tripoli - We have been under a press of sail
the greatest part of these 24 hours & hemmed in as as we are on an
enemys coast it was necessary to carry thro' all when the squalls were
favorable - This we did two or three times till we found the mast
to be in danger from the heavy pitching of the ship - During the
squalls we clued up the Topsails - ,4t noon strong gales from the
N E b E - We are under close reefed topsails 8: storm stay sails
& a reefed main sail - Lattitude obsd 34' 7' N ?
[LC. EPP, Log Constit~dion,1803-1804.1

126 December 18031
To the Eon. William Eustis, United States Congress, from Secretary of the Navy

The Secretary of the Navv informs Doct' Eustis, in addition to his
note of Saturday last, that by allowing full rations to all the Officers
of the Navy when they are on half pay, the annual additional Expence
to the Government would be about 18000 Doll" but if the allowance
of full rations should be confined to such sea officers as altho' on furlough shall not have permission to leave the Country, & whose professions do not supply them with the means of supporting tl~emselves
on shore, the annual additional Expence would then be $9,928 as nearly
as it can be estimated. Captains, Lieutenants and Midshipmen are
Officers of the description alluded to. I t is manifest that Officers of
these grades arc incapable of professional exertions on shore. When
officers are furloughed with permission to go to Sea on their own
private Affairs, half pay without rations is as much as they ought or
I believe do expect. Doctor Eustis will herewith receive arough draft
of a section which comprizes the ideas of the Secretary. MONDAY
26 DecT1803.

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

297

[Enclosure]

Rough draft comprising ideas of Secretary of the Navy regarding pay and rations
of ofacers on furlough

That every Captain, Lieutenant and Midshipman who may not be
under, but may be subject to, orders for actual service, shall during
war a t present subsisting between the United States and the Bashaw of
Tripoli be entitled to receive their respective rations in addition to the
half pay prescribed by the Act providing for the Naval Peace Establishment: Provided that if any Captain Lieutenant or Miashipman
shall apply to the Secretary of the Navy for a furlough for the purpose
of prosecuting any voyage whatever in a Merchant Vessel or any
other private business and shall accordingly obtain a furlough for any
such private purpose no such officer shall be entitled to receive any
rations as aforesaid. [NDA. Cong. LB, Vol. 1, 179&1811.]
To Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Navy, from Secretary of State

DEPARTMENT
OFSTATE
December LCt? 1805.
SIR I have had the honor to receive your letters of the 23'4 Sep:
and 15th of October last. The President's sentiments concerning the
event communicated in the latter, and respecting yourself as having
had a principal Agency in bringing i t about have been expressed in his
hlessage to Congress of the 5'9 Inst which will doubtless have been
forwarded to you from the Department of the Navy; and I have the
pleasure to add that the terms of the peace, a.nd the honorable manner
in which it was restored, have equally impressed the Public nlind in
your favour.
The letter from the Emperor to the President came to hand and by
this conveyance an Answer is transmitted to the care of h l r Simpson.
This d l not be the sole expression of our sense of the reconciliation
as the Gun Carriages formerly written for by Mr Simpson, will probably arrive, and be presented about the same h e . They left the
Chesapeake towards the close of last Month in the Schooner Citizen
bound to Gibraltar, but ordered to touch a t LIOrient, to land the
ratification of the treaty with France respecting Louisiana [LC. EPP, LB, Dec. 1803-April 1804.1
To Joseph Yznardi, U. S. Consul, Cadiz, Spain, from Tobias Lear, U. S. Consul
General, Algiers

ALGIERS
December d6th 1805
SIR,A few days ago I was favoured with a letter from Mr Perry,
inforniing me of the loss of the Ship Sdly, Cap: R. Archer, near the
Bar of St Lucns, chartered by the American Governnlent with naval
stores, for the Regency of Algiers. - This Ship we have been long
expecting; and the loss of her is unfortunate for us a t this time, as
our Annuity was due on the 5tP of Sep: last, and has been anxiously
looked for here. - I am in hopes that all, or a part of the cargo,
may have been saved. - Should there have been as much saved, as
to make it worth while to send (I vessel with it here, I wish it ma be
done, on account of the U. States, as it will be an advantage to t em
a t this time. -

E

298

ATAT7AL OPERATIONS FROM 1805 TO 1804

You have u~ltloubtecily,before this, ilearcl or" the loss of the U.
States Frigate Philadelphia, Cap! Bainbridge off Tripoli, and the
Cap: & Crew being Captured by the Tripolines. )Ye received the
account bere on the 15rhins?. That on the 30th of Octobrr the Philadelphia, chasing a Tripoline near the land, about two miles from
Tripoli, ran on shore, and could not be got off; - that the Gun
boats came out from Tripoli & engaged her from daylight till 4 P.M.
when the Ship keeling so as not to be able to bring her Guns to bear
upon the Boats, was carried by boarding, &- the people made Captives. - TTe have heard nothing since from thnt quarter.
The affairs of the U. States are, at present, very well in this
Regency. - With the tender of nl_v best services, a r ~ dassurances of
high Respect & Esteem,
[Stephen Pecatur Col.

SD.4 photostat, Book A , ]

Extract from journal of U. S. Brlg Argus, Leutenant Isaac Huil, U. S. Navy, commanding, Nlonday, 26 December 1803

A[t] sundown the town of Adera bore S E by El a t 6 tacked ship
tacked again a t 8 , 9 , & i O OClock as per log saw Sail on the Weather
bow fired a Gun arid brought her too a t 4; past 10 tacked and spoke
a Spanish Schooner from hlmeria bound to Aipazirus a t 9 fired a
1Iusquit and Drougilt too the Brig New C'ontury of Boston 3 days from
Cadiz baud to Ailcant a t ::past 11 fired :I Gun and brought to a
Schooner she proved to be the John 36 days iron1 Mt~rbleheadbound
to Aiicant Eirlployed Occasion?
[Latitude Observed 360101[Yj ir;.
(Continued a t sea until anchoring off Tangcrole, 2 January 1804.)

[SDA pliotostat.]
Extract from 8lernoracdurn Zook of Crptaui Euward Preble, U. S. Navy, on board
U. E. Frigate Constilut~on,26 December 1803

A heavy gale of wind froin ihe 5.111;.in tlmger of being lost
coast of 'l'ripoli.

011 thc

[LC, original.]
Extract from Diary of Captain Edward Preble, U. 6. Navy, Commodore of
Squadron in the Mediterranean, Xonday, 26 December 1803

U. S.

Strong Gales and very lieaq- Squalls of wind and rain - Cnder
close reefed topsails, reeied courses and Storm Stay Sails - Standing
to the Xortilu-ard by tlle wind which is variable from the S K E to
K E b E : About Midnight the Gale abated 2nd the sea began to fall:
\$hen the Gale first came on I ordered down top Gallant
and
all the studding sail booms on deck, and Jibb boom in, in order to
ease the Masts and Bowsprit: Set up a stout belly stay and two good
runners on the Fore mast to ease the bowsprit and save tlle mast in
case the Bowsprit should give way: At day light saw the Enterprize
and Prize in the E X E: Kigged out the Jibb boom & let reefs out of
the Topsails. At 7 A 11. spolie the Enterprize: Ordered her to tow
the Prize which she had parted from in the Gale: Atnoonobserved
in Latitude 34'53' North - The ship 113s made more distance to
the Korthward by Observation than the log will give her which I

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

299

suppose to be owing to a stron current which generally setts to the
N. )I-. along the Coast of Tripo y during a N E Gale.
[LC. EPP, Diary, 1803-1804.1

7

To Secretary of the Navy, from John Randolph, 3r., Chairman of the Committee
of Ways and Means, House of Representatives

8th Congress.
1st Session.
COMMUNICATED
TO THE HOUSEO F I<EPRESENTATIVES,
JAXUART
10,
1804
27Q DECEMBER,
1803.
SIR: The Committee of K a y s and hfeans have instructed me to
request that you will cause to be laid before them such information,
in the possession of the Department of the K a y , as map enable them
to carry the enclosed resolution into effect.*
I beg you to accept the assurance of my high respect.
JOHX
RAKDOLPH,
Jr.
ROBERTSMITHEsq.,
Secretary of the ATuzy.
*Resolved, That provision ought to be made, by law, to indemnify
the captors of such armed vessels, belonging to the Emperor of
?rIorocco, as have been captured and surrendered to the said Power,
for the prize money to which they are entitled, and that a bill be
brought in for that purpose by the Committee of Ways and Means.
[Am. State Pnpcrs Yay. AB., Vol. I.]
Extract from Diary of Captain Edward Ireble, U. S. Navy, Commodore cf G. S.
Squadron in the Yediterranean, Tuesday, 27 December 1803

Moderate breezes from the I i E and pleasant weather - Standing
to the Northward on rt Kind. At 1 P. M. sounded in 2 s fathoms,
sandy bottom. At J; past 1 saw the Island of Lampidosa bearing
S N E The Teather clear and Pleasant: Sent up Top Gall! Masts
and yards At 5 Y . h1. Calm, Lampidosn S E )t: Iiorth 6 leagues Enterprize in sight bearing S E b E. It continued cnlnl until1 2 A . &I.
when a light breeze came from the 17-estward - Steered for the
Island and saw it a t day light bearing E II- E. The Enterprize and
Convoy in sight At 8 A. M. Lampidosa the west end bluff bore N
); I\' 6 miles and Limosa a small Island S \I- >i11':ran down the South
side of the Island, tiiscowred a vessel a t Anchor in the harbor, sent
an armed boat to examine her: At this time we were about two
miles from the harbor, Our soundings from 8 leagues to the S S TI-.
to within three miles from the shore varied from 26 to 30 fatlloms
and within one mile we had 10 fathoms sand and shells. A t !(past
10 A. 11 the boat returned and the Ofiicer reported that the Tlessel
he wns sent to examine to be English from Malta and the only one in.
The Harbor is on tlie S IT side of the Island: I t is snlall but capable
of holding in safe anchorage with any wind about 8 or 10 Vessels of
about 12 or 15 feet draft of Water: this Island has only 15 or 20
idlabitants who are herdsmen, farmem and fishermen - This is an
excellent summer station for Vessels of mar cruising for Tripolines or
Tunisians a s their corsairs often stop and harbor to plunder pro+
sions - bore away to the Eastward. Kind Ti- b S. Lat*" observed
35O25' North - The South part bore N \Y b \I6T
or 7 miles distt
[LC. EPP, Diary, 1803-1804.1

300

N A V A L OPERATIONS FROM 1803 TO 1804

To Secretary of State from George Davis, U. S. Chargl d'AfTaires, Tunis

Duplicate
TUNIS
December 28th 1803.
SIR, My unpleasant communication of the 17th ultimo, (which was
forwardedgia Marseilles, Leghorn, and Malaga) announcing the loss
of the U. States Frigate Philadelphia - I trust has been r e d - This
unfortunate event, has given not only the Bashaw; but all Barbary,
an influence over us, which no other possible circumstance could have
produced; the little National consequence, we possessed with this
Regency, is already materially effected by our recent misfortune. On the 14th instant, I was called to Bardo, by the Sapatapa, who
demanded an answer to the Bey's letter, directed to Commodore
Morris - (a Copy of which I have the honor to enclose You) I informed
him that no reply was yet received, and that it was not time to expect
one - He observed, that his Master would wait no longer, as he
was resolved to know whether we were in a state of peace or War - I
told him that no doubt could, or ought to exist in the breast of His
Excellency, of our good will & friendship towards him - "we
'Lshould be better satisfied to hear that, from Your Government,
"accompanied with such proofs as we expectn- I answered, that on
such a question, I was not authorized even to have an opinion "Good words cost You nothing; however, we expect that no longer
'(delay will be made by the Commodore; or does he intend to wait
"for more Corsairs, in order to decide the war commenced by Your
"Embrolione? - it would be a different game from that You have
"played with Tripoly - uncl the loss of one frigate with us, could
"only be repaired by a Regalia of three" - Then turning to one of
his Agents, he contemptuously observed in Arabic --"The Americans
"are now like the ground - E
L iMericken kej el trapu-- To these observations no reply was made - he concluded his audience by requesting
my medical assistance, for a Chronic complaint, under which he has
laboured many years.
The affairs of Spain, will be arranged, as His Excellency the Bey,
may think proper to dictate - The U. States, will be their Successor
in difficulties; and Denmark, must follow us - Such is the order of
the day.

*

*

*

*

*

*

*

[NA. SDA. CL, Tunis, Vol. 2, Part 2, 1803-1806.1
To Joseph Pulis, U. S. Consul, Malta, from Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Navy

UNITEDSTATESFRIGATE
Constitution
off Malta 28th December 1803
SIRI have detained a Vessel under Turk's Colours from Tripoly
bound to Bengaza. I met with her off the Harbour of Tripoly, a
few days ago. She has on board, Officers & Soldiers of the Bashaw
of Tripoly; and all the property on board is Tripoline.
I wish much to have her papers translated. You will oblige me,
and render a service to our Government, by procuring a proper
person to translate the papers found on board. Some of them are
in the Turkish, and others in the Arabic language. I am very desirous
to have you engage a person as soon as possible for this purpose;
and I wish you to accompany him to Syracuse as I shall want your
assistance in this business very much.
[LC. EPP, LB, Dec. 1803-April 1804.1

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

301

Extract from log book of U. S. Frigate Conrtilulion. Captain Edward Preble, U, S.
Navy, commanding, Wednesday, 28 December 1803

Joined company the Enterprise and her Convoy, we Took her Convoy in Tow, the Enterprise parted company, for the Harbour of Malta,
which bore SE, nine or ten miles a t 9 A M we a i d and made all plain
sail to the NE, in order to make Cape passari, situated near the SE
extreme of the Island of Sicily.
Latitug 0b4 36. 15 N9
[NA. KD original.]
Extract from journal of Midshipman F. Cornelius deKrafft, U. S. Navy, in U. S.
Brig Siren of 18 guns, Lieutenant Charles Stewart, U. S. Navy, commanding,
Wednesday, 28 December 1803

-4t 2 anchor'd in the harbour of Syragosa in G fathoms the castle a t
the entrance bearing S E % S Mount Etna N 34 W, unbent top gall5
sail & moor'd, stream N N El Larboard bower S S W. At sunset
sent down top gall! yards, hoisted in barge & run the gig up astern.
(NB these remarks contain 36 hours)
[NDA.]
To Commanding Oflicer of the U.S. Squadron in the Mediterranean, from Richard
Farquhar, Yalta

MALTA
Decr 2gth1803
SIR According to your desire I cnlld on the Consul of His Excellcncy Sidi Ahmet Caramallis, (late Bashaw of Tripoli) to inform hrn
that you wished to see him he writes you by this oppertunity
hfy iittle Vessel arrived from Tripoli a few days ago the news his
C n p ' 9 r i n g s is that Some of the Philadelphias Crew has turnd T u r l ~ s
to the number of Eight, and that one of them who is a Srveed by birth
has got the Command of a little Schooner latly built in Tripoli & that
hIr Lisle has taken the Command of the Philadelphia who has all her
Guns on Board now, & that those Slaves who Intended to make their
Escape has declined atternping it until1 you land Some men near
Tripoli as thcrc is about Two Hundred of them & with the three
Hundred Americans there those five Hundred men d be of great
Service if you wish m Vessel to go upon any Business to Tripoli I d l
Send hir or if I can e of any Service in Sending the Officers of the
Philadelphia any more money wine or Cloathing &c Please Command
me

g

[LC.

EPP, Vol. 8, 1803-1804.1

To Captain Edward Preble, U. 8. navy, from William Higgins, U. S. Navy Agent,
Malta
~ ~ A L Tthe
A

29 Decr 1803

DEARSIR Capt. Smith having been good enough to say he would
take a letter I avail myself of the oppertunity to inform you that the
different articles you ordered me to purchase for Capt? B~ainbridgeand
his Officers have been these four or fire clays in perfect readiness but
as yet Mr Pulis has freighted no Vessel I do not h o w the reason, as
he keeps aloof from any enquiry on my part, he is no doubt piqued a t
my being employed -

302

hTAVAL OPERATIOhTSFROM 1803 TO 180.d

I congratulate you on the Prize I learn you have made full of fine
women and great men, they may serve as an offset against the Captives in Tripoly K e have no news stirring, Sir Richard Beclierton has arrived in o
leaky Condition from the fleet off Toulon which had rnct with dreadful
Weather, he brings the King's speech which bretlthes nothing but s
Continuance of the war
Cuptv Smith tt.11~I;P we sllall shortly have the pleasure of seeing
you on this port, the sooncr thc more grstifj-ing to me, as I wish to
haye frequent oppc.rtunitic.s of conrincing you of the respect with
&ich 1 remain
[LC. EPP, 17cl.8, 1803-1804.]
Extract from log book of U. S. Frigate Cunsfifulion, Captain Edward Preble, U. S.
Navy, commanding, Thursday, 29 December 1805

3loderste Brvezes and clear pleasant weather. wc are Running a
cross the Channel Bctu-ren Sicily and Malta u-jthe Tripolitan prisc
in Tow that n r c:apturd on the 23 of this month we continu@Running
for Cape passari \vl~ichwe made at Sundox-11 Bewing EbXSK.
IK.4.

KD original.]

Extract from journal of Midshipman F. Cornelius degrafft, U. S. Navy, in U. S.
Brig Siren of 18 guns, Lieutenant Charles Stewart, U. S. Navy, commanding,
Thursday, 29 December 1803

(Harbor of Spayosa) -4t 1 P. h i discovcr'd a large ship of the
harbour (u-earing a broad pendmt) suppos'd to be the U. S. Frigate
Constitution -4t 3 sent lower yards &- top mast rigging on deck,
gunners 8: fore castle men prep5 t o strip the lower masts. At 4 the
above ship anchor'd litlre, she prov'd to bp thc Constitution Commodore Preble v-ith a small Tripoline rrsscl (a Ret8ch) prize to h ~ r ,
crew empby'd on necessary clutv. Carpent~rsemploy'd about the
Partners of the 51.M r t s t & pumps. - wind ,h; -I; E. [SDA.]
Extract from Dierp of Captain Edward Freble, U. S. ITavy. Commodore of U S.
Squadron in the Mediterranean, Friday, 30 December 1803

At 3 spoke thr Enzlish Sloop of war B i t t ~ r nfrom ?Ilnlta. At 5
P. 11. anchored in Syracusc Htwbor in fiw fathoms water: Our
Prize anchortd a t the Samp time. The Brig Syren here a t anchor
t
to me his
arrived last 97-cninz from Mpiers. Cap! S t e ~ - a rreported
Proceedings sincr lie left Gibmltar. Eecieved letters by him from
Leghorn and Alyicrs [LC. EPP, Diarv, 1803-1804.1
Extract from log book of U. S. Frigate Consfitulion, Captain Edward Preble, U. S.
Mavl, commanding, Friday, 30 December 1803

This Day Commences with moderate Breezes and clear W' Standing
in for Syragse It Bearing NKW Dist 7 miles a t 3 PM Spoke the
English Ship V i t r o n on a Cruse At 3; past 5 Come too with Small Bower in five fathoms water
Run a kedge out to t>heSouth East and hove up the Small Bower and
Slufted our Birth 1 Cables length to the SE let go the Small Bowcr
veared out 40 fathoms of Cable Let go the Best Bower under foot

VC7ARS W I T H BARBARY POWERS

303

Cast of[f] the Prize She Came too to the Nrd of US about 2 Cables
length Dist Saw the Us Brig Siren Laying here Capt Charles Steward
[NA. K D origind.]
To John Beekman, Navy Agent and Superintendent of Navy Yard, New York,
N. Y., from Secretary of the Navy

NAVYD C P A R ~
Decemr 31, 1803
You will consider yourself hereby appointed navy agent for the
Port of K e n - Yorlc - and also Superintendant of the navj7 yard a t that
place - pour duties as n a r y agent are not susseptible of enumerationyou will however receive as occasions arise instructions from this
Department whose operations you will aid in conformity to such instructions - Pour duties as Superintendant may be more particularly
defined - they consist in receiving taking care of and issuing under
the directions of this Department a11 the property of whatever description belonging to the Dcpnrtmcnt a t New Tork - Distinct
accounts must be kept of a11 the Timber scantling. plank
distinct
accounts must be also kept of all the stores of whatever description
monthly returns of which must be made to this Department - you
will receiw the timber stores & b y inventory of Daniel Ludlow Esqr
late agent upon receiving them you will be held accountable for themAs N a r y agent you 1 d 1 be allowed for your Compensation 2 PrC! on all sums of money paid and expended by you on public
account
1 PrCC on all sums of moncy received on all public property sold by
you
)I Pr Cent on all sums of moncy paid for the purpose of recruiting
paying off a crew arid the like Services As Superintendant you will be allowed an annual con~pensationof
1,200 Dollars - To aid you in the discharge of pour public duties,
you will be aliowed a clerli a t a Salary not exceeding BOO Dollars Pr
annum and a Porter a t a monthly allowance not exceeding 30 Dollars
both to be appointed by yourself. I shall be happy to hear from you
hy the return of the mail. [Similar letters sent t o Daniel Bedinger, ?;orfolk, Va., 31 December 1803;
George Harrluon, Philadelphia, Pa., 3 January 1804; Woodbury Lnnsdon,
Portsmouth, ?;. H., 4 January 1804.1
[Suit. GLB, Yol. 7, 1803-1805.1

Extract from log book kept by Sailing Master Nathaniel Haraden, U. S. Navy, on
board U. S. Frigate Consldultor~,Saturday, 31 December 1803
Moderate Breezes from the Korthg - T e are lying moored in
Saragosa - Unbmt sails -

K e this afternoon sent fill the Tripolitnn Prisoners on board the
Prize to perform Quarantine.
A. M. Employed washing cloaths & scrubbing I-Iammoclcs - Recieved fresh Prox-isions & vegettlbles for the ships company. Anchored hero the Enterprize Lieut5 Decatur who waited on the Cornrnodore. Cleared Hawse by warping the ship round
At Noon Moderate Breezes from the North'! The Surgeon reports
fourteen sick, Nine convalescents $ two discharged.
[LC. EPP, Log Conslitution,ll803-1804.1

*So called from having been built by American Prisonem.
** " from having fired the first shot at the brig Vzzen, and having been
built in consequence of her having distressed the town from that
quarter - %as silenced by the gun boats Aug. 7. 1804 -

P. When Commodore Dale's Squadron arrived before Tripoli the
enemy had only guns enough mounted to fire a salute, and those on
bad carriages - Government were advised of this situation - Why
they did not profit of it is a question to be solved - If one frigate
could make the impression which we see Commodore Preble has done
with one hundred and fifteen guns opposed to him,what might not
Commodore Dale's squadron have done with three frigates against
blank walls!
[H.E.Huntington LBAG. EA 260.1

[I8041
[NOTE:
In the Edward Preble Colledion, Manuscripts Division of the Library

of Congrem there are many volumes of signals. There are four volumes of signals for 1804, but in most instances the sets of signals do not indicate by whom
prepared or used, and only a few have been dated.)

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

305

[January 1804?]
Rules for government of U. S. Ships of War entering Algiers

OBSERVATIONS
for the Commander of an American Ship of War
coming to the Port of Algiers
1" On a Ship of war of the U. States coming in sight of Algiers,
the Consul must obtain the Defs permission to go off to her; without
which no Consul can go off. Said Vessel is to hoist her pendant &
Ensign ann fire a Gun to Leeward and then hoist the American Jack
a t tlw Fore top Gallant Mast head. - She is not to approach nearer
Algiers than 5 or 6 miles, until1 the Algerine Boat, with the Consular
flag, is coming off. 24 If there be no contagious disorder in Algiers, the Boat, with the
Consul, will go along side; but if any contagious disorder prevails,
she will drop astern and confer at a distance.
34 The Consul will have a detail of &flairs,or news ready written,
to give to the Commander; and the Commander will also give, in writing, all requisite information to the Consui. - By this means nothing
will be forgotten.
4'Q The Ship should take care to anchor before that, by light
winds, calms. or currents, she would be set within cannoli sbot of the
~lgerk~
e u t i e r i e sBut
; must new? anchor until visitted by the Consul
and is infornled by hi111 of the state of affairs between the U. States and
t,he Regrncy. st? Should the business of the Shiv require her anchoring: the best
placr will be to the S E by F of the ~ i ' g h thouse on the ~ n r & ,a little
to the east of the second Castle on the Southern shore: wbich is the
second Battery from the Cape North of the Metafour River Curayuh OBSERVE That to the North of Cape Met;lfour (the eastern Cape
forming the Bay of Algiers) there is a reef of Rocks, laying two miles
from the land - VVhen the wind is fresh from K. \IT.
Korth, K.E. or
East the sen breaks over this reef: - Tt should hare a good birth
coming in and going out of Algiers Bay.
All within Cape hletufour and Cape Coxines (the western Cape
forming the Bay of Alyiers) the current sets to the Westwad; and outside thls line it sets to the eastward, a t the rate of three miles per
hour. \Then you anchor in t.he Bay of Algiers, be always ready for action;
and always ready for getting under way. - Here are always sudden
Gales; and I mny add, you are never secure in your affairs. The whole crew of the Algerine boat which comes off with the Consul should not be permitted to go on board the Ship. - By t,heir
enquiries false news is often circulated, and representations made
rej judicial to your national affairs. - Communicate nothing to the
people who come on board; but treat them with c i d i f y and attentions.
When the ship anchors, she is saluted with 21 Guns, which she
must return. If she anchors, and is not saluted, it indicates that
your nation has a point to settle. - If the Ship salutes under Sail, it
will not be answered by Algiers; because it is not usansa, or custom. The Consul will inform the Commander when it is proper for him
to land. And when he does land, he will be saluted with Seven Guns,
which the Ship must return
After the Commander has landed, and has seen the General of
Marine & Admiral, he then proceeds to the Consular houst*; and if

306

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM IS03 TO 1804

requisite, visits the Dep at his Palace. - The Consul must first
obtain permission on this point through his Drogerman. The oars are always taken out of the Ships boat by the Algerines,
when they lnnd. - This is to prevent Slaves from making nn escape
with the boat. - When the boat is ready to return, the oars will be
delivered up. The next day a.fter tbe Ship anchors, it is customary for the Regency
to send a present to the Ship of BU~IOGI~S,
Sheep, Poultry, & on
receiving which, the Ship fires three Guns, and the Consul pays for
it 15 or 20 dollars. If tlle Commander, when on shore, should be visited b~ the different
Consuls, the Consul, with him, returns the visit; or if by necessity,
or accident, he does not return the visits, the Consul makes an
excuse. An Captives. or Turks, or Moors, or Jews, of Algiers, who should
illegn Iy grt on board the Ship, the Commnntler must report them to
the Consul, and he will endeavour to obt,ain pardon for them. At all
eaents they must be given up.
Twenty minutes beforr sun set, the Marine Gnte of the Citv is
shut. This excludes all interco~mebetween the Citv anti the Marine;
which is the o d v place, at which Boats are allowed t.o lnnd. - Core
should be taken that all persons who ought to be on board the Ship in
the night, should pass the Gate before this time. When the Ship is ready to depart the Consul gives the intimntion
thereof to the Dev, through the Drogermnn. - I t is cr~stomaryfor
the Dey (if he be in the City) to see the Comnmnder before his Departure. - On this visit he will say, - "Has Your Highness any
Commands? I am destined for Sea". When the Commander e,nters his boat, to Depnrt from Algiers, he
is saluted with Secen Guns, which the S h i p rn?r..d return. OBSERVE, t h a t Christinn Fridap is Turks Sunday. OBSERVE, only the Ports of Algiers, Bonn, & Oran, are p~rbiic
ports. The others should never be entered but by necessity, as the
Inhabitants are very sacage, and often commit outrages Bt arrests on
Officers and Crews of Boats.
When the Consul pocs off to a Ship his national flnq is displav* in
the fore part of the Bont, to denote the he (the Consul) 1s on board the
boat,. - N. B. The flag is not displny'd until the Bont passes the pier
head of the Marine; and on returning it is taken down a t the same
place. When an Embargo is laid on the Vessels in the Port of Algiers. on
account of the fitting out of their Cruizers, it docs not effect the Ships
of war, of other Nations which may come into the Bay.
Unless the U. States Vessels of War have some very particular
business, I would not recommend their Anchoring. - They had
bettor lay off $ on two or three days, to avoid the danger of Gales &
bad weather in the Winter Season, as well as the Caprice of the
Government. [LC. EPP. Vol. 9,Jan.-Feb. 1804.1

9

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

307

To Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Navy, from Lieutenant Charles Stewart, U. 6.

Navy

UNITEDSTATESSLOOPSyren
Syracuse Harbour J a n ? 1st 1804
SIR, I have the honor to inform you of my departure with the
Convoy X ?2. from Gibmltar, on the night of the 24th October pursuant to your orders of the 18cQ[?]of that month. Our progress
was much retarded by contrary winds, untill the 31st, when we had
light airs from the Southu-ard and Westward. On that day, we made
Cape de Gatt, and passed the Britisl~Convoy under the Termagant.
Nothing of any importance occurred, untill the 4Q of November,
when the Termagant came up with us, and requested permission to
examine the papers of the Brig Fame from Batavia, alledging they
had received information of her having Dutch Property on board,
I brought the Fleet to, and granted them permission after examining
them myself, and finding they were perfectly clear.
On the gth, we were up with ?rlarceilles, but it blowing a Strong
Gale from the Westward, and the weather very thick, we dare not
make the land, untill the next day, when I dismissed the Vessels
bound there. The 12@ we arrived s t Leghorn, and landed M:
Cathcart a t the Lnzaretto. The 17th I obtained Prnttique, and
landed to expedite the business. On the 2Sth the money and other
articles were ready, but I was prevented bringing them on board,
untill the 26th in consequence of a severe Gale of Wind from the
Kestward. The 27th we sailed, and kept company with the United
States' Brig Arguc., untill the 29th a t hiidnight, a scvrre Gale of
Kind came on, with a tremendous Sea, that hove the Syren, on her
Beam Ends, and filled her waist full of 7Tater. X e got her before
the \Tirid, Knocked out some of the Ports, and freed her Decks.
The Jolly Boat was stove to Atoms, $ lost. Kothing but Strong
Gales from the Westward, with heavy Squalls (that prevented our
carrying any Sail, but Storm Stay sails) prevailed from the 2nd of
Decemher to the 12th; during which time, we were driven considerably
to the Eastward, and all my Officers Sick, but two young &- inex~erienced hlidshipmen: On the 21st we arrived a t Algiers, and delivered
the Articles to hlr Lear, Consul General. Xext day me sailed. The
26tQwe made Cape Bon, without having seen any Vessels on our
passage. Not having provisions to prosecute your orders farther,
we bore up for this place where we arrived on the evening of the 2Sth
Your orders of the 4t'! December I immediately commenced the
necessary repairs $ 9 that the Brig requires. She leaks very much
in her upper Works, which has damaged some of the provisions, and
other Articles. I am, therefore, under the necessity of caulking Her rigging we take this op ortunity of overhauling, and also to sliift
her hlnin Rlast further A t, which it requires, and feel confident
it will much improve her sailing. I left a t Leghorn Robert T. Spence
Midshipman, whose mind had been for some. time deranged - he
is a son of Al! Spence Purser of the Philadelphna.
[LC. EPP, LB, Dec. 1803-April 1804.1

!'

308

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1805 TO 1804

To Foreign Consuls, Lisbon, Portugal, from William Jarvis, U. S. Consul, Lisbon,
Portugal

CONSULATE
of the UNITEDSTATESof AMERICA
Lisbon dudJanuary 2804
SIR I have the honor to inform you that Edward Preble Esquire
Commander of the American N a v d Squadron in the Mediterranean
Seas, has advised me, that in consequence of the War actually existing
between the United States and the Bey & Regency .of Tripoli he has
given orders for a detachment of said Squadron to Blockade the Port
of Tripoli 6: when invested, that dl Vessels attempting to enter or
depart from said place, mill be treated according to the Law of Nations
established in such cases I have the honor to be
Sir
Your Most Obedient
Humble Servant
WILLIAMJARVIS
JAMES
GAMBIER
En$
Consul
(I
JACOB
DOHRMAN
Dutch
(l
JOHN
AYRES
Danish
(i
Ispace] KANTZOU
Swedish
(4
[space] DEBATCHIOSKEY
Russian
(I
BARON
DE STOQUI
S A IR~
?~
.Imperial
6I
[space] SCRUVIER
~r&ch
LL
Spanish
[space]
"
Neapolitan
[space]
COPY

[NA. SDA. CL, Lisbon, Vol. 2, Jan. 1803-Dec. 1805.1
To Charles Maurice d e Talleyrand-PBrigord,French Minister of Exterior Relations,
from Robert R. Livingston, U. S. Minister to Paris, France

COPY
PARIS
2nd January 1804
SIR, I have just recd the afflictive information that an American
Ship of 44 Guns having been stranded in the Harbour of Tripoly, has
been compelled to surrender to the Gun Boats of the Dey by which
she was surrounded. This circumstance puts in the power of those
Barbarians 307 American Seamen and 26 Officers, the ship having been
fully manned. The War between Tripoly and the United States was
commenced by the Dey in direct breach of a solemn Trcaty and without the smallest pretence of ill faith or aggression on the part of the
United States. I cannot but hope sir that the humanity of the First
Consul will feel an interest in an event which affects so nearly the
happiness of so many Men; and that this circumstance connected with
the subsisting harmony between France and the United States will
induce him to interpose his good Offices with the Dey of Tripoly for
procuring them immediate relief. The First Consul has known how
to diminish the dread of the reat power which France has acquired
under his wise administration y embracing every occasion by rendering that power subservient to the interests of humanity. In soliciting
his mediation for the establishment of Peace between the United
States and Tripoly, and releasing from Slavery the unhappy Men I
have mentioned. I afford him a new means of extending to a distant
World that species of Glory, which is I am satisfied dearest to his heart.

i

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

309

Nor sir, will he want a direct cause for this interference founded on
the interest of France and Italy, which are deeply engaged in the uninterupted Commerce of the United States during a War in which
their view is arrested.
Should the First Consul sir, think this an object worthy hi attention, wo are content to place our Treaty on the old foundation on
receiving back our Citizens to which we are the more entitled, as in
all captures made by us upon Tripoly, we have returned immediately
the men found on board their Vessels.
[LC. EPP, LB, Dec. 1803-April 1804.1
To Lieutenant Stephen Decatur, Jr., U. S. Navy, commanding U. S. Schooner
Enterprize, from Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Navy

U. S. Ship Constitution
Syracuse January 2"* 1805 [I804?]
SIR I have received your note requesting the loan of the launch,
you should have her if I could admit of her being employed as a
watering boat for the squadron excepting in cases of great urgency
cP: necessity, - a shore boat that will carry 20 Gang C a s h with 4
51en attached to her can be hired for 91. pr day I prefer your taking
this method, and mill send my Pilot to engage a boat and send her
along side of the Enterprize this Afternoon or early tommorrow
morning which will be in time, [HS of Pa. Mrs. I?. H . Getchell.]
Extract from journal of U. S. Brig Argus. of 18 guns, Lieutenant Isaac Hull, U. S.
Navy, commanding, Konday, 2 January 1804

At Anchor off Tangerole Employed turning to windward under all
drawing sails making short stretches off to 35 and in to 7 fathoms
Water a t 7 P. hi. Came to with the Larboard bower dnchor in 18
fathoms Water off Tangerole the Easternlost land E. :i S and Westermost land \V ): N good bottom At midnight light breezes & fine Weather
At daylight sent an Officer on s[h]ore in the Jolly boat to see if
Water Could be obtained boat returned a t 7 AM At 8 hoisted out the Launch and Barge and sent them on Shore
Watering Empg Watering & otherwise Occasionally
[SDA photostst.]
Extract from journal of U. S. Brig Argus. Lieutenant Isaac Hull, U. S. Navy,
commanding, Tuesday, 3 January 1804

At Anchor off Tangerole At 4 P, hf, carried the Kedge anchor out
and sighted the larboard Anchor it being Clear let it go again At 5 hoisted in the barge At 9 the Jolly boat and launch returned
run Up the Jolly boat and hoisted in the launch
At 6 A, M, moderate breezes and Cloudy Feather Wind N E
Weighed anchor and made all sail for the Westward Several sail in
Sight At 8 Marbelia bore N N 11: 34 W Gibralter W S W - At
meridian Europa point W b S jh S Variously Empg
[NDA photostat.]

310

ATAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1805 TO 1804

Extract from log book of U. S. Frigate Constilution. Captain Edward Preble, U. S.
Navy, commandmg, Tuesday, 3 January 1804

We continue a t anchor in Saragosm [Syracuse], with the Syren and
Enterprize in company
[NA. K D original.)
To Captain William Bainbridge, U. S. Navy, from Captain Edward Preble, U. S.
Navy

UNITEDSTATES
SHIPConstitution
Syracuse Harbour Junv 4t? 1804
SIR I am honQwith your several favours of the 25'Q Kov; 05Q &
13@ December, but that of the 15'4 Ulto, which had your first C-r
has not come to hand. I understand that which you have given me
in yours of the 5'h Vlto and shall make use occasionally of it. I wrote
you the 19th and 20th of last Month, and ordered Mr Pulis to hire
a vessel and send over for the purpose of carrying my letters, and
some articles which I supposed you might most want; and which I
directed Mr Higgins to purchase for yourself and Officers. I regret
to find that hlr Pulis has not yet sent a Vessel agreeable to nly orders.
To prevent any further disappointments I shall go to Malta tomorrow
to see my letters &c%hipped to you. I thank you for the information
your letters contain and shall profit by it. Col Lear has lodged I:31
[lo?] thousand dollars in Tunis for you to draw for, Your Bills on
George Davis Esyr charge des Affaires of the United States a t that
place will be duly honored, and your Bills on 3Ir. Pulis a t hlnlta will
also meet prompt payment as I have made arrangements with him for
that purpose, of course, i t will not be necessar-j- for you to draw any
more Bills on Leghorn or elsewhere a t a loss. I shall contrive to supply
you fully with every thing necessary. Write me what clothing will
be proper to send to the Officers & Men, and who I can send i t to with
safety and it shall be forwarded imniediatelg. Also what provisions
& Stores &c"ou wish to have sent you. I shall endeavour to take the
most effectual means for your release and am convinced Col Lear will
do the same. Our representations have long since gone forward to
our Government and we shall, no doubt, have answers to them by the
Congress, Essex & Boston by the last of March or early in April - I
lament most sincerely the situation of yourself & Officers, a sitmtion
which makes you and your friends unhappy, and deprives your
Country of your services. I have not the smallest doubt Government will take the most ready means of procuring your liberty I u7asoff Tripoly the 23rd Ulto. and in sight of the town I cn tured
a Vessel which left the Harbour in the Kight. She was under urk's
Colours and the Captain says belongs to the Captain Pacha and was
bound to Bengaza The papers will be translated in a day or two,
and if the Captain tells truth, I shall release her together with a
Turkish Officer and all the Crew which the Captain claims, amounting
in all to twelve. The remainder consisting of two Officers of rank
belonging to the Bashaw of Tripoly the son of one of the Officers
twelve Tripoline Soldiers and 42 Black Boys & Girls belonging to
Tripoly, and intended to be sold or given away I shall keep as prisoners; - This, the Turkish Officer agreeas to be just, and acknowledges
he had no right to be transporting our enemy's Ofticem, Soldiers, &
property in tune of War I hope to be able to exchwge this cargo for

k

UTARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

311

some of you unfortunates Mr Pulis is well acquainted with the
Tripoline Officers and tl~inlisthen1 a valuable prize. A gale of wind
drove rne from ofl' Tripoly or I should have sent a Boat on Shore. I
shall soon be oft' there again - I l ~ a v ealready given you my sentiments resperting tlie loss of the Ship, and sliull say no more on that
subject until1 I see you, I regret most sincerely the loss of your assistance and serviccs in the Squadron, and of your society. Be assured
of my sincere and unalterable friendship. Adieu for the present write me everything interesting - I write to your officers and crew
and to the Bashaw. Tliese letters you will take the direction of, and
have tliern delivered or not, as you may think best.
[LC. EPP, LB, Dee. 1803-April 1804.1
To James Leander Cathcart, Leghorn, from Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Navy

UMTEDSTATESFRIGATE
Constitution
Syracuse Harbour Jany 4 ' h 1604.
SIR. I am hond with your esteenwd favours of the 17'h and l g t @
Novemr - accompanied by sevcral communication from you to
Comodorc htorris, and from Mr Kiss? to you; the whole containing
many useful hints, and much valuable information; for which plcase
to accept my thanks. I approve your proposed plans of operations
against Tripoly, as they exactly coincide with mine. I had hopes of bringing that Rcgcncy to reasonable terms in the
spring, and effecting a solid pcace; but the loss of the Philadrlphia,
11:~smarred tliat prospect, and will probably protract the desirable
event to a longer period. Howcver, I shall make them feel the effcct of my remaining force,
and hope, soon to reduce the Bashaw's prcslmt dcmands, to something
reasonable.
I an1 told lie demands for Peace and ransom, three Rlillions of
Dollars, this is u pretty good asking price. I prrsume our Govcrnmerit will ncvcr accede to any thing estravaglmt, as we sliall by that
mcnns, hazard a War d l 1 all the Barbary powers, by sthi~ulating
tlwir avarice. 1 liave just rcturncd from a Cruise off Tripoli, where on the 23'd
Dcccmber I captured a Vcsscl \\-it11 the Bashaw's presents to tlie
Grand Seignior, accompanied by scvcral Tripolinc Officcrs of distinction. 1 trust tlJs Capture u-ill give us considerable advantages
in nc~g.otiatinga Pcnce. I \\-ish to procurc two or threc Gun Boats, and two hrortar Boats
with Guns, and 10 Inch hlortnrs compleat. Can you procure them
for me?
Where - Then and on what terms? Writc mc as soon as possible.
I also want one or two good Bombartlicrs, & will make tlieir pay
hantlsomc, if t h y understand tllcir business. Thcy can instruct our
young Officers in thnt branch of Gunnery, endearour to procurc one
for mr from Toulon; if you cannot short of thnt; A quantity of Shot
& Sliclls for the Artillery u-ill be wantcd. 1 liave made this port the
rrndczvous of the Squadrm, & ~112111tw glnd to hcnr from you often.
I t is probable one of the Squadron will go dou-n to Gibrullar about
the first of May, I shall if so, readily accomodate you. -

312

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1805 TO 180.4

P. S. The Philadelphia ran on the rocks about 4): Miles from
Tripoly, and was captured together with every officers and man
belonging to her, by the Tropoline Gun boats Pray inform me who hfr J. Barnes is, he has written to me from
Leghorn, but I h o w nothing more of him. [X'A.

SDA. CL, Tripoli, Vol. 3, 1801-1805.1

[4 January 18041
To the Warrant and Petty Offlcers, Seamen and Marines late of the U. S. Frigate
Phihdelphia, Tripoli, from Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Navy

Altho' the fortune of War has made you prisoners to the Bashaw of
Tripoly, it has not made you his Slaves - Whether you will be Slaves
or Kot, depends on yourselres, Your determination not to work will be
proper, and if the Bushaw should attenipt compulsion by punishing
you for a refusal, I shall retaliate on l i s Subjects which 1 now have,
and which niay hereafter come into my posstssion. If you conduct
properly, you will in due time be redeemed and restored to your
friends, and entitled to receive full pay from the time of your capture
to your arrival in the United States. In the mean time every proper
means will be taken for c l o t l I ~ gand keeping you as comfortnblc as
circumstances will admit of, but should any of you voluntarily engage
your services to the Enemy, and afterwards fall into the hands of your
justly incensed Country Men you will undoubtedly suffer death
agreeable to the laws of the United States in such cases made and
proridcd. You ought not to let the threats of those, into wlmse hands
you have unfortunntcly fallen, intimidate you, but obstinutcly pcrsist
in your rights of bcing treated as prisoners and not as Slaves I sllall
write to the Bashaw inlnietliatc4y and acquaint him that all those
Americans who suffer tl~emselvesto be compellcd to worli for Iiini,
will be considered as having nliexmtcd tllemselvcs from the United
States, and of course our Governm! will not consider itself under any
obligations to ransom them. Behave like Amrricans btl firm and do
not despair the time of pour liberation is not far distant
I am with Sentiments of regard & Consideration
Your friend
(Signed) EDW'J
PREBLE
Janua y 4'Q 1804
[LC. EPP, LB, Dec. 1803-April 1804.1
[4 January 18041
To the Prime Minister of the Bashaw of Tripoli from Captain Edward Preble, U. S.
BavI'

Edward Preble Esqr Commander in chief of the United States
Squadron stationed in the Mediterranean Sea, unto Siddi hlohamened
D'Guise, Prime Minister to His Excellency the Bashaw of Tripoly in
Barbary. HEALTH

It has pleased the almighty disposer of all sublunary events, t o
as pnsoners of war, the officers & crew of the
late belonging to the United States, but humanity
general usage of Nations, forbid your treating

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

313

them as Slaves: and should you so treat them after the receipt of this,
you will be exerciseing your power against your interest; as I presume
the United States will only make provision for the ransom of then
Citizens who are considered as prisoners of war, and not for those
whoom you treat as Slaves, by compelling them to work for you
against their inclinntion. It is their duty to resist such compulsion
by refusing to work; and all those of our Citizens, who voluntarily
engage in Tour Service, should they ever fall into our hands, will (by
the laws of our Country) be considered as Traitors, and punished
with death. I therefore request that the unfortunate American
prisoners may not either be inticed or compelled to labour as Slaves,
but that they be treated with humanity.
On the 23'4 Citimo in sight of Tripoly, I captured a Vessel under
Turkish Colours, bound to Bengaza, with two Tripoiine Officers,
several tripoline Soldiers, and a number of Black men & women;
amounting in all to about Sixty on board; and brought her to this
place. She is now performing quarantine, and as soon as she is
ndmitted to prattique, I shall release the Vessel, together with d l the
people claimed by the Captain; consisting of an officer of the Captain
Pacha, four Turks, and seven Greeks and will give the Captain a passport and every assistance to prosecute his voyage to Constantinople,
whither he sap's he is bound, after he should have been a t Bengaza;
but the Tripoline Officers, Soldiers Br Black people I shall detain as
prisoners, and send them to America, unless you think proper according
to the custom of other Xations, and as humanity dictates, to enter
into a negotiation for an exchange of prisoners. I n the mean time
you may rest assured that your people are, and sljall continue to be,
well treated as prisoners of K a r , and not as Slaves. I have not
allowed a single article of cloathing, or anvthing else, to be talien
from them; and each one of them now has all the money u-11ich they
had when they came into my possession. I pray you to make known
all these matters to His Excellency the Bnshaw, and to write me an
answer to hlulta. I also want to know what the demand will be for
the ransom of such of the officers & crew as are considered and treated
as prisoners of war.
Accept my thanks for your kind attention to Captain Bainbridge
& his Officers, and be assured I shall when oppertlmity offers, give
you proofs of my satisfaction. M'ishing you health I have signed
this with my hand on board the United States Ship Constitution, in
the Harbour of Syracuse, the 4'4 day of January 1504.
(Signed) EDWARD
PREBLE
[XA. SDA.

CL, Algiers, Vol 7, Part 1, Jan. 1804-Nor. 1805.1

To Secretary of State from John Gavino, U. S. Consul, Gibraltar

GIBRALTAR
Jte January 1804
SIR I have not been honord with any of yours since my last under
2Qth Ult? N 9 138 p' the schooner Mary Cap? Sinclair Ng

139

Two days ago arrived from Cyracuse the Nautilus Lieu' Somers who
brought me duplicate dispatches from Comodor Prible to be forwarded Consul Isnardi for the Hone Secr of the Navy which went by
Post I am Extreamly mortified to find by Comodor Pribles Letter to me
that the ship Philadelphia Capmaimbridge has been lost off Tripoly,

314

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1803 TO 1804

& that the Officers & Crew are Prisoners a t that Gov!, this is a most
unpleasant event, and for particulars rcferr to said Comodors dispatches to the Hen-ec? of the Navy pr h P Gadscn a Midshipnlan in
the service - bearer thereof, who was sent down in the Il'autilus with
them and I got him a Passage on board the above mcntiond Schooner
M a y bound to George Town S. C. & is the only American Vessel 9
Port; the Wind is now coming round to the Xast & they will sad
imediately. Yesterday arrived the Brig Argo Cap'! Hull u-ho is undrr 3 days
Quarantine having Waterd a t Frangirola near Malaga. Thcl accounts
of Publick health from that Citty announce its intire Recstablislim~~ntThe Portuguese admiral is gone to Anchor a t Alguesiras, account the
apprehmtions of Warr, and the rest of the Squadron is now geting
under way for Lisbon. I have not yet had an oppertunity of passing Consul Simpsons Bills
on you for $1000
1000 $2550 [sic] 555

t

[SDA. CL, Gibraltar, Vol. 11, April 1796-Kov. 1804.1
To Commanding Officer of the U. S. Squadron in the Mediterranean

MALTA
Janr 4, 1804
SIR I n consequcncc of the information that I have rccd from the
frcinds of His Excellency Cidi Ahmet Caramanlli late Bashaw of
Tripoli, I am obliged to send thc Bearer Expressly for an answer, to
know if I can give them true Intcdigence with regard to your Cooporat-

ing & assisting His Exccllcncy Cidi Shmct Csramnnlli late Bashaw ?f
Tripoli if I can give them those good news they will comcnce war m
favor of His Excellency & the United States and I have purch:~scd
some necessary articles for War in Barbary I n the name of Cidi Ahmet Caramanlli the first Born of the Dominion of Tripoli & late Bashaw I ask the Loan of Two Thousand Dollars
on purpose to purchase some more articics of War & to collrct Somc
of his Freincls to go with me to bring him to Derna with your assistance
then we will take Bengaz & Tripoli. I have inclosthd a copy of Comodor Morris's Letter to me a Copy of which I also sent to Dcrna with
Mr Farquhar
I am Sir
your Humble Sert
SALVATORE
BUFUTTIL
To the Commander in Chief of the
United States Ships of War in the Mediterranean,
[LC. EPP, Vol. 8, 1803-1804.1
Extract from journal of U. S. Brig Argus. Lieutenant Isaac Hnll, U. S. Navy, commanding, Wednesday, 4 January 1804

At 6 AM. Europa point bore N E. a t 10 brought too in the bng
of Gibralter with the Starboard Anchor in the S W. and moored with
the larboard Anchor in the Tu' E, in 12 fathoms Water found here the
U. S. Schooner Enterprize who informd that the U. S. Frigate Phila-

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

3 15

delphia had been lost off Tripoli and all the crew made prisoners
People Variously Erriployed [NDA photostat.]

[5 January 18041
Marine Force of Algiers

An Algerine built Frigate, copper bottomed . - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -44 Guns 12 & 9 Pound'"
A Portuguise do - - - - - - - - do - c a p t u r e d - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 44 d o _ do
An Americnn built do. - -A present.
coppered - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 34 do-9 & 6
do
A liebeck, Algerine built, copper bot34 D?
Dq
tomed . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
- ditto . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30 do - - - do
- ditto - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 26 do - - - - do
- ditto . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20 do-8 & 6
do
A Polacre Greek built - - - - - - - - - _ - - - - - - 26 do-9 & 6
do
- do - - - - - - d o - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 18 do - - - - - - 8 pounders
A Brig Philadelphia built. - - _- - - - - - - - - 22 do-- 4.6 8: 9 do
A Schooner U. States built . - - - _ - - - _ - - 18
- do - - - - - - 6 pounders
- do - - - - - - 4 ditto A ditto - ditto _ _ - _ - - - - - - - - - _ - - - 14
There is a frigate building a t the Marine to carry 48 Guns - Viz.
18 Pounders on her Main Battery & 12 Pounders on her quarter deck
& fore castle. Each cruizer carries ten men to a Gun, and one Turk soldier to.&
Gun. - N. B. These Turk Soldier[s] are the leaders of the men m
boarding. There are two Merchant Coasting Vessels, nlounting 4 Guns
each. - 2 Guard Row Gallies for the Port. 50 Gun & Mortar boats - carrying 18 & 24 Pounders
At Oran & Bonn there are two armed Galliots a t each, with latteen
Sails and Sweeps. 150 Sail of lateen sail Coasters, from 25 to 30 Tons. 3 Harbour Pontoons a t Algiers
8 Harbour boats~exclusiveof the Barge of the Gen! of Marine
[LC. EPP, Vol. 9, Jan.-Feb. 1804.1
To Lieutenant Stephen Decatur, Jr., U. S. Navy, commanding U. S. Schooner
Enterprize, from Captain Edward Preble, U. 6.Navy

U ~ I T ESTATES
D
SHIPConstitution
Syracuse Harbour Jany 5 9 1803 [1804?]
SIR One of the ships of the squadron, is each day to take the Guard
for 24 hours commencing a t S OClock in the morning, a Signal for
the ship that is to have the Guard will be made by the senior Officer,
and the Gunrd ship is to hoist an American Jack a t the mizen Top
gallant mast head, but if a Brig or Schooner, at the Fore, which is to
be kept flying until1 the Gunrd is shifted by signal Guard is to be
rowed by a boat of the guard ship for the 24 hours, and it is to speak
every Vessel that enters the Harbour by day or night, before she
approaches near the squadron, and report to the commanding officer
in port, every morning at 9 OClock, agreeable to the lollowing form
for the information of the Commodore
[HSof Pa. Mrs. F.H. Getchell.]

316

NAVAL OPERA4TIONSFROM 1805 TO 1804

To Lieutenant Charles Stewart, U. S. Navy, commanding U. S. Brig Siren, from

Edward Preble, U. 6. Navy
U . S. SHIPConstitution
Syracuse Harbor Jan? 5@1804
SIR YOUwill prepare the Syren for a cruize as soon as possible
with six weeks full allowance of Provisions Stores BCQnd will wait
in this port my farther Orders. - One of the ships of the Squadron
is each day to take the Guard for 24 hours commencing a t 8 O'clock
in the morning, A Signal for the ship that has the Guard will be made
by the Senior Officer in Port and the Guard ship is to hoist an American Jack a t the mizen top gall5 Mast head, but if a brig or Schooner
a t the fore which is to be kept flying until1 the Guard is shifted by
Signal: A Guard is to be rowed by a boat of the Guard Ship for the
24 hours and is to speak every vessel1 that enters the Harbor by day
or night before she approaches near the squadron, and report to the
Commanding officer in Port every morning a t 9 O'clock agreeable to
the following form for the information of the Commodore [see below]
You d l keep a good look out on the Tripoline Prize and take care
the Prisoners do not make their escape
Captain

Commander Syracuse [space] 1804

[Similar letter to Lieutenant Stephen Decatur, Jr., 5 January 1804.1
[LC. EPP, Order Book, May 1803-June 1805.1
Extract from journal of U. S. Brig Argus. Lieutenant Isaac Hull, U. S. Navy,
commanding, Thursday, 5 January 1804
Moored in Gibralter Bay. These 24 hours begins with Squally
Weather and Variable winds and very heavy Squalls Hoisted the
Yellow flag sent the Jolly Boat on shore for fresh Provisions
[KDA photostat.]
To Lieutenant John Cassin, U. 6. Navy, Navy Yard, Washington, D. C., from
Secretary of the Navy

NAVY
D E P ~Jan? 6.1804. Cap1 Rodgers has been authorized to employ Mr Peter Gardner
and such other of the Ship Carpenters a t the Yard as he may deem
useful and necessary in the building of the Gun-Boat directed to be
built a t this place. I wish the further repairs of the Boston to be discontinued as soon
as it can be done with propriety, and without leaving the ship liable
to injury from discontinuing her repairs. Be pleased to attend to
this subject. [NDA. OSW, Vol. 6, 1802-1805.1

317

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

To Captain James Barron, U. S. Ravy, Hampton, Va., from Secretary of the Navy

NAVYD E P ~
Janr 6. 1804 -

Understanding that it will be more agreeable and convenient to
you that the Gun-Boat which you have been requested to su erintend,
should be built a t Hampton, than a t either of the places eretofore
rescribed, and as it will make no sort of difference to the public,
consent to her being built a t Hampton. The monies instead of
passing thro' the hands of Mr Bedinger as has been arranged, will
be remitted to you, and you will be held accountable to this depmt
for their espenditure. You will perceive by m letter to you of the
21a1 ultq, that I have left it entirely to yourse f to determine upon
the Mechanics and other persons to be employed under your direction
in the building of the Boat. Employ whoever you may think best
qualified. -

!

P

9

[NDA. OSW, Vol. 6, 1802-1805.1
To General William Srvine, appointed Naval Storekeeper, Philadelphia, Pa., from
Secretary of the Navy

NAVYD E P ~
Jan? 6. 1804
You will consider yourself hereby appointed Store Keeper to this
Department a t Philadelphia - Your duties as Storekeeper consist
in receiving taking care of find issuing under the directions of the
navy agent a t Philadelphia - all the stores belonging to the Department a t Philadelphia - The Superintend! has the Custody of the
timber, plank scantling &Qs you will have room in the public arsenal
for the stores you will receive them by inventory of George Harrison
Esqr nnd have them deposited there - The Secretary a t K a r will
write to you on the subject authorizing the Deposit - On receiving
the stores you will be charged with them on the books of the Accountant of the Navy and you will be held accountable for them.
You will receive from the accountant of the navy the requisite
forms & instructions you are to make to him monthly returns of the
stores on hand which must comprehend all the issues you may have
made and all the articles received by you - As a Compensation for
your Services as Storekeeper you will be allowed the sum of 600
Dollars I?: annum payable Quarter yearly by the agent a t Phila
[KDA. GLB, Vol. 7, 1803-1805.1
To Lieutenant John E. Dent, U. 6. Navy, from Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Navy

U. S. FRIGATE
Constidufion
Syracuse Harbor Jan? 6'Q1804
SIR Business calls me to Malta and during my absence you are to
progress as fast as possible in Equipping the Constitution ior a cruize
of a t least four months with water, provisions &CB and every thing
necessary for that time, The ships rig,oin$ is to be completely overhauled and repaired where it is worth repairing and where it is not it
must be replaced with new; The Ship and Gun Carriages to be scraped
and painted inside and outside and a set of hanging shot lockers to be
mnde for the Guns of both decks: The boats to be repaired and painted:
Top Gall! sails and royals altered or new ones made to fish the new
Top Gall! Masts: Hammock cloths tarred and a light touch of tar

318

hTAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1805 TO 180L

on all the rigging which requires it. The boats excepting the guard
boat (which is to be moored as usual) to be hoisted in every night a t
sunset and not any Officer to Sleep out of the Ship or have permission to be on shore after 9 Oclock on any pretence whatever during
my absence - .
One of the ships of the Squadron is each day to take the Guard for
24 hours commencing a t 8 oclock in the morning. A Signal will be
made by the Senior Officer in Port and the Guard Ship is to hoist an
American Jack a t the Mizen top gall! mast head but if a brig or
Schooner a t the fore, which is to be kept fl.ving untill the Guard is
shifted by Signal. A Guard is to be rowed by a boat of the Guard
ship for the 24 hours nnd is to speak every vessel1 that enters the harbor by dny or night before she approaches near the Squadron and report to the commanding officer in Port every morning a t 9 Oclock
agreeable to the followhg form for the Information of the Commodore * * *
[LC. EPP, Order Book, May 1803-June 1805.1
To Midshipman Hethcote J. Reed, U. S. Navy, from Captain Edward Preble, U. S.
Navy

U. S. FRIGATE
Constitution
J a n ? 6th 1804.
SIR YOUwill not permit, any boat excepting one belonging to the
squadron for the purpose of bringing you supplies to come alongside
of the Prize under pour charge nor allow your boat to be put out or
any of the Prisoners or any person belonging to her to go on shore or
leave her untill you have my orders or the Orders of the Commanding
Officer in Port for so doing.
[LC. EPP, Order Book, May 1803-.June 1805.1
To Lieutenant Charles Stewart, U. S. Navy, commanding U. S. Brig Siren, from
Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Navy

U. S. FRIGATE
Constit~~fion

Syracuse Jan? 6Q 1804.
SIR MI Nathan Baker Purser of the Brig Syren under your command
t
has represented to me by letter under date of the 2c Inst: t h r ~ [space]
Carter Pursers Steward has conducted improperly as Stewsrd and
basely as a man by maliciously spreading reports to endeavour to injure
his reputation. Mr Baker's character is I concieve too well estnblished to be blemised by the malice and wickedness of the said Carter.
I cannot therefore give the smallest degree of credit to his insinuations
and you are hereby directed immediately to dismiss the said Carter
from the employment of Steward and place him on the list of ordinary
seamen.
[LC. EPP, Order Book, May 1803-June 1805.1
Extract from log book kept by Sailing Master Nathaniel Haraden, U. S. Navy, on
board U. S. Frigate Conslitulion, Saturday, 7 January 1804

[Moored in Syracuse Harbor.] Moderate breezes & cloudy weather.
The ships company employed in refitting. the rigging. The carpenters
employed in making a new fore top gall! Mast and altering the main
one. The armorers have been employed these three days in making
preventure wash plates for the U. S. Schooner Enterprize. We had

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

319

moderate breezes through A. M. The large cutter was sent on the
watering service - We rccieved in the course of the day 30 Gang
Casks. The ships company employed in reffitting the rigging and
rigging the ship - recieved fresh mutton & vegetables from the ship's
company. The surgeon reports to the Commodore the same as
yesterday The Tripolitan Prize which was brought in here was
ordered under quarantine for 13 - days. We supply her every day
with water & provisions. At Noon moderate breezes from the
Westd - .
[LC. EPP, Log Constitution, 1803- 1804.1
To Degen, Purviance & Co., Leghorn, from Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Navy

UNITEDSTATESSHIPConstitution
Syracuse Harbour January 9tV80.4
GENTLEMENIt is my intention to procure by purchase or Charter
two or three Mortar Boats, and t h e e or four Gun Boats with Guns
and 10 Inch Mortars compleat to act against Tripoly early in the
Spring, I shall nlso want a good Bombardier or two to whom I shall
be willing to give good wages to make it an object for them to engage
in our service. I wrote to R4r Cathcart respecting this business but
presume you can render me more service than he can, and it is uncertain if my letter will reach him. I wish you to enquire a t Leghorn,
and write to Naples and let me know if they can all be procured a t
either placc and on what terms. I think you might contract with the
Neopolitcln Government for them. The largest size Gun & Mortar
Boats will be best, as I wish the Gun Boats to carry a long 24 or 32
pounder each 300 Shclls and 500 shot suitable will be wanted. Pray
write me as soon as possible, and desire your friend a t Naples to write
and give me all the information possible on this subject. Let me
know if they can be procured how soon, and on what terms?
Can I procure about 50 Men of different Nations to mix with ours
to assist in manninp our Armament against Tripoly? If you give me
encouragement I will send one of our cruisers to Naples or Leghorn as
you mny ttiink best with an Officer to compleat the business, and
convoy the Boats to this place.
Your attention to this, will render an acceptable service to our
Government
P. S. Name to me a proper correspondent in Naples, one whom I
can confide in, and who has influence with the Govr
[LC. EPP, LB, Dec. 1803-April 1804.1

To Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Navy, from Captain William Bainbridge, U. S.
Navy

TRIPOLI
BARBARY
9'h January 1804
SIR, I have had the honor of writing you eight or ten letters since
our unfortunate captivity, and have anxiously expected to hear from
ou, - as pet have not received that satisfaction; nltho' several of my
Yetten particularly pointed out the want we were in for an established
credit; and the almost naked situation of our Crew.
Having already particularized the loss of the Frigate Philadelphia,
I forbear the painful repetition: suffice it to say that impatient the
time will pass until I can publicly justify my conduct in the catastrophe, and I hope that no premature censures will be formed.

320

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1803 TO 1804

Being uncertain whether my communications hare come to hand,
makes me forbear particulars on this place.
[LC. EPP, Vol. 9, Jan.-Feb. 1804.1
TO

Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Navy, from Lieutenant Isaac H a , U. S. Navy

UNITEDSTATESBRIGArgus
Gibrahr Bay gt@J a n ? 1804. SIR, I have been honoured with your Lettcr of the loth ultimo by
Captain Somers, who informed me of the loss of the Frigate Philadelphia, ~ h i c hcircumstance my long passage from Leghorn prevented
my being made acquainted with before
I wrote you from Leghorn informine you of my arrival a t that place,
and my determination to leave there for Gibraltar as soon as possible,
and after experiencing several hard Gales of wind in the Gulf of Lyons,
and off Minorca and strong westerly winds from thence to Cape Pallos,
I found the Masts and Bow Sprit to complain, Owing to the Rigging
becoming Slack, in consequence of which 1 thought proper to run into
Carthegene to secure them - After remaining there three days and
having woulded the Masts, secured the Bow Sprit and set the Rigging
up, I sailed and beat down as far as Tangerole, the wind being ahead
and my water nearly Expended I came to an Anchor and filled some
of my R a t e r Casks, on my arrival a t Gihralter, after being from there
nearly Sixty days, without Communication a t any Port, they obliged
me to perform three days quarentine I am very sorry it is not in my power to give you the least information respecting the Emperor of 3lorocco or the state of his Cruizers,
owing to my long absence from hence and not having hear'd from hlr
Simpson since my arrival. - As soon as I can possibly fill my R a t e r
and get Provisions on board I shall run over to Tangier, and should
all be well, from thence to Cadiz, where most likely I s h a l remain ten
or twelve days as 1 find the Weather v e r y bad in this Bay and not
very safe lying a t Anchor. - I find the Argus to be an excellent Sea
Boat, and I believe when in trim will Sail very fast by the Wind. but
have not as yet had an oppertunity of Sailing with anything except
the Syren, nnd I believe Cap5 Stewart will be candid enough to
acknodedge she beats her. I have been informed by Captain Somers that men were shipping
for one of the Frigates, if so she may be soon expected on this station,
so that I hope I shall be able to join you as soon or sooner than the
time mentioned in your Letter. - I shall endeavour to keep as good a
look out on this station as the very bad weather we have, wit1 allow
me, and write you every oppertunity, and hope soon to have i t my
power to send you some news Papers. [NDA. Isaac Hull LB, 1803-1806.1
To Lieutenant John Cassin, U. 6. Nsvy. Navy Yard, W a s h i i o n , D. C., from
Secretary of the Bavy

NAVYD E P M ~

Jan? 10. 1804. Herewith you will receive "directions respecting the em loying and
paying workmen, laborers @ a t the Navy Yard a t this p ace" which
you mill observe and cause to be observed by the Officers and others
under your command.

P

-

321

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS
[Enclosure]

Directions ;especting the employing & paying Workmen, Laborers
&O? a t the Navy Yard Washington. All the workmen, laborers
employed in the yard or in repairing
the Ships &? are to be employed under the direction and controul of
the Superintendant of the Yard, and to be paid for their services such
compensation as may have been agreed on with him; - the amount
of daily wages to be ascertained in the following manner vizt
I t shall be the duty of the Clerk of the Yard, daily and every da
a t morning, noon and Evening to muster every person employed:
carefully noting in a Musterroll prepared for the purpose each and
every person that may appear to be attending to their duty or employment, and their particular occupation and the object of employment;
as well as such as may appear to be absent with the cause of absence
(if understood). - Haring a due regard in making the said Musters
to the convenience of the persons employed and the Interest of the
Public, attending for the purpose, whenever circumstances may
render it necessary, a t the Shops or places of employment: And to
deliver daily one copy of the Rilusterroll so made out to the Superintendant, retaining another copy in his possession. And it will also be the duty of the said Clerk a t the end of every
month to make out separate payrolls for the respective objects of
employment headed in the manner herein after directed, varying
the description so as to designate each separate object of employment
viz t
"Payroll for the Ship-Carpenters, Caulkers, Laborers kc.
employed in repairing the frigate United States in the month of
Jan? 1803." Including in the said respective poyrolls every person employed in
that particular object, designating their respective occupations, and
stating the number of days work actually performed, ascertained
from the iLIusterrolls made out as herein before directed; which payrolls he will then submit to the inspection of the Superintendant,
whose duty it will be to compare the same with the hlusterrolls in
his possession; and if it shall appear to him that the time of employment is therein correctly stated, he will certify it to be so, and insert
opposite to the name of each person the daily wages a t which they
are respectively to be paid, and then to hand the payrolls so certified
and inserted to the Purser of the Yard, with directions to extend the
amount due to each person, and pay the same, taking their receipts
on the payrolls. [A few general rules in relation to the Navy Yard n t Washington were Inter
issued 22 May 1805.1

*

[NDA.

*

*

*

*

*

*

OSW, Vol. 6, 1802-1805.1

To Midshipman (acting as Lieutenant) James T. Leonard, U. S. Navy, New York,
N. Y., from Secretary of the Navy

NAVYD E P M ~
Jan? 10. 1804. The Government wishes to send dispatches to Europe by a provision Vessel which will sail from Norfolk in the course of the present

322

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1805 TO 1804

Month, and you have been selected to convey them. - Be pleased
to repair to this place immediately on the receipt of this Letter. [NDA. OSW, Vol. 6 , 1802-1805.1
To the Auditor of the Treasury from Secretary of State

DEPARTMENT
of STATE
January I OK@1804.
SIR. I t appearing that William Eaton Esqr late Consul of the
United States a t Tunis did on the 9'!' of August 1802, in his official
capacity, enter into an instrument of writing acknowledging to have
received from Sidi Haggi Junis Ben Junis, a Tunisian Merchant, the
sum of thirty four thousand Spanish milled dollars, as a loan for the
use of his public agency; and Richard V. hlorris Esqr having on the
8" of March last caused to be paid to Junis the sum of twenty two
thousnnd dollars on account of the snid instrument, hl? Morris is to
be credited with the amount last mentioned. which is to be debited
to Mr Enton.
Mr hlorris is likewise to receive credit for two thousand dollars
advanced by his letter of credit for the same sum, dated on the
of
March last, in favor of George Davis Esqr acting as American Consul
a t Tunis, upon Messr?Dagen, Purvinnce & C' of Leghorn. With the
last mentioned sum M r Davis is to be charged. The instrument
signed by Mr Eaton as above stated, Junis receipts thereon, and
another instrument executed by the former and dated on the gt+ of
March last, wherein he acknom-ledges the sum of twenty two thousand
dollars to have been paid as above mentioned to Junis, and also
Mr Davis' receipt for the credit of two tllousnnd dollars are enclosed
as vouchers to the transactions hereby authorized.
[NA. SDA. Dom. L., Vol. 14, May 1802-May 1805.1
Presumably from Midshipman Henry Wadsworth, U. S. Navy

SYRACUSE
HARBOR,
JanY l o t h , 1804.
On the 17th December we sailed from this
Port with our tender the Enterprize, & nest day arrived off Malta.
The Consul cnme on board bringing with him Br an Italian gentleman
who had been sargeon to the Bashfiw of Tripoly. * * * We stood
for Tripoly - our ship completely prepar'd for the boisterous gales
of this season. - & in two days captured a small Ketch under the
Ottoman colors - * * *
Twenty four hours after we had sent off the Prize under convoy of
the Enterprize, the wind set in to the Northward & we began to beat
off the coast under a Press of sail - the Gale increased, the sea mn
high & the Constitution, with Top g. masts Br yards on deck, under
courses & close recf'd Topsails clawed off the coast to the great dissatisfaction of our Prisoners - who were in hopes that we might be
drivcn on their inhospitable shore Br have added to thcir treasures & Slaves. - The Italian Surgeon gives u s much information he
knows the Prisoners personally. - He says that it was 4 hours after
the ship struck the ground, before the gunboats came out to nttaclr
her, that for scveral hours they continued firing without one shot
hitting the Philadelphia - that she struck her colors & the enemy
were afraid then to come along side until Capt B. & officers left the
DEARSIR, *

* *

THE LANDING-PLACE
A T SYRACUSE.

323

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

*

ship & landed when the boarded her finding every man on board
drunk, & laying about tTle decks like dead men. The moment the
oEcers landed they were stripped to the buff. Thus (if this information be true & we have no reason to doubt it) one of our Finest Frigates
was deserted, without even making a defence to be expected from an
American cockboat: * * *

*

*

*

*

*

*

*

Narative.
On the 13th January 1804 the Commodore shifted his Pendant
on board the Vixen &: sailed for Malta with M': Izard &. Wadsworth
Midshipmen 8: ME Morris Purser - we arrived a t hlalta on the
next day & took up our Lodgings on shore. I now for the first time
in two years enjoyed a few Days of uncontrolled Liberty, for the
Com' did not Trouble us excepting to inform us when we were to dine.

* * *

In ten days the Cornr? having finished his business we reluctantly
Departed for Syracuse but for him all places are alike busied with
his Summer operations against Tripoli he feels no pleasure in anything
which does not forward his Favorite plans. - * * *
I n April the Cornr+ was again off Tripoli & sent in proposals of
Peace our Terms were refused notwithstanding the menace of a bombardment at the end of Two Months. This he would not believe.
The next port made was Tunis. The Bey threatens us with mar
if we left the Bay without acceding to his demands: - he sent. the
Cornr% letter back unopened by the Charge de Affairs hIr Davis:
immediately all hands were called to weigh anchor 9r we stood to sea.
The next day we returned to know the event, - but blr Bey mas in
a very good humor 8: gave six weeks for the Cornr+to determine whether
he would accede to his demands or not. The answer was you may
declare war as soon as you please. I am already determined not to
grant you anything. Nay said the Bey be not rash - I shall not
make war until six weeks expires. - J u s t when you please was the
answer & we sail'd for Malta & from there to Syracuse.
The Following Prizes have been made by the Squadron under our
present Cornr?
23 December 1803 A Ketch from Tripoli bound to Bengazi (e:
Constnntinople, taken in sight of Tripoli with several Tripolines
of Conseauence & 45 Blacks on board - likewise a Consul of the
Grand ~ e ' i ~ n i oreturning
r:
from Tripoli. The vessel belonged to the
lsle of Candia.
A En[g]lish Merchant Brig from h,falta taken off Tripoli by the
Naulilus.
A Maltese ship from Tripoli bound to Malta by the Siren.
An English Brig of 16 guns from Tripoli bound to Malta by the
Siren. The Transjer of 16 sixes was sold a t Mnlta at the Conclusion
of the Peace between France B England. Is a complete Man of
War Brig & is Taken in to the Service of the United States, renamed
the Scourge. John H Dent Lt Commander, Henry Wndsmorth 1st
Lieutenant, Ralph Izard 2d- Charles Morris Sailing Master, Thomas
Mnrshall Surgeon all promoted from the Constitution. Rfr Green
Purser, from the Nautilus - MI Davis 6: Rowe hfidVrom the Constitution.

324

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1803 TO 180.4

Several other vessels have been sent in & afterwards releasrd.
The Port of Tripoli has been constantly Blockaded since 1804 commenced. * * *
Two Spanish Ketches by the Argus and Scourge in May, coming
out of Tripoli.
[H.W.L.Dana Col.]
To Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Navy, from Lieutenant Charles Stewart, U. S.
Navy

U. S. BRIGSyren Jan? l o t h 1804
SIR Herewith I send you farther charges instituted against Mr

Baker by Lieu$ Maxwell & Doct: Marshall
If Sir those things exhibited against Mr Baker are true, they are of
such a nature that will oblige me to withdraw my confidence and renders him consequently unfit for the service. You will be pleased to
institute such enquiry into 11' Bakers conduct as you think proper
that its character may wear its proper colour, for without it there will
ever be dissentions among them.
[LC. EPP, Order Book, May 1803-June 1805.1
Extract from log book kept by Sailing Master Nathaniel Haraden, U. S. Navy, on
board U. S. Frigate Conslilulion. Tuesday, 10 January 1804

Moderate Breezes 8: cloudy weather we continue a t Anchor in Saragosa with the Syren and Enterprize in company. The Ships company
employed refitting the rigging. Towards the Evening we made the
Enterprize signal to unmoor - We had moderate breezes from the
N N W through the night.
At 4 A. M. Commodore Preble shifted the broad pendant from the
Constitution to the Enterprize leaving Lieu' Dent as Commanding
Officer. The Enterprize weighed a t Day light and stood out to scu
with the Commodore on board in order t,o proceed to hlaltu
We recieved in tho course of this day 42 Gang Casks of Water The ships company employed refitting the rigging & cleaning ship.
We received one barrel1 of Tar from the Constitution's stores on shore.
The Brig Syren hoisted a Jack as a signal for the Guard. At Noon
moderate breezes from the Northq
[LC. EPP, Log Constztution, 1803-1804.1
Extract from journal of Midshipman F. Cornelius deKrafft, U. 6. Navy, in U. S.
Brig Siren of 18 guns, Lieutenant Charles Stewart, U. S. Navy, commanding,
Tuesday, 10 January 1804

[Syracuse] Moderate breezes from the Nd & Wd & pleast At 5 rccd
a quantity of mutton for ships Company, & some oakum, spikes &c
Hand employ'd in fitting ship for sea. At 6 the Commodore hoisted
his flag on board the Schooner Enterprize, weigh'd & stood out of
the harbour, same time 2 carpenters came from the Schooner, to assist
in cutting the sweep ports At 8 completed watering, having on board
52 casks each 115 gall? At >4 past 3 the Enterprize hove in sight. &
came in the harbour, brought with her a Polackey ship & come too an
anchor At Yi past 5 the Commodore hoisted his flag on board the
Frigate, Constitution. Anchor'd here the U. S. Schooner Vixen. 6
caulkers a t work this day. [NDA.]

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

325

To Charles Pinckney, U. S. Minister to Madrid, Spain, from Captain Edward
Preble, U. S. Navy

UNITEDSTATES
FRIG~TE
Con~titution
Syracuse Harbour 11th January 1804
SIR, Yesterday I r e d your favor dated the lgLhNovember last in
which you mentioned some deserters from the French Marine supposed
to be on board this Ship, in wluch I can only observe that I was in
C d i z about the 1st of November last, and wanting a, few men to complete my complen~ent,I ordered my Officers to recruit some Americans: they accordingly recruited some and a few more who declared
themselves Italians & Maltese I find now on examination that there
are but three urnong the whole who speak the French Language, and
they deny having ever belonged to the French Marine, but whenever
1 go to any port where there is a French Consul or Commissary I will
permit him to interrogate them, and if they prove to be French
Citizens I will readily deliver up or discharge them as he may think
most proper and I beg you to assure Genl Beurnonville that I shall
give particular orders to all the commanders in my Squadron not to
engage Citizeris of France on any pretence whatever, and that I
truly reciprocate his, and our own feelings as it respects your wishes
for a good understanding etween the two Governmtq
(Signed) E D WPREBLE
~

K

[LC.

EPP, LB, Dec. 1803-April 1804.1

[ l 1 January 18041
To Midshipman William Burrows, U. S. Navy, from Captain Edward Preble, U. 8.
Navy

SIR I h a ~ eappointed you acting Sailing Master of the United
States Schooner Vixen during the Indisposition of hfl: Butler who goes
on shore for the recovery of his health
You will t,hereforerepair on board Said Schooner and take upon you
the duty of Sailing Master and hold that employment until1 farther
Orders for which this shall be your sufficient Warrant.
Signed EDWARD
PREBLE
UNITEDSTATES
SHIPConstitution
Syracuse Harbor Jan? 11th 1803 [I8041
[LC.

EPP, Order Book, May 1803-June 1805.1

To Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Navy, from Captain Stephen Decatur, Jr., U. S.
Navy, commanding U. S. Schooner Enterprize

U S. S C HEnterpriz
~
SYRACUSE
HARBOUR

Jany. 11tQ180S118041 SIR The situation of the United States schooner Enterprize under
my command induces me to request a SF-ey - "Her situation in my
opinion is such as will make her cruismg during the winter months
(unless repaired) hazardous" - Be assured sir my motives for
requesting this survey arriscs from what I conceive to be my duty &
a wish t,o benefit the service
[LC. EPP,

Vo1. 5, 1802-1803.1

326

NAVAL O P E R A T I O N S F R O M 1805 T O 1804

To Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Navy, from Lieutenants Charles Stewart, John
Smith, John H. Dent, and Carpenter Thomas Moore, U. 8. Navy

UNITEDSTATES
SCHOONER
Enterprize
Syracuse Harbor. Jan7 1ltQ 1804
SIR Pursuant to your warrant of this date we have taken a careful
and strict surley of the United States Schooner Enterpriz~commanded
by Lieut! Stephen Decatur Junr, and arc of opinion frorn her defective
state that she is rendered incapable of cruizing during the present
season without undergoing considerable repairs; The Extent of her
defects will be better discox-ered when she is placed in a situation for
repairs.
[LC. EPP, Order Book, May 1803-June 1805.1
To Lieutenant Charles Stewart, U. S. Navy, commanding U. S. Brig Siren, from
Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Navy

U. S. FRIGATE
Constitution
Syracuse Harbor Jan?' 11'h 1804
SIR YOUare to preside at a court of Enquiry to be assembled on
board the U. S. Brig Syren under your cornmancl on Thursday 13%Q
Inst at 9 O'clock A. h1. for the investigation of the Official Conduct of
Mr Nathan Baker Purser of said Brig since learing the United States;
The Members of the Court are to be yourself, Lt Commt S Decatur of
the Enterprize and L! T. Robinson of the Constitution. Mr Lewis,
Mid"
act as Judge Advocate. I now enclose you a letter from
Joseph J [or I.] LMaxwell and S. R. Marshall containing charges
against Mr Baker and a letter from hfr Baker respecting the conduct
of his Stewart; you will summon the members of the Court in due
form and furnish Mr Baker with a copy of the charges bro't against
him and will also summon such witnesses as may be required; In the
mean time you will give him an order of arrest and suspension from
duty until1 after the investigat.ion; and report to me in writing a clear
statement of facts to enable me to Judge of the Propriety of assembling
a Court Martial.
[LC. EPP, Order Book, May 1803-June 1805.1
Extract from Diary of Captain Edward Preble, U. 6. Navy, Commodore of U. S.
Squadron in the Mediterranean, Wednesday, 11 January 1804

[Syracuse] The wind proving contrary and meeting with the Vixen
a few leagues from this Port with dispatches for me I returned and
Anchored - The Vixen also anchored: Shifted my Pendant to the
Constitution - recieved Sundry Stores by the Vixen which were left
a t Malta by the Philadelphia - r e d letters from Captain Bttinbridge.
[LC. EPP, Diary, 1803-1804.1
Extract from log book kept by Sailing Master Nathaniel Haraden, U. 6. Navy, on
board U. S. Frigate Constitution, Wednesday, 11 January 1804

Moderate Breezes & clear weather. We continue a t anchor in
Saragosa with the Syren in company The Ships company employed
in rcfitting the rigging. The Carpenters employed in repairing the
bowsprit - As the Bowsprit has been under repair thesc two days,
it may be necessary to mention its defects and how they were occasioned. As it is a made spar two of the scarfs meet under the gam-

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

327

monning, the Ends of which were rotten. No accurate calculation of
its detects could be madc without taking off one of the fishes which
arc secured to the spindle; A piece was cut out nearly 7 feet in length
and about 8 Inches wide & between 6 & 7 lnches thck.
'I'owards Evening the Enterprize re-anchored in shore of the Constitution. On thc Commodore's coming on board the broad pendant
u-as shifted irorn the Enterprwe to the Constitution His return was in
consequence of his fulling in urith the United States Schooner Vixen
Lieut' Smith with Displ~tchesfor him.
At 7 P. M. tinchorcd here the U. S. Schooner Vixen Lt Smith who
sailed from here nearly three weeks &go as a convoy to the Traveller
store ship. L! Smith waited on the Commodore A. hl. a t Day light
we rccieved from the Vixen the follou-ing stores said to have been left
a t l l a l t n by the U. S. Frigate Philadelphia
[LC. EPP, Log Co?utttutzon, 1803-1804.1
Extract from Memorandum Book of Captam Edward Preble, U. S. Navy, on board
U. S. Brig Vuen. 12 January 1804

Sailed in the Vixen for hlalta on business for the squadron.
[LC, original.]
Extract from Diary of Captain Edward Yreble. U. S. Navy, Commodore of U. S.
Squadron in the Medlterranean, Thursday, 12 January 1804

[Syracuse] Siren, Vixen & Enterprize in company: Ordered Mr Butler
master of the lFixenon shore to Sick Quarters and Mr Burrows midsl~ipmanof this Ship to supply his Place as Acting Master. At 7
A. hi. made the I.Ti;cenSignal to prepare to sail: At 9 A. h4. I embarked
on board of her and Sailed for hlalta Wind IY E . by 10 A 31.the \%-ind
died away, the clouds thickened and every indication of a gale from
the Soutlnvard: returncd into Port and anchored - Kejoined the
Constitution - This being the Birth day of the h g of Saples I
ordcrcd a ltoyal Salute fired in honor of the day as a Compliment to
the Government.
[LC. EPP, Diary, 1803-1804.1
Extract from journal of Midshipman F. Cornelius deKrafft, U. S. Navy, in U. F.
Brig Siren, of 18 guns, Lieutenant Charles Stewart, U. S. Navy, commanding,
Thursday, 12 January 1804

[Syracuse] At 9 the Commodore hoisted hi flag on board the T7ixen
madc soil & stood out of the harbour, r e d a quantity of mutton &
Vegetqor the crew. At 11 the Fken return'd into harbour having
sprung her fore top mast crosstrees. At >4 past 11 the Commodore
hoisted his flag on board his own ship the Constitution. At Meridian
the Commodore fired a salute of 21 guns in Commemoration of the
day of nativity of the King of Naples - this day sent on shore several
coils of Rope 2 hawsers 1 topmast stay, signal halyards & a quantity
of blocks &c. [XDA.]

328

NAT7AL OPERATIONS FROM 1805 TO 1804

To Captain Edward Preble. U. S. Navy, from Major General W. A. Villetts, Commander-in-Chief of the British Garrison, Malta

MALTA
January l.?'? 1804
SIR,There being a certain number ot Bullocks at Tripoli purchased
for the use of the British Garrison under my command in this Island
a considerable time I believe before the blockade of that port was
declared, I have to request you will be pleased to permit the two
Vessels on boara of which they are embarked to pass without hindrance
or molestation to this Island. The Vessels being the properiy ot, and
navigated by Maltese subjects of His Britannic Xlajesty and the
Bullocks aiso British property beyond all question, I flatter myself
that I am perfectly justified in making this request, and that you will
be pleased to comply with the same.
(Signed) IT: ,4: Villetts
La Vcrgine del Carmine - C a p t O i ~ G
~ A~MoE N
I1 Santissimo Crocijesso - Cap? X I C ~ O LDE
O CANDIA
[LC. EPP, LB, Dec. 1803-April 1804.1
To Midshipman Jacquelin B. Harvie, U. S. Navy, Richmond, Va., from Secretary of
the Navy

KAVYD E P M ~

Jan: IS. 180,4. I have received your letter of the 8th. Mr Thompson, Chaplain in the Kavy, is employed by government a t
this place to instruct our Young Officers in the Theory of navigation,
preparatory to their entering into actual service. You will repair to
TVashington as soon as you can with convenience and report yourself
a t this office when further directions will be given you. [SDA. OSW, Vol. 6, 1802-1809.1
Extract from journal of U. S. Brig Argus. Lieutenant Isaac Hull, E. S. Navy,
commanding, Friday, 13 January 1804

Moored in Gibralter Bay AM, the United States Schooner hTautilus
Sailed on a Cruise
[SDA photostat.]
Extract from log book kept by Sailmg Master Nathaniel Haraden, U. S. Navy,
on board U. S. Frigate Constitution. Friday, 13 January 1804

Moderate Breezes & cloudy weather. We continue a t Anchor in
Saragosa, The Syren, Vixen & Enterprize in conlpany. Ships cornpanp employed in refitting the rigging. Recieved from shore 12 & f.4
Pounds line for seizing stuff & two Pounds hlarline. We shortened
in 7 fathoms on the small bower in order to swing clear of the N W
buoy.
At day light the Commodore rehoisted his Pendant on board the
Vixen & stood out to sea in order to proceed to Malta.
The Constitution has had the Port Guard these 24 hours & was
relieved by the Syren a t 8 this morning. At 9 A. M. answered the
Syrens Signal for a Court of Enquiry - The ships companv employed
in watering ship & refitting the rigging. At noon we had completed
our water having recieved 28 Gang Casks. We recieved fresh Mutton & Vegetables for the ships company. R e also recieved 6 hides of
leather from the shore - Surgeons report 18 Sick & 5 Conv""'"
[LC. EPP, Log Constitution, 1803-1804.1

E7ARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

329

To Joseph Yznardi, U. 6. Consul, Cadiz, Spain, from Lieutenant Isaac Hull,
U. S. Navy

UNITEDSTATES
BRIGArgus
Gibralter Bay 14Q Jan? 1804
SIR, I have the honour to inform you of my arrival in this Bay
from Leghorn, after a very long and disagreeable passage, and hope
soon to have the pleasure of seeing you at Cadiz, as I am now making
every preparation for Sea, and shall sail the first fair Wind for that
Port. I have been informed since my arrival here that an American Vessel
had arrived at Cadiz, with despatches from the United States to the
Court of Spain, & that some difficulty had arisen respecting the giving
up of Lousiana to the Americans. - Should you be in possession of
the particulars I will thank you to write me by return of Post, as
1 shall be anxious to hear from you before I leave Gibralter. - If
you or your friends have any Commands from this to Cadiz, I beg
you will command me - when I arrive off Cadiz, I shall hoist an
American Jack, at the fore, for a Pilot, and a whit.e flag with a red
Cross at the Main as a distinguishing flag. [NDA. Isaac Hull LB, 1803-1806.1
To Tobias Lear, U. S. Consul General, Algiers, from Captain William Bainbridge,
U. S. Navy

TRIPOLIBARBARY
14 January 1804
SIR, NO doubt before this reaches you but what you will hear of
the unfortunate loss of the United States Frigate Phildelphia, under
my command, on Rocks off Tripoli: presuming that Comnlodore
Preble or Consul 0,Brien has communicated the particulars of that
accident makes me forbear detailing them: My feelings on that event
can better be concieved than described.
By late letters from Mr Davis, charge of Affairs at Tunis, I received
information of your being at Algiers in your functionary authority,
in consequence of which I take the liberty of stating the situation of
of our captivity.
The Officers, with a few servants to tend on them, are, and have
been, closely confined to the late American Consular House. The
remainder of the Crew are confined at nights in prison, and made to
work in the day; five of them have turned Mahoinetant.~,and probably many more will do the same. R e have been much necessited
for a Credit; which difficulty hlr Davis's l ~ s tletter has removed
be attended
by nuthorising the drawing of Bills on Tunis; but that \?-dl
with a loss of 25 p' cent, which can only be prevented by having money
sent to us.
I have been anxiously expecting to hear from Commodorc Preble,
and am at a loss to account for his silence, particularly as I stated
our wants, and informed him of the mode of communicating with
this placc. I was greatly in hopes that you mould have Yisitcd
Malta in the Constitution, and would have felt yourself at liberty to
enquire the demands of the Bashaw of this Regency. - I consider
the carlier that question is put, the sooner it will effect a negotiation;
as their demands, either for our ransom or peace, no doubt will a t
first be exccedingly exorbitant, and the system of these Barbarian

330

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1803 TO 1801

powers have always been to demand more than they will finally take,
and that kind of treating procrastinates negotiation; tlierefore, an
Overture being made this Winter to recieve their first demands,
probably would be attended in the summer with their ultin~atum;and
if the question is postponed until the summer, their ultimatum,
owing to the proceeding Autumn & Winter, may be prolonged a
twelve month.
I shall briefly give you my ideas on the situation of the United
States with this Xegency, and trust that you will do me the justice
to believe they are not influenced by my unfortunate captivity.
Nature has strongly guarded the Harbour of Tripoli by Hocks &
Shoals; - the Town is too well fortified for our shipping, by an
attack, to make an impression on it; - the coast is so situated as to
make the most vigdant blockade prove inadequate to prevent their
Cruisers going in and out of port; - the Country abounds with such
a plenty of provision that they are not in the least depending on
importation for subsistance: and the loss of their small Mercantile
trade can only effect a few Jews, by whom it is carried on, and whose
interest the Bashaw totally disregards; and the trade of those Jews
by the closest blockade can be but little injured whilst Tunis is a t
peace; as the Island of Zirbe in the Regency of Tunis, adjacent to the
boundary of Tripoli, would always be a port for the reception of goods
destined to this place, - which could be readily conveyed in small
boats along the shore, or brought on Camels, for a small expense; as
these animals are numerous here, land carriage is exceedingly cheap.
The Bashaw will never be forced to terms, without he considers
his own safety endangered; and he is only Vulnerable to the United
States one way; that is by eight or ten thousand men landing near
his Town, which in my Opinion would soon become an easy conquest.
This measure or money, are the alternatives. \it?lere is your predecessor, could he not visit Tripoli? His understanding the language
and custom of the country would be of great sen-ice in .negotiating.
The Consuls, except the Danish, have not shewn a d~spositionto
be on friendly terms with us; - you are placed amongst a more
Christian sett
Please to present my best respects to LMr"ear - I hope she finds
herself agreeably situated; aitho' Barbary may not afford all the
convenieneies of America, those little embarrassments are greatly
over-balanced by having you with her, - a happiness that Mre B.
seldom experiences.
I flatter myself to hear frequently from you, - your correspondence
Nil1 always give me much pleasure.
I think you will find the Vickle Hadge Minister of Marines a t
Algiers, who I carried to Constantinople, a man of principle, - my
compliments to him.
[Stephen Decatur Col.]
Extract from Diary of Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Navy, Commodore of U. S.
Squadron in the Mediterranean, Saturday, 14 January 1804

Wind from the Eastward. At 10 P. M. arrived and anchored in
Malta Harbor - Sent an Officer to the Governor and one to the
Admiral - At 11 saluted the Garrison with 15 Guns which was
returned - Waited on the Governor Sir Alex' Ball, the Admiral Sir

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

331

Richard Bickerton, Major General Villette and Gent Oakes and was
politely recieved [LC. EPP, Diary, 1803-1804.1
Extract from log book kept by Sailing Master Nathaniel Karaden, U. S. Navy,
on board U. S. Frigate Constitution. Saturday. 14 January 1804

Moderate breezes & cloudy weather. We continue a t anchor in
Saragosa. The Syren & Enterprize in company. Ships company
employed in refitting the rig,&g.
The carpenters employed in fishing
the Bowsprit. Commodore Preble has gone to Malta on service.
Lieut? Steward commander of the Syren is the Commanding Officer
here a t present. Lieu' Dent is the commanding officer of the Constitution. We had moderate breezes from the Rest!' during the night.
A. M. Employed in garnmoning down the bowsprit and refitting
the rigging. At noon winds from the Southd The Surgeon reports
32 Sick, 4 convalescent B: 1 discharged from the Sick list to which
15 hare been added these last 24 hours. [LC. EPP, Log Conslitutlon, 1803-1504.1
Extract from Memorandum Book of Captain Edward Preble, U.S. Navy, on board
U. S. Brig Vixen, 14 January 1804

Arri~-edat Malta saluted the garrison which was returned.
rccd. with politness by the X a w ~and Army.

Was

[LC, original.]
To Secretary of State from John Gavino, U. S. Consul, Gibraltar

NO 141

GIBRALTAR
15tQJanuary 1804
SIR My lasts which I had the honour of adressing you were Nq
139 & 140 under dates 4t?' & l l t ? Ins? to which please be referrd. I this day recieved by Post from J a m . Cathcart Esqr of Leghorn
the inclosed dispatch. My friends a t Malta tell me Cap t Bairnbridge
&his unfortunateofficers are treated withHumanity by theTripolinsOn the 12t@Ins? was brought into this Port for Examination by the
English frigate Phebe, J. R. Cape1 Esqr Commander, the ship American Hero, Andrew Marsters, Master belonging to Mr F V Gray
Jun' of Salem in the U. S. loaded with sugar Cofle, Pepper & fish
from said Port of Salem bound to Marseilles on pretence of being
French property ; Cap! Marsters was interogated in the Vice Admiralty
Court in my Presence on the 13tB Ins? when ship and Cargo appenrd
to be the property of said Mr Gray, & was released yesterday, had
been stopd near Barcelona on the 2d Ins! & brought here for the
aforesaid purpose, she is now proceeding on her Voyage.Yesterday arrived a Vessel from England who had saild with a
Convoy of upwards of 40 Sail for this place and had been dispersed
by a Gale of wind in the Bay of Biscay, says there was many Troop
ships with them.The Arautilus proceeded two days ago for Syracuse, and the Argo
is here ready to go on a Cruise in the Gutt &cR The inclosed from Consul Simpson of Tanger just come to hand
[KA. SDA. CL, Gil;raltar, Vol. 2, 1796-1804.1

332

AAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1803 TO 1804
[About 15 January 18041

To Citizen Beaussier, French Charge d'Affaires & Commissary General, Tripoli,
from the French Minister for Foreign Affalrs
Copy of the Instructions sent to Citizen Benussier in Tripoli, from the French
Minister for Foreign Affairs

PARIS
2iTtQA7it)ose
I have recd Citizen pour Dispatches of the 10tQand 1StQBrumaire
No" 8 10. The details they contain, regards the loss the Americans
have sustained off Tripoli by the Philadelphia Frigate. This I had
been already informed of by Mr Livingston th14r hiinister ?lcnipotcntiary at Paris, who wrote me to claim the good offices of the First
Consul in favor of his Country men, whom this accident had delivered
into the power of Tripolines.
The First Consul touched with the most lively cornmisseration for
their misfortune, has authorised me to request you will put all in train
to alleviate their situation, and to obtain their deliverance.
You will a t same time make k n o m to the Pacha, that the \Tar
between the Regency and the United States, has more than once
excited the solicitude of the First Consul; and being truly attached to
the People and Government of America, he desires that a solid and
advantageous peace to both parties, may speedily put an end to the
War that a t present divides them.
The First Consul expects from the friendship and harmony which
subsist between the French and the Regency, from the sentiments
which the Pacha has always express'd, and from the conduct always
used towards him, that the means prescribed you to make use of, will
not be fruitless.
I expect myself from your intelligence & Zeal erery necessary step
will be taken to ensure the success of this negotiation, and the exact
result of which, you will please make known to me.
This letter will be sent you by the Commodore of the American
forces before Tripoli, to whom Mr Livingston engages to forward i t
with his Dispatches I have the honor to salute you
(Signed) Ch: MAUTALLEYRAND
[LC. EPP, Vol. 7, 1803.1
To Sir Alexander John Ball, British Civil Commissioner for the Islands of Malta
and Gozo, from Captain Edward Preble. U. S. Navy

MALTA16th January 1804
SIR, I am honored with your letter of the 24'h Ulto acknowledging
the receipt of a Declaration of the Blockade of Tripoli by the Commodore Commanding the United States Squadron in these Seas, and
requesting permission to bring from that port, One thousand Bullocks,
purchased previous to your having been notified of the Blockade, for
the supply of the Inhabitants of this Island Knowing how much it is the wish of the United States to cement
more strongly the present Friendship and good understanding with
Great Britain, I have no hesitation in complying with your request I shall therefore give Orders to the Captains & Commanders of the
Ships, and Vessels of War under my command, not to molest any
British Vessel, sent by you from Malta to Tripoli in Ballast, or, returning from thence to Malta, with Bullocks - until after the la$

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

333

day of March next; presuming by that time, you will have effected
the Transportation of the provissions in question - I wish it was
in my power consistently to extend the time beyond this limitation T o His Excellency Sir ALEXANDER
BALL
H. B. Majesties Civil Commissioner
for the Islands of Malta & Gozo - &c &c &c [LC. EPP, Vol. 9, Jan.-Feb. 1804.1
To the Captains and Commanders of the U. S. Ships of War in the Mediterranean,
from Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Navy

MALTAJan? 16Q 1804
The British Vessell bearing this Passport You are to permit to
pass from Malta to Tripoly in Ballast and from Tripoly to 34alta with
a Cargo of Bullocks until1 after the first day of hlarcll next, and to
render her any assistancc she may stand in need of.
G i r m under my hand
and Seal on board the
(L 8 )
U. S. Schooner Vixen at
Malta the 16 day of Jan?' 1804
Signed, EDWARD
PREBLE
[LC. EPP, Order Book, May 1803-June 1805.1
To Major General W. A. Villetts, Commander-in-Chief of British Garrison, Malta,
from Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Navy
~ ~ A L TJanua
A
y the 16th 1804
SIR I am h o n h a i t h your letter of the 13@ Ins; directed to the
Officer commanding the Ships of the United States of America off
Tripoly, requesting that two Vessels now in that Port on board of
which a number of Bullocks are embarked for the use of the Garrison
on this Island, and which were purchased previous to my declaration
of the Blockade of that Port having been made known to you, may be
permitted to pass unmolested. I now enclose you passports for those
Vessels, and

[LC. EPP, LB, Dec. 1803-April 1804.1
To Brian McDonogh, British Consul, Tripoli, presumably from Captain Edward
Preble, U. S. Navy

MALTAJan? 16th 1804 SIR I have desired hl' Higgins to send to your care sundry letters
& bundles of news papers, & clothing for Capt. Bainbridge & his
officers. They are to be shipped in a vessel sent to Tripoly by Sir
Alex! Ball, you will oblige me by directing the delivery of them. I
beg leavc to ask your kind attention to those unfortunate Prisoners
& be assured I shnli not want gratitude in making you such acknowledgements as may be most acceptable when opportunity offers. I
wish much for a correspondence with you, & you will do me a favor by
endeavouring to learn what the demand of the Bashaw will be for the
ransom of the officers & crew & make mc acquainted therewith hlr O'Bricn our late Consul a t Algiers was so good as to give me your
address & to recommend it to me to interest you in our affairs -

334

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1803 TO 180.4

I captured a vessel in sight of Tripoly the 23's' ult. under Turks
colors, bound to Bengaza with two Tripoline Officers one of which has
his son with him - several Tripoline soldiers & 42 black men &
women were also on board. 1 shall release the vessel as soon as her
quarantine is over together with all the people which the Turkish
Captain claims, viz - one officer of the Capt: Pacha, three Turks &
seven Greeks - The remainder amounting to about 60 being Tripolines & Tripoline property I shall send to America, unless the Bashaw
thinks proper to exchange them - I wish you would sound him on
this subject. I shall make you a satisfactory acknowledgement if you
can effect an excllange I hope to hear from you soon & beg [MS mutilated]
[LC. EPP, Vol. 9,Jan.-Feb. 1804.]

T; Captain William Bainbridge, U. S. Navy, Tripoli, from Captain Edward Preble,
U. S. Navy

MALTA Janua y l G t @ 1804

DEARSIR I came here for the purpose of forwarding letters and
supplies of stores to you. You will readily conceive my intention in
writing to the Warrant Officers, & Petty Officers & Crew of the Philadelphia, and to the Bashaw's Minister respecting them. I did not
think it necessary to say anything to the Commissioned Officers, nor
do I suppose that it is to any of the Warrant excepting some of the
Mechanics. If you think that either of th,: letters will have a tendency
to make the situation of the Officers and Crew more uncomfortable,
you may use your own discretion respecting the delivery, but I suspect they will not have a bad effect. Let me know precisely how you
are all treated, what distinction they make, and what they allow you.
Did they plunder your Watches - and take the money and other
articles from your Pockets? I want to know particulars. Has any
of your Officers lost a Gold Watch with three or four hands one of
which is broken? Tell L! Porter I found his Sword & Belt in bad
hands, and shall take care of it for him. Write me if you know anything of the T'essel or people which I captured off Tripoly the 23rd
December. I believe from circumstances that not only the Tripoline
Soldiers but the Turkish captain of this Vessel was active in boarding
the Philadelphia and plundering the Officers Give me a11 the information you can respecting the situation of the T . P. Pcrliaps in May or
June you may see the Squadron off the Port or perhaps hear of us
sooner. Keep up a good heart and for God's sake do not despair.
Your situation is bad indeed but I hope ere long, it will be better.
Rest assured my dear friend that every exertion of mine shall be made
to lighten your captivity and to release you. I have sent you a suit
of cloths to the care of the English Consul The othrr articles arc seat,
to the care of the Danish Consul You must write to me by the r e t b
of this vessel which has my passport, and let me know what to send
you. I regret that you have not sooner recd the articles which I now
send you. they have bern put up and ordered over more than a month
but owing to the neglect of Mr Pulis, they have remained here. Write
to Mr Higgins for any thing you may want, and he will send it you If
I am not here to do it myself - He will bc the person with whom in
future I shall entrust my letters &ca to be sent to you. -- I have written
to the British Consul and desired him to render you assistance. Sir

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

335

Alex' Ball assures me that he will write to the same effect. You will
receive by this conveyance many letters & news papers from your
friends
Adieu for the present with esteem & respect Dear Sir
Your Obedt Servt
PREBLE
(Signed) EDWARD
P. S. As the Vessel which brings you this is English, you had
better send all the letters excepting particular ones to the English
Consul to forward to this place EP. [LC. EPP, LB, Dec. 1803-April 1804.1
To Captain Edward Preble, U. 6. Navy, from Sir Alexander John Ball, British Civil
Commissioner, Malta and Gozo

MALTA,1Yt@ Januay 1804
SIR, I am honored with your Letter of the 16'"stant
in answer to
mine of the 24t@ulto by which you are pleased to accede to my request
of being permitted to bring from Tripoli One thousand Bullocks which
had been purchased for the silpply of this Island previous to the notification being received of your having declared that port in a state of
Blockade.
I beg, Sir, to express my high sense of the terms in which this permission is conveyed, and to add that I am well persuaded of its being
no less the wish of Great Britain than of the United States that the
present friendship and good understanding may long continue to
subsist between the two Governments.
[LC. EPP, Vol. 9, Jan.-Feb. 1804.1

[IT January 18041
To Robert R. Livingston, U. S. Minister to Paris, France, from Charles Maurice de
Talleyrand-PBrigord, French Minister of Exterior Relations

COPY
The Alinister for Foreign Affairs has the honor to transmit to Mr
Livingston the letter he addresses to the French Commissary a t Tripoly in Barbary [15 January]. He sends it him in secret to the end that
he may give it due attention. He desires that this measure dictated
by the First Consul towards the United States may hare all the
effect which they can hope for, and that it may contribute to the
advantage of those Americans retained in Tripoly
I have the honor to renew to hl' Livingston the assurance of
esteem. [LC. EPP, LB, Dec. 1803-April 1804.1

117 January 18041
To Robert R. Livingston, U. S. Minister to Paris, France, from Charles Maurice de
Talleyrand-PBrigord, French Minister of Exterior Relations

SIR, The moment the First Consul returned, I laid before him the
letter you did me the honor to write me dated the ll* instant. He
was much hurt a t the loss the United States have experienced in the
roads of Tripoly. He has not examined whether (according to your
Excellency's remark) it particularly regards the States he Governs that
Peace should reign between the Regencies of Africa and the United

States: but although himself is engaged in a War that the ambition
and disloyalty of our enemies has rendered inevitable and necessary,
that which the United States have to support has more than once
excited his solicitude. His greatest pleasure would be, to be able to
effect or preserve the blessings of Peace in all civilized parts of the World
He holds a sincere attachment to the people & Government of America,
depending on a just return on their part. In short, his natural feelings excite compassion for the misfortune of your Country Men,
whom destiny and not want of Courage has deprived of their liberty,
but not of honor.
With these sentiments Sir, he has requested me to order the Commissary General of the Republic of Tripoly to put all in order, to
alleviate the situation of the American Prisoners and even obtain their
deliverance; a t the same time he will make known to the Bashaw the
ardent desire of the First Consul that a Peace solid and advantageous
to both parties map shortly put an end to the E a r which divides them.
May these means be attended with full success! The reason to hope
they map not be fruitless, is the good understanding and friendship
existing between the French Government and the Pacha Dey of
Tripoly, and the disposition and sentiments on which the First Consul has ever prided himself. As I suppose your Excellency intends
writing to the Commander of the Forces off Tripoly, I shall have the
honor of addressing the Instructions for the French Commissary to
him, to be formmled
I beg your Excellency to accept my best Consideration
(Signed) Ch: MAUTALLEYRAND
[LC. EPP, LB, Dec. 1803-April 1804.1
To Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Navy, from Robert R . Livingston, U. S. Minister
to Paris, France

PARIS17th January 1804.
SIR,Upon receiving advice of the Misfortune that had happened
to the Philadelphia, and a desire to render every possible aid to my
unfortunate fellow Citizens that were captured in her, induced me to
make immediate application to the first Consul for his aid in procuring
their relief; and his mediation in bringing about a Peace. He r e d
my application in the most friendly manner, as will appear by his
answer to my note [2 Janua 1, which with the note are enclosed for
your perusal. The Minister ns written on the subject in the strongest terms to the French Commissary a t Tripoly. recommending that
he may use every endeavour to procure the release of the prisoners
and every effort to bring about a Peace that he declares to the Pacha
the interest the First Consul talies in the restoration of Harmony
between the two Nations. The regard he has for the United States,
and his hope that the friendship the Pacha professes for him, will
induce him to offer ternls of accomodation Thinking the subject
sufficiently important to merit your immediate attention. I have
directed M' Appleton to send a dispatch Vessel with i t immediate1
to you. You will see the instructions safely delivered to the Frenc
Commissary a t Tripoly You have probably some powers and instructions from the Government on the subject of Peace, if the Pachn
should be disposed for it, or if you have not, M' Lear certainly will
have Ample powers for the redemption of the prisoners, and the con-

I?

E

337

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

--

elusion of a Treaty. It will be proper therefore for you as soon as
possible, to send a ropy of this letter with the enclosures to MT Lear,
who will act thereon, as his prudence may suggest. The business
being out of my department and being wholly uninformed as to the
wishes of our Govt all I can do is to procure for you the aid and support of this Court in whatever Mr Lear and you may concert and I
doubt not that the Consul's recommendation will have much weight.
I shall feel myself extremely happy if with that aid you can effectuate
anything for our brave but unfortunate fellow Citizens. I hope that
you will be so obliging as to give me the earliest and fullest information relative to your operations, as it may contribute to advance the
objects you have in view, as well as enable me to communicate earlier
intelligence to our Government that you may havc the means of doing
[LC. EPP, LB, Dec. 1803-April 1804.1
To Secretary of the Xavy from Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Navy

UNITEDSTATESSCHOONER
Vixen
Afulta Harbour January 17th 1804.
SIR, I have the honor to inform you that I came here in the Vixen
the 13tQInstant from Syracuse, where I left the Constitution making
some necessary repairs on the Bowsprit and overhauling and refitting
Rigging Q c V h e Bowsprit recd some damage in a heavy Gale of
Kind off Tripoly last month, but I shall make it do with what repairs
our Carpenters can give it. I think it will be well to send out a Spare
Bowsprit, and the necessary wood for a lower Mast as neither can
be rocured here and in the e v e ~ of
t losing either I should be obliged
to Lave this station and go to Toulon to replace it, which would to
me be a grievous and mortifj-ing circumstance. The co[a st of Tripoly is estremely dangerous a t this season of the year but could not
avoid paying it a visit, and on the morning of the 23'c Vlto I captured
a vessel in sight of Tripoly u-hich left that port in the K g h t bound to
Bengaza. She mas under Turkish colours,. and Kavigated by Turks
and Greeks, but had on board two Tripollne Officers of distinction,
a son of one of the Officers a number of Tripoline Soldiers, and 42
Black Men and Women Slaves belonging to the Bashaw and his
Subjects, and a small sum of about 1000 dollars in money, Tripoline
p p e r t y . M y object in coming over here was to attend to the Transation of the papers, to look out for some good Boats for light cruisers
and to forward some necessary supplies to our unfortunate Country
Men.
If I find on the translation of the papers that the Vessel is Turliish
property I shall release her together with all the people claimed by
the Captsin Viz. An Officer of the Captain Pacha three Turks and
seven Greeks the remainder amounting to about Sixty Tripdines
and Slaves belonging to the Bashaw and his Subjects I shag keep as
I'risoners
I have written to the Bashaw proposing an Exchange,
and hope this Capture will enable me to release some of our Country
Men, or a t any rate it will afford us considerable advantage in ally
negotiation for a ransom or peace. I have had indirect proposals
from the Bashaw for a peace. He is willing to restore the Frigate
Philadelphia if we will give him a Schooner and and he will give up
our Officers and Men for five hundred Doll. each. I believe that,
on these terms he would make peace but he demands an annual

1

338

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1805 TO 1804

stipend for keeping it, such as the Sweeds and Danes pay him amounting to [space] doll: pr Annum payable in [space] This we never ought
to accede to, as it would stimulate the avarice of the other Barbary
Powers and probably induce them to make K a r upon us. I am taking measures to procure two Mortar Boats, and three or four Gun
Boats, and hope as soon as the season becomes favorable to make
War upon Tripoly in a way that will lessen the Bashaw's demands. He seems already to be convinred that he has sometlling
to dread, or he u-ould not propose acceptingone hundred and f i f t ~
Thousand Doll: for what not long since he expected to receive Three
Millions. I shall return to Syracuse in three or four days, and shall
forward three setts of Dispatches hy diffr conveyances detailing all
the transactions of the Squadron since the 14tWecember, the day
on which the Nautilus sailed from Syracuse for Gibraltar with my
dispatches up to that date, by her I forwarded three setts of Dispatches and one set by the Traveller Store Ship, with all the particulars
of the loss of the Philadelphia and other occurrences. I gave one
set in charge of hl' Gadson who was directed to proceed to the United
States with them by the first Vessel fromGibraltar, one set directed
to Mr Gavino to forward to Cadiz to >.I:Yznardy, to forward by the
first Vessel from that Port, and two setts to hi! Gavino who was to
forward them by different conveyances. Of course it is hardly possible
but some of them must have reached you. I shall however briefly
stnte that in chace of a Tripoline she [E'hilarlelphia]ran on the rocks off
Tripoly the 1st h-ovember; that most of her Guns were thrown over
board; her Fore Mast cut away, and other measures adopted for
lightening her to endeavour to get her off but without effect, and
that after an attack of about 4 hours by the Gun Boats, she surrendered, and all the Oficers and Crew amounting to 307 Men were
made prisoners.
The Civil and Military Government of this Island have represented
to me by letters that a number of Bullocks u7ere purchased by them
at. Tripoly, and paid for previous to my declaring it in a stnte of Blockade, and requesting permission to bring their property out of that
Country, in consequence of which I have allou-ed them until the last
of February to bring them away stipulating however that the Vessels
should bring no other property away, and that they should proceed to
Tripoly in Ballast I hope you will approve of this indulgence, as the
season of the year is such, that i t is not prudent to keep so near the
Coast as to enable us closely to Blockade it. After February has
expired I shall be able t o cruise near the Coast, and no farther indulgence shall be granted to any Kation. The peculiar situation of this
property I hope will justify my acceding to the request
The Nautilus has not yet returned from Gibraltar. The S y e n returned to Syracuse the week before last from Algiers where she carried
the Mopey &c* from Leghorn. She has refitted her Rigging and to
improve her sailing her Main Mast has been removed farther aft. I
shall send her immediately on a cruise off Cape Bon, and to look into
Tunis occasionally to receive any interesting intelligence Dr Davis
may have to communicate The Enterprize returned to Syracuse the
29th Ulto from a cruise off Tripoly since which Lt Decatur has requested a survey on her, stating that her hull is in tco weak and
decayed a state to proceed to Sea in the Winter season I according1
ordered a survey by Ll Commandant Smith Ls Command' steward:

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

339

Lf Dent, and two Carpenters who reported her rotten, and not sea
worthy for winter cruising of course she must lay by until the month
of April, this leaves me only the Syren and two Schooners as the Argus
has returned to Gibraltar after having convoyed Vessels to Leghorn,
and she must remain a t Gib! until relieved, which I hope will be soon
as she is the best Vessel in our service for cruising in these seas. She
sails wonderfully fast, has been tried with the Syren, and sails more
than a third faster and will certainly outsail the Vixen as much.
K e are much in want of an agent both here and a t Syracuse. Our
Consul Mr Pulis does not speak a word of English he speaks Maltese,
l
for an Agent to
and Italian, but still he may answer for C o ~ s u but
procure Articles wanted for the Squadron, negotiate Bills, &c%e will
not do. K e can have no communication but by a Linguist. he is
very inattentive to our concerns. I beg leave to recommend TTilliam
Higgins Esqr a Merchant in this place of respectability and influence,
attentive and attached to ourInterests and concerns, for an Agent here;
and George Dyson Esqr a hlerch' at Syracuse for our Agent there.
He is a Gentleman of respectability is very attentive, and is the only
person in the place proper for the appointment. I am under the
necessity of employing those two Gentlemen until I can li110w the
pleasure of the President J hope you will please to recommend them,
for I assure you we cannot have better Agents. I am induced to
recommend them from patriotic motives only.
The Bashaw of Tripoly's brother who is his declared Enemx is now
a t Alexandria, and has all t,he Arabs & a number of Mamelukes a t his
command, and wishes to march to the siege of Tripoly, but is destitute
of Money, Powder, or Field Artillery-. His consul has been with me
this morning for assistance. He wants 50 Barrels of Powder Six
Brass 4 & 6 Pounders and Eighty or Ninety thousand Dollars This
he thinks with our assistance by sea would put him in possession of
Tripoly ; and I am very certain that it would in less than two months.
He offers perpetual Peace as soon as he is in possession of the Government, to give us hostages &- if we chuse, allow us to hold the principal
Fort a t the entrance of the Harbour, or in fact to allow us to make our
own terms to release our Country Men, and all Christian Slaves in the
regency I wish earlier notice had been taken of this man and his
views. In fact I am astonished that the first or second Squadron did
not oblige the Bashaw of Tripoly to sign any treaty they pleased. I
hare less force than either with ten times the force to contend with.
The Tripolines by May will have 19 Gun Boats and unless we have
Boats to fight them in their own way we shall not be likely to succeed.
If you will allow me to expend One hundred Thousand Dollars in
such additional Naval force as I think proper, I will take Tripoly or
perish in the attempt. I am confident that i t may easily be destroyed
or talien in the summer with Gun Br. Mortar Boats protected by our
Cruisers.
N. B. I cannot but observe that the Officers of the C i d & Military
dept of this place have been extremely attentive to me, and have given
every assurance of being friendly disposed towards the United States.
Admiral Bickerton called on me this morning to assure me that the
conduct of Captains Gore and Sutton in giving protection to our
deserters met his disapprobation and that he had no doubt but Lord
Neilson would order them to be delivered up. That in future no such

340

NAVAL OPERATiONS FBOM 1803 TO 1804

thing would happen promissing me a t the same time, every assistance
that their ports offered.
[LC.

EPP, LB, Dec. 1803-April 3804.1

To Tobias Lear, U. S. Consul General, Algiers, from Captain Edward Prebie,
U. S. Navy

UXITEDSTATESSCHOONER
T;ixen
Malta Harbor, 1 7 t V a n r 1804
DEARSIR, I was honored with your esteem7d favor by the Siren,
and most sincerely deplore the loss of the Philadelphia and its attendant consequences - it was to me an unexpected & mortifying
circumstance, but we must make the best of it I h a r e not get, had i t in my power to send a boat on shore a t
Tripoli on account of the severe w-eather I met witb near that CO:LY~.
On the 23" December in sight of Tripoli, T captured a Vessel [the
iklastico, renamed the Intrepid] under Turkish Colours from that
Port only a few hours out, bound t o Bengnza: she had on board two
T r i p o l i e Officers of Distinction, a number of Tripoline Soldiers, 30
Young black Tl'ornen, and 12 black Boys, some belonging to the
Bashaw, and some to Tripoline Merchants, and some of the Officers
side arms &c+captured in the Philadelphia
The prize is now in Syracuse where I have establislied my head
quarters: I came here yesterday in the Vixen to have the papers 01 the
prize translated, and to forward some necessary supplies to Cnptnin
Bainbridge his Officers and Crew I hope this capture will enable me to effect the release of some of
our Countrymen as I have proposed an Exchnnge - I shall write
you as soon as I know the result of my proposition to the Bashaw. 8&all by the next opportunity send you copies of my letters.
I t will not do to be too anxious for the ransom of our friends, as the
Bashaws demands will undoubtedly be too exorbitant to meet the
Concurrence of otr r Government 1am taking measures to lcssen his pretentions as soon as the weather
becomes favorable to our Operations and hope to convince him, that
it will be for his interest to make pence on reasonable t e r n s - I t
would be imprudent in me a t present to make known to you b~ letter
m j plans, I dial1 e're long send a Vessel to Algiers. you wdl then
have all the information I can give you Make my best respects to Mrg Lear. and believe me with sentiments of Esteem, and the highest respect Dear Sir,
P. S. Make my respectful] regards to Mr Obrien and tell him 1
received his letter by the Siren, and shall write him by the Vessel, I
intend sending to Algiers
[Stephen Decatur Col.1

To George Davis. U. S Charge d'Affaires. Tunis. from Captain Edward Preble,
U. S. Navy

MALTA17th January 1804
SIR I enclose you a lrtter for Col Lear which I bcg you to forward
as soon as possible; this is tthc first opportunity I have had of writing
you since my amival in these Seas. I cnme here yesterday in the
Schooner Vizen from Syracuse (where I have estnblished my head

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

341

quarters and general rendezvous) for the purpose of sending some
necessaries to Tripoly for the comfort of our unfortunate Countrymen; and to get some Arabic Papers translated which I found on board
a Vessel that I captured in sight of Tripoly the 23rd Ulto. The Vessel alluded to, was from Tripoly bound to Bengaza undrr Turk's
colours, and had on board two Tripoline Officers of distinction, the
son of one of the Officers, a number of Tripoline Soldirrs, 30 Black
Women and 12 Black Men, which were intended to be sent to Coustantinoplc from Bengaza for sale If the Vessel proves to be Turkish property, I shall release her, together with all the people which the
Captain claims; Viz an Officer of the Captain Pacha, 3 Turkish Sailors
& Seven Greeks; the others hc acknowlrdges are Tripolines does not
claim them. The whole number of Tripolines on board, is between
60 & 70 and I trust this capture will release some of our Countrymen,
or afford us a considerable advantage in any negotiation with the Bashaw. As you are acquainted with all the circumstances of the
loss of the Philadelphia, and arc well able to judge of the consequences,
I am making preparations for tlie commencement of a vigorous campaign in the Spring
I t will afford me pleasure to hear from you often and to co-operate
with you in every measure for the good of our Country, and be assured
I shall lose no opportunity of giving you all the information in my
power. I shall ere long, send a Vessel to Tunis, and shall write you
more pnrticularly respecting my views. The uncertainty of a letter
reaching you excepting by one of our own Vessels forbids an u[n]restraincd comrnunica tion. Write me under cover to Nr Killiam Higgins of this place Merch! or to the Consul h i r Puiis ,4 few days since
I re@ a pacliet from you directed to Commr: Morris enclosing a letter
from the Bey of Tunis, some letters respecting M' Cathcart and papers
respecting the prize captured by the Enterprize, the whole of which I
shall forward to the U S immediately.
J A K U A R Y lSth The translation of t h papers
~
of the Vessel I captured
of?' Tripoly is finished, and 1 find that one of the Officers on board is
a chouish of the Bashaw's who was ordered to present 20 of the Negroes on board to the Captain Pachn on his arrival a t Constnntinople
from Bengaza where he was going to take on board two hundred firkins of Butter, and some other property.
[LC. EPP, LB, Dec. 1803-April 1804.)

117 January 18041
Concerning the Polacre Paulina

The declaration of Daniel Charles Heath, acting lieutenant in the
navy of the United States, and late prize-master on board the
polacre Paulina, captured by Lieutenant Commandant Sterrett,
under the order of Commodore hforris, of the American
squadron in the Mediterranean, taken on oath before the
Committee of Claims, on the 31st January, A. D. 1804, viz
That the deponent was on board the Enterprise a t the time of the
capture of the said polacre P a d i n a , which took place off the island
of Malta; that thc prize was carried into the port of Vallette by Lieutenant Lswrcnce, who afterwards returned on board the Enterp.prise,
and the charge of the polacre was committed to the deponent, as
prize-master, on or about the 19th January, A. D. 1803. That on

342
--

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROlM 1805 TO 180.4

the 29th of the same month, David Valenzin, and several other persons
captured on board the polacre, were put on board the Enterprise,
and sent to Tunis, as the deponent was informed; that the deponent
received orders from Lieutenant Commandant Sterrett, approved by
Commodore Morris, then a t Tunis, to deliver to the Bey of Tunis,
or his order, the greater part of the cargo of the polacre, as particularized in the said order. The residue of the cargo, which was said to
belong to David Valenzin, the deponent sold by the order of Commodore Morris. The sales were completed by the 9th June, 1803; the
gross amount of which being $2,665 70 reduced to American currency,
may be seen by the accounts of Joseph Pulis, Esq., American consul
a t Malta, and Mr. William Higgens, who had the management of
the sales of said cargo, and whose accounts of the sales are now before
the Committee of Claims; and the nett proceeds, after deducting some
charges and expenses, amount to two thousand one hundred and fortyfour dollars and eleven cents. From which sum the deponent paid
to Commodore Morris (as per receipt) five doubloons, and the balance,
estimated a t two thousand and sixty-four dollars and eleven cents,
was by the deponent deposited, with the approbation of the Secretary
of the Navy, in the bank of discount and deposite in this city, on the
17th December, 1803; that as the deponent was leaving this city, he
left his papers relative to the disposal of the cargo of the polacre Paulina
with Mr. Goldsborough, clerk in the Navy Department.
The raisins, figs, and cheese, which Mr. Pulis had the management
of the sale of, were in a perished and perishing state.
The part of the cargo that Mr. Higgens had the management of
the sale of, which was perished and in a perishing state, is particularized in a certificate given by Mr. George Pierce and Llr. Lure, which
the committee have an opportunity of seeing.
The deponent further saith that the proportion of Valenzin's
property in a perished and perishing condition was but small, not
exceeding, perhaps, four hundred dollars in value.
DAXIELC. HEATH.
Sworn before me,
JOHN
C. SMITH,Chairman.
[For further details regarding this capture attention is invited to pp. 292-296,
American State Papers, Claims.]
[Am. State Papers, Claims.]

To Eon. John C. Smith, United States Congress, from Secretary of the Navy

NAVYD E P M ~
Jany 17, 1804 -

I have recd your letter of the 5t? inst I concur in opinion with the Committee of claims that some tempo-

rary provision ought to be made by government lor David Vnlenzin;
but I have not the power, consistently, to make any provision for
him. [NDA. Cong. LB, 1798-1811.1

343

W A R S WITH BARBARY POWERS

117 January 18041
To Charles Pinckney, U. S. Minister to Madrid, Spain, from Secretary of State

Apr1l21" 1804
SIR, I have the honor to inclose the report of the Committee of
claims to the House of Representatives and an Act of Congress
respecting David Valenzin, a principal owner of the cargo of the
Polacre P a d i n a , Cap$ Rndich, captured in January 1803 by Cap!
Sterritt of the United States schooner Enterprize wllich has beep a
subject of complaint by the Imperial Minister a t Madrid. The are
transmitted to you together with the inclosed documents from Fommodore Morris with a view to explain the particulars of the capture
and subsequent proceedings in relation to the pretended prize. These
are certainly marked with irregularities, which doubtless proceeded
more from mistaken conceptions of duty than from a disposition to
oppress the captured. I n the mean time. i t is hardly susceptible of a
question that Valenzin was a subject of Tripoli and as such his property liable to condemnation. I t is understood that no actual blockade
of Tripoli existed a t the time of capture, and theretore that, the vessel
was not forfeitnl~lebut entitled to freight. That the capture was
lawlul and justifiable is not doubtea, but what is to be regretted is the
misapprehension which induced the captors to expect an adjudication
a t Malta or Gibraltar and finally to send the papers and owner of part
of the cargo to the United States without the property. You may
therefore signify to the Iniperial Minister that the United States
having a particular interest in respecting and seeing respected the
neutral flag cannot but disnpprorc of whatever has happened in
derogation of its rights in this particular instance; that their Courts
of justice being distinguished for a liberal regard to the rights of
foreigners it is to be expected that the Imperial subjects will receive
adequate compensation for the wrongs comnlitted, on making a
proper application accompnnied with the necessary proofs; but that
if any peculinr circumstances should render the judicial remedy less
applicable or extensi~ethan may satisfy the claims of ample justice,
the Legislature will doubtless listen to their complaint with the same
favorable disposition by which they were led to pass the Act in
Valenzin's case.

*

[NA. SDA.

*

*

*

*

*

*

Dip. Cor., Inst. to Mixi., Vol. 6, Oct. 1801-May 1808.)

117 January 18041
To Secretary of the Navy from Captain Richard V. Morris, U. S. Navy

Uhshingdon April 10. 1804 COPY
SIR, The Imperial Polacre Paulina was captured by Lieut Sterett.
The particular circumstances relative to the capture and detention
of that Vessel, are as follows - on the lgtQof January 1803, he captured and brought into the Harbour of Malta the Imperial Polacre
Paulina, Lucca Radish Master; she was bound from Malta to the
Port of Tripoli laden with merchandize the property of Tripolitans,
and having the Subjects of the Bnshaw of Tripoli on board, one of

344

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1803 TO 1804

which was the principal of the Charter Party and Claimant of the
principal part of the Cargo. Lucca Radish, Master of said Polacre
took this cargo on board a t Malta well knowing the situation of
Tripoli with t.he United States. The Master of the Vessel that
brought this Cargo from Smyrna refused to proceed to Tripoli and
others were solicited to take it on board; none would venture but
Lucca Radish. Mr Pulis was ordered to obtain t,he oath of a Master
of a Merchant Vessel there who had refused to take the Cargo on
board "that he had refused to take i t on board because it was to be
carried to a blockaded port". I solicited Sir Alexander Ball Governor
of Malta to direct a Trial on the said Polacre. He assured me i t was
not in his power; the only alternative was to endeavour to have the
Validity of Capture investigated a t Gibraltar and ior that purpose
carried the papers first discovered, with Lucca Radish and the Boatswain, to answer the necessary Interrogatories, and that he might be
satisfied no illegal advantages were intended to be taken of him. His
Royal Highness the Duke of Kent then Governor of Gibraltar did not
think proper to let the Court of Admira!t4y take Cognizance of the
Affair. I was then compelled to send the papers with the Tripolitans
to America; it was also my intention to have sent Lucca Radish to
the United States if he would not consent to relinquish all claims to
freight and demurrage which I was induced to believe he was not
entitled to. This offer made by M' S t a e t t to him and the Imperial
Consul a t Gibraltar at my request and in my presence. I sent Lieu'
Sterett with the papers and vouchers found on board of her and a t
the same time, I sent by Caps Barron my correspondence with Sir
Alex! Ball and the Imperial Consul a t Malta on the subject of the
Capture. My principal object in sending M r Sterett to the United
States was that a full and perfect report might be made to the Secretary of the Navy relative to the capture and detention of that vessel.
On the 1" July hearing that Lucca Radish was a t Malta, I wrote hl'
Pulis a letter specifying the particular Terms upon which he would
be justified in giving Lucca Radish the possession of the Polacre; of
which letter the enclosed is a Copy. Those terms were complied
with and Lucca Radish took possession of that vessel. I know of no
irregularities that, may have taken place in relation to that vessel, and
consequently can say nothing on that subject. I do not recollect
any other offers having bean made to Radish concerning that vessel
except those already stated. Rg V. MORRIS[NA. SDA.

Misc. L., Jan.-July 1804.1
[Enclosure]

[17 January 18041
To Joseph Pulis, U. 6. Consul, Malta, from Captain Richard V. Morris, U. 6. Navy

UNITEDSTATESFRIGATE
New York
2Clalta. Harbour 1" f July 1803
SIR, I have to request that you will acquaint Lucca Radish master
of the Imperial Polacre Paulina t,hat I have instructed you to offer to
put him in immediate possession of said Polacre provided be will
conjointly with you have the Polacre Valued and he Radish leave a
security for the payment of the said sum she may be valued at, should
she be condemned in America by a regular Court established for the

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

345

purpose of taking cognizance of vessels circumstanced as she is - if
he should refuse to acquiesce to this proposition you will please to
inform him that in order to avoid a waste of property by decay and
otherwise to which Vessels are exposed by so long laying up as t,o gain
intelligence from the United States you are authorised to sell the
Polacre Paukina at Public Sale and hold the amount of her proceeds
until a decision takes place and if favorable to Lucca Radish, you
will be instructed to remit the money to him or his Order, you will
please to make the representation immediately and request an
answer Signed. K. V. MORRIS
To JOSEPH
PAULIS
Esq
U S. Conaul, Malta
[NA. SDA.

hlisc. L., Jan.-July 1804.1

[17 January 18041
To Secretary of the Navy from Captain Richard V. Morris, U. S. Navy

Hon. ROBERT
SMITH.
On the 15th January, 1803, Lieutenant Sterrett received the enclosed orders to cruise. On the 17th he boarded and brought in for
trial the imperial polacre brig, bound from Malta to Tripoli, laden
with merchandise, the property of Tripolines, and having on board the
subjects of the Bashaw of Tripoli, one of whom was the principal of
the charter-party and claimant of the principal part of the cargo.
Lucca Radishjz, the master of the said brig, took this cargo in a t the
port of hialta, well knowing the relative situation of Tripoli with the
United States. The master of the vessel that brought this cargo from
Smyrna refused to proceed to Tripoli, and others were solicited to take
it on board. None would venture but Lucca Radishjz. hlr. Pulis
was ordered to take the oath of a master of a merchant ship to that
effect. I solicited Sir Alexander Ball to grant a trial on the said
polacre. He assured me that it was not in his power. My ordy alternative was to endeavor to have the validity of the capture investigated
at Gibraltar; and for that purpose carried the papers first discovered,
with Lucca Radishjz, the master, and the boatswain, to answer the
necessary interrogations, and that he might be satisfied that there
were no illegal advantages taken of him. His Royal Highness the
Duke of Kent, then the Governor of Gibraltar, did not think proper
to let the court of admiralty take cognizance of the affair. I was then
compelled to send the papers, with the Tripolines, to America. I t
was also my intention to have sent Lucca Radishjz to the United
States, if he would not consent to relin uish all claims to freight and
demurrage, which I was induced to be ieve he was not entitled to.
This offer Mr. Sterrett made him, at my request. He absconded from
the United States' ship Chesapeake, and refused the offer made to him
and the imperial consul at Gibraltar. My correspondence with Sir
Alexander Ball was perfectly satisfactory respecting the distance the
polacre was taken from the land. Mr. Heath was prize-master, and
can give every information of the pretended insult made to the imperial
flag, and the treatment of the crew. The petitioner, David Valenzin,
is the person alluded to as being the principal in the charterand
a subject of the Bashaw of Tripoli. Both can be proved %arty,
y papers

P

which were discovered on board the vessel detained by Lieutenant
Sterrett, and were put in his possession when he left the Mediterranean,
in the Chesapeake frigate, for America. The contract of the charterparty was in the name of Lucca Radishjz, the master of the imperial
brig, on the one part, and David Valenzin on the other part, as principal owner of the cargo. As a proof that David Valenzin is a subject
of Tripoli, a regular attested certificate from the British consul to that
effect was discovered among the secreted papers; and, as a further
proof, Mr. Cathcart h e w him in Tripoli as a broker, and his father as
a merchant in the city of Tripoli, and always considered him a Tripoline. His servant has also declared him a Tripoline, as well as himself.
RICHARD
V. MORRIS.
[Am. State Papers, Claims.]
To George Harrison, Navy Agent and Superintendent of Navy Yard, Philadelphia,
Pa., from Secretary of the Navy

NAV.D E P ~
Jan? 18. 1804
I am desirous of engaging a ship carpenter and constructor to superintend the repairs of the public ships a t this place and perform such
other duties in the line of his profession as may be required of him I have therefore to request that you will make enqui and ascertab
whether a suitable person can be procured in Philade phia or not We require a man who unites science with practical information in his
profession to such an one we will allow a salary of 2000 D'r pr annumShould you succeed in finding a Gentleman of the requisite qualifications disposed to accept the appointment you will let me know it and
you may assure him of the probability of his being appointed There is no station in the gift of this Department of more importance
nor any which requires a greater extent of Science than the one we
are about to fill - I t becomes us therefore to have the most unequivocal assurances of fitness in all respects for the appointment before we
confer it -

7

[NDA. GLB, Vol. 7, 1803-1805.1
To Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Navy, from Captain William Bainbridge,
U. S. Navy

TRIPOLIBARBARY
18'h J a n u a y 1804
SIR, I have had the honor to address you several times since the
unfortunate loss of the United States Frigate Philadelphia, and twice
sent you aphers to enable us to communicate without danger from
detection; i t is near three months since the distressing event, and as
yet have not had the pleasure of hearing from vou, altho' anxiously
expecting it. I feel confident that you must have good reasons for
not communicating, for I cannot think that my unfortunate situation
has changed that regard which you professed; but situated as I am
you may naturally suppose the great desire I must have to hear
from the Commodore whom I had the honor of serving under, and
who is the proper Representative of my Country for me to address.
It is unnecessary for me to make a repetition of the late unfortunate
event, - suffice it to say that every day is an age until I can justify
my conduct before a Court Martial, where I do not in the least dread
the strictest examination.

347

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

The day after you appeared off here on the 23 ultQ,a Russian Vessel
with Turkish soldiers arrived from Smyrna; and a few days after a
Tripolitan Cruiser from Derne, with considerable money; and many
valuable presents for the Bashaw. About ten days since a Polacre
rigged ship of twelve guns went out a Cruising.
[See paragraphs 5, 6 and 7 of a letter to Tobias Lear dated 14 January 18041

*

*

*

*

*

*

*

I n my former letters I mentioned, when you appeared off here,
by hoisting a White Flag and firing o gun to call attention, and if
a White Flag in answer was hoisted by the Bashaw, you may send a
boat on shore with safety.
We have been much necessited for a Credit, - which difficulty is
removed by Mc Davis's, charge of Affairs, letters, by authorising my
drawing on him, but the exchange is 25 pr cent against us on Tunis,
which is the only place we can get money for: this great loss can only be
prevented by having money sent us from Malta.
In one of my letters I suggested the idea of destroying the Frigate
(which lies in the harbour); - I think it very practicable by sending
a few boats prepared with combustable to bum her; the Gun-boats
are hauled up, and was a Vessel only to make the Town of Tripoli about
sun-set so as to prevent her being seen from the shore, and then stand
in for the Town, her boats might get into the harbour unnoticed;
no person, or very few, ever stays on board the Frigate; and the Gunboats could not be launched before the service would be performed.
If it is attempted, it should be done this Winter, and the first night
that the vessel comes off, to take them unawares, for it could not
be effected when they were prepared; - the wind in the night is
generally off the land.
I hope soon to see you off here to nsk the demands of the Bashaw,
for the sooner thnt questior~is put, I concieve the better. If Consul
0,Brien could be prevailed on to come here to assist you in negotiating,
he would be very serviceable by speaking the language and knowing
tlle Customs of the Country.
Pray inform me what advance I am to make to the Officers. Fire of the Crew have turned Turks, and two have died - our number
is a t present three hundred.
I beg the favor of your sending us American News papers when
opportunity offers.
[LC. EPP, Vol. 9, Jan.-Feb. 1804.1
To John Gavino, U. S. Consul, Gibraltar, from Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Navy

MALTAJanwl y 1 8 t h 1804

DEARSIR,I recQpour letter of the 12th Ulto a t Syracuse Via Palermo

The cargo of the Traz~ellerwas delivered aereeable to Bill of Lading
and I hope ere this you have receired my Dispatches by the Nautilus
and Traveller. I thank you for the information your letter contains,
and shall profit by it.
My reception here by the K a q - Department as well as the Civil
and Military is rather more flattering than a t Gibraltar although I
cannot but highly esteem your Governor Sir Thomas Trigg and
Others and beg you to make my respects to him, General Barnet and
Col. T res - Col: Lear and famdy were well a short time since.
I am p eased to hear tho Essex is soon to be out, and expect the Con-

f

348

N A V A L OPERATIONS FROM 1805 TO 1804

gress & Boston will r e v soon follow. I find o u r friend Mr H i g i n s
the man I should wish for an Agent here. I have employed him as
such, and you will govern yourself accordingly notwithstanding any
thing I may hare written you heretofore. However you will consign
all the Stores that may arrive for the Squadron under my command
to Syracuse to George Dyson Esqr Merchant whom I have appointed
Agent for the Squadron of the U S in these Seas Your correspondence
udl a t dl times afford me pleasure The Nautilus sailed from Syracuse
for Gibraltar the 14'b Llto with my Dispatches, and the particulars
I am momently expecting her
of the loss of the Philadelphia &c"
return.
P. S. You will please attend to forward the letters which nccompany this, as they are of importance. On the 23'4 blto off Tripoly
I captured n Vessel with some of the Bashaw's Principal Officers, a
all upwards of sixty
number of Soldiers, 30 young Women &c"n
persons.
[LC. EPP, LB, Dec. 1803-April 1801.1
To William Kirkpatrick, U. S. Consul, Malaga, Spain, from Lieutenant Isaac Hull,
U. S. Navy

UNITEDSTATES
BRIGArgus

Gibralter Bay 18q Jan? 1804
SIR,I have the pleasure to congratulate YOU on ?-our return to :-our
house in Tou-n, and the restoration of health a t Mainea, and am
happy to learn that Tour family has escaped the dreadful calamity
that has so long threatened t h t place. You no doubt have heard of the Capture of the Frigate Philadelphia
by the Tripolians, and all the mortif;ving and unpleasant circumstances
attending it. I have no news to send you, as there has not been any late arrivals,
either from England or America. - I have however seen the arrival
of Cap$ Rodgers a t Washington in a Baltimore Paper, but not one
word has yet made its appearance about Commodore Morris. The Nautilus Captain Somers sailed last Evening for Syracuse,
but has nothing new for the Commodore. The Argus is now ready for Sea, and will sail in two or three days
for Tangier, and from thence to Cadiz, where I intend to remain eight
or ten days, in the course of which time, I am in hopes the communication from this to Malaga wdl be open, as I intend paring jou a
Visit on my return from Cndiz. - Should you have anv Commands
from Cadiz to your place, you will please write me, and rest assured
they shall be attended to. [NDA. Isase Hull LB, 1803-1804.)

[ I 8 January 18041
To Tobias Lear, U. S. Consul General, Algiers, from Charles Pinckney, U. 6.
Minister to Madrid, Spain

(Copy)

(Duplicate)

"DEARSIR, "I[n] pursuance of what I wrote you, I spoke to the
"French Ambassador here, and the English & Danish Minist.ers,
"to write to their Consuls or Agents a t Tripoly to use their best
"endeavours to have our unfortunate Countrymen's situation allevi-

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

349

"ated as much as possible. and to get them the best treatment in their
61
power. I am hopeful their influence will do much to soften their
"sufferings. I mentioned to the French & English Ambassador &
"Minister to authorize their Consuls to aid the exertions I knew you
"would make to have them Fa-nishecl u-ith money for clothes and
"necessaries, and I w@reimburse their expenditures here as far as two
"or three Thousand dollars. That I had no authority to say any"thing on the question of Ransom, as 1 do not know the course our
''Gov! means to pursue on this subject, but that this expenditure was
"solely to render their situation a little more comfortable, and in aid
"of your exertions. That I was not authorized even to do this, as
"the Barbary affairs were more particularly committed to you &
"Commodore Preble's management; but in the case of so many of our
"brave Countrymen suffering as they are in the public service, I was
"sure our Govl wg approve u-hat I had done. Please let me hear from
mention what I have
"you, and when you write Capt-ainbridge
"done, and please do the same to the Secretary of State. * * * *
"January
1804
"In MADRID."
-

"I have not the pleasure to know Capt-ainbridge,
or yourself
'(personally; but I beg you to assure him, and be conrinced yourself,
"that anything I can do here t.o serve him and his fellow sufferers,
"will be done, and that you & they may command me in anything
"which may appear useful in this, or any other business.
"I beg sometime to hear fronr you through our Consul at Alicant,
"on our Barbary Affairs." [NA. SDA.

CL, Algiers, Val. 7, Part 1, Jan. 1804-Nov. 1805.1

Extract from journal of U. S. Brig Argus. Lieutenant Isaac Hull,U. S. Navy, commanding, Wednesday, 18 January 1804

This day begins with moderate and light airs from the Eastward at
a t 11
unmoored Weighed and stood out of the bay [of Gibraltar] [En route to Tangier] Lowered the Jolly boat down to board an
American bound in lay by for the boat, the Vessel prored to be t,he
Brig American Eagle from boston bound to Trieste made sail to the
Westward 10 AM got the Top Gallant Yards across and bent the sails

[NDA photostat.]

Extract from journal of U. S. Brig Argus. Lieutenant Isaac Hull, U. S. Navy, commanding, Thursday, 19 January 1804

These 24 hours Commence with moderate Breezes and Clear a t 2

P M Europa point bore E 54 N 3 leagues at.4 brought too in Tangier
bay the town bearing W $4 N diste 5 miles moored, the Starboard
Anchor N, E, and larboard Anchor S. E, in 14 fm* Sandy bottom
found here the british frigate Dianna sent the Jolly boat with an
Officer on Shore at 6 the boat returned [NDA photostat.]

350

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1803 TO 1804
To Secretary of the Navy from Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Navy

MALTA
January 20tQ1804.
SIR I have recd further proposals indirectly from the Bashaw He
appears to be willing to give me as many of our Officers & Men as I
have Tripolines in exchange. For the remainder I suspect he is
willing to take 400 dollars for each, and make Peace without any
considerations or annual Stipend or Tribute, and give us the Frigate
for a Schooner. These terms will be thought favorable by the United
States. I shall send a vessel to Col: Lear to consult him, and in the
mean time take the necessary steps for lessening the Bashaw's expectations. You may rely with confidence that no exertions on my
part shall be wanting to retrieve our National Naval character which
has suffered considerably in this part of the World.
I dare not make an unrestrained communication of the objects
which I have immediately in view for fear of a miscarriage of my
letters.
[LC. EPP, LB, Dec. 1803-Spril 1804.1
Extract from journal of U. S. Brig Argu~. Lieutenant Isaac Hull, U. S. Navy,
commanding, Friday, 20 Jamary 1804

[Moored in Tangier Bay] These 24 hours Commence with light
airs from the Westward and Cloudy Weather a t Meridian unmoored
weighed and made sail
[NDA photostat.]
Extract from Diary of Captain Edward Preble. U. S. Navy, Commodore of U. 6.
Squadron in the Melterranean, Friday, 20 January 1804

[Malta] The Vixen taking on board the stores left by the Philadelphia, Stores sent up from Gibraltar and Stores purchased for the
use of the Squadron - Dined with General Oakcs the Commander
in chief of the army, the principal part of tlie field and Staff of the
Army, and the Captains of the Kavy were present Our Consul has
not yet presented me with the translation of some of the Prizes papers
altho' he promised them some days Since [LC. EPP, Diary, 1803-1804.1
To Captain Daniel Carmick, U. S. Marine Corps, from Secretary of the Navy

NAVDEP
21 J a n ? 1804

SIR YOUwill proceed immediately in the brig Superior, with the
detachment of Marines under your command, to Kew Orleans - on
your arrival there you will report yourself to the officer commanding
the army a t that place, under whose orders you are to act The Contractor for the army in that quarter will supply your
detachment with rations - agreeably to the enclosed copy of a letter
from the Secretary of War to the commanding officer - Mr Allme
will leave this in a few days for Fort Pitt - from whence he will
proceed with money for the use of the detachment, to New Orleans He will act as Pay Master of the detachment - & receive from this
Department particular instructions relative to the supplies that may
be required by the detachment.
[NDA. Misc. LB, 18023-4.1

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

351

Extract from Diary of Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Navy, Commodore of U. S.
Squadron in the Mediterranean, Saturday, 21 January 1804

IMalta] Received the Translation of some of the prizes papers
which clearly prove the property on board to be Tripoline: Conversed
with the Governor and Admiral respecting the Deserters detained
by Capta Gore & Sutton: The Admiral disapproved the Conduct
of the Captain and promised to make a representation to Lord Nelson;
who, he had assured me he had no doubt, would order the men returned
and that no conduct of the same nature should again take place I likeu-isc recieved indirect proposals for a peace with Tripoly - .
[LC. EPP, Diary, 1803-1804.1
Extract from log book kept by Sailing Master Nathaniel Haraden, U. S. Navy,
on board U. S. Frlgate Constitution. Saturday, 21 January 1804

Moderate Breezes & clear weather. At Anchor in Saragosa
Employed rattling & tarring d o n the rigging. Towards evening the
weather became overcast and had the appearance of a gale from the
southd; cleared hawse & bitted a range of the sheet cable. At 7 in
the evening the weather cleared up. Employed cleaning ship.
departed thls life John Sloan Seaman: his body was put into a boat,
carried out to sea & committed to the deep - Towards noon the
weather cleared away The Ships company cmployed scraping the
studding sail booms $ fleeting the back stays - Surgeons report
Thirty sick, 13 convmP & 1 dead. At Noon calm The Constitution
a t 8 A. M. hoisted a Jack as a signal for the guard.
[LC. EPP, Log Conslilulion. 1803-1804.1
To William Higgins, appointed U. S. Navy Agent, Malta, from Captain Edward
Preble, U. S. Navy

MALTA
Jan? 22d 1804
SIR I do hereby appoint you agent for the Squadron of the United
States in the Mediterranean under my Commnnd, Authorizing you
to recieve the supplies forwarded from the U. S. for the use of Said
Squadron, To purchase such as may be wanted, and to issue the
same and to transact all such business as is generally transacted by
Agents. You will a t all times supply the Ships & Vessells of the
Squadron with such articles as they may ?ant on. the requisitions of
their respective Commanders taking duplicate rec~eptsfor the same:
From the representations I have made to the N ~ v ydepartment I
have no doubt but the President of the U. S. Will confirm you as
naval Agent for this Place.
(Signed) EDWARD
PREBLE
W" HIGGINS
Esq:
Hereby appointed Naval agent
of the U. S. a t Malta.
[Similar appointment sent to George Dyson of Syracuse, 27 January 1804.1
[LC. EPP, Order Book, May 1803-June 1805.1

352

hTAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1805 TO 1804
[22 January 18041

To Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Navy, from the Agent of Bnmet Caramanli,
lawful Bashnw of Tripoli

May it PLEASE
YOUREXCELLENCY
your Excellency will be Pleased to excuse me for Pointing out the
impossibility of reducing Tripoli next Summer, unless you send for the
Bashaw of Derna by landing him there or at Bengaza where he will
be joined by his friends and ready to Cooperate with Your Excellency
when ever news arive from America, Should he remain three or four
months where he is untill the answer arive and then to send for him
it will take three Months more, then there would only be a few weeks
of good wether for reducing Tripoli
but should your Excellency be Pleased to take mp advice to send
one of your Vessels for him now and land him Either a t Derna or
Bengaza he u-odd then be ready to Cooperate with your Escellency
when ever the news arives from America, in that case 1 will go with
some of his freinds in the Vessel who will furnish the money untill the
answer arive, as delay may be dissagreable and unfortunate to America
and to my Prince also
BUSUTTIL
SALVATORE

Console di Sidi Ahmet Caramalli
given at MALTA
Jany. 22-804
[LC. EPP, Vol. 9, Jan.-Feb. 1804.1
Extract from journal of U. S. Brig Argus, Lieutenant Isaac Hull, U. S. Navy,
commanding, Sunday, 22 January 1804

These 24 hours Commence with Moderate Breezes at hleridian
unmoored weighed and made all sail to the Westward a t )i past 2
set studding sails on the larbd side forward alow and aloft at 4
Europa point bore E 5: N dist" leagues Cabritta point E % N 2
leagues town of Terriffa E b N )h N distc about 4 miles Cape Spartel
W S W 3 Leagues 2 Sail in sight one of the two sail fired a shot over
us backed the main Top sail and lay too for her at j: past 7 spoke his
Britannic Majestys frigate Madstone Sounded Constantly during
the night at 6 Cadiz light house bore N E b N a t 10 sent the Jolly
boat to a fishing boat for a pilot she returned with one Mustered
the people Variously Employed
[NDA photostat.]
Extract from log book of U. S. Frigate Constitution. Captain Edward Preble, U. 6.
Navy, commanding, Sunday, 22 January 1804

at anchor in Saragosa Syren and Enterprize in Company, the ships
Company Employd overhawling the Rigging and cleansing ship We
had plesant weather through the night. at 9 in the morning the Syren
hoisted the Signal for the port guard. the Ships Company Employ"
as necessaT, and Restowing the spare Rower anchor. the Trepoletian
prize continues in Quarantine Shee is dayly supplf with water and
provission from the Constitution,
[NA.

N D original.]

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

353

To Captain William Bainbridge, U. S. Navy, from Captain Edward Preble, U. S.
Navy

MALTAJan? 23,1804
DEARSIR YOUwill receive a present supply of money from here
through The British Consul B MFDonogh Esqr forwarded by Mr
Higgins
Any letters for me you will direct to the care of William Higgins
Esqr whom I have appointed Agent a t this port for the Squadron of
the U S in these seas, & I am confident that he will pa.y you every
attention. The clothing and other stores which ought to have been
- . six weeks since, were detained by h P Pulis and for what
with you
reason 1 know not.
Your drafts on Mr Higgins will be duly honored, keep up your spirits
and despair not, recollect there's a sweet Little cherub that sits up
aloft.
May the Almighty disposer of all events aid me in m plans and
operations for the good of my Country and may you be tberated by
them is the hope of your friend who esteems you
[LC. EPP, Vol. 9,Jan.-Feb. 1804.1
To Captain William Bainbridge, U. S. Navy, from James Leander Cathcart, Leghorn

LEGHORN
2Fd of Jan? 1804.
SIR,On receipt of Mr Nissen's letter of the 2" of Kovemr 1803,

COPY

informing me of the loss of the United States Frigate the Philadelphia
under your command, I immediately forwarded a credit to Mr Kissen
for $4000 with orders to draw upon Mr Frederick Degen of Knples
or myself for the ammount, provided hlr William Higgins of Malta
did not forward to him three thousand dollars in cash he hating
receiv'd my orders to thnt effect. In six weeks will be finish'd & ready to embark, wearing appare!
for the crew as pr the enclosed invoice & for the Officers I shall send
such articles as will serve their present nccessitps, which t h ~ ycan
have made in Tripoli to their own liking much better than I cnn suit
them by making them here, should Comodore Prebble be upon your
coast I request you to inform him that it will be necessary for one of
the small vessels to come to Leghorn for the above cloathing as nothing
is permited to be embark'd from this place for Malta except in vessels
of War, from Malta, the[y] can be sent to Tripoli under a neutral flag
or landed under the sanction of a Flag of truce which ever the Comodore may conceive most expedient. The cash for which I hare forwarded a credit you will (in conjunction with Mr Kissen) please to h8.x-e &stributed to the Officers
& crew from time to time until government makes provision for them,
as I have no orders whatever on that subject & forward these supplies
of my own accord from motives of humanity not doubting but theb]
will be of infinite service to the Unfortunate sufferers, who may depend
that I will do every thing in my power to alleviate their sufferings
consistant with the honor of our nation & dignity of our flag. The deplorable event of losing the Philadelphia & captivity of her
Officers & crew envolves incalculable consequences and changes our
position not only with Tripoli but the whole of the Barbary States;
~t is reported here that a treaty has been enter'd into between the
United States & the Regency of Tripoli in consequence of the former

354

NAVAL OPERATIONS

FROM

1803 TO 1804

promising to pap the latter the sum of 450,000 dollars, & a considerable annuity, which I presume is false, as none of our Officers in this
sea has power delegated to them to such extent, & i t is not very
probable that they would commit themselves by making unauthorized agreements which they must be sensible would envolve such
national consequences, that government would never ratify them;
what ever may be the intentions of government the idea that the
United States will ever conclude a peace with Tripoli upon dishonorable terms ought to be treated with contempt, this is the only
means to induce the Bashaw to moderate his terms & to prevent the
other Regencys from breaking with us; I have been eleven years in
captivitp myself & yet I solemnly declare that before I would see my
Country obliged to accede to all the impositions which will be the
consequence of concluding a precipitate peace with Tripoli that I
would suffer to undergo as long a captivity again & would glory in
my chains. It is likewise reported that the Moors hare pot the Frigate off the
bank & are fit in^ her out for sea. if true (which I doubt verv much)
I think their is lprobability that ~ o m o d o r ePrebble will Fivk e good
acct of her if he should be so fortunate as to encounter her out of gunshot of the Fortifications. Their has been so matiy reports circulated by the Jews of Barbary
& others relative to your misfortune; manifestly calculated to lessen
our importance as a nation Bt sully our maratirne reputation, that I
conceive it necessary to contradict them in the most pointed manner;
as soon as I am inform'd of the particulars, which I request you to
communicate to me as soon as possible; with the number of liill'd $
wounded on both sides & such other minuti2 as will tend to counteract the malice of our enemies. I likewise request you to give me every information in your power
relative to the Bashaw's sentiments on this change of position, & what
are his pretensions in consequence thereof, & whether you suppose
the prisoners can be redeem'd independant of entering into Treaty
with him. Enclosed is a letter from our friend M' Anthony Dugan which I
believe encloses letters from home, I request you & your Officers to
make use of my services without reserve & to believe that while I
lament your unfortunate situation that I would take a singular
pleasure in alleviating your sufferings and making them as supportable
as possible. [LC. EPP, Vol. 9, Jan.-Feb. 1804.1
To William Higgins, U. S. Navy Agent, Malta, from Captain Edward Preble, U. S.
Navy

MALTA
January 22Ir+1804.
SIR, If the Vessel bound to Tripoly by which you have shipped the
clothing has not yet sailed, you will please to ship one thousand Dollars for account of the U S addressed to Captain Bainbridge for the
use of himself Officers and Crew, under such cover as you may deem
most proper for its safe arrival notifying him that i t was shipped by
my orders, and requesting duplicate receipts for the same.
[LC. EPP, LB, Dec. 1803-April 1804.1

355

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

Extract from journal of U. S. Brig Argus, Lieutenant Isaac Hull, U. S. Navy,
commanding, Monday, 23 January 1804

These 24 hours Commence with moderate Breezes and Clear Wg
all sail set by the wind a t 2 P, M, fired a Gun and hoisted a Sigi for
a pilot standing in for Cadiz bay a t 3 Shoaled to 9 fathoms Tacked
Ship a pilot boat came off and gave directions for entering the bay a t
past 5 brought too abreast the town of Cadiz in 43 fathoms the
tarboard anchor in the S. IT and moored with the larboard anchor
in the NE, the Northermost of the Porgues rocks a t the entrance of
the bay bearing N T + N the Pratique boat came alongside and ordered the Yellow flag to be hoisted, discharged the pilot a t 8 AM,
hoisted out the Bnrge Armourer emplop with his forge loosed sails
to dry -

B

[NDA photostat.]
Extract from log book kept by Sailing Master Nathaniel Earaden, U. S. Navy, on
board U. 6. Frigate Conslilulion, Monday, 23 January 1804

Moderate breezes &. clear weather At anchor at Saragosa Syren & Enterprize in company - Working up Junk - Cleaning
ship & fleeting the back stays - The carpenter & four of his crew on
shore repairing the small cutter & painting the hammocli cloaths A. M. light airs from the \Test$. Ships company em loyed restowing the sheet anchor & refitting the ridge ropes - e recieved
the cutter from shore which was sent to be repaired 30 days ago. The
Boat was repaired by the Ships carpenter The Surgeon reports 26 sick,
8 con^"^^ & 1 discharged At Noon light airs from the Southg -

d'

.

[LC. EPP, Log Conutztutton, ISO3-l SO4.1
To John Gavino, U. S. Consul, Gibraltar, from Secretary of the Navy

NAV.D E P A R ~
24@Jan? 1804
The Bet.y I.T7alk hns a cargo of provisions on board for the use of
our Squadron - Mr Bedinger will send you copy of the Charter
Party invoice and bill of lading - By the Charter Party you will
percieve she is to proceed to Syracuse or malta as may be adv~sedby
you - Your communications with Commodore Preble will enable you
to act with sound Judgement upon this point I have written to Lieu! Hull to convoy the Betslj F.ITalkto her place
of destination - As I have informed him I have given him this order
under the impression that it will not interfere with any Service
assigned to hlrn by Commodore Preble of Greater or equal importance - Should he be of opinion however that his orders from
Commodore Preble are of more consequence - than that of the
Squadron being certain of a supply of provisions he will advise with
you and convoy the Betsy Walk or not as may be determined upon
Such Consultation.
As this may be a subject of great importance I have no doubt that
you will bestow due attention to it - You and Lieu$ Hull will be
enabled to act more understandingly upon i t than I can possible do
a t this distmce - I have therefore committed it to your discretion.
[NDA.

GLR, Vol. 7, 1803-1805.1

356

NN4T7ALOPERATIOL%WFROM 1803 TO 1804

To Captain Niles Reddick, of the American ship Bdsy Woik. Norfoik, Va., from
Secretary of the Navy

EAVY
DEPARTNENT
Janwrg 2 4 f h 180.6
As soon as you are prepared for Sea you will weigh anchor and
proceed to Gibraltar where you will apply to John Gavino Esq. the
American Consul for further orders respecting the disposition of the
publie property committed to your Charge I enclose letters for Commodore Preble, Lieu5 Hull Commander of
the Argus and blr Gavino all which you will be pleased to deliver
(XDA. GLR, Vol. 7 , 1803-1805.j
To Lieutenant Isaac Enll, U. S. Navy, commanding U. S. Brig Argus.
from Secretary of the Navy

NAVYD E P N ~
Jan? 24, I804 The provision ship Betsy Walk is to touch a t Gibraltar and thence
proceed to Syracuse or Malta as may be directed by hl' Gavino.
You d l convoy her to her place of destination. This order I give you under the impression that it is of great consequence that the squadron be certain of a supply of provisions, and
that it will not interfere with any service assigned to you by Commodore Preble of greater or equal importance. Should I err in these
impressions you d l advise with h.1: Gavino nnd afford convoy or
not as you may determine upon such consultation.[NDA. LB, 1799-1807.1
To Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Navy, from Secretary of the Navy

N AY ~D E P ~Jan? 24. 1804 (By the Fl'oodrop Sims from h'orfolk - V"
)
I have received your letters of 234 October 1803 from Cadiz Bay,
and 9 November 1803 from Gibraltar Bny. By this time, I presume the Provision-ship TITilliam and Mary from

Korfolk, has reached ller destination. nmong other Articles she took
out butter, cheese, hiolnsses B- Candles. By another Provision Vessel the Betsy Wnlk, this letter will be
conveyed to SOU - She has on board, beef, pork, flour, suet, bread,
butter, rice, pease, vinegar, Molasses, cheese, cordage, and canvas of
X?. 1, 2 & 3 - probably about 1,200 ynrds of IS" I & 3, and about
2,200 ynrds of Pi? 2, which is all that we can conveniently send by
this opportunity. I have also ordered some twine not esceeding 500
Ibs which will be sent if the Agent can rowre it in time. I am rather surpri~edthat you shou d have made a requisition for
Slop-Clothing. All the pursers of your Squadron have been supplied
with sums of money for the purchase of slop clothing, &- I cannot
conceive to what they could have applied the sums advanced to them
for that purpose. However, by the John Adams, w e s h l l send you
an additional Supply of bread, beef, pork
& we will also send
some Slop-Clothing. The John Adams ns a transport ship nrmed en flute, will sail from
this country so as to arrive a t Syracuse about the last of April nest.
I
endeavour to provide nn active intelligent Commander for her.
Tl-e s h d send by her, Men for the Enterprize, & if we can procure

P

357

WARS WITH BARBARY PO WEBS

them, we shall also send by her 20 good able Seamen for the Constitution. V l e n the Crew of the Enterprize shall know that they are
shortly to be relieved, it is hoped they will be satisfied even if they
have to remain on board a short time longer then they entered for. I have ordered Lieu! Hull, (presuming that he is a t or near Gibraltar)
to convoy the Betsy U h l k to her place of destination. This order I
linve given him (and so stated i t to him) under the impression that
i t will [not] interfere wit11 auy service which you may have assigned
to him of greater or equal importance, and sl~ouldhe think that the
remaining in the neighbourhood of Gibraltar in the execution of your
orders, will be of greater or equal importance to the squadron being
certain of a supply of Provisions, he is directed to advise with M'
Gavino and convoy the Betsy I.I.'alk or not as may be determined upon
such consultation. I enrlose seven Mediterranean passes which you will distribute
among the Vessels of your squndron, giving to each Commander,
one. I hope they will answer the purpose contemplnted by you. The report which you have made of your officers, afl'ords me great
satisfaction. I t appears that the conduct of Lieu! Livingston has
presented an exception to that general correct demeanour observed
by his Brother Ofhcers. I regret his appointment. I t is our duty to
rid the service of such OBcers; the course you inteud to pursue towards
h i is therefore correct and proper. [NDA. LB, 1799-1807.1
To Lieutenant Colonel Commandant W~Uiam W. Burrows, U. S. Marine Corps,
from First Lieutenant John Johnson, U. S. Marine Corps

U. S. BRIGArgus

Cadiz d..$@Jany 1804

DEARSIR

*

*

*

*

*

*

*

T e e have No Xews hear but what you hare hcard before now,
If: G a ~ i n oa few days ago told Ale that 100 & 40 of the Crew of the
YhilaQad petitioned, Lord Kelson, to Claim them as British Subjects, his Answer was, if he done any thing in the Business, i t would
be to have the Rasccls all hung - wee have Just hcard from
Tripoly - the Officers are well treated but Closely Confined to the
House - the Men are a t hard labour, - the Commodore & all the
Squadren esept us in, is now off Tripoly
[MCA. LR, 1804.1
[24 January 18041
Clothing for U. S. Prisoners in Tripoli

Invoice of Wearing apparel a making for the American prisoners
a t Tripoli in Barbary which are to be finish'd in six weeks from the
date hereof. Hats - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 300
600 pair
Shoes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Cloth Jackets & trowsers-- - - - -- - 300 - Those Articles for
the Seamen.
Russia duck d Q- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 300 Shirts. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
600 Hnndkerchicfs if to be procured-- 300 -

I

358

N A V A L OPERATIONS FROM 1803 TO 1804

A Credit for 4000 dollars has already been forwarded for the use of
the Officers & crew, to be distributed at the discretion of Mr Nissen
& Cape Bainbridge and Wearing apparel to the ammount of one
thousand dollars for the use of the Officers will be purchased & sent
by the vessel that takes the seamens cloathing to Tripoli. JAMES
LEA^ CATHCART
Janp ,%'dt@1804. LEGHORN
[LC. EPP, Vol. 9, Jan.-Feb. 1804.1
Extract from Memorandum Book of Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Navy, on board
U. S. Brig Vixen. 24 January 1804

sailed for Syracuse and arrived new day.
Constitution.]

[Rejoined U. S. Frigate

[LC, original.]

[25 January 18041
To Levett Harris, U. S. Consul General, St. Petersburg, Russia, from the Grand
Chancellor of the Empire of Russia
(Translation of the Original in French)

SIR I made known to the Emperor the note you addressed to me
under date of the 30. of this month, by which you solicit our intercession near the Ottoman Port in behalf of the Crew of one of the
Ships of War of the United States of America that have been made
prisoners by the Pirates of Tripoli.
I t is with great pleasure I announce to you that His Imperial
Majesty, guided by the most favorable dispositions for your Government, has given me orders to direct his Minister at Constantinople
to make the strongest representations to the Turkish Court, in order
that a Firman be dispatched to the Bey of Tripoli to liberate not
only the Crew, but the Vessel itself.
These orders Sir will be expedited to Constantinople by the &st
Courier, and I have not a doubt that the re resentations which
will in consequence be made by our Minister
d'ltalinsky, will
have their full effect.
I t is extremely agreeable to me to add to this information the most
positive assurance, that the Emperor peculiarly gratified in according
this mark of his interest for the United States, will not be less so,
on all occasions wherein He may be able to give them new proofs of
it, and of which, it is His Majestys desire that you expressly acquaint
your Gwernment.
Signed S. ALEXANDER
Count de Worontzoff [or U'oronzow]
S. PETERSBURG
25. Jany. 1804

hr

[See letter under 7 February 1804.1
[LC. EPP, Vol. 9, Jan.-Feb. 1804.1

Extract from journal of U. S. Brig Argus. Lieutenant Isaac Hull, U. S. Navy,
commanding, Wednesday, 25 January 1804

Moored in Cadiz Bay. This day begins with a Severe gale from
the Westward with heavy rain an American Brig got on Shore on
entering the bay sent the barge and Jolly boat to her assistance the
boats returned on her geting off hoisted in the barge and run the
Jolly boat up [NDA photostat.]

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

359

Extract from Diary of Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Navy, Commodore of U. S.
Squadron in the Mediterranean, Wednesday, 25 January 1804

Light breezes from the S E and pIeasant weather. At 2 P. M.
spoke the English Ship Industry from Zant bound to Liverpool with
an American Ship and English Brig in Company from the same Port
bound to London. At 5 P. M. out all sweeps to pull round Cape
Passari - At 9 P. M. doubled the Cape and stood to the Northward
for Syracuse - At 11 A. M. anchored in that Harbor and rejoined
the Constitution - The Syren, Vixen & Enterprize in Company.
[LC. EPP, Diary, 1803-1804.1
--

Extract from log book kept by Sailing Master Nathaniel Haraden, U. S. Navy,
on board U. S. Frigate Constitution. Wednesday, 25 January 1804

Moderate Breezes & clear weather - At anchor a t Sartlgosa Syren & Enterprize in company - Painting ship & pointing the straps
of the leading blocks - Hecieved fresh mutton & Vegetables for the

ships company - Moderate breezes from the westq during the night,
At 11 A. M. the U. S. Schooner Vixen returned from Malta
Commodore Preble rejoined the Constitution Painting Ship and completing the rigging - The cutter watering - Kecieved 14 casks of Water. At Noon winds from the
West!' - .
[LC. EPP, Log Conslilut~on,1803-1804.1

-

Extract from journal of Midshipman F. Cornelius deKrafft, U. S. Navy, in U. S.
Brig Siren of 18 guns, Lieutenant Charles Stewart, U. 8. Navy, commanding,
Wednesday, 25 January 1804

[Syracuse] At past Meridian the U. S. Schooner Vixen anchor'd
here from Malta with the Commodore on board. At >;
past Meri:
the Commodore hoisted his broad Pendant on board the Constitution.
At 5 r e d 1 cask of water, ends with light airs from the westward &
clear weather [NDA.]
To Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Navy, from George Davis, U. S. Charge d'bffaires,
Tunis

AMERICAN
CONSULAR
HOUSE
Tunis January 26tQ1804.
SIR, I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your favour,
of the 12") of No+ 1803. under cover, from Consul Lear, a t Algiers and agreeable to Your order, have officially communicated to the Gorernmcnt of Tunis, as well as to the Consuls of Neutral Powers resident here, the Bloclcade of Tripoly, by the U. States Ships of war
under Your command.
I presume, that my communications since the gth of September
1803, to the address of Commodore R* V Morris, have necessarily
been received; and consequently that You are fully acquainted with
the subjects, on which I have waited a reply, .u-ith much Impatience to wit, the return of tile Tunisian property, captured on board an
Imperial [Paulina],if st111 in our possession - and an answer, to the
Ictter which I forwarded from His Excellency the Bey of Tunis, who
is particularly tenacious, of that attention, which he imagines due him

360

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1805 TO 1804

from all Christian Governments, and who daily becomes more impatient for a reply. - I have the honor to enclose You a Copy of the
original, which was forwarded on the 16tb Septr to the care of Messr"
Degan and Purviance & C? Leghorn.
It is more than six weeks, since I have received any advice from
Tripoly - My last from Capt. Bainbridge, mentioned that he &
Officers, had been taken from the Consular house & confined for one
day with the men; he receives from me all the assistance, which my
linuted means admit of - Our Mcn must suffer for want of Cloathing - perhaps, from the Squadron under Your command a Sufficient
quantity might be spared for our fellow SufFerers a t Tripoly, - As 1
shall be compell'd to pay an extravagant price for any thing of the
kind purchased here.
I beg to learn, what port, may be considered Your General Rendezvous, in order that I may know where to address You; should any
pressing necessity, require Your immediate attention
GEORGE
DAVIS[Surgeon, U. 8. Navy]

-

[Stephen Decatur Col.1

To Secretary of the Navy from Lieutenant Isaac Hull, U. S. Navy

UNITED
STATESBRIGArgus
Cadiz Bay Janualr~L P h 1804
SIR I have the honor to inform you that I arrived at Gibralter on
the 4tQInst from Leghorn, where I had been ordered by Commodore
Preble, for the purpose of Couvoying an American Ship and Schooner,
and to return with such Vessels, as were at that port ready for sea,
and wished the benefit of Convoy down,
After performing a short Quarantine a t Gibralter, and taking on
board what provisions, Water, and other stores, was Necessary I sailed
on the 18'@ for Tangier, where I arrived after a passage of four hours,
and am happy to inform you, that every thing remains peaceable at
that place, and that nothing has happened worth hotice, since
Commodore Preble left this Station,
The Emperors ships are all dismantled, and laid up a t Sallee, and
Larash, and no attempt has been made, to Equip any of them for sea,
in the absence of the Squadron.
I remained one night in Tangier, and sailed with an intent to go
direct to Cadiz, but t,he uind Shifting sudden to the Westward, and
the Weather being very bad, was obliged to return to Gibralter, and
wait a fair wind, on the 22"g the wind being from the Eastward, got
under way and run through the Straight, and Arrived here the following Evemng, where I shall rernaiu eight or ten days, and return back
into the Straights, calling a t Tangier in my R a y ,
I shall endavour to Keep as ood a look out on this station, as the
very bad Weather, and hard ga es of wind, I esperience here will allow
me, and Keep you advised of all my Proceedings,

B

[P;DA.

Officers LB, 1802-1805.1

To Lieutenant Isaac Hull,U. S. Navy, commanding U. 8. Brig Argru, from John
Gavino, 0.6. Consul, Gibraltar

GIBRALTER
&Bth Jan? 1804
DEARSIR,This moment is arrived a Victualler from Norfolk with a
Cargo of Provisions for the Squadron to be discharged here or for-

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

361

warded to Malta, and consigned there a t my option - tha Captain is
to wait four days for my orders - the Cargo is insured to this place
and Malta a t 9 pr Cent, to return 4 if the Voyage ends here, and 2 if
the Ship Sails and continues with convoy from Gibralter. - As I do
not apprehend any danger, will order her to proceed, Yet I wish you
had been here, the Gun Carriages for the Emperor were shipt when the
Accounts of War got to America, and they are to come forward, and
the Vessel is to touch a t L'Orient, with dispatches, so that I have my
I have no Letters by her for you, we
apprehensions about them.
have dirty weather and not time for more. -

-

[NDA. Isaac Hull LB, 1803-1804.1
To Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Navy, from Lieutenant Charles Stewart, U. S. Navy

U. S. BRIGSiren HARBOUR
OF SYRACUSE
Jan? 26@1804

SIR Last night I received the accompanying communication from

Mr Baker; as one of the Charges contained in it, is of the most dangerous Nature and in direct Violation of the internal rules and regulations, for the safety and government of the Brig which I have the
honor to Command, I cannot in justice to the Service and respect to
my feelings, pass unnoticed such Contempt of my orders, that has
placed the lives of my Officers and Crcw for one moment in jeopardy
You will perceive by the accompanying regulations that the 36tQ
Article has been violated and the G t Q Article addressed to (the Master
particularly) has also been treated with Contempt and Neglect [See documents dated 27 January 1804.1
[LC. EPP, Vol. 9, Jan.-Feb. 1804.1

[27 January 18041
To the Bey of Tunis from President Thomas Jefferson

Thomas Jefferson President of the United States of America
To the Most Illustrious, and most
magnificent Prince, the Bey of Tunis.
GREATAND GOODFRIEND
I received in due time your letter of the 7th of September, repeating the request of a Frigate of 36 Guns with which on a former occasion I had informed you that circumstances did not permit us to
comply. I am under the necessity of stating, that. these circumstances contunue, and that our Naval force being only proportioned
to our exigencies, we cannot with Prudence lessen it, by parting
with any portion of it. I should regret much a misconception of
our Motives on this occasion. We set a just value on your friendship, as we do on that of all other Nations with which we have
intercourse; and as we presume those Kations do on ours. These
mutual friendships, and the interests arising out of them, are equivai m t s the one for the other, and authorize equal expectations, equal
claims, and rights on both sides. Of our disposition towards yourself in particular, we have not been wanting in Proofs, in addition to
the faithful fulfilment of our Treaty: nor shall we on proper occasions
fail to continue reasonable manifestations of them according to the
rules we observe in our intercourse with Nations

362

NAVAL OPERATIOhTS FROM 1803 TO 1804

Such being our regard for you, it is with peculiar concern I learn
from your letter of September 14 that Mr Cathcart, whom I had
chosen to succeed the place of hJr Eaton near you, and chosen from a
confidence in his integrity, experience, and good dispositions, has so
conducted himself as to incur your displeasure I n doing this, be
assured, he has gone against the letter and spirit of his instructions,
which were, that his deportment should be such, as to make [merit?]
my esteem and respect for your character, both persona1 and Public
and to cultivate your friendship by all the attentions and services he
could render. So soon as he went out of this line, he was out of the
line of his duty, and his acts are disclaimed as in opposition to his
orders. On his return to the United States, he will be made sensible
how far in this he departed from the intentions of his employers. The
consideration that the bands of Peace between Nations ought not to
be burst asunder by the hasty and unauthorised acts of a Public Agent
was worthy of your wisdom and Justice; and the acquiescence in the
transaction of our affairs by Mr Davis until an Agent could be sent
with formal authorities manifested a desire of maintaining a good
understanding, which being reciprocal is auspicious to our Peace. I n
selecting another character to take the place of Mr Cathcart, I shall
take care to fix on one who, I hope will better fulfil the duties of
respect and esteem for you; and who, in so doing only, will be the
faithful representative and organ of my earnest desire that the Peace
and friendship so happily subsisting between our countries may be
firm and permanent, and I pray God, Great and good Friend that he
may have you under his holy keeping.
Done a t the City of Washington in the
United States of America, this twenty sct-enth day of
January, One thousand Eight hundred and four
(Signed) TH: JEFFERSON
By the President

JAMES
MADISON
[LC. EPP, LB, Dec. 1803-April 1804.1

Sec?' of State

To Lieutenant Charles Stewart, U. S. Navy, from Purser Nathan Baker, U. S. Navy

On board SLOOPOF WARSiren
Syracuse Jan? 27'Q 1804 SIR Delicacy has hitherto prevented me from making known to
you the following circumstances, conceiring however that I ought no
longer to observe any delicacy towards the parties concerned in this
unjustifiable conduct, I now proceed to relate to you as follows Vizt
1" On our passage from Leghorn to Algiers, on or about the first
of December a t Midnight - the Spirit room was opened by Lieu!
Maxwell & M' Harrison, & some rum pumped out of a Puncheon I lay awake in my Cot, during the whole of this transaction. Thinking it probable that the parties concerned, would mcntion to
me the next morning, the quantity they had taken out, I waited
until1 the ensuing evening - but as neither of them said any thing
on the subject - I then asked Mr Maxwell how much had been taken
out - he appear'd somewhat surprised, observing that lie thought
M: Harrison had given me an account thereof - to which M' H -

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

363

replied he had not, Mr Maxwell then acknowledged they had taken
out a Quart 2*iy I n pursuance of your directions, soon after we left Leghorn,
I presented the Shipping Articles to Wm Kelly, a Seaman taken on
board a t Gibralter, for his Signature - which after reading to him,
and informing him that I was directed to furnish him with such
Cloaths as he wanted, he was about to sign - when Mr Harrison
they laying in his Birth observed to Kelly, that he was a damned
fool if he signed the Articles without receiving the same Advance in
Cash, that had been paid to the Men in Philad? upon hearing this
observation from the Sailing-Master, Kelly put down the pen, &
said he would not sign the Articles.
3 Q P Whilst the Brig was a t anchor off New Castle & I was on
shore - Mr Maxwell found a Key on board which suited the Lock
on my Store Room, & opened the same, being informed of this by
the Steward - I mentioned it to Mr Maxwell as soon as I went on
board, before Lieu; Caldwell & other Officers - obserring that I
should not have taken such a liberty with him - I do not relate this
as a thing of much consequence, but the slight acquaintance then
existing between Mr M - & myself did not sanction such a liberty I shall produce the Testimony of Lieu5 Howard, to establish the
foregoing charges, which 1now communicate from a sense of duty [LC. EPP, Vol. 9, Jan.-Feb. 1804.1

127 January 18041
Court of Enquiry into Conduct of Purser Nathan Baker, U. S. Navy

Statement of evidence appearing to the Court of enquiry held on
board the Syren Brig on the Official conduct of Mr Baker Purser of
the said Brig. The mRsT charge agt Mr Baker is that he had ordered a quart of rum
to be stopped from the daily allowance of the crew, & that this had
continued 20 days. Mr CALDWELL
states that he knew nothing of an order being given
to the Purser's Stewd to stop one quart of rum from the daily allowance
of the crew untill lately; that then Carter (the PQte) u-as called into
the cabin, in consequence of a report to that effect from severnl of the
Officers, & said he had stopped one qut of rum for twenty days by the
order of h4! Baker, which Mr Baker acknowledged.
QUES. DO you know whcther the measures were too great, so as
to cause a stoppage of thc daily allowance? ANS. I do know that the
gill measure was too great, or bore an over proportion to the other
measures on board.
Mr CALDWELL
further stated that there had been frequently a
deficiency in serving out grog without the cause being known - &
that Carter had stopped a quart & said Mr Baker enquired whether
that would be sufficient, to which Carter replied it would.
CHARLES
B. CARTERstates that he had orerdraum n $4 pint of rum
for three or four days on account of two men leaving the ship That
some time after this M? Balier ordered him to stop a qut a day from
the allownnce $ continue it untill further orders. He did so, untili
the people complained to Mr Harrison of tllcir grog being too weak, &
then he drew the full allowance, but with Mr Baker's knowledge; and
that i t was three weeks during which this stoppage continued.

364

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1805 TO 1804

QUES. Did you know of any inaccuracies in the measures? ANS.
The gill & half-pint overrun the gallon, or did'nt correspond with it.
after drawing the full allowance by the Gallon measure, I was often
obliged to get more rum out, to make up the deficiency of grog caused
by this difference in the measures.
QUES. Did 317 Baker state to you that this inaccuracv in the
measures was his reason for ordering the stoppage of one quart per
d a ~ ?ANS. He did not. QUES. Have you hnd any dispute with his Baker since you have
ANS. I hare. h
sailed ~ l t him?
QUES. What time was i t when you discovered the inaccuracies in
the measures? AN&I t was after the stoppage of a quart per day had
ceased - I tried the measures with each other, & found that the gill
5 p! did'nt correspond with the gnlIon, but all the other measures did.
QUES. When was i t that 115 Baker gave you the order to stop the
qur? A m . TWOor three dogs after lea~ingthe Capes of the Delaware, or the 3d or 4!? Septr
M: HARRISON
states that the C a p b f the Fore castle complained to
him that their grog was too weak; and that he had heard Mr Baker
acknowledge that he had ordered a qut to be stopped from the daily
allowance. JAMESKELSO(S~CW-*'~
Alate) says, that a quart pr day had been
stopped for a fortnight or longer, and that Carter said it was by hi'
Baker's order & in consequence of too much being drawn before.
QUES. Do you remember that it was necessary to get more rum up
in consequence of the grog not holding out? A m . Yes; I remember
it happened twice that we had to get more rum up; but I don't h o w
for what cause. C R STEWART
~
Presdt Court.

W.LEWIS J*e Adutv
SECOND
charge against Mr Baker; Viz. That he had charged the
E a r d room mess with 60 Ib. beef illegally. L I E CHOWARD
~
Says that a mess book was kept in the IT$ Room of
the provision drawn from the ship; that st one time there was n charge
of 60 lb of beef, which it appeared to him could not have possibly
been used. Some time afterwards in an altercation among the Of%cers of their mess, M! Baker said a barrel of beef had been opened for
the use of the u-ard-room, & that 50 or 60 Ib were missing out of it, &
that he concieved i t was hard he should loose i t ; urging this as a reason
for his charging the ward room mess with the above meat.
QUES. At what time did this altercation take place? ANS. I don't
remember certainly - but about the last of Sept or begining of Octob.
I believe.
QUES. HOWmuch do you think your mess was overcharged?
ANS. I think it was overcharged about 40 or 50 Ib. QUES. By whom was this charge made? ANS. M' Baker made the
charge & sent for the Ship's s t e d to prove the propriety of it a t the
time of the altercation aforesaid.
QUES. Did your mess draw your provision regularly, & in what
quantities generally? ANS. We drew our provision as we wanted it;
e
of the regular
and tbis charge of 60 Ib was an extra ~ h a r g independent
charges agt the mess.
QUES. Is this the A/C. (Nq 1) alluded to? A N S . I believe it is, to
the best of my remembrance.

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

365

QUES. 'ill10 drew provision for your mess, & by what authority was
it dmwn? ANS. It was drawn by the Boy, generally by the verbal
order of some one of the mess. CIXARLES
R. CARTERwas asked whether there was not a Barrel of
Beef kept open for the use of the W-QRoom, from which beef was taken
without its being weighed or any notice taken thereof. ANS. I know
nothing of R. Bar! of beef opened for that purpose or used in that way;
but I know of six pieces which were brought to the harness Tub a t
one time for the use of the Ward-room, & which weighed about 50 or
60 lb to the best of my knowledge. These pieces were not used by
the Ward-room, but served out to the crew.
QUES. Did you not weigh the remains of a barrel of beef by M:
Baker's direction, from which you had never used?
ANS. I did, but a m not certain as to the weight.
QUES. Did ou not hear Mr B ~ k e say
r he would deduct 50 1b from
what he had c ~arged? ANS. 1 did. JAMES
KELSOsays that he knew nothing of a barrel of beef kept open
for the use of the W room: but he knew of five pieces brought to the
harness Tub a t one time, for the use of the ward-room, u i t h a mark
on them.
QUES. DO you know whether they were used by the R-c' Room?
ANS. They were; I kept the key of the harness Tub, & they were used
sooner or later by the Ward-Room. JNQ
REEDYsaid he knew of a bar! of beef ordered to be kept for the
use of the W-Room by Mr Carter, before the arrival a t Gibraltar;
That to the best of his knowledge 30 or 40 lbs were used out of it, &
that the remainder was served out to the Crew by the order of the
Ship's Stew$.
QUES. T e r e these 30 or 40 lb drawn a t different times or together?
ANS. They were dmwn a t different times.
QUES. DO you know of five or six peices taken out of this barrel1 &:
sent to the harness Tub a t one time? ANS. I do, five or six peices
were taken out by the order of hIr Carter R- sent to the harness Tub.
Qn~sU
. h a t time elapsed between opening this B.1. Rr serving i t out
to the ships crew? ANS. I don't know certainly but I suppose about
a week or a fortnight. Mr HARRISON
says that a b.11. of beef was reserved for the use of
the Ward-room, but not being better than the other beef in the ship,
it was afterwards served out in common.
QUES. HOWmuch was used out of it, before i t was served out?
ANS. I can't say certainly, but I suppose about teu or twelve pounds.
Mr MAXWELL
states that Mr Baker presented an A/c. to the mess
wherein was R. chargeof 60 lb of beef. -4t the same time Mr B. acknowledged he did'nt think the mess could have used so much; but as the
b.11 was opened for their use as he understood, and there being a deficiency of 60 lb or more, he thought he ought not to loose it. After
some nltercation h4r B. agreed that 10 1b should be inserted instead of
60 lb. - Mr Maxwell further said he knew nothing of a b.ll of beef
reserved for the use of the Wq-Room until1 that night.
Doc$ MARSHALL
Said that some time in Octob. he was appointed
to settle the mess A/C. a statement of which was furnished by M r
Baker, in which was a charge of 60 lb. & several others a t yery short
dates interveening. Upon refering to the Mess, they all exclaimed
ngainst the exorbitancy of this charge of 60 lb. Mr Baker himself

7

366

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1803 TO 1804

acknowledged that they could not have used as much, but that a
considerable quantity had been lost out of a bar! which he understood
was opened for the mess, he thought they ought to bear the loss, as
he could'nt afford it himself. CHS.STEWARTPredJ Court
W. LEWIS J q e A d v !

A statement of facts arising out of the evidence produced to the
Court of enquiry on the Official conduct of M: Baker, Purser of
the Syren Brig. It appears, as to the FIRST charge, viz. That a quart of rum per
day had been stopped from the allowance of the crew for a considerable
time, by the order of ,llr Baker; that the fact is, some rum had been
stopped with the knodedge of Mr Baker, in order to make up for
an inaccuracy in the measures, too much rum having been previously
served out; but that no particular order had been given to stop any
specific quantity; the thing being left in a great measure to the discretion of the steward: And i t does not appear that Mr Baker's
object was to defraud the crew, or benefit himself; for by the returns
of provisions, the Rum has fallen short a considerable quantity 150 or 160 gallons. -4s to the 2Vd charge viz. That Mr Baker had charged the Wardroom mess uith 60 1b beef illegally: it is the fact that a Barrel of
beef had been opened for the use of the Ward-room, from which five
or six pieces, weighing 60 or 70 !b, were taken & used for the Wardroom Mess; and afterwards, when this beef was found to be of no
better quality than that used by the crew in common, the remainder
was served out by the ship's Steward; and therefore it appears that
the charge of 60 Ibs in Mr Baker's A/C. is correct.
C H ~STEWART
.
Presdt Court.
W. LEWIS JayeAdvte
[LC. EPP, Vol. 9, Jan.-Feb. 1804.1
To Lieutenant Charles Stewart, U. 5. Navy, from Captain Edward Preble,
U. S. Navy

U. S. SHIPConstitution SYRACUSE
HARBOR

J a n ? t r t Q1804
SIR, From the Statement of facts arising from the examination .of
the evidence produced a t the Court of Enquiry respecting the official
conduct of Mr Nathan Baker Purser of the U. S. Brig Syren, I concieve
that the charges brot against him by LC Maxwell and Doctor Marshall
t,o be without the least foundation and that they must have originated
from motives by no means honorable to those gentlemen: It is to
be regretted that the time and attention of a number of respectable
officers of the Squadron Should a t any time be taken up for the purpose
of investigating charges bro't against any gentleman from motives
of private picque: The conduct of M' Baker I conceive has been
very proper and that he has not intended to defraud either the Government of the United States, or the officers or crew of the Syren, but
that he has paid a laudable attention to his duty. You will therefore
take off the arrest and direct him to return to the duties of his office.

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

367

You are to direct this Order to be read on the Quarter deck publickly.
E D WPREBLE
~
To CHARLES
STEWART
Esqr
President of a Court o j Enquiry
Instituted for the purpose of investigating
the conduct o j M: BAKER
[LC. EPP, Order Book, May 1803-June 1805.1

[27 January 18041
Receipts for Turkish Yataghan

RECEIVED
March 29, 1803 of ITmEaton Esq: a Turkish Attagan,
or Sword, mounted in Gold, and set with valuable Jewels; for which
I hold myself accountable to the government of the UNITEDSTATES
OF AMERICA,
and for which I have signed duplicate receipts of this
tenor and date. Signed R QV. MORRIS.27 Jan? 1804 - Reed the above Attagan from the office of the
Secretary of the Navy of the United States, to be deposited in the
Office of the Secretary of State. Signed - JACOB
WAGNER
Ch Clk Dept State. [KDA.

Barbary PoKers LB, 1803-1808.1

To Secretaq of State from George W. Erving, U. 6. Consul, London, England

AMERICAN
CONSULATE
London - Jarwary t Y t Q 1804. SIR. I have had the honor to receire your circular letter of October
I s &u1it.h the remarks of the Comptroller of the Treasury respecting
- --sales
.
of. - American registered Vessels to which proper attention
the
sliall be paid. By my letter of Novr 10tQ(KP27) - I transmitted the Documents
required by yours of April 4@ and referred to in this last Circular. I have found the Powers vested in the Consuls by the late Acts and
Instructions extremely useful in preventing rarious irregularities both
in the Transfers of Vessels, and the treatment of Seamen, to render
their effect more complete by insuring the deposit of the Ships Papers
and preventing the possibility of any British Vessel using American
Papers, forged or otherwise obtained I have thought it expedient to
apply for a regulation to be made b this Government prohibiting
the Entry or Clearance of any Vessel c aiming to be American without
permission previously obtained from this Office; - I inclose my letter
to Mr Munroe upon this Subject; the application has been delayed
by unavoidable Circumstances there can be no doubt however
but that the Accommodation will be readily conceded. Tho a p e a t deal has been done to purify the ownership of American
Vessels perhaps something is yet necessary to accomplish this desirable Object and which Congress may hereafter see fit to regulate;
there is the best reason to believe that many Vessels under our Flag
are partly owned by Merchants in this City; I would suggest also
whether during the time of European War i t might not be desirable
to establish some Mode of verifying the character of the Car oes of
American Vessels, whether the Sea letter ought not to be de%vered

9

368

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1803 TO 180L

up on the termination of the single Voyage for which it is granted, or
a suitable endorsement made to prevent the possibility of its being
misapplied in the manner suggested in a former letter, whether the
Bills of Lading ought not in all Cases to be sworn to by the Shipper
before the Consul or Collector and made distinctly to express the
account for which the Vessel is freighted.
I am aware of the delicacy of t l m subject & the Objections which
must arise in favor of the carrying-Trade to such regulations, 'tho I
cannot conceive that the fair carrying trade woud in fact be injured;
but inasmuch as it might be in'ured the substnntial capital Trade of
our Country woud be strengt lened. I t has been strongly urged
against the establishment of the principle in the law of Nations that
"Xeutral Bottoms make free Cargoes" the great encouragement
which such a rule would offer to the carrying trade a t the espence of
the Capitd Trade of the United States; the Objection may be supposed to have more force as i t comes principally from a quarter where
interest u-oud seem to lead to an entension of ye carrying trade - If
then it was desirable to sacrifice a principle of Public Law for the
support of which some have thought the honor of every independent
Kation to be pledged, for the purpose of encouraging the Capital
Trade of our Country, it is to be hoped that no substantial Objections
can be made to such regulations as are calculated only to repress the
dishonest and irregular practices of the Carrying Trade; Perhaps the
only evil of regulations calculated to define the Bonn fide property
on board American Vessels, would be, the admission which they would
seem to make of the Right of Belligerents to seize Enemies property
on board Keutrul Vessels. I have been prompted to these remarks a t this moment by a Transaction which has lately fallen under my Observation and which I
took some pains to investigate. - The Owner of an American Vessel
lying in this port left a Power of Attorney with a London hierchant
enablmg him to freight, charter, or sell her: The hlerchant freighted
her with Goods for the Coast of South America, and put a Supercargo
on board who assumed the Character of an American Citizen, & who
was to appear to be the owner of the Cargo; the Supercargo had
served an apprenticeship in Boston, but it happened to my knowledge
was not a Citizen of the United States; they applied however for a
Certificate which I refused of course; he probably obtained a Document of some sort, for the Merchant was satisfied that he would
answer his purpose as an American: as I also knew that the Young
Man had neither Property or Credit sufficient to procure this Cargo
I questioned the Merchant upon this Subject, who candidly confessed
that the Cargo belonged to liimself and friends.
I was disposed therefore to retain the Ships Papers 'till I had compelled them to name in the Bills of lading the true account for which
the Property was shipped: Upon more mature consideration horn-ever
seeing that I had no specific Authority, I doubted of my controul
over the subject, and how far my view of it nught coincide with that
of Government; therefore concluded by only insisting that the Su ercargo shoud not be named an "American Citizen" in any Bil of
lading signed by the Master; this point was conceded and the Ship
Proceeded on her Voya,we. I have entered into this detail to shew the nature of the Trade
which may be carried on from hence to which I mean to apply the

1

r

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

369

observations respecting the Verification of Cargoes which I have
taken the liberty to submit - And have the honor to be
P S. The a n g e s and Cyrus American Vessels purchased in this
Port by William Moore of Nantucket on the 20tb of May 1802 and which sailed from this to Dunkirk have been taken engaged in
the Whale Fisher under French Colours by a British Letter of
Marque. - G W

E

[NA. SDA. CL, London, VoI. 9, Jan. 1804-July 1812.1
To Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Navy, from John Gavino, U. S. Consul,Gibraltar

GIBRALTAR
27 Jan? 1804
DEARSIR I m o t e you the 4@ UltQpr the Nautilus which now conk s & refers thereto; I paid the Dock Yard for the anchor supplied
her $179~69Yesterday arrived in 44 days from Norfolk the ship Will" & Mary
Era' H.Tipling Com' with a Cargo of Provisions for your squadron pk
note at foot. I wanted Cap; Triply to proceed to Syracuse wc? he
will not do, the Ship being Insured for this Place & Malta, as is said
Cargo; The Hon*ecP of the Kavy requests my unloading same here,
or Direct the Master to proceed to Malta as more Convenient for the
Squadron, the freight is to be paid in America. wherefor I have
orderd his going to Malta & Consign the stores to such Comr of our
State Vessels as may be there Br: in default to Consul PuIie who will
forward you this, & may give him your Directions on the Subject I now inclose you a Letter from the Navy Dept with several others
& send Mr Pulie se~eralsfor Cap! Bainbridge
Cap-ululI
has been at Tangier with the Argus, went to Cruise &
I believe is now at Cadiz
as to News we have none, as such Conclude truely I send Mr Pulie by the bearer large fills of News Papers wCbcame
Directed for Capmainbridge, also some for his Bror had I got any
would have sent them you [LC. EPP, Vol. 9, Jan.-Feb. 1804.1
To George Davis, U. 8. Charge d'Affaires, Tunis, from Tobias Lear, U. 6. Consul
General, Algiers

ALGIERS,
Jan? 27'4 1804
SIR, I had yesterday the leasure of receiving your letter of the
27t"f December with its enc osures; for which I am much obliged to
you. I shall make no comments, at present on the conduct of Mr
Cathcart - it must speak for itself. The enclosed were prepared to go by the Spanish Brig Two Friends,
which sailed from hence for Tunis, on the 2Ot%s! But as she went
off unexpectedly, when I was in the count^ with Mrp Lear, 5. had not
time to forward them. Mr OBrien, who happened to be m Town,
wrote to you by that opp? and at my request, put on board her a Box
containing two thousand dollr! for the use of our unfortunate Countrymen a t Tripoli, as mentioned in my letter of the 15th He also
informed you of the then situation of Affairs here, with respect to the
appearance of the British fleet. - This fleet left the coast on the I8Q
and has not again appeared. From the nature of the communication
between the Dey & Lord Nelson, (tenacious on both sides) we expected

No 5.

P

370

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1803 TO 180.L

something serious. We are left in the field of conjecture as to the
cause of their departure, without enforcing their points. The heroic
character of the Commander forbids the idea of fear: and whether the
fleet mas called away by information from Toulon (as another Ship
joined them on the evening of their departure) or from some other
cause, we have yet to learn. I think the measures you have taken to supply the wants of our
unfortunate Countrymen a t Tripoli, are proper. I will endeavour to
make some arrangement for your drawing on Leghorn in future. In
the mean time you must negotiate in the best manner you can, for
the sum mentioned in my former letter. I m i t e this letter to take its chance b any conveyance which may
offer, and shall write you again more ful y. In the mean time, I will
thank you for all the information you can obtain on our Affairs a t
Tripoli as well as Tunis. .
N. B. Delivered, with enclosures to Mr Beaussier to be sent by the
land Courier, under cover to his Correspondent. -

9

[Stephen Decatur CoL

NDA photostat, Book A.]

To Captain Thomas Eopkins. commanding American Brig Edwmd, Maples, from
Caphiin Edward Preble. U. S. Navy

U S: FRIGATE
Constifution
Syracuse Harbour Jan? . W t b 1804
SIR, I am honq with your letter of the 18*"ns! from Palerrno.
Accept my thanks for your polite attention. The Packet from hly
Brother came safe to hand
There are not any Tripolines out a t present, and I shall keep a good
look to prevent them from sailing. I shalI write you again if the
srntilest danger is to be apprehended, and will in that case, send a
Vessel to convoy you, m d the other Americans to the Westwd.
Let me know how many American Vessels are at Naples, and where
they are bound
[LC. EPP, LB, Dec. 1803--4pril 1804.1
Extract from Iog book kept by Sailing Master Nathaniel Haraden, U. S. Navy, on
board U. S. Frigate Corutikdion, Friday, 27 January 1804

Moderate Breezes & cloudy. At Anchor in Saragosa Syren Enterze & Vixen in company - Pointing the leading blocks & ring
Its of the Gun Carriages and reeving the running rigging. At 2
P. M anchored here the U. S. Schooner Nadilus Lt Somers who
sailed hence 30 days ago with the Commodores dispatches for Gibraltar. Large cutter landing stores from the Vixen - Moderate Breezes
through the night. From 8 A M. till noon Painting ship and Pointing
leading blocks &"* - Large cutter bringing off Provisions to the
Schooner Vixen.
Surgmns report 20 sick, 4 convdescent & 3 discharged At Noon
winds W b N.
[LC. EPP, Log Constitution, 1803-1804.1

C

-.

Extract from Hemorandurn Book of Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Havy, on
board U. 6. Frigate Gmfitufion, 27 January 1804

Naufilw arrived from Gibraltar
[LC, original.]

W A R S W I T H BARBARY POWERS

371

To Secretary of the Treasury from Secretary of State

DEPARTMENT
OF STATE,
January 2'8Q 1804.
SIR. I request you to be pleased to cause twelve hundred and
eighty dollars out of the appropriations for Barbary negotiations to
be remitted to the Purveyor to enable him to pay a draft for the like
sum which I have authorized Ebenezer Stevens Esqr of New York to
draw upon him in payment of additional freight of the Ship Anna
Maria formerly employed as a transport to Tunis.
[NA. SDA. Dom. L., Vol. 14, May 1802-May 1805.1
Extract from Diary of Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Navy, Commodore of U. S.
Squadron in the Mediterranean, Saturday, 28 January 1804

[Syracuse] Wind W N W,. The Quarantine was taken off the Prize;
this day I recieved information from the Master of an English Vessel
who is now our Pilot that he was in Tripoly when the Philadelphia
ran on the rocks near that place, And that the Prize now in our possession ketch rigged named the Afastico [renamed Intrepid] and commanded by hlustapha Rais was then a t Anchor in that Port under
Turkish Colors and that as soon as the Philadelphia Grounded the said
hlustapha Rais took on board upwards of One hundred Tripolines
armed with muskets, sabres &""lipped his cables, hauled down the
Turkish and Hoisted Tripoline Colors, and proceeded to the Attack
of the Pldadelphia, And that as soon as the Philadelphia surrendered
the said Mustaphn Rais with his men boarded the Frigate, plundered
the Officers and 3l\fen,made them prisoners and conducted the Officers
to the Bashaw of Tripoly : In Consideration of which I have concluded
to make prize of the Vessel and prisoners of all on board excepting
the Choui. of the Captain Pacha whom I intend to liberate with a
letter to the Cnpt Pacha with an account of this transaction.
[LC. EPP, Diary, 1803-1804.1
Extract from log book of U. S. Frigate Constitution. Captain Edward Preble, U. S.
Navy, commending, Saturday, 28 January 1804

a t anchor in Saragosa, Syren, Vixen Enterprize and Nautilus in
Company, * * * the prize we captured of[f] Trip017 her
Quarantme was yesterday Taken off. we Reced nine of the prisoners
on board the Constitution. Shee was under Quarantine 29 days
[NA. ND originnl.]
Extract from Diary of Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Navy, Commodore of U. S.
Squadron in the Mediterranean, Sunday, 29 January 1804

[Syraruse] Light breezes and pleasant weather - Painting I%"? Took all the white prisoners 26 in number on board from the prize
and ordered her Equipped for a Cruize.
[LC. EPP, Diary, 1803-1804.)

372

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1803 TO 180L
[30 January 18041

To Robert B. Livingston, U. S. Minister to Paris, France, from Charles Manrice
de Talleyrand-PBrigord, French Minister of Foreign Affairs, Paris
[Translation]

PARIB,
10 Pluz~iose,17ear XI1
The Minister of Foreign Affairs
to Mr. Livingston, Minister Plenipotentiary of the United States.
SIR,A declaration by Commodore Preble, commander of the naval
forces of the United States in the Mediterranean, announced last
December to the constituted authorities of Marseilles that he had
blockaded the Port of Tripoli and the adjacent coast and that neutral
vessels which should attempt to enter Tripoli or which should be
encountered off the neighoring coast, would be halted by the squadron
by his orders and taken to a port to be adjudicated.
Although recognizing the privileges and practices of which two
belligerent powers can avail themselves, practices according to which
a neutral vessel is excluded from a port actually blockaded, I cannot
refrain from observing that Commodore Preble appears to have, in
this instance, stretched the application of these rights in a manner
which tends to injure neutral commerce without being justified by the
rules generally adopted in the maritime neutrality conventions.
I n order to determine what constitutes a blockaded port, that
designation should apply only to a port that is attacked by a number
of vessels proportional to the force of the place, and urhich are near
enough that there is an obvious danger that the port will be entered.
I t is on this principle that the various conventions, which define
what is meant by the blockade of a place are based.
Therefore, i t was not sufficient for the American Commodore to
make a single frigate cruise off Tripoli, in order to authorize him to
declare that port and the adjacent coast under blockade. I t must
also be mentioned that the coast of a countxy has never been included
in the blockade of a'place. This extension of thelaw w o u l ~ b e n o t l ~ i ~ i g
but a violation of the rights of neutrals and an attack on their commerce. The British have set the example. No natiou has been
disposed to imitate it, nor has been interested in doing so, and perhaps the United States is more interested than any other power in
not adopting a system contrary to the rights and commerce of neutrals.
Convinced that Commodore Preble cannot have been authorized to
ignore principles which have become, in this matter, the basis of
international law and universally accepted usage, 1 ask you, Sir, to
request him, in the name of your government, not to interpret orders,
which he may have received, with a freedom which is as injurious as
it is unusual and to declare a port blockaded only when all the indispensable conditions are fulfilled under which neutral nations have no
right to protest against such a declaration.
[Franklin Delano Roosevelt Col.]
To Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Navy, from James Leander Cathcart, Leghorn

LEGHORN
Janrr SOth1804.
SIR I was honor'd with your esteem'd favor of the 4 @ins; this day
a t Meridian, & as the post departs for Naples this evening must postpone answering you as fully as I could wish until next week. - I

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

373

am happy that I have anticipated your desires relative to the gunboats & send you a plan of one drawn after my own directions &
calculated to keep the sea as the bow gun which may be either a brass
32 pounder or an Iron 24 is fix'd in such a manner as to be eas'd down
on the keelson & hatches are made to lock over tight which will keep
the vessel perfectly dry & secure in bad weather, in the wake of the
after rowlock is to be fix'd a short cannonade either a 36 or a 42
pounder on a slide so constructed as to be pointed right-aft or a t
either side as circumstances might require.
FTe have not yet agreed upon the rig of a boat calculated to carry a
mortar & a bow gun, but if you only desire to have a Mortar & the after
gun the boat can be built of the same dimensions as the gunboat with
about five inches more depth of hold, which d l increase her resistance
sufIicientIy and the price will be nearly the same, plans of both shall
be forwarded to you by next post & full answers given to all your
requests. - Enclosed is a Copy of a letter which I wrote to Capt"
Bainbridge as likewise a list of cloathing which will be ready to ship
at the time therein mentioned, if you could possibly permit one of the
small vessels to come for them about that period I will not detain her
one day & you will render the captives a great service. I have not time to add any thing more a t present & continue very
respectfully.
[LC. EPP, Vol. 9, Jan.-Feb. 1804.1

[30 January 18041
Concerning the Building and Equipping of a Gunboat in the Hediterranean
lTranslationl

A Gun boat according to the enclosed plan built of part oak & part
Elm bound round & sheath'd with pine of this country, with sails

Oars Anchors Cables & every other necessary compleat except Ammunition Artillery & its utensils can be built for the Sum of one thousand
eight hundred Florentine Sequins and launch'd ready for sea in the
space of two months; $ four boats of the same dimensions can be
built & equip'd for sea in four months and a half from the da.y the
contract is sign'd. N. B. One thousand eight hundred Sequins is equal
$3776 3 ? i 0 ~
to Spanish dollars a t par a t GjS- . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
The scale of the enclosed plan is in french feet each foot being 12%
english Inches. JAMES
LEANDER
C.~THCART
LEGHORN
Jaw? QOt? 1804. [LC. EPP, Vol. 9, Jan.-Feh. 1804.1
To Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Navy, from James Leander Cathcart, Leghorn

LEGHORN
JanT QOth 1804 SIR I have by this conveyance in part ansu-er'd your esteem'd
favor of the 4thins! & by the next post will give you such information
as I can collect on the subject of your enquirys - If you can permit
one of the small vessels to come for the Cloathing herein mentioned
for the prisoners a t Tripoli I will not detain her one day & you d l
rendcr those Unfortunate men a very singular service [LC. EPP, Vol. 9, Jan.-Feb. 1804.1

374

KAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1805 TO 180.4

To Lieutenant Richard Somers, U. S. Navy, commanding U. S. Schooner Nautilus.
from Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Navy

U . S. FRIGATEConstitution

Syracuse Harbor Jan? 30tW804
One of the Ships of the Squadron is to take the Guard for 24 Hours
commencing a t 8 O'clock in the morning A Signal for the ship which
ha^ the Guard will be made by the Senior Officer in Port and the Guard
Ship is to hoist an American Jack a t the Mizen top gallt mast head
but if n Brig or Schooner a t the fore which is to be kcpt flying until1
the Guard is shifted by signal. A Guard to be rowed by a boat of
the guard ship for the 24 hours and is to s p e d everj- Vessel1 that
enters the Harbor by Day or night before she approaches near the
t the commanding officer in Port every morning
Squadron and r ~ p o r to
a t 9 O'clock Agreeable to the following form for the Information of
the Commodore. *
*
*
*
[LC. EPP, Order Book, 1803-1805.1
Extract from Diary of Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Navy, Commodore of G. S.
Squadron in the Hediterranean, Monday, 30 January 1804

[Syracuse] Painting Ship & F & $ - Landed all the Black Slaves 43
in number from the Prize and placed them in a house on shore undcr
the care of the Agent M' Dyson; Sent, two men from this ship to
cook for and attend them - Seven Greek Christians takcn in the
prize VoluntariIy entered into our service as Ordinary Seumcn Surgeons report 13 Sick 4 Convalescent [LC. EPP, Diary, 1803-1804.1
Extract from Iog book of U. S. Frigate Constitution, Captain Edward Prehie, U. S.
Navy, commanding, Monday, 30 January 1804

a t 7 in the morning we sent the large cutter to assist landing the
Black prisoners, from the prize we recd on Saturday last from the
prize, the 26 white prisoners that Belong to the prize, the 43 Blacks
was landed a t Saragosa this morning, among the whites is four
gentlemen officers, who says they belong to the grand Seignior,
four small Boys, servants to the Seigniors officers, Seven greecians,
who appear to have Becn slares t o the Bashaw of Tripoly, those
greecians are not confm'd. the Remainding Eleven are Trioylians,
they are under charge of two Centinals, the officer Messes in the
gunroom,
[NA. ND original.]
Extract from log book kept by Sailing Master Nathaniel Haraden, U. S. Navy, on
board U. S. Frigate Consliiution, Monday, 30 January 1804

Moderate breezes & clear weather. At Anchor rtt Saragosa Syren,
Enterprize, 'E7izen & Nautilus in com any. Painting the ship &
blackmg the bends. Towards Evening resh breezes from the northe.
The N N W wind continued fresh dwin the night. At 7 A. M. sent
the large cutter to assist in landing the b ack prisoners from the Prize
Wc recieved on Saturday last from the Prize 26 white prisoners belonging to her. Forty three blacks were landed at Saragosa this morning.
Ships company painting ship, gun carriages & mwB. Surgeons report

f

k

375

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS
is 13 sick, 4 convalescent & one discharged.
from the N N W.

At Noon strong breezes

[LC. E P P , Log Constitution, 1803-1804.1
To Secretary of the Navy from Lieutenant Isaac Bull, U. 6. navy

UNITED
STATESBRIGArgus
Cadiz Bay 31%Jan? 1804
SIR, Since I had the honour of writing you on the 26@ Ins! I have
received Letters from J n ? Gavino Esquire, informing me of the arrival
of a ship a t Gibralter from rjorfolk laden with Provisions and Stores
for the use of the United States Squadron in the Mideteranian, and
that he had determined to Order her immediately to Malta, as he
considered the risque of going up without Convoy so trifling that i t
would be improper to detain the Ship a t Gibralter such a length of
time, as it must take for me to get Letters from h i , and arrive there
to take her under Convoy. I think hlr Gavino has determined very wisely, and have no doubt
but the Ship will arrive safe. I shall leave this place in three or four days for Tangier and Gibralter, and if the weather is such that I can with safety keep a t Sea, shall
run to the Eastd as far as Cape DeGatt, and Cape Pallos, where most
likely I shall Cruize for some time. I shall write every oppertunity, and keep you advised of all my
proceedings. [XDA

Isaac Hull LB, 1803-1804.)

To John Gavino, U. S. Consul, Gibraltar, from Lieutenant Isaac Hull, U. S. Navy

UNITED
STATESBRIGArgus
Cadiz Bay 31" Jan? 1804
SIR,I have been honored with your Letter of the 26 Ins! and agree
with you, that it is unfortunate that I happened to be absent from
Gibralter when the Store Ship arrived, however as the risk in going
up the Strniplits, a t this Season of the year is so trifling, I am happy
that you ordered the ship to proceed to Malta, and have no doubt she
will arrive there safe. I sliall leave this place in three or four days, and hope soon to- be in
Gibralter, should any Letters be sent to your care, 1 beg ou ~ l not
l
forward them, as I shall leave this before they can possi ly come to
hand. - I have nothing new to send you, as there has not been any
arrivals, either from America or England, since I hare been here The Schooner Sails in all this Week, with dispatches for America, I have wrote the Secretary, informing him of the arrival of the Store
Ship, and that she had sailed for Malta. -

K

[NDA. Iaaac Hull LR, 1803-1804.1

To Lieutenant Charles Stewart. U. S. Navy, commanding U. S. Brig
Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Navy

U. S. FRIGATE
Constitution

Syracu.se Harbor Jan 31

Siren.

from

" 1804

SIR YOUwill prepare the Syren for a Cruize and be ready to s d
tomorrow evening, or as soon as the Signal is made.

376

N A V A L OPERATIONS FROM 1803 TO 1804

Proceed with all possible dispatch for the Coast of Tripoly; The
Ketch Intrepid under the Command of Lt Decatur with Seventy
Volunteers from the Squadron is ordered to accompnny you, to
endeavor to effect the destruction of the Frigate Philadelphia by
burning her in the Harbor of Tripoly.
Previous to your approaching so near the Coast that the Syren can
be discovered from the Shore, you are to disguise her by changing
the Color of your paint, sending Top Gall' masts on deck, rigging in
flying Jibb boom, Housing guns, Shutting in Ports, raising quarter
cloths &9"0 give the appearance of a Merchant Vessel
I concieve the Object in view can be best effected in the night;
You will therefore keep a t a distance from Tripoly untill the Evening,
but not so far but that you can reach the Harbor by Midnight: The
Intrepid being rigged in a manner peculiar to the Mediterranean
probably will not be suspected bp the enemy, of course it will be most
adviseable to send her ahead in order that she may stand into the
Harbor, and board the frigate
I have no doubt but Lt Decatur with the Officers and men under
his command will be able to take ossession of, and destroy her: As
soon as the Intrepid has entered t e Harbor, you will stand in and
anchor in such a position as you, in your Judgment, may think best
calculated to afford her assistance in the execution of the main object,
cover her retreat or destroy any of the Enemies Cruizers that may be
in the Harbor by sending your boats for that purpose
I t will be most proper for you to enter the harbor with a Westerly
Wind as i t will ensure you a safe retreat. The destruction of the
Frigate is of Kational importance, and I rely with confidence on your
Valor Judgment & Enterprize in contributing all the means in your
power to effect it. Whatever may be your success you will return if
possible directly to this place
May the Almighty take you under his protection and prosper you
in this Enterprize.

i

[LC. EPP, Order Book, May 1803-June 1805.1
To Lieutenant Stephen Decatur, Jr., U. S. Navy, commanding U. S. Ketch
Intrepid, from Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Navy

U . S. FRIGATEConstitution
Syracuse Harbor Jan? Slat 1804
SIR YOUare hereby ordered to take command of the Prize Ketch
which I have named the Intrepid and prepare her with all possible
dispatch for a cruize of Thirty days with full allowance of Water,
Provision &O"or Seventy five men. I shall send you five Midshipmen Midshipmen from the Constitution and you will take Seventy
men including Officers from the Enterprize if that number can be
found ready to volunteer their Services for boarding and burning the
Philadelphia in the Harbor of Tripoly, If not, report to me and I
will furnish you with men to compleat your compliment. I t is
expected you will be ready to sa11 tomorrow evening or some hours
sooner if the Signal is made for that pur ose.
It ia my Orders that you proceed to
in company with the
Syren Lf Stewart, Enter that Harbor in the night Board the Frigate
Philadelphia, burn her and make your retreat good with the Intrepid
if possible, unless you can make her the means of destroying the

#ripely

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

377

Enemy's vessels in the Harbor by converting her into a fire ship for
that purpose and retreating in your Boats and those of the Syren.
You must take fixed ammunition and apparatus for the Frigates 18
Pounders and if you can, without risking too much you may endeavor
to make them the Instruments of distruction to the shipping and
Bashaw's Castle. You will provide all the necessary Combustibles
for burning and destroying ships. The destruction of tbe Philadelphia
is an object of great importance; And I rely with confidence on your
Intrepidity & Enterprize t-o effect it. Lr Stewart will support you
with the boats of the Syren and cover your retreat with that vessel
be sure and set fire in the Gun room births, Cockpit Store rocms
forward and Births on the Birth deck.
After the Ship is well on fire, point t~7oof the 18 Pdr%hotted down
the Main Hatch and blow her bottom out - I enclose you a memorandum of the Articles, Arms, Ammunition, fire works &"%necessary
and which you are to take with you - Return to this Place as soon
as Possible, and report to me your procee+gs. On boarding the
Frigate it is probable you will meet with Resistance, it will be well in
order to prevent alarm to carry all by the Sword, May God prosper
and Succeed you in this enterprize.
[LC. EPP, Order Book, May 1803-June 1805.1
To Lieutenants Thomas Robinson, Jr., Samuel Elbert and Midshipman William
Lewis, U. S. Navy, from Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Navy

U. S. FRIGATE
Constitution

Jan? 31 a $ 1804 Syracuse Harbor
GENTLEMEN
YOU will take an exact account of all the arms,
money & papers in possession of the Officers Passengers & Crew of
the ketch Prize [h4astico]from Tripoly captured by the Constitution
& Enterprize.
[LC.

EPP, Order Book, May 1803-June 1805.1

To Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Navy, from Lieutenants Charles Stewart, John
Smith and Richard Somers, U. S. Navy

SYRACUSE
gist Jan? 1804.
SIR, According to your order we repaird to the Prize [Mastico]
and after inspecting into & examining her Hull & materials, we conceive her to be worth, Eighteen Hundred Dollars
CH?STEWART
JOHNSMITH
RICH^ SOMERS
[LC. EPP, Vol. 9, Jan.-Feb. 1804.1
To Tobias Lear, U. S. Consul General, Algiers, from Captain Edward Preble,
U. S. Navy

UNITEDSTATES
SHIPConstitution
Syracuse Harbour 31 Jan? 180.4
(re@15 March 1804)
DEARSIR,Since my last letter to you I have discovered that the
rize [the Mastico, renamed the Intrepid] I took off Tripoly the 23rd
under Turkish Colours, was in that port when the PhiladeZphie
ran on the rocks; and that the Captain who pretends to be a Turk,

bto

378

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 180.9 TO 1804

took on board upwards of an hundred Tripolines a m e d with Swords
and lMuskets - slipped his Cables - hauled down the Turk's, and
hoisted Tripoline colours, and went out to the attack; and as soon
as the Frigate surrendered, boarded her, - plundered the Officers
and Men, and conducted them as prisoners to the Bashaw. In
consequence of this conduct I have detained him and his crew, and
shall make prize of the vessel. The Captain and Crew having acted
hostile towards our Flag, under enemies colours, I cannot release
either the Vessel or them, as I hare no doubt but should they meet
an American hferch: Vessel they would witfiou t hesitation capture
her. If a Tripoline, he is a prize; if a Turk, a pirate
I find on tran~lat~ion
of the papers that 23 of the Xegroes belonged
to the Bashaw of Tripoly, which he intended as presents to the Captain
Pacha, and other Officers; and 20 of them belonged to the Officers
and Merchants of Tripoly, which were for sale. I have among the
Tripoiine prisoners a chouix of the Bashaw's and a Col. of his Troops,
besides a number of Tripoline Soldiers.
The prize is equipped as a cruiser. She sails tomorrow with 70
Volunteers from the Squadron on board, under the command of
Captain Decatur whose orders are, to burn the Philadelphia in the
Harbour of Tripoly. The Syren Brig goes with him to assist with
her Boats, and cover the retreat. I hope they will succeed; it is of
Natiooal importance that they should.
I have r e d letters from Cap? BB[ainbridge] as late as the lgth
Ins! he compIains of not having received one from me, notwithstanding I hare u-ritten several From Malta last week I forwarded Clothing, Stores & Money to s considerable amount, to the care of the English and Danish Consds. The Bashaw has received my proposals for
an exchange of Prisoners ere this, but I hare no answer. Rllile I
was a t Malta I received proposals from the Bashaw of TripoIy's Agent
for a peace, which he says he is authorised by the Bnshaw to negotiate The Bashnw finds we are making considerable preparations for
the next Summer, and has become alarmed. His Agent proposcd a
truce for 10 years. 1told him that would not do. I had several conversations with him and assured him we never would consent to pay
a cent for Peace or Tribute. He then proposed that we should give
the Bashaw 500 Dollars for each of the Philadelphia's Officers and
Crew - a Schooner in exchange for the Frigate, and make peace
without Money or Tribute and that they would exchange 60 Americans, for the sixty Tripolines in my possession. This would be gnining Peace on more reasonable terms than is expected by our GOT-ernment
Say 300 American Captives
60 Tripolines deduct'd
leaves 240 st 500 Dolls each- - - - -- - - ------- $120,000
and we should gain something by exchanging one of the worst
schooners for the Frigate. If you could prevail on MI OBrien to come
here with Cap' Smith as he speaks the language of Barbary, he could
be of infinite service in any negotiation. I should he glad to see you
both here, and wish I had a larger yessel to send for our accommodation; but if you cannot leave Algers a t present, w at sum will you
authorise me to psy for the ransom of the Officers and Crew of the

t

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

379

Philadelphia, if the Bashaw will make peace without Money - Without any annual Tribute - or any Consular present - escept a small
present a t the reception of the first Consul that is appointed? I
am anxious to know your opinion, as I expect further proposals from
the Bashaw in three weeks.
I have written to Naples and Leghorn for Gun & Mortar Boats,
and hope to succeed in procuring them. I enclose you a copy of the
last letter I recQfrom Captain Bainbridge. I differ in opinion with
him respecting a Blockade. I think it will have a good effect. I go
out on a cruise tomorrow and intend to touch a t Tunis. I have
nothing new in this quarter Make my best respects to Mr?Lear, and
believe me with real esteem and respect Dear Sir,
[Stephen Decatur Col.]
To James Leander Cathcart, Leghorn, from Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Navy

U. S. FRIGATE
Constitutwn
Syracuse Harbour Jan? $1" 1804.
D' SIR Since my last let,ter t.o you I have discovered that the Prize
[ilIastico, renamed Intrepid] I took off Tripoly the 23'g UltQ under
Turkish colors was in that Port when the Philadelphia ran on the
rocks, & that the Captain who pretends to be a Turk, took on board
upwards of an hundred Tripolines, slipped his Cables, &r. went out to
attncli her, hauled down the Turkish, & hoisted Tripoline colors, and
as soon as the Frigate surrendered he boarded, plundered the Officers
& conducted them to the Bashaw in triumph, in consequence of which
I have detained him & his crew & shall make prize of the vessel, as
the Capt! has acted in a hostile manner towards our Flag: should I
release him & his vessel and an American of inferior force fall in his
way, I have a right to believe that he wou'd not hesitate to capture
her: if a Tripoline he is a prize, if a Turk a Pirate. I find on translation of some of the papers th8.t 23 of the negro men & women belong
to the Bashaw, and 20 to the officers & merchants of Tripoly. I
ha\-e also a Tripoline Chaus, another Officer with the rank of Colonel,
& a numbcr of Tripoline soldiers as prisoners. I cnclose you a duplicate of my letter of the 4tQUltQI must have
gun & mortar boats: & it is my determination to go to Naples with
the ship if I cannot procure them without. I hare no doubt but you
will do all in your power to assist me. I wish you would go to Naples,
& endeavour to procure them for me.
I want two or three Mortar boats & four large gun boats: there are
some fine mortar boats a t Palermo perhaps you can procure an order
for them. My prize is ketch or bombard rigged & is ahead? equipp'd
as a cruizer: she sails tomorrow with 70 volunteers from the squadron
on an expedition. the Syren brig goes with her; I hope they may be
successful & cannot doubt but they d l .
The Nautilus & Vixen sail on a cruize in a day or two, & the Constitution in a very few days.
The Nautilus returned from Gibraltar five days since: nothing new
from that quarter, I a m anxious to hear from you soon respecting
the gunboats.
[NA. SDA. CL, Tripoli, Vol. 2, 1801-1805.1

-

380

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1805 TO 1804

To Richard O'Brien, U. S. ex-Consul General, Algiers, from Captain Edward
Preble, U. S. Navy

UNITEDSTATESSIIIPCon~titution
Syracuse Harbour 91 Jan? 1804
DEARSIR, I write you in great haste. Your favor by the Syren
came safe, for which, accept my thanks. I believe the Bashaw has a
disposition to make Peace with the United States. For particulars
I refer you to Col: Lear. Capt-ainbridge
thinks with me, that if
you would afford Four services to your Country, by coming up here,
and remaining a few weeks with me, to assist at anF negotiation that
may be entered into uith Tripolx: your knowledge of the Language
and people with whom we have to negotiate, would give us advantages
which we cannot otherwise have. I wish you to converse with Col:
Lear on this subject. You may rely on my endeavors to make your
situation on board this ship as pleasant as possible.
hlrtlre my respects to M'a OBrien, and accept my best wishes for
your health & happiness.
[Stephen Decatur Col.]
Extract from log book of U. S. Frigate Conrlitufion. Captam Edward Preble,
U. S. Navy, commanding, Tuesday, 31 January 1804

Moored in Saragosa. the Tripolean prize was got underway by the
officers of the Enterprize and towd into the Mole in order to Repair.
[NA. ND original. j
To Captain Edward Preb!e, U. S. Navy, from Richard Farquhar, Malta
~ ~ A L TFeb'~
A
1"

MAY IT PLEASE
YOUREXCELLENCY

1804

The Bearer is the Master of a Vessel whom you spoke to in Malta
for a Pilot, he is not only well accquainted with the Coast of Tripoli
Bengaza & Meauserate
but a very active steady man and should
you want any more men than he has taken with him now, he would
be a very proper person to send over hear for more, as this is the
time to get them, for when the Spring of the year comes in the_'iessels
begins to fit out for their respective Voyages
As he has got 25 men he hopes your Excellency will permit him to
have Uniforms, he has advanced Cash for the men he takes with him
There is a Vessel arrived hear from Tripoli, the News by hir is much
the same as formerly viz that Provisions is still high and by the different Accounts which I have had the People is murmuring much
against the Bashaw they seem all to agree that when your Vessels
appear off Tripoli with his Brother on Board they %ill Murder the
present Bashaw
there is also a Vessel arrived a few days ago from Alexandria with
news from the Bashaw of Derna saying that he is prepairing to retake
Derna again, his Consul hear has wrote to him by a ship which saiIs
to morrow for Alexandria he is in hopes you have determined to send
him to Alexandria, in one of your Vessels either to bring the Bashaw
to Derna or Bengaza as His Excellency is in daylee Expectation of
some American Vessel arriving in Alexandria, I understand your
Consul hear has got also a Letter from the.Bashaw of Derna the Bearer has taken his Brother mth him & hopes your Excellency
will permit him to be in the same Vessel m t h his Brother

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

381

the Argo English Frigate arrived hear yesterday from England &
brought one of the Beys of the Momalucks in Egypt and takes him up
to Alexandria.
[LC. EPP, Vol. 9, Jan.-Feb. 1804.1
To Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Wavy, from Lieutenant Charles Gordon, U. S. Navy

FRIGATE
Constitutwn
SYRACUSE
HARBOUR Isf FebY 1804 SIR,AS I have heard it suggested that the Prize [Intrepid], is going
on a secret expedition against the Tripoleens, I should wish you to
consider me as a volanteer As it is my determination to let no opportunity escape wherein I
can render my Country any service on so important an occasion, I
should esteem it as a particular favour, to meet your consideration on
this Subject C H AGORDON
~
[LC. EPP, Vol. 9, Jan.-Feb. 1804.1
To James Watson, former Navy Agent, New York, N. Y., from Secretary of the Wavy

NAVYD E P A R2Q
~ Febr? 1804
Your favor of the 1~~~ultQhas been received it contains the first
information which has reached me of the suit instituted against you
by Mr W. E. Sheffield The Department is ready and has always been ready to settle the
accounts of Jackson and Sheffield - B- they ought to call on the Department for a Settlement - If in your official capacity as navy agent
vou consented under the authority of the Department, to pay them
lor tho draft and model of the ship Adams you are not personally
responsible for the fulfilment of the engagement an action cannot be
sustained against you and I presume your counse! will so advise you The accounts of Jackson & Sheffield for building the ship Adams is
yet unsettled and from the documents in our possession it appears
that they are considerably in debt to the Department - it would
therefore be highly improper in me to authorize any payment of money
to them a t present The enclosed letter to Mr Wm E. Sheffield and left open for your
perusal I will thank you to seal and deliver
[NDA. GLB, Vol. 7, 1803-1805.1
To Mrs. Ralph Izard, Sr., South Bay, Charleston, S. C., from Midshipman Ralph
Izard, Jr., U. S. Navy

SYRACUSE Feby 1803 [I8041
This evening, my Dear Mother, I sail for Tripoli on board of a
prize (we took on the 23'@ Decr) in company with the Brig Syren
Capt. Stewart, for the purpose of burning the Frigate Philadelphia
wlvch is now in the possession of the Tripolitans. Lieut. Decatur
commands the prize. - We are certain of success, not only in accomplishing that project, but are in hopes to be able to cut out of Tripoli
several of their cruizers. Our prize when we took her was bound to
Constantinople with presents for the great folks in those parts from
the Bashaw of Tripoli, consisting of 50 black Slaves & money appropriated for the purpose of purchasing merchandize - I was then in

382

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1803 TO 1804

the Constitution. The Tripolitans we have in close custody, I believe
their number amounts to 12. Besides these we have the Grand Segniors
ambassador for Tripoli, who was on his return home. After a short
cruize off Tripoli we returned here, & the Commodore wishing to
make some regulations for the better accommodation of Capt Bainbridge & his officers thought proper to go to Malta. I had the honor of
accompanying him thither - We remained ten days during which
time we lived on shore: I m o t e you a very short letter from thence
for which I must beg leave to excuse myself not knowing of any
opportunity until1 the moment the Commodores dispatches were to
be sent on board of an English Frigate bound to Gibraltar. My
friend Christopher by this time must have arrived in America I shall expect him out here next summer a Lieutenant on board of
one of the Frigates I understand are coming out here Before this day week I am in hopes we shall have the happiness
of seeing the Philadelphia in flames- We shall astonish the Bashaws
weak mind with the noise of shot falling about his ears Perhaps some
shot "more lucky than the rest may reach his heart" & free our countrymen from Slavery It is this idea which keeps us all alive here for
upon my word nothing can be more detestable than this Syracuse I have not put my foot on shore here for six weeks & have been a
greater part of the time within a stones throw of the place. RiIalta
is a charming place comparatively speaking - There one has some
mode of enjoyment - Masquerades Balls Governors Gardens,
Parades, fine Ships, & folks to whom you map converse, all which
one loses a t Syracuse - Is there no hope of a Spanish War? Who
would not be a Soldier in these times in Louisiana? At all events
there, there is some chance for distinguishing one's self - here we
have to go in their very houses before we can make them fight. And
the thought of who it is we fight. A parcel of poor wretches without
a single spark of honor & in conquering them no honor is to be derived
Does not my Brother the Capt regret having hauled himself up
in ordinary? I see his arrival in New York announced in one of the
Papers - I presume from that he has been paying you a visit with
his cara sposa.
What a mountain they have made of a mouse I allude to what
I see in the Newspapers concerning our "terrible" affair with the
Emperor of Morocco. Capt Rodgers acquired vast applause for
burning a Tripolitan ship of 22 Guns - Our Commodores name I
am glad to see is mentioned with some bclat. Remember me most
affectionately to my Dear Father. Tomorrow is his birthday. Oh!
May he see many happy returns of it! Tell him my Dear Mother
that I still am
his very aff ecte Son
RA: IZARD
junr
Tell Tom Caroline & Georgy I have not quite forgot them as they
shall see some 18 or 20 months hence when I shall again see them
(NDA A-4.1

383

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS
Prisoners on board U. S. frigate Comfitufion

Constitution daily report of Prisoners Febr? 24 1804
Names

I

J. Cross

Quality

By whom Conf?

when

how

Crime

Seaman

Lieut Dent

Janr? 25

in irons

Drunkenness

Prisoners of War
Names

Aff vishous

Mustapha Hsesan
Mustapha
Masarese
Salaseres
Mahomet
Hamet
Hamet
Ihvahim
Mustapha
Selim
Koma

Osmanlagger
Ossinadder 4
Mustapha
Mahomet Alle
Mahomet
I bvahim
Alle

[Maine HS.

Names

JOHN BURCHARD
M. A.
NDA photostat.]

To Stephen Cathalan, Jr.. U. S. Commercial Agent, Marseilles, France, from
James Leander Cathcart, Leghorn

(COPY
LEGHORN
Qd Febr? 1804
Dr SIR Since I wrote you last, I have received orders to ascertain
where can be procured on the most advantageous terms four Gunboats
each mounting a 24 pounder & four Bombards with each a Mortar
from ten to Eighteen inches, compleatly equipped & calculated to
keep the sea in an weather & two Bombardiers perfect masters of
their profession, w o are Capable to instruct our oung officers in
unnery 6r Marine Fortification in all its different granches; If any
Euch can be engaged a liberal Salary will be given. - I therefore
request you to inform me whether Such boats ?s above described can
be procured at Marseilles or Toulon ready budt; if not, can they be
built there, if they Can, on what terms, & in what time can they
be got ready for Sea; if the boats can not be procured, can four brass
Cannon 24 pounders &. four brass Mortars of the above Calibre with
the necessary bombs, balls & ammunition & one or two Bombardiers
of the above description, if procurable please to inform me the probable prices of the first & the expectations of the latter.
To quiet any unfavorable apprehensions of the french government,
it is only necessary to observe that those boats are to form a part of
the United States Squadron Stationed in the Mediterranean & will
navigate under the American Flag & be Commanded by national Officers
By giving me a speedy answer you will render the United States a
s m c e & Confer an obligation upon, Dr St

E

-

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1803 TO 1804

384

N B. If Mortars & Cannons can not be purchased pray can they
be borrowed or can they be got on any terms you will please not to direct my Letters to the Care of any person,
I am known a t the Post office & the Letters will be brought to my
house; List of the Ships & Vessells of War which compose the United
States Squadron Stationed in the Mediterranean.
Constitution- - - --- - 44 ------ ----- - - Edward Preble Esqr------ Commanderin
Chief.
Brig Argus- - - - -- - - 18,36 pounders. Isaac Hull Esqr- - - - - - - - - Lieutenant
Commandant
d9
Chq Stewart Esqr _ _ - - - - _ d~
Brig Svren -------- 18,32
d~
John Smith Esqr- - - - - - - d~
SchoonerVzzen ----- 16. 2-5
Rich* Somers Esqr_- - - - d~
SchoonerATautolus--10, 9 dq
d~ Enterprix. 16,24
d~
Stephen Decatur Esqr_--d~
Another Fregate is expected to replace the Philadelphia & robably
one of our small Fregates of 28 Guns will accompany her, t e Crews
of all our Vessels of War are now engaged for two years. [NA. SDA. Disp., France, Vol. 9, 1803-1805.1

%

To Secretary of the Bavy from Captain Edward

Preble, U. S. Bavy

U: S. SHIPConstitution

Syracuse Harbour Feb? 3 r d 1804
SIR, I have the honor to inform you that, since my last letter from
Malta, I have discovered that the Vessel [Mastico, renamed Intrepid]
which I captd off Tripoly the 23rd December last, was a t Anchor in
the Harbour when the Philadelphia ran on the rocks. That as soon
aa the Frigate took the ground, the Captain took on board u wards
of one hundred Tripolines, hauled down the Turkish, and oisted
Tripoliie Colours; Slipped his cables, and went out to the attack;
and as soon as the Frigate surrendered, the Captain and Men proceeded on board the Philadelphia; undered the Officers; made
prisoners of, and conducted them on s-Elore to the Bashaw of Tripoly.
As 1 have clear proof of their having acted thus hostily towards our
Flag the moment they have an opportunity, I have a right to believe,
the would not hesitate to do it again, if I should release the Vessel
an crew, and they should fall in with an American Vessel of inferior
force. I have, therefore, detained her for adjudication; and as she
is not a proper Vessel to cross the Atlantic a t this season of the year,
I shall forward all the pa ers necessary for her condemnation. She
has been valued a t 1800 cf'ollars, and as there cannot be the smallest
doubt of her being a lawful prize, I have fitted her out as a cruiser,
with 4 Guns & 70 Volunteers from the Squadron, among whom, are
10 Officers under the Command of Lieu$ Decatur. She sailed last
evening for Tripoly; the object is, to destroy the Philadelphia. She
sailed in company with the Syren Brig Lieu$ Stewart, who hag orders
to assist her with Boats in effecting the main object, and cover a
retreat. I enclose you copies of their orders. I am confident of
their success if the weather proves favourable. The prize being
Ketch or Bombard ri ged, and neither of our Brigs ever having been
of3 T r i m , they wdfnot probably create suspicion; particularly as
the Brlg will be disguised before she approaches the coast, to give her
the a earance of a Mercht Vessel. Our Frigates and Schooners are
so we known, that they create alarm the moment they are seen.

E

r

P

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

385

The NauCilzls and Vixen sail tomorrow morning on a cruise; they
are to proceed to Tunis Bay, and communicate with Mr Davis. The
Vban then goes to
iers, and the Nautilus off Tri oly
I have given this s 'p's rigging a thorough over aul, painted the
Hull, and shall immediately proceed to Sea.
I wrote to Naples some time since, to hire or purchase, three or
four Gun & Mortar Boats, pre ared with Guns and Mortars. If
I succeed in procuring them,
can attach them to the different
Vessels as thex Boats, and I think work with effect on Tri ly, aa
soon as the Spring opens. I mentioned in my last letter &t the
Bashaw's Agent at Malta had consented to make peace with us, on
the following terms Viz. No pecuniary consideration for Peace or
Tribute. No consular present, except a small one with the Consul
that may be first appointed. A schooner in exchange for the Frigate;
and 500 dolls for the ransom of each of her Officers and Crew, after
exchanging as many Americans for Tripolines, as we have Tlipolines
to give them Say 300 American Captives
Deduct 60 Tripoline prisoners to be exchanged
leaves 240 Americans to ransom a t $500 pr- $120,000
He afterwards concluded, that the Bashaw would take One hundred
thousand doll? for ransom, we giving up the Tripoline Prisoners, and
make peace as above. I have written to Col Lear on the subject for
his advice what to do, if the Bashaw lessens his demand as I suspect
he will, should the PhiEadelphia be destroyed. If it was not for the
situation of our unfortunate Country Men, I should be sorry to have
peace with the Bashaw, until we could oblige him to beg for i t as a
favour, and sign any treaty that night be dictated to him. I am
anxiously ulshmg for the favourable season to arrive, when we can
keep constantly near Tripoly ; closely blockade their ports, and annoy
thex Coast, to prevent the possibility of their Vessels cruising, destroy
their commerce, and distress their City - We ought to have a Brig
& Schoonar to cruise between Cape Bon and the West end of Sicily.
A Brig or Schooner off Cape Mazuratt to the south of Tripoly a Bng
on the coast of Calabria; two Frigates with one Schooner and some
Gun and Mortar Boats before Tripoly; and a Brig or Schooner to
cruise from Derne to Bengaza. With such a force so disposed, or
with Troops, Tripoly would soon be brought to any terms we might
please to dictate. Gun and Mortar Boats are for the Summer service
most essential.
I shall write you by every opportunity; and I now enclose you
sundry papers for your information.
I sent to Captarn Bainbridge One thousand dollqrom Malta last
Week, and a quantity of clothing for his Officers & c V conceive it
my duty to attend to their Rants, and shall most certainly do so.
Captain B - complains of not having recq letters from me, I have
written a number, and it has been altogether the fault of Mr Pulis,
that they have not been forwarded, together with a supply of newssaries left with him for that purpose - m?lilst I was a t Malta I
detected Mr Pulis in a transaction of a very unpleasant Nsture: he
had received a large number of letters from America for the Officers
of the Squadron; and some from the Officers of the Squadron for their
friends in the Mediterranean, America and London he kept these

31

fl

f

386

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1805 TO 180.4

letters on hand a long time; by accident I discovered that he had a
large number in his possession and requested a sight of them; he at
first hesitated, but as I persisted in my right of seeing them, he produced four large packages directed to the care of Mr Gavino at Gibraltar to be forwarded to the U S, which he said were letters from himself and others to their friends in America. I knew that several of
them were for the Navy depi and an English Man of T a r to sail
immediately for Gibraltar, I lnsisted on his opening the packages and
giving me all the letters from the Officers of the Squadron. he did
not chuse to do it, which increased my suspicions that all was not
right, and I opened one of the Packages in presence of him and four
of my Officers in which I discovered the letters that had come out for
the O5cers of the Squadron for some time past and all the letters
that had been for the Officers at Tripoly kept b Mr Pulis and that
he was actually sending them back to America A 1 the other packages
were in the same situation, and neither of them contained a single
letter from him - M' Pulis was formerly Consul to the Bashaw of
Tripoly, has no respectability attached to his character - cannot
speak a word of English, and is by no means a proper representative
for the U S to have in the Island of Malta - I wrote you from Malta
that I had employed Mr William Higgins as an ent fm the Squadron;
he has every qualification to make a respectab e Consul, and I wish
for the good of the Service, that the change may take place; be assured
I have no other Motive

9

9

[LC. EPP, LB, Dec. 1803-April 1804.1
To George Davis, U. S. Charge d'Affaires, Tunis, from Captain Edward Preble,
U. S. Navy

UNITED
STATESSHIP Constitution

Syracuse Harbour Feb: 3'4 1804.
SIR, The Vixen and Nautilus Captains Smith & Somers are ordered
to touch a t Tunis for information, and to receive any communications
you may have to make. The Vixen proceeds to Algiers, and shall
take our dispatches for the West, and call a t Tunis on her return
The autilus is ordered to cruise Eastward, and it is probable will
fall in with me soon I shall be glad to hear from you by her. I t
will not be long before I shall call at Tunis and hope then to establish
some mode of frequent communication. I am making preparations
for annoying the Tripolines in a way they have not been accustomed
to as soon as the Spring opens. I enclose you extracts from C Bainbridge's letter of the 18'Q Ulto - I have made a prize of the
Vessel I captured off Tripoly, as she was under Tripoline Colours a t
the Capture of the Philadelphia with more than 100 Tripolines on
board, and one of the f i s t Vessels that sent her Boats to Board that
unfortunate Ship; and the Captain of her one of the most active men
in taking the pmoners, lundering them, & conducting them on shore
to the Bashaw of Tripo y I refer you to Captain Smith for further information, and am with
esteem & respect

K

f'

*

1

[LC. EPP, LB, Dec. 1803-April 1804.1

I

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

387

To Lieutenant Richard Somers, U. S. Navy, commanding U. 6. Schooner N a u f f h ,
from Captain Edward Preble, U. 6. Navy

U. S. FRIGATE
Constitution
Syracuse Harbor Feb? 3q 1804.
SIRYOUwill Sail tomorrow morning in Company with the Vken

for Tunis Bay, after having had communication with the shore, if
you recieve information that can be depended on of any Tri oline
Cruisers having gone to the West$ you may take that rout mostekely
to fall in with them according to the Information you may recieve
but if you do not hear of any such cruisers having passed to the westward you will proceed to the Coast of Tripoly and off Cape Massurat,
Cruize there ten or twelve days and return to this Port - take on
board as much provisions and water as you conveniently can and
proceed to the Blockade of Tripoly.
[LC. EPP, Order Book, M a y 1803-June 1805.1
To Lieutenant John Smith, U. S. Navy, commanding U. S. Schooner Vixen, from
Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Navy

U. S. FRIGATE
Constitution
Syracuse Harbor Feb? 9 1804
SIR, YOUwill sail tomorrow morning for Tunis, deliver the letters
with which you are charged for Geo: Davis Esquire and proceed by
the shortest rout to Algiers and deliver the dispatches for Colv Leer;
If you should while a t Tunis or Algiers, receive information to be
depended on, of any Tripolitan Cruisers having passed to the Westward, you will take that route which will, in your opinion, be most
likely to fall in with them according to the Information you have recieved, Cruize ten or twelve days and return to Algiers, take on board
COPLear and Rd OBrien Esquire or either of them or their dispatches
and return to this place; Take in as much provisions and water as you
can conveniently stow and proceed to the Blockade of Tripoly. You
will however while at Algiers comply with Cob Lear's request in any
thing essential for the Good of the Service - You are to capture &
Tripoline or other Vessels on which Tripoline property is laden which
you may happen to fall in with. You are not to suffer the vessels of
any nation to enter or to have commerce with Tripoly, but have a
right to treat as an Enemy whoever may endeavor to enter that place
or carry any thing to it whilst blockaded by us. You are to respect
the ri hts of Nations with whom we are a t Peace and not to capture
Vesse s within the Jurisdictional limits or under the protection of such
nations - You are a t all t,imes (as far as may be in your power) to
Succour Aid, Relieve, and Free any American Vessel which you may
happen to see attacked by the Enemy or in their possession
The Officers of the Vixen may recieve payments of money from time
to time, but no advance beyond what may be due them - Should
you want money for the necessary contingent expences of the TTia:en,
you are to draw on the Secretary of the Navy when it can be done and
when it cannot ou may draw on me, expressing in either case the
pu ose for whic you draw your Bills.
you will keep me regularly informed from time to time of all your
proceedings P. S. There are two Maltese Vessels who have m passports untill
the first of March Next: They are to Proceed to $ripoly in ballast

f

E

388

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1805 TO 1804

and from thence to Malta with BuUocks only for the British Garrison
there [LC. EPP,Order Book, May 1803-June 1805.1
Extract from Memorandum Book of Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Navy, on board
U. S. Frigate Cohc(itulion. S February 1804

The Syren and Intrepid sailed for Tripoli to burn the Philadelphia.
[LC, original.]
Extract &om Diary of Captain Edward h e b l e , U. S. Navy, Commodore of U. S.
Squadron in the Mediterranean, Friday, 3 February 1804

[Syracuse] Taking on board water and provisions; Setting up rig-

ging &"* At 5 P. M. Sailed the Syren Lt Stewart and the Prize
Intrepid with LC Decatur with 64 Volunteers from the Enterprize

and Six Midshipmen and two Pilots from this Ship bound for the
Coast of Tripoly to endeavor to burn the Frigate late the Philadelphia - From information which I have recieved from Tripoly
that ship is now in the Harbor with all her Guns mounted: but that
she has no ammunition on board and only a Guard of about 30 Men.
[LC. EPP, Diary, 1803-1804.1
Extract from log book of U. S. Frigate Constitution. Captain Edward Preble, U. S.
Navy, commanding, Friday, 3 February 1804

a t anchor in Saragosa Syrin Vixen Nautilus and Enterprize in
Company, the ships company Employd setting up the Rigging and
watering ship, Towards the Evening Saild the Syrin and the prize,
the prize was Commd by Captain decator, and had on board 90 of
the Enterprize Men nnd Officers, Six of the Constitution officers was
also on board her, they stood out to the Southwd and are bound on
some Secrete Expuditen
[NA. N D original.]
Extract from log book kept by Sailing Master Nathaniel Haraden, U. S. Navy, on
board U. S. %ate ConsNfulion, Friday, 3 February 1804

Moderate breezes from the West!' At Anchor at Saragosa, Syren,
Vixen, hTautilus & Enterprize in company - Setting up the rigging
and watering ship. Towards evening saded the Syren and the Prize.
The prize was commanded by Cap$ Decatur and had on board 70 of
the Enterprizes men and Officers. Six Officers from the Constitution
were also on board her. They stood out to the Southa and are bound
on some Secret Expedition. We recieved 28 Gang Casks of water.
Moderate breezes through the night. Recieved some Old rigging
which had been landed out of the prize. A. M. Employed fitting
rigging & securing the Guns.
[LC.

EPP, Log Constitution,1803-1804.1

Extract from journal of Midshipman F. Cornelius deKrafft, U. S. Navy, in U. 8.
Brig Siren of 18 guns, Lieutenant Charles Stewart, U. S. Navy, commanding,
Friday, 3 February 1804

On Expidition to burn the Philadelphia.

-

Commences with moderate breezes & pleasant weathr At 1 P. M.
Hethcott Reed a midshipman & Lewis Jourvass a pilot came on
board from the Constitution -

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

389

At 5 got under way & stood out to sea the (Ketch) Intrepid in
company. At j/i past 8 Syracuse light house bore NW. The
Southermost part of the harbour S. by E At 9 took the Intrepid in
tow a strange sail in sight on the Lee bow. At past 9 beat to quarters, charged the guns. At 10 beat the retreat & set top gall! sails
At 11 back'd the main topsail & sent a number of 6 lb cartridges,
1 lb dQa quantity of wads & a package of brimstone. - Midnight
haul'd up square main sail & handed top gall$ sails, fresh breezes &
clear, bent main stay sail & set square main sail. At 3 set stay
sails & flying jib. At 9 all hands were muster'd when the intention
of the Expidition was made known to the crew, with which they
were pleas'd to express their satisfaction by 3 hearty cheers. At
10 beat to quarters and exercis'd the great guns & small arms. at
11 beat the retreat & hous'd the guns. Ends with fine breezes &
pleasant weather Latt: Obs: 35'40' N [NDA.]
To Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Navy, from Secretary of the Navy

NAVYD E P ~
Feb? 4.1804.
Your favor of the 12'h Novr enclosing your circular notification of
the blockade of the Port of Tripoli, I have received. Sensible, as you must be, that i t is the interest as well as the disposition of the United States to maintain the rights of neutral nations,
you will, I trust, cautiously avoid whatever may appear to you to be
incompatible with those rights. I t is, however, deemed necessary
and I am charged by the President to state to you what, in his opinion,
characterizes a blockade. I have therefore to inform you that the
trade of a neutral nation in articles, not contraband, cannot be rightfully obstructed to any port not actually blockaded by a force so disposed before it as to create an evident danger of entering it. Whenever
therefore you shall have thus formed a blockade of the port of Tripoli,
you will have a right to prevent any vessel from entering i t and to
capture for adjudication any ressel that shall attempt to enter the
same with a knowledge of the existence of the blockade. You will,
however not take as prize any vessel attempting to enter the Port
ii
such knowledge; but in every case of an attempt
of ~ r i ~ owithout
to enter without a previous knowledge of the existence of the blockade,
ou will give the commanding Officer of such vessel notice of such
glockade and forewarn him from entering. And if after such a notification such vessel should again attempt to enter the same Port,
you will be 'ustifiable in sending her into port for adjudication.
You will, ir, hence perceive that you are to consider your circular
communication to the Neutral Powers, not as an evldence that every
erson attempting to enter had previous knowledge of the blockade,
gut merely as a friendly notification to them of the blockade in order
that they might make the necessary arrangements for the discontinuance of all commerce with such blockaded Port. -

b

[NDA. LB, 1799-1807.1

390

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1808 TO 1804

%tract from Diary of Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Navy, Commodore of
U. S. Squadron in the Mediterranean, Saturday, 4 Februarg 1804

[Syracuse] Bent our Sails: At 10 A. M. the Nautilus & Vixen
weighed and sailed for Tunis Bay where they are to seperate after
having Communicated with our Agent there: The Vixen is then to
proceed to Algiers with dispatches for Consul Lear and the Nautilus
on a cruize off Tripoly - Wind S. W. Moderate.
[LC.

EPP, Diary, 1803-1804.1

Extract from log book of U. S. Frigate Comlitulion, Captain Edward Preble,
U. S. Navy, commanding, Saturday, 4 February 1804

moored in Saragosa. A M. a t 9 made the Nautilus and Vixen
Signal to weigh a t 10 Saild the ATautiLwand Vizen.
[NA. ND original.]
Extract from journal of Midshipman F. Cornelius deKrafft, U. S. Navy, in U. 8. Brig
Sirm of 18 guns, Lieutenant Charles Stewart, U. S. Navy, commanding, Saturday,
4 February 1804

At 8 inclining to calm IntrepLd cast off the tow rope. At j$' past 10
took in royals & back'd main top sail, hoisted out the cutter & sent her
on board the Intrepid At 11 boat return'd, hoisted her in & fill'd away. At % past 11 set
after main sail. At 4 AM wore to the w*. 8 took t'he Intrepid in tow
& boarded main tack. All hands employ'd getting every thing in
readiness for the expedition Latt: Obs: 3 5 O 14' N.
[NDA.]

[5 February 18041
To Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Navy, from Richard Farquhar, Malta

MAYIT PLEASE
YOUREXCELLENCY
In consequence of the different Accote r e d from Tripoli, and the
Promises your Excellency made to assist the Bashaw of Derna to
recover his Kingdom of Tripoli, I have advanced money on Acct of
the Bashaw and so confident I am of his recovering Tripoli, with the
assistance of the Americans that I will advance him more and share
in the Danger also
when your Excellency left this you told me that you would Either
come hear in two or three weeks or send an Officer to arange every
t h u g with regard to assisting the now Bashaw, by sending his Consul
& freinds to Alexandria. then he would soon take Derna & Bengazi,
this would not only asstonish his Brother the Bashaw of Tripoli but
would be of great advantage to Your Excellency in fresh Provisions
$9 and every thing would be ready for atack on [or attacking] Tripoli
when you r e d a little more h i s t a n c e but many People is of oppinion
that with the Vessels you have now & the Bashaw to land a t same time
that they would give up the Place Emeadetly
if our Excellency should think the Bombard I send with this will
be o m y service in going for the Bashaw with one of your Vessels I
will send hir a t my expence
the Argo Frigate sail'd yesterday for Alexandria with one of the
Manelucks Beys of Egypt which she brought from England a few days

7

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

391

ago the Bashaw of Derna & his Consul is well Accquaintmd with this
Bey & many of the Principd Turks in Egypt
[LC. EPP, Vol. 9, Jan.-Feb. 1804.1
Extract from journal of U. 8. Brig Argus, Lieutenant Isaac Hull,U. 8. Navy, commanding, Sunday, 5 February 1804

[Moored in Cadiz Bay since 23 January 18041 This day be
with moderate breezes from the Northward & eastward and C ear
Weather a t 8 AM, bent top Gall%sails crossed T. Gallg yards and
unmoored Ship a t 9 hove short on the starboard anchor the pilot
came on board & beat out of the bay a t )4 past 10 dischq the pilot a t
Meridian the li ht house bore E. S. E. distance about one League
Set studding sa s fore and aft -

P

S

[NDA photostat.]
Extract from journal of U. S. Brlg Argus. Lieutenant Isaac Hull, U. 8. EJavy,
commanding, Monday, 6 February 1804

past 2 hoisted the Ensi to his Britannic Majestps fri ate
at
Medusa made and took in P a r a s Necessary a t M past 8 a p e
W At f i past 1 AM employed beating into
Spartel bore S S W
Tangier Bay a t f i past 10 brought to with the bower anchor in 12
fathoms The town of Tangier bearing W B N * * * the Captain and a passenger went on Shore
[NDA photostat.]
Extract from journal of Midshipman F. Cornehus deKrafft, U. S. Navy, in U. 8.
Brig Siren of 18 guns, Lieutenant Charles Srewart, U. S. Navy, commanding,
Monday, 6 February 1804

Commences with fresh gales from the Nd PO4 with rain At 1
handed top sails. haul'd down fore top mast stay sail & double reef'd
after main sail, set them & rounded too. made signal for the Infrepid
to heave too. a t
past 1 hous'd top gall! masts. At 3 set fore top
mast stay sail. At past 6 bore away for the Intrepid. At 8 the Intrepid brought too hiidnight made signal for the Intrepid to wear. same time wore to
the "$I
EG At 4 made signal for the Intrepid to wear again same
time wore to the Ng & IV j/z past 10 haul'd down main stay sail At
past
11 hoisted out the cutter & sent her on board the Intrepid.
11 the cutter return'd with Lieu! Decatur - Meridian wore to the Ng
& Eg set the topsails close reef'd & shook the reefs out of the main snil
& set main stay sail. Hands employ'd makmg preparations for the
intended exped~tion.
Latt: Obs: 32' 22' N.
[NDA.]
To Eon. Joseph E. Nicholson, United States Congress, from Secret-

of the Navy

8th Congress
1st Session
TO T H E HOUSEO F REPRESENTATIVES,
FEBRUARY17,
COMMUNICATED
1804.
Navy Department, February 7, 1804.
The arrangeSIR: I have received your letter of the 4th
ments contemplated at the navy yard a t this place are -

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1803 TO 1804

392

1st. To discontinue the services of certain officers and men who
have been found to be superfluous.
2d. Instead of entering a certain portion of men for each ship, and
as the peace establishment law directs, attaching them ermanently
to such ship, to enter the men for the general service of e yard, and
to assign to them one ship, as a place of eating, sleeping, &c.
The officers proposed to be discontinued may retire on half pay,
like other officers of the navy not in actual service.
The accompanying copy of a letter from Captain Cassin to me,
exhibits a detailed view of the grounds upon which the proposed
arrangements are founded.
Statement B exhibits a view of the officers and men a t present
employed a t the yard and on board of the ships in ordinary; also a
view of the officers and men proposed to be discontinued, and of those
proposed to be retained.
Statement C is an estimate of the saving which the adoption of the
contemplated arrangements would produce.
I have the honor to be, sir, respectfully,
Your most obedient servant,
ROBERTSMITH.
NICHOLSON.
Honorable JOSEPH

&

A.
To Secretary of the Navy from Lieutenant John Caesin, U. S. Navy

JANUARY
23, 1804.
SIR:Since I have had the honor of being entrusted with the charge
of the ships in ordinary, many objections to the system rescribed
by the act of Congress, providing for a naval peace esta lishment,
in relation to the officemg and manning the vessels in ordinary,
have occurred to me. To provide a remedy, and suggest it for your
consideration, I have reflected much on the subject, and have advised
with gentlemen of the first practical information. The result I now
beg leave, respectfully, to submit :
By the act of March 3, 1801, it is provided that there shall be
permanently attached to each frigate laid up in ordinary, one sailingmaster, one boatswain, one gunner, one carpenter, one cook, one
sergeant, or corporal of marines, and eight marines; and to the large
frigates, twelve, and to the small frigates, ten seamen. The sailingmaster of each ship to have the general care and superintendence of
the ship, and generally to execute such duties of a purser as may be
necessary.
reeably to the provisions of this law, and the instructions which
you ave, from time to time, honored me with, the ships placed under
my care have heretofore been officered and manned. My objections
to the resent system, are, 1st. The officers and men being dis ersed
in sma squadrons on board of a number of ships, cannot be co ected
with that facility or despatch which is desirable.
2d. There being a squadron of men on board of each ship, there
must necessarily be a fire kept on board each ship to cook at, and in
proportion to the number of fires is our danger of suffering from them.
3d. The 0 5 ~ 0 cannot
1 ~
be sufEciently em loyed, and our experience
has demonstrated that even good officers
degenerate if not actively
employed. I t will be perceived, in the sequel, that there are other

6

%

e

f

w8

393

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

objections to the present system. They are, however, subordinate to
the three principal objections above recited, and proceed from them.
With respect to the first objection, it is obviously desirable that
our force should be concentrated as much as possible. If all were
drawn from one point, it could be applied at a moment's warning. For
many days together the services of the men are required for one
common object; every day, therefore, when their services are so
required, we unavoidably lose time in collecting them.
2dly. I t is manifestly true that, under the present system, we are
exposed to great and constant danger from fire, and a considerable
proportion of the time of the men is unavoidably employed in cleaning
up dirt made by themselves on board of their respective vessels, and
dirt is a powerful auxiliary in rotting a ship.
3dly. As our officers are not sufficiently employed, they will not avoid
setting an evil example of idleness and inactivity. While at sea,
sailing-masters, boatswains, gunners, and carpenters, have all important duties to discharge, and they would have important duties in a
vessel in ordinary, if all the rigging, sails, cables, guns, spars, &c.
were kept on board.
But, under the present system, every article belonging to these
departments is taken from on board the vessels, and deposited on
shore, and neither of these officers have a single article under their
charge, excepting the master, who, under my superintending control,
has the general charge of the ship; our experience having evinced
the inexpediency of requiring masters to perform the duties of pursers,
the provision which has been substituted will, I have no doubt, be
found a very salutary one.
Having suggested these defects in the present system, it bec,omes
me also to suggest a remedy, which I do, with great deference, by
proposing1st. That the establishment of officers and men a t the navy yard
shall consist of only the following:
1 Master of the yard,
2 Gunners, one sail-maker,
1 Head carpenter and constructor,
1 Shipkeeper to each ship, and
with his crew,
100 Seamen, and three guards of
1 Purser,
marmea,
Plumber, blacksmith, and crew,
1 Clerk, to keep the account of the
stores,
Block-maker and crew,
Cooper and crew.
1 Clerk of the yard,
2 Boatswains,

We have a t present:
1 Clerk of the yard,
10 Sailingmaatera,
Plumber, blacksmith, and crew,
1 Carpenter, head and crew,
11 Boatswains,
Block-maker and crew,
11 Gunners,
Cooper and crew,
130 Seamen,
11 Carpenters, one sail-maker,
1 Clerk, to keep the account of the 11 Guards of marines,
stores,
1 Purser.

2d. That all the men have their cooking done, diet and sleep, on
board of one ship, or in a house to be built for the purpose. This
arrangement would not only diminish the expense, a s a pears by
paper A, and increase the security of the public property, ut would
enable me to discharge the duties assigned to me mth increased
facility and despatch.

B

394

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1803 TO 1804

Under the proposed arrangement, it would be the duty of the
master of the yard to attend to laying down the buoys, marking out
the channel, to be in readiness with the proper pilots to go on board
of ships of the United States, at the mouth of the branch, and to bring
them up to their moorings, and take them from thence to sea; to be
vigilant in despatching boats necessarily provided for the relief of
such vessels coming into port, and for the discharge of stores, &c.
having them carefully conveyed to the warehouses appropriated to
the same. To visit the ships in ordinary at least once a day, in
order that they should be kept clean and sweet, and properly ventilated to prevent decay, and in case of delinquency to report thereof.
When any ship of ships should be ordered for sea, to attend particularly to the distribution of officersand men, as may be found necessary
to facilitate the execution of such order. To state from under his
hand a proportion of rigging, ground tackle, and stores, for the boatswains, that the superintendent may warrant the store-keeper in the
issue thereof. He is to specify the size, length, and quantity, of each
required, in order to frame indentures for the boatswains of each
ship to sign previous to leaving port. When it becomes necessary
for the crews in ordinary to perform duty in the yard, to regulate the
distribution of officers and men for the better performance thereof;
to attend to the moorings of the ships in proper season; to see the
cables well secured from ice or other in ury; their boats carefully collected and placed under cover, when no onger necessary to be exposed
to the weather; to attend in person on board of ships removin
their moorings to dock, &c. I t is also necessary that he shoufdfrom
pay
great care and attention to the ships' spars received a t the navy
yard, and suggest such measures as will prevent their decay. I t is
further necessary that he should visit the warehouses frequently,
and examine the stores of each ship, placin them in a state of foradmit.
wardness, as far as the state of ordinary
The boatswains and gunners would be placed under the immediate
eye of the master of the yard, and should have the particular charge
and direction of crews employed in their respective departments.
The three guards of marines would be placed, one on board the
headmost and one on board the sternmost ships, to prevent boats
coming inside of the moorings a t night, &c. and one guard in the yard
to prevent desertion and to guard the public property there.
The duties of the other officers have already been prescribed to
them by you, and are well known to themselves.
Thus, sir, I have taken the liberty of suggesting to you the aforementioned arrangement, which, in my opinion, would effectually
remove all the obstacles a t present opposed to the security of the
public property committed to my care, and to the due and prompt
execution of any orders with which you may honor me, as superintendent of the ysrd.
All which is most respectfully submitted.
I have the honor to be, sir, your obedient humble servant,
JOHNCABBIN,
Superintendent Navy Yard.
Honorable ROBERT
SMITH,
Secretary of the Navy.

i

wd

W a s WITH BARBARY POWERS
At present we consume annually about one hundred and thirty
cords of wood, and one thousand bushels of coal. Under the roposed arrangement forty cords of wood and two hundred and &ty
bushels of coal would be sufficient, and the proposed arrangement
contemplates our dispensing with the service of
9 Sailing masters,
9 Boatswains,
9 Gunners,
11 Carpenters,
30 Seamen,
8 Guards of marines;
All of which, it will be found, diminish the expenses of the yard
from twenty to thirty thousand dollars per annum. If the sailing
masters, boatswains, unners, and carpenters, proposed to be dispensed with, were fur oughed and put on half pay, in that case the
saving to the public would be upwards of twenty thousand dollars
a year.

P

View of the oficers and men at present employed at the navy yard, and on board the
ships i n ordinary, al Washington; also a view of the oficers and men proposed la
be discontinued, and of those proposed to be retained.
Officers and men proposed to
be retained.

OBcers and men proposed to
be discontinued.

Officers and men at present
employed.

I

!

1 Navy,agent, ........................................................
I ~uner~ntendent.
................. ....................................

I

I

1 Captain of the navy,.
I ~uwrinten~en~..

Suigeon,
.
1 Surgeon, ............................................................
Surgeon's mate
1 S u m n ' s matc, .....................................................
Bailing master.
10 sailing masters, ................. 9 ~lallingmasters, ................
1 Head h n-t e r ...................I ....................................I
Head carpenter,
1 Purser, ..............................................................
P-.
Clerk to keep the accounts
1 Clerk to keep the accounts of .-----..--.-------.----------------of stores
stom,
Clerk of t i e yerd.
1 Clerk of the yard, ...................................................
Boatswams.
11 Boatswams, ..................... 9 Boatswains, ...................
11 Gunners, ........................ 9 Ounnem, ......................
Gunners.
11 Clirpcnters. ..................... 11 Carpenters, ....................
Sailmaker and crew,
1 Bailmaker and crew ..................................................
Plumber and crew
1 Plumber and crow ..................................................
Blockmaker and CAW,
1 Blockmaker and crew, ..............................................
Cooper and crew,
1 Cooper and crew, ...................................................
Seamen,t
130 Scamen. ......................... 30 Seamen, .......................
Guards of marines.
11 Guards of marines. .............. 8 Guards of marines. .............
I

'1 Captain of the navy, propossd to be attached

to the establishment, would have the generat superintendence of the nav yard, and perform the dutiw of navy agent.
t In no state of th%gs shall we require more than one hundred seamen at the yard.

396

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1803 TO 1804

Estimate of the annual expense of keeping i n actual sermce the oficers and men
proposed i n statement B to be discontinued, which ezhibits the annual saving that
would be prodwed by adopting the arrangements contemplated.
PAY

Deduct the amount of the half pay of the above officers,
which they would receive when not in actual service,- 30 Seamen. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

at $12 per month

$11,280. 00
5, 640. 00
$5, 640. 00
4,320.00

$9,960.00
PROVISIONS.

38,690 rations, at 20 cents,------ - ------- - - -- -- - - - - ------ - -

- --

7,738. 00

GUARDS OF MARINES.

8 Guards of marines, - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 12,
- -705.
- - -28
In the articles of wood, coal, candles, kc. we should save about- - - - - - 1,000.00
$31, 403.28

[Am. State Papera. Kav. Aff., Vol. 1.1
To Midshipman John B. Nicholson, U. S. Navy, Washington, D. C., from Secretary
of the Navy

NAVYD E P ~
Feb? 7. 1804 -

Dispatches will be delivered to you by the Secretary of the Treasury,
which you will carry to New York and there deliver to Lieu? Leonard
of the Navy, if i t should be agreeable to him to proceed with them
thence to France. If it should not be agreeable to Lieut Leonard to
carry the dispatches to France, you are to proceed with them to
France yourself, under such instructions as you may receive from the
Secretary of the Treasury. [NDA. OSW,Vol. 6, 1802-1805.1
To Midshipman (acting as Lieutenant) James T. Leonard, U. S. Navy, New York,
N. Y., from Secretary of the Navy

NAVYD E P ~
Febv 7.1804. This letter will be delivered to you by Mr JnOB. Nicholson who will

also deliver to you dispatches from the Secretary of the Treasury,
which you are to carry to France, if it should not interfere with your
private enga ements, but should it interfere with your private engagements, Mr gicholwn himself will carry the dispatches to France. In the event of your going to France with the dispatches, you will
conform yourself to such instructions as you may receive from the
Secretary of the Treasury. While on this duty, you will be allowed
full pay and rations from this dept and you will be allowed a t the
Treasury dept your reasonable expences, of which the Secretary of the
Treasury will give you more particular information. [NDA. OSW, VoL 6,1802-1805.1

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

397

To Captain Edward Preble, U. 5. Navy, from Levett Harris, U. S. Consul General,
St. Petersburg, Russia

CONSULATE
OF THE UNITED
STATESOF AMERICA
St Petersburg 26 Jan? - 7' February I804
SIR, The unfortunate news of the loss of the Frigate Philadelphia
reached this about two weeks since, being however without information from any of my Colleagues on the subject, I was induced for some
time to encourage doubts of its truth; but it is with deep regret I have
to add, that the intelligence received by the two last mails is such, as
to leave my error too manifest.
As soon as this fatal information was intitled to credence, I delayed
not a moment to address an official note to the Grand Chancellor of
this Empire, soliciting the influence of His Imperial Majesty with the
Turkish Government in behalf of the Officers and Crew, who by this
disaster fell a prey to the merciless barbarians of Tripolie - You
must be convinced of the importance of an intercession so ascendant
as that of a Monarch of Russia, Who, from the eminent position He
has taken the present War, has added weight to the power and Consequence which He maintains throughout Europe. I have the most
cordial satisfaction Sir, in felicitating you and my Country on the
magnanimous part which His Imperial Majesty has deigned on this
occasion so promptly to take, and I delay not a moment to transmit
the inclosed Copy of the Chancellors letter that you, and all attached
to the Squadron under your Command, mag share in the general
gratification it is calculated to produce. If no effective measures have been employed, on our receipt of this,
in behalf of our Suffering fellow Citizens, you d b e too sensible of
the powerful influence of the Court of St Petersburg a t Constantinople,
to delay improving the value of its interposition: I t will in that case
perhaps, conduct you to a Correspondence with Mr drItalinskyRussian
Ambassador there, the result whereof, I cannot doubt, will be as
satisfactory as the event to which it may lead, must be fortunate
and con so la to^.

LEVETT
HARRIS.

duplicate to the care of the U. S Consul Gibralter
[LC. EPP, Vol. 9,Jan.-Feb. 1804.1
Extract from log book kept by Sailing Master Nathaniel Hareden, U. S. Navy,
on board U. S. Frigate GnrUtution. Tuesday, 7 February 1804

Fresh Breezes & cloudy. Winds North$ At dnchor a t Saragosa,
Enterprize in company - Ships company employed as necessary Clewed hawse - Condemned by survey t,en bvrells of beef marked
as follows "George Town, J. Knouse, D Madeua". I t was stinking
and rotten and thrown Overboard into the sea; The Beef was recieved
from the Traveller an American store ship, and had been repickled
three times in expectation of bringing it to At 8 P. M. a peared in the offing the U. S. Schooners V k n and
Nautilus; he^ gad no eolours hoisted The Biltern weighed and stood
out to sea.- Made the 'C7izen.& lLTautilus Signals to holst their colors.
After the Signal was obeyed the B.ib2er-n Stood in and reanchored as
did the Vixen and Nadzlus. Stron breezes throughout the night
At 2 A. M. the weather became Squa y. Bitted a range on the sheet

ii

398

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1803 TO 1804

cable. At 7 A. M. made the Vixen and Nautilus Signal to prepare to
sail, and signal for all crtptains. Lt' Somers & S m t h waited on the
Commodore At 10 A. M. the Nautilus sailed as did the Bdtern Strong breezes all the forenoon. Recieved from shore a Quantity of
new rigging Surgeons report 19 sick, 2 c0nvO9~& one discharged
Noon strong breezes from the Northward.
[LC. EPP, Log Constitution, 1803-1804.1
[8 February 18041
To Lientenant John H. Dent, U. S. Navy, from Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Navy

By Edward Preble Esquire Commander
in chief of the United States
Squadron stationed in the
Mediterranean.
To Lieutenant John, H. Dent hereby appointed Lieutenant Commandant of the U. S. Schooner Enterprize
BY VIRTUEof the Power and Authority to me Given, I do hereby
Constitute and appoint you Lieutenant Commandant of the United
States Schooner Enterprize ; Willing and requiring you forthwith to
go on board and take upon you the charge and Command of Lieutenant Commandant in her accordingly; Strictly charging and Commanding all the Officers and Company belonging to the said Schooner, to
behave themselves jointly and severally in their respective Employments with all due respect and Obedience unto you their said Lieutenant Commandant: And you likewise to observe and execute the
General printed instructions, And Such Orders and directions as you
shall from time to time recieve from me, or any other your Superior
Officer for the United States Service: hereof nor you nor any of you
may fail as you will answer the Contraq a t your peril. And for so
doing this shall be your Warrant.
Given under my hand and
Seal this 8@dday of FebY 1804
and 2St@Year of the
Independmce of the
United States of America
PREBLE
(Signed) EDWARD
[LC. EPP, Order Book, May 1803-June 1805.1
(LS)

To John Broadbent, Messina, from Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Navy

U. S. SHIPConstitution
Syracwe Harbour February 8Q 1804
SIR, M': Dyson has mentioned to me that on application you would
afford me your assistance in procuring a few Gun and Mortar Boats.
I am in want of four of the former, and two or three of the latter, all
of the largest size. The Gun Boats to carry a long 24 or 32 Pounder,
and the Mortar Boats a ten inch Mortar each - I wish the Boats
to be in compleat order with Guns and Mortars and shall want shot
and shells, suitable for the same You will lay me under a great obligation by writing to some of your friends a t Naples who have influence
with the Court to endeavour to obtain an order that my wants may be
suppliedI t is said that there are some good Mortar Boats at

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

399

Palermo, and I believe you have some at Messina. I beg your early
attention to this business and hope soon to have the pleasure of personally acknowledging the favour.
[LC. EPP, LB, Dec. 1803-April 1504.1
Extract from journal of U. S. Brig Argus. Lieutenant Laae Hull, U. 6. Navy,
eommandiig, Wednesday, 8 February 1804

[Moored in Tangier Bay] At 6 P. M unmoored a t 7 Weighed and
made sail for Gibraltar light airs and calm through the night a t
midnight Cabreta point bore [space] Europa Point bore [space]
At 6 AM, brought too with the starboard anchor in the S El and
moored with the Larboard in the N W, St Roque N b E ): E Devils
Tower S E )$2 S, people employ'd as Necessary [NDA photostat.]
Extract from journal of Hidshipman F. Cornelius deKrafft, U. 6. Navy, in U. S. Brig
Siren of 18 guns, Lieutenant Charles Stewart, U. S. Navy, commanding,
Wednesday. 8 February 1804

Fresh breezes from the Wq with a heavy swell from the N E. %
past Meridian made the land bearing S W by S - At 1 P. M took in
main sail close reef'd the topsails & haul'd up fore sail. At 2 sent Li
Decatur on board the Intrepid & directed him to proceed ahead. 54
past 2 proportioned our sails to keep about 5 miles astern. At 5 made
the town of Tripoli bearing S E ji E bore up for it (at 8 sounded in
13 fathoms water. At [space] came too in 7 fathoms, with the larboard bower, the E, point of the land bearing S S W supposed to be
about 7; of a mile off. I t being dark $ hazy codd desern no object
by which we might h o w the precise place. Got the boats out sounded
a considerable distance astern & got 6,7 & 8 fathoms, hard bottom,
also in shore got 6, 7, 5 & 4 fathoms hard bottom (Cutter being very
much injur'd hoisted her up astern) At 10 saw a light bearing W by
N not far distt suppos'd to be the Intrepid. At 11 it bore N W by W.
answr'd it by a Iight on the starboard bow, Got in the boats the wind
hading to the NQ& increasing, also the sea, the brig rolling gunnels
under - brought too the takles on the cable (parted them) drawing
bolts & hooks, brot the messenger & purchases, after heaving a t it
5 hours (men 3 times knocked down from the bans & several much
injur'd) a bank heaving in sight to the N E, wind & sea increasing
& day light approaching which would discover us to the enemy, we
cut the cable; set close reef'd topsails, reef'd fore sail set fore top mast
stay sail & main stay sail reef'd & stood off N by E. hous'd the guns
shipp'd the ports, clearing decks & secur'd the boats. At 6 AM the
gale increasing considerably took in fore top sail & fore top mast
stay sail. Tripoli bearing S by W 5 leagues. at 7 spoke the Intrepid.
Meridian heavy gales & thick hazy weather
Latt: Obs: 33'20' N.
[BDA.]
To Lieutenant Isaac Hull,U. S. Navy,commanding U. S. Brig Arlw, from Secretaq
of the Navy

N a n DEPM~
Fib? 9. 1804. Since my letter to ou on the subject of convoying the Betsy Walk.
(now called the woo&op Simr)I have redinformation that she has

400

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1805 TO 1804

an Algerine protection against all the Barbary powers. As she has
such a protection it may be unnecessary to afford her convoy - the
subject however is still committed to the discretion of yourself and
Mr Gavino. [Similar letter to John Gavino, Gibraltar, 9 February 1804.1
[ND-4. LB, 1799-1807.1
To Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Navy, from William Higgins, U. S. Navy Agent,
Malta

MALTAthe 9 jebr 1804
DEARSIR A Cargo of Stores for the Squadron under your Command
has arrived in this Port and as it is addressed by Charter to M: Pulis
of course I cannot take upon myself to give any directions concerning
it - The Vessel is obliged to go no further than this place and of
course the Captain will demand an extraordinary freight for carrying
the Cargo to your place - You would do well to give immediate
directions concerning it and furnish me with orders to take the same
under my direction, either (if you choose it to be sent to Syracuse),
to make a fresh agreement with Captain Tipling or if he is too exorbitant in his demands affre[i]ght some other Vessel for the purpose of
sending it over to you I have had some letters put into my hands for Captain Bainbridge
and his Officers, I expect to be able to forward them in the course of a
day or two. - As yet I have no news from Tripoly.
[LC. EPP, Vol. 9, Jan.-Feb. 1804.1
Extract from journal of U. S. Brig Arguc. Lieutenant Isaac Hull, U. S. Navy, commanding, Thursday, 9 February 1804

Moored in Gibralter Bay These 24 hours Commence with hard
gales from the Eastward Arrived here the American Ship Independanee of Baltimore from Leghorn bound to Baltimore Came too
Abreast of us but blowing to heavy her anchors could not bring her
up she made sail out of the bay for the Straight 107'b of damaged
bread hove overboard At 6 AM, sent the end of the stream Cable on
board an english merchant ship whose anchors could not hold her she
not being in a condition to make sail for want of hands Arrived here
an English convoy bound to Malta under convoy of the Sophy Sloop
of War Employed as Necessary
[NDA photostat.)
To Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Navy, from John Gavino, U. S. Consul, Gibraltar

GIBRALTAR
1Otbfeby 1804
DEARSIR I have to inform you that this day arrived a Danish
Brig, the Commander of which has declared that he was boarded the
12thUltp between Sardenia & the Coast of Italy by a Tripolin Cruiser,
she was a three mast Polacra with 8 Guns, about 60 Men, had black
Top sides, & 90 T o m burthen, sayd had taken nothing but mentiond
the misfortune happend the Philad"
* *
[LC. EPP, Vol. 9, Jan.-Feb. 1804.1
To Secretary of State from John Gavino, U. 8. Consul, Gibraltar

NQ144

GIBRALTAR
1Ot@febmary1804
SIR I have not been honord with any of yours since my last NQ
143 dated 2 g Inst continued to the 4t4 -

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

401

I have now to inform you that I this day received a Letter from
W" H. Thone Commander of the Scho' Citizen with the Gun Carriages
dated LIOrient 6t@UltQwherein he tells me was not permitted to Sail
untill the departure of the French Squadron, which he supposed would
be the first fair wind, her has not yet appeard here. This day arrived a Danish Brig the Commr of which declares he
was boarded the 12t@Ulto between Sicily & the coast of Italy by a
Tripoline Cruiser, she was a Polacra with 3 Masts, 8 Guns, about 60
Men & 90 Tunns burthen, had black Top sides, sayd had taken nothing,
and informed him of the misfortune hap end the Philadelphia. I
have Communicated this to Comodor Prib el Cap1 Hull Commander
of the Brig Argus now in the Bay, and the Consuls along thecoast. a t hfalaga Publick health is restored

P

[NA.

SDA.

CL, Gibraltar, Vol. 2, 1796-1804.1

To Joseph Pulis, U. S. Consul, Malta, from John Gavino, U. S. Consul, Gibraltar

GIBRALTAR
lot@February 1804.
SIR,I wrote you the 26th. Ulto by the Victualing Ship called Port
Mary for the Squadron which I forwarded you. The enclosed being
of consequence please forward it to Commodore Preble as soon as
possible. A Tripoline Cruiser Polacre Ship of 8 Guns 60 Men and
about 90 Tons with 3 Masts visited the 12th Ulto a Danish Brig
between Sardinia and the Coast of Italy
[LC.

EPP, LB, Dec. 1803-April 1804.1

To Captain Edward Preble, U. S,Navy, Syracuse, from Joseph Pulis, U. S. Consul,
Malta

MALTAlot@Febr? 1804
DEARSIR. I moreover add you these few lines, in order to have the
honour of informing you, that two days past, has arrived a t this place,
a Vessel from Alexandria in Egypt, with whom I have had the pleasure
of receiving a letter from the Basha of Tripoly's Brother, who a t
present resides at that place. And who writes to me in the following Manner. That he would be eternally kept at the disposal of the United States
of America, if they would protect and help him (as Commodore
h4orris had promised him, he would write to our G o v e m e n t about
it) And that having such protection, he is sure would enjoy of the
Command of the Regence of Tripoly. I beg you to honour me with an Answer concerning this affair, that
I may Answer to the Dey of Alexandria respecting the same. -*
* *
[LC. EPP, Vol. 9, Jan.-Feb. 1804.1
To Lieutenant John H. Dent, U. S. Navy, commanding U. S. Schooner Enterprize,
from Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Navy

U. S. FRIGATEConstitution
Syracuse Harbour Febry log@1804 SIR YOUwill proceed to Messina with the Enterprize, deliver the
Letters with which you are charged, Examine the Gun and Mortar
boats there, and endeavour to know if any of the largest size are for
Sale, Enquire what Guns or Mortars can be procured, what Vessels
suitable for Gun Boats or light Cruizers are for Sale or Charter, and

402

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1803 TO 1804

a t what rate. You will stay only two days at hlessina and return
directly to this place. You may take under Convoy any American
Vessels bound to the Westward and from hence I will give them protection as far as Algiers. Lt Commt J. H. DENT
U. S. Schooner Enterprize
[NHF.Dent's LB.]
To Captah Edward Preble, U. S. Navy, from Lieutenant Isaac Hull, U. 6. Bavy

UXITEDSTATES
BRIGArgus
Gibralter Bay 10" Feb? 1804
SIR, AS the Ship that brings this is under u-ay, I have but a
moment to inform you, that I arrived here two days since from Cadiz,
and Tangier, and have thr pleasure to acquaint you, that all is peacible
on this Station, The Emperors Ships are all dismantled, and no
attempt has been made to equip any of them for Sea since you left
this. I am now taking on board Provisions & Water, and shall in n. few
days run up as far as Cape de Gntt, and call at Malaga, as soon as the
Communication is open with that part of Spain - The Schooner with
Gun Carriages, is hourly expected here, should she arrive, before I
leave this, I shall run over to Tangier with her, and attend to their
delivery
I t is unfortunate, that I happened to be absent from this, when the
Store Ship arrived, as so good an oppertunity seldom offers for sending
Letters to Malta. I have no news to send you, but have collectcd a few Papers at
Cadiz, and this place, and hope you will receive them. [NDA. Isaac Hull LB, 1803-1804.1
Extract from Diary of Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Navy, Commodore of U. 8.
Squadron in the Mediterranean, Friday, 10 February 1804

[Syracuse]Fresh Gales from N N W & cloudy - Vixen & Enterprize
in Company At sundown moderate & leasant after blowing a hard
Gale for these 4 days past. Got up ower Yards and top Gallant
Masts: I recieved letters from Palermo announcing the arrival there
of five Merchant Vessels from the United States, and letters from
Messina with a request that I would send a Vessel to convoy the
American Ship Port M a y laden with a very Valuable cargo to the
Westward clear of Danger. Ordered the Enterprize to prepare to
sail under the command of L5 Dent whom I have appointed L: Commdt
Lt Decatur being absent on an expedition to the Coast of Tripoly Lent the Enterprize a Lieutt Midshipman, Surgeons Mate and Thirty
Men. [LC. EPP,Diary, 1803-1804.1

P

To Bichard Harrison, Auditor of the Treasury, from Secretary of State

DEPARTMENT
OF STATE,

Feb? 11tQ 1804.
SIB.I return the documents enclosed in your letter of the 19'h Ult.
in relation to Mc Eatons accounts. On a view of the contingent
expenm as now specified and explained i t seems proper that they

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

403

be admitted as far as the items of which they consist are comprised
within the rules established by my letter of the lit@ July last; and
the following may also be admitted, viz: Customary presents a t
public feasts, expences of horses & carriages, repairs of the house
& appurtenances, hire of boats, porterage, postage, sums paid to
Couriers, and small presents to Messengers coming on public business.
On the reference of the demand on account of the Gloria to the
Navy Department it was rejected under the idea that no such addition
could be made to the Naval establishment without an express legal
sanction, but from the nature of the service for which she was destined
she may be looked upon as retained for giving and receiving intelligence. Under this impression her hire may be settled at a reasonable
rate for the period she may have been actually employed in such
service. The last charge of 10,131-781100 Dollars under date of
August 1802, is under all circumstances of the case not admissible
under any proper exercise of the discretion vested in the Executive.
As the Bey of Tunis has admitted the receipt of the Military and
Naval Stores due to him in consideration of the peace, it may be
omitted to charge M' Eaton with them.
[NA. SDA. Dom. L., Vol. 14, May 1802-May 1805.1
To Captain William Bainbridge, U. S. Navy, from Tobias Lear, U. S. Consul General,
Algiers

ALGIERS
FebY ldtb 1804
DEARSIR I had the pleasure of writing to you on the 16'h of
December, under cover to D' Davis, our Charge d'AfTairs at Tunis,
and forwarded a copy on the 2d ins: through the same channel. I
also wrote to Citizen Beaussier, the Commissary Geni of the French
Republic, at the same time, and enclosed a letter for you from iMr
Thainville the French Agent here. Immedi~telyon hearing of your
misfortune I authorized D' Davis to give every necessary supply to
yourself & our unfortunate fellow Citizens, with you, and to enable
him to do so, I placed a credit of ten thousand dollars in his hands.
Since that I have r e d a letter from Dr Davis of the 27'Q of Decr
acknowledging the receipt of my letter &:. and enclosing a copy of his
to you on the 20thof Decr I sent to our Govt the account of your misfortune, as soon as it came
to my linowledge, and of the steps which I had taken in consequence,
and have the pleasure to know that my letters have gone from Alicant
to the U. S. by good & safe oppertunities. I yesterday r e d a letter from the Honble Charles Pinkney, our
Minister a t Madrid, in which he informs me, that upon hearing of
our misfortune, he had applied to the French & British Ministers a t
b a d r i d to write to the Agents of their respective nations, a t Tripoli,
to use their best endeavours that the unfortunate situation of yourself & fellow Citizens might be rendered as comfortable as possible
in Captivity, and authorized them to use 3 or 4000 dollars, if necessary,
to supply your immediate wants, and look to him for reimbursement;
adding that he did this without any special authority from our Govr
knowing that our affairs with Barbary were committed to the care of
Commodore Preble & myself; but he was led to do it from motives of
humanity, lest I might not have had timely notice of your misfortune,
or any accident aha retard supplies from this quarter. - He requests

404

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1803 TO 1804

me to assure you & the others of our fellow Citizens in Captivity of
his sincere cornmisseration, & earnest desire to render you every service
in his power. At the same time I received a letter from Mr Cathcart, dated a t
Leghorn Decr 13'5 informing me that he had authorized Mr Nyssen,
the Danish Consul a t Tripoli, to furnish 3 or 4000 dollars for your use,
and that he shq purchase two suits for each man from his private
funds. The style of M! Cathcarts letter to me was arrogant & dictatorial, and carrying with it an idea that he was the person empowerd
to do these things. He tells Mr Nyssen that as he has no more cash,
he shall write to our Agents at Algiers to furnish him further, &
expects that I shall do it. - Had MI: C any reason to believe me
ignorant of my powers & duties, or neglegent in attending to them,
he might well have written in this manner. - Mr C should consider
that he is now but a private Citizen; & further, he should remember,
that his conduct has given disgust (whether right or wrong) to the
Barbary powers; and therefore it could do no good to our affairs for
him to assume an agency in them. - Had humanity alone dictated
this measure I am sure no one would have given him more credit than
myself; but I see in it more of a wish to appear consequential & arrogate to himself a power which he possesses not, than anything else.
I am however, sincerely happy that there are so many sources of
supplies for our unfortunate Countrymen. I hope, my dear Bainbridge, you will not think hardly of me for
speaking thus of a man, who has taken measures for the relief of those
of our Countrymen who are in misfortune. God forbid I should do
any thing but thank him for the act; but I confess, the manner in
which he has done it, as it relates to me, has wound my feelings;
for I trust that yourself & those with you will have no cause to accuse
me of inattention to your wants.
Affairs between the British & this Regency have assumed a very
serious aspect. - In April last the Dey sent Mr Falcon, the British
Consul out of this Regency, with marks of high indignity; and soon
after his Cruizers to a number of Vessels having the passports of
General Ball & others, condemned & sold vessels & cargoes, and kept
the crew in slavery. - This business was dormant here 'till the 16t@
ultimo, when 8 British Ships of the line, with Lord Nelson, in the
Victory, appeared of[f] the Harbour. Cap$ Keets came to anchor
in the Superb of 74 Guns, with Mr Falcon on board. The letters of
Lord Nelson to the Dey, insisting upon his receiving Mr F. again as
Consul, making an apology for sendin him out of the Country, in
the manner he did, and pving up the rews of those Vessels bearing
British passport%,& maklng indemification for the Vessels & Cargoes,
were received b him with great indignity. Cap! Keets had an interview with the g e g on the 16'Q in which he urged those points with
high Language, such as the Dey never heard before. The Dey retorted
and much altercation ensued. The Dey absolutely refused to receive
Mr Falcon again, or to yield any one point. - The next day the
Ships stood into the Bay. Caps Keets came on shore again; but the
Dey refused to see him, saying he had given him his answer yesterday.
Every preperation was made for defence. An immediate att,ack was
expected; but the Ships tacked & stood out of the Bay again. The
next day they were 5 or 6 Leagues to the N.E. (excepting the Supeyb,
which stood on & off in the Bay; but had no communication mth

8

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

405

the shore) calm or light airs all day. On the 1gtb the Ship disappeared,
and have not been seen since. The heroic character of Lord Nelson
forbids the idea of fear, on the part of the British, with such a force;
and there can be no doubt but he was called off on other business
which could not be delayed; particularly as another Ship joined him
on the morning of his departure. - Thus stands the busmess & we
are in anxious expectation of the issue. This appearance of the British fleet has caused some commotion
here, and much irritation against the Jews, who are supposed to have
been the cause of the dispute with the British. Busnah, the Jew,
was attacked by a Turk in the Street & slightly wounded. The
whole paternity are in fear & trembling, and frequent robberies which
happen in the neighbourhood of the City, causes no small degree of
alarm: - Indeed there seems to be a discontent prevailing which
threattens serious consequences. I have not received any letters from the U. States since my arrival
here; nor heard a word from Commodore Preble since he left this
Bay on the 21" of Novr. By a letter which I received yesterday
from Mr Gavino, he informs mc that a Vessel arrived from Baltimore
which brings accounts of Cap$ Sterretts recruiting men for the Esser,
which may be daily expected in this Sea. I feel anxious to hear from you & know the situation of yourself,
your Officers & men, and manyeother important points in which you
will be able to give me information. Mr O'Brien is still here, his wife has lately presented him with a
fine Boy, and I presume they will hardly depart untiU the season is
morc favourable. - They send their best regards to you. Mra Lear desires me to tell you how much she thlnks of yourself
& our other fellow citizens in captivity, and how anxiously she wishes
your deliverance.
Remember me to those about you. I need not say you must bear
your misfortune like men; for I know you will do i t ; and with my best
wishes you may be assured that everythmg will be done for you in
the power of,

TOBIAS
LEAR
N.B.

Enclosed to G . Davis Esq' in NQ6.

[Stephen Deeatur Col. NDA photostat, Book A.]
To Joseph Pulis, U. S. Consul, Malta, from Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Navy

UNITEDSTATESSHIPConstitution
Syracuse Harbour Feb? lW 1803 [I8041
SIR, I understand that a store ship for the squadron under my
Command has arrived a t Malta. I must confess I am not a little
surprized that you should neglect to inform me of this event - Several
Vessels arrived here yesterday from Malta by which I received the
information. I have sent Captain Smith to take the sole direction
of the Cargo of the Store Ship, and any letters that she has for the
Officers of my Squadron - A pilot brought over as m w y Seamen as
I shall want.
[LC. EPP, LB, Dee. 1803-April 1804.1

406

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1803 TO 180.4

To Lieutenant John Smith, U. S. Navy, commanding U. S. Schooner Vixen, from
Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Navy

U. S. SHIPCon-stitution
Feb? 12iQ 1804. Syracuse Harbor
SIR M' Butler Master of the Vben has reported to me that he has
so far recovered his health as to be able to attend to his duty; You
will therefore send Mr Burrows on board this Ship, and Recieve
Mr Butler.
[LC. EPP, Order Book, May 1803-June 1805.3
To Robert R. Livingston, U.S. Minister to Paris, France, from Stephen Cathalan, Jr.,
U. S. Commerical Agent, Marseilles, Prance

MARSEILLES
13Q Feb? 1804
SiR I have the honor to beg your reference to the inclosed Copy of
a Letter I have received yesterda from J. Lea: Cathcart who was
our Consul a t Tripoly, now in Leg om.
His demands Could not be executed here or a t Toulon unless this
Government should grant us the permission to purchase, build or fit
out such vessels & export the ammunition desired, which is forbidden
by the existing laws of France - I t is also doubtfull, whether this
Government would consent Such an armament be made in the Ports
of France by a power in war against tripoly.
I Should have wrote already to the Prefect Maritim a t Toulon on
that Subject, but he could do nothing - without orders from the Minister of Marine - This being an object of dyplomacy, which, if
obtained, must be kept Secret, I cannot apply to any to treat this
matter with this hlinister or that of foreign Relations than to you,
Sir, to do it properly & Efficaciously; - If the Should have Such
Vessells not to be employed in this war ngahlst England, they might
wish to Sell them and give orders a t Toulon in Conformity or let us
build them at Toulon, La Seyne or Marseilles after their own h4odcls;
& I hope they could be built & Ready two months after such permission granted Should have reached me.
Unfortunately we have too many Americans in Captivity a t
Tripoly, when the Sweeds threatened the Bey of Tripoly of a Bombardment, his Repply was that the first attempt to execute it, would
be the signal to put to death the Sweedish Captives i n his power! I s
it not to be apprehended such a threatening for the american Captives
by the U. S. Fregate Philadelphia On your answer which I will transmit to Mr Cathcart I will be
ready to execute your orders and any I may Receive for the United
States Service - You may write direct to Mr Cathcart at Leghorn
on that subject Begging you to advise the Sec? of State a t Washington
of what occurs P. S. I have Strongly Recommended the American Officers & Crew
of the PhiJadelphia to my friend Mr Beaussier the french Commissary
a t Tripoli -

K

[NA. SDA. Disp., France, Vol. 9, 1803-1805.1

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

407

To William Higgins, U. S. Navy Agent, Malta, from Captain Edward Preble, U. 8.
Navy

U: S SHIPConstitzLtion
Syracuse Harbour Feb? l S t @1804
DEARSIR I have received your esteemed favour of the g t 9 Inst
and have sent Captain Smith to regulate the business respecting the
Store-Ship. I hope he will be able to prevail on the Master to come
here with the Cargo. If that cannot be done I have directed him to
apply to you to engage a Vessel, nnd Ship it to this place - The
removal from Vessel to Vessel will injure the provisions; of course it
is best to give him a reasonable consideration for bringing it over
The Vixen will convoy her - I send you a thousand dollars to replace the money sent to C - Bainbridge I t wdl not be long before
I shall call a t hlalta when I d l make a deposit of money with you.
[LC. EPP, LB, Dec. 1803-April 1804.1
To Lieutenant John Smith, U. S. Navy, commanding U. S. Schooner Vixen. from
Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Navy

U. S. SHIPCon~tiL'ution
Syracuse Harbor Febr ISt@1804
SIR
will sail for Malta and on your arrival there take charge
of the Curgo of the Store ship lately arrived from the United States
with provisions and Stores for the Squadron under my command; and
of all letters for me or the Officers of the squadron; I have no doubt
but the Cap' of the Ship will consent to discharge the Cargo here for
a reasonable consideration as the Distance is so short; If he Consents
you will convoy him: but if he cannot be prevailed upon, you will
deliver the charge of the Cargo to \.I;" Higgins Esqr and direct him to
store it and return immediately to this place.
[LC. EPP, Order Book, May 1803-June 1805.1
Extract from log book kept by Sailing Master Nathaniel Haraden, U. S. Navy, on
board U. S. Fhgate Constitution, Monday, 13 February 1804

Strong breezes from the W,S. Ti' - At anchor in Saragosa Vixen
in company - I neglected to mention that at 5 P. M. yesterday we
made the Vixen Signal, NQ611 and a t 9 this Morning the signal N Q
598 Ships company employed this afternoon as necessary. At Sundown the weather became moderate and continued so during the night
At 7 A. M. made the Vixen Signal NQ878 - She immediately weighed
and stood to sea. We received from Malta twenty new recruits who
entered for the Constitution - Employed working up Junk and surveying the Warrant officers store rooms - Surgeons report 10 Sick,
10 convVt and one discharged from the sick list At Noon light airs from the East$.
[LC. EPP, Log Constitution, 1803-1804.1
Extract from journal of U. S. Brig Argus. Lieutenant Isaac Hull, U. S. Navy, commanding, Tuesday, 14 February 1804

These 24 hours Commenc.e with moderate breezes and Clear Pleasant Weather a t 1 P, hl, weighed nnd stood out of the bn,y [of Gibraltar] bound to the Eastward having the American Ship Actress of New

408

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1803 TO 180L

York under Convoy a t K past 1 made all sail a t 4 Europa point
bore W b N 4 leagues distq Made and took in sail as necessary to
keep Company with the Actress Merchantman 4 strange sail in sight
the Actress Considerably astern Latitude Observed 36'35' N.
[NDA photostat.]
Extract from log book kept by Sailing Master Nathaniel Haraden, U. S. Navy, on
board U. S. Frigate Constitution. Tuesday. 14 February 1804
Moderate Breezes and cloudy. At Anchor at Saragosa - Survey-

ing the Warrant Officers store rooms and working up Junk: Towards
evening the weather became Overcast and had the appearance of a
Gale from the South$ between 9 & 10 in the Evening we had light
rain: the Weather continued moderate throughout the night: A M
Employed in surveying the warrant officers store rooms, clearing Hawse
and in clearing between decks. At 10 the ship was alarmed by the
cry of fire occasioned by the ships corporal in fumigating one of the
Officers Cabins in the Gun room. Punished James
Ships
Corporal with 36 lashes for attempting to fumigate any part of the
ship without re ar orders for neglect of duty, and for suffering the
rope Yarns to b aze. Surgeons report 11 sick 8 convalescent and one
discharged. At Noon calm with a swell setting in from the Eastd.

P

[LC. EPP Log Constitution. 1803-180-1.1
Presumably to Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Navy, from Captain William Bainbridge, U. S. Navy

TRIPOLIBARBARY
15'4 February 1804
DEARSIR Your much esteemed favors have this day come to hand,
to which I have replied fully by this conveyance. In my former letters I have sug ested the idea of destroying the Frigate; since then
having had the fiberty of walking out, and having seen the situation
she is anchored in, I do conceive that it could be easily effected. She
lays about three quarters of a mile from the shore. By not showing
the vessels off here before the attempt is made, there is not the least
doubt of success. Let the boats be well prepared with combustibles
to set her on fire, the only thing to be attempted. At present all the
gun boats are hauled up.
The most important part to guard against the Tripolitan Cruisers
is in my opinion between Cape Bon and Sicily. Should the Tripolitans demand be too great I would reccommend an attack by land about
night. A thousand troops would do. Fri ates will not answer. I
presume that the Frigate Philadelphia w be offered to Tunis or
Algiers. This if possible should be prevented.
My grateful wishes attend you in your undertakings.

B

[LC.

EPP, Vol. 9, Jan.-Feb. 1804.1

To Captain Edward Preble, U. 6. Navy, from Captain William Bainbridge, U. S.
Navy

TRIPOLY
I N BARBARY
16'4 Febrr I804
DEAR
SIR, I am this day honq with your much esteemed letters of
the 19 & 20th December 4'@16'9 & 24t@January last, be assured
they afford me unfeigned happiness; as three months and a half had
expired without the pleasure of hearing from you, and was at a loss

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

409

to account for so long a silence, for I would not permit myself to entertain the opinion that you could forget me in my unfortunate situation. Your warm commisseration, and strong assurance of your exertions to relieve our distresses, and effect our release from bondage,
are entitled to warmer thanks than I can express. Suffice it to say,
that they are deeply registered in my heart, and the remembrance of
them, will only end with my life. I shall endeavour to follow your
friendly advice in keeping up my spirits, and bear my misfortune with
fortitude but being obliged to surrender without the least chance of
resistance, will ever be a painful reflection to me. I feel conscious of
having done my duty in the unhappy dilemma Situated as we were,
had the Enemy attempted to have boarded us, we should have had a
chance of convincing our Country that opportunity and not courage
was wanting, but alas! for us, they made no such an attempt, but pursued a Plan in which they risqued nothing, and was certain must
prove effectual, the Ship Careening in such a manner as made every
Gun become useless. Our situation was like a man tied to a stake
attacked by another with arms. Believe me my Commodore, it cannot even be justly conceived but by the unfortunate who experienced
it. God forbid that any of my Brother Officers should be placed in a
similar situation
Your letter to Siddi Mahomet D'ghies Minister of Foreign Affairs,
I have delivered. The one addressed for the Warrant Officers & Crew
I have judged proper (by the latitude you gave me) not immediately
to deliver it, and upon further reflection may withhold it altogether;
if I should, I shall give my reasons for so doing Your letter for the Swedish Consul I shall retain as John Willson
(the greatest Villain I ever h e w ) has turned Renegado Accept of my
thanks for the attention you paid to my situation, and for the stile
in which you addressed him.
In answer to your questions respecting the manner we are treated,
and if they robbed us of our Watches kc"
shall briefly reply. That
mysdf and all otltcrs lost everything except what was on our Backs,
and part of that tore off Our Pockets picked, Watches and Money
taken, even to Pocket handkerchiefs 8: Gloves, To answer our immediate necessity, we have purchased some qf our own cloths - As
for the treatment we have received, there is no change since my
report to you, except about eight days ago, myself and O5cers
received permission to walk out, Six or Eight a t a time, with the
Drogoman who attends on us. this indulgence gave us an opportunity
of breathing fresh air, which we had not done for three Months and
nine days We are supported entirely at our own expence, and live in
the House that Mr Cathcart occupied. Our situation now is rendered
tolerably comfortable. The Crew are confined in a separate Prison a
part of which are daily employed a t various work; they are allowed
Bread and Oil, but no meat. I have given them Beef once a week,
being as often as our finances would admit of and have been able to
buy clothing to the amount of about five hundred dollars which has
afforded them a change. Enclosed you will receive a list of Cloths
that they will stand in need of the next autumn 8: Winter, if it should
be our hard fate to continue here. Since our captivit'y two have died,
and seven turned Renegadoes so that our complement now stands 298.
From the very great attention of Mr Davis Charge des affairs at
Tunis, our situation has been much ameliorated, he has twice sent us

410

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1805 TO 1804

Bills to the amount of Nine hundred Dollars, and I have drawn on
him for One thousand Dollars; but my Bills on Tunis are attended
with a loss upwards of 27 pr Ct, which cannot be avoided but by
having money sent to us I have received a very friendly letter from Col: Lear, dated Algiers
16th December
Respecting the Vessel you captured off Tripoly, I can only say it
was reported here, that she was a Vessel belonging to the CapWacha.
The Turkish Officer I believe to be the Man who was passenger in the
Frigate [George] Washington under my command from Constantinople
to Malta. As to the Cargo I should suppose it to be a Bon Prize.
Had you fortunately been off here two days after you made that
capture you would have had a chance of a valuable prim from Derne
I t appears in this climate that fortune attends the ~[nlrighteous.
Our letters from America are all received with the Articles that you
ordered Mr Higgins to send us. also One thousand dollars in Cash.
The necessary receipts I shall send to Mr Higgins. I gratefully thank
you for sending me the suit of Clothes. When you appear off here,
there is no doubt but you may safely communicate with the shore.
Words are too light to express my feelings, if ever opportunity
offers actions shall convince you how much I estimate all your attention. May success attend the Squadron under your command and
Glory and honor be the reward You meet from your Country! is my
sincere wish M: Higgins omitted sending us an invoice of the articles which will
be necessary to make the proper charges. Your letter to Mr Kissen,
does honor to your command, he is one of the best of Men.
I thank you in behalf of the Officers and Crew, in sending to our
Government the valuation of the Mirboka. I hope it will be allowed
to compensate in some measure our loss. Mine has exceeded two
thousand Dolls
[LC. EPP, LB, Dec. 1803-April 1804.1
To Captain Edward Preble, U.S. Navy, from Captain William Bainbridge, U. S. Navy

16th FEBRUARY
1804.
DEAR
SIR, * * * In my former letters I have suggested the idea
of destroying the Frigate, since then having had the liberty of walking out
and have seen the situation she was anchored in, do conceive that it
would be e a d y eflected. She lays about three uarters of a mile, from
the shore; By not showing the Vessels off here,S,efore the attempt was
made, there is not the least doubt of success. Let the Boats be well
prepared with combustibles to set her on fire the only thing to be
attempted at present as all the Gun Boats are huded up
The most important Part to guard against the Tnpolitan Cruisers
is in my opinion between Cape Bon & Sicily Should the Tripolitan's
demand be too great I would recommend an attack by land. About
Eight thousand Troops would do. Frigates will not answer. I presume
that the Frigate Philadelphia wiU be offered to Tunis or Algiers. this
if ossible should be prevented.
grateful wishes attend you, and your transactions

by

[Italics indicate translation of coded message.]
[LC. EPP, LB, Dec. 1803-April 1804.1

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

41 1

TO Captain Edwclrd Preble, U. S. Navy, from Lieutenant Richard Somers, U. S.

Nav

UNITED
STATES
SCHOONER Nautilus
Off Tripoli 1 6 ' h F e b w r y 1804

SIR I have thought proper to send into Syracuse an English Brig
called the Nominato k i f i s s o commanded by Fortonato Barbaro
from Malta bound to Jerba in Tripoli, for your examination, although
having your passport to sail in Ballast & return with a Cargo of
Bullocks - She has Six Turkish Men or Tripolitans & ts7o women,
and a Cargo consisting of Bales Merchandize, Wines Spars, new made
sails, hemp & linen $ 9 &??
The Captain informed me be sailed in Company from Malta with a
Brig and under Co~lvoyof an English Cutter for Tripoli - The
papers of the Brig are committed to the Ce~raof Mr Cox whom I send
prize master
ILC. EPP, Vol. 9, Jan.-Feb. 1804.1

[16 February 18041
To Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Bavy, from Lieutenant Richsrd Somers, U. S.
Navy

U S SCHOONER
Nautilm
Malta Harbour March 7'@1804
SIR The Brig Nomlnato Ciucifiso, Fortuuata Barbara Master that
I captured off Tripoly, was steering S. R. two points free from the
Wind, and direct for the Harbour of Tripoly, which was at the time of
Capture about four or five leagues distant; and the land a little to the
Eastward of it in si ht. with a cargo consisting of Hemp, Wine,
Scantling, and severs bales of Merchandize. six Tripolines, and two
Women. A number of letters were secured under the Transom all
with directions for Tripoly. Amongst her papers was an agreement
between the Owner and the Captain for him to sail for Jerba, Tripoly,
or Bengaza, to be gauranteed by your passport which I found on
board for to sail in Ballast for Tripoly, and return with Bullocks, she
having on board the within mentioned Cargo, & steering for Tripoly
was a violation of your passport. I sent her in for your examination.

T

[LC. EPP, LB, Dec. 1803-April 1804.1

116 February 18041
Concerning the captured Brig Sf. CrwifiJso

I do hereby Certify, that the Brig St Crucijiso Fortunata Barbara
late master was met with the 16tQDay of Feb? last under English
Colors by the U. S. Schooner of War the Nautilus wider command
of LfSomcrs as the said Brig was endeavoring to enter Trjpoly in
Barbary with a cargo of various kinds of supplies for the inhabitants,
the said FortunaIta] Barbara knowing the aforesaid Port of Tripoly
wns then under a State of Blockade by the U. S. Squadron under
my command, in conse uence of which she has been detained; and
is now ordered to the . S for adjudication. I therefore require
the commmdcrs of all the ships & Vessels & all the other Powers in
Amit with the U. S. of America to let the said Brig pass free & unmoleste and to give her all tho assistance that may be required by

7.J

d

412

NAVALOPERATIONSFROM1803TO180~

PvIr Edward N Cox an officer in the Navy of the U. S. who is ordered
to navigate her to Philadelphia
Given &C on board the U. S. Ship
Constitution Syracuse harbor
23'Jday of April 1804.
Signed E: PREBLE
[LC. EPP, Order Book, M a y 1803-June 1805.1
[16 February 18041
Concerning the captured Brig St. Crusi/iJto

SIR John Baptiste Russo, and Vincent Barbara natives of Malta as
proprietors of the Brigantino Vessel called the Santissimo Crocefisso,
take the liberty to lay before you the titles of their aforesaid property
and other valuable documents in order that their conduct may be
justified, as far as regard their late departure from Malta, till the
moment that the said Brigantino was stopped by the Ships of the
United States, flutering themselves that Your Justice and Equity,
(after laowing the true destination intirely different, and by no mean
intended to violate the Law of the Blockade of Tripoli) you will be
pleased to order the restitution of the said Brigantino Vessel to the
above mentioned proprietors
The title of property is uncontradictory prouved by the contract
of sale made on the 29 of January 1804 by the Public Notary Baldassare
Mamo contracted by Vincenzo Aquilina to the said Russo and Barbara
on paying the price of 2330 Maltese Sardis, and with the Licence of
the President of the Court and the payment of that price - that
therefore no doubt will remain of not being the said Vessel or Maltese
Property
To this title the affraightemcnt made by the same Public Notary
the 31 e t of the said month of January for going to Gerhu as her immediate destination is to be observed; for, the Frei hter hi: Gaetmo
Schembri was bound in it to fournisch the said Vesse with an American
Pass, which precaution shows clearly in what decree the said Proprietors intended to respect the American Power, and absolutly intended
to navigate in those seas with the approbation of the said Power.
This circumstance demonstrated by authentic papers shows Likewise
that the said Proprietors did not intend to violate the Bloakade of
Tripoli
All the papers regarding the expetition or clearances received from
the Public offices at Malta do perfectly answer to prouve the immediate destination for Gerba; for, the licence received from the Customs
for shipping from the Larravetto [?I Seven Bales [?] of Linnen, and 12
of hemp do specify that these goods were to be carried to Gerba; the
paper received from the Health office for taching on Board the said
Vessel seven [word illegible] including two Women, to be landed also
a t Gerba, And finnally the paper from the Gran Visconte's O5ce shows
that the Goverment of Malta sent on Board the said Vessel a Sicilian
to be landed also a t Gerba for his bamishment; After such uncontradictory documents, it will evidently appear that the immediate destination of the said Vessel, was for Gerba, and if the Said Vessel was
found cruising thouwards Tripoli it was in consequence of the contrary
wind which was then blowing from the West and forced them to keep
by that part to avail themselves of the first breese to go to Gerba,
which disposition must be known and approved by every Pilot.

f

W&S

WITH BARBARY POWERS

413

Being every reason wanted to suppose a false intention in the navigation of the said Vessel, and her destination authenticated with so
many Public and Powe[r]full documents and having not the said proprietors and Master any particular interest to go into Tripoli with such
a great danger, The said proprietors hope therefore that after having
shown their manifeste innocence and founded upon Your Justice
Equity and goodness, that the said Vessel will be restored to them as
they Beg and protest themselves your most Humble and Obedt
Servunts.

G I BATTA
~
RUBSO

[LC. EPP,Vol.

10, Feb.-April 1804.J

[16 February 18041
To Secretary of the Navy from Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Navy

UN~TED
STATES
SHIPConstitufion
Syracuse Harbour 19@Feb? 1804
SIR,I have the honor to inform you, that the U S. Brig Syren Lt
Comm' Stewart, and Ketch Intrepid of 4 Guns Lf Commi Decatur
arrived here last evening from a cruise. They left this ort the 3'"nst
with my orders to proceed to Tripoly, and burn the rigah, late the
U S. frigate Philmldphia at anchor in that Harbour.
I was well informed that her situation was such as to render it
impossible to bring her out, and her destruction being absolutely
necessary to favor my intended operations against that city I determined the attempt should be made I enclose you copies of my orders 131 January 18041 on this occasion,
which have been executed in the most allant and Officer like manner
by Lieu[ Commt Decatur, assisted by t e brave Officers & crew of the
little Ketch Intrepid under his command. Their conduct in the performance of the dangerous service assigned them, cannot be sufficiently
estimated - I t is beyond all praise - Had Lieu$ Decatur delayed one
half hour for the Boats of the S'ren to have joined him, he would have
failed in the main object, as a gale comme~cedimmediately after the
Frigate was on fire, and it was with difficulty the Ketch was got out of
the Harbour. The Syren owing to the lightness of the Breeze in the
evening was obliged to Anchor a t a considerable distance from the
City which prevented her Boats from rendering such assistance as
they might have done had they entered the Harbour earlier. Lt
Stewart took the best position without the Harbour to cover the retreat
of the Intrepid that the lightness of the wind would admit of. His
conduct t h o ' the expedition has been judicious and hi hly meritorious.
But few of the O E c m of the Squadron could be grati ed by sharing in
the danger & honor of the Enterprize. In justice to them I beg leave
to observe that they d offered to volunteer their services on the
occasion and I am confident whenever an opportunity offers to distin uish themselves, that they will do honor to the Service.
fenclose gou Lieu; Comrn?Stewart & Decatur's official communication, with t e names of the Officers on board the Ketch

J

%

t

[LC. EPP, LB, Dec. 1803-April 1804.1

414

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1803 TO 1804
[16 February 18041

To Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Navy, from Lieutenant Stephen Decatur, Jr.,

U. S. Navy

ON BOARD
THE KETCH
Intrepid

a t Sea February 17th, 1804
SIR,I have the honor to inform you, that in pursuance of your orders
of the 1st Ins! to proceed with this Ketch off the Harbour of Tripoly
there to ezldeavour to effect the destruction of the United States late
Frigate Philadelphia. I arrived there in company with the U S Brig
Syren L! Commt Stewart on the 7th, but owing to the Badness of
the weather was unable to effect any thing untill last evening when we
had a light breeze from N. E. At 7 O'clock I entered the harbour
with the Intrepid the Syren having gained her station without the
Harbour, in a situation to support us in our retreat a t % past 9
laid her a long side the Philadelphia, boarded, and after a short contest
carried her. I immediately fired her in the Store Rooms, Gun Room
Cockpit & Birth Deck and remained on board until the flames had
issued from the Spar Deck hatch ways & Ports, and before I got from
alongside the fire had communicated to the rigging and to s. Previous
to our boarding, they had got their Tompions out, and ailed several
times but not a Gun fired The noise occasioned by boarding and contending for possession
(altho' no fire arms were used) gave a general alarm on shore, and on
board their cruisers which lay about a cable and a half's length from
us, and many boats filled with men lay round, but from whom we
recd no annoyance. They commenced a fire on us from all their
Batteries on shore, but with no other effect than one shot passing thro'
our Top Gall! Sail.
The Frigate was moored within half Gun shot of the Bashaw's
Castle, and of their pri~icipalBattery; two of their Cruisers lay within
two cables length on the starboard quarter and their Gun Boats within
half Gun shot on the starboard bow she had all her Guns mounted
and loaded which as they became hot went off as she lay with her
Broadside to the town, I have no doubt but some damage has been
done by them. Before I got out of the harbour, her cables had burnt
off, and she drifted in under the Castle where she was consumed. I
can form no judgment as to the number of Men that were on board
of her; there were about 20 killed -A large boat full got off, and many
leapt into the Sea. We have made one prisoner, and I fear from the
number of bad wounds he has r e d will not recover, altho' every assistance & comfort has been given him I boarded with sixty men & Officers, leaving a guard on board the
Ketch for her defence; and i t is with the greatest pleasure I inform
you, I had not a man killed in this affair, and but one slightly wounded - Every support that could be given I r e d from my Officers, and
as each of their conduct was highly meritorious, I beg leave to enclose
you a list of their names. - permit me also, Sir, to speak of the brave
fellows I have the honor to command, whose coolness and intrepidity
was such, as I trust will ever characterise the American Tars.
I t would be injustice in me, were I to pass over the important
services rendered by Mr Salvador the Pilot, on whose good conduct

!

WARS WITH BARBARY POJT7ERS

415

the success of the Enterprize in the greatest degree depended. he
gave me entire satisfaction.
I have the honor to be, Sir,
With great respect
Your Mo. ob Servt
DECATUR
(Signed) STEPHEN
Commodore E D WPREBLE
~
Commanding the U S Squadron in the Mediterranean
[LC. EPP, LB, Dec. 1803-April 1804.1

[I6 February 18041
To Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Navy, from Lieutenant Charles Stewart, U. S.
Nav

BRIGSyren, SYRACUSE
HARBOUR

February 19th 1804.
SIR,I hnve the honor to enclose for your information the principal
occurrences and observations during our late expedition in compnny
with the Ketch intrepid Lt CommJDecatur to effect the destruction
of the Frigate Philadelphia in the harbour of Tripoly; and on the
h ~ p p ytermination of that enterprize I heartily congratulate you.
I only have to lament that a junction had not been formed with the
Intrepid by the Boats of the Syren, under the commnnd of Lt Cnldwell, as I make no doubt they would have been able to carry and
destroy one or bolh of the cruisers laying near the Frigate - You
will observe by my notes, that the Boats were dispatched in due
season to meet the Intrepid agreeable to our Arrangements, but
circumstmces rendering it advisable for Lieu! CommJ Decatur to
enter upon the enterprize much earlier than was intended, the junction
with the Boats was consequentlv defeated until after the ship was on
fire, and the ketch retreathg ou"t of the harbour.
[LC. EPP, LB, Dee. 1803-April 1804.1
116 February 18041
To Captain Edward Preble, IT. S. Navy, from Lieutenant Charles Stewart, U.
Navy

U S BRIGSwen
Syracuse Harbour 19Q Peb? 180.4
SIR, P u r s u ~ n tto your orders of the 31st January 1804 we sailed
on the 3'g of February in compnny with the Intrepid Lt Commandant
Decatur, and arrived off Tripoly the 8th Ins* having employed
ourselves in the intermediate time, in reparing every thing for
executing the intended object - at 9 P
we Anchored in 6 fms.
Water near the Rocks, got out the boats and pre ared them for w operating with the Intrepid at 11 we observed t 0 Intrepid by her
hght standing off shore a very heavy sea from the North, and a strong
wmd hauling to that quarter obliged us to get our Boats in immediately, and get under weigh, at 4 A A4 tinding it impossible to wei h
our Anchor having had the Men several times knocked down by t e
Capstm Bars and several much injured. daylight approaching to
expose our desi,ps to the Enemy we cut and got an o f h g of 10 Milea,

B

%

416

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1809 TO 1804

when the gale and sea having encreased so much that we could
scarcely show any sail, which continued until the l l t h It then
abated, and I sent for Lieu' Commandant Decatur, and we fixed on
the following plan for the next attempt Viz. he to proceed in the
Intrepid about 5 miles ahead of the Brig, and anchor a t night abreast
of the Eastern Rocks that form the Harbour until the Syren got into
that station or her Boats had joined him - After Midnight he to
proceed in the Intrepid to the Ship, the Boats to keep a t a considerable
distnnce astern of him, until he effected n lodgment in the Frigate,
they were then to board the Intrepid, and reinforce him, or proceed on
such other service, as he might direct.
T i e were driven so far to the Eastward by the gale that we did not
regain our Station off Tripoly until the 15t@when considering the
possibility there was of the Tripolitans having some suspicions of our
intentions, I reinforced L' Decatur with an Officer and Kine Volunteers from the Syren. The necessary arrangement of his Men not
leaving more than 50 to support him in boarding We stood into 8
fathoms Water that night, but could not deterrtline our position not
having seen the town, We were therefore obliged to stand off again,
on the 16th a t 11 Ah1 the Intrepid stood in for the Harbour, and when
she had got her distance we tacked and stood after her, with a light
breeze from the NG & 1Testward, a t dark we hoisted out the Boats and
a t 8:30 P. hl the wind left us, and rt light air from the
f ~ ~ $ % ~ c $ ~ ?we
~ , anchored with our stream in 20 fms, water the
town of Tripoly bearing S W about 3 Miles distant We immediately
dispatched the Boats with 30 Men and Officers under the command
of Lieu1 Caldwell who was ordered to proceed to the Eastern Rocks
where he would find the Intrepid, and to place himself under the
command of L' Commf Decatur. At past 10 the Frigate Philadelphia was in a blaze fore and Aft, when the Batteries commenced a
fire on the Intrepid as she retreated. a t 11 the Frigate's tops fell, and
several of her Guns going off, the shot mads a considerable mttling
in the town; shortly after her cables parted and she drifted under the
Castle a t 1 AM the Intrepid & Boats joined us, a t 6 the l i ~ h could
t
still be seen from the Deck, we being about 40 Miles distaut from her.
[LC. EPP, LB, Dec. 1803-April 1804.1

[16 February 18041
hard, Jr., U. S. Navy
20tQFEBY1804 SYRACUSE
HARBOUR
U. S. Constitution
MY DEARMOTHERYesterday morning I arrived from Tripoli
whither we had been in the Ketch we took in December last & to
which the CommrP gave the name of Intrepid. We are astonishing
the folks in these parts & we do as we please with the Syracusans.
On the Zn9 we left this place for Tripoli & arrived off there in a few
days but the weather obliged us to keep off untill the 7'Q a t night
when we anchored close under the Batteries & sent a boat ahead to
find if it was possible to enter the Harbour. The pilot who was in
the boat declar'd that if we attempted to go in we mould never come
out again for the breakers were tremendously high owing to the late
ale. On the 15'P we again anchored a little to the Eastward of
h q o l i , but it being very dark when we made the land we by that
To Mrs. Ralph hard, Sr., from Midshipman Ralph

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

417

means missed the Port. On the 16tP we hoisted E lish colors $ a t
sunset stood in to the Harbour & the English Cons on shore there
hoisted his colors supposing us to be English. At 10 o'clock P M
we came with in hail of the Philadel hia, & the Pilot told the men on
board of her that we were from Mt i 7ta & had been in a gale of wind
& had lost our anchors. They gave us a hawser to make fast to her
by & we then hauld up along side of her & 50 of our men & officers
boarded her instantly. They Tripolitans on board of her were
dreadfully alarmed when they found who we were. Poor fellows!
About 20 of them were cut to pieces & the rest jumped overboard.
We set fire to her & in less than 15 minutes from the time we first
boarded her the flames were bursting out of her ports. I t is astonishing that not one of our men was the least hurt. But it is a miracle
that our little vessel escaped the flames, lying within two feet of them
& to leeward also! Our men were in high spirits & I never saw a
[(finer?) Ms mutilated] set of fellows. We have taken one poor
creature who I am affraid wilI not recover. I think the Bashaw will
soon be humbled. The Commodore has new schemes in his head.
The Nautilus yesterday sent in a prize. She is a Brig. The Commodore when he was a t Malta gave six passports to Gov. Ball for six
vessels to go to Tripoli for bullocks for the garrison. The Vessels
were to go in b d a s t , & return with bullocks. This Brig had one of
these passports & has also a valuable cargo on board, besides several
Turks. I expect to go to Naples short1 & afterwards we shall have
hot work off Tripoli. I received your etters Yesterday of the 2Bt*
Sep? $ 15% Oct ; They are very old. I also received a letter from
each of my Sisters of the same date. Mount Etna looks very cold
this morn. The wind is N. & when that is the case i t is very cold
here owing to the snows on the Mountains. The Brig Syren (I forgot it before) accompanied us to Tripoli but
when we fired the ship she was a t least 5 miles off.
Adieu my dear h$other, your fears concerning the plague a t M d t a
are unfound[ed]. The place is perfectly healthy from Your ever &ec' Son

5

T

[KDA Area 4.1

RA: LARD
JUN?

f16 February 18041

Affldevit of Surgeon's Mate Lewis Beerman, U. S. Navy

COMMONWEALTH
OF PENNSYLVANIA,
City o j Philadelphia.
On this twenty-sixth day of April, in the year eighteen hundred and
twent eight, before me, William Milnor, an Alderman of the city of

~ h i l a c f ~ ~ ~and
h i aen
, officio, a Justice of the Peace, of the State of
Pennsylvania, duly appointed and sworn, personally appeared Doctor
Lewis Heermann, a Surgeon in the Navy of the United States, who
deposeth upon oath, That, having been chosen in common with his
brother officers, by the late Commodore Stephen Decatur, then a
Lieutenant Commandant, to accompany him on an expedition which
had the destruction of the late United States' frigate Philadelphia for
its object, then in possesion of the enemy of the United States, m d lying in the harbor of Tripoli, on the coast of Africa, he, the deponent,
departed, under the command of the said Stephen Decatur, from
Syracuse, in Sicily, on the third day of February, eighteen hundred

418

NAVAL OPERATIOOVSFROM 2805 TO 180L

-

-

-

and four, in his official capacity as surgeon in the late ketch [Mastico],
(taken a prize by the said Decatur, of the enemy,) and yclep'd the
Intrepid, for this especial occasion, by the late Commodore Edward
Preble, then commanding the Mediterranean squadron; also, that the
United States' brig Syren, Lieutenant Commandant Charles Stewart,
sailed in company, for purposes connected with the expedition. Deponent further declareth, that, in the pursuit of the above object,
uncertainty and continued hardships were experienced by the o cers
and crew of the Intrepid, as arising from an accidental supply of putrid provisions, the frail construction and s m d size of the vessel,
with the occurrence of a severe gale, which, in disappointing early
success, laid the foundation of apprehensions for eventual failure; the
discovery by the enemy of an armed force having being anchored near
the port, being rendered more than probable. That, at or before midday, on the sixteenth of February, the town of Tripoli hove in sight;
that, on the evening of the same day, under an unpromising aspect of
the weather, a council of officers, held on board the ketch, came to the
conclusion of anticipating the hour previously appointed (by Captains Stewart and Decatur, conjointly,) for entering the harbor.
With a full understanding on their part, that the aid of the Syren's
boats was necessarily forfeited by this new arrangement, and the
safety of retreat out of the harbor placed exclusively at the risk of
the officers and men who formed the complement of the Intrepid bold measure - the responsibility of which they justly appreciated,
but, under existing circumstances, was considered a lesser eviI than
that which would have arisen from procrastination. That, by stratagem, and not without difficulty, the ketch was laid along side of the
frigate, at or about ten o'clock. That, under an irresistible impetus,
the assailants boarded and carried her; while 1Midshipman Thomas 0.
Anderson, with a crew detached from the brig Syren on the day before,
took his assigned station in a boat, for the purpose of despatching
those of the enemy who might flee from the carnage of the boarders,
as also to give notice of and attack any of the enemy's force that might
approach the ship. That deponent, according to prior arrangement,
was piaced simultaneously in command of the Intrepid, with orders
suitable to the occasion; that "look-outs" were stationed by him, to
observe any movement in the harbor, and guard against surprise.
That the same precautionary vigilance adopted on board the frigate,
formed one of the fundamental measures of security, as was proved
in the instance of one of the "look-outs," (believed to have been stationed on the starboard bow of the Philadelphia,) reporting in quick
succession the approach of enemy's boats, and their retreat, with an
intern1 of time just sufficient to execute the order which grew out of
it - "of killing all prisoners," and draw from the ketch part of a supply of ammunition, small arms, and pikes, for the defence of the ship.
That, after the hasty retreat of the boats, attributable to the sudden
illumination of the gun-deck a t this juncture, by the lighted candles of
the boarders, combustibles were handed on board, a part of which had
been received on board the ketch a t Syracuse, (where some had been
prepared, and others purchased,) and a part from the brig Syren, after
leaving port. That the systematic arrangement of the pian, embracing every contingency incident to the boarding, capturing, and firing
the ship havin been formed with consumate skill and foresight, the
execution of t ese objects, mlth the greatest regularity, consumed

rat

k

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS
a smaller space of time than could possibly be imagined. That the
boarding officers and crew, literally chased from below deck, were pursued by the flames to the ketch, and herself, from the unavoidable
difficulty of getting from along side, was well nigh enveloped. That,
to obviate this calamity, various and well directed efforts were made
without effect,;until a t last, her boats being got ahead, and her rigging,
&c., cleared, she was successfdly towed out of the influence of the current of air, that, with great violence, rushed from every side towards
the flames, which, issuing from the hatchways, and seizing the rigging
from below to two of the mast heads, then standing, played also most
furiously from every gun-port and scupper hole, athwart the ketch.
That, in the momentary confusion that preceded this escape, the
frigate's boat, which had been captured along side, and the crew killed,
by Mr. T. 0.Anderson's party, a t the commencement of the action,
got adrift, and the enemy's flag of the frigate being also lost, left
no trophy in possession save one Tripolitan, who, towards the close
of operations, was made prisoner by deponent. That the whooping
and screaming of the enemy, on bring boarded and defeated, drew
an almost instantaneous and continued fire of small arms from two
xebecs lying near; and that, after throwing a rocket by Captain
Decatur, which was done immediately upon possession being had of
the ship, a brisk cannonade commenced, and was kept up from the
castle and other batteries.
That, by means of towing, (exclusive1 by one or both of her boats,)
sweeps inboard, and sails set, the ketc made good her retreat, and
had arrived at the rocks forming the outermost boundary of the harbor,
when she was met by the Syren's boats, who, in being so much nearer
at hand than had been calculated on, surprised the nautical officers of
the Intrepid quite as much as had the inquiry of the Captain of the
Pfdadelphiu before boarding her, "respecting the vessel astern,"
meaning the brig Syren; and proving that, notwithstanding her great
distance in the offing, during daylight, she had been noticed. That,
ere this time, the frigat,e's gun's had commenced discharging, and
those of the enemy now slackened their fire; that now also the breeze
freshened, and shortly after increased considerably; but being fair,
made good weather of it. That, sometime after midnight, the ketch
joined company with the Syren, then under way, and a t a distance
m the offing; and that the two vessels reached Syracuse on or about the
nineteenth of the same month. Deponent also states, that, after
the perusal of documents accompanying a report bearing the number
201, of the Naval Committee of the House of Representatives made
at the present session, being the first of the twentieth Congress, he
feels himself bourld likewise to declare, under oath, that in frequent
converse and common parlance with the officers of the brig Syren,
on the incidents of the expedition, he never heard any pretensions
advanced by them, or either of them, to any agency or cooperation
whatever in the consummation of the enterprise within the harbor;
and, moreover, that nothing did ever transpire, in his intercourse
with the o5cers of that vessel, or those of any other vessel in the
squadron, which could have led to an anticipation of the painful
necessity to defend, a t this date, the entire and undivided credit,
acquired nearly one-fourth of a century ago, by the o5cers and crew
of the late ketch Intrepid, and consecrated no less by oficial records

g

420

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1803 TO 180.4

than the concurrent testimony of a multitude of gallant officers, now
no more.
M. D.,
LEWISHEERMANN,
Surgeon United States Navy.
Sworn and subscribed before me, this twenty-sixth day of April,
eighteen hundred and twenty-eight.
WILLIAMMILNOR,
Alderman, and, ex ofiio, Jwtice o j the Peace.
[NR&L. Wa' D 451, 14347.1
[16 February 18041
Aftldavit of Midshipman Edmund P.Kennedy, U. S. Bevy

VIRGINIA,BOROUGH
OF NORFOLK,
to Wit:
On this tenth day of March, in the year 1828, before me, Walter
F. Jones, a Notary Public in and for the borough of Norfolk, duly
commissioned and sworn, personally appeared Edmund P. Kennedy,
a Master Commandant in the Navy of the United States, who made
oath that, during the years 1803-'4, he served, in the capacity of
gunner's mate, on board the United States' brig of war Syren, then
under command of Lieutenant Charles Stewart, and one of the squadron in the Mediterranean sea, sailing under the orders of Commodore
Preble. That, some considerable time after the capture of the frigate
Philaddphia, by the Tripolitan gun boats, an expedition was planned
and fitted out to destroy that vessel, then lying nearly equipped in the
harbor of Tripoli. That the brig Syren, and the Ketch Intrepid,
sailed for that purpose from the harbor of Syracuse; the day after
the departure of these vessels, the crew of the Syren were called aft,
and a letter was read, addressed to them by Commodore Preble;
as well as affiant remembers, this letter states the importance of the
destruction of the Philadelphia, and set forth, as an inducement to
the crew, the large amount of prize money which would be awarded
to the vessels composing the expedition. Volunteers were called to
fill up the complement of the Intrepid, and for the general purposes
of the expedition. The whole crew voluntrrred, and it became
necessav to make a selection among the officers and men. The
two vessels proceeded to Tripoli, and it was conserted, that, upon a
certain signal, to hc e v e n from the S y r ~ n the
, Intrepui, accompanied
bv two boats, manned and armed from the Syren, should proceed into
the harbor, for the accomplishment of thrir ob'ect. The night of
the destruction of the Philadelphia, the Syren anc ored off the mouth
of the harbor, her two boats manned and nrmed nlonpsidc. The
Intrepid was in shore, and the signal being made, the two boats
left the Syren, and proceeded to join the Intrepid. The signal,
however, wm not answered; and affinnt understood Licut. Decatur
to have said, that he was, a t the time, so near the batteries, that
any exhibition of lights might hnve caused the discovery of his vessel;
and a l i ~ h tand favorable breeze springing up a t the moment, he
preferred running in without the aid of the boats, to encountering a
delay and exposure which might have defeated the object of the rxpedition. Affiant was in one of the boats which put off from the Syren;
the night was very dark, and the Intrepid having exhibited no light
to indicate her position, the boats lost their way among the rocks,
and were falling in uncertainty, until the Intrepid was seen standing

h

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

421

out of the harbor, when they joined her. The crew of the Syen
were a t quarters nearly the whole night. Affiant further states, that
all the combustibles and materials to be used in burning the Philadelphia were prepared on board the Syren.
Jura attestor:
[XR&L. Wa4 I3 451, 14347.1

-

WALTERF. JONES,
Notary Public.
(16 February 18041

Certificate of Salvedore Catalano, Psot

NAVYYARD,WASHINGTON,
Dec. 19,182.5.
The subscriber certifies, that he was attached to the American
squadron in the Mediterranean, as pilot on board of the frigate Con&tution, commanded by Commodore Preble; that he was sent in the
ketch Intrepid, to pilot her into the harbor ol Tripoli, for the purpose
of destroying the frigate Phil&lpliia, then in possession of the Tripolitans; thnt owing to hie perfect acquaintance with the harbor of Tripoli,
and his personal knowledge of the peode and their language, the kstcb
was permitted to come alongside of the Philudelphia; that he is, and
always was, of opinion, that in the state oj the wind at the time, and
knowledge o j the current and the soundings of the harbur, that the ship
might have been brought wLct &th sajety, had not orders been preemptorily
gicen to destroy her; that he gave this opinion to Commodore Decatur, on
board the Philadelphia, at the moment o j her capture, who was only prevented by his orders from making the attempt; that dl the nautical man
with whom he has conversed on the subject, and to whom he has
explnined the grorlnds of his opinion, have acknowledged the correctness of his statements.
SALVADORE
CATAUNO.
[NRbL.

Wad D 451, 14347.1
--

-

116 February 18041
Presumably to the Danish Consul, Marseilles, Fance, from Nicholas C. Bissen,
Danish Consul, Tnpoli

Extract of a Letter from M' C. Nissen Consul of his Danish Majesty
at tripoly, Dated 29. february 1804
The Americans have Just now burnt Their Bregate in This Port.
on The 16'4 currt a t Sun Set, they Saw two VessoUs masked so as they
could not be recognized, the one was an american Fregste the other a.
fire Ship, the latter with people on board Speaking Arabick. She
entared the Harbour a t 954 a t night, She was taken for a merchant
Vessell and was helped to come near The formerly american Fregate,
the set her on fire and Sailed out directly
&e Bashaw Saw the whole business with his own Eyes, - The fire
ship was be ond reach before they could give orders - The E'regato
was totally urnt The American Officers Prisonners of war here have been put under
a strong guard since this Event, it is not permitted to write Them,
&c* great preprtrations of defence have been made here, against The
attacks we are threatened with by the Americans, in the interim the

,!i

422

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1803 TO 1804

V i a of the Bashaw a t Maltha Sq gaetano Schembri, or il conte G~llina
is arrived here, they Say he is Charged by The American Commodore
to make Conciliating proposals. We Shall See A true Copy received by the danish Consul at Marseilles Via Genoa,
Marseilles 28@ March 1804
STEPHENCATHALAN
JUN~
[NA. SDA. CL, Marseilles, Vol. 2, March 1803-Nov. 1827.1

[16 February 18041
To John Gavino, U. S. Consul, Gibraltar, from Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Navy

U S. FRIGATE
Constitution
Syracuse Harbour Febr [ l a ]1804
DEARSIR I have the pleasure to announce to you the pleasing
intelligence of the Capture and destruction of the Tripolitan Frigate
of 40 Guns, late the United States Frigate Philadelphia by the U . S.
Ketch Intrepid of 4 Guns and 70 Men commanded by Captain
Decatur of the Enterprize who volunteered his services on the occasion.
It is to be regretted that she was so situated that it was impossible to
have brought her out.
On the 3Q Inst the Brig Syren Capt Stewart and Ketch Intrepzd of
4 Guns, fitted for the purpose, and Commanded by Capt. Decatur
with 70 Volunteers from the S uadron sailed for Tripoly with orders
to burn the Frigate in that Har our. They this day returned having
executed m orders much to my satisfaction. On the night of the
16'@Captq %ecatur entered the Harbour of Tripoly with the Ketch,
laid her alongside the Frigate and in a Gallant and m c e r like manner,
boarded and carried her against all opposition: After gaining complete possession he proceeded to fire her with success, and left her in
a blaze, in which she continued until she was totally consumed: He
had none killed & only one wounded. The Tri olitans lost between
20 & 30 Men killed on the Decks: One large oatload made their
escape: some Men ran below & perished in the flames, but the greatest
part jumped overboard: She was moored close to the Batteries with
all her Guns loaded, and two of their Corsairs full of Men lay within
half Musquet shot of her
A fire was kept up on the Ketch by the Batteries, Bashaws' Castle.
and Corsairs: Not a musquet or Pistol was fired by our Men: Every
thing was settled by the sword.
The Syren anchored without the Harbour to cover the retreat of
the Ketch, and sent her Boats to assist but unfortunately the did
not arrive in Season, as the Business was accomplished and the g e t c h
on her wa out before the Boats met her: Had they got in sooner i t
is probab e some of the Tripolitan Corsairs would have shared the
fate of the Frigate -

%

b

P

[SDA. CL, Gibraltar, Vol. 11, April 1796Nov. 1804.1

[16 February 18041
Concerning the destruction of the Frigate Philadelphia

Statement of the Circumstances attending the destruction of the
Frigate Philadelphia with the names of the Officers and the number
of Men employed on the occasion as laid before the President by the
Secretarg of the Navy, November 13 - 1804. -

On the 31?t January 1804 Commodore Preble lying with his Squadron in the Harbour of Syracuse, gave orders to Lieu1 Charles Stewart,
commanding the Brig Siren of 16 Guns, and to Lieutenant Stephen
Decatur jr cornanding the Ketch Intrepid of 4 Guns $ 75 Men, to
proceed to Tripoli and to destroy the Frigate Philadelphia. of 44 Guns,
then lying in the harbour of Tripoli. Lieu? Decatur had orders to
enter the Harbour in the night, board and set fire to the Phikdelphia
and Lieut Stewart was ordered to take the best possible position without the Harbour to cover the retreat. Under these orders they proceeded immediately to the Coast of
Tripoli but owing to the very heavy gales of wind that usually prevail
there in the winter Season, the Enterprize could not be undertaken
until the 16q February when Lieu? Stewart having taken the best
possible position to effect the object of his Instructions, Lieu5 Decatur
a t 7 O'clock in the night, entered the Harbour of Tripoli, boarded and
took possession of the Philadelphia. This Frigate a t the time she
was boarded had all her Guns mounted and charged, and was lying
within half Gun shot of the Bashaw's Castle and of his princi a1
Battery - Two Tripolitan Cruisers were lying within two Cab e's
length on the starboard quarter and several Gun Boats within half
Gun Shot on the Starbowd bow - and d l the Batteries on shore
were opened u on the Asssilants. About 20 Men of the Philadelphia
were killed, a arge Boat full got off, many leapt into the water, and
one Man was made prisoner. After having gained possession of the
Frigate, Lieut Decatur set fire to the Store-rooms, gun-room, Cock-pit
& birth deck, and with n. firmness highly honorable to him, his Officers
and Men, they remained on Board until the flames had issued from the
Ports of the gun Deck and the Hatchways of the Spar Deck, and they
continued in the ketch along side the Frigate until the fire had communicated to her Rigging and Tops. Lieu! Decatur did not lose a
Man and had but one slightly wounded. The following is a list of the Officers, & the number of Men employed
in the destruction of the Philadelphia. Liout Stephen Decatur jr
JaGawrence
Joseph Bainbridge Lieutenants.
Jonathan Thorn
Louis Heermm Surgeon. Ralph Izard
John Rowe
Charles Morris
Midshipmen.
Alex: Laws
John Davis
Th"Macdonough
Tho! 0.Anderson
Mr Salvadore ICatalano] - Pilot
62 Men. Lieu$ Decatur has stated that dl his Officers and men behaved
with the greatest coolness and intrepidity, m d Commodore Preble
has informed me that Lieu' Stewart's conduct was judicious and
meritorious.

f'

'i

I

-

I

ROB$SMITH
Sem4at.y of th NUW.

424

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1803 TO 1804

[Note: Men who took part in the destruction of the Philadelohia.
William Wiley, boatswain
James Robinson, seaman
William Hook, gunner
Matthew Yeates, seaman
George Crawford, quartermaster
William Ducket, seaman
George Brown, quartermaster
Andrew Espey, seaman
John Newman, quartermaster
William Tumbo, seaman
Paul Frazier, quartermaster
Thomas James, seaman
James Metcalf, boatswain's mate
Joseph Numond, seaman
Nicholas Brown, boatswain's mate
George Murray, seaman
Edward Kellen, master's mate
Robert McKnight, seaman
Samuel Endicott, quarter gunner
William Dixon, seaman
James Wilson, quarter gunner
Henry Davenport, seaman
John Ford, quarter gunner
Joseph Parker, seaman
Richard Doyleu, quarter gunner
Dennis O'Brian, ordinary seaman
Joseph Boyd, ship's steward
Jacob Kurgen, ordinary seaman
Edward Burk, seaman
John Burtson, ordinary seaman
Peter Munell, seaman
Tilliam Rodgers, ordinary seaman
Richard Ormond, seaman
Charles Robinson, ordinary seaman
Ssmuel Jackson, seaman
William Trippet, ordinary seaman
James Pasgrove, seaman
John Jose h, ordinary seaman
Joseph Goodwin, seaman
Michael Illiams, ordinary seaman
John Boyles, seaman
Marines
Augustus C. Flew, seaman
Charles Berryman, seaman
Solomon Wren, sergeant
Daniel Fra~ier,seaman
Duncan Mansfield, corporal
William Graham. seaman
Noble James, private
Reuben James, seaman
John uin, private
Robert Love, seaman
Isaac amfield, private
John Williams, seaman
Reuben O'Brian, privat.e
Joseph Fairfield, seaman
William Pepper, private
George Fudge, seaman
John Woisfrandarf, private]
[NDA. Cong. LB, 1798-1811.1

#'

8

I16 February 18041
Extract from letter to Susan Decatur, widow of Captain Stephen Decatur, Jr.,
from Hon. Littieton W. Tazewell

NORFOLK,
Sept. Yth, 1826.

MY DEARMas. DECATUR:
In reply to your letter of the 22d ult.
(which, owing, I presume, to some accident, has just been received,)
I will state to you, that during the lifetime of your late husband,
I had many conversations with him, upon the subject of his claim

upon the Government of the U. S. for the capture and destruction
of the frigate Philadelphia. The first of these conversations took place,
I think, in 1806, soon after he established himself in this place. In
this, his object was to consult me professionally as to the validity of
his claim, and as to the proper course to be adopted to obtain the payment of the amount, should I think the claim just. I then investigated
the subject very maturely, and gave him a long written opinion upon
it, in which I stated the reasons that induced me to consider it, not
only a fair claim upon this Government, but one which it was his duty
to prefer, as the guardian and protector of the officers and people
who were associated with him in this daring and honorable enterprise.
Of one thing I am very certain, that durlng the whole course of his
life, Commodore Decatur was f i d y and fully persuaded, that he,
his officers and crew, had a just claim upon the U. S. for the value of
the frigate Philadelphia, which they had captured and burnt by the
express order of them commanding officer.
I am,very respectfully and sincerely yours

LITT'NW. TAZEWELL.

[NB&L. Wa4 D 451, 14347.1

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

425
-

[16 February 18041
To Susan Decatur, widow of Captain Stephen Decatur, Jr., from Surgeon John
Erdgely, U. 6. Navy

Annapolis, NOD.10, 1826.
MADAM:
Your letter of the 2d inst. has just been received, and I
hasten to reply to it. I have a distinct - an indelible recollection

of the leading events of our imprisonment. The Pl~chaand his court
did not attempt to conceal their exultation on the capture of the frigate
Philadelphia. I t was a jubiIee in Tripoli So extravagant were his
calculat~ons,that he would not listen to any proposal of peace and
ransom, for a less sum t h m one million of dollars. I n this condition
of affairs, it would have been impolitic to have opened a negotiation.
I t would have been regarded as an evidence of fear and imbecility.
This tone of confidence and triumph continued until the daring enterprise, led on by your gallant and lamented husband, illuminated his
castle with the blaze of his trophy. The sensation produced by the
achievement was indescribable - consternation and dismay were
depicted on every face. But the best evidence of its impression, was
the frequent conferences of the Pacha with the Consuls, his undisguised
desire to make peace, and his proposition to that effect, on terms much
more moderate - I think $200,000. The terror inspired by the recapture and conflagration, (increased by the attack of the gun-boats,
on the 3rd of August, 1804,) was felt during the war, and its influence
was acknowledged when the treaty of peace was signed.
I t may not be known to you, Madam, that I was appointed to the
Consulship of Tripoli after the war, and obtained this and other information from one of the European Consuls, with whom the Pacha often
conferred during our captivity, and to whom he confided his difficulties
and danger.
Description can convey but an inadequate idea ot the horrors of
our imprisonment. We were confined in a dungeon m the centre of
the castle, into which no air or light could find access, but through
a small iron grate in the terrace or ceiling. To privation of pure a v ,
wholesome food, &c. was added the annoyance of noxious reptiles.
The desperation of the officers may be inferred from two attempts to
escape - one by undermining, and the other by passing over the walls
of the castle. An account of these enterprises and thelr failure, may
be found in the biography of Com. Porter, published some years
since, (1815,I think,) in the Analectic Magazine and Naval Chronicle.
When any communication, between the squadron and the castle
was announced, joy and gladness were diffused through our glqorny
cells, and reiterated disappointment could not dispel the cherished
hope that the happy hour of emancipation had arrived. Even a t this
distant period, the heart sickens a t the recollection of "hope long
deferred. "
That a enerous legislature may grant this 'ust claim, is the confident belie of one who knew and appreciated the high-minded and
chivalric officer on whose services it ~sfounded.
I am,Madam, with sentiments of the highest respect and consideration, your obedient servant,

!f

JOHN RIDGLEP.

[NRCL. W d D 451, 14347.1

426

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1803 TO 1804
116 February 18041

To Susan Decatur, widow of Captain Stephen Decatur, Jr., from Captain John
Eodgers, U. S. Navy

Ukshington, Noaember 15, 1827.

DEARMADAM:
I have received your letter of the 8th instant;
and in reply, have to state, that I had always supposed the plan by
which the fri ate Philadelphia was destroyed, was projected by your
husbmd, an that I never heard the slightest intimation to the
contrary.
With great respect and regard, I am, dear Madam, your obedient
servant,

B

Mrs. SUSAN
DECATUR.

JOHNRODGERS.

[NR&L. Wa4 D 451, 14347.1

[16 February 18041
To Susan Decatur, widow of Captain Stephen Decatur, Jr., from Lieutenant Jacob
Jones, U. S. Navy

U7ashington, Dec. 8, 1625.

DEARMADAM: I n reply to your note of yesterday, I h a w the
pleasure to say, that I know nothing which could have rendered it
impracticable to the captors to have taken the Philadelphia out of
the harbor of Tripoli. The water wa-s sufiknt, and I beliece the wind
waa javorabb; consequently, nothing but the want of skill in the
pilot who was with them, wrts likely to have prevented such a resdt,
if it had been attempted. The brig Syren, which lay off the harbor,
would have been sufficient, to have protected her the moment that she
had cleared the port.

Mrs. DECATUR.

[NR&L. Wa4 D 451, 14347.1

[l6 February 18043
To Pusan Decrtur, widow of Captain Stephen Decatur, Jr., from Lieutenant Charles
Stewart, U. 6. Navy

Bordentown, (N. J.)Dee. 12, 1826.

MY DEARMRS. DECATUR:
The re-assembling of the honorable

Congress of the United States, renders it necessary to delay no longer
answering your esteemed favor of June last, in which you request me
to state such informtation, relative to the burning of the Philadelphia,
in the harbor of Tripoli, as I may possess, in aid of your claim on our
country, for the success of that gallant enterprise, so ably and honorabl performed by your late husband. I regret that my limited
ab' 'ties disqualify me from portraying, in those glowing colors of
which that act is susceptible, the gallantry and perseverance with
which it was erformed by my late friend.
You state t a t your late husband had given you to understand that
the project of burning that frigate a t her moorings, therebv to remove
s serious impediment to the future operations of the squadron against
Tripoli, originated with him. This understanding was perfectly
correct; it did originate with your late husband, and he first volunit into effect, and asked the permission of
teered himself to c
Commodore Preble, o Tripoli, (on first discovering the frigate was
lost to the squadron,) to effect it with the schooner Enterpriee, then

9,

E

?

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

427

under his command. The commander-in-chief thought it too hazardous to be effected in that way, but promised your late husband that the
object should be carried into effect on a proper occasion, and that he
should be the executive officer when it was done. I t was accordingly
effected in the ketch Intrepid, by your husband and 70 volunteers
from the schooner he commanded, a t great hazard, not only of life or
liberty, but that of reputation, and in the season most perilous in
approaching that coast. The recollection of the difEculties and
dangers he had to encounter in that expedition, of which I mas an eyewitness, excites more and more my admiration of his gallantry and
enterprise -and although the result shed a lustre throughout Europe,
over the American character, and excited an unparalleled emulation
in the squadron, in our country alone is .where it has never been duly
estimated, or properly understood.
Courage, and great force alone, could not have effected it. I t was
necessary not only to put the smallest possible force to the hazard,
but its success depended upon a very small force being used. The
genius and mental resources of the executive officer, could alone
compensate for the want of force and numbers. To these demands
your late husband was found fully adequate - and hence the brilliant
result. The frigate was completely destroyed, in the midst of the
enemy, and his retreat effected without the loss of a man.
Accept, my dear Madam, the assurance of my highest respect and
esteem.
CHAS.STEWART.
[Captain, U. S. Nauyj
Mrs. SUSAN
DECATUR.
[NR&L. Wa4 D 451, 14347.1

[16 February 18041
To Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Navy, from Secretary of the Navy

Commodore ED^ PREBLE.
Mediterranean.

NAVYD E P M ~
22 May 1804. -

Your several Dispatches have been received. Your whole conduct
has afforded us the highest satisfaction. Justly are you entitled to
our warmest Thanks. We congratulate you on the glorious Enterprize achieved by Cap! Decatur. As s testimonial of our high sense
of the hrillianc of this Enterprize, we send The Hero a Captain's
Commission. %nowing that you will feel great pleasure in presenting
it to him I herewith send it to you for that purpose.
Rt SMITH.
[NDA. LB, 1799-1807.1

116 February 18041
To Captain Stephen Decstur, Jr., U. S. navy, from Secretary of the Nevy

NAVYD E P ~

2 2 W ~ y180.4
,
STEPHEN
DECATUR
q of i 9 ~Un&d States.
Captain in the aesq'
Care of Comm'QED@
PREBLE.
Mediterranean.
By Dispatches from Commodore Preble it has been announced to
us that the destruction of the Iate frigate Phildelphk has been effected
while Iying in the Harbour of Tripoli under circumstances of extra-

&

428

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1803 TO 1804

ordinary peril to the parties that achieved it. I find, Sir, that you
had the Command of this Expedition. The achievement of this
brilliant Enterprize reflects the highest honor on all the Officers and
men concerned. You have ac uitted yourself in a manner which
justifies the high Confidence wegave reposed in your valour and your
Skill. The President has desired me to convey to you his Thanks
for your gallant Conduct on this occasion, and he likewise re uests
that you will in his name thank each Individual of your gallantq~nnd
for their honorable and volorous Support rendered the more honorable
from its having been volunteered. As a Testimonial of the President's high opinion of your gallant
Conduct in this Instance, he sends to you the enclosed Commission. R l SMITH.
[NDA. LB. 1799-1807.1
(16 February 18041
Concerning the burning of former U. S. Frigate Philadelphia

RESOLUTION
expressive of the sense of Congress of the gallant conduct
of Captain Stephen Decatur, the officers and crew, of the United
States ketch Intrepid, in attacking, in the harbor of Tripoli, and
destroying, a Tripolitan frigate of forty-four guns.
Resolved, &c., That the President of the United States be requested
to present, in the name of Congress, to Captain Stephen Decatur,
a sword, and to each of the officers and crew of the United States
ketch Intrepid, two months' pay, as a testimony of the high sense
entertained by Congress of the gallantry, good conduct and services
of Captain Decatur, the o5cers and crew, of the said ketch, in attacking, in the harbor of Tripoli, and destroying, a Tripolitan frignte of
forty-four guns.
November 27, 180.4.
APPROVED,
(Navy Register 1798.1

[16 February 18041
Extract from Memorandum Book of Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Navy, on board
U. S. Frigate Conrlilufion. 19 February 1804

Syren and Intrepid arrived having executed my orders.
[LC, original.]
Extract from journal of Midshipman F. Cornelius deKrafft, U. S. Navy, in U. S.
Brig Siren of 18 guns, Lieutenant Charles Stewart, U. S. Navy, commanding,
Thursday, 16 February 1804

Commences with fresh breezes, clear & pleas; weather, the Intrepid
in Co: At j4 past 2 made the land on our lee bow, haul'd up the mnin
sail took 1 reef in the topsails & bent the stream cable At # past 3
back'd the main topsail for the Intrepid to come up At 4 lower'd
down the cutter & sent 9 men on board the lntrepzd with cuttlasses,
pistoles, musqueL9 &c &c. At past 4 the boat return'd hoisted her
up & made sail for the land. At past 5 mountain To ura (6 or 8
miles to the E'Jof Tripoli) bore S. S. V.town of Tripoli W. - At
6 tack'd to the NW. At j4 past 7 boarded main tack At % pt 9
TK9 to the S. W. set stay sails & jib At 10 call@all hands to quarters
& run out the guns, hauld down stay sails & jib & haul'd u square
main sail, brail'd up after main sail. At past 10 spoke the ntrepid.

8.

!

429

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

At 11 back'd the main topsail sounded & ot no bottom - Midni h t
moderate 61 clear Lost sight of the 1 d ~ e ~ i haul'd
5,
up the fore s ~ 6rf
back'd main top sail, sounded in 35 fathoms & fill'd away. At 1
sounded in 14. 12 & 9 fathoms (from I to 4 standing off & on the shore,
shewing lights for the Intrepid (which were answer'd) At 1 call'd all
hands to quarters, run in the guns & secur'd fhem, hi p'd the ports,
wore & stood off shore, made sail, the I d r e p i d on our ee bow. At 8
the hign land near Tripoli bore S. W by W 7 leagues At 11 the Intrepid
TR9 to tbe SQ& EQMeridian wore to the S'J & WQhanded square main sail, reef'd the
fore sail & set after main sail moderate breezes & pleasf the Intrepid
bearing S W E 8 miles disf
Latt: Obs: 3 3 O 21' N.

r

[NDA.]

116 February 18041
[Note: Attention is invited t o an article entitled ''Finding the Frigate Philadelphia" by Charles Wellington Furlong, published in Harpers Magazine, JuneNovember 1905, Vol. CXI, No. DCLXI, p. 50.1
To Captain Edward Preble,

U, S. Navy, from William Higgins, U. S. Navy
Malta

Agent,

MALTA
the 16 Febr? 180P

DEARSIR:I have been honored with your Letter under the 13t@
Inst which I assure you I received with a good deal of satisfaction, i t
eased me of considerable uneasiness, a s I hardly h e w how to act

respecting the Cargo, of Provisions on board the f17ilEkm &Mary. The Consul to whom it came addressed and who was as fully informed
of pour wishes as I was, had given Captn Tipling instructions to unload
and had directed him to draw along side the Wharf for that purpose I conceived it my Duty to put him in mind that I thought such a
measure precipitate - and ill-advised, and wrote him as p' enclosed
Copy, he chose to reply in terms not altogether civil which you will
perceive by the transla tion oi his Letter also herewith, - I shall make
no Comment on his Conduct in this bussiness, you will see it in its
roper light, it certainly does not tell much in h ~ scommendation,^^ a
h b l i e officer who talks so much about his "indispensible duty I have agreed with Cnpt Tipling to carry the Provisions to you for
480 Dollars which I think a fair bargain and full as little as I could
have sent i t over to you by Vessels belonging to this Place, independant
of the expense of trmshi ment and the injury of removal from one
Shi to another; - The reight is made payable here as the Captam
wis es to ret*urnhome with a ballast of Salt, which he has directed
me to provide:
I have received the 1,000 Dollars you have been good enough to
remit me to rnplnce a similar Sum 1sent CapcnBainbridge, - As get
I have received no intelligence whatever from Tripolj, but am lookmg
daily for the return of the Vessel that went over; There is a Vessel in the harbour with 47 Hogsheads of Gin on board
which the Proprietor offers at 5 Sh91109 pr Gallon. I send you a Sample
of it, and if you choose will make the purchase for the use of the
Squadron. - The holder has promised to wait a week fol your answer;
if I receive none, I shaU of course conclude that you do not want it,
you will find the quality I believe pretty good, and 1 think the bargain
not a bad one -

1

P

430

N A V A L OPERATIONS FROM 1803 TO 1804

I have sent over by the TT7illia,m& Mary, 7 Kegs of W i t e Paint,
(prepared) by Mr Dyson's order also 3 butts of Rum, by order of M r
Robinson, Purser of the Schooner Ewteqrize and expecting that you
will not lose sight of your promise of paying us a Visit Soon, I remain
The Proprietor of the Gin has sent to let me know that he cannot
wait our answer, I send you the sample however for as much as it
may e remaining if you should choose to purchase
[LC. EPP, Vol. 9, Jan.-Feb. 1804.1

g

[16 February 18041
To Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Navy, from Purser Keith Spence, U. S. Navy,
and Captain William Bainbridge, U. S. Navy

Duplicate
in BARBARY
Feb? b7Q 1804
TRIPOLY
Indent of Slop Cloathing wanted for the immediate use of the U. S.
Frigate Philadelphia prisoners in this place exclusive of those wanted
for next fall and winter as pr Indent before sent
280 Duck frocks or Shirts
280 pair Duck Trowsers
280 pair shoes
Signed, KEITHSPENCE Purser
Signed, WmBAINBRIDGE
N. B. The shoes are added in this duplicate, ommitted in the first,
not gkn0.
that they were wanted Indent Slop Cloathing wanted for the Crew of the United States
Frigate Philadelphia prisoners at Tripolp. 300 Seamens blue Cloth Jackets
600 Pairs blue Cloth Trowsers
300 Pairs Shoes (generally large Size)
600 Shirts
300 Wool Hats
280 Blankets, three point or about that size,
lStb Febmay 1804.
TRIPOLY
(Signed) KEITH
SPENCEPurser
[LC. EPP, Order Book, May 1803-June 1805.1
To Captain James Barron, U. S. Navy, Hampton, Va., from Secretary of the Navy

NAV.DEP.
Februuy 1YC@ 1804
We are desirous of building a number of Gun-boats, but we cannot
progress in the business for want of an approved Model. As has
been already intimnted to you, the two Gun-boats building under
your and Captain Rodgers's superintendence, are intended as
models. - We are now waiting to see them finished before we
,
order any. This will suggest to you the ropriety of employing as many
laborers as can be employed usefu y in bulldin the one under your
direction. - It will be agreeable to me to flave her finished as
early as may be practicable, tho' I do not wish you to hurry the business to the injury of the Vessel. With respect to her armament you may either have it tixed where
you are, or have the Gun-boat brought to this place first and fix her
armament here. - We have 32 pound Cannon both a t Norfolk
and a t this place

II

431

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

The Gun-boat must be brought here as soon as she is finished. The Gig which you have lately been attending to must be brought to
this place a t the same time. Can you furnish me with an estimate of the probable cost of the
Gun-boat? If you can, I will thank you to attend to it as early as
may be convenient. Mr Bedinger has directions to deliver to you one 32 pound Cannon,
should you call on him for it. Rt SMITH.
[NDA. Off. Comg. Gunboats, 1803-1808.1
To Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Naw, from Captain William Bainbridge,

U. S. Navy

TRIPOLY
17th F e b m y 1804.
DEARSIR,We are still close confined, and are not permitted to
send letters, I scroll this to inform you that a bold attempt is in conlemplatwn, I believe for the Harbour of Syracuse, expecting to take you
unguarded. to effect t h i ~
purpose, they would dkegard the loss of
their people.
I have already informed you that t h y intend to disguise their Crew
in Christian dresses.
My Cypher runs thus

Id

bflchrgaeptumk
digsonvzym
Your letter not explaining dear1 led me into a mistake to
write ou some days since by the [space] o the 15'@December, which
must ave gone down with the Vessel - This is by the [s ace] of the
tit'? December, which continue - dated this LSth day of ebmary Our cruisers should examine every description of Vessels under
Frigates, and not trust to any Colours or dress of the Crews and should
not consider themselves secured from attack at Anchor. Most may
happen when least expected.

* * *

E

9

P

[Italics indicate translation of coded message.]
[LC. EPP, LB, Dec. 1803-April 1804.1
Extract from journal of Midshipman F. Cornelius dskrafft, U.S. Navy, in U. 6. Brig
Siren of 18 guns, Lieutenant Charles Stewart, U. 8. Navy, commsnding, Friday,
17 February 1804

(Burning of the Frigate Philad?) Commences with fine breezes &
pleas! weather the Intrepid in co: at % past 1 set jib & main top
mast stay sail. ji past 2 haul'd them down. At 4 made the town
of Tripoli a t $ past 5 it bore S R by S M S English castle S. S. W.
12 miles dist At % past 6 back'd main top sail & hoisted out barge
& launch.
At 7 turn'd the reefs out of the topsails & sounded in 38 fathoms,
small irregular stones, small shells $ red R: white coral. the Town of
Tripoli bearing S. S. W. 9 miies At K past 7 sounded in 33 fathoms,
set jib & after main sail. 8 sounded in 26 fathoms, fine yellowish coral,
small shells & gravel. Tripoli bore S. S. W. 5 miles disi At K past 8 sounded in 20 fathoms, haul'd up the fore sail, down
jib, brail'd up after main sail. At 9 came too with the stream anchor
m 22 fathoms, small yeIlow cord & fine sand. Tripoli bearing S. W.
by S 1 mile distant inclinf to calm, sent off to Lieu$Decatur reinforcements in the boats, Lieu$ Caldwell & JnQDorsey mid@ with 20 men

432

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1803 TO 1804

(in the launch) Mr Brooke & M' Budd with 8 men (in the Barge)
At % past 10 Lieu$ Decatur made the signal for a reinforcement of
Officers I%men in boats; answer'd it; about ten minutes after which
the Frigate Philadelphia in the harbour of Tripoli burst into a flame
fore & aft, the castle & Batteries then commencd the f i e on the
Intrepid, all around the frigate & in every direction - Midnight
gentle breezes & pleas? weat: Weigh'd & stood to the NQ& Ed under
easy sail. At K past midnight the launch & barge return'd & were
welcom'd with repeated cheers (hoisted in boats) At 1 AM spoke
the Intrepid & took her tow, when Lieu5 Decatur came on board got
top gall! masts on end 8: made sail. Town of Tripoli bearing S S W
dis' 2 leagues At 4 hous'd the guns & shi p'd the ports At 9 haul'd
down main top mast stay sail $ b r d ' up after main sail. stiff
gales from the S S E. At Ji; past 9 set main top mast stay sail At
10 run out the ~bboom bent the standing jib & set it. a t X past 11
double reef'd a ter main sail & set it. NB About midnight the frigate burnt her cables & drifted ashore
she was then burnt down to the waters edge. Latt: Obs: 34'25' N.

1

[NDA.]
To Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Xavy, from Captain William Bainbridge,

U. s. Navy

TRIPOLY
IN BARBARY
18Q FebT 1804
DEARSIR, A Vessel from Maita arrived here on the 15t8 inst
which brought your Dispatches; and the Articles sent, for which,
accept my grateful thanks.
About 10 days ago we obtained permission to take the fresh air by
walking in the T o m and Gardens 4 or 5 in number a t a time; but
since the burning of the Frigate, our house has been surrounded with
Guards, and what will be the result, I cannot get say. Let what will
come, believe us to be Americans possessed of Fortitude
P S: Keep it a secret that you receive any letters from me. thro'
hl' Nissen; and even better to not let it be known of your receiving
any from me. - Place not too much confidence in the Neapolitan
Doctor you have on board. Forbid all Officers writing m y movements
of the S uadron, particularly Midshipmen. We are closely watched,
but I wi?weather
I
a few W: 3:[LC. EPP, LB, Dec. 1803-April

1804.1

To whom not indicated, presumably from Captain William Bainbridge, U. S. Navy

T ~ ~ ~ o ~ ~ f e b r u 1804
ary
"You have doubtless long ere this heard of the loss of the Frigate
PhiZadelphia - The particulars of that most unfortunate event
which has terminated in our becoming Prisoners of War, or rather
Slaves to the Bashaw of this Regency, are briefly these - On the
morning of the 31" October last cruizing a few leagues to the Eastward of this tom, We discovered a Tripolitan Armed Ship, standing
to the Westward, to which We gave chase. She kept close in with the
land, and continued running for the town, while we kept up firing upon
her as our guns could be brought to bear. Finding, however, all our
efforts, either to compeI her to run on shore, or to cut her off from the

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

433

town ineffectual, We gave up the pursuit and was standing off from
the land, when we suddenly run upon a reef of Rocks, with only twelve
feet of water - All the guns, except, a few to defend us against the
attacks of the Enemy's gun Boats were thrown overboard, the Anchors
cast away from the Bows, and the fore mast cut away, in order to
lighten the Ship; but every thing was unavailing - Finding all our
exertions ineffectual, convinced that no expedient had been left
unattempted that could have a possible tendency to save the Ship After having sustained the fire of the Enemy's Gun Boats for upwards
of four hours, and Our Ship so much careened over as to render the
firing of our guns inpracticable, cruel necessity Ieft no alternative but
the melancholy one, of hauling down our Colours; and the Flag of the
United States was struck to the Tripolines The treatment we received from these Savages was such as raised
our utmost indignation - Nothing was sacred or escaped their pryin
search, d l our chests, trunks, with every article of cloathing, and
our books were carried off - Our swords were snatched from us, our
pockets searched and emptied; some of us had our boots pulled off,
to examine if something was not concealed there, and some had their
very coats pulled off their backs, which the barbarians exultingly put
upon themselves, and rts if the rewards of some si a1 Exploit; seemed
to triumph in acquiring what fortune alone had o tained them Immediately on being landed, we were all conducted, amidst the
shouts and acclamations of the rabble Multitude to the Palace and
there ushered into the presence of the mighty Bashaw who seated in
state with his Council about him, and sorrounded with Guards, awaited
our coming - He asked a variety of questions rincipally concerning
our Ship and Squadron; and after having us a f paraded before him,
and taken a full survey of each of us, a t which a gracious smile appeared
upon his countenance, expressive of his inward satisfaction a t his good
fortune which by renderin us miserable had so kindly befriended
him, we were led by a Guar to the house assigned for our Prison.
Here we were left to our own reflections till the 1 . F November - On
that day, the Bashaw, for reasons best known to himself, thought
proper to remove us, and ordered that We should be conducted to the
Castle - The change indeed was rather an unpleasant one -From a
large commodious house to what they call a Castle, which in fact, was
a most loathsome prison - We were there crammed into the same
place with all our Ship's Company - How well capable of containing
such a number you may judge when I inform you that the room was
about 80 feet by 25 - How confortably when you learn that the only
place to admit the fresh air was by a small aperture in the cieling
grated over, without any floor or a single Article of furniture, so that
when fatigued standing up, we were obliged to lay down on the filthy
ground - In the Evenin the Bashaw's natural goodness reappeared
and, banishing all passion rom his mind, we were by his orders reconducted to our former abode Two nights since the Boats of one of Our Frigates came within the
ht~rbour,and burnt our ship - It was a most sublime sight, and very
gratifyin to us; we have not as yet heard the articulars - In consequence o this however, the Bashaw has redou led his vigilance of us,
and 'tis said that we are wain to be carried to the Castle
[NA. BDA. CL,Tripoli, Vol. 2, 1801-1805.1

A

f?

8

7

f

!

434
-act

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1803 TO 180.4
from log book kept by Sailing Master Nathaniel Haraden, U. S. Navy, on
board U. S. Emgate Constilulion. Saturday, 18 February 1804

Moderate breezes from the Westward At Anchor a t Saragosa Surveying Warrant officers stores & working up Junk. Towards
evening tbe Wind shifted to the S E. and had the appearance of a gale
from the East'?. Cleared Hawse and down to Gall* Yards. At 8
P. M. the wind had increased nearly to a Ga e - Anchored here
the U. S. Schooners Vixen and Enterprize with convoys: The Vixen
from Malta with the W7illiam d Mary Store Ship; The Enterprize
from Messina with the ship Port May The Spider an English man of
war brig anchored here - Towards midnight the wind shifted to
E N E and continued so till day light with strong breezes A M.
Cleaning ship Washing cloaths. Surgeons report 9 sick and 9 convalescent - Noon fresh breezes from the E N E with a swell setting
into the Harbor [LC. EPP, Log Constitution,1803-1804.1

P

To Bobert Montgomery, U. S. Consul, Alicante, from Tobias Lear, U. S. Consul
General, Algiers

ALGIERS
Feb? 19" 1804
DEAESIR, I have the pleasure to acknowledge the receipt of your
acceptable favor of the 19'h ultimo, with its enclosures, and to thank
you for the communications which it contained.
I take the liberty of enclosing two letters for the Secretary of
State of the U. States, which may go by the same conveyance (one
being a wpy of a preceding letter) a letter for the HonbleCh9 Pinkney,
one for Mr Kirkpatrick, & one for Mr Gavino. The Courier passing
from this to Alicant, will, I am afraid, give you much trouble m conveying letters to the U S . and other places; but I know you will
readily take that trouble, knowing it the only certain channel of
communication that we have. I presume that the appearance of the British fleet off here on the
17'Q 18'b & 19'h ultimo, has been announced in your quarter, and that
after much altercation with the Dey, in which neither yiel[d]ed, it
went offf] without affecting anything - The Heroic Character of
Lord Nelso[n], who commanded the fleet, forbids the idea of fear on
the part of the British, and it is presumed thl he was called from hence
by lndispensible circumstances. We wait the issue of this business
with some anxiety. 7
I have heard nothmg from Tripoli further than the general account
Captivity of the Crew - I have made
of the loss of the Philad"
provision for the comfortable support of our unfortunate Countrymen,
and await the orders of Government for further proceedings. The departure of the Courier a day sooner than I had expected,
prevents me from adding more than the assurances of the most
perfect respect & esteem
By the Spanish Courier Via Alicant
Duplicate by the U. S. Schooner Vizen Lc Comd*Smith - March 17tb

P. S. I enclose the two letters for the Secp of State under one cover. [Stephen Decatur Col. NDA photostat, Book A.]

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

435

To John Gavino, U. S. Consul, Gibraltar, from Tobias Leer, U. 6. Consul General,
Algiers

N Q7.
ALGIERSFeb? lgt@1804
DEARSIR, It was not untiU the l l c h inst, that I had the pleasure
of receiving your acceptable favour of the 15"JDece~with its enclosures; for which I am much obliged to you; my ale as sketched in
your letter, is just, Mr Mountford forgot to pa for making the
money bags, which you will be so kind as to do.
ommodore Preble
did not pay me the 20 dollars you mention, i t was forgotten undoubtedly; but as I shall have some accounts with him I will mention it.
My good little wife & myself often talk of your kind & hospitable
attentions. Your excellent Sister will be remembered by us with
gratitude as long as we live - Fanny wrote to her some time ago, but
had no opp? of sending the letter, it is now enclosed, - when a direct
oppertunity offers for Gibraltar she will write more fully.
r e arrived here after a pleasant passage of five days. I have been
received by the Dey with much cordiality, and our Affairs appear
to be well here; but we are in an unsteady latitude. We find the
Country exceedingly pleasant, and as yet have no cause to complain.
I found Captain Cornick here to whoom I gave a proper lecture As he determined not to touch at Gibraltar, I did not write by
him. - The loss of the annuity Ship near Cadk is unfortunate
but we must do without her. The unfortunate loss of the Philad* & the Captivity of poor Bainbridge & his Crew at Tripoli, you are undoubtedly informed of before
this, it happened on the 31"f of October, and i t was not until1 the
15tWecemberthat I knew it here. I then took measures for supplying
all the wants and making the situation of my unfortunate Countrymen
as comfortable as could be in that state. It is an unlucky affair; but
in the end, it will, I think be attended with good effects. - It will
disconcert the plans of the Commodore, from whoom I have not
heard since he left this Bay on the 22@Novr but he will receive further
aid. (See British Affairs in letter to Capt. Bainbridge Feb? 1Z* 1804)
I pray you to present my affectionate regards to your good Sister
&: Brother Thomas, in which my wife joins me, & sends her best love
to you. Our best respects await Sir Tho?Trigg & his amiable Lady I respect the Veteran, and his attentions are not forgotten. To
Co1QFyers his Lady & family & our other acquaintances in Gibraltar
we wish to be remembered with respects & regards.
1.t by Spanish Courier via Alicant. - 2 4 by U.S. Schooner [Vizen] Lt. Comdt
Smith via Alicant March 17tb 1804 -

8

[Stephen Decatur Col. NDA photostat.]
To Captain Edward Preble, U. 6. Navy, from James Leander Cathcart, Leghorn

LEGHORN
lgtQFebrur 1804.
SIR. I had the honor to answer yours of the 4'9 on the 30t@UltQ
& enclosed you a plan of a gunboat, the price thereof, & the time i t
would take to build four on that construction, I now send you a plan
of a boat calculated to carry a 10 inch mortar a brass long 24 pounder
& a short forty two, with which I am certain you will find many faults
& 'oin with me in giving the preference to the former, both for its
u d t y & price, the latter is better calculated for inland navigation
where a current or regular tide might facilitate its operations, but I

436

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1803 TO 1804

can't think i t is a proper vessel to be on a barbarous coast which
inevitably at some periods becomes a lee shore. In my opinion the best rig for a vessel carrying a mortar is a Ketch,
such as the are now used in the British Navy which are vessels of
burthen & resistance & calculated to keep the sea in any weather,
to build such vessels here, would cost as much as it would in the United
States, & the timber would not be so good, nor the work so well done,
& for a boat to carry a mortar & a gun aft, I prefer the rig of the boat
the plan of which I have already sent you.For the enclosed plan I could devise no other rig but what is delineated as the vessel must inevitably carry two masts, & when the
mortar is play'd the foremast must be taken out & two stay sails
fitted from the mainmast head to enable the boat to hold her wind
until taken in tow by the vessel that would have her foremast on
board: for that reason 1 prefer a sliding gunter sail forward, to a
schooners, the mast being shorter & lighter, less incumber'd with
riging, & consequently easier taken in & out, but upon the whole
this plan is very inconvenient; however it can do no harm to submit i t
to your inspection & probably your superior judgement & experience
will enable you to point out some improvement which will remove
the difficulty: it ought likewise to be consider'd that in action, should
my of the larger boats be sunk we would lose a Gun & a mortar,
exclusive of the difference in the price of the boat; the former being
valued at dollars 3776 32/100 & the latter 5978 941100 so that you may
have built nine of the smaller boats for a very little more than what
five of the larger would cost. I found here four mortars the smallest was eleren inch french
measurement & weigh'd 1455 Lbs of Leghorn the other three were
12 inch & weigh'd 2720 lbs each, I should have purchased the smallest a t a risk but the[yJ being in possession of a Jew, immediately
on his being informed that I wanted them he broke them all up,
& sold them for old brass, altho the person whom I employ'd to buy
them offer'd to give him a better price than he possibly could get
else where; I presume he was affraid that if the Bashaw of Tripoli
should be inform'd that we had purchased arms from Jews that he
would make it a pretext for levying contributions on his fraternity
a t Tripoli; I have heard of none others for sale in Leghorn, if I do I
will inform you as soon as possible, I wrote to the Pounder a t Florence
on the subject, who answer'd me. that first pcrmission must be obtain'd
from the Tuscan government & that i t would take him a year to make
four ten inch mortars; & that he would settle the price when I forwarded him the design, as for balls bomb shells & ammunition, I
presume the[y] can be procured by applying to this government, as
the governor of Leghorn when I applied to him to know whether
any impediment would be placed in the way of our building & fiting
out gunboats answer'd none whatever; but on the contrary that
every facility would be given us for giving the preference to the
Port of Leghorn & that I might begin the work when ever I thought
proper. I have wrote to France & Genoa for information on the above
subjects as well as to be inform'd whether two capable men can be
procured, here I have found none that I would recommend, when I
run answer'd you shall be inform'd of the result. Should you determine to Commission me to have those boab
built & fited out here; it will be necesearg for you to inform me where

WARS WITH BARBARY POJ17ERS

437

I am to procure cash, for I have none in my possession belonging
to the United States, if the Navy Agents here have any in theirs,
your bills upon them would be the best way to re-irnburse me, if not,
upon London, bills upon the United States are not all ways negociable
& never without considerable loss. Should you think proper to make any alterations, or additions to
the plans please to specify them, that a proper contract may be enter'd
into - with the builder, in order to prevent future altercation & to
enable me to have them built exactly as you would wish them. If you think proper that I should apply to this government for
shells ammunition &$ please to send me your orders & specify the
quantity & quality you would wish to procure. I have not heard from Colonel Lear since we parted pray how was
he receiv'd at Algiers, $ how did the presents which I forwarded
by the Siren please the Dey & Regency. - Requesting your answer
as speedily as you determine on the measures which are to be pursued,
I continue very respectfully. [LC. EPP, Vol. 10, Feb.-April 1804.1
To James Leander Cathcart, Leghorn, from Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Xavy

UNITED
STATES
SHIPCons~~zcti~n
Syracuse Harbour feb? l g a @1804.
DEARSIR.I am honQwith your highly esteem'd favour of the 30t@
Ult? together with a Copy of your letter to CaptQBainbridge, Invoice
of clothing, plan, & estimate of the cost of a gun boat; for all which,
please to accept my thanks.
I have applied to the Neapolitan Governmt for gun &- mortar boats,
8: wait an answer before I can determine on building any, they have
a great number of very fine boats a t Palermo $ Messina. I t is not
in my power to send a vessel to Leghorn at present. The Vixen I have sent to Algiers, the Enterprize is a t Alessina
undergoing a thorough repair. The Argus is ordered to cruise
between Cape de gat, and Ca e Martin on the coast of Spain, so that
I have only the Nautilus ScYlooner, & Syren brig on the Tripoline
station; of course no vessel to send for the clotSing. I have as much
provided, as will be wanted for the prisoners a t present, & will send
a vessel to you as soon as possible. If you could Obtain permission
to send it to Naples, I intend to go there with this Ship, for the urpose
of making some arrangements with the Iiing, & wish you coufd meet
me. It is my intention to be a t Kaples by the 30tQof next month,
but shall not remain more than five or six days. mhat think you of
a cruise for a few wecks? I am in want of a volunteer who possesses
your knowledge of the Nation we are a t war with. My Cabin &
table is a t your Service, if you incline to favour me with your compnny;
& I will engage to show you sport before the summer is out. The Philadelphia Frigate was got off the rocks without damage;
dl her guns were taken out to ffoat her close into the Bashaw's cestle,
where she was moored, her guns were then put on board, & the ship
& her batteries got in fine order: her guns were kept loaded, tompions
out, & a strong guard constantly on board. I determined from the
moment I heard of her capture, to destroy her, to prevent the conseuences of her remaining in their possession: this has been effected.
8 n the 3*Q ins" I sent Capt'! Decatur in a small ketch or bombard of
about 60 tons & 4 guns, with 70 volunteers from the squadron to

438

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1803 TO 1804

Tripoli, with orders to burn the Frigate, as she was so situated, that
she could not be brought out. Capt? Stewart in the Syren brig, was
order'd to support him with boats, & cover a retreat with the brig, by
anchoring off the harbour. On the night of the 16tWapt?Decatur
enterd the harbour of Tripoli, was hailed from the Frigate; he answered
from Malta, & the rigg of the vessel, deceived the Tripolitans, however
they were soon undeceived. Captain D - laid the ketch a long side
& in a gallant & officer like manner with his brave handful of men,
boarded against all opposition; & after a conflict of a few minutes;
carried her by the sword, without iiring a musket or pistol: then set her
on fire in every part, & she was totally consumed with all her materials:
we did not lose a man, & only one was wounded: between 20 & 30
Tripolines were killed; one large boat load made their escape; many
leapt into the sea & it is supposed a number hid themselves below, &
perished in the flames, we made but one prisoner. The conduct of
& the Officers & crew under his command, deserve the
Capt"ecatur,
highest commendation: two of their largest Corsairs, lay within half
musket shot of the Frigate, the crews of which, for some time, stood
appalled a t the intrepidity & daring of our men, but after a while, they
commenced firing on the ketch, Rt the batteries & the Bashaw's castle
did the same. This day the Nautilus sent a Maltese brig taken near Tripoly, in
a considerable
violation of the blockade, with 8 Tripoline mercht"
cargo of goods; hemp, plank,
&Obn board, she is a good prize. Your attention to Captwainbridge, & the officers, & crew who are
captives with him, does you i f i t e honor. P. S. I approve your plan for a gun boat, & wait in expectation, of
receiving the letter you intended to write by the post, following your
last. [ N k SDA. CL, Tripoli, Vol. 2, 1801-1805.1
To Lieutenant Isaac Hull,U. S. Navy, commanding U. 6. Brig Argus. Gibraltar, from
Captaln Edward Preble, U. 8. Navy

UNITED
STATES
SHIPConstitution
Sir,

*

Syracuse Harbour Febr?lgt'-', 1804.

*

*

*

*

*

*

You will immediately on receipt of this sail on a cruise off Cape de
Gatt and as high up as Cape Martin, as it is possible some of their
cruisers may slip down. I would have you keep a good look out, and
board every suspicious Vessel and examine below decks every one you
board - Write me b way of Malta to the care of William Higgins
Esquire Naval Agent or the U S, and send me all the News papers
you can meet with. I am in great want of you with the Argus in this
quarter, and I hope you will soon be relieved by some Vessel from
America.
[LC. EPP, LB, Dec. 1808-April 1804.1

3

To Secretary of the Navy from Captain Edward Preble, U. 6. Navy

UNITED
STATES
SHIPConstitution

Syrwuse Harbour FebrP lgt@1804

SIB,I regret that the 100 Gun Carriages have been sent to the
Emperor of Morocco. We ought not to give those Barbarians the

means of Defence or Annoyance.

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

439

I am taking measures for bringing the Bashaw of Tripoly to t e r n
which I dare not mention for fear my letters should miscarry The
destruction of the Frigate will be a great disappointment to him, and
deprive him of resources from the sale of her which he is much in
want of. My heart is fixed on obhgmg him to sue for Peace and I
hope yet to make him consent to sign a t r a t y as favorable as ours
with Morocco without a cent for Peace or Tribute. I had rather
spend my life in the Mediterranean than we should ever consent to
either. I hope before the end of next summer to make him give me
the Officers & Crew of the late frigate Philadelphia without a ransom.
I made Lieu$ Dent a Lieu$ Commandant to command the Enterprize, and since Decatur's return have ordered him to join this ship
again, but shall employ him in a light Vessel soon. 1 wish you would
confirm him in the appointment
I have an excellent set of Officers who dare do anything I order
them to do. Pray don't neglect Decatur
I never have heard of the arrival of my dispatches by the New
York and John Adams. I forwarded a large packet by each.
[LC. EPP, LB, Dec. 1803-April 1804.1
To Captain William Bainbridge, U. S. Navy,from Captain Edward Preble,

U. S.Navy

UNITED
STATESSHIPCo~~~titution

Syracuse Harbour Febr? lgt* 2804
letter
from
the
Navy
dept of November 8Q 1803 I am
SIR, B
cornman ed by the Honb'y Secretary of the Navy, to assure you, that
the President of the United States, has approved of your conduct in
capturing the Mirboka and re-capturing her prize; and to convey to
you his thanks for the vigilance and foresight exercised by you in the
whole conduct of that business; and for the rapid movements which
you subsequently made to arrest the mischief intended us. I am
also charged to communicate to you the thanks of the Honb19Secretary. I obey these commands with pleasure & satisfaction, sensible
that you merit and deserve them.

1

[LC. EPP, LB, Dec. 1803-April 1804.1
To Lieutenant John H. Dent, U.S. Wavy, from Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Navy

Constitution, SYRACUSE
HARBOUR,
Febru 19'h 1804
SIR YOUwill immediately join this Ship and return all the men lent
from her to the Enterprize. [NHF. Dent's LB.1

[19 February 18041
To Tobias Lear, U. S. Consul General, Algiers, from Captain Edward Preble,
U. 6. Navy

Enc1osed.i~a copy of a letter from the Sect? of the Navy to me on
m conduct at my first arrival in the Mediterranean [As] my friend
I L o w it will gratify you fl] therefore sent it.
Y r )Wth Esteem
[Stephen Decatur Col.]

E P.

440

--

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1803 TO 1804
-

-

To Secretary of the Navy from C ~ p t a i nEdward heble, U. 6.Bevy
UNITED
STATESSHIPConstitution
Syracuse Harbour Febr lgtb I804
SIR,
I am hond with your letter of the 18th November & 12th december approbating my conduct, and conveying to me the thanks of the
President of the U S. and your own - I accept them with gratitude
and pleasure, sensible how much I am hong thereby. To know that
my services are approved of by my Country is the highest reward I
can ever receive, and to continue to deserve its approbation shall be
my constant aim
I have conveyed to Capt-ainbridge the thanks of the President.
[LC. EPP, LB,Dee. 1803-April 1804.1
To Secretary of the navy from Captain Edward Preble, IT. S. Navy

UNITED
STATES
SHIPConstitution
Syracuse Harbour February l g t h 1804
Sir, I had the honor to write you the 3'0 Inst at which time all the
Vessels of the Squadron were at sea, excepting the Enterprize, whose
Officers and Crew were gone in the prize which I captured the 23'g
Ulto. on an expedition to endeavour to destroy the Philadelphia in the
Harbour of Tripoly. The Syten went to protect and assist.
7th - The Vizen and Nautilus returned, and reported the Wind
West, and weather so boisterous in the channel between Sicily and
Malta, that they could not with safety keep a t sea. The 8th it
moderated, and the Nalltilus sailed on a cruise off Cape Mazuratt to
the Eastward of Tripoly. The Wind continues Kesterly - IOth
r e d letters from Messina requesting me to send a Vessel to convoy
the American trade from thence to the Kestward. The V k n 1s
destined for Tunis & Algiers, and only waits a favorable Wind. I
appointed Lt Dent to the command of the Enterprize - Supplied
hun with Officers & Men from this ship to make his complement 60.
and ordered him to Messina to protect the trade to this port From
hence the Vixen will convoy it, as far to the Westward as Algiers.
I t can then roceed with safety.
lbth I r e c about 20 Maltese Sailors & Pilots from the Island of
Malta, which by permission of the Governor, I ordered to be
shi ped there. Those Men I shall want to distribute among our
Saifors in Latteen Boats as they are accustomed to them & shall want
a number in the Spring. By the Vessel that brought over the Men,
I r e d intelligence of the arrival of a Store Ship a t hlalta. I immediately sent the V k n to convoy her to this place, where I have Magazines rovided for the rece tion of her Cargo.
1
d The Vixen arrive8 with the Store Ship WiLliam d Mary
Captain Tipling from Norfolk. she has a cargo we shall soon be in
want of, as the Beef and Pork r e d by the TravelZer has proved so bad,
that a very great proportion of it we have been obliged to throw into
the Sea. It is not necessary to send out Vinegar or Rice in future,
as they can be purchased here much lower than in America. I am
not yet acquainted with the quality of the present Cargo, as she has
not commenced discharging - In the evening the Enterprize arrived
with a convoy from Messina
19th - At 10 AM the Sgren and Ketch Intrepid arrived from the
coast of Tripoly, after having executed my orders highly to my satis-

a

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

441

faction, b effecting the complete destruction of the Frigate late the
~ h i l & l & ~ in the Harbour of Tripoly on the night of the 16th Inst
9
her with all her Materials The Frigate was moored in a
s~tuation rom whence she could not be brought out. Of course it
became an object of the first importance to destroy her. I t has been
effected by Lieu* Decatur and the Officers and Crew under his command in the most gallant manner His conduct and that of his brave
Officers and Crew is above all praise. I regret that the Boats of the
Syren did not arrive in the Harbour of Tripoly before Lieu! Decatur
had effected the burning of the Frigate, as it is probable the corsairs
near her would have shared the fate of the Frigate, if they had.
I enclose you Lieuts Stewart & Decatur's official communications
respecting this affair [16 February 18041.
P S. A prize to the Nautilus has this moment arrived captured to
the Eastward of Tripoly. She is a Brig from Malta under English
Colours bound to Tripoly, loaded with Hemp, Spars, ready made
Sails, Bale Goods, & Building Stone and has Nine Tripolines on
board E: P -

by

[LC. EPP, LB, Dec. 1803-April 1804.1
To Secretary of the Navy from Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Navy

UNITEDSTATESSHIPConstitution
Syracuse Harbour F e b m r y 19" 1804
SIR Lieutenant Decatur is an Officer of too much Value to be
neglected. The important service he has rendered in d e s t r o y an
Enemy's frigate of 40 Guns, and the gallant manner in w ich he
erformed it, in a small vessel of only 60 Tons and 4 Guns, under the
bnemY1sBatteries, surrounded b their corsairs and armed Boats,
the crews of which, stood appa ed at his intrepidity and daring,
would in any Navy in Europe insure him instantaneous promotion
to the rank of post Ca tain. I wish t
w a stimulus, it could be done in
this instance; it woul eventually be of real service to our Navy. I
beg most earnestly to recommend him to the President, that he may
be rewarded according to his merit.
By the Store Ship, I shall have the honor to write you again in a
few days. With the highest respect

d'

f

[LC. EPP, LB, Dec. 1803-April 1804.1
To Captain William Bainbridge, U. S. Navy, from Captain Edward Preble,
U. S. Navy

UNITEDSTATESFRIGATE
Constitution
SYRACUSE
HARBOUR
February l g t @1804.
DEARSIR, I am anxious to hear from you since the destruction of
the Philadelphia. That business was handsomely accomplished by
Ca tain Decatur, without the loss of a man.
$here has been foul play with my letters at Malta. otherwise you
would have had no reason to complain of my not writing. Mr
P[ulis] - at Malta has been detected in sending the letters from
America directed to you and your Officers out of their proper channel,
where you never would have r e d them, if I had not made the dis-

442

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1803 TO 1804

covery; and I suppose mine have shared the same fate. I n fact he
enclosed them under cover, and directed them all to the United States
I have procured a supply of clothing for the seamen which I shall
send you b the first opportunity. I wish ou to direct your letters
to me by tie way of Malta to the care of ilfiam Higgins Esquire.
Adieu!

f

[LC. EPP, LB, Dec. 1803-April 1804.1
To Tobias Lear, U. S. Consul General, Algiers, from Captain Edward h e b l e ,
0. S. Navy

U.S. SHIPConstitution
Syracuse Harbor Feb? lQtQ
1804.

DEARSIR I wrote you the 3'6 Ins! that I had sent Lt Commt
Stewart in the Brig Syren, and Lt Commt Decatur in the Ketch Intrepzd
to Tripoly to burn the Philadelphia as I un[der]stood it was not possible, from her situation, to bring her out.
I now have the Pleasure to Inform you that both those vessels
returned here this day, after having executed my orders highly to my
satisfaction; Lt Decatur entered the Harbor of Tripoly in the evening
of the 16*8 Inst with the Ketch, and in the most gallant manner, laid
the frigate dong side, boarded and carried her, notwithstanding the
resistance of a large number of armed Tripolines prepared to recieve
him: after having gained compleat possession, he proceeded to fire her
with success; She was soon in a Blaze from her Birth Deck to her Tops,
and is totally destroyed with all her materials: during the Operation
the Batteries and Bashaw's Castle kept up a constant fire: The Frigate
had all her guns, 40, mounted and loaded, and was in good Order. Cap.! Decatur did not lose a man and had but one wounded: The
Tripohes had between twenty and thirty killed: Not a musket or
Pistol was fired on our side, every thing by the sword and tomawhawk.
We made one prisoner I t is presumed some Tripolines perished in
the flames, and many drowned: I am preparing for another Expedition
to their Coast; this is not the season for Action, but you know I do
not like to be Idle I enclose you a letter from Mr Davis: As you will have all the Papers
alluded to in it, ou can best jud e of the Answer proper to send the
Be of Tunis.
concieve it will e well to m i t e him:
{be. you to make my best respects to MrqLear
P. S. I expect soon to bring the Bashaw of Tripoly to reason, and
shall feel anxious for your arrival or advice in case of negotiation: If
you cannot leave the Regency at present, and can revail on Mr Obrien
to come here, his knowledge of the Barbarians an their language, will
enable him to render me essential service. A Prize brig sent in by the
Nautilus has this moment arrived, she was taken to the Eastward of
Tripoly last Thursda under English Colors from Malta bound to
Tripoly with Hemp pars ready made, Sails and Bale Goods, has
Eight Tripoline men, and two women on board as Passengers.

i'

f,

S

6

[Stephen Decatur Col.]
Argus. Lientenant Isaac Hull,U. 8. Navy,
commanding, Sunday, 19 February 1804

Extract from journal of U. S. Brig

These 24 hours Commence with strong breezes from the Northward
and Clear Weather Employed beating into the bay of Blticant the

443

WARS W I m BARBABY POWERS

Ship Actress in Sight. At 6 P, M, Cape St Paul bore W b N >h N at
$4 ast 7 brought too, with the Starboard Anchor in 9 fathoms good
hofding ground the Ship Actresa Arrived, a t 7 AM obtained Pratique, by sending a boat with a Lieutenant on Shore the American
ConsuI came off with him, latter part pleasant Weather people
Variously Employed
[NDA photostst.]
Extract from Diary of Captain Edward Preble, U. 6. Navy, Commodore of U, 6.
Squadron in the Mediterranean, Sunday, 19 February 1804

[Syracuse] Wind N N E to E N E - Moderate and cloud . At 10
A. M. the Syren & Ketch Intrepid appeared in the Ofhg; t ey sailed
the 36 Ins! for the Coast of Tripoly with orders to Burn the frigate
Philadelphia. At Y2 past 10 LWtewart and Lt Decatur came on
board and informed me that my Orders were executed; On the night
of the 16@ L+Decatur entered the harbor of Tripoly with the Ketch
and in the most gallant manner laid her alongside the F'rigate, boarded
and carried her against all opposition, killed about 20 or 30 Tripolines
and drove the rest overboard, excepting one boats crew which escaped
on shore and made one prisoner He then set fire to her and left her
She was soon in a complete Blaze from her birth deck to her tops and
was totally consumed I n effecting the destruction of the frigate we
had none killed and only one man wounded with a Sabre, on the
head, Altho she had all her Guns mounted and loaded and a great
number of men to defend her, and two Tripoline Corsairs full of men
lay within half musket shot. The names of the Oficers on board the Ketch Intrepid who effected
this Important business are,
Lt Comrn4

g

Lieutts
Surgeon

Midshipmen.

[LC. EPP, Diary,

1803-1804.1

Extract from log book kept by Sailing M ~ t e Nstheniel
r
Haraden, U. 6. Navy, on
board U. S. Frigate Coac(ihdf0n. Sunday, 19 February 1804

Moderate Breezes from the E N E with a swell setting into the
Harbor - Ship's company employ'd in cleaning ship, working up
Junk, and watering ehip - Employ'd a small shore boat to assist in
watering - The large Cutter being on shore under the C
repair - Reciev'd Carpenters stores nineteen plank.
oderate
breezes from the Eastward during the night. At 9 A M made the

2enter'

444

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1803 TO 1804

the Vixen s i p d N? ,5589. At 10 appeared in the o f i g the U S Brig
Syren and the Intrepid - Made the Syren's signal NP 227 - The
Intrepid is the prize lately taken from the Tripolitans, commissioned,
and named by the Commodore - The Wind being light we sent boats
out to assist in towing them in I mentiond that the Syren & Intrepid
had sail'd on the third of this month on a secret expedition - At %
past 10 they pass'd through our squadron (Constitution, TTixen,and
Enterprize) in triump, receiving three cheers from each as the[y]
pass'd - Lieu; Steward of the Syren & Lieu1 Decatur of the Intrepid
waited on the Commodore, and informed him, that agreeably to his
orders they had proceeded to the Harbour of Tri oli, and Burned,
and totally destroyed the late U States Frigate Phi adelphia and that
the plan on which they acted was so well arranged that they had not
one man either killed or wounded - Above 20 of the Tripolitans
were killed, and one made prisoner - The rest escaped by jumping
overboard after the ship was afre - Surgeon's report, Twelve
Sick, and seven convalescent Noon light airs from the Eastward
[LC. EPP, Log Constitulion, 1803-1804.1

f

Extract from log book of U.S. Frigate Conrtilufion. Captain Edward Preble, U.S. Navy,
commanding, Sunday, 19 February 1804

Moored in Saragosa. A M. a t 10 appeared in the o f b g the united
States Brig Syren and the intripedlis the late Tripoletion prize/was
Commissioned by the Commodore and now calld the intripedlthe
wind being light we sent boats out to assist Towing in
[NA.

ND original.]

Extract from journal of Midshipman F. Cornelius deKrafft, U. 6 . Ravy, in U. S. Bng
Siren of 18 guns, Lieutenant Charles Stewart, U. S. navy, commanding, Sunday,
19 February 1804

Commences with fresh breezes & clear, the Intrepid in tow. ,4t M
past M e r i d m o k in top g a l l ~ a i l sstay
,
sails & flying jib - At % past
1 set top gall! sails At 2 set top gall! 8: middle sta sails &- flying jib
past 3 set roya s, larboard fore &
made the S. W. end of Scicily.
main top gall! steering sails. At
past 4 set larboard lower steering
sails. At
past 5 took in steering sails & royals: 6 lower'd down
the boat & sent her on board the Intrepid with Lieu! Decatur: At
past 6 the boat return'd with Mr Anderson & the remainder of the
men. At 8 cape Passaro bore N N E 3 miles disr - At % past 8
discover'd we were drifiting towards cape Yassarro, call'd all hands &
mann'd sweeps, set royals, flying jib, main top gall1 & royal stay sails,
after m-ail
At 10 pass'd cape Passaro. past 6 hoisted out the
Midnight moderate breezes & pleast. At
boats & took the brig in tow & haul'd up fore sail At 7 set royals.
At past 7 set fore sail, top mast & top gall$steering sails, dropt the
boats astern. At 9 made the town of Syracuse, the Commodore lyin
in the harbour. at % past 9 the Commodore made a si a1 (if we ha
succeeded) which we answer'd,
Immediately after E e u f Stewart
went on board the Commodore. run out the guns & secur'd them At
10 mann'd the sweeps to sweep in the harbour. - At Meridian
pass'd the Commodore (who had the yards & rigging mann'd) &
cheer'd us. we then pass'd the Nautilw & Vixen who went through
the same motions, whch was Answer'd by us.

r'

f

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

-

445

- -

Came too in 4 fathoms water. Light house bearing S. E.
S.
the large church E by S. takin in sad we sprung the fore top gall1
yard. At
past 2 moor'd B ip starboard bower S by E stream
N by E. A brig Polacre rigg'd, off the harbour under American
colours. At 3 said brig came to an anchor prov'd to be a Tripolian
prize to the Schooner Nauiilus. Survey'd & condemn'd a quantity
of beef. % past 7 hoisted in the barge. hands employ'd on various
duties. (NB those remarks include 36 hours.)

%

[KDA.]

To Minister of Foreign Affairs, Tripoli, from Captain William Beinbridge,
u. 6.wavy

TRIPOLY
IN BARBARY
20th Feb? 1804
SIR I have the honor to address you on the change of our treat-

(COPY)

ment which we have experienced since the burning of the Friaate, and
presuming that it is owing to that circumstance, I take the eberty of
mentioning, that it was an occurrence which His Excellency oukh]t
naturally to have expected from the fate of War. To have made the
attempt required no information further than what the Commodore
must have got, by seeing her when he was off here in December last:
the probability of such a thing, must have been obvious to every one,
from the distance she laid from the shore. H a v y stated to you that
i t required no information to the Commodore an the natural expectation of such an event, I trust His Excellency, will see that it was not
owing to any information from myself and Officers, who were confined
until eight days before it happened; in which period not a letter was
wrote, or could have reached the Commodore and had we every
liberty of the Town, it would be impossible for us to give any information respecting its strength &c. more than what the Commodore must
already be in possession of from Consul Cathcart, and various channels The numerous Guard we are surrounded with, is entirely unnecessary. The Walls of the City are suscient barriers to our making the attempt of etting away, and you Sir, have a much stronger
bind on us, than a1 the Guards that can be placed. Our Parole of
Honor, that no Officer dare to break ij kept on the part of the Government to whom it is given. Preventing our sending letters to our friends,
is a restraint to us, without the least benefit to his Excellency, as it
is entirely out of our Power to give any information; and could we,
prudence would forbid it. And you may be assured that the Commodore or his Officers will never write to us any thing which requires
secrecy for fear of the letters being detected: as a proof of this, the
Commodore mentioned to me in his last letter that he would not be
off here before May or June, therefore from correspondence no injury
can arise to Tripoly. The letters to and from our Families & friends
will be the on1 consolation we can receive in our ca tivity.
had proofs of t e humanity of your heart, I feel confi ent that throug
your Interest of this indulgence, we shall not be deprived - Myself
and Officers are fully sensible of your friendly disposition towards us.
Permit me to remark that no change of treatment to us, can prevent the Commodore's acting in every Warlike manner, so long as our
respective Countries are a t War, His Excellency will find the Americans
true friends in time of Pertce, but active Enemies in War.

g

E

B

446

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1803 TO 1804

I pray the same God that Guards and protects us both to give you
health -

WM.
BAINBRIDGE

SIDIMUHAMMED
DGHIES
Minister of
His ExceUeny

[LC. EPP, LB, Dec. 1803-April 1804.1
To Captain Stephen Decatur, Jr., U. 6. Navy, commanding U.6. Schooner Enlc~prIrc.
from Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Navy

U. S. FRIGATE
Constiiution
Syracuse Harbor FdiY 20tQ1804.

SIRYOUu-ill proceed immediately to Messina with the Enterprize
under your command, and give her such repairs as are absolutely
necessary to make her a safe Vessel. Mz Broadbent will be the
Proper person for you to apply to for assistance; You wiU hire a
vessel sufficient to recieoe the Stores, Officers and Crew of the Enterprize wile repairing: Apply to Mr B. to employ proper persons and
pay the Bills. I t is expected that not a moment of time will be lost,
as in the latter part of March I shall sail with the Squadron on an
Important expedition, where I shall want your services. You are
not to expend any money in Ornamenting the Schooner Enterprize I expect One thousand dollars will pay the expences necessary
PREBLE
Signed, EDWARD
[LC. EPP, Order Book, May 1803-June 1805.1
To John Broadbent, Messine, from Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Bevy

UNITEDSTATESSHIPComtitution

Sy~museHarbour Febrr &It@
1804
DEAR
SIR, I have ordered Captain Decatur to proceed to Messina
with the Schooner Enterprize to give her some repairs. I have
directed him to apply to you, to employ proper persons, and to pay
the Bills, for the re-imbursement of which I will send you the Dollars,
or you may draw on me here: I wish the repairs which Capt. Decatur
directs to be made, may be finished in the shortest possible time. He
will inform you of his late expedition to Tripoly and the success of i t
JOHN BROADBENT
Esquire
Merchant Messina

[LC. EPP, LB, Dec. 1803-April 1804.1
To Captain Edward Preble, U. 6. Bsvy, from Nicholas C. Nissen, Danish Consul,
TRpoli

TRIPOLI
IN BARBARY
Flebruury
1804.
SIR Give me Ieave Sir to present You my thanks for the very polite
letter of the 19tWecember, wherewith kou have been pleased to
honour me
If i have been so happy, to have been able to render Captain Bainbridge and his OfEcers some few services, since their captivity, i am
fully persuaded not to have done more t h m was my duty, and my
feeble exertion to alleviate their situation certainly does not merit
the distinguished praise You give it.
Be wured Sir that whatever can be in my power for ameliorating
the situation of the American Prieonnere of War, slid never be

WARS WITE BARBARY POWERS

447

wanted, unfortunately however i am afraid that Captain Bainbridge
and his Officers will for the future be deprived of my assistance, and
i of the pleasure of shewing them politeness.
Since the attack of the 16th inst: in the evening, when the late
Frigate of the U: S: Philadelphia was set on fire and totally consumed;
the American Officers Prisonners of war here, have been closely confined in their house, having a strong guarde, who does not permit any
body to see them nor to send them any letters, neither are they permitted to send any letters. h the house they live however in their
usual way, and m Cook is permitted as hitherto to purchase and
but severely prohibited from receiving
bring them their f!rovisions,
an paper.
ft is said that the Bashaw has ordered a lodging at his Castle to be
prepared for the American Prisonners of War.
It depends upon the Bashaw, if i am to have the honour of seeing
You Sir, when You come off with the Squadron; in consequence of
his express and positif demand by making i t an Article of our Treaty
of Peace, i have been oblidged to renounce to be char d with the
affairs of any Nation but my own. I t was not d i f f i c g to see the
remons of this demand of the Bashaw, but they are too many to be
detailed here.
I beg You however Sir to be assured, that whatever consistent
with my Character, may depend upon me for doing any service to
the United States or their Prisonners of War here, shall willingly and
with the greatest pleasure be executed, i shall thereby find an opportunity to shew You my profound Respect wherewith i have the honour
to remain
[LC. EPP, Vol. 10, Feb.-April 1804.1
Presumably to Captain Edward Preble, U. 8. Navy, from Sailing Master Samuel B.
Brooke, U. I. Navy

U S BRIGSiren

F e b my 26 [ZOJ 1804
SIR On my arrival in this Harbour yesterday, I was honored with

a Letter from the Secretary of the Navy, Bearing date 17 October
1803; Tendering a SailI[i]ng Masters Berth. My absence from
America, having entered on Board the Siren, as Masters Mate,
Prevented my acknowledging the Receipt of the Letter, - or my
acceptance of the appointment - I have now the honor of Presenting
you, with my acceptasce of the appointment, and wait your Further
orders,
SAMTJ~
B BROOKE
[LC. EPP, Vol. 10, Feb-April 1804.1
Extract from Diary of Captain Edward Preble, U. S. navy, Commodore of U. 6.
Sqordron in the lediterranean, Monday, !Z0 February 1804

Light breezes from the Eastward; S en, Vixen, Enterprize and
Intrepid in Company - Ordered L b n t to join the Ship with
the men lent the Entetprize & Caps Decatur to resume to Command
of the Entereze and the Officers and Crew of the Intrepid to join
their respective Ships - Store Ship discharging - .
[LC. EPP,Diary, 1803-1804.1

d

448

N A V U OPERATIONS FROM 1803 TO 1804

Extract from log book kept by Sailing Master Nathaniel Haraden, U. 6. Navy, on
board U. S. Frigate Constitution, Monday, I 0 February 1804

Moderate Breezes from the Eastward. At Anchor in Saragosa,
Syren, Vixen, Enterprize and Intrepid in company. On the late
expedition to Tripoly the Commodore sent the following Officers
from the Constitution, Mess!" Reid & Izard Masters Mates and Mess!"
Rowe, Laws, Morris and Davis Midshipmen. Lt Dent of the Constitution in the absence of Lt Decatur was appointed to the command
of the Enterprize - He took with him from the Constitution Lieutt
Elbert Mr Macellii Midshipmen and thirty three Seamen and proceeded to Messina from whence he bro't an American convoy - On
the Arrival of the Intrepid yesterday Lt Dent with his officers & men
rejoined the ConstitzLtion Towards Evening we had fresh breezes
from the Northward which continued through the night. A. M.
ships company employed cleaning Hammocks and Ship. At 6 strong
breezes from the Northwg - Sent a party of men to assist in discharging the William and Mary Store Ship. Surgeons report 11
sick & 7 convalescent - At Noon strong Gales from the Westward. [LC. EPP, Log Constitution, 1803-1804.1
Extract from journal of U. S. Brig Argus. Lieutenant Isaac Hull, U. S. Navy,
commanding, Monday, 20 February 1804

These 24 hours Commence with iModerate Breezes and pleasant
Weather - at 1 P, M,fired a Salute of 16 Guns which was returned
with the same number from the Saluting battery on Shore a t 8 AM
Moored Ship [in Alicante Bay]. ISD.4 photostat.]
Extract from journal of Midshipman F. Cornelius deKraflt, U.S. Navy, in U. S. Brig
Siren of 18 guns, Lieutenant Charles Stewart, U. S. Navy, commanding, Monday,
20 February 1804

[Syracuse Harbor] At 6 AM hoisted out the barge At 4 P. M. the
schooner Vixen hove up & stood out of the harbour, same time anchor'd
here a British ann'd Schooner At jh past 5 the Vizen return'd &
Came too. At 6 the British Frigate Amon anchor'd here. At 7
hoisted in the barge. Carpenter & crew employ'd painting ship. Sent on board the Enterprize the 2 brass 6 Pounders & every thing
belonging thereto as we receiv'd from her. ends with light airs from
the W S W & fine weather. [SDA.]
To Captain Edward Preble, U.6. Navy, from Abraham Gibbs, U. 8. Consul, Palermo

PELERMO
21 febr? 1804,
DEARSIR I am honored with your kind favor 13 Ins! - & return
you m best thanks for your obliging promise to let me know, whether
it wou d be permitted for any individual to ransom your Gent+Officers
in Tripoli.
Here are several Gun Boats & Mortars, but the Commanding OfEcer
orrather the Vice King has no authority to sell or lend them; lt would
therefore be necessary to make application to General Acton a t Naples
& I have no doubt but that your demand would be granted upon giving
Security that they are to serve against the Common Enemy Tripoli;[LC. EPP, Vol. 10, Feb.-April 1804.1

'!i

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

449

Extract from Diary of Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Navy. Commodore of U. S.
Squadron in the lediterranean. Tuesday, 21 February 1804

Fresh breezes from the N. W: & cloudy - Arrived the Brig S1
CmLc.i,Fso, fortuna barbara Master, prize to the Nautilw: This Vessel
belonged to Malta and had my passport to go to Tripoly in Ballast,
but in Violation of that passport and the Blockade she was met with
to the Eastward of that place in sight of the fire made by the burning
of the Frigate in that Harbor on the night of the 16* Ins, standing
towards the Town with 8 TEipoline 'Passengers and a number of Bales
of Goods belonging to them, besides a quantity of Plank, Scant-,
and buildin stone - Took 4 of the principal Tripoline Passengers on
board the 80nstih~ionfor safe keeping and shall carry the Vessel to
Malta for the Purpose of investigating more clearly the property of
the Vessel &9
[LC. EPP, Diary, 1803-1804.1
Extract from log book of U. S. Frigate Comfilutian, Captain Edward Preble,U.S. Navy,
commanding, Tuesday, 21 February 1804

Moored in Ssragoss. Towards the Evening anchd her[e] a Malta
brig prize to the united States Schooner Nautilis also His B. T.
Magestys Ship Anson and a man of war Schooner, * * * We
recid from the malta brig prise to the Nautilus four Tripolanti
prisoners
[NA. N D original.]
To Captain Edward Preble, U. 15. Navy,from Captain William Bainbridge,
U. 8. Navy

BARBARIE
TRIPOLI
226 February 1804

DEARSIRBy this conveyance you will receive letters from me of the

16Qand 1W insf.that of the
informed you that we were surrounded
with Gaurds since the burning of the Frigate. -On the 20Z@I
addressed
the Minister of forei M a i m for this Regency on the change of t.reatment to us; enclose you will receive a coppy of my letter to him on
the subject; last evening he very politely called on me and strongly
assured me that nothing unpleasent would take place and renewed
his friendly offers of serving us with the humanity due to Prisoners
of War; indeed his conduct has been towards us m the most liberal
wa that we could have expected.
fyesterdag received a letter from h.1' Cathcart at Leghorn which
was handed to me by this Government after they had read i t hl"
C - has in my opinion been very officious in making purchases of
Cloathing to the Amount of 5200 dollars amongst which is 1000 doll9
for the Officers who are supplied for the present with every necessary
that i t is prudent to have in our Situation: In rnr letter of the 16"
I have enclosed you a list of Articles which will be wanted the next
Autumn and Winter for the Seamen c9r. Marines. I do myself the
honor of enclosing ou my answer to 3.P Cathcarts letter from which
you will perceave t a t it may not be im roper to give him a caution.
I n con$dence I hope that you wilI not su' together for the Port of liberty
for I really believe him to be a bad Pilot altho he possesses the most
consumate assurance which you no doubt will find out on acquaintance
The Minister I presume will reply to your letter by this conveyance.

P

K

[LC. EPP, Vol. 10, Feb.-April 1804.1

3

450

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 180$ TO 1804

To Ceptain Edward heble, U. S. Navy, from James Simpson, IT.S. Consul, Tangier,
Morocco

TANGIER
22G Feby 2804.

DEAR
SIRThe want of interesting matter to impart has been the
cause of my not addressing ou before now, - better that than the
reverse in this part of the dorld. - All the Emperours Vessels remain in Winter Quarters, and the Meshowla in same state at Larach.I had flattered myself my troubles with that Vessel were over -

but the Tsipoline Captain and two of his Countrymen who embarked
as Passengers a t Tunis have represented to His Majesty that they
lost in money and Merchandize on board of that Ship to the amount
of $1440%.
A special Messenger was sent by the Minister with an Official
Representation to me on the subject, and by Command requiring
me to obtain satisfaction to those people. I answered the Letter fully stateing the reasons for my believing
the claim unfounded, and I have not hitherto heard any more on
the matter. - Agreeabl to your wish I sollicited the release of
Arraez Omar of Tetuan rom his dismal confinement and obtained
it. - The old man has repeatedly expressed his great thankfulness,
both to you and me; - he pretends to regret the mentioned Tripolines
should have informed the Emperour that he had a tooth beat out on
board the Meshouda, for he declares from gratitude he never would
have mentioned the circumstance himself. As I was also called upon to satisfy Omar for this injury, it became
my duty to make some enquiry into the matter and I find he accuses
a M' Bellet as the person who gave him the blow, which I have mentioned to the Secretary of State. Omar goes farther and says that in the presence of Captain Smith
and Lieu! Cox, he gave up what money he had on board the it4eshowla,
which has not been returned to him. This charge against an Officer appears of too serrious a nature to be
mentioned to Government, untill those Gentlemen who have been
named as Witnesses to the fact can be heard on the subject. - As
the satisfaction Justice requires should be made to Omar, if his representation be true, is not pressed upon me; I had thought of deferring
any enquiry until1 I should have met Captain Smith; but ns its
uncertain when that may happen, I have to request you will hear
from that Gentleman what he knows on subject of Omw having
delivered a certain sum of money as he has represented: - should
that be found to be the case, then it will remain with him who rccieved
it to shew when it was returned to Omar. - It has proved matter
of regret the New York did not remain here a sufficient time to admit
of a more formd delivery of that ill fated Ship, than took place. - I
have not heard from Government since the arrival of that Ship and
the ,John Adam Frigate at Washington, but I have the highest satisfaction in congratulating you and myself on the proofs we have already
seen of The Presidents approbation of the conditions on which the
reconciliation with this Country was effected. You will have heard the Gun Carriages for the Emperor have been
sent out and that they have met another stoppage a t LIOrient, however that I hope will be but momentary. It is still my intention to visit the Ports of this Country as far as
Mogadore in April next, as I conceive a t all but particularly a t the

9

WARS WITR BARBARY POWERS

451

latter I shall find necessary to make additions or alterations in the
Instructions to my Agents; the propriety of which can best be determined when on the spot. - I trust you may find it consistent with
other Services to allow either a Frigate or one of the Brigs to visit
Mogadore beginin of May, for the reasons were explained between
us; and I will s o i c i t a assage back to this Port in her from the
Captain, as the heats w$ then hare become too much to render a
land Journey pleasant. The Emperour ip a t Morocco and most probably will remain there
some Months. I am now a t the 25t? Feb? the Schooner mizen has a t last reached
this Port with one hundred Gun Carriages for His Imperial Majest
which are this day begun to be put on shore, with Captain H
assistance. AlrF Simpson desires me to convey you her best regards and I beg
you wilI be assured I am with sentiments of great Respect
[LC. EPP, Vol. 10, Feb.-April 1804.1

&

To Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Navy, from Lieutenant Charles Stewart, U.S. Navy,
commanding U. 6. Brig Siren

SYRACUSE
HARBOR
22QFeb? 1804
SIR Herewith I transmit ou Names of the Officers attached to
the Siren under my c o m m a n d who Neglected their Duty and left the
deck on the night of the 16'"ns5 when all the rest were armed and a t
y a r t e r s , the Brig then riding at Single anchor about one mile from
t e Batteries of the Enemy, for the purpose of Carrying into effect
your Orders of the 31? Ut?. I beg leave to observe that Mr. Anderson
was afterwards sent in the Ketch Intrepid Lieu1 Commqc Decatur
with the reinforcement from the Siren, and Lieutt Decatur reported
to me (no doubt to you Iikewise) that his Conduct was officer like and
highly meritorious - ,41so Mr Dorsey was wit,h Lieu+ C a l d ~ e l who
l
has reported his Conduct while in the Boat as deserving of praise
Mr T. 0. Anderson
J. S. Dorsey
C. F. DeKraEt
Wv R. Nicholson
[LC. EPP, Vol. 10,Feb.-April 1804.1
Extract from log book kept by Sailing Master Xatbaniel Haraden, U. S. Navy, on
board U. S. Frigate Co&itution. Wednesday, 22 February 1804

Moderate breezes and cloudy weather: At Anchor a t Sarctgosa:
Syren, V k e n , Enterprize and Intrepid in company - White washing
between drcks, making wads and working up Junk - Rigged out
the flyingJib-boom and bent the sail - Tou-ards evening Commodore Craycraft of the Amon waited on Commodore Preble. An
officer and party of men are emplo ed in assisting to discharge the
W & Mary Store Ship - Saile The Amon with a convoy Moderate Breezes from the Westward during the night A hl Ships Company scrubbing bags, Making wads and cleaning
between decks: At 9 loosed sails to dry At 11 the weather became
overcast: Furled Sails - In the course of the forenoon made the
Vixen the following signals Ng* 1127, 995 & 1126. Sent an officer
and party of men to assist in getting the Port Mary under weigh -

1

452

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1803 TO 1804

Carpenters planking up the ship's gang ways, between the main mast
and fore rigging, which were originally constructed for guns but were
covered only with canvass - A Midshipman and three or four men
remain on board the Intrepid which is not now in commission Surgeons report 17 sick $ 3 convalescent Noon fresh breezes from the 1\; E with light rain.
[LC. EPP, Log Constitution, 1803-1804.1
To William Higgins, U. S. Navy Agent, Malta, from Captain Edward Preble,
U. S. Navy

UKITEDSTATESSHIPConstitution
Syracuse Harbour 23"q Febv 1804

DEAR
SIR The Store Ship arrived safe, and brought me Sour letter

she sails for your place the moment the wind is favourable under
convoy of the Syren Captain Stewart
I wrote you the 19th, that we succeeded in burning the Philadelphia
in the Harbour of Tripoly on the night of the 16th inst.
The Nautilus has met with a Maltese Brig off Tripoly [16 February]
with my passport to proceed to that place in Ballast She has on
board in direct violation of that passport and of the Blockade n cargo
of Tripoline property, and eight Tripoline Passengers, of course she is
a good prize. I shall however bring her over to Malta, investigate
the business, and deposit the cargo with you; and endeavour that the
Master shall be punished for the abuse of the passport I left with
Gov': Ball You will consider yourself as prize Agent in all cases
I expect to be a t Malta in a day or two.
[LC. EPP, LB, Dec. 1803-April 1804.1
To Secretary of State from John Gavino, U. S. Consul,Gibraltar

GIBRALTAR
2,Tdfeb? 1804
XQ145
144, advising
SIR I had the honor of adressing you the lot?Ins"?
my receiving a Letter from the Commander of the Schooner Citizen
informing me of his being detaind at L'Orient, also of the report of
a Tripolin Cruiser being at Sea, which Occasiond the Argus Cap"1ull
to go to examine Cape de Gatt & Cape Pallas. I have now the pleasure to acquaint you of the arrival here of the
Schooner Cdizen on the 21B3Instant with the Gun Carriages, when M.fs
Thorn deliverd me the Original of your favour of 2Wov' last Continued to 4@ do, when Agreeable to Consul Simpsons desire I directed
their proceeding for Tangeir the Winds being fair, which they accordingly did yesterday, taking with them your Dispatchcs for said Gentleman, those for Consul L ~ a rCornodor
,
Prible &c%ill forward by first
opportunity M' Thorn told me two french 74 Gun Ships & frigate had pone from
L'Orient to Rochford, & a Division of Gun Briggs for Brest, That the
Genl taulk there was that the Army Collecting at Brest would makc
an attempt for Ireland Three days ago arrived the British first rate ship B 2Smereign of
120 Guns Commanded by Cap'?Malcome in Eight days from off Ushant
to reinforce Lord Xelsons fleet, the CapWolcl us when he left Lord
Cornwallis fleet i t consisted of 25 Sail the Line of which 11 three
Deckers cruising off Brest

453

m7ARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

Cap+ Hull in the Argus just returnd in 36 hours from Alicante,
could get no accounts of the Tripolin in question, but brings information of Comodor Prible baring Captured one with about 60 Men,
which he carried to Syracuse, where he was prepairing to return off
Tripoly, he further adds that he learnd of the Commander of the
American Schooner Equality,who arrived from Leghorn that the french
had Embargoed all Vessels there, amongst which was the American
Ships Piomingo, 6t Alezunder Hodgson, and orderd 200,000 Rations to
be got ready in 24 hours, and Impressd 2000 Genoese Sailors for the
ships of Warr, it was supposed they intended to Visit the Iseland of
Sicily or Sardina
Capqflull with the Argus intends going in the Morning for Tanger,
as they have no Boats there for Landing Goods, to assist with his and
Men, if neccssary, to unload the Carriages,
Two Imperial Briggs of mnrr of 8 Guns each have arrived from the
adriatick to Cruise in those seas for the protection of their Trade with
the Emperour of llorrocco kc"
IIL'A. SDA. CL,Gibraltar, Vol. 2, 17961804.]
Extract from journal of U. S. Brig Argus, lieutenant Isaac Hull,U. S. Navy,
commanding, Thursday, 23 February 1804

These 24 hours Commence with fresh gales and clew Weather at
4 P, M, got down T. G yards and bent the sails at 6 Weighed anchor
and proceeded out of the bay of Allicrtnt for Gibrnlter havkw the
Vessels bound down under Convoy Set and took in sail frequently
us Necessary
fXD.4 photostat.]
Extract from log book kept by Sailing Master Nathaniel Haraden, U. S. Navy, on
board U. S. klgate Consliluiion, Thursday, 23 February 1804

Moderate breezes from the I
S E. with a swell setting into the Horbor. At 1 Y.ill. Sailed the U. S. Schooner Vixen with the Pod Mary
under convoy for Gibraltar.
The Constitutions draft abaft 22 feet 9 Inches - fomnrd 21 feet 2
Inches - difference 19 Inches. \Ye recieved the Kedge Anchor lent
the Vixen about two months ago - Towards Everling the weather
became overcast nnd had the appearance of a gale from the Eastq
Swayed up the lower Yards in readiness for unslinging By S in the
Evening the weather cleared away About 3 weeks ago a smnil vessel arrived here from the Eastward.
She had Seventy or Eighty persons on board supposed to belong to
Tripoly. Through fear of the American cruizers her Peo le left
theu own vessel and went on board an English Brig which sai ed this
Evening. The Commodore ordered the Enterprize to bring her back.
The Enterprize arrived this morning with the [English] Brig in company and the Commodore went on board her to examine her Employed making Wads, cleaning ship and scraping the Topmasts.
Noon light airs from the East'! - Surgeons report 15 sick and 5
cont.alescent.
[LC. EPP, Log Constitution, 1803-1804.3

P

454

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1803 TO 1804

To Captain Franklin Wharton, U. 6. Marine Corps, Philadelphia, Pa., from Secretary
of the Navy

NAV.D E PFebP
~ 2.4, 1804
You will immediately Commence recruiting and as soon as you obtain 50 men you will send them to this place together with the Detachment now under your command by Lieu? Gale - You are not
restricted as to Country but must recruit no man less than 5 feet 6
inches You will report to me from time to time your progress in Recruiting and I confidently rely on your making every Exertion to complete
this business as soon as possible Mr Harrison the agent will on your requisition furnish the necessary
monies and cloathing [NDA. GLB, Vol. 7, 1803-1805.1
To Sir Alexander John Ball, British Civil Commissioner, Malta and Ctozo, from
Captain Edward Preble, U. 6. Navy

UNITED
STATESSHIPConstitution

Syracuse Harbour Febrr 2dtQ1804.
SIR, As it is probable you may hear various accounts of the capture and destruction of the Tripolitan Frigate late the United States
Frigate Philadelphia in the Harbour of Tripoly, I beg leave to mention the transactions relative to that affair. On the 3rd inst I sent
the Ketch Intrepzd of 4 Guns, with 11 Officers, and 59 Seamea and
Marines, under the command of L' Decatur, to Tripoly with orders to
burn the Frigate. The Syren Brig accompanied her to anchor off the
Harbour, send in her Boats to assist, and cover the retreat of the
Ketch. The weather was unfavourable until the night of the 16tQ
Ins! when they arrived, the Brig took her position, and the Retch
entered the Harbour - Was hailed from the Batteries and Frigate Answered from Malta and the rig of the Vessel deceived the enemy
until she was alongside the Frigate; they were then fatally undeceived.
Lieu! Decatur boarded with his Men, and carried her after a short
conflict in which upwards of 20 Tripolines were killed on the Decks One large Boat load made their escape, some ran below & probably
perished in the flames; and many jumped overboard. As soon as
complete possession was gained, she was set on fire, and totally destroyed. All her Guns were mounted and loaded; and two of their
Corsairs lay within half Musket shot of her. As soon as she was in
flames, the Batteries, Bashaw's Castle and Corsairs commenced firing
on the Ketch. One Cannon shot passed through her Top Gall1 sail
was all the damage
We did not lose a man, and had only
- she received.
one wounded.
The same Night to the Eastward of Tripoly, in sight of the burning
of the F r i ~ a t e .the United States Schooner Nautilus fell in with a
Merchant Brig' from Malta, named the &ocisfisso, Fortunata Barbara
Master, bearing one of the pass orts which I left with you; but the
Master in direct violation of t I? at passport, and of the Blockade,
had taken on board Hemp, Linens, Plank, Building Stone &c%nd
8 Tripoline Passengers in consequence of which, she was detained and
sent to this port. The captain says he was bound to Gerbi, but
his being met with in sight of Tripoly to the Eastward of the Town,
and standing for that Harbour, with Tripoline passengers on board,

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

455

and having a passport from Malta to Tripoly, forbids a belief of
his assertion - I suppose he thought to smuggle in our Enemies &
their property with impunity. I am confidant this transaction is
without your sanction, and without your knowledge. The Captain
deserves to suffer, and I certainly shall make prize of his Vessel and
Cargo. I have however sent her to Malta that the business may
be investigated more thoroughly, in order to convince you of the
propriety of my conduct. Captain Stewart of the Syren convoys
her over, and will have the honor to deliver you this letter.
(LC. EPP, LB, Dec. 1803-April 1804.1
f24 February 18041
To Midshipman Thomas Brown, U. 6. Wavy, from Captain Edward Prebh,
U. S. Navy

SIRYOUwill proceed on board the United States Brig Syren and
place yourself under the Command of Cap$ St.ewart.

FEBY
24q 1804
[LC. EPP, Order Book, May 1803-June 1805.1

Extract from journal of U. S. Brig Argus, Lieutenant Isaac Hull, U. S. Navy,
commanding, Friday, 24 February 1804

At 7 P, M, the rock of Gibralder bore W b N # N. Estepona N W
VF passed a Swedish Ship bound to the Eastw* at 10 brought too
in the bay of Gibralter with the larboard Anchor in the S E and moored
with the Starboard in the N W, Apes hill bore S W b S St Roque
NbEXEf:

[NDA photostat.)
Extract from log book kept by Sailing Master Nathaniel Earaden, U. 6, l a v y , on
board U. S. Frigate Coftttilution, Friday, 24 February 1804

Moderate breezes from the Eastward. At Anchor a t Saragosa:
Syren Enterprize and Intrepid in company Watering ship, Making
wads and cleaning ship for Sea. Towards evening the Commodore
recieved Intelligence of a small cruizer being in the c h a ~ eofl Malts Made the Enterprize signal for a Cap: Lieut' Decatur waited on the
Commodore - By this time the Easterly wind had died away nearly
to a caIm - The Enterprize Weighed and swept out of the Harbor The Weather moderate during the night Sent three officers snd a
party of men to assist discharging the WiUiarn & Mary Store shi At 9 A. M. loosed sails to dry - Set up the Topmast and top aIlr
rigging. The Intrepid's launch employed watering the Constitution.
At 11 A. M. the weather became Overcast. Furled Sails Recieved
a 12 pound Caronade from the Syren which we fired twice to see
how far it carried a shot. [it upset both times.]
Surgeons report 11 sick & 8 convalescent Noon fresh breczes from the West* -

&

[LC. EPP, Log Constiiution, 1803-1804.1

125 February 18041
To Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Xavy, from Captain William Beinbridge,
U. S. Wavy

DEARSIRWe are surrounded with Guards, and I am only able to
smuggle this small note to advise you that the Bashaw intends shortly

456

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1805 TO 1804

to send his cruisers out. He has a Brig and schooner amongst them
and is making cloths in the European mode for the Crews, and I
presume that they will disguise under English Colours expecting by
such means to evade the examination of our Cruisers
I am afraid the Italian sent will not be of service If OBrien could
be persuaded to come, I have no doubt but he would Negotiate to
the best advantage. Success attend you Prays TRIPOLY
2'5th Febr 1804
[LC. EPP, LB, Dee. 1803-April 1804.1
Extract from journal of U. S. Brig Argus, Lieutenant Isaac Hull,U. 6. Navy,
commanding, Saturday. 25 February 1804

[Anchored in Bay of Gibraltar] At 5 Weighed Anchor and made
sail for Tangier bay under Close reefed Topsails at 9 came too in
Tangier bay in 10 fathoms and moored Ship the Town of Tangier
bearing TV N N found here the Schooner Citizen of Georgestown
with gun Carriages a present from the United States to the Emperor
of Morocco sent 10 men t o assist in discharging her [NDA photostat.]
Extract from log book kept by Sailing l a s t e r Nathaniel Haraden, U. S. Navy, on
board U. S. Prlgate Corutiiulion, Saturday, 25 February 1804

Moderate breezes from the West*, Syren & Intrepid in company Ships company setting up top gall; rigging and working up Junk The Intrepid's launch watering the Constitubion - Toward Erenin
fresh breezes from the Westward - Clewed H a m e - By 8 P . I v f
the weather became Moderate - Mustered a quarter Vatch as an
anchor watch - At 3 A. M. the Gumd boat reported an armed brig
standing into the Harbor - Cleared Ship for action except the
lanterns and boarded his Brittannic Majesty's brig Spider From
day light till 9 A. M. Employed cleaning ship and scrubbing cloathes:
from this time till Noon fresh breezes from the N 'CT. In the course
of the forenoon we made the followhg signals to the Syren, 1127,
1126, 1197, 1196 Surgeons report 15 sick & 8 convalescent - Noon strong Gales
from the N IT b W - Down top Gall? Yards and launched top
Gall? Masts - This morning made the necessary arrangements for
unmooring ship, but the strong winds from the W have prevented us
from doing i t -.
[LC. EPP, Log Consfilulion, 1803-1804.1
To Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Navy, from Captain Stephen Decatur, Jr.,
U. S. Navy

UNITED
STATES
SCHOONER
Enterprize
Malta February 26Q 1804
SIR,I arrived here last evening. My reason for making this port
was, the wind blowing hard from the Westward I could not carry a
sufficiency of Sail to hold my own. I have seen a letter from Mr
Gavino to Mr Pulis informing him that a Danish Vessel was boarded
by a Tripolitan Cruiser between the Islands of Sicily & Sardinia on
the 12rb of Iast Month. the Wind is still F e s t and blows heavy but
let the wind be as i t may I will sail this evening
[LC. EPP, LB, Dec. 1803-April 1804.1

457

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

To Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Navy, from Lieutenant John Smith, U. 6. Navy,
commanding U. 6 . Schooner Vixen.

MALTAFebT 66th 1804
SIR,Favoured with an opportunity by the Reynard, I am sorry to

inform you, that on the Night of the 24th off Goza I was run on Board
by the P o r t 3 4 a y , the ship under my charge, & received some damage
in the loss of my Main Boom, Boat Davids & some damage to the
Stern, the Boat was compleatly lost & the h4ain Boom broke short
about one third, which makes it impossible to Fish it, & conceiving it
a sacrafice to cut the Philadelphia's Main Yard for the purpose, I have
obtained a Spar suitable from the Publick Stores. I arrived a t t b
place with the Ship a t 4 Oclock in the morning after the accident,
which was effected by his running on board me while layin too, he
being under full sail & in the act, of veering. The Boom wi be compleat this evening at 4 the other dammages, I shall repair a t sea; mithout any expence. Thc day after leaving Syracuse, the Winds were
verry light & round the Compass, since which it has blown heavy from
W. N. W. & continues so to do still which detains both Cap! Decatur
$ myself - He arrived yesterday afternoon. The Ship has sustained no other loss than her Jibb Boom & C a t Head.
*
*
*
*
*
*
[LC. EPP,Vol. 10, Peb.-April 1804.1

lf

Extract from log book kept by Sailing Master lathaniel Earaden, U. S. Navy, on
board U. S. Frigate Corulilulion. Sunday, 26 February 1804

Strong Gales from the Northg. At Anchor a t Saragosa - The
Syren and Intrepid in company. - Making Wads &. cleaning ship
Towards Evening bhe weather became more modern te which continued
through the night till day light - At T A. bl. the weather became
over cast with strong breezes from the JV S W.
At 9 the wind Veered t o the N W - Spliced the stream cable and
the old Junk together - Veered avay and unmoored ship - In
purchasing tbe small bower we parted the Messenger - After
spliceing i t we hove short and bro't to with an additionnl purchase to
the Jeer ca stern. - Shortened in to the h10oring service: from
this time ti 1 noon Employed scrubbing and washing cables - In
the course of the forenoon made the following Signals to the Syren
No! 611 & 1000 Surgeons report 13 sick, 5 convalescent & 7 discharged
Noon strong breezes from the N. W. -

f

[LC. EPP, Log Constitution, f 8O%-l804.]
To Eon. John C. Smith, United States Congress, from Secretary of State

DEPARTMENT
OF STATE
February byth1804.
SIR.I have had the honor to receive your letter of the 23Qinclosing
Mr Eaton's petition with sundry documents respecting t,he subject
of it. The inclosed copies of two letters from this Department to
the Auditor of the Treasu
and of those to which they are answers
will manifest the course \%ch the three items of his claim now in
question have heretofore taken in the Executive Offices. I t will also
appear from them that the two first items (viz, the demurrage of the
Anna Maria,and the charge made for the Ship Gloria) have been

458

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1803 TO 180.4

-

referred to the Auditor for his decision, and that the last item, viz,
a sum of money alledged to have been extorted from MF Eaton by
the Minister of the Bey of Tunis, was rejected as, under all the circumstances of the case, not admissible under any proper exercise of
the discretion vested in the Executive. This determination was
guided by the consideration that the claim was rather for an indemnity for a loss sustained in his private & mercantile concerns, re resented as brought upon him by the course of his public Agency, t i a n
for compensation for services rendered or reimbursement of money
paid in the exercise of his office; and on this account as well as the
absence, from the nature of the case, of full and formal proof of the
fact of extortion, it was thought to be better adapted for the interposition of the Legislature, whose power of dispensing relief in peculiar
cases, like the present, is less circumscribed than that of the Executive.
With respect to the claim for the Anna Man'a, it will be sufficient
to observe, that it has been unreservedly referred to the Auditor for
his decision upon the merits, with a communication of the documents
deemed necessary for its elucidation, and that on this account it
might be considered premature or irregular for me to anticipate his
decision. Permit me therefore to suggest that on a communication
with him the Committee may obtain such information as may enable
t,hem to form a just opinion respecting it, should it be requisite to
bring it into their deliberation, circumstanced as it is a t present. I t
will be observed that the Auditor has been instructed to consider the
GZom'a as a Vessel retained for giving and receiving intelligence; and
accordingly to settle her hire at a reasonable rate for the period she
may have been actually employed in such service. Should however
the footing on which this part of his claim has been placed be deemed
by M: Eaton narrower than he conceives substantial justice to demand,
i t will remain with Con ess to provide such more extensive relief as
they may judge equitab e; it being my opinion for reasons analogous
to some of those stated above in relation to the indemnit claimed
for the extortion by the Beys Minister, that Congress are a one competent for such a mode of relief, and this opinion is more strongly
confirmed by the negative decision made upon the claim at the Navy
Department, where it was presented for settlement in the shape of
an incident to the Naval establishment.

y

9

[NA. SDA. Dom. L., Vol. 14, May 1802-May 1805.1
To Captain Edward Preble, U. 6. Navy, from James Leander Cathcart, Leghorn

LEGHORN
Febr f27'Q 1804.

SIR I had the honor to forward to you a t Syracuse via Naples a
plan of a gunboat on the 30'Q UltQ& on the 19'Qinsst a plan of a gun
& mortar boat by the same conveyance, which I hope you will receive
in due season, as likewise lists of two suits of cloathing which I have
prepared for three hundred men which will be ready to shi whenever
you can make it convenient to send one of the small vesse s for them
& you may depend she shall not be detain'd more than twenty four
hours a t most. Enclosed is a copy of my correspondence with our Consul a t Marseilles, i t seems that so many obstacles are to be removed before an
thmg can be done in France, that Leghorn is by far the most eligib e
place for buildmg those boats unless you can purchase them a t Naples

P

P

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

459

ready built; it is to be lamented that we have no treaties with the
Italian States bordering on the Mediterranean they being all at war
with the Barbary States, as stipulations might be made of vast advantage to us in the event of a war with any of them. It is reported here
that Sterrett has got the command of the E w x & is to carry the ratification of the Treaty gE Convention relative to Louisiana to France &
then to join you; remember I dont vouch for the truth of this report,
but I hope it may be true for he is such a man as you want. On the 26tQ December the date of the departure of the last arrival
from America, the loss of the Philadelphia was not known a t Baltimore,
the three Frigates which sail'd from Gibraltar in October were safe
at Washin ton, Abraham Venable is appointed Governor of Louisiana
&- that is a the news 1have in my power to inform you at this moment,
let me hear from you when opportunity serves & believe me to be very
respectfully
Pr St I dont know how true Mc Cathalan's observation may be
relative to the Bashaw's menaceing the Swedish Captives, neither do
I know how he would treat our prisoners in case you should Bombard
the town, these are ~ o i n t sto be determined by government, but I will
never cease to lament that energetic measures had not been pursued
before they had any of our Citizens m their power. [LC. EPP,Vol. 10, Feb.-April 1804.1

fi

To William Jarvis, U. 5. Consul, Lisbon, PortugaI, from John Gavino, U. S. Consul,
Gibraltar

GIBRALTER
2rtQFeb? 180.4
SIR The l l t h Inst. I communicated to you the Accg received of a
Tripolin Cruiser being a t sea, in consequence Captain Hull in the State
Brig Argus went along the Coast of Spain as far as Alicante, but could
not get any tidings of him, he returned two days ago & brings an Acc'
of Commodore Yreble ha%&:: captured one of 60 Men & taken her to
Cyracuse
[NA.

SDA. CL, Lisbon, Vol. 2, Jan. 1803-Dee. 1805.1

Extract from journal of U..S. Brig Argus, Lieutenant Isaac Hull, U. 6. Navy,
commandmg, Monday, 27 Februerg 1804

Moored in Tangier Bay These 24 hours Commence with moderate
and light airs from the Eastward r e d on board two Bullocb-s, some
podtry Eggs and Ve etables as a present from the Emperor of Morocco
Killed one of the BI l locks and served fresh beef to the Crew [NDA photostat.]
Extract from log book kept by Sailing Mwter Nathaniel Earaden, U. S. Navy, on
board U. S. Frigate Conslitution, Monday, 27 February 1804

Strong Gales and cloudy weather: At single Anchor a t Saragosa;
Syren & Intrepid in company - Cleaning ship and scrubbing
cables - Towards Evenin the weather became squally with light
showers and continued so t 5 midnight when it became moderate At
% past 12 Midnight the Spen weighed & proceeded to sea in order to
convoy the William & Mary store ship from this port to Malta:
The Store ship in proceeding to sea fell on board a Grecim Ship In

460

N A V A L OPERATIONS FROM 1805 TO 180.4

the act of clearing the two ships a seaman belonging to the store ship
fell overboard - He saved himself by swimming to the Grecian
ship A boat was sent for him, but the Greeks would not deliver him
up on account of some damage done the ship - Application was
made to Commodore Preble who adjusted the business to the satisfaction of both parties. At 7 A. M. swayed up top Gallant Masts &
up top gall! Yards - Slung the lower Pards & shortened in to a Stay
Peak & stowed the sheet anchor - Surgeons report 13 sick & 6
ConvTt At Koon moderate breezes from the Northward No
opportunity these three days to get the ships draught of Water - No
alteration has been made in the ships trim since the 23@Inst
[LC. EPP, Log Constitution, 1803-1804.1
Extract from journal of Midshipman F. Cornelius deKrafft, U. S. Navy, in U.S. Brig
Siren of 18 guns, Lieutenant Charles Stewart, U. S. Navy, commanding, Monday,
27 February 1804

At 1 the British arm'd brig Spider anchor'd here At % past 2 beat
to quarters & exercis'd the men. At 4 beat the retreat At 10 sent 10
men on board the ship TJ7Ziamd M a r y (provision ship from America)
to assist in getting her .under way. At ): past 11 broi too on the starboard cable & made slgnal for the above ship to get under way Midnight fresh breezes & pleas' At % past hlidn' weigh'd Br stood
off & on for the store ship. At % past 2 the light house bore h' W by
N 3 leagues dis' At 4 cape Morade point bore K IS E 4 leagues dis'
At % past 4 discover'd a sail ahead 1 league dist: At % past 6 sct fore
sail & after main sail. At 7 sway'd up top gall! masts. At 9 cape
Passaro bore K E dis! 8 miles. at 10 single reef'd after main sail.
At 11 turn'd 2 reefs out of the topsails, set jib & square main sl Came
in boat from the above ship 2 men, left on board the store ship (belonging to the S i r e n ) EYI: Anderson & 5 men. Meridian moderate 6
pleas' the Castle on Cape Passarro bore N E % E.
Latt: Obs: 36" 34' X.
[NDA.]
To Secretary of State from James Simpson, U. S. Consul, Tangier, Morocco

N?73 Triplicate

TANGIER
28'h February 1804.SIR I have had the honour to receive original and duplicate of the
Letter you wrote me the 31" October last year with postscripts of
4@ & 10tQNovem! - The former was delivered me 22@this Month
by Mr William Thorn, together with Charter party of the Schooner
Citizen and Bill of lading for One hundred Gun Carriages by that
Vessel, destined as a Present from the United States to His Imperial
Majesty Muley Soliman. - The several Letters I trust you will
have received from me subsequent to that of the 5th Septemr, will
have advised the accommodation of the differences had arisen with
this Country on such a footing as left me no room to hesitate at the
immediate delivery of these Gun Carriages. I n consequence I lost no time in dispatchin an Express for Morocco
with advice to the Emperour of their arrivaf which will no doubt be
highly satisfactory to him: at recei t of the answer I will have the
honour of transmitting to you trans ation thereof, together with cop
of the Letter I wrote His Majesty on the occasion. - Captain Hu 1
in the Argw i8 here to give assistance in landing the Cargo of the

P

i?

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

461

Citizen and if Weather permits it d be all on shore tomorrow. - I
must beg leave to express my regret a t those Carriages not having
been sent all of the natures the Emperour expressed a wish to have; The twelve pounders can be but of little use to him, as the Batteries
thro'out his Empire are almost all mounted with Guns of 24 $ 18.
I must also mention the whole yet landed being for Sea Service and
the circumstance of but one handspike sent for each Carriage. - To
remedy the latter mistake in the person who was encharged with
Shipment of the Stores, I have written M: Gavino to endeavour to
procure a hundred more of the suitable sizes, which I shall deliver
into the Kings Stores so soon as I get them, to prevent any unpleasant
remarks on a matter of so trifling a value. - Carriages for Sea
Service having been sent in place of those suitable for land Batteries
I fear may not be so easily got over; however as happily they have
none other of same make for Land Service in the Country, I may be
rtble to keep them satisfied with what they have got. By 59 71 you will have seen the unpleasant busyness agitated
respecting losses pretended to have been sustained by Passengers on
board the Meshouda. - I sent back the Messenger came to me, on the
fourth of January and urged every argument I thought would have
weight against the claims set up, since when I have not heard any
farther on the subject. Arraez Omar of Tetuan has referred me to Capt? Smith & Lieu$
Cox as eridences to part of his loss. - As it appears highly necessary
to come at the truth of the facts alledged by these people, I have
requested of Commodore Preble to hear what the former of these
Gentlemen knows respecting Omars story, on receiring his answer I
shall conceive it my duty to lay the whole of the information I shall
then be possessed of, before you. - If it be found the people have
lost their property, it m i l l remain for the Wisdom of Government to
find a means of redress and if on the contrary (as I much wish) the
allegations prove to be false, I am satisfied the Emperour will punish
those within his power. - A very small present for His Majesty has
at last arrived from Holland by the way of Lisbon - as it consists only
in twelve Cases, two C e s b and a Bale there can be but little hopes of
its proving equal to expectation. - The Consul is encharged with the
Negotiation and waits His Majestys Commands for going to Morocco
immediately or not; - in the mean time he has desired permission of
our [the Emperor's] Governour (at present at Tetuan) to send his
Family to Europe, to which no answer has been returned, and I have
reason to beleive it will not be granted. T h e n the Emperour went to Morocco he appointed Sidy hluhammed Selatvy Bashaw of the Province of Beni Hassan with residence a t
Sulle, encharged also with the Government of that Town. [NA. SD.4. CL, Tangier, \ 01. 2, ,Tan 1803-Oct. 1SlO.I

126 February 18041
To 116. Wallen, from Charles G. d e KUnig, Swedish Charge dlAffaires,
Constant~nople

COPY

Mr Monroe Envoy Extraordy and Minister Plenipn from the
United States of America to the Court of England, on being informed
of the misfortune by which the American frigate called the Phila-

462

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1803 TO 1804

delphia, commanded by Captain Bembridge and employed in the
Mediterranean against the Bey of Tripoli, fell into the hands of the
enemy of the aforesaid Commonwealth, addressed himself to me as
representative of His Majesty a t the Ottoman Porte, re uesting that
His Majestys Legation a t Constantinople might emp oy its good
offices with the Turkish Ministry and engage the same to use the
influence of the Porte with the Bey of Tripoli in favor of the unfortunate prisoners, so as to procure them their liberty or if this was out.
of its reach, a t least recommend them to be treated with humanity,
untill they by a thorough settlement of affairs between the two
respective governments, may be set at liberty.
Thoroughly persuaded of the sentiments which His Majesty the
King of Sweden bears to the United States as well as of his sincere
wishes for their prosperity and for an uninterrupted friendly intercourse between the two Nations, I think it my duty to authorize you,
Sir, to seize the earliest opportunity to take such steps with the Porte
as you shall think the most efficacious in order to procure a result
favorable for the prisoners.
Besides this step it will likewise be necessary, to send an order to
His Majesty's Consul at Tripoli, to give every aid and assistance, in
his power (without committing himself or the interest of his Principals)
to the unfortunate prisoners; and likewise not to omit any means by
which he might obtain their liberty, or a humane treatment during
their captivity.
London the 28th February 1804.
(Signed) CHARLES
GUST.
DE KOKIG.
M. FALLEN
having the management of the
Mairs of Sweden during the absence of
His Majesty's Charge des Aff* a t the
Ottoman Porte -

?

[NA. SDA.

Disp., Gt. Britain, Vol. 12, 1803-1807.1

Extract from Diary of Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Navy, Commodore of U. 6.
Squadron in the Mediterranean, Tuesday, 28 February 1804
Syracuse - Light breezes & rain from the Eastward. Ordered

the Ketch Intrepid and Prize brig Sr Cruci&so hauled in shore near
the Mole entrance, sails unbent, and a midshipman left in charge of
Each - Weighed our best bower anchor; unbent the old cable and
bent a new one - Ordered the Old one cut up for Junk.
[LC. EPP, Diary, 1803-1804.1

Extract from log book kept by Sailing Master Nathaniel Haraden, U. 8. Navy, on
board U. 8. Frigate Constitution, Tuesday, 28 February 1804

Moderate breezes from the Eastward, At single Anchor in Saragosa - This Afternoon the Intrepid was warped in close to the shore;
her sails unbent and landed: She had a Midshipman and three men
from the Constitution on board of her who are to remain in her until1
the Commodore returns to this place - We landed and sent to t h e
castle [for safe keeping] thirteen of the Tripolitans which were taken
in the Intrepid - Three which we recieved from the Brig and Six of
the Intrepids prisoners remain on board the Constitution - Towards
evening it became calm, Hove up and down in order to keep a clear

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

463

anchor - We continued short with every thing in readiness for
getting under way, should a wind offer thro' the night - At 9
A. M. a breeze s rung up from the S. W. which is a head wind for
Malta - weigheB the best bower which the old Junk was bent M and
let go the small bower which we unbent & bent to the best bower
Cable - Surgeons report '13 sick 6 convalescent. Ships company
employed shifting and scrubbing cables. [LC. EPP,Log Constitution, 1803-1804.)
Extract from joarnal-of Midshipman F. Cornelius deErafft, V. 6. Bavy, in U.S. Brig
Siren of 18 guns, Lieutenant Charlea Stewart, U. S. Navy, commanding, Tuesday,
28 February 1804

At X past 9 saw a schooner to leeward, call'd all hands to quarters
& bore down upon her, she prov'd to be the Enterprize on a cruize.
At K past 2 brail'd up the after main sail At 4 tack'd to the S@&
V F g Day light swa d u top gall$masts, 3 sail in sight. Entrance of
'67
At 7 set square main sail top gall5 sails
Malta bearing S
& f l ~ i n gjib At 11 handed top all$ sails & haul'd up main sail.
Meridian squally. At 1 four Ma ta boats, assisted ours in towing
the Brig. At 2 came too with the stream anchor, light winds &
variable At 3 hove up & warp'd in the harbour. At 4 the American
Consul & L? Smith Commander of the Trizen came on board. At
past 5 came too with the starbg cable in 14 fathoms 4 Malta boats
employ'd carrying anchors out kc. At 7 secur'd ship, with stern
fasts on shore, found here the Vixen & american ship Port Mary
Provision ship. Midnight light airs from the Sg & fine weather. NB (Those remarks include 36 hours)

$by

f

INDA.1
Extract from Diary of Captain.Edward Preble, U. S. Bavy, Commodore of U. 6.
Squadron in the Med~terranean,Wednesday, 29 February 1804

ISyracuse] Moderate breezes from the S. W. 8: cloudy weather:
At single anchor The IVautiEzts arrived off Tripoly, Ieft there two days
since - reported that several Vessels were in that Port and that no
part of the hull of the late Frigate PhiladeZphia was Visible.
[LC. EPP, Diary, 1803-1804.)
Extract from log book of U. 8. Frigate Condilulion, Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Navy,
commanding, Wednesday, 29 February 1804

ancW here [Saragossa] the united States Schooner Nautilw, which
has Returnd from cruising of [ fl Tripoly, Lieu tenant Summors
waited on the Commodore, we sent a boat for brooms and sand]
[NA. ND original.]
Extract from journal of U. S. Brig Argus, Lieutenant Isaac Bull, U. S. Navy,
commanding, Thursday, 1 March 1804
[In Tangier Bay] a t 4 AM, sent Mr Stewart Midshipman and

Mathew Pease & Livingston Barns seamen on board the Schooner
Citizen to assist in Ballasting and geting her to Gibralter she being
distressed for want of hands a t dayli ht unmoored weighed anchor
and made Sail shewed Colours to the ommodore of an English Convoy bound to the Eastward, through the Straight

8

[NDA photoetet.)

464

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1805 TO 1804

Extract from Diary of Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Navy, Commodore of U. S.
Squadron in the Mediterranean, Thursday, 1 March 1804

Strong gales from S. W. - At single Anchor in S racuse. Nautilus
in company - At 7 P. M. the Store ship Wm& fury returned and
anchored here - She sailed three days since under convoy of the
Syren for Malta; The Master reports the Syren into that Port, but the
Gale was so strong from the S W that he could not gain i t in the We
& A4aq - Midnight rain - Morning fair weather Br. calm [LC. EPP, Diary, 1803-1804.1

K

Extract from log book of U. S. Fri-gate CoruliMion. Captain Edward Preble,
U. S. Bavy, commanding, Thursday, 1 Xarch 1804

a t 7 in the Evening anchord here [Saragossaj the U'dliam an& M a y ,
Store Ship, that saild from here three days ago under Covy of the
Syren, for Malta
[NA. N D original.]
Extract from journal of Midshipman F. Cornelius deKrafft, U.S. Navy, in U. S. Brig
Siren of 18 guns, Lieutenant Charles Stewart, U. S. Navy, commanding, Thursday,
1 March 1804

[Malta] At ?4 past 12 the Vben \r-cigh'd & put to sea. At ?4 past
1 unrnoor'd & brought too on the Starboard cable. At 3 hove up &
stood out of the harbour under topsails. 34 past 3 boarded fore tack
At 4 the South end of Malta bore Tlr by S. 5 miles distr Left a t
Malta on liberty six of the Officers. At # past 4 saw a sail bearing
N E standing to the Nd Bi W' made sail & gave chase, % past 5 spoke
the chase, (the Trustee bound to hamburg).
At 1 came too with thc starboard anchor in 13 fathoms, handed all
sail. At 2 moor'd ship with stern fasts on shore. Hands emp1oy7d
splicing cables making matts kc. ends with light airs. At 4 the
Officers that were left on shore came on board. [NDA.]
To Secretary of State from James Simpson,U. S. Consul, Tangier, Morocco

TANGIER
2P hfureh 1804.KO 74.
SIRI have now to advise that all the Stores shipt on the Schooner
Citizen for His Imperial Majesty have been landed in safety, but
one Truck, which thro' the negligence of the Moor Boatmen was
lost overboard. - As this was no fault of the Master of the Schooner,
I gave him Certificates of the entire Delivery. - The Rice was found
of so very bad a quality it could not be offered His Majesty, for this
reason I left i t on board & desired Mr Gavino to rcceive it for Issue
to the Squadron. I am sorry for this disapointment, but happily I did not mention
in my Letter to His Majesty that the Rice was come. With this I enclose duplicate of N? 73 forwarded by way of Gibraltar,
to which I beg your referrence for farther particulars respecting the
Cargo of the Schooner Citizen. Mr Thorn has paid every attention a t unloading that Vessel and
as he tells me he will take the earliest opportunity for returning to the
United States, he will be the bearer of this Letter. - As I have lost
all hopes of being able to recover any more of the Men belon ed to
the Omego or Schooner Betaey stranded on the South Coast, take

f

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

465

this opportunity of handing you the Accounts of disbursements for
Redemption and other incidental Charges paid for those whom we
have fortunately got out of the hands of the Arabs. The Amount of disbursements for those of the Oswego is $1783 7/12
and for those of the Schooner Betsey
149 6/12
making in all One thousand nine hundred thirty three dollars and
eight Cents; which sum has been provided for out of the Bill drawn
under date 8tWctober 1800 for Two thousand dollars or Account of
this Service. I have also the honour of handing herewith a Report on arrivals
and departures of American Vessels a t the Ports of this Empire
during last year, which I am sorry to say you will observe is not so
Interesting as the former year was. The interuption our Trade to this Country met with in September,
has no doubt been some cause of the very great differences, but a t
all times (I still think) we shall only see occasional Speculations
take place, as for the reasons mentioned a regular Commercial intercourse between the Countries cannot be hoped for on a grand scale. As the Port of Mogadore will undoubtedly continue to enjoy the
chief part of whatever Trade may be carried on by the Citizens of
the United States in this Country, I have considered that it may
be well to visit that Port myself, when I can be best able to judge
of the Regulations most proper to be established for the Masters &
Merchants arrivin there. However I shal? not take any decisive resolution on the matter,
until1 I be honoured with the sentiments of Government on subject
of the late accommodation with this Country, which must be the rule
of my future actions. The Portuguese are now about taking off the Quantity of Wheat
granted them from Dare1 Beyda, but the Spaniards are still denied
the supplies of Grain they have so long and so earnestly sollicited. [NA. SDA. CL, Tangier, Vol. 2, Jan. 1803-Oct. 1810.1
Extract from journal of U. S. Brig A!gus. Lieutenant Isaac Hull,U. S. Navy,
commanding, Fnday, 2 March 1804

These 24 hours Commence with heavy gales and Squally a high
and heavy sea forced the Jolly boat from her Tackles and lashings
got her a longside and hoisted her on deck lost all her oars and she
Sustained some damage at 3 P, M, bore away before the wind and
Stood out of the Gut to the Westward Spoke the Ship Mercury of
New York from Cette, last from Gibralter, bound to Liverpool forced
to Slip his cables owing to the Voilence of the gale offered her assistance by giving her a hawser, Water, & Provisions which he declined
accepting replying that he would put into Lisbon,
[NDA photostat.]
Extract from Memorandum Book of Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Navy, on board
U. 6. Frigate Constitution 2 March 1804

sailed for Malta and arrived next day.
[LC, original.]

466

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1803 TO 1804

Extract from log book of U. S. Frigate ~ohtfifution,Captain Edward Preble, U. 8. Navy,
commanding, Friday, 2 March 1804

a t daylight a light breezes sprung up from the NE, we weighd and
came to sail, a t 7, we Brought to without the Harbour for the nautilus
and WiUiarn and Mary Store Ship to Joine company, a t 8 we filld and
Set Top gallant Studdinpails and Steerd for Cape Passari * * *
we left a t Saragosa the znt[r]epid which [is] to Remain there till the
Commodore Returns, a t noon the NautiEus NE with the WiUiam
an& Mary in Tow,
[NA. ND original.]
To Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Navy, from Lieutenant Isaac Hull, U. S. Navy

UNITEDSTATESBRIGA r m
Algeciras Bay, 9March 1804
SIR, After I had put my Letter to you of the 10" FebP on board
the Convoy for Malta, a Vessel arrived here from the Eastward,
which brought information, of his having been boarded of[f] Sardenia,
by a Tripolitan Cruizer, carrying 8 Guns, and Sixty or Seventy Men,
I made all the dispatch I could, and sailed on the
the Eastward, with a Ship belonging to New Pork, under Convoy, bound to
mcant. We had a fair wind as far as Cape de Gatt, where we took the wind
from the Eastward, and beat from there to the Bay of Allicant,
passing near Cape Pallos On my arrival a t Allicant, I found there American Vessels bound
down, and as I could not gain the least information there, of any
Cruizers having been seen on that station, and fearing that something might arrive a t Gibralter, which would make it necessary for
me to be there, I thought it best to return, with the Ships bound down,
taking a good look off Cape PaJlos, & Cape de Gatt in my way. I arrived at Gibralter on the 24" in the morn8 and found that the
Schooner [Citizen] with the Gun Carriages had been there, and sailed
for Tangier in distress for want of men, his Mate having been pressed,
and one or two of his Seamen Sick - on gaining this information
from Mr Gavino, and finding that there were not any Vessels in the
Bay bound to the Eastward, I sailed the same Evenin for Tangier,
to assist the Captain of the Schooner, in delivering %is Cargo After remaining in Tangier four days, and findin that I could be of
no further use to the Schooner, I sailed for this ay, leaving a Midshipman and two men to assist the Captain in Ballast5 his Vessel,
and to come over with him. The Moors are very much leased with the Gun Carriages, and are
remarkably attentive to our ag a t present, the Governor made us a
present of two Bullocks, a few Fowls, Bread &$ and suffered us to
take away, what Stock we pleased. You d not be a t a loss, to know the reason of my anchoring on
this side, as you will know the inconvenience of being much a t Gibralter,. tho' I have escaped so far, without any thing happening worth
notice. I have the disagreeable task to inform you, that 1 have been obliged
to arrest Lieutenant Livingston for the enclosed charges, brought
against him by Lieutenant Blake, and wish you to give me Orders
concerning him, he wishes very much to go to America, but I s h d
detain him until I hear from you - I have likewise four or five men

B

g

467

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

that have been sick ever since they left America, and likely to remain
so - Should you think proper to send them home, or discharge
them I shall be thankfull. - I have not as et been able to learn,
whether any of the Frigates, have began to t out for this Station,
and fear, that I shall not leave this Station, so soon as you expected. I am now watering and shall in a few days run to the Eastward, as
far as Cape de Gatt and Cruize there for a short time. -

i

[NDA. Isssc Hull LB, 1803-1804.1
To Captain Edward Preble, 0.6. Navy, from Captain William Bainbridge,
U. 6. Navy

TRIPOLY
IN BARBARY
SrQMarch 1804
DEARSIR, When I was a t Gibraltar, Mr Gavino the American Consul sent on board the Frigate Philadelphia four seamen without my
permission on the authority of having heard me express that I was
short of complement. Those people willingly came on board in a
Merchant Vessel's boat. The following day as the shi was tripping
her Anchors and all boats in, the came and requestecf to be put on
Shore. I did not think proper to getain my ship to gratify their whim,
which was in contradiction to their conduct of the day before, and
Ire t them on board the Frigate until I received your orders, or their
w' 1 to enter Our haste in meeting in the Bay of Gibraltar made me
omit mentioning it to you. One of them entered before the loss of
the Frigate; - the other three did not but were made to do duty, and
our being short of complement of which the[y] supplied a part I presume entitles them to Wages notwithstanding they had not signed
Articles. I request you to inform me whether I am to consider them
as part of the Philadelphia's Crew, in order for [word illegible] my
Government for the advances of clothes.
Enclosed you will receive a list of Clothing wanted immediately for
the crew of the late United States Frigate Philadelphia - I am not
able to point out in what manner for you to send them I presume when
you appear off here, and have communication with the shore, that
permission will be granted to land them -

I

[Note: Triplicate copy of this letter was dated 16 February 1804.1
[LC. EPP, LB, Dec. 1803-April 1804.1
To Captain Edward Preble, U. 6. Navy, from John Gavino, U. 6. Consul, Gibraltar

GIBRALTAR
3rd March 1804.
DEARSIR, I wrote you the 27th January last p' the Victualler
W&m & Mary, under cover to Consul Puhs, as the Captain would
not go to Syracuse on RCCI of his Insurance, and the 10th Ulto. advising
you of the information given by a Danish Brig regarding a Tripoline
cruiser (as he called himself) being off Sardinia. A 3 Mast Polacre,
8 Guns, about 90 Tons and 60 Men, and had black top sides. Since
when have heard no more of her. Captain Hull went immediately
along the coast of Spain as far as Alicante, and returned without being
able to get any acct of him.

*

*

*

*

*

*

*

This goes under cover to Sir Alexr Ball, and contains letters r e d
r the Citizen, Those for other Gentlemen of the Squadron,
and for fkipoli, I send Mr Higgins.
LC.

EPP, LB, Dee. 1803-April 1804.1

468

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1803 TO 1804

Extract from journal of U. S. Brig Argus. Lieutenant Isaac Hull,U. S. Navy,
commanding. Saturday, S March 1804

Moored in Algeciras Bay These 24 hours Commence with moderate Breezes from the Southward a Boat from the Portugeese Admiral
came alongside the Officer of which informed of the loss of his
Britannic Majestys brig Weazell Caberetta point in the gale got T. G
masts on end loosed sails to dry and cleansed the Ship fore and aft,
sent the barge to Gibralter which ret.urned having obtained Pratique
and brough[t] information that the United States Schooner Viren had
had Captured a Tripolitan Vessel [NDA photostat.]
Extract from log book kept by Sailing Master Nathaniel Haraden. U. S. Navy, on
board U. S. Frigate Cahclilulion. Saturday, 3 March 1804

Moderate breezes from the N E Steering to the S W with an offing
of 6 or 7 Miles from Cape Passari We hare now on board 83 leagurs
55 Butts and 67 Gang Casks - Twenty of the Butts and Twenty of
the Gang Casks are Empty - By 4 P. M it became calm - At
5 we answered the Nautilu.~signal NQ819 and immediately sent a
boat to her for her Intelligence - At X past 6 the boat returned The Commodore recieved Intelligence of a small cruizer being in
shore. The Nautilus was ordered to part company [in chase to the
Westward] and we took her convoy the William and M a q store ship
under charge - At sun down Cape Paqsari bore N E b N X N nearly
six Miles; the low land to the Westward of Cape Passari N N W 4
or 5 miles The wind continued light and Variable till 8 P. M. a t which time
we took our departure from Cape Passari for Malta. At % past 8
a breese sprung up from the E S E - Hoisted a light as a signal for
the IVilIiam & Ma to follow At 10 P. M. a sai passed ahead - fired a Gun to bring her to, and
spoke her, a Swedish Brig bound from Trieste bound to Gottenburgh
continued under easy sail all night
At 6 A. M. made the Island of Malta bearing from S S W to S W. Stood in for the Harbor of Valetta till 8 when we tacked off shore as
the wind was a t this time unfavorable for going into Port - At 9
tacked in towards the land -Unstowed the two bowers At 10 A. M.
came by the light house and anchored in the harbor of Valetta Furled sails and ran a Kedge out to the West, S, West in order to
moor ship Moored in the direction of the Harbor half a cable each
way - Our depth of water 9 fathq soft muddy bottom The Harbor of Valetta consists of three channells forming as many
oints of solid rock rising a considerable height above the sea and
aving excellent harbors within them capable of holding large Fleets The situation is naturally strong and no labor has been spared to
render its fortifications impregnable - Surgeons report 13 sick 7
convalescent and one discharged.
[LC. EPP, Log Cmlitutirm, 1803-1804.1

7'

E

Extract from Diary of Captain Edward Preble, U. 8. Navy, Commodore of U. 6.
Squadron in the Mediterranean, Saturday, 3 March 1804

Light breezes from the N E. Steering to the S. W - At 5 P. M.
abreast of Cape Passari; the Nautilwr was boarded by a boat from the

W A R S W I T H B A R B A R Y POWERS

469

shore and immediately made the siggal for having intelligence of
importance to communicate, on which I sent a boat which brought
me information that a small cruizer under Red Colors was on the
Coast: Sent the Nautilus in pursuit of her - At 8 P. M fired a shot
to bring to a Brig which proved to be a Dane from Trieste for Gottenburgh. At 6 A. M. saw Malta: At 10 A. M. anchored in the harbor
of Valetta in that Island. The store ship had previously entered Surgeons report 13 sick, 7 convalescent - Syren a t Anchor here [LC. EPP, Diary, 1803-1804.1
Extract from journal of Midshipman F. Cornelius deKrafft, U. 6. Navy, in U. 6. Brig
Siren of 18 guns, Lieutenant Charles Stewart, U. S. Navy, commanding, Saturday,
3 March 1804

Commence with light airs from the S@& E d At 9 the store ship
came too here. At ?4 past 10 the Constitution (Commodore Preble)
came too in the harbour [Malta]. At 11 Lieu: Stewart went on board
the Commodore, X past 11 L! Stewart return'd - At meridian Mr
Anderson &. the men (that went on board the store ship) return'd
sent the 2 men on board of her belonging to her. R e d an anchor
from shore (for a larboard bower) weighing 1500 lb unmoor'd & hove
short on the starboard cable. hoisted the anchor on board & stow'd
i t on the gunnel - Fresh breezes & rainy weather wind S. S. E. (Those remarks include 12 hours.) [NDA.]
To General Brune, French Ambassador to Constantinople, from Captain Edward
Preble, U. S. Navy

UNITEDSTATESFRIGATE
Comtitution
HARBOUR
OF SYRACUSE
4th March 180.4
CITIZENGENERALI have the honor of enclosing a letter addressed
to you, which I found on board the prize Martingana called the
hlastico, as likewise a declaration of the Blockade of Tripoly, which I
beg you to present to the Captain Pacha.
I wish him to understand that our object in Blockading that port,
is to distress an Enemy who has made War on the commerce of the
United States of America without any cause except those founded on
avarice and injustice, and that this measure, is of the first importance
in compelling them to a peace that may be consistant with the honor
and dignity of our Country.
The Bearer of this, is an Officer of the Captain Pacha who was
passenger in the said prize called the Mastico as it is possible that his
Government may attach blame to him from the circumstance of his
being in the Vessel I feel it a duty incumbent on me to declare that
from enquiry and observation his conduct as an Officer, and Gentleman, reflects great honor on his Nation
Submitting the most proper method of making these communications to your better judgment
Au General BRUNE
Ambassadeur de la Republiqu.e
Francaise - A'CONSTANTINOPLE
[LC. EPP, LB, Dec. 1803-April 1804.1

470

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1803 TO 1804

To General B r a e , French Ambassador to Constantinople, from Captain Edward
Preble, U. S. Navy

UNITEDSTATESSHIP Constitution
Harbour oJ Syraezlse 4th March 1804
CITIZEN GENERAL
Presuming on the good faith & friendship
existing between the French Republic and the United States of
America, and owing to our having no Ambassador or Consul a t the
Porte, I venture to ask your mediation in an affair which, if misrepresented, might bring us into collision with a power whom we are,
and still wish to continue in Peace and friendship with. - reposing the
fullest confidence in your well wishes for us, I beg leave to submit to
you, the following statement of facts, earnestly hoping, that you will
avail yourself of the earliest opportunity to make them known to the
Captain Pacha, or the proper Department a t Constantinople and to
impress on their minds the truth of this our complaint and the
attendant consequences of such a flagrant violation of the laws of
Nations and Humanity.
On the 29th of October last the United States Frigate Philadelphia,
then cruising alone off the Harbour of Tripoly ran on the rocks near
that place. the consequences of this misfortune were, that she was
attacked by Gun Boats, and other Vessels, then laying in the Harbour, and the Frigate careening so much, as to render her Guns useless
she was obliged to surrender. Among the Vessels which acted in a
hostile manner towards our Flag on this occasion, was the Martingana
called Mastico commanded by Mustapha Rais of Candia who was in
the Harbour of Tripoly under Turlush Colours which on this occasion
he does not scruple to haul down, and hoist the Tripoline flag. He
then proceeded to the attack, and was actually the person who first
boarded the Philadelphia plundered and abused the Officers, and
afterwards conducted them as prisoners to the Bashaw's Castle.
Thus was the Crew of one of our Frigates made prisoners by the
assistance of a Vessel belonging (as is said) to the Captain Pacha, in
which case she certainly ought to have been sailing under a friendly
flag. Surely such an infrin ement when truly represented to the
Government a t Constantinop e, will meet their prompt consideration,
and that they will readily subscribe to a punishment tantamount to
the aggression I can have no doubt.
On the 23'q December last as I was cruising off Tripoly I fell in with
the aforesaid Martingana commanded by the said Mustapha Rais.
The crew consisted of 7 Greeks, and 3 Cretans (Turkish subjects.)
There was also on board as passenger a Chouix of the Captain Pacha
(who is now on his way home to Constantinople) and between 50 and
60 Tripolines and Slaves belon ing to the Bashaw of Tripoly and his
subjects. She was from Tripo y bound to Bengaza, and from thence
to Constantinople. I sent her into port for further examination and
just a t the moment I was about discharging the Vessel Captain and
Crew, I was informed of these important circumstances, which left me
no alternative, but to make prize of her, as the Captain and the three
Cretans, stand convicted of Piracy in the fullest extent of the word,
and as such I am constrained to treat them, until I am advised by the
Captain Pacha, whether or not this Captain Mustapha was sailing
under Turkish Colours, and with his orders. If this is really the case,
the Captain Pacha will doubtless decree that Mustapha Rais, and
his associates have merited death, But I have a strong suspicion,

f

f

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

471

that this Vessel and Captain was commissioned by the Bashaw of
Tripoly, and shall wait the Captain Pacha's advice on this subject
with im atience
I enc ose you the deposition of the Chouix of the Captain Pacha,
who was passenger in the Vessel; as also the depositions of several of
the Crew, which prove the facts beyond doubt. After this brief statement Citizen General I beg leave to assure you, that the interest you
may take in this affair, will not only insure my gratitude but that of
my Country Accept my cordial wishes for your health and happiness,
and believe
- me to be,

f

[LC. EPP, LB, Dec. 1803-April 1804.1

[4 March 18041
To Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Mavy, from Bichard Farquhar, Malts

MAYIT PLEASE
YOUREXCELLENCY
The Bashaw of Dernas Consul calld on me this morning to know if
I had r e d any answer to the Letters he Sent to Your Excellency
I have had some conversation with the CaptQf a Vessel which
brought the last letters from the Bashaw of Derna he also informed
me what the Bashaw Said to him, but I Suppose your Excellency r e d
the Letter from your Consul also all the Particulars. I calld on a
CaptP Nicola who has been many years in the Service of the Bashaw
of Tripoli and who latly came from there, and being now displeased
with the Bashaw is willeng to Serve your Excellency. he is also of
opinion that this is the time to Cooperate with the Bashaw of Derna
4'Q March 1804
MALTA
[LC. EPP, Vol. 10, Feb.-April 1804.1

To Captain Edward Preble, U S. Navy, from Lieutenant Charles Stewart,
U. 6. Navy

Syren off MALTA
4'h March I804
SIR, I met with this Polacre Ship about 6 Leagues to the Northward of Goza she having Guns and a Number of Turks on board, I
thought proper to detain and send her for your investigation. They
report themselves four days from Tunis bound to Zante The person
who came on board as Captain of her could not tell how many persons
there were on board neither could he shew me any papers or passports
for them from our Consul a t Tunis He reported (but in a very prevaricating manner) that there was a Tripoline Corsair sailed the same
day he left Tunis.
[LC. EPP, LB, Dec. 1803-April 1804.1
Extract from log book of U.S. Frigate Consfilulion, Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Navy,
commanding, Sunday, 4 March 1804

Moored in Valeto in the Island of Malta, winds fromESE to WNW.
on our anchoring here we found the united States Brig Syren,
we was Em lo all the afternoon, in cleals and cleaning up the
Lieutenant Steward of the Syren waited on the
decks, a t 3
Commodore. Towards the Evening the Syren saild on a Cruise of[q
Tripoly. * * * a t nine in the morning anchored here the united
States Schooner Nautilus. Leiutenant Summors, who waited on the

5 6.

472

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1803 TO 1804

Commodore, and Reports that he could gain no intelligence of the
Crurises he was orderd to look out for.
[NA. ND original.]
Extract from log book kept by Sailing Master Nathaniel Haraden, U. S. Navy, on
board U. S. Frigate ConrNlulion. Sunday, 4 March 1804

Fresh breezes from the E S E. On anchoring here found the U. S.
Brig Syren. Employed all the afternoon clearing decks & cleansing
ship. At 3 P. M. Lt Stewart of the Syren waited on the Commodore Towards evening the Syren sailed on a cruize off Tripoly - By
7 P. M. the wind had shifted from E S E to N N W which continued
t h o ' thenight withstrong breezes -The ships company were mustered
a t watch and employed washing and scrubbing cloaths. At 9 A M
anchored here the U. S. Schooner Nautilus - Lieutt Somers waited on
the Commodore and reported he could gain no Intelligence of the
cruizer he was sent to look for - Cleaning ship Surgeon's report
13 sick, 4 convalescent and three discharged - Among the sick are
three cases of the Venerial Lt Elbert, Mr Wadsworth & One Seaman
The others are affected with coughs, Fevers and declines M' Pulis
the American Consul waited on the Commodore. Noon moderate
breezes from the N N W.
[LC. EPP, Log Constitution, 1803-1804.1
Extract from journal of Hidshipman B. Cornelius deKrafft, U.S. Navy, in 0.S. Brig
Siren of 18 guns, Lieutenant Charles Stewart, U. S. Navy, commanding, Sunday,
4 l a r c h 1804

Commences with fresh breezes & rainy weather. At % past 2
hove up & made sail out of the harbour [Malta].
Lat: Obs: 3 6 O 25' N.
[NDA.]
To James Monroe, U. S. Minister to London, England, from Secretary of State

DEPARTMENT
OF STATE
March 6t!' 1804
SIR,

*

*

*

*

*

*

*

I t appears by letters from Commodore Preble to the Navy Department that he had proclaimed the port of Tripoli to be in a state of
blockade, on the grounds and in the form of British proclamations,
used in cases where no effective blockade had taken place. That
this measure may not be cited against the principle of blockades
maintained by the United States, it is pro er you should know that
no instruction was given to the American ommander to that effect,
and that the instructions since transmitted him will set and keep
him right on that subject.
From a letter lately received by this Department from Mr Jarvis
our Consul a t Lisbon, it appears that he has fallen into an error on
another subject which might tend to mislead the British Government
in their estimate of our principles and policy with respect to their
claim of seamen serving in vessels of the United States. In a spirit
of liberality he signified to a British Naval Commander a t Lisbon
that in order to prevent a resort to impressment by British Commanders,
he was willing, on roper application to deliver seamen from american
vessels, who sho d appear to be British subjects. You too well

8

9

473

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

know the principles maintained by the United States on this subject
to be at a loss in repelling any inference that may be drawn from this
circumstance, or from any others, in favor of a claim which can be
reconciled neither with our national rights, nor the honor of our
flag.

*

*

*

t

*

*

*

JAMES
MADISON
[NA. SDA. Dip. Cor., fnst. t o Min., Vol. 6, Oct. 1801-May 1808.1
To Secretary of the Navy from Lieutenant Isaac Hull, U. S. Navy

UNITED
STATES
BRIGArgus

Algeciras Bay JtQ
March 280.4
SIR,I have the honour to inform you, that I arrived a t Gibralter,
from Cudiz and Tangier, on the gtQFebu, and on the 10tQa Sweedish
Vessel arrived from the Eastward, the Cap! of which brought information of his having been boarded off Sardenia, by a tripolitan Buizer,
carrying 8 Guns, and Sixty or Seventy men. - I lost no time in getting
a discription of the Vessel, and preparing the Argus for Sea, and sailed
on the 14@in pursuit of her, with the ship Actress of New York, under
my Convoy, bound to Micant - We had a fair wind as far as Cape
de Gatt, where we took the Wind from the Eastg, and beat from there
to the Bay of Allicant, passing near Cape Pallos,
On my arrival at Micant, I found three American Vessels bound to
the Westward, and as I could not gain, the least information, of any
Cruizers having been seen on that station, and fearing that something
might arrive a t Gibraltar, that would make it necessary for me to be
there, I thought it adviseable to return, with the Ships bound down,
taking a good look off Cape Pallos snd Cape de Gatt in my way,
I arrived at Gibralter, on the 24@in the Morning, and found that the
Schooner Gtizen, had been there, with the Gun Carriages, and sailed
for Tangier, in distress for want of men, his mate having been pressed,
and one or two of his Seamen Sick, on gaining this information from
MF Gavino and finding that there was not any Vessels in the Bay,
bound to the Eastward, I sailed the same Evening for Tangier, to
assist the Captain of the Schooner in delivering his Cargo. - After
remaining in Tangier four days, and finding that I could be of no
further use there, the Gun Carriages being nearly delivered, I sailed
for this Bay, leaving a Midshipman and two men, to assist in Ballasting the Schooner, and to come over with her to Gibralter. - The
morning I left Tangier, came on a most violent G d e of wind, which
obliged me to run through the Straight, and lay by until the followin
morning, when the wind became more moderate - I beat up, an
Anchored here in the Afternoon. - I have been this moment informed,
by the health Boat, that his Britanic Majestys Brig M'eazle, was lost
in the Gale, on Caberitta Point, and that several Vessels had drove
from their Anchors a t Gibralter, and was obiiged to go to sea Amongst the Number two Americans, but I have not as yet been able
to learn their names. - I t is my intention to fill up my water a t
this place, and then run over to Gibralter, and take on board a supply
of Provisions, and if no application is made for Convoy, I shall again
take a look off Ca e de Gatt, and Cape Pallos, and hope, should any
of the Enemp's 8ruizers venture on this station, to be fortunate
enough to fa1 in with them. [NDA. Isrrac Euli LB, 1803-1804.1

3

474

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1803 TO 1804

To Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Navy, from Captain William Bainbridge,
U. I.Bavy

TRIPOLY
IN BARBARY
6'@March 1804
DEARSIR, With this you will receive three letters from me of the
followin dates 16'9 and 20th of February and the 3 ' h f March. I
do mys f the honor of enclosing you a note I wrote on the 3rd inst to
Sidi Muhammed Dghies, Minister of foreign Affairs to His Excellency
the Bashaw of Tripoly and his answer. In the latter you will perceive
his question on Massacre of Prisoners. I have noticed i t in my Note
to him of this day, but you will be able to reply to it.
On the h t of March we were taken from the Quarters which we had
occupied, and placed in an Apartment where we are shut up, from all
communication with any person. Of course our situation is not as
comfortable as it has been.
Myself and Officers send many letters for America by this conveyance to Malta. Trusting to hear from you as Often as you deem
proper.
[LC. EPP, LB,Dee. 1803-April 1804.1

9

To Captain William Bainbridge, U. S. Navy, from the Minister of Foreign Affairs
of the Bashaw of Tripoli
Translation

TRIPOLY
IN BARBARY
6 March 1804
SIR, I replied to the letter which Commodore Preble did me the
honor to write on the 4th January last and which reached me the 15Q
of February. The Commodore speaks much of humanity in his letter,
he is however far from the practice of it, since three of the Guards of
the Frigate have been found dead on the shore between Tripoly and
Mesurat covered with wounds How long has i t been since Nations
massacred their Prisoners?
All that I have done to soften your situation requires no thanks. I t
was with much pain that I prevailed at last on the Prince to permit
you to go and walk in the Town & Country I might certainly have
continued to procure you other privileges
In the actual state of things, and above all on account of the Anger
of His Excellency the Bashaw who has rendered himself inaccessible.
You must know Captain that I cannot undertake to charge myself
with another Negotiation.
You may communicate this information to Commodore Preble if
you think roper, and send me the letter which I will have conveyed
ou can do the same with those letters which Yourself and
to him.
Officers wish to send to your families as you have requested by the
Letter of the 3rd inst whch you wrote me.
DGHIES
(Signed) SIDI MUHAMMED
-Minister of Foreign A#airs to His
Excellency the Bashaw of Tripoly
in Barbary
PS. I forgot to tell you in reply to your billet of the 27t@Febr? that
M' Schambn Ambassador sent by the Commodore is closely engaged
with His Excellency the Bashaw in the Negotiation with which he is
charged -

f

KC. EPP, LB, Dec. 1803-April 1804.1

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS
-

-

475

To Sidi Mohamed D'ghies, Minister of Foreign .Affairs of the Bashaw of Tripoli,
from Captain Wiiam Bambndge, U. 6. Havy

TRIPOLY
IN BARBARY
5th March 1804
(COPY
SIR, I had the honor last evening to receive your letter of that inst
in come uence of the permission contained in it, I now send you letters
for the amilies and Friends of myself & Officers which we shall be
much obliged to you to forward to Malta.
With our consent I have enclosed to the Commodore a translation
of your etter to me, who no doubt will be able to explain clearly to
you that the death of the men you allude to, does not merit the appellation of Massacre, but was occasioned by a necessary consequence in
makin their escape You may be assured, Sir, that it is an incontrovertab e fact, that the Americans always treat their Prisoners with
the greatest humanity and give quarters the moment opposition ceases.
I take this opportunity of again assuring you that myself and Officers are sensible of your interposition in procuring the Priviledges
which were granted us.
[LC. EPP, LB, Dec. 1803-April 1804.1
Extract from letter to Midshipman Henry Wadsworth, U. 6. Navy, from Lieutenant

%

9

f

David Porter, U. 6. Navy

TRIPOLY
PRISON
March 5th 1804
"DEAR WADSWORTH,
Since the burning of the Frigate we have
been removed & close confined in an apartment of the castle, but the
Minister granted us permission to write our Friends and he has
promised to forward our lettefs after he has perused them. With
respect to the capture of the Frigate I shall only observe that we were
in pursuit of one of their cruizers, after giving over chace & in the
act of hauling off shore going about 8 h o t s we grounded on a reef of
rocks laying about 3 miles from shore. Her bows were in 12 feet
water & her lee gun deck ports on a level with waters' edge: every
exertion was made to get her off & every seamanlike expedient tried
to but without effect - at first all was hove aback & all the guns run
aft: then Most of the guns hove overboard, all the water started in
the hold & pumped out: the Anchors cut from the bows, & as a last
effort the Foremast was cut away to lighten her forward but without
effect. - The enemies gun boats in the mean time took their station
on our starboard Quarter & commenced a well directed fire at our
masts and rigging, they lay in such a situation that not one of our
guns could be brought to bear on them not withstanding we cut away
part of our stern.
all endeavors to defend the ship useless Capt Bainbridge
very coo ly & prudently call'd a council of his officers who were
unanimously of opinion that to save the lives of the Brave crew there
was no alternative but to haul the colors down & with tears in his
eyes did that truly brave man submit to the painful necessity: previous to hauling the colors down we did everything in our power
to disable the ship.
"Rest satisfied that no exertions were wanting to get her off nor
could courage avail anything - their getting her off was more the
effects of fortune than any exertions on their part - 48 hours after
the unfortunate event a fresh N W gale arose which rais'd the waters
on this coast with a heavy swell which hove her off the reef. After
we struck our colors finding they did not come to take possession of
the ship Capt B sent me in the Barge to tell the enemy they might

476

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1803 TO 1804

take possession as we should make no further resistance, this probably has given rise to the story you mention. When an investigation
takes place I feel confident the American character will suffer nothing
from this accident. Present my best respects to my old shipmates &
your Brother Officers and accept assurances of high respect & esteem
from your unfortunate but aft'ectionate Friend, D. PORTER.
[H. W. L. Dana Col.]
To Sir John Acton, Prime Minister of State, The Two Sicilies, from James Leander
Cathcart, Leghorn

His Excellency
ACTON
&C&C&C
Sir JOHN

LEGHORN
March 5*h[*]1804

Naples
SIR The commander in chief of the United States Squadron
stationed in the Mediterranean, having established his head quarters
a t Syracuse in Sicily, iinding it absolutely necessary to join to his
squadron four Gun & four Mortar Boats, and being informed that at
Palermo and Messina there are some belonging to His Sicilian Majesty
exactly calculated for the service on which he intends to employ
them, has requested me under date of the 31st January to proceed to
Naples to request permission from the Government to purchase the
said Boats which are not at present in actual service; or if more
agreeable, he promises either to have others built in their place, or to
return them in at least as good condition as he receives them, should
the Government of Kaples not think proper to alienate them entirely.
Deeming it inexpehent to make so long a journey before I was
informed of the probability of success, I have taken the liberty to
address Pour Excellency on the subject being encouraged thereto by
the very polite reception the Ofhers of the American Squadron have
always received from you at Kaples, and the consideration that His
Sicilian Majesty being engaged in a War with all the Barbary States
by our Squadron frequenting his Coasts & Harbours, and destroying
the Cruisers of any one of those states, is in reality promoting the
Welfare of his subjects, by giving security to their persons and property, and lessening the risk of navigating under the Neapolitan flag.
I have requested John Matthiew Esqr our Consul at Naples to
present this to Your Excellency, and to await your answer, which by
your influence I have reason to believe will be in the affirmative.
Mr Matthiew will be directed to procure the necessary order for their
delivery to Edward Preble Esqr Commander in chief of the U S
Squadron stationed in the Mediterranean when he finds it convenient
to call or send for them, and to forward it to him at Syracuse.
If we should be so happy as to succeed in this our request the
Government of the United States will take a singular pleasure in
acknowledging the favor, and Commodore Preble or myself will
proceed to Naples in order to enter into any contract with that
Government on the part of the United States of America that the
circumstance may require.
LEANDER
CATHCART
(Signed) JAMES
Consul General and Agent for th L7 S
of Tunis
of America near th Rege
pro tempme atZe&orn
[*One copy of this letter is dated 2 March 1804.1

[LC. EPP,LB, Dec. 1803-April 1804.1

477

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

To Captain Edward Preble, U.S. Navy, from George Davis,U.6. Charge d'Affaires,

Tunis

SIR,

*

CONSULAR
HOUSE
TUNIR
March
1804.

*

*

*

*

*

*

On or about the 17th Ulto. anchored in the road of Gouletta
a corsair of Barbary, said to be an Algerine, it wm but a few days
since, that she was discovered to be a Tripolitan, who came here for
supplies. On its being made known, she was immediately ordered
away by the Veckil - contrary winds, and want of Provisions have
detained her. I have advized the Enterprize getting under weigh in
order to avoid her detention on the part of the Government (agreeable to Treaty) as I have this moment received an order to appear
at the Palace, and suspect this to be one of the objects. His Excellency has been pointedly peevish of late, and apprehend that my
morning visit, will renew the history of his complaints.
[LC. EPP, LB, Dec. 1803-April 1804.1
Extract from Diary of Captain Edward Preble, IT. S. Navy, Commodore of U. S.
Squadron in the Mediterranean, Monday, 5 March 1804

[Malta] At 2 P. M. Governor Sir Alexc Ball, General villetts,
General Oaks Cap1 Schomberg of the Navy 8: several other Officers
both Civil, Naval and Military came on board to pay a complimentary
visit on my arrival and welcome us to the Island - Cap! Stewart
of the Syren sent a Prussian Brig into this Port for examination:
She was from Tunis with Turkish Passengers bound to Candia. I
ordered the Prize Master and men to leave her immediately and gave
her up to the Master to pursue his Voyage, as I concieved no just
cause for detention - Nautilw recaullung and getting ready for sea. ILC. EPP, Diary, 1803-1804.1
Extract from log book of U. S. Frigate Constitution. Captain Edward Preble, U. 6. Xavy,
commanding, Mtonday, 5 March 1804

Moderate Breezes and clear weather. Moored in the upper harbour
of Valeta, the nautilus in company at 2 in the afternoon, Governour
Ball with Several officers of distinction waited on the Commodore
at 7 in tbe Evening anchored her[e] a Prusian Ship Sent in for adjudication by the united States Brig Syren * * * on our anchoring
here the governour and the Commanding officer of the port Verry
obligingly offered Every assistance
[NA. ND original.]
Extrect from journal of Midshipman F. Cornelina delrafft, U. S Navy, in U. S. Brig
Siren of 18 guns, Lieutenant Charles Stewart, U. 6. Navy, commanding, Monday,
5 March 1804

Commences with fresh breezes & hazy several sail in sight. At
1 P. M turn'd a reef out of the topsails & sent up top gall' yards, in
chace of a ship close in shore, under russian colours. rtt 2 spoke

the chace. sent the cutter on board for the Cap$ & papers. on
examination concluded to send her into port. sent on board to take
charge of her Mr Dorsey & Nicholson. a t M past 2 sent them &
the Cap; with 8 of our men on board of her, fill'd away with the
prize in oompr for Malta. It bearing S. S. W 4 leagues dud 3 past

478

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1803 TO 1804

3 handed top all! sails & main sail. )r; past 4 took in fore sail. At
6 the E. end o Malta bore S by E. At 7 hove too & order'd the ship
to make the best of her way into malta. At 8 bore away to the S'J
& E d set top gall! sails & fore sail. Midnight hght airs from the
N E. the S. cape of Malta bearing N W by W 2 leagues distf
At 1 took in top gall' sails. At 5 set after main sail & top gall$
sails, stay sails, flying jib & square main sl Meridian East cape of

B

Goza bore N E by E - hands employ'd making matts kc. &c.
Latt Obs: 37' 5' N.
[NDA.]

To Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Navy, from John Broadbent, U. S. Navy Agent,
Messina

MESSINA6Q March 1804.
DEARSIR, I am infinitely obliged to thee for the leasing intelligence
of the gallant action of Captain Decatur a t Tripo y and as I am convinced that i t will give great pleasure to the Inhabitants of this
Island, I shall take the liberty of giving a translation of it in the
Gazette of this City. I shall also send a copy of it to General Acton,
confident that it will meet with thy approbation. Atchievments of
this nature cannot be too well known; it will have a good effect on the
Court of Naples, and may give courage to this Government. A
Neapolitan Squadron of 2 Frigates and 2 Cutters arrived yesterday
from Naples, and i t is said they are to be joined by another Frigate
refitting in this port, but what the object of this expedition is, I
know not.
Numerous reports have been spread about the sailing of the French
Fleet from Toulon, but I have reason to believe that none of them
are true.
Lord Neilson with his squadron was seen off Minorco eleven days
ago,
B the hands of Lt Comt J: H: Dent, I had the honor of receiving
thy Iktter of the 8@Ulto: and waited immediately upon His Excellency
the Governor Guillechini to see if I could procure the Gun Boats
kc' but he had no authority to dispose of them without previous
orders from the Court of Naples either by sale or otherwise.
He the Governor as well as the Marquis Ospley [?I Minister of the
Marine to whom I also spoke on the subject, promised to do every
thing in their Power to assist any of the ships of the S uadron under
th command which may come into this Port for t e purpose of
r e K t t , and be assured, that I shall a t all times be happ to render
cers such services or attentions as they may stan in need of
thy
to the utmost of my abilities
As soon as I receive Genl Acton's answer to my request for Gun
Boats &c* I shall do myself the honor of acquaintmg thee therewith
a t Syracuse. Should I not, in the mean time have the pleasure of
welcoming thee a t Messina

P

1B

ILC. EPP, LB, Dec. 1803-April 1804.1
To Lieutenant Thomas Robinson, Jr., U. 6. Havy, from Captain Edward Preble,
U. S. Navy

Constitution March 6s 1804
SIR I have appointed Lt Dent a Lt Commt You will therefore
Observe such ceremony and respect towards him aa ie observed towards

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

479

the Ltg Commandants of the Squadron, and enjoin it on the Officers
and Crew to do the same [LC. EPP, Order Book, May 1803-June 1805.1
To Sailing Master Samuel B. Brooke, U. S. Navy, from Captain Edward Preble,
U. S. Navy

U. S. SHIPConstitution, MALTAMarch 6" 180.4
SIR I have recieved our letter of the 20t@ult? with your acceptance
of the appointment of ailing Master to which Station the Honb!%c-

Z

retary of the Navy has appointed you by letters dated the 17t@October
1803. You wiil remain on board the Syren as a Supernumerary
Master until a Vacancy Offers, and be assured I shall take the Earliest
opportunity to place you in a situation Agreeable to your rank [LC. EPP, Order Book, May 1803-June 1805.1
Extract from Memorandum Book of Captain Edward Preble, U. 6. Navy, on
board U. S. Frigate (hsfifution6 March 1804

Three Tunisian Corvettes arrived [Malta].
[LC, original.]
Extract from Diary of Captain Edward Preble, U. 8. Navy, Commodore of U. 6.
Squadron In the Mediterranean, Tuesday, 6 March 1804

[Malta] Moderate breezes from the N. h' W. Rain, Thunder &
lightening - At 3 P. M. i t cleared up, but soon commenced raining
again and continued Stormy through the Night. At 9 A. M. arrived
here three ships of war of Tunis of 32, 24 & 18 Guns to repair and
Equip for a cruize - I t is reported that the Bey of Tunis intends to
declare war against the United States - Surgeons repor[tj 13 sick,
6 convdescen t
[LC. EPP, Diary, 1803-1804.1
Extract from log book of U. 6. Frigate Codilulion, Captain Edward Preble, U.S. Navy,
command~ng,Tuesday, 6 l a r c h 1804

at anchor in Valeta in the Island Malta. the Na~iEusin company
s t ninre] in the morning anchored here the ships of war
belong to Tunis, one of them a 32, a 16, and a 12 Ship

* * *

[NA. ND original.]
Extxoct from journal of lidshipman F. Cornelius deXrafft, U. S. Navy, in U.6. Brig
Siren of 18 gum, Lieutenant Charles Stewart,U.S. Navy, commanding, Tuesday,
6 March 1804

Moderate breezes & fine weather, hands employ'd setting up top
masts & top gall$ rigging. At 5 discover'd a sad ahead, gave chace,
At 4 took in royals & steering sails, wind hauling to the WestwG
At 6 she hoisted the barbary flagg a t her main. At j4 past 6 we pass'd
about 2 miles to leeward of her under English Colours. At 7 tack'd
& stood after her. At 8 hail'd her, she answer'd Tunisian bound to
Malta, requested to send our boat on board, which she refused, concluded, then to dog her untill da hght. At 11 dose reef'd & wore to
the W@in a heavy squall from $e W lost sight of her B handed fore
to sail &idnight Set fore topsail. the weather squaily with heavy showers
of rain. At 2 took in courses. A t 4 moderate wore to the Nq the
chace still out of sight A t 5 turn'd 1 reef out of the topsails & dis-

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1803 TO 1804

480

cover'd the above sail on our lee bow close in with goza made sail in
chace At 9 she went into Malta At 10 we shorten'd sail )ipast 10
came too with the starboard anchor in the outer cove in 13 fathoms,
found the ship we chac'd laying at anchor in the harbour, also the
Frigate Constitution & Schoner Nautilus Meridian the Officers &
men return'd on board from the ship we had sent in after she had been
releas'd got the Launch out to water.
(Those remarks include 36 hours)
[NDA.]
Acceptance of resignation of Lieutenant Colonel Commandant William W. Burrows,
U. S. Marine Corps, from Secretary of the Ravy

WILLIAM
W. BURROWS

NAY.D E P ~
March 7 , 1804

Charleston S. C
Your resignation of the appointment of Lt Col. Commandant of
the Marine Corps tendered in your letter of the 23 ultGis accepted but
as there is a large balance to your debit on the books of this Department it is Expected that you will without delay repair to this place
for the purpose of settling this balance [WDA. GLB, Vol. 7 , 1803-1805.1
To the Captain Pacha, Constantinople, from Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Navy

UNITED
STATES
SHIPConstitution
Malta Harbour March 7th. 1804.
MAYIT PLEASE
YOUREXCELLENCY,
The United States of America's Frigate Philadelphia having unfortunateIy struck on the rocks off Tripoly in Barbary, the 31st of
October last was attacked by Armed Vessels and Boats, and from
the situation of the Ship, was obliged to surrender. Among the
Armed Vessels which made prize of the Frigate and prisoners of the
Crew, was the Martingana called Mastico commanded by Mustapha
Rais of Candia which Vessel it is said, belonged to your Excellency.
She was in the port of Tripoly under Turkish Colours, when the
accident happened, but immediately hauled them down, and hoisted
the Tripoline fla took on board a number of Tripolines armed with
Muskets and sa res, and went out to the attack; Anchored near
the Frigate, and as soon as she surrendered Mustapha Rais with
his men, boarded the Frigate, made her a prize, and took the Captain
& Officers &c* as Prisoners Plundered and abused them, and conducted them to the Bsshaw of Tripoly. Thus by the Piratical
interference of the Vessel of a friendly Nation, was the crew of one of
our Frigates made prisoners of. A true representation of that transaction will be made to you, by the English and French Ambassadors
residing a t your Court; and I hope and expect from the friendship B:
respect which the Government of the United States of America have
for the Grand Seignior, and the Ottoman Nation that it will please
him to ant us that Justice for which he is so renowned by ordering
the Bas aw to surrender up to me, the Officers and Crew of the Frigate,
and by punishing in an exemplary manner those of his subjects who
were concerned in this flagrant violation of the law of Nations. The
U. S. are in peace and friendship with the Ottoman Porte, and wish
ever to remain so. The friendly interference of the Grand Seignior,

%

r

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

481

will insure the lasting gratitude of my Country. I cannot but be
astonished that the Bashaw of Tripoly could have permitted such a
piratical transaction in his Port with impunity.
[LC. EPP, LB, Dec. 1803-April 1804.1
To the Captain Pacha, Constantinople. from Captain Edward Preble, U. 6. Navy

U S. SHIPConstitution
Harbour of Malta 7th of March 1804.

His Excellency
the Captain Pacha
a t Constantinople
MAYIT PLEASE
YOUREXCELLENCY
The bearer of this Hafiz Chouix of Constantinople was in Tripoly in
Barbary at the time the United States of America's Frigate Philadelphia was captured by the Tripolines, but he was not concerned in
the piratical transaction of which Mustapha Rais and his associates
were guilty on that occasion, and which will be ropresented to you
by their Excellencies, the English & French Ministers or Ambassadors
a t Constantinople.
Hafiz Chouix was a passenger on board the Vessel commanded by
the said Mustapha Rais when captured by our ships, and has conducted in a manner honorable to himself, and his Nation. I have
treated him well and have sent him home by the first good conveyance
and hope you will receive him favorably, as he is a very deserving, and
good Mussulman.
I beg leave to refer you to him for information respecting the conduct of Mustapha Rais and his associates.
The United States of America, respect & honor the Grand Seignior,
and the Ottoman Nation, and wish to be in peace and friendship with
them for ever.
May God preserve your life and health!
(Signed) EDWARD
PREBLE
[LC. EPP, LB, Dec. 1803-April 1804.1
To Secretary of the Navy from Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Navy

UNITED
STATESSHIPConstitution
Harbour of Mdta 7th March 1804.
SIR,I have the honor to inform you, that I have this day recd a

e London, by whom
Ictter from Messr*James Mackenzie & A G l e ~ i of
I have been advised that they had hond Six of my Bills dated at Gibraltar the 27th of September last amounting to Four thousand Pounds
Sterling, and drawn in favor of Laurent Roberts. You will easily
judge of my surprise, when I inform you, that I have never written to
them, nor drawn on them for one cent. The liberal supply of Money
which came out in the Squadron has precluded the necessity of such
a measure. I enclose you a copy of their letter to me, and my answer
thereto, I have written Mr Gavino a t Gibraltar, in hopes that he may
be able to fathom this villanous transaction. However I cannot believe, but it must have originated with some person in London who was
ac uainted that I was authorized to draw on the House of Mackenzie
an Glennie previous to my arrival in the Mediterranean, as I had
your letter of credit on board for some time after those Bills are said
to be d r a m .

3

482

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1803 TO 1804

I am directed by my instructions from you, to draw on the House of
McKenzie & Glennie; and should I have occasion to draw, it will be
on that firm, for I never (previous to the receipt of the enclosed extraordinary information) heard of the firm of James Mackenzie and A
Glennie,
I have never heard the name of Laurent Roberts nor do I know the
firm of a House, or a Merchant in Gib? excepting Mr Gavino
[LC. EPP, LB, Dec. 1803-Apd 1804.1
To Lientensnt Isaac Chauncey, U. S. Navy, New York, 8 . Y., from Secretsry of the

navy

NAVY
D E P ~-

March 8. 1804. You will repair to this place to take Command of the Frigate John
Adums, now fitting out for the Mediterranean. I do not wish you to come on immediately if not convenient to you,
but as early as you conveniently can. Let me know by return mail
when I may expect you.
[NDA. OSW, Vol. 6, 1802-1805.1
To Sir Alexander John Ball, British Civil Commissioner, Malta, from Ceptain
Edward Preble, U. S. Navy

U S. SHIPConstitution
Malta Harbour March 8th 1804.

SIR, I have the honor to enclose for your information a cornrnunication from Captain Somers of the United States Schooner Nautilus,
relstive to the Capture & det,ention of the Brig S F. Cruc<fiso Fortunata Barbara Master met vith on the Coast of Tripoly, with a Cargo
of Plank, Scantling, bale Goods, and having a number of Tripoline
passengers on board, she was cleared from Malta for Bengaza, had
English Colours, but a s there cannot be a doubt from the situation
she was found in, and an examination of her apers, but she was bound
directly for Tripoly, in violation of the ~ l o c i a d eI, have every reason
to believe the capture & detention to be perfectly legal.
[LC. EPP, LB, Dec. 1803-April 1804.1
To Captain Edward Preble, U.S. Navy, from Lieutenant Richard Somers, U. S. Navy

UNITED
STATES
SCHOONER
Nautilus
Malta ha~bor8@March 1804

SIR In consequence of the immediate Orders received from you
to proceed to Sea and your verbal Orders that you would not have
any thing to do with the Brig [St. C P U C Z ~ ~I Scaptured
O]
off Tripoli,
cannot make any arrange respecting her a t present having applied
to you agreeable to my Ordew received from tbe Secretary of the Navy
of the United States with me are as follows. - "With respect to the
disposition of Prisoners - & on all other subjects not herein expressly
provided for, you fire to take your directions from the Commanding
Oacer on the StationuThe Man I now have on board, I send to you agreeable to orders
from Mr Robertson, and your saying you know him to he a Tunissian
R ~ c dSOMERS
P. S. f send you agreeable your request the Paper the Governor
wiahea

to see

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

483

You advise me to send the papers respecting the prize to my Agent
in Syracuse -I have no Awent in Syracuse nor have I now time to do
any thing further in the gusiness - as my orders are to proceed
immediately to Sea; But on my return shall pay every attention the
importance of the case may require.
[LC. EPP, Vol. 10, Feb.-April 1804.1
To lieutenant Richard Somers, U. 6. Bavy, commanding U. 6. Schooner Ncnrlllus.
from Captain Edward Preble, U. 6. Bavy

Colzstitvtwn MALTA
March 8 f 804
SIR YOUwill immediate1 proceed to the F'ockade of Tripoly in
Company with the Syren an cruize untill I jo2. you with this Ship or
until farther Orders from me; You are not to seperate from the Syren
or leave the station to which you are Ordered if i t can be possibly
avoided Lt C o r n t SOMEBS
U. S. Schr Nautilus
[Similar letter to Lieutenant Charles Stewart of U. 5. Brig Siren,9 March 1804.1
(LC. EPP, Order Book, May 1803-June 1805.1

d

To Tobias Lear, U. 6. Consul General, Algiers, from George Davis, U. S. Charge
d'bffaires, Tnaie

AMERICAN
CONSULAR
HOUSE

COPY

TUNISMarch 9Q 1804
Recg April 9 t @ 1804
SIR, By the enclosed, you will learn, that the U. States Schooner
Enterprize, has made us a visit - in quest of a Tripolitaa Corsair,
(Polacre mounting 12, six & eight pounders) which she found here; as
articulars of the destruction of the late United States
theP W l p h i a , in the harbour of
- I t has made much
Frigate
noise in Tunis, and is the only occasion, on which I have heard our
Countrymen spoken of with due respect.
I received no communications of any kind by the Enterprize; but
em;
learn from the Commander, that t h e Vizen, had sailed for
and may daily expect the pleasure of seeing Yourself and Mr 0' rien
here. The uncertainty that this will find you a t Algiers, does not permit
me to make any remarks on the late event. The Tripolitan, will be
dismantled in this port; at least orders have this day been given by the
Veckil to that effect [NA. SDA. CL, Algiers, Vol. 7, Part 1, Jan. 180PNov. 1805.1

1

%

To Captain Edward Preble, U. 6. Navy, from Joseph Pulis, U. S. Consul, Malta

MALTA9th March 1804.
SIR I have to inform you that An American Seaman was left a t
this place, on Account of a Desease, and sent to the Maltese Hospital,
By Commodore Morris's Orders; where he has remained from the
25th of December 1802. till this present day. I have to request you will be pleased to inform and Direct me, how
I am to proceed respecting the same. [LC. EPP, Vol. 10, Feb.-April 1804.1

484

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1803 TO 1804

Extract from journal of Midshipman P. Cornelius deKrafft, U S. Navy, in U. S. Brig
.%en of 18 guns. Lieutenant Charles Stewart, U. S. Navy, commanding, h j d a y ,
9 March 1804

Commences with light winds from the S E by E. At 4 hove short.
a t # past 5 L! Stewart went along side the Commodore % past 6
returnd weigh'd & stood out of the harbour [Malta]. At 8 set jib
6r main sail & tack'd to the S U W+ beating off & on the harl,our.
At. 9 wore $ stood to the N W.bound on a cruize in Co: with the
Nautilus. * * * At 10 Lieu' Summers came on board.
[NDA.]
To Captain Richard V. Morris, U.S. Navy. New York, N. Y., from Secretary of the
Navg

NAVY
DEP~
March 10. 1804.
By the enclosed copy of a Precept, you will find that a Court of
Enquiry is called to investigate your conduct and to state an opinion
thereof. You
also perceive that your attendance here is required
by the 1" of April next. [See ':yaval Documents related to the United States Wars with the Barbary
Powers. Volume 11, pp. 526 to 531.1
[X'DA. OSW, Vol. 6, 1802-5 1

-

[lo March 18041

To Captain Samuel Barron, U. S. Navy, from Secretary of the Navy

WHEREAS
the President of the United States did send a squadron
of ships of war to the Mediterranean and did give the command
thereof to Richard V. Morris a Captain in the Navy of the United
States, with orders and instructions to subdue, seize, and make prize
of all vessels, Goods, and effects belonging to the Rt~shawof Tripoli
or to his subjects, and to exert such other efforts as should be judged
most proper for a ~ o y i n gthe enemy $ for protecting the Commerce
and Seamen of Iho United States, and whereas Richard V. Morris
was specially instructed to proceed with the Squadron under his
command and lap off against Tripoli and closely and vi~orouslyblockEtde that Port, all which will bv our severnl instructions hereto annexed,
more fully appear. - And whereas a close and vigorous blockade of
the Port of Tripoli hath not bwn made and all practicable means have
not been used to annoy the Enemy - concerning the cause of wbich
disobedience and neglrct we think it necessary that inquiry should
be made in order that we may have a faithful report made to us of
the causes thereof for our better information. The President of the
United States has therefore charged me to call a Court of Inquiry
for the purposes aforesaid and you are hereby accordingly ordered to
proceed to this place to act as a Member of the said court, and being
the Senior Officer called, you will be the President thereof. Notifications are also transmitted to Capi Hugh G . Campbell and Lt Jn?
Cassin, with orders to appear a t this place on or before the 1" day
of April next as members of the Court, and the Court is hertxby directed
and empowered to summon such persons as may be necessary to
give information touching the said matters and is moreover authorized,
empowered, and required strictly to examine into the matter before

485

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

mentioned, and to report ti statement thereof as i t shall appear to them
together with their opinion thereon. All which you are to transmit
to me to be laid before the President of the U. States for his consideration, and for so doing this shall be to you and to our other said Officers
and all others concerned, a sdlicient warrant. Given under my Hand, and
&a1 of the Department of the
Navy, this tenth day of March
1804. -

R+SMITH.
Secretmy of the Navy.
{NDA. OSW, Vol. 6, 1802-1805.)
Extract from Diary of.Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Navy, Commodore of U. 6.
Squadron m the Mediterranean, Saturday, 10 March 1804

[Malta] Wind S E b E. & Moderate - I this day liberated a man
(captured in theBrig StE'Cm$so by theNautilus) who proved himself
t o be a Tunisian and restored him ail the property he claimed I also
set at Liberty Hafis, Chouix of the Captain Prtcha, and charged him
with dispatches for the English & french Ambassadors, and the Captain Pacha at Constantinoplc explnnator of the Piratical transactions
of the Cap! b: crew of the hlartingano &adico in the capture of tbe
Philadelphia: and after his liberation I had the deposition of himself
and sewn Greek mariners taken before the Public Secretary to the
Kings Civil Comraissioner for the Islands of Malta and Gozo - I
ordered the Arms and property of every kind belonging to Ha&,
Chouix, to be delivered to him and supplied him with provisions and
stores for his Voyage and 25 Doll?in Cash for his Current expenccs

-

[LC. EPP, Diary, 1803-1804.1
T o Secretary of the Navy from Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Navy

LNITED
STATESSHIPConstitution

Harbour of Malta 1l t h of Illarch 180.4 .SIR,I had the honor to forward you two setts of Dispatches by
the way of Gibraltar, under date the 3rd and 19th Ulto by different
vessels, and now forward you Triplicates of the same I experienced
many inconvei~iencesfrom having so many Prisoners on board, as
thcir want of attention to cleanliness a s injurious to the health of
my Crew; and they occupied more room, than 1 could spare.
no Prison-Ship, I applied to the Keapoli tan Government, and obtain
permission to Land t h ~ r na t Syracuse, and deposit them in their
Castles which per,~ssion,I hare availed myself of. I have howex-er
kept on board Eight of the Principal Officers, who are of too much
conse uence to be trusted out of our sight. 1 expect to recover
Cs
for the principal one.
Vixen is gone to Tunis and Algiers, Kith my letters to the
eh! '
Consuls, and is to rpturn immediately. The Enterprize sailed on a
Cruise olf Cape Bon, and was to return to Messina to e t a thorough
repair, which cnn be done cheap at thnt plttce, ar~din a out a month.
The S y r m and Nautilus is ofl Tripoly, and I shall sail this day to
join them.
I espect to obtain Gun and Morttlr Boats from N a p l e o n loan
from the King; but shall not want them before the last of May, as

Hnv?i

"8-

"b

486

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1803 TO 1804

they cannot navigate these seas with safety before that time, revious
to which, it will be necessary for me to go to Naples in t 's ship,
to OfEcer, Mann, and Convoy them to the Coast of Tripoly, but shaU
delay no time, and my rout to, and from there, will be the best cruising
ground to fall in with Enemy's Cruisers, if they should have any
out. There are now in this Port, three Tunissian Frigates from 24 to
32 Guns; and one of 32 Guns, and a number of Xebecks, Polacres,
and other War Vessels a t Tunis, fitting in all possible haste for sea;
the object is hinted to be the American Commerce I verily believe
against us. &lY whole
that i t is the intention of Tunis to make
Squadron consisting only of two Brigs and three Schooners, is quite
inadequate to carry on the Blockade of Tripoly, &- watch the coast
of Morocco & Tunis; not only so, but i t will be dangerous for our
small Vessels to separate for the protection of our Trade, as the Tunissians may be too strong for any force that I can detach a t present. It
will be politic, and for our Interest to send out a sufficient force a t
Once to quell thcse Barbuims If I had two Frigates more here, and
the Brig Argus, I would engage to have Peace with Tri olg on our
own terms before July and to keep the Tunissians in fufl check. I
wish you would send me out Eight 32 pound Carronades for the Upper
Deck of the Constitution; they will be much wanted in case of a War
with Tunis and Algiers, which we ought to be prepared for. I also
want six 12 pound carronades for our Boats, the Carriages Worms,
Rammers, Spunges, & Shot &c*should be complete for all the Carronades, as they cannot be procured here unless at an enormous price.
1 expect to spend a large quantity of Powder in Fire Ships, and Infernals to blow up the Bashaw's Works, of course it will be well to send
me 100 Barrels of Powder by Lhe first Vessel of War that comes out.
If I had a vessel to spare, I would send to Alexandria to bring down
the Bashaw of Tripoly's Brother, and put him in possession of Derne
and Bengaza immediately, from thence he could march to Tripoly,
and with our assistance take it; as d the Arabs of the Country are
in his favour. I am in hopes the arrival of some additional force to
our little Squadron will enable me to do this before the season is so
far advanced as to dry up the S rings, and prevent the march of
Tmops from Egypt to Bengaza & bipolypolg,
Our Commerce in the Mediterranean zs immensely valuable, and
daily increasing; and should the War continue between the European
Powers, we may engross nearly the whole business by k e e p 3 up a
respectable force, to protect our Vessels. I hope we never sha consent to pay Tripoly for Peace or Tribute; and should Tunis make
War that we never shall have Peace with them but on the same terms.
If we are now too economical with our Kaval force, i t will only lead
to greater expences in future. I only want the means to b ' them
to a proper sence of their situation, and it shall be done; b u z a sufficient force is not sent out immediately the consequences may be
serious, as i t regards our Commerce.
One of the Tunissian Cruisers which arrived here a few days since,
was met at Sea by the Syren Cap$Stewart and refused either to aeqd
a Boat on board, or to allow him to send one to them; or to exhibit
any passports. The force was so nearly equal, that Captain Stewart
did not think proper to attempt to enforce the
of being satisfied,
should not
as she hailed from Tunic. Had 1 met with

B,

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

487

have suffered her to pass without asserting the right our Treaty gives
us, of examining Passports, as Tripoline Vessels often visit Tunis,
and wear similar Colours to the Tunissian Vessels. You may rely
with confidence that I shall do all in my power to protect our Commerce, and punish those ~ ~ infringe
h o
on our rights. I hope I shall
not be accused of a want of Prudence i n the measures I adopt.
When I was last a t Syracuse, I recd a letter from a Mr Barnes,
dated at Leghorn, who subscribes himself Consul of the United States
for Sicily. I find from enquiry that he was appointed about two ears
since, but I believe has not been in Sicily a resident in the Is and.
We have a wretched Vice Consul in each of the ports of that Island,
who cannot speak a word of English, and who have no respectability
attsched to them. I am told they have purchased their Offices a t
Naples, a t from 270 to 500 Dollars each; they are of no service, and
disgrace the uniform of our Navy by
in the most ridiculous
own Country Men as well as
a respectable representative a t Naples, a Man of inJEwnce by which
means we should at all times have every facility in procuring whatever we may want for our operations against the Barbary Powers.
Would it not be for the Interest of our Country [to] have a Minister
Plenipotentiary or an Ambassador at the Ottoman Porte? Such a
character might influence the Grand Signior to guarantee our treaties
with the Barbary powers, and t.hey would then never dare to infringe
tbem.
The Brig [St.Crwifiso] captured off Tripoly by the N a ~ i l wthe
,
Govr of this Island acknowledges to be a fair prize, and will lay no
claim on her. I t will not be prudent to send her home at this season
of the year, as she is a very dull sailer, and I cannot at present spare
men, as soon as I conveniently can, I shall send her to the United
States.
I have just r e d letters from Captain Bainbridge he acknowledges
the receipt of six letters from me, and a quantity of clothing, stores,
and one thousand dolls for the OfGcers, and Crew. They are closely
confined since the burning of the Frigate, but I have allowed the
Tripoline Prisoners I have, to write to Tripoly, and when the Bashaw
is informed of the manner in which I treat them, he will undoubtedly
more favorably towards Capt-ainbridge,
his Officers and
conduct
Crew.
The Barbary Powers are daily increasing their Naval force, and will
soon become powerful, if not seasonably checked Let me once more
enforce the necessity of an addition to our S uadron of two or three
frigates. If you send three be assured we s h h eventually be gainers
by it, as it will give us a consequence with the Barbar States which
we want. If no additional force arrives before the d d d l e of Mag,
I shall take Derne and Bengaza, to deprive the Tripoline Corsairs of
a rendezvous there, and the Bashaw of t.he revenues of that Beylic;
but I shall be obliged to destroy the Towns, unless the Bashaw's
brother contrives to march from Alexandria in Season to receive the
possession of them from us, I shall then commence my operations
against Tripoly,
- . as soon as Gun and Mortar Boats can be brought to
the Station,
I have sent three men home in the Store Ship WiUium & Maw

3

488

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1803 TO 1804

unfit for service, one of them was left in the Hospital here by the
Philadelphia, and the other two, belonged to this ship. They are
furnished with proper Tickets.
[LC. EPP, LB, Dec. 1803-April 1804.1

[I1 March 18041
Passport of Hafie Shaux or Haftz Choui.

MALTA,
Whereas Hafis Shaux a subject of the Grand Signior takes passage
from this Island for Constantinople,
These are to require the Captains and Commanders of the Ships
and Vessels of war of the U. S. of America to let the said Hsfis Shaux
ass free and Unmolested and to give him all the assistame he may
&,and in Need of Given under my hand & Seal on
board the U. S. Ship Constitution
(LS)
in the Harbor of Malta the llt@
day of
March 1804,
PREBLE
SIGNED EDWARD
[LC. EPP, Order Book, May 1803-June 1805.1
Extract from log book kept by Sailing Master Nathaniel Haraden, U. S. Navy, on
board U, S. Frigate Consfitufion.Sunday, 11 March 1804

Strong Gales from the S E - At anchor in Valetta Ships company
employed as necessary - By 2 P. M. it began to rain which continued all the Afternoon Deserted from the Constitution John
Scolchfigge & John Parodini seaman both Maltese who were recieved
about a month ago. During our stay here a boat with two midshipmen and four men has been employed as a guard boat throughout the
night, a precaution which is necessary as we are not more than a
cables length from the shore Strong Breezes during the night Towards daylight the wind shifted from SE to WSW - At day light
made the necessary arrangements for unmooring while doing which
the wind shifted from the W S W to N E. which is nearly into the
Harbor and prevents our goi to sea this day - We this day sent
to sick Quarters to the Hospita a t Malta Robert Kenny, Noah h4orse,
Joseph Ballard, & William Smith seamen and Francis Hopkins and
Enos Webster Marines Sent also on board the American store ship
Wm& Mary Michael Ryan and John Bolton Seamen invalided from
the Constitution - With the two last was sent a quantity of Provisions for Victualling them to America - All this forenoon the
weather has been cloudy and overcast with a swell setting into the
Harbor - Winds N. E.

?

[LC. EPP, Log Constitution, 1803-1804.1
To Nicholas C. Nissen, Danish Consul, Ripoli, from Captain Bdward Preble,
U. S. Bavy

UNITEDSTATESSHIP Comtitution
March 12th 1804
DEARSIR, I am honq with your highly esteemed favour of the 20th
Ulto. for which please to accept my thanks. I hope when I a pear
off Tripoly the Bashaw will permit you to come on board, as ?wish

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

489

personally to pa my respects, and you are well aware that you must
visit us to enab e me to do it, until we are on more friendly terms
with the Bashaw than a t present. I cannot conceive why he should
deprive Capn Band his Officers of any priviledges they enjoyed
previous to the burning of the Frigate - She was set on fire by my
and his Officers ought not to suffer for an act,
orders. Capt. Bof which they could have had no sort of previous knowledge or foresight. I t is certainly unjust in the Bashaw to treat them with more
rigour on account of that affair. I however hope when he finds how
well I treat his people who are my prisoners that he will relax and
allow them more liberty. I enclose you a letter for Captain 3-which you will please to forward to him If i t is necessary the Minister
should read it, I have no objection to his breaking the Seal.

f

[LC. EPP, LB, Dec. 1803-April 1804.1
To Captain William Bainbridge, U. S. Navy, from Captain Edward Preble,

U. S. Navy

UNITED
STATES
FRIGATE
Con~titution

12th March 180.4.
DEARSIR, I have received your several favours of February &
March and cannot conceive why the Bashaw should have changed
his Conduct by removing you to the Castle, and depriving you of
the priviledges you enjoyed previous to our burning the Frigate.
She was burned by m orders, and without the previous knowledge
of any person in T r i p y. I had a right to burn her, but if I had not,
the Bashaw would be unjust to punish you for an Act of Mine of
which you could have no knowledge or foresight.
The Minister says I am wanting in the practice of humanity before
he again makes the assertion, let him en uire of his Country Men
Prisoners with me. I have given them fu liberty to write without
restraint or examination of their letters; and when I appear off
Tripoly if he chooses he may send one of his Officers on board to
accompany one of the Consuls and learn from the mouths of the
Prisoners how they have constantly been treated. After such an
enquiry he will not have reason to accuse me of a want of humanity.I regret that any lives were lost in destroying the Frigate, the Men
who were killed in taking possession of her, had a right to expect
their fate from the opposition they made, and the alarm they endeavoured to create Our People were few in number, and had everything
to ap rehend from an attack by their Cruisers and armed boats
The fficer who conducted the expedition has not reported to me
any act of Massacre or inhumanity - People who handle dangerous
weapons in War, must expect wounds and Death, but I shall never
countenance or encourage wanton acts of Cruelty I have not yet been bong with answer which the Minister Mentioned to have been made to my letter of the 4th January.
Mr Schambri whom the Minister styles (in his letter to you) my
Ambassador, has no more authority from me than I have knowledge
of him, and I assure you I never spoke to, or saw him since I was
created.
When the Bashaw chooses to propose a Negotiation I will attend
to it, if consistent with the honor and dignity of the United States.
I very soon expect M? OBrien here from Algiers on business. MI
the clothug for your sailors are made, and on board this ship.

r

8

8

490

N A V a OPERATIONS FROM 1803 TO 1804

We wiU take wly good w e of our friends, and Enemies both at Sea
and in Port. I shall be glad to see them well provided for.
PS: The night the ship was burned, I capte M d t a Vessel to the
Eastwg of Tripoly loaded with Plank, Scantling, Nails, Hemp, Flax
and bales of read made clobhing and Linen, with 8 Tripdines on
board bound for 'fnp0ly she is ao fair a prize, that Govr Ball will
not claim her [LC. EPP, LB, Dec. 1803-April 1804.)

To Captain William Bainbridge, U. 6. Navy, from Captain Edwsrd Preble,
U. 8. Navy

MARCH
12th 1804
DEARSIR,The prize I captured off Tripoly the 23rd of December
was the Martingma or Ketch which assisted in making prize of
the Philadelphia -She was under Turkish Colours when you had the
misfortune to run on the rocks, but as soon as that event took place,
he hauled them down and hoisted Tripoline Colours, took on board
as many Tripohes armed, as her Decks would hold, slipped her
Cables, and went out to the attack, Anchored as near as they dared
to, and as soon as you struck your Colours, her boats were manned,
and they boarded you. Mustapha Rais who commanded her, was
the most active in making Prisoners of yourself and Officers, and
conducting you to the Bashaw. He was also extremely active in
plundering the property of the Officers. The Turkish Officer who
was passenger on board, and also with you in the [George] Washington
is gone to Coastantinople. I released him as he had no concern in
the business: I have his,'deposition and that of seven others who
were captured in her, which makes prize of the Vessel and Cargo,
and Pirates of the Captain and four other Cretans who were concerned
in the infamous transaction. I have written a full account of the
whole business to the Ottoman Forte, and to the English and French
Ambassadors st that Court. I presume that the Grand Sei-pior
will demand of the Bashaw of Tripoly the release of you all, as you
were captured Piratically by the assistance of a Vessel which was a
few moments before bearing the Ottoman Colours and that he will
also demand of the Bashaw satisfaction for permitting this Piratical
transaction with impunity.
P S. All the depositions were taken before the Government a t Malta
[LC. EPP, LB, Dec. 1803-April 1804.1
Extract from log book kept by Sailing Xaster Nathaniel Haraden, U,E. Navy, on
boerd U. S. Rigate CondiWon, Tuesday, 13 Xsrch 1804

Light aim and Variable from the W. At Anchor in Valetta. At
3 A. M. furled sails & set up top Gall9 Rigging - Towards evening the
Wmther became cloudy and overcast and had the appearance of
a Gale from the East. At 9 A M. the wind shifted from W S W to
E N E By midnight we had strong breezes and rain - The E N E
wind continued to encrease till 4 A. M. st which time i t blew a violent
fale - Down top Gallt Yards and launched Top Gal19 Masts - A
ttle after day light we heard several guns of distress - The Commodore immediately ordered two boats in readiness with Hawsers and
Eedgm As the light appeared we saw the si d of distress f l p g
on board the BeUmme an Engliah transport
which had pvted

gP

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

491

her cables and drove on a shoal a little within the N E Extreme of
the harbor Her situation was very dangerous as she was exposed to
a heavy surf - The Commodore sent the two boats to her assistance
with Hawsers and Kedges - At 9 A M the boats returned after
heaving the ship off and Mooring her in safety - A Kedge belonging to the Co~~stitution
Wf 1100 pounds, One 8 Inch & One 6 Inch
Hawser were left for the safety of the ship assisted - All the forenoon
heavy Gales from the N E b E with constant rain - Our situation is
very snug as we are moored in the upper harbor - Surgeons report
4 sick, 5 convBgtNoon strong N E b E Gales & rain
[LC. EPP, Log Constitution, 1803-1804.1
To Secretary of the Navy from Captain Edward Preble, U. 6. Navy

UNITEDSTATES
SHIPConsfitution
1804
Malta Harbour March l p @
SIR, A heavy Gale of wind from the E N E has detained me here
since my last; the moment i t subsides, and changes I shall put to sea.
Yesterday a Boat from the Tunissian Admiral came alongside with
three Officers, and in a haughty imperious tone, demanded that
I should turn all our Prisoners up for his inspection to enable him
to judge if there were any Tunissians among them I replied to him
that I had released the only one of his nation that had fallen into
my hands among the Tripolines; this was not satisfactory, and as
I did not think the request or the manner in which it was made very
decent or proper on their part, I refused to gratify them or degrade
ourselves by a compliance, they then moved off but observed that
it would not be lon before they should have plenty of us. I t is
possible they may te truth, but I suspect they will pay dear for their
bargain I have been told from good authority here, that it is the
intention of the Bey of Tunis to declare T a r against us as soon as
the Spring opens, if we do not give him a Frigate completely equipped.
This I am confident our Government never will do. of course we
must look out for War. The Tunisaians have more Kaval force than
I can watch with sufficient attention to prevent them from injuring
our Commerce, and at the same time carry on the Siege of Tripoly.
I beg you to pardon my solicitation that additional force may be
sent out with all possible expedition I feel extremely desirous of serving my Country - Give me the means and I will do it, by rendering
the purchase of Peace or payment of Tribute totally unnecessary in
this Eastern World. I n the mean time every thing shall be done
that our little Squadron is competent to, and I hope more than can
be reasonably expected from it.
I have to observe that the Provisions sent out in the V7iUiam &
Mary Store Ship are ve excellent. The Beef & Pork is branded
Connecticut, and the who e has been delivered in good order.
[LC. EPP, LB, Dec. 1803-April 1804.1

fi

7

To Captain Jamea Barron, 0.6. Navy, Hampton, Va., from Secretary of the Navy

NAVYD E P M ~
March 16, 1804 You will repair to this place - leave our present residence so as
to arrive here on or before the ifl of * p i n e x t . -

492

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1803 TO 1804

This order is given under the persuasion that your testimony is
material to be given before a Court of Enquiry instituted for the
investigation of the official conduct of Captain Morris - and to save
time.
[NDA. OSW, Vol. 6, 1802-1805.1
To Captsin Edward Preble, U. S. Navy, from Captain Stephen Decatnr, Jr.,
U. S. Navy

U S. SCHOONER
Enterprize off PALERMO
March 15'@1804.
SIR,I arrived at Tunis on the 3rd inst and found there one of the
Bashaw of Tripoly's Corsairs of 12 Guns and a great many Men. I
was informed by Mr Davis, she would be ready for Sea in two or three
days, the wind blowing heavy from the Northwe and Westward I
remained here three days. On the fourth I rec* a letter from Mr
Davis, mentioning that the captain of the Corsair had reported it was
his intention as soon as he was ready to go out, and wait for me, and
on my coming out to board me. To strengthen him in his intention,
I circulated a re ort that we were short handed, and what few we had
were sickly the 6th I re& a letter from Mr Davis mentioning
that he was summoned to the castle, together with the Bashaw of
Tripoly's Consul, he mentioned also that he had strong suspicions
that the Tripolitans had requested my detention in port. I of course
got under weigh immediately, and cruised off Cape Bon until the 1 3 ~ "
when supposing it possible he might have slipped out unobserved, I run
into the roads to ascertain where I found him hauled into the Mole
with all his yards upon deck I was informed he hauled in, and stript
the day after my departure, since which period, the whole of his Crew
had deserted him. There can be no doubt but he is bound direct for
Tripoly, as he had taken on board a very Valuable Cargo. of dry
Goods belonging to the Bashaw. I left him discharging his Cargo
again. I touched here for the purpose of giving you this information
and replenishing our Wood, which is entirely out. I reported a t Tunis
my intention was to remain off the Bay until relieved by another
Vessel - We have had easterly winds for ten days past, and blowing
ver heavy. 'tis now almost calm, and I doubt much weather, I
shaf get in to day after procuring Wood, I shall make my appearance
off Tunis again, from whence I shall repair to Messina. I enclose
you a number of letters from Mr Davis.

8n

[LC. EPP, LB, Dec. 1803-April 1804.1
[I5 March 18041
To Captain Edward Preble, U. 8. Navy, from Richard Farquhar, Malta

MAYIT PLEASE
YOUREXCELLENCY
I last night r e d the Inventory of the Feluga Tbe Bronte, She has
4 four Pounders &F &? She cost Mr Noble more than 500 but I

beleve will Sell for $400 he wants an Answer to day
I r e d a Letter from the English Consul a t Tripoli there is no other
news than of the Bashaw being displeas'd and that his Consul Mr
Schembrie will Sail from therc for Malta in a few days I understand
part of his Brigs Cargo is Oil therefore hope he will be taken, there is
a Maltese coming Passenger who has lived in the English Consuls
House many Months who will inform me all the News of Tripoli and

CAPTA~N
S T E P H E N DECATUR.JR., U. S. N A V Y .

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

493

when they expect any Vessels I think there will be one or Two in
Bengaze the begining of April1
March 16*Q1804 MALTA
[LC. EPP, Vol. 10, Feb.-April 1804.1
Extract from Diary of Captain Edward Preble, ZJ. 8. Navy, Commodore of U. 8.
Squadron in the Mediterranean, Thursday, 15 March 1804

Fresh Gales from the N E. H. B. M. Ships Agiwourt Captain
Briggs and Argo Cap* Hallowell anchored here from Egypt at 10 P. M
the wind shifted from the N E to N W, which continued through the
night In the morning clear weather, A Sailor swam from the ship
last evening I have been ready for sea several days and wait for an
opportunity to leave the Harbor. At Noon light breezes from the
N b W - A Tunisian boat came alongside, & in an insolent manner
the Officer demanded that we should muster our prisoners that they
might know if any Tunisians were among them; this I did not comply
with - I sent Ms Lewis Midshipman on board H B M's ship Agincourt by permission of Cap? Briggs who was so obliging as to recieve
him passenger for Gibraltar. Mr Lewis is charged with three sets of
dispatches from me for the Nary department of the United States and
with a great number of letters from the officers prisoners at Trip0.l~;
I have been constantly engaged since my arrival here in preparutg
the dispatches alluded to and others for different parts of Europe and
in taking the Depositions of the chouix and others captured in the
Martingano Mastico, and have forwarded a particular account of that
capture and ail the necessary documents to the English and French
Ambassadors and the Captain Pacha at Constantinople [LC. EPP,Diary, 1803-1804.1
To Stephen Cathalsn. Jr., U. 6. Commercial Agent, Marseilles, Ranee, from
Captain William Bsinbridge, U. S. Navy

COPY

TRIPOLY
BARBARY
16'5 March 1804

DEARSIR Tour friendly letter of the lgth of January last this

moment came to hand: your commiseration for our misfortune, and
Kind offer of Services claims my warmest thanks. - In the unavoidable loss of the Frigate Philadelphia, under my command, I feel
confident, on investigation, that my conduct on that unhappy event,
as well as those I had the honor of commanding, will appear satisfactory to our Governm!
The friendly interposition mentioned in the Iatter part of your
letter I sincerely hope will take place - I have not the least doubt of
the advantage to be derived from it. Since the burning of the Frigate in this harbour, which you no
doubt will hear of before this reaches you, we have been Kept closely
Confined.
As the walls of a prison afford no interesting matter for a letter, you
will excuse the brevity of this, with my smcere assurance that I
estimate your friendly attention, and Shall a t all times be happy to
hear from you, and equaHy regret with you that circumstances prevented my cultivating your ac uaintance when I was at Marsalles
in the Frigate Eaacz, on which had flattered myself much pleasure;
and should our destiny be for your Port after leaving this, it would

?

494

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1803 TO 1804

sfford me great satisfaction to repeat my assurances under your
roof - .
[NA- SDA. CL, Marseilles, Vol. 2, March 1803-Nov.1827.1
To Eobert B. Livingston, U. S. W s t e r to Paris,Rance, from Thomas Appleton,
U. S. Consul,Leghorn

LEGHORN
16t4 March 1804
SIR I t is with singular satisfaction that I can now announce to you
the total destruction of the ship Philadelphia, in the Port of Tnpoli. this intelligence was yesterday received here by the Danish Consul,
from the Consul of the same nation a t Tripoli in date of the 29'@of
february. - the following is the translation of his letter. - "on the
16t@ ins3 was discovered from the town, two Vessels, but both so disguised, as to prevent our discerning of what Nation they were - the
smallest having the Appearance of a Merchant Vessel, entered boldly
the Port at half past Nine in the evening, and having taken designedly
some turks on board, they requested in the language ?f the country,
of those in the frigate to suffer them to anchor a long side; which was
immediately granted, and even assisted in bringing her to moorings.
this was no sooner effected, than an hundred well armed Arne.ricans
leaped on board, cutting down every one who opposed them, whde the
more prudent, took their flight by leaping into the sea and gaining the
Shore. - almost instantaneously the Ship was in a blaze, and the
Small Vessels again out of the port, before any orders could be given
by the Bey, dthough he saw the burning of his frigate from the
windows of his palace Nothing I am told can be compared to his
unavadhg anger; but in order to spend his rage on some object, he
has order'd an additional portion of labor to the fore-mast men of the
PhiZadelphia, and the Officers so closely guarded, that even communication by writing is interdicted them. - were i t not for his hopes of
a heavy ransom, they would most assuredly experience some more
distressing marks of his disappointment. - The Danish Consul adds
in his letter, that the Bey's Charge d'affaires at Malta had very
lately returned to Tripoli, and "it is said" with proposals of accomodation from ComQPreble". - if this were eyen true, the grounds
on which they would have negociated a t that time, are since changed
by the burning ofthe frigate, and will increase the demands of the
Bey in the same proportion as he estimates her loss. - indeed, I am
told that he bitterly swears that for less than a million of dollars, he
will not hearken to any overtures of peace. - on the 6 t b ins; a Yea olit& squadron of five frigates sailed on a cruize against all the arbaresque powers. -

i

[NA. SDA. Dilrp., France, Vol. 9, 1803-1805.3
To Willism Jarvis, U. 6. Consul, Lisbon, Portugal, from Tobiee Lear, U. 8. Consul
General, Blgiere

DEARSIR

*

A L ~ I E RMarch
B
16Q 1804

*

*

*

*

*

*

The U. States Schooner Vixen,Cap$Smith, arrived here yesterday,
from the Commodore a t Syracuse, who gives me the pleaslng inteEence of the frigate PhiEndeZphia which had been captured b the
hpolines, got ofM the shod di equip'd in their Harbour, being umt

E

495

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

there by the stratagem & enterprize of the Americans without the
loss of a man. - He also adds that there are strong appearances
of the Bashaw of Tripoli making peace with us upon proper terms.
Should he not do this, every arrangement is made to give him warm
work in the ensuing summer. Our -4ffairs here appear to s t m d well at present. We have no
special diEculty before us; but nothing is certain in these latitudes.
The Bey of Tunis is not very well satisfied with the U. States; but he
has no just grounds of difference; and while we have a force in this
Sea he will hardly break out upon us. Of the British we have heard nothing since their fleet left this
Coast on the 1 9 s of Janr exceptf that h.1: Falcon, their former Consul
here, sailed from Gibraltar for England in Feb?. I shall be happy to hear from you whenever You can make i t convenient to write, and you may always assure yourself of my best
services, if they can be made useful to you.
(NA. SDA. CL,Algiers, Vol. 7, Part 1, Jan. 1804-Nov.1805.1
Presumably to Nancy Dome, from Midshipman Henry Wadsworth, U. 8. Navy

SYRACUSE
March 17th 1804
Constitution 44
[Written to Cousin Nancy]

*

*

*

*

*

*

*

I h w e been so long in the Meditterranean that I have acquired an

habitual hatred of the Rashaw our enemy, &- I feel as much interested
in punishing him as if he had personally insulted me. We are almost
certain of Peace in a few months, but whether it will be done without
cannenading him (I mean his Capital-Tripoli) I do not know: The
officers all wish the latter. - The Bashaw is a shrewd fellow, but
he has an equal in our commander: He has many of my friends in
captivity --. By the bye I cannot help letting you know that I
was appointed one of the Expedition to burn the Philadelphi& but at
the time they left the port I was so unwell as to be confined to my
bed & have but just recovered so as to be able to return to duty.

*

*

a

*

*

*

*

The Argus is universally allowed to be the h e s t vessel floating in
the Meditterranean. The envy & jealousy of the British officers is
excited by our fine Shi & handsome manoeuvring: we meet on shore
but to fight - (e- insu tr each other. The Politeness of the American
officers will always induce them to give the reference to such as
do not claim i t but we wage eternal war wit those who arrogate
superiority.

*

-*

E

*

*

*

*

*

[a Postscript] direct to the care of J. Gavino American Consul at
Gibraltar & write by any vessel bound up the streights B;. for. they
all touch there.
[Copied by 9. Picking, from H. W. L. Dana Col.]

To Captain Edward Preble, U.S. Bavy, born Lieutenant Charlee gtewnrt, U.8. Bavy
Syren off TRIPOLY
1Ye'? March 1804
SIR,I have the honor to inform you that I ca tured the Brig

Trun& under the Batteries of Tri ly. She left tie Harbour this
morning atJ o'clock where sho ha been for 19 days past, and not

f'

496

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1803 TO 1804

having your pass, T conceive the violation of the Blockade of the
plnce sufficient grounds for detainin and sending her in for your
examination. You mil perceive by er papers that she is commissioned for 14 Guns, but has only 10 Mounted. They have in the
Hold Horses and Oil.
[LC. EPP, LB, Dec. 1803-April 1804.1

E

[17 March 18041
To Richard O'Brien, George Dyson, U. S. Navy Agent. Syracuse, and Captain Mills
Reddick, from CaptPin Edward Preble, U. S. Navy

UNITED
STATES
SHIPConstitufion
GENTLEMEN
YOU will oblige me by going on board the Brig
Transfer [Scourpe] captured by the United States Brig Syren Lr

Stewart, for a violation of the Blockade of Tripoly; and after taking
a mreful survey of her KuU, Cables, Anchors, Rigging, Snils & Boats
kc? and Military-Stores, report to me from under your hands, what
in your opinion is her real value
[LC. EPP, Order Book, May 1803-June 1805.1
[17 March 18041
To Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Navy, from Richard O'Brien, George Dyson,
U. S, Navy Agent, Syracuse, and Captain Xills Reddick

SYRACUSE
16th April 1804
SIR In compliance with your request of this day, we the underwritten have been on board of the Brig Tran$fer, and after tnking
a careful survey of her Hull, Masts, Sails, Rigging, Anchors, Cables,
Guns, Boats, and Military Stores, and all her present apparel, we
are jointly and separately of opinion that the said Brig Transfer as
she norv stands is worth five thousand Spanish Dollars.
OBRIEN
(Signed) RICHARD
GEORGE
DYSON

MILLSREDDICH

[LC. EPP, Order Book, May 1803-June 1805.1

[17 March 18041
To Secretary of the Navy from Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Navy

The following was endorsed on t,he back of tbc Valuation of the
Brig Transfer prize to the Syren d Nautilus I certify to the Honb'e Secretary of the Navy of the United States
that the within mentioned Brig Tramjer was captured by the U. S.
Brig Syren and Schooner h7autilusoff the Port of Tripoly for a violation of the Blockade of tkat Port by the U S. Squadron under my
command, and that an Officer concerned in the capture with all her
papers have been sent to the U. S. to obtain her condemnation and
that as there can be no doubt of her being a lawful Prize agrecable
r the Service of the U. S.
to the law of Nations I have taken h ~ into
and Promise in behdf of the said U. S. to be accountable to the Cnptors
for the within mentioned sum of five thousand Dollars nt which she
has together with her guns and nppurtenances &F & bren valued, as
soon as she is legally condemned in the Court of Admiralty of the

WARS W I T a BARBABY POWERS

497

United States - And should she be lost in the service of the U. S.
revious to the determimtion of the Court of Admiralty the U. S. to

!e accountable for the aforemid Valuation whethar she is condemned

or not, The money to be paid at the Navy department
Signed, E: PREBLE
[LC. EPP, Order Book, May 1803-June 1805.1
To Frederick Degen & Go., U. S. Agents, Baples, from Captain Edward Reble,
U. 8. Navy

UNITED
STATES
SHIPC-

Syracuse Harbr I ' P March 1804

GENTLEMEN
I have this moment arrived in Port from Sea, and shall
mil eclin tomorrow for the Coast of Tripoly. I am h o d with your
much esteemed favour of the 15tP Ulto: and thank you for the information it contains respecting the procurdon of Gun & Mortar
Boa*; & I should immediately write to Genl Acton, and at the same
time authorize you to act for me, but I expect to be at Naples in two
or three weeks, and shall postpone anv application until then; when
I stmd in need of, and claim your f ~ e n d l yaad obhging offers of
assistance.
&C. EPP, LB,Dec. 1803-April 1804.1

Extract from Xsmorandnm Book of Captain Edward Reble, U. 8. Navy, on board
U. 8. Prigate ContliMion, 17 March 1804

aided from Malta m d arrived at Syracuse the same day.
[LC, original.]
Extract from Diary of Captain Edward Preble, U. 8. Ham, Commodore of U. 8.
Squadron in the Mediterranean, Saturday, 17 Xarch 1804

Light airs from the N N E. At 5 P. M. a breeze from N W. We
ran out 400 fathoms of Hawser to the N W point at the entrance of
the Port - Weighed and made sail, 4 Boats ahead towing - Our
Hawser caught a rock at the bottom which obliged us to cut away
80 fathoms to prevent the ship from
on shore - directed a
shore boat to recover i t and de osit it with the Navy Agent - At
10 P. M. we were clear of the arbor - Steered N E b E W E for
Ca e Passari L' ht breezes from the Westward and plwant sll
nigf it - punishe several men for breach of regulations. At Noon
Cape Passari bore N E b E 30 Miles [LC. EPP, Diary, 1803-1804.1

H

f

Extract from joarnd of Y i d r h i p ~ nF. Cornelins deKraflt, u. 8. Navy, in U. 8. Brig
Shar of 18 gum, Lieutenant Chwlea Stewart, U. 6. Navy, commonding, &tur&y,
17 Xwch 1804

at 10 saw a sail ahead off the harbour of Tripoli, set 4mil & gave
cham - Meridian Tripoli bore S by W. 4 leagues. Latt Obe. 33'5' N.
[NDA.]

498

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1803 TO 1804
118 March 18041

.

To James Simpson, U. S. Consul, Tangier. Xorocco, from the Emperor of Xorocco
[Translation]

THANKS
BE TO THE ONLYGOD.
Imperial
Seal
To the American Consul Sinpsm. We have received your Letter and have understood its Contents. The Carriages which you have received from your Nation for Our
use, is a fresh proof of your diligence and of the Friendship of your
Nation towards Us, which We will a t all times bear inmind.
Written on the 28" day of Dulkaada the Blessed, 1218 - (Corresponding with the
March 1804)

*

*

*

*

*

*

[NA. SDA. CL, Tangier, Vol. 2, Jan. 1803-0ct.

*

1810.1

To Bobert B. Livingston, U. 6. Minister to Paris, France, from Captain Edward
Preble. U. 8. Bavy

UNITED
STATESSHIPC0?~8l%~071
Syracztse Harbour 18'4 Match 1804
SIR, I arrived here last evening from a Cruise and was hone with
your Dispatches of the 17'h January, and under the same cover a letter
for the French Commissary in Tripol which I shall attend to and
deliver the first opportunity. This S ip is now receiving on board
Provisions and Water, and will sail again tomorrow for the Enemy's
Cosst. The generous and friendly interference of the first Consul
[Napoleon Bonaparte] for the purpose of endeavouring to liberate
our unfortunate Citizens in Tripoly and restore Peace between the
United States and that Regency is truly characteristic of that great
Man, and an additional proof of the close alliance of humanity, with
intrepidity
By the enclosed Duplicate of a letter to yr: Excell? under date the
19th Ulto: you wiU be informed of the particulars of the taking and
burning of the Tripoline Frigate late the Philadelphia. I determined
from the moment I h a d she was in possession of the Enemy to destroy her, and it has been done. This will seriously effect the Bashaw
who is poor as it has deprived him of the resources which the sale of
her to Algiers or Tunis would have afforded, and at the same time;
those Powers are deprived of an important addition of strength to
their Navy. The Bashaw is extremely angry since the loss of the ship,
and has removed our Citizens within the Walls of his Castle, and does
not d o w either of the Consuls or Commissaries to see or speak to
them,but I have s uufficient number of Tripoline Prisoners of distinction m my posseasion to insure their safety. I treat my Prisoners
with the utmost kindness and attention, and have allowed them to
write and make what communication they please to the Bashaw
without examining their letters, conscious that the cannot say
anything but what must lend to our advantage.
he Bashaw's
first expectation for the ransom of our people and a Peace, is said to
have been three Millions of Dollp! he has however fallen considerably,
as not long eince he offered thro' his Agent at Malta to make a truce
for five years without Money. I observed to him that my Government never would c o m n t to a truce, it must be a solid Pesce on the

E

F!

W U S WITH BARBARY POTTERS

.499

same terms for that we never would purchase Peace, or pay him
Tribute and I have no doubt but we shall be able to dictate our own
terms before the last of July. I am preparing to attack his Coasts on
every part of it, and have applied to the Neapolitan Govr for the loan
or hzre of a few Gun & Mortar Boats, which if I obtain, I will oblige
the Bashaw to sue for Peace as a favour in three days after I reach his
Coast I wish you could prevail on the French Govern, to influence the
Neapolitan to loan or hire us what Gun & Mortar Boats we stand in
need of, we paying for such as might be lost, and making ood all
damages, and to furnish us with Amunition The King of r$aples is
at War with all the Barbary States, of course it will be for his Interest
to comply, as it will enable us to destroy all the Bashaw's Towns on
the Sea Coast, and all his Cruisers, of course it will be a long time
before the Tripolines can again depredate on the Coast of Sicily.
Perhaps the desire of the First Consul that Peace may be established
will have the effect, but it will be well to take the precaution to have
the Gun Boats kc+ a t command in case it should not. I have sent a
vessel to Algiers for Col: Lear, and expect him very soon, when I
shall deliver him the papers you desire me to. He has full powers to
make peace, but not to pay Money for it: he is only authorized to
give a consular present of Ten thousand doll* and that is more than
we ever ought to consent to give them. I had rather spend my life in
these seas than ever purchase Peace, or pay tribute to the Barbary
States, and I believe i t is the intention of our Governt never to consent
to either I have taken two Prizes and seventy Tripoline Prisoners;
and have written to the Bashaw proposing an exchange of Prisoners
An answer has [not] yet come to hand. I am at present in great haste
but shall in future take every opportunity to write you, and keep you
informed of my proceedings. I have had frequent opportunities of
writing to America since I have been on this station.
[LC. EPP, LB, Dec. 1803-April 1804.1
To Thomas Appleton, U. S. Consul, Leghorn, from Captain Edward Preble,
U. 8. Navy

UNITEDSTATESSHIPConstitution
Syracuse Harbour March 18@1804
SIR I am honQ with your much esteemed favour of the 6t@Feb?
accompanied by the dispatches from Our Minister a t Paris enclosing
letters from the Bench Consul's Minister of Foreign Affairs to the
French Commissary General a t Tripoly which I shall attend to the
delivery of. I arrived here last night to take in provisions and water,
and sail again for the Coast of Tripoly tomorrow.
Some time since, I forwarded you an account of the burning of the
Philadelphia in the Harbour of Tri oly, since which, no occurrence
of note, - except that I have r e d etters from Captain Bainbridge,
who in consequence of our destroying the Frigate, has with his
Officers been closely confhed within the Bashaw's Castle; but I
have a sufficient number of Tripoline Prisoners of distinction, to
guarantee their safety, and tolerable good treatment.
The interference of the First Consul will undoubtedly have considerable influence with the Bashaw of Tripoly but I have no doubt,
even without that influence, that I &dl be able to effect a release of
our Country Men, $ s Peace, on terms honorable to the Unitad

P

-

--

500

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1803 TO 1804

States, by beating the Barbarians into a roper sence of their situation
I un in great haste a t present, but sh& in future keep up an unreserved correspondence with you, when opportunity offers. Please
forward the enclosed to Paris [LC. EPP, LB, Dee. 1803-April 1804.3
To Degen, Plwience & Co., U. 6. Agents, Leghorn, from Captain Edwnrd Preble,
U. 6. Bavy

UNITED
STATES
SHIPCmtitution

Syracuse Harbour March 18'4 1804
GENTLEMEN.
I have this moment arrived here, and shall sail again
tomorrow for the coast of Triply. I am hong with your esteemed
favour of the 30t@January, and thank you for the information it
contains. I shall, agreeable to your recommendation apply to
Beds Dewen & CQat Naples for their assistance in an negotiation
at that p?ace, but shall postpone fixing on any lan or procuring
Gun & Mortar Boats until I go to Naples myse f, which I intend
shall be in two or three weeks - Another rize has increased our
number of Prisoners - News Papers & E l ? tters will always be
acceptable - Please to forward the enclp I am in great haste, and
have the honor to be

P P

PC. EPP, LB, Dec. 1803-April 1804.1
To John Broadbent, U. 6. Navy Agent, Messina, from Captain Edward Preble,
U. 15. Navy

UNITEDSTATES
SHIPCmtitutwn
Syrac118e Harbour March
1804
DEARSIR, I have r e d your letter of the 6th instant - accept my
thanks for the information it contains, and for your endeavours to
serve me in the procuration of Gun Boats &c+ I think the most
ready way to accomplish my wishes will be to visit Naples myself,
' which I have determined to do in about two or three weeks. You
have done well in publishing the account of Decatur's affair at Tripoly
I ho e the Neapolitans will profit by the example shown them.
~ h o J dyou receive any answer from General Acton you will oblige
me by forwardug it to M' Dyson who will send it to me. I arrived
last night and sail for the Coast of Tripoly again tomorrow
KC. EPP, LB, Dec. 1803-April 1804.1

To Joseph Barnes, U. 6. Consul, Sicily, from Captain Edward Reble,
U. 6. Navy

UNITEDSTATES
SHIPConstitution
S'yracwe Harbour 18*QMarch 1804.
SIR,I returned to this Port last evening from Sea, and was hong
with our letter of the 6th Ulto. Yours by the Syren, I had previously
recg gut did not think proper to answer, as I was not informed of
our OEcial situation; the Govenunent of the United States never
Lving notified me, that a Consul had been appointed for Sicily;
neither had I ever heard your name mentioned, until I r e d your letter.
I shall in future kee a regular correspondence with you when in
port, & shall be glad o every sort of Pohtical information which you
ma deem it neoesssry to oornrnunicate.
bttsr. for me, you will please address under Cover, to George
I)sron l h q r Naval Agent for the United States Squadron at fhis p b ,

P

du

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

901

as he ahm w i l l know where to send them to me. I have
correspondence with MT John Broadbent a t Messina MF
Palmermo, Mess* Fred?. De en & Cq a t Na les, Messn Degen
Purviance 61 Cq Leghorn and "William Higgins 8 s r at Malta, who
are Navd Agents for the Squadron, and to whom? am indebted for
much information and assistance.
The dispatches from Paris forwarded to Mr
ingston our Minister, I have r e d
attention. The interference of
have weight with the Bashaw of
suspect we must depend on our own
terms as we choose to dictate. I have no doubt of compe
Barbarian by force to restore me the Officers and Crew of the hilathe
delphia, and to make Peace without any pecuniary consideration or
a cent for tribute. I sail for the coast of Tripoly tomorrow morning
and am in great haste
J BARNES
EsqC
Consul from the U S. for Sicily
Memo* Care of Mess" G C% E Noble - Naples

Yf

[LC. EPP, LB, Dec. 1803-April 1804.1
To James Leander Cathcart, Leghorn, from Captain Bdward Reble, U. 8. Xavy

U. S. SHIPConstitdon
Syracuse Harbor March lat@1804.
Dr SIR.I arrived here last evening for provisions & water. I have
not yet receiv'd your plan of a Mortar boat) & it is not probable I
shall very soon as I sail again tomorrow for the coast of Tripoli: I
am informed from Naples that I shall be able to procure the necessary
boats from the Neapolitan Government, of course shall not build
any, but am much obliged to you for your prompt offer to undertake
the business, I have receiv'd letters from Algiers which inform me
that Mr OBrien late our Consul at that place is coming up, fully
empower'd by Col! Lear to join with me in a negotiation for peace,
I expect him to join the ship off Trip017 in a few days: the Bashaw is
anxious for Peace & I think will make it on our own terms; if he does
not, I will beat him into a disposition for it; before the next summer
is gone. As Mr OBrien is sent up by Col! b a r , and understands the
language of the country & disposition of the Barbarians, it will preclude the necessity of your putting yourself to the least inconvenience
to join us. I have letters from Tripoly Capta B: writes me that they are kept
closer than before the burning of the Frigate but are well treated. [NA. SDA. CL,Tripoli, Vol. 2, 1801-1805.1
[I8 March 18041
To President Thomas Jefferson from Richard Farquhar, Xalta

MAYIT PLEASE
YOUREXCELLENCY

I have the Honor to inform your Excellency that theer is every
appearance of bringing the Bsshaw of Tripoli to moderate terms t h i ~
summer

but ehould the United States think of sen
three or four
and three emall Briga or Schooner with six f d Peacea and
men &Q Tripoli can be taken with the Assistance by

%f

502

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1803 TO 1804

Excellency Side Hamet Caromanli, Brother to the Present Bashaw
of Tripoh, who is now marching towards Derna to Cooperate with
Commodore Preble who has Promised him Assistance
As Side Hamet Caromanli, has Promised to repay all the Money
&$advanced to him or on his Account and to remain at Peace forever
with America, and to put them in Possesion of one of the Principal
Forts in Tripoli untill the Expences is repaid but this is of less conseuence to America than the Effect it will have with the other Barbary
Ztates. and if Tripoli is taken in this manner, I am convinced
America will be a t Peace with those States for many years, for Should
the Present Bashaw make Peace with his Brother or America seperately, he will then be more revenged with the other, for I can Prove
to your Excellency that I prevented him from making Peace with his
Brother who had not knowledge to see, that he would only make
P e w with him untill he did so with America, & afterwards he would go
to war with them seperatly, but I am happy to think I was the Cause
of him commencing Hostilitys with his Brother untill America had
made Peace, and also to prevent him from Poisoning his Brother
which he had in contem lation by offering his Docter (who is now
in Syracusa and in the Lrvice of America by my recomendation) a
reward of ten Thousand Dollars to go to Derna to Poison his Brother!
he has Murderd another Brother [Hassan] some years ago and in the
Presance of their Mother - therefore it is better for America to be
a t the &st expence to make a Insting Peace with all the Barbary
States for they only go to war with those who are afraid of them, and
should a patched up Peace be made with him, he says & will make
war against Denmark or Sweeden and in rotation with the United
States again, therefore this is the time to make a long Peace with
them all. I have inclosed one of the Official Letters to me when I
was in Tripoli for the attention I paid to the American Officer there,
by a Letter I r e d the other day from the English Consul that the
Bashaw will write to Sir A. Ball about my assisting the Americans
with Plans of Tripoli and Pilots one of which was in my Employ as
a Caps of a Small Vessel who had been in Tripoli often and who
Piloted in the Vessel which Burned the Philadelphia and also my
having procured thirt Seamen & has been a t Expence & troble
with Pleasure and I w'Jl be a t more which I ho e will rove advantageous to America in afew weeks I could wish to flold a ~tuationunder
the American Governm[en]t which would prevent the English GOVenunent from Pro[se]cuting me hear, which I am afraid they will
when ever the Letter arrives from the Bashaw which I think will
come with his Consul who is expected hear soon from Tripoli
MALTA
18s March 1804
[NA. SDA. CL,Tripoli, Vol. 2, June 1801-Sept. 1805.1
&Q.

8-

Extract from journal of Midshipman F. Cornelius deKraEt, U. 6. Navy, in U. 8. Brig
Siren of 18 guns, Lieutenant Charles Stewart, U. S. Navy, commanding, Sunday,
18 March 1804

past 12 took in ro als, steering sails, top
1 . M. close under the
6atterim of Tripoli, spoke & sent the boat on board the chace for the
Ca t dz Papers, She prov'd to be the Malta brig Transfer of 10 guns
otePonging to Count Golena of Malta) 6 hours from Tripoli, bound to
Malfa On Examination thought Proper to send her into Syracuse for
Fresh breezes & pleast

dfsails & single reef'd the topsails, At

5

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

50'3

the Cornm*' examination, Sent in her as Prize Master Lt Maxwell two
midshipmen & eleven men to assist in taking her in, Brought on
board the Cap8 firat Officer & 18 men, likewise detain'd a boat $ four
men that came from shore and was going on board said Brig, At
Jpast
i 3 order'd the Brig to proceed for Syracuse - Lieu$Summers
return'd on board the Nautilus, Double reef'd topsails boarded fore
& main tacks, j4 past 4 turn'd one reef out of the topsails & set the jib.
At 5 TI(@to the N. E. At 6 Tripoli bore S E % E 3 leagues the forts
fired several shot at the Nautilus but without effect * * * 5
past 9 dismiss'd the shore boat, the Town of Tripoli beafi S E by
S % S. 9 miles dist discova 2 small sail to the S. W Call'd all hands &
made sail, stood to the Nq - Made a signal to the Nautilw to give
chace At 10 let out all reefs TKg & stood in for the land in chace,
Till 12 standing off & on about 4 miles to the W@of Tripoli firing several
shot at the boats close in under the land - Meridian Tripoli bearing
S E by S 9 miles Dist
Latt: Obs: 33"00f N.
INDA.]

119 March 18041
Concerning return of M e s b d a and Mirbafo to Emperor of Xorocco

AN ACTfor the relief of the captors of the Moorish armed ships
Meshowla and Mirboha
SEC. 1. Be it enacted, &c., That the sum of eight thousand five
hundred and ninety-four dollars and fifty cents, being one n oiety of
of the value of the armed ship Meshouda, captured by the frigate
John Adams, commanded by Captain John Rodgers, and restored to
the emperor of Morocco, be, and the same is hereby, appropriated
to defray the expense of prize money due to the captors; and that the
further sum of seven hundred and thirty-eight dollars and twenty-five
cents be, and the same hereby is, appropriated for defraying the
expenses incurred for the said ship, whilst in possession of the captors.
SEC. 2. And be it further enacted, That the further sum of five
thousand dollars be, and the same hereby is, appropriated, for defraying the expense of prize money due to the officers and crew of the
frigate Philadelphia, commanded by Captain William Bainbridge,
bemg one moiety of the value of the armed ship Mirbohu, captured by
the aforesaid frigate P h W p h i a , and likewise restored to the emperor
of Morocco.
SEC.3. And be il further enacted, That the aforesaid several sums
shall be divided amongst the captors, respectively, in the proportion
already established by law, for the distribution of prize money, and
shall be paid out of any moneys in the treasury not otherwise appropriated.
March 19,180.4.
APPBOVED,
[Navy Register 1798.1
To Robert B. Livingaton, U. 8. ldinister to Paris, Fronce, from Captain Edward
Preble, U. 8. Wavy

UNITEDSTATES
SHIPCwtitUtion
Syracuse Harbr 19th March 1804.
SIR, I have this moment received intelligence from a gentleman
just arrived from Tunis that the Bey of that Regency is equipping

504

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1803 TO 18011

his whole Naval force with the utmost expedition, and it is whispered
that the object is the American Commerce: from various ciroumstances I believe there is much truth in the conjecturc. Three of
their Frigates from 24 to 32 Guns are now fitting out at Malta, One
Frigate of 32 Guns, and a number of smaller Vessels are getting
ready at Tunis. I have written home by two favourable op ortunities requesting an addition to my Squadron, as we have onf one
Brig of 16 Guns and three Schooners of 14 each besides this s& in
these Seas, and one Brig at Gibraltar. This force is unequaf to
Blockade Triply, and protect our trade against the Tunisians. I
have long since stated to our Government the necessity of sending
out two or three more Frigates. If they arrive soon, it will most
undoubtedly check the Tunissians and keep them in peace; if not,
our Commerce may suffer in some degree, as it is impossible for me
to guard all parts of the Mediterranean with so small a Squadron.
I shall, however, do all in my power to make them repent their want
of good faith; and shall visit Tunis ba immediately with as many
of the Squadron as can be collected off L p o l , to endeavour to learn
what the intentions of the Bey are, and shal write you the moment
I can come at the truth. The Bey is very much dissatisfied that the
United States will not give him a Frigate which he has demanded of
them; and this is to be his pretext for War. These people must not
be humoured but beaten. I was at Malta not long since, and was
then told by good authority that we might expect War with Tunis
very soon.
N: B Co ies of the above have been srnt to Mr Ap leton, Le
horn Measl red5 Degen & Cq Naples, Mr Broadbent h. essina.
Oibbs Palermo. Mr Gavino Gibrnltar & Cape Hull of the Argus -

9

P

P

8;

[LC. EPP, LB, Dee. 1803-April 1804.1

To Captain Edward Preble, U. 8.

Havy,

from Brim XcDonogh, Britiah Conad,

Tripoli

TRIPOLI
18th March 1804.
SIR, I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your letter of
the 16 Jam
and in reply, I beg leave to assure you, that nothing
has been, or s all be wanting on my part, to render every assistance
in my power, for the relief and comfort of the OfEcers and Crew of
the late Philadelphia Frigate, as far as my public situation in this

9'

to say, that you wished for a c o r n
you, that it d o r d s me infinite p easure in
having it in my ower to com ly with your request, articularly for
mmy motives w en a personoPintrrvien takes place, shall explain.
I hare not been able to make much enquiries respecting the demands
the Bashaw ma expect from the U: S. as time & circumstances has
been so much a?' bred of late, that since the destroying of the Frigate,
and the slaughtering of all the Tripolines who were on board, m y
urgent solicitations on m part, migPt at this moment be construed
(by people who I know t eir idem) m a different light from what it
wes mtended for, and perhaps render abortive my future proceedings
a t mother$"od
more PIe
I have erefore thought it prudent, to remain at present dent,
until the Anger of the Bsehaw ~sover; and when I see a PIe moment,

E

P

f,

ponden*

W m S WITH BARBARY POWEBS

505

you may rest assured no exertions in my power shall be wanting to
promote the interest of the United States with this Government and
convey to you the result of my interviews.
PC. EPP, LB, Dec. 1803-April 1804.1
To Captain Stephen Decatnr, Jr., U. 6. Navy, commanding U. 6. Schooner En(apfrc.
from Captain Edward Preble, U. 8. Navy

UNITED
STATES
FRIGATE
Cmtitution
at Anchor Harbour S y r m e
19% March 1804
SIRHa*
received information that there is an expedition preparing a t % p l y for the declared purpose of burning or destroying
some of our cruizers While lying a t Anchor, I think it proper to apprize
you of the Circumstance, that in case of an attempt you may give
them that kind of reception that shall leave them nothing to boast, I t has likewise become necessary from well grounded reasons to
caution you against the TUNISIANB,
be particularly on your guard their movements and conduct appears - host&, towards our country,
But it is necessary that these suspicions should in the present state
of Mairs, be confined to your own Bosom, N B, The Tri olitans have dressed themselves in English clothing,
and it is probab e you will meet them under false colours, [HSof Pa. NDA photostat.]

f

To John 8. M. Yatthiew, U. S. Consul, Naples, from Captain Edward Preble,
U. 6. Navy

UNITED
STATES
SHIP C d u t i m r
S ' y r m e Harbor 19'QMarch 1804.
SIR.I have this moment receiv'd intell' ence from a gentleman
'ust arrived from Tunis, that the Bey of t at Regency is equiping
whole naval force with the utmost expedition dr it is whisper'd
that his object is the American commerce, from various circumstances,
I believe their is much truth in the conjecture. Three of their Frigates
from 24 to 32 Guns & a number of smaller vessels are getting ready
a t Tunis, I have written home by two favorable opportunitys requese
ing an addition to my Squadron, as we have only one brig of 16 guns
& three schooners of 14 each besides this ship in these seas & one brig
at Gibraltar. - This force is unequal to blockade Tripoli & protect
our trade against the Tunisians. I have long since stated to our
government the necessity of sending out two or three more frigates. If the arrive soon, it will most undoubtedly b e c k the Tunisians
& keep t em in Peace, if not our Commerce may suffer in some degree
as it ~simpossible for me to uard all parts of the Mediterranean
with ao small a Squadmn, I ah& however do all in my power to make
them repent their want of good faith & shall visit Tuols bay immediately wlth aa many of the uadron as can be collected off Tri li
to endeavor to learn what t e intentions of the Bey are, &
write you the moment I can come a t the truth. The Bey IS very
much dissatisfied that the United States will not e v e him a Frigate
which he has demanded of them as a present & this UIto be his pretext
for war.
COPY

x

h

E

"h

-

506

N A V ' OPERATIONS FROM 1803 TO 180.4

These people must not be humour'd but beatten, I was a t Malta
not long since & was then told by good authority that we might expect
war with Tunis very soon. [NA.

SDA.

CL, Tripoli, Vol. 2, 1801-1805.1

Extract from journel of U. S. Brig Argu, Lieutenant Isaac Hull,U. 8. Navy,
commanding, Monday, 19 March 1804

[Moored in Algeciras Bay since 3 March 18041 A[t] 6 AM, unmoored a t 8 Weighed Anchor and Stood over for Gibralter a t
20 Minutes past 8 moored in Gibralter Bay Cabrita Bearing S. W
Europa S b E. S+Roque - N N E Employed as Necessary
[NDA photostat.]
Extract from Diary of Captain Edward h e b l e , U. S. Navy. Commodore of U. S.
Squadron in the Medite~anean,Monday, 19 March 1804

Wind S S E - hloderate and pleasant - Ordered 5 Months
provisions Stores &$ to be taken on board and our stock of water
filled: All hands busily employed in taking in and stowing the provisions stores, water Wood & q &$. Recieved a letter from Mc Livingston our minister a t Paris enclosing a letter from the first Consul
Buonaptlrte to his Commissary General at. Tripoly directed to m
charge to bc conveyed to him. This letter instructs the Frenc
Comissary to endeavor to effect the release of the American prisoners
captured in the PIdadelphin, and to influence the Bashaw to make
peace with the United States immediately - I wrote to our minister
s t Paris and to several of Our Consuls in Europe and left letters for
each of the Commanders of the Vessels of the Squadron. [LC. EPP, Diary, 1803-1804.1

rl

Extract from log book kept by Sailing Master Nathaniel Haraden, U. 8. Navy, on
board U. S. Frigate Conrfifufion. Monday, 19 March 1804

P. M. Moderate breezcs from tho E S E. At Single Anchor in
Saragosa. RecQ201 bbls brcad 91 bbls beef & 78 bbls Pork also
78 gang casks of water - Towards evening cleared ship for action
& loaded all the guns with Cannister and Grape Shot - This precaution is taken in consequence of some intclligence from Tripoly
recieved since the burnky of the Philadelphia - At 8 P. hi. armed
a boat & stationed her wlthout the Harbor 8y a Guard boat. A. M.
Employed recieving and stowing away revisions wood & water.
In the course of the day we recieved 304 bls bread, 15 small casks,
17 boxes chee3e 7 Bierces rice, 17 boxes candles, 4 bhls beans, 22 bags
as 16 bbls Vinegar, 12 bbls %our & a quantity of wood supposed
to e 5 Coards. Rec'd also 8 Butts & 33 gang casks of water The
Of
Butte are some of those sent on shore for safe keepin Surgeons
report 7 sick & 7 convalescent. Noon light breezes from &asto
[LC. EPP,Log Cmrstitutimr, 1803-1804.1

g

%

Resident Thomnrr Jefferron'r Message to Congress

8th Congress

1st Session.
COMMUNICATED
TO CONGRESS,
MARCH20, 1804.
T o the Senate and House of Represdatwes of the United States.
I communicate to Congress a letter received from Ca tain Rainbridge [dated 1 November 1803]. commander of the fhiladalphh

507

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

frigate, inform' us of tho wreck of that vessel on the coast of Tripoli,
and that himsel , his officers, and men, had fallen into the hands of
the Tripolitans. This accident renders it expedient to increase our
force, and enlarge our expenses in the Mediterranean, beyond what
the last appropriation for the naval service contemplated. I rocommend, therefore, to the consideration of Congress, such an addition
to that appropriation, as they may think the exigency requires.
TH:JEFFERSON.
MARCH
20, 1804.

7

[Am. State Papers. Nav. Aff., Vol. 1.1
To Lieutmant Richard Somera, IT. 6. Navy, from Lieutenant George W. Reed,
U. 6. Navy

UNITED
STATES
SCHOONER
Nautilus
At Sea: March. ROtb 1804.
SIR Agreeably to your order I submitt to you an account of the
situation of the Nautilus from the time 1 took charge of the deck on
the morning of the 2Ot@untill the time of her being run foul of by the
U S Brig Syren.
At 4 A A4 the Syren was three quaters of a Mile a head on our
weather bow we then having our starboard tacks on board with the
Wind at E S E. At about 20 Minutes after 4. I discovered the Syren
bearing away I supposed with the intention of wearing yet did not
alter my course untill I could determine what she intended doing,
by this time she was on our lee bow three cables length distant with
her yards square. I then ordered the quater master to keep his luff
which he did bringing her nearly on our lee beam intendi to shoot
across her stern and mew after her that we might pass to eeward of
her. Observing his bracing up on the larboard tack and finding we
could not weather and bad not room to wear, I ordered the helm to
be put alee & at the same time hailed the brig and told her to put
her helm a weather, but received no answer I then hailed her again
and received no answer when she run her Jibb boom just fore head of
our main Mast and we sustained the damage which has occassioned
the subject of this letter.

T

[LC. EPP, Vol. 10, Feb.-April 1804.1
To Lientenant Richard Somers, U. 6. Navy, from the below-mentioned o5cers

20th MARCH
1804.
SIR. After examining the damages sustained this morning from the
Syren's running on board of us we are of o inion that it is not safe to
continue a t sea The damages are, four of er stantions carried away,
which prevents our setting up the rigging with sufficient security to
the Mast in bad weather, and a t the same time prevents the use of
two of the guns The Plank Heare is split twelve or fourteen feet, and
opened so much, that it is impossible to secure it a t Sea against bad
weather (Signed) JAMES
B DECATUR
Lieu$
EDWARD
N Cox
Master
JOHN
FELT
Carpenter of
the Syrpn
ROBERTFELL
dq of the
Nautilw.

f

[LC. EPP, Order Book, M a y 1803-June 1805.1

508

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1803 TO 1804

lhtroct from Diary of CapEdward Preble, U. 8. Raw, Cornmodom of 0. 6.
Squadron in the Mediten~nean,Tuesday, 80 March 1804

Wind S S W, and clew weather - Preparing for Sea. Took on
board a Tripoline Prisoner who was taken at the burning of the
P h W p h k - He was badly wounded, but has nearly recovered [LC. EPP, Diary, 1803-1804.1
btmct from journal of Midshipman F. Cornelius deKrafft, U. S. Navy, in U. 6. B a
Siren of 18 guns, Lieutenant Charles Stewart, U. 6. Navy, commanding, Tuesday,
BO Yprch 1804

Light airs & pleas, At [space] the Nautilus under our lee, At 5
unbent the jib, fore sail & main top sail, & brot new ones too the
, the Town of Tripoli bearing S. S. E. 3 leagues. At 8 Lieu;
ummers went on board the Nautilus, the cutter return'd run her up Midnight gentle breezes & clear, A t 4 wore to the N W & owing to the
lightness of the wind & the Nautilm not wearing at the same time we
did, but continuingher way athwart our hawse, our jib boom entangled
in her main rigging which carried it away with our Spritsail yard
likewise much mjur'd the Nautilm in her rig ' g & Bulwarks, At
W past 6 Lieu$ Stewart went on board the autilus, soon after she
bore away & made signal for us to follow her motions. At 44 past 7
baek'd the main topsail & sent the
on board the Nazltilw
return'd, 10 sent the
to assist in repairing her, At 8
Prisoners of the Transfer on
4
j past 11 Lt Summers came on board, r e d from the N a d u s 1 binnacle com ass Meridian hght airs & pleas8 Carpenters employ'd fishmg ji boom
& spritsail yard Lett: Obs: 33O19' N.

T

Na"

l

1NDA.I

121 March 18041
To Capkin Daniel Carmick, U. S. Matine Corps, Washington, D. C., from Secretary
of the Navy

NAV.DIP
Jan? 21 1804
You will proceed immediately in the Brig Su erior with the Detachment of marines under gour command, to J e w Orleans On gour
arrival there you will report yourself to the officer commanding the
Army at that place under whose orders you are to act The contractor for the Army in that quarter will supply Your
detachment with rations agreeably to the enclosed copy of a letter
from the Secretary of War to the cornmandug officer - Mr Alline
will leave this in a few days for Fort Pitt from whence he will proceed
with money for the use of the detachment to New Orleans - He
will act ae pay master of the Detachment and receive from thia Department particular instructions relative to the supplies that may be
required by the Detachment (Note, This letter wna written 219' March dtho dated 21. Jan? 1804)
[NDA. GLB, Vol. 7, 1803-1805.1

5O9-

WARS WITaf BAZZBARP POWERS

To Lisutonant John Curin, U. S. Wsvy, Navy Yard, Warhingtan, D. C., &om
Secretary of the Bevy
NAVYD E P M ~

March 21.1804The %ates P r d e n t and t%ngre88 must be prepared for %a
with all practicable dispatch. On thm occasion we require the exertions of your most strenuous
efforts. Let me know in season every thing that you may require in the
execution of this order. [NDA. OSW, Vol. 6, 1802-1805.1
To Lieutenant Iaeac Chamcap, U. S. Aavy, (or other ofacers in his ebrence),
Aew York, BT. Y., from Secretary of the Havy

Lt JBAAC
CHAUNCEY,
or in his absence
Lr C H LUDLOW,
~
or in his absence
Mids"~oss H. GRENELL.-

NAVPDEPTMarch 21. 1804-

New YorkOpen rendezvous immediately and use your most strenuous ex=tions to enter 120 able seamen and 100 ordinary seamen - Able
Seamen to be &owed $10 p' month - Ordinary Seamen $8. - to
be entoeredto serve 2 years - to receive 2 months' advmce, upon
giving responsible security - C d Midshipmen Grenell and Creighton to your aid, & report to me d d y the progress you mey be mak'
Blank Shipping papers are enclosed. - The Navy Agent wi
furnish you with monies, and render you every other assistance in
his ower. ~Eouldany difficulties arise in the execution of these orders, call
on the Agent and receive his instructions. The occasion imperatively demands your every exertion - Let
not one moment be lost. P. S. The men are to serve on board the Frigate P r e d m t , Congress, or John *4dam.s,as may be directed by me on their arrival here. -

7

[NDA. OSW, Vol. 6, 18021805.]
To Lieutenant George Cox, U. S. Raw, (or others in his absence), Philrdelphio, Pa.,
from Beoretory of the Ravy

NAVYDEPT.
March 81.1804-

Lt GEORGE
COX,or in hi8 absencc
Ll DAN^ C. HEATH,
or in his absence
Lt J. M. GABDNER
-

Phil *
SIB,Open Rendezvous immediately, and use our most strenuous

snortions to enter 100 Able Seamen
30 Boys.

- 100 0r&mq

Seamen

-&

F o r the remainder of them iwtruations am letter t o Lieutenant Isaac Chatmoey,
of 21 March 1804.1
[NDA. OSW, Vol. 6,1802-1605.1

510

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 180.9 TO 1804

To Lieutenant Samuel Evans, U. S. Ravy, or in his absence Xidshipman John B.
Nicholson, U. 6. Navy, Baltimore, I d . , from Secretary of the Bavy

NAVYDEPT-

March 21, 1804

SIR,Open Rendezvous immediately and use your most strenuous

exertions to enter 100 Bble Seamen, 50 Ordinary Seamen, & 30 Bop.
[For the remainder of these instructions see letter to Lieutenant Isaac Chaunoey,

of 21 March 1804.1

[NDA. OSW,Vol. 6, 1802-1805.1
Extract from journal of U. S. Brig Atgur, Lieutenant Isaac Hull, U. 8. Ravy,
commanding, Wednesday, 21 March 1804

Moored in Gibralter Bay AM, a t 9 loosed sails to dry a t 10 the wind
increasing furled Sails and veered the long Service of both Cables
in the hawse Arrived the Ship Woodrop Sims 30 days from Norfolk
with Stores for the Squadron, latter part blowing heavy launched
Top Gall! masts [NDA photostat.]
Extract from Memorandum Book of Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Navy, on board
U. S. Frigate G d i t d i o n , 21 Parch 1804

Sailed for Tripoly. Caried over letters from the French Minister
to the French Consul sent to me by Mr. L e ~ ~ t o n .
[LC,original.]
Extract from log book kept by Sailing Master Nathaniel Earaden, U. S. Navy, on
board U. S. Frigate Gnsfitution, Wednesday, 21 March 1804

Moderate breezes from the S. E. At single Anchor in Saragosa Ships company employed as necessary At 4 P. M. fresh breezes from
S b W. We ran a Kedge out to windward in order to Weigh & proceed to sea - The S b W wind continuing fresh we brought home the
Kedge - We were in the act of running out the stream anchor
when the weather became squally. Stoppered over all and bitted
the cable - Towards evening the weather became moderate and the
wind shifted to S b E - On the evening of the 20t@deserted from
the Constitution Hendrick Johnson Seam9 Moderate breezes from
the Southward during the night - At day light a breeze sprang
up from the S, W, b W, - Weighed & stood out to Sea - Ships
draft abaft 23 feet 2 Inches forward 21 ft 4 Ins: cliff9 22 I n When
we sailed from Boston the ship drew 6 In: abaft & 13 In: forward
more than she does a t present - We have now on board 83 Leagurs
72 butts & 40 Gang Casks of Water making in all 37450 Galls or 145
Tons. Moderate breezes from the S b E all the forenoon Ships company employed working Ship to windward between
Saragosa & Cape Passari
Stowed the two bowers and unbent the sheet cable
At Noon we bro't to a Brig 7 miles S S W under English colors
taken by the U. S. brig Syren and ordered to Saragosa for adjudicationNoon Moderate Breezes from the S S E.
[LC, EPP, Log Conditutian, 1803-1804.1

-

-

Bxtract from journal of Xidnhipmfut F. Cornsfinn deXrdt, U. S. Xavy, in U. 8. Bri#
h of 18 gum, L i e u t ~ ~Charles
t ~ ~ ~ tStewsrt, U. 8. Navy, commanding, Wedneedey, 21 &uch 1804

Lieu1 Summers returnJd on board the Nautilw & made sail for
Syracuse the boat return'd run her up & fill'd away & stood to the
S@& W*
At % past 5 AM descried a sail on our lee bow, made all sail &
gave chace L t t Obs 33O36' N.
[NDA.]
To Captein Edward Prebk, U. 6. Bevy, from Lieutenant CharSes Stewart,

D. S. Bavy

Siren at Sea 1 Oclock P. M
2 2 d March 18d4.

SIR I have the honor to inform you, that I this moment captured
the Polacre Shi under the Russian flag called the Madonnu di CatapaEiani laden wit Bullocks, Sheep and Horses. She left Tripoly last
night, and is bound for Malta.
They have violated the Blockade by carrying to our Enemy. Troops,
Arms, Goods &c* The Pilot of this Ship informs me that they came
from Smyrna about the 6th Novr having cleared out for Gerbi, for
the purpose of deceiving our Cruisers should they meet with any
off Tripoly as they knew it was blockaded by our Squadron, and
arrived at Tripoly the 26th December, where they delivered their
Troops and Cargo.
[LC. EPP, LB,Dec. 1803-April 1804.1

1

116 Febmav-22 March 18041
lsmorial to Captain Edward Prsble, U. 8. Bavy, from Gaetano Andreo Schembri,
Valletta

To his Excellent EDWARD
PREBLEEsqr commander in Chief of

9

the Ships o the United States of America cruizing in the
Mediterranean.
The humble Memorial of Gaetano
Andrea Schembry of the City of
Valette Merchant. SHEWETH
That your Memorialist is deeply interested partly IS proprietor
& partly as Freighter of three Ships named the Tramjer icaptured 17
March], the SiP CroCiJisso and the Madonna di Catapoliani lately
seized Ion 16 February and 22 March respectively] by the Cruizers
under your Command on a charge of having violated the Blockade
of Tripoli
That for many years prior to the Blockade established by your
Excdencys orders, before the Port of Tripoli your Memorialist
carried on a considerable commerce with that City, & was so far in
the confidence & esteem of the Baahaw as to be appointed his Consul
at Malta, yet notwithstanding his principal support was derived from
this Branch of his trade he determined from the time he became
ac uainted with your intentions to conform in the strictest manner
to%s duty as Neutral 81 abstain from dl intercorn with the Block...- -

512

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1805 Ti? 180.4

aded Port unless so far as he might be authorised thereto by your
Excallencp express permission. That having in the early part of Febru
last observed your Excellency in conversation and intercourse wit Mr Wilkie his Majestys
Commissary for the Reet at Malta, & with whom your Memorialist
was intimately acquainted, it occurred to your Memorialist that an
offer to sound the inclination of the Bashaw towards an accommodation
with the United States might not be unacceptable to your Excellency,
that our Memorialist communicated his Ideas u on the subject to
Mr dilkie & having been assured b him of your xcellencys approbation embarked on board a Vesse of his own named the Transfer
bearing his Britannic Majestys Letter of Mar ue, & which was
going under your excellencys Licence to be loade with Bullocks for
Malta. That your Memorialist left Malta on the 13'@of FebT but being
forced back by contrary winds was obliged to remain in the harbour
of the Valette till the 17'Q when he again sailed for Tripoli & arrived
there on the 21'1 That from the moment of his arrival there he gave up most part
of his time and attention to discovering the sentiments of the Bashaw,
and endeavouring by a faithfull representation of the power & preparations of the United States to induce him to wave those pretentions
to tribute upon which he had formerly insisted & at last succeeded
so far as to prevail upon him to treat with your Excellency upon the
sole conditions of Ransoming such Americans as were at that time
prisoners in his possession, at which time the Bashaw also furnished
your Memorialist with a set of Signals to facilitate any communication
which your Excellency might be inclined to open with him. That your Memorialist in the mean time caused one Vessel to be
laden with such Cattle as he was able to procure & conceiving this a
a large sum then due
Butts of Oil, & Iron on
to him in discharge of
board the
the account, the Bashaw not being able a eeably to the wish & request
of our Memorialist to furnish him with ullocks
Ghat in so withdrawing his property our Memorialist was so little
apprehensive of incurring your Exce encys displeasure that the
Transfer sailed from Tripoli m open day when some of your Cruizers
were actually in sight, & with orders to lie off till such time as our
Memorialist having finished some private affairs should be ab e to
follow her. It was therefore with extreme surprize & sorrow that your Memorialist saw from the shore the seizure of his Ship, & that he has since
been informed of the Capture of two other Vessels of which one laden
sold with Cattle was seized for not having compleated her Voyage
by e l e t of March, & the other was taken on her Voyage outward,
for having on board certain Tripoline passengers, and also some few
Articles of Commerce chiefly Boards & pavlng Stones which were
nevertheleas to have been landed at Gerba, a port in the dominions
of Tunis,prior to the Vessel proceedmg to Tripoli for Cattle. Under these Circumstances your Memorialist humbly hopes from
our Excellent 's Justice & humanity the restitution of the
$ . m , & suc part of the Cargoes of all the three V
d as belong
particularly to him.
In the case of the Bark bound to O a r b

"T,

E

i

1

f
f

I

J

z

-

3

W a s WITH BARBARY POWERS

513 -

your Memorialist submits that no Licence was necessary, & no offence
could of course be committed, that the dday of the Vessel laden with
Csttle was in part owing to muses which he could not controd, &
partly to his Zed in execut' your Excellency's commission, & with
respect to the Oil shipped in%e T~amjer,he trusts that a reasonable
distinction will be made between a common Mercantile transaction,
& the only means which our Memorialist had for obtaining possession
of & bringing away his roperty.
GAETANO
ANDREA
SCHEMBBY
[LC. EPP, Vol. 7, 1803.1

J

116 February-22

March 1804.1

To Goetano Andrso Schembri, &om Captain Kdwpld Prebls. U. 8. Navy

U. S. SHIPC d i l u t i o n

M& 19'8 Septemr 1804.
To GAETANO
~ D R E A
SCHEMBFU,
SIR,- Some time since I received Your Memorid setting forth
the "deep InterestJJ you had in three Vessels Vizt The Tramfer,
C h e i f i s o & the Madona d i Catapoliana, captured by the U.S. Squadron
blockading the Port of Tripoiy.
This Memorial Sir, I consider nothing more or less than an ap eal
to r n humanity
~
- However grateful to my feelings as an Indivi u d
to realize the wshes of the unfortunate, I cannot violate the important
trust placed in my hands by an act of pusilmimiLy The three Vessels as above named were captured not only in the
act of violating the laws of Blockade, but in a most Bagrant violation
myself to his Excellent Governor Ball for
from Trip01 a number o Bullocks contracted
- d e s e Passports particular1 ape&
i and
should go to Tripoly in Ba ast
return M e n with nothing but Bullocks, but to my astonishment &
distress learned that an instrument given in the fullest confidence and
from the most honorable motives wss, by you, prostituted to the most
infamous pur oses The Y'ransfer s a e d from Malta for Triply with 8 Passport as
a hove alluded to; but was laden with military stores - The weather
favorable, she eluded the vigilance of our cruizers & arrived mfe, m d
delivered her cargo to the Bashaw, and was captured coming out
laden with Oil, Bar Iron kc &c
The SWQ Crueij80 sailed from Mdta with my passport, but l d e n
with Planka, Nails, building stone, Flax, Hemp, and bale Goods,
and was capt~tredto the Eastward of Tripoly standing directly in
for the Town: She had eight Tripolitan Passengers on board, who
acknowled e that they were bound directly into Tripoly: Independent
of which, t ere was found secreted under under the Transom q e h g
a large number of letters clirected to different persons in Tnpoly:
and neither letter, Bill of Lading or Invoice for Gerba, where you
pretend she was bound
The Mudona de Cata oliana knowing of the Blockride of Tripoly,
Bailed from Smyrna 1ufen with Naval & Military Stores for ~ccount
Favored by the weather she arrived in
of the Bashaw of Tripol
that Port and delivered er c
& sailed from thence Iaden laden
with live stock directed ta tb?f&pdine Consul at Mdta, .ntl

t

i'

f

%

g.

514

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1803 TO 1804

captured by Our Squadron - In all rmpeetes these vesscls have
been conducted in direct. violation of the Blockade and my particular
Passport I have adverted ve
briefly as to the circumstances
under whirh they were taken, Rr have now only to make a few general
remarks on the motives by which you hltve been governed.
You have prefaced your appeal with circumstances which only
exist in Idea. You m p a t e to yourself the posession of the "confidence and esteem of the Bashaw of Tripoly": and the "pnrticular
ac uaintance of Ni? Wilkie His Majesty's Commissary for the Fleet
a t k d t a " - This you seem to suppose a sufficient reason why you
should (unasked) interfere in the Afffih of the U. S. of America Insolent Medlar! - Have you sagacity enough to c~lculrttethe
pernicious consequence of your Duplicity? Do you know, that your
dl timed officiousness served only to raise the sordid expectations of
a Barbarian?-No - You do not exactly comprehend the extent of
t mothe mischief you hffve done - but this you well know, t b ~ the
tives of this fraud against the U. S, were to secure the mouey you bad
then due in that regcncv and to make as much more as you could b
the Violation of ihe iaith reposed in you by his Excellency Go+
I only regret that an investigation must be deferred until Inid
before my Go+: tbis I shall make a point of doing the moment I
amve in the U. S. 8 I h ~ v eno doubt but they will demnnd of the
English Govi an enquiry into your conduct, and have still Iess doubt
but they d l award a punishment tantamount to your iniquitious
proceedings In conclusion 1 have to observe that all your vessels shall be subject
to trial by the Admiralty Courts of my Country - I n addition to
which I would adrise you to be caut~iousin agslin interfering in the
affrtirrr of those who WIN not fail to detect your duplicity & want of
common Honour & honmty.
I am not uninformed of your 1nt.e attempt to supply our Enemy
with powder while he was not only Blockaded, but act.ually besieged Signed EDWARD
PREBLE
PC. EPP,LB, April -Nova 1804.1

7

B~K

To Secretary of the Bavy, from lieutenant Isaac Hull. U. S. Ravy

UNITED
STATES
BRIGAr.w

O i b d t e r Bay 2 2 W u r c h 1804
SIR,1 bave been honoured with your letter^ of tbe 24'b Jan? and
Feb? by the Woodrop Simms, whch Vessel arrived here last e v e
ning - I have since consulted hV Gavino on the subject of giving her
Convoy, and have determined, as every thing is perfectly tranquil on
this Statiou, and the A r p ready for Sea, to sail immediately for
Syracuse, with the Ship under Convoy, and shall make every exertion,
to return to my station, as soon as possible. [NDA. Issac Hull LB, 1803-1804.1
-

-

To Captain Edward Reble, U. 6. Bavy, from John Qsvino, U. 8. Coned. OibrdtPr
GIBRALTAR
B n d March 1804
DEARSIR,Althougb I had nothing new, I wrote you on the 3rd

Of

instant uuder cover to Governor Balt with sundry enclosed
English convoy. And the 17th b the American Shi
went for Malta. This goes by t s Ship Wbodrop &mu Captun

L

A~~J'~

515

WABS WIT73 BARBARY POWERS

Miles Reddick who arrived yesterday from Norfolk, with a Cargo of
provisions for the use of our Squadron, and have directed her to
proceed to Syracuse to Mr eorge Dyson, to whom I now enclose Bid

6

of Lading and Invoice. She goes convoyed by the A m Capfsin
Hull. As nothing new occurs here yet 5 think i t should be proper
some state Vessel was on this station a s two Imperial Brigs of W~LT
are in these seas to protect their trade against the Emperor of Morocco.
He will avail himself of this pretext to fit out his Cruisers, and after
play a trick upon such Nation as may be unguarded.
I now come to own recpl of your favor dated Febr 1804, with the
few lines of 5tP inst accompanying Dispatches for the Navy de :
which shall be forwarded by first conveyance. It has givcn me t e
greatest s&sfaction to f k d the success which attended the brave m d
spirited attempt of Captain Decatur in taking and destroying the
late Philadelphia frigate, your account of which, I have ubhhed
in the Chronicle of t b place and hope such brave feats will fo ow from
your Squadron to convince the Tripolitans of their error, and make
other states look about. I have given Capt. Hull ten News papers
for you, and wishing you all happiness
[LC. EPP, LB, Dec. 1803-April 1804.1

B

%

To Secretary of State from John Ctavino, U. 6. Consul, Gibraltar

N Q147

GIBRALTAR
$,??Q March 1804
SIR Without any of your favours I have now the honor of handing
ou DupLicate of my few lines N9 146 Via Cadiz also of Mr Wiem
Letter to me dated Malta 25" Ult? and the Paragraph from

Consul Pulics Letter regarding the Distroying of the Philadelphia
frigate. I have now the great satisfaction of handing you Copy of a
Letter to me from Comodor Prible with the very pleasing and interesting account of the Capturing and distroying of said Vessel in Tripdy,
the Gallant and brave manner in which it was accomplishd by Cap9
Decttture does him and others Employd on that hazardouse service
much honour. I hare got the Commodores Letter publishd in the
Chronicle of this Place.
The Schooner Ccitizen who brought the Gun Carriages had her
Mate John Morrison Imprmsd a t Sea on her way here from Lurient
by the British frigate Am,pkion Ca tain Sutton on account of his
hnvin9 been Born m Scotland, who so threatend to take out a Seaman, geing a Native of Ireland, however the latter went on b o d the
U. S. Brig Argus & Enterd having his Protection as a Citizen. The
schooner Citizen being in distress for want of a Mate &c* and being
bound to New York with a Cargo, I put on board of her Federick
Lewis a Native Citizen Mariner in distress who the Comander shipd
and alowed him $18 pr Month Wagers, but mas not qualsed to be a
Mate, in consideration of which, and that he might proceed on his
Vovage, I requested of Arch4 Karr Commander of the American Ship
B&imote then in this Port, to alow John J. Blake one of his ships
Corn r who offerd to go Voiunteer on board the OiCizen ss Mate,
whic he granted on my making a formal request to the p
he might be seveerd of responsabilitys, whch I did to releve the
CiCim, and of which hope you will approve INA. SDA. CL, Gibraltar, Vol. 2, 1196-1804.1

S

l

"P""

516

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1803 TO 1804

Extract from journal of U. 8. Brig Arm, Lieutenant kaac Hull,U. 6. Bavy,
commanding, Thursday, 9%March 1804

Moored in Gibraltar Bay loosed Sails and got the T. G. masts on
end fired a Gun & made the Sig! for the Woodrop Sinas to Weigh
sent 8 men to Assist her got her under way the wind hauling to
the Eastward Obhged her to Anchor again furled Sails employed
Stowing away Provisions mDA photostat.]
Extract from journal of Midshipman F. Cornelius degrafft, U. 6. Navy, in U. S. Brig
Shcn of 18 guns, Lieutenant Charles Stewart, U. 6. Navy, commanding, Thursday, %2IKorch 1804
At j4 past 10 haul'd up courses, took in Royals, steering sails, &
stay sails & fired a bow gun at the chace. At 11 came u with her,

found her to be a Russian ship bound from Tripoli to &aha. L?
Caldwell & Mr Brown went on board of her, the boat return'd with
the Cap? of the Prize, who inform'd us that the boat which he had in
tow in the Evening, had roceeded to Malta with the Tripolian
Consul - Midnight gent e breezes & least At 4 the Russian
Cap* went on board his ship. At 5 his p$ot came on bog of us with
6 men to remain on board of us. At % past 6 concluded to send her
into S acuse Mr Brown & Mr Anderson went on board of her as
Prize asters with 10 men to assist in taking her into Port At jr;
past 7 set top g d t sails, & stay sails, jib & square main sail - MeridIan light airs & fine weather crew empc on various duties h t t : Obs: 33'50'N.
The name of the above Mentioned prize is Madona de Catapoliagne
as mentioned in the remarks of April 1. 1804

P

E

rnDA.1
TO Captain Edward Preble, U. 6. Bavy, from Tobiae Lear, U. 6. Consul General,
Algiers

ALGIERS
March
1804.
DEARSIB,I had the honor to receive by Lieu' Commf Smith of
the United States Schooner Vixen, your several favours of the 17'9
and 31'1 January and 3'g & 19'9 of February, with their enclosures.
The burning of the Philadelphia, is a circumstance which does honor
to the head which planned, and the bold enterprize which executed
it. I think it must be productive of good effects to our affairs in
fhis Sea.
The Vizen arrived in this Bay on the 15'9 instant. Upon the
fullest consideration I can give the subject, I am persuaded it would
not be for the interest of our Country that I should leave this Regency
a t present, even if I could obtain the Dey's permission, which might
be somewhat doubtful, as we are indebted to him on account of our

-%

517
-

WARS WfTII BARBARY POWERS

is the aid you will most want, and which can be much better supplied
by Mr OBrien, than by me. As he had been making arrangernt* to
leave this place with hts family for Alicante in a short time, he tagea
them up with him, in order to proceed from that quarter to the U.S.
whenever an opportunity may offer; or when his semices can be
dis ensed with.
order to give MI OBrien time to prepare for his departure (which
would require some days) Lieu' Cornmt Smith with my ap robation,
left this on the 16th instant, to look over on the coast of pain, and
has returned here this day. He must be detained until the 25**
instant, ss the Mahometan feast of Biram commenced yesterday,
and will not finish 'till tomorrow night during which time it is not
practicable to get t h ~ people
e
to do that kind of work which is
necessary for embarkmg a family This will I hope, excuse Lieu1
Commandant Smith from any blame on account of unnece
delay; and I believe the services which Mc OBrien can r e n d e r 3
fully compensate for the loss of a few days.
In your letter of the 31st of January, you mention that the Agent
of the Bashaw of Tri oly at Malta, had proposed that we should give
the Bssbaw 500 ~ o B a r sfor each of the P h W l p h i a ' s OfEcera and
Crew. - A schooner in exchange for the Frigate, and make peace
without Money or Tribute; and that they would exchange 60 Americans for the sixty Tripolines in your possession. If these terms could
be insured, I think there should be no hesitation in accepting them;
for they are much better than our Government had calculated upon
utting the loss of the P h W p h i a out of the question) In order
t at ou may see the views of the Government when we left the U S
I encgse a copy of a letter on that subject from the Secretary of State
to Mr Cathcart dated April 9th 1803 and which I was authorised to
go to, if Peace should not be previously made.
You wish to know what sum I will authorize you to pay for the ransom of the Officers and Crew of the YhilcKielphia, if the Bashaw will
make peace without Money - mthout any Annual Tribute, or
Consular present, excepting a small present on the reception of the
first Consul that is appointed. As I have no special authority on this
subject, I can only say, that I should not hesitate to take upon myself
in behalf of the United States to pay at the rate of six hundred doBam
for each (exclusive of what might be exchanged) upon the ratification
of the other parts relating to peace &c* And should you consider
my sanction necessary I do hereby authorize you to act in this business
ta any extent that I might go myself.
f have the honor to enclose copies of my letters to George Davis
Esqr our Charge d'affairs at Tunis, by which you will see the steps I
have taken to supply the wants of our unfortunate fellow Citizens in
Tripoli; also copies of my letters to C. Bainb~dge From Dr Davis
I have not had a line since the 27 December I s h d write to him by
this opportunity, and Mr OBrien
be able (if the V b n touches
there) to give you full information on our affairs in Tunis. As it is
probable that new instructions respecting that power will be soon
received from our Government in consequence of the refusal of Mr
Cathcart, and the Bey's subsequent letter to the President, I have
hitherto avoided taking any steps in the business.
To Mr OBrien I must refer you for a fulI detail of our afFaire here,he
ie able to give you thia to the greatest extant. I shall therefore only

%

d

'g

518

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1805 TO 1804

say that we appear to stand well here at present. I yesterday made
out the Consular pass rta and other documents for the C m r s of
this Regency; a list o which, is enclosed, and also ten copies of the
Consular passport and Prize certificate, which will afford one for each
of your Squadron to assist them in their examination if they should
meet with any of these cruisers at Sea. I t is thought however, that
they will not send out more than two or three, if any before these
a$airs are settled with the British
The News papers which you was so good as to send me by the Vixen
gave the latest intelligence we have had from the U S. I am in daily
expectation of hearing what measures the Government has taken in
consequence of the loss of the Philadelphia. I wrote to the Secretary
of State on this event, that, in my opinion, it would have such an
effect on our &airs in these Regencies that the Governrnt must
determine either to follow her loss by a force suEicient to reduce
Tripoli to terms at once, or become tributary to all the Regencies to
any extent they might think roper to demand - or withdraw our
commerce entirely from this L a , which would be attended with as
great an expence in keeping Ships of War to guard the Straits as to
effect the first point.
M" Lear sends you by CapWBrien a sword Belt, which she has
had embroidered here for you, and of which she begs your accepq with
her best wishes for your health, happiness, and prosperity There are
no clasps or Buckles to it, as they could not be so well done here, as
the ma be elsewhere.
tezyou my dear Sir, what I think of your conduct since you have
been in this Sea, would appear too much like flattery. I hope and
trust you will find our Country ready to pay the tribute due to your
talents, your patriotism, and your activity. Ardent as I know you
would be to gather laurels in your profession, yet, I am equally certain
that the love of your Country would never permit you to sacrifice her
peace and interest, when they can be
with honor & propriety
To the Officers of your Ship and
I beg leave to present
my best respects & regards, in
P. S. March 25'Q I am happy to inform ou that we have this
morning settled up all our Accounts with tf& Regency paying in
Cash the balance due to this time.
[LC. EPP, LB, Dec. 1803-April 1804.1

P"

'80

U. 8. Passports and Certificates issued to Algerine Cruizen

List of Passports, Prize Certificates & Tops of Passports given to

the Algerine Cruizers March 23$ 1804. 1 Passport
2 Prize Certificates
1 Old Top of Mediterranean Passport
1 New ditto of ditto
NQ1. A coper bottom frigate of 46 Guns Rais Hamida Algerine
NQ 2. Ditto Frigate, Co per bottom, forty four Carriage Guns,
aais Hamet AJ ,Algerine, b m d r
NQ3. ditto &ate, Copper bottom thirty four Carriage Guna
Bsia Hamet All Algerine Comdr
Nq 4. ditto Pebeck Thirty four Carriage Guns, Hassan R d ,
Levantino Commander

-

WARS WITH BARBARY POWEBS

519

Ns 5. ditto, Xebeck -Thirty carriage Guns, Mamet Rais Isvantino
Comdr NQ6. ditto Xebeck - Twenty six Carriage Guns, Mustapha Rais,
Levantino - Comds
NQ 7. Polwre Twenty two Carriage Guns, Mustaph Rab,
Levantino - Comdr
NP 8. Brig, Co per bottom, twenty two Carriage Guns, Hassrrn
Rais, Levantino 8ornd' N Q 9. Ditto kebeck, Twenty Csrriage Guns, Rais Bamidan
Algerine, Comdr NQ10. Ditto Polacre 18 Carriage Guns,Hassan Rais Levantino Comd'
NP 11. ditto Schooner, Eighteen Carriage Guns, Bechie Rais
Algerine - Comdr
N Q 12. ditto Schooner, Sixteen Carriage Guns, Sali Raie
Levantino - Comdr
There are two Merchant Polacres of the Regency w@have Consular
Passports to be renewed for coasting or trading - no tops - no
Prize Passports - to be dated 23q March 1804. A Frigate of 48 Guns building, which will be launched in about
one year from this. A Galiott belonging to the Bay of Oran No Passports
One ditto to the Bay of Constantine
from the Consul's
60 Gun & Mortar Boats
30 ditto ditto building
About 150 Sail of Latteen Sail Coasters from 25 to 30 tons eachcarrying from I1 to 14 men
2 Guard Gallies with Sweeps to tend the Port
10 or 15 Vessel's of different nations out on trading voyages, with
the Deys Passports, which in generd bdong to the Deys Jew
Subjects. 10 men to a Gun - ji of
N. B. The Cruizers of Algiers c
the Crew's Turks, Colors or Sons of urks; and j4 Moors. -

-

-

-

i

?

t,
A.]
[Stephen Decatur Col. NDA p h o t ~ s t ~Book
--

Extract from journal of U. S. .Brig Aygm, Lieutenant Isaac Hd,U. 8. Haw,
commandmg, Fnday, 25 March 1804

These 24 hours Commence with moderate Breezes from tbe Eastw*
past 8 P, M, unmoored and
got the Woodrop Sims under way a t
a t 9 Weighed and proceeded out of the bay fof Gibraltar) having the
Ship under Convo brought the people on board from her Livingston Barns & Mat ew Pease (excepted) who were ordered to remam
on board of her, s t 8 AM, light airs set the Royals Stay& and
Sta,rbq Studdingsails a t 9 took them in again At Meridian Europa
point bore W # N distance about 6 or 7 Leagues Convoy in Company
and a strange sail in Sight -

E

[WDA photoatat.]
Iktmct from Diary of Captain Edward Preble. U. 8. Navy, Commodore of U. 8.
Squadron in the ledhrraneon, m d a y , 89 March 180Q
Light breezes of Variable Wind, shifting aU. round the Corn ass,

and thick foggy *weather;At Sunset no l a d in sigh*, euppoee 8ape

P d bore N b W, distance 10 leagues. Mustered all hmds a t
Quarters; For several niighta past, the dews have been so heavy as to
drench our sails and wet our decks as if we had experienced a constant
rain; these dews are hurtful to the health of the pea le if they fall
d e e p , I have accordingly Ordered the Officers of the !Vat& to keep
them up and constantly in motion - At Noon foggy. - We h a m
steered between the S b W and W b S. these 24 hours, - True Course
S S W 5 S; Triply bears S S W distant 130 Miles. The S E point of
Malta N % W distant 50. Miles
Latitude Observed 35' No:
[LC. EPP, Diary, 1803-1804.1

To Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Wavy, from Joseph Thomas,Malta

VALETTA,
MALTA
9.4Q March 1804
SIE,In a letter which I received from my friend Mr MPDonough
(the British pro Consul at Tripoli)since you sailed from this Port, is
the following passage.
"The Bashaw is preparing fast to meet the hostile preparations of the Americana
'#whichHe understands is carried on with vigour at Syracw - I wish much to
%ee the American Commodore, & I have no doubt of Hie arainging matters
L'amicsblywith this Government" -

Thinldq,~this extract from the Consul's letter might be of mme
I have taken the emliest opportunity of transmiting it to
you. I s h d be happy if on this or any other occasion I csn render
you any sarviw.
service,

[LC. EPP, Vol. 10, Feb.-April 1804.1
To Captain William Bahbridge, U. S. Bav,from Tobias Lea, U.8. Consul General,

(COPY
ALGIEBSMarch 24.1804
DEARSra, A few days ago I had the pleasure to receive your favor

of the 14tQFebr by Lr Comdt Smith, of the United States Schooner
Viaen,which wm sent here by the Commodore. I assure you it would
have been most grateful to my feelmgs, had it ao happened that I had
been at Malta, when your misfortune took place, and could have
affordedyou and my unforttumte fellow Citizens relief. - Communications hsve undoubtedly taken lace, ere this, between Commodore
Preble and the Bashaw on the Su ject of rsnsom &c. - and I flatter
myself you have found the means of releiving yom- present wants from
verioue sources. - My letters to You, copies of which are enclosed
will shew that measures to that effect have been ttllran in seved
uartem, with an alacrity which does much credit to our Countrymen
honor to humanity. The friendly attentions and services of the
Daniafj~]
Consul shall be made known to our Goverrunent, and I have
no doubt will be gratefdiy acknowledged. Be l e d to tender him
my best mpecte ct warmest thanks. - a he $modore mites me
h t he has sent supplies of Stores and money. - a d I now encloee
fhe Co y of a letter from the Honble Ch* Phkney, our Minister at
~ a d r i c fwhich I red Yesterday b the VLm,which 6aa bean over to
Biicmt
and the original from $atrick Joytxi & Sons, Bankers, that
if it should be neceaeary you can make use of jt. - I also r e d a dupliate, at the same time,from Mr Hirkpatnck m Malrrf;a of hie lettar of

g

8

-

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

521

-

the 31gr Janr
enclosing one for You which is forwaded hemwith:
My Predecessor, Cap! OBrien, pes with his family up in the Vim%,
as it &or& him s
opportmty of leaving this pleee, and he will
be essentially usef to Commodore Prebh if m y negotiation should
take place with the Bashsw.
I can only sa , my dear Sir, that there is i t feeling interest taken in
the situation o yourself and unfortunate companions, snd that you
may depend that you will not be left a moment longer in the situation
you now we, than you can be releived with propriety. - More I cannot say at present. My best respects & regards attend your fellow
sujkrers to whom I beg to be corddly remembered. Mr*b a r unites with me in every wish for your speedy deliverance.

i

[NA. SDA. CL, Algiers, Vol. 7, Part 1, Jan. 1SOPh'ov. 1805.1

To Q e o m Davis, U. 8. Charg6 dd'Affaires,Tunis, from Tobias Lear, U. 9. Consul
General, Algiers

No8 copy
ALGIERS,Ma~ch24'@ 1804
SIR, I cannot forbear expressing the surprize I felt in not having
received a line from You since Your letter of the 27'9 of December,
and especially when our Affairs at Tunis & Tripoli are in a situation
to make me feel anxious to hear from those qumters as often as
- The other Consuls here have received letters Iatel
and t h o u h them I learn that the Spanish Brig, whio
sailed from hence for unis on the 20'9 of Jan?, on board of which
was put two thousand dollars for You, to be ap lied to relieve the
wants of our unfortunate Countrymen in 'I'ript, had arrived. I
cannot ersuade myself but You must have written, and that Your
letters ave miscsrri'd. Lest mine should have met a similar fate,
I enclose copies of my three last, Viz. Nvs 5. 6. & 7. The U. S Schooner Vizen, Lieu! Corndt Smith, arrived here on the
15** inst from the Commodore. She has since been over on the
Coast of Spain, & sails again tomorrow to join the Commodore.
In her goes Cap$ OBrien, my predecessor, with his family. Should
the Schooner touch at Tunis this will be handed you by Captain
OBrien, to whoom You will be so good as to make a full communication of our &airs with that Regency; and I trust that his general
knowledge of the whole of our business with these Regencies, and of
them, d enable you and him to ascertain the ultimate view8 and
ctations of the Bey of Tunis with respect to &haU. States.
e$have r e d from Commodore Preble a copy of your letter to him
of the 26'9 of Jan? with its enclosures. If the sum of four thousand
dollars demanded on account of property vended at Malta, would be
the means of preserving peace with that Regency, and doing swcay
the discontents which appear to prevail, I should have no hesitation
in paying it immediately; but if it will not have that effect, nor answer
any good
ose to our Country, it would not be worth while to
pay it; &?our
responsibility therefor makes it necessary. - On
thls subject of the four thousand dollars You and Cap$ OBrien will
decide. I a n on1 say on our affairs here that we get appear to stand well. To Cap1 0 h e n I must refer You for part~culars.P. S. Should the Bey of Tunis be inclined to settle all mattars
with the United States on admissable tmm, it will be neceesary

is,
k'

F

1

522

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1803 TO 1804

that the precise amount of everything should be known, that he may
expect from them
[LC. EPP, Vol. 10, Feb-April 1804.1
To Captain Edward Preble, U.6. Navy, from George Davis,U.8. Charg8 d'Affairer,
Tunis

CONSULAR
HOUSETUNIS
March $4&@ 1804
SIR,I have the honor to inform ou that the Tripolitan Polacre
laying at this Port, has been dismant ed by order of the Veckel. The
eater part of her Officers and Men have already left this for Tripoli
land, and that their intention is to send her for the ne-t
port
in Tripoli, under some foreign flag as a Merchr Vessel.
A passport was yesterday demanded by the Commercid A ent
for a Vessel (as he says) bound for Constantinople, but to touc a t
some port in Tripoli. - I t has been refused. I have no doubt but it
was for the Enemy's Corsair, and that she will shortly snake the
attempt, probably shaping her course for Jerba.
A Spanish Courier from Tangiers (last from Algiers) sails tomorrow
te is irrepfor Tripoli. Letters from Tripoli inform that the F'r'
arably destroyed, and that Captp Bainbridge and fficers were
taken the following Morning from the Consular House and confined
in the Bashaw's Castle.
I have the honor to enclose you a letter from Cq Bainbridge.
&C. EPP, LB, Dee. 1803-April 1804.1

f

%

f

8'

To Midshipman John Dorsey, U. 6. Navy, from Captain Edward Preble, U:B. Navy

Conatdudion MARCH
25Q 1804.
SIR You are hereby Ordered to liberate the Russian Brig in which

ou arrived last eveni v and be careful that nothing is taken out from
ger belonging to the argn, Otficers, Crew or Passen ers; You will
together with the Mr Nicholson & the Seamen $ 9 be onging to the
Syren retire to Quarantine Quarters until the Syren arrives and you
are then to repair on board -.
Given under m hand this
25'@day of arch 1804
Signed EDWARDPREBLE
&C. EPP, Order Book, M a y 1803-June 1805.1

3

f

d

[26 March 18041
perhinba to the Bavy
United States Statutes at Large.
Eighth C0ngre.s.
Sess. I.
An Ad further to protect the comnatfce and seamen of the U n M &&a
against the.Barbary powers.
Be it enacted by the Senate and H m e o Repre~entdvesof t k UnM
Stdcs of America in Congress assembled, hat for the purpose of defraying the expenses of equipping, officeri , manning, and emplo
such of the armed vessels of the ~ n i %states, ps may be deem
requisite by the President of the United States, for rote~ting~the
commerce and seamen thereof, and for carrying on war e operatJons
Act

4

1

f&

523

WARS W I T a BARBARY POWERS

aimt the regency of Tripoli, or any other of the Barbary powers,
%ch ma commit hostilities against the United States, and for the
purpose
of defraying any other expenses incidental to the intercourse with the Barbary powers, or whlch are authorized by this act:
a duty of two and an half per centum ad valorem, in addition to the
duties now imposed by law, shall be laid, levied, and collected upon
d oods, wares and merchandise, paying a duty ad valorem, which
sh&, after the thirtieth day of June next, be imported into the United
States from any foreign port or ace: and an addition of ten per
centum shall be made to the sai additional duty in respect to all
goods, wares and merchandise imported in ships or vessels not of the
United States: and the duties imposed by this act shall be levied and
collected in the same manner, and under the same regulations and
allowances as to drawbacks, mode of security and time of a p e n t
respectively, as are already prescribed by law in relation to t e dutiee
now in force on the articles on which the said additional duty is laid
by this act.
SEC. 2. And be it further enacted, That a distinct account shall
be kept of the duties imposed by this act, and the proceeds thereof
shall constitute a fund, to be denominated "The Mediterranean
Fund," and shall be applied solely to the purposes designated by this
act: and the said additional duty shall cease and be discontinued at
the expiration of three months after the ratification by the President
of the United States, of a treat of peace with the regency of Tripoli;
unless the United States shod then be a t war with any other of the
Barbary owers, in which case the said additional duty shall cease
and be &continued a t the expiration of three months after the
ratification by the President of the United States of a treaty of peace
with such power: Prowided hommer, that the said additional duty shall
be collected on all such goods, wares, and merchandise, liable to pay
the same, as shall have been imported previous to the day on which
the said duty is to cease.
SEC.3. And be it further enacted, That the President of the United
States, if he shall deem it necessary, shall be, and he is hereby authorized to cause to be purchased or built, officered, manned and equipped,
two vessels of war, to carry not more than sixteen guns each, and
likewise to hire or accept on loan in the Mediterranean sea, as many
gun boats as he may think proper.
SEC.4. And be zt further unacted, That a sum not exceeding one
million of dollars, to be paid out of any money in the treasury not
otherwise appropriated, shall be, and the same is hereby appro rinted
(in addition to the sum heretofore a propriated for the same o jects)
for the purpose of defra
any o the expenses authorized by this
act, which may be incurred uring the present year: Or if necessary the
President of the United States 1s hereby authorized to borrow the
said sum, or such part thereof as he may think proper, a t a rate of
interest not exceeding six per centum per m u m , from the Bank of
the United States which is Lereb empowered to lend the same, or
from any other body or bodies pottic or corporate, or from any person or persons; and so much of the proceeds of the duties laid b this
act, as may be necessary shall be and is hereby pledged for rep acing
the mud sum of one million of dollars, or so much
in the treas
thereof as s h x k a v e been thus expended, and for paying the principal
and interest of the wid sum, or so much thereof as may be borrowed,

Ll"

%

J'

?f

P

Y,

f

524

NAVAI; OPERATIONS FROM 1803 TO 180.4

pursuant to the authority given in this section: m d an account of
the s e v d expenditures made under this act, shall be hid before
Congress during their next session.
APPROVED,
March 26, 1804.
[U.6.Statute at Large, VoI. 11, pp. 291-292.1
To Degen, Purviance & Go., U. 6. Agents, Leghorn,from Tobiaa Lear, U.S. Gomd
General, Algiers

ALGIERS
Match 86'4' 1804.
GENTLEMEN
In my instructions from the Secretary of State of

COPY

the United States, I am directed to use all my endeavours with this
R ency, to make ayment of our Annuities to them in cash, instead

%

of a d Stores, wkch by the Treaty, we must furnish, and which
are generall attended with a loss of 150. to 200. p? Cent to the United
St-,
as e Stores are taken at their o m prices, fked many Years
since with other Nations - On the Eit4 of September last we were
indebted to this Regency, for two Years annuity, since which two
C oes of Timber have arrived from the United States, which will
about one Year, leavi~gus One Year & Six Months indebted
to the 5'4' of this Month.
I yesterday settled the Accounts of these Two Cargoes with the
Government, and finding a favourable Opportunity, pressed to pay
the balance of one Year and an half in cash, which point was Carried
with much sddress, upon condition of their receiving the money
immediately As I had not all the cash in hand, and it being impossible
to negotiate bills here on the United States, I have ventured, on the
Strength of your letter to me of the 22g of November 1803, to draw
upon you at Sixty Days Sight for Twenty Three Thousand Dollars,
in favour of Mr David Coin Bacri to reimburse the Jews Bacri &
Bussah who have advanced this Sum for this purpose. The pecuniary advhtages of this transaction to the U. States will be very
considerable, besides giving them a better Security for Peace with this
ency than they could have, if we were to be much in amear.
give you this explanation in this letter which accompanies my
Draft, and shall write more fully by the Opportunity which may
offer to convey this.

&

9

[NA. 6DA. CL,Leghorn, Val. 1, Oct. 1793-DM. 1806.1
To Bemetory of State from George Dayis, U. 8. Charge dtMaires, Tunis

Turns March 26*p1804 Triplicate
SIB,On the 17'4 ultimo, anchored in the road of the Gouletta a
Corsair of Barbary, said to be an Algerine; (a Polacre mounting
twelve six & ei ht pounders) as she came here for Supplies, and the
Veckil of Trip ', charged himself with obtaining them, she was soon
discovered to be a Corsair of the enemy. - Contrary winds, and the
ill h d t h of the Crew, detained her, untill the 29 inst. when she made
sn attem t to get underway; but we had the satisfaction to discover
a U. S. hooner, entering the port, at the same moment, which
induced the Tripolitrun, to come to an mchor - I oould not obtain
permiasion to go on board, untdl the evening of the 4t4 - She
L+Cornmt Decatur, who avs us the
proved to be the ET u
intelligence of t s htrl destruction of tAc Zute
8.Frig.*
$aPhi.a*
in the harbour d Tripoli. On the foUowing evenkg I

t

L

8

WARS WITH BARRABP POWERS

525

received sn order to appear a t the palace, and resuming that the
chief object, was to demand the detention of the chooner, (
to treaty) as the Tripolitan, was ready for Sea - I immedia%able
y sent
an express, advising the Schooner's getting underway before morning - as the intelligence I should have to give to His Excellen
Bey, would be as painfull to him, as it waa une ected, (the hilathe
delphia being destined for this place) - I plead indisposition, and
sent the necessaq communications b my Drogerman. - The
burning of the Pht.ih?elphia, under the gashaw's forts, has not only
made a Serious impression on our d o e enemy; but will have the
greatest idiuence, with thb Prince;each wandering Bedouin, details
the daring action, and augurs somethmg dreadful to our enem from
this event: in short, i t is the only occurrence, which has f o r A them
to view the American Ghuracter with proper respect. - The sudden
disappearance of the Schooner, excited the curiosity of many; and
for the moment, permitted the Tripolitans, to make deductions most
favourable to themselves. - On the 13'9 the Enterprize, again entered
the harbour - the sight of her gave a general p&c to the crew of the
Tripolitan, who took baggage and abandoned their Corsair the same
evening. (The Schooner, after laying too some time, shaped her
wurse for Sicily.) The Rais, and eat part of the crew, have already
left this (by land) for Tripoli; and tgfeir intention is to send the Polacre
to the nearest port in Tripoli, under some neutral flag, as a Merchant
Vessel - of this circumstance the Commodore, has already been
apprized, and I trust, has taken such measures, as ts ensure her
capture, should she make the attempt.
On the 23g instant, a Spanish Felucca, arrived from Tangiers, (last
from Algiers) bound for Tripoli - I have every reason to sus
is destined as a Corsair for the Bashaw - the Cammod9
the intelligence in time to give her an o~efhwling,as she shapes her
course for Jerba
I am kept in constant agitation, by the Sapatapa, and Commercial
Agent -the former on the part of his Master, for a reply to the letter,
addressed to Commodore Monis; and the Latter on the part of the
Merchants of Jerba, for the pro erty captured on board an Imperial,
fifteen months past. As Cons Lear, informed me in his first, (the
12t+ Deer 1803) that he would probably visit Tunis, in the Spring,
when all difficdties should be aranged, I have made this my last
apology for a further delay.
4
*
*

5

3

Y

zz::

3

[NA. SDA. CL, Tunis, Vol. 2, Part 2, 1803-1806.1

To Captain Edward Prsbb, U. 8. Navy, from Captain William Bainbridge,
U. S. Bevy

TRIPOLIBARBARY
R6Q March 1804
Dr SIR,On the 9th inst. I wrote you a lenphy letter in cipher, but
am doubtful of your receiving it: I gave a hmt for our cruisers to be
always on their guard when laying in the port of Syracuse, and that it
was necessary to examine strictly all descri tion of Vessels and trust
to no appearance of colours or dress, for t ey intend here t o death
their Seamen in the Christian mode, and some times send to sea boats
without carriage guns with armed men.
Mf Shombrie who was here from Malta said by your authority to
negotiate for our ramom, I am induced to believe has done eome

g

526

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 18W TO 1804

and not the least service; i t is reported that he offered any sum
inj
wh% they would demand; and if he was charged by you with a commission to negotiate he did not steer in the roper channel, for he
should have treated with Sidi Muhammed Dg 'es, Minister, and not
directly with the Bashaw - the Minister is the proper person to
address in such affairs - he has much the coddence of the Bashaw,
and his powerful interest may naturally be expected to be a t varience
with any negotiation that 1s not carried on in its pro r channel
through him. When any person comes to treat the s ould study
well the disposition of the Minister, and like an able p%isician feel his
pulse before they prescribe; but this should be done in a most secret
and liberal manner: you may be assured that such conduct will tend
much to the interest of the United States in negotiating -I fre uently
mentioned to you Consul OBrien as a very pro r person to e sent
here; let who will come he should be a man o address to act with
discretion, for only such an one will take to advantage with the minister, who is a man of the world has great discernment and much politeness. I sincerely hope soon to hear of your being off here on the business of treating; by your having a proper character to remain on
shore to communicate with you as circumstances may require, I
flatter myself a peace would readily take place on as advantageous
terms as could be got, - except our country would act with spirit and
distroy the place, which could be effected by sending 3 or 4 thousand
troops, and if i t was possible to observe profound secrecy of the
expedition, I have no doubt but a much less force would accomplish
it: I am clearly of Opinion that if you could arm about 18 or 20 ships
boats you can destroy all the Gun Boats, which would be attended
with the most favorable consequences towards a peace; the Gun Boats
about 25 or 30 men, - they are a dastardly set of wretches.
E%%d you effect the exchange of a Lieu1 or two by giving all the
Tripolitans in your possession, i t would be attended with great
advantages, as they could give you that information which i t is imossible for me to do by letter, and could act as pilots, and would be
round Very servicable oflieem in any attempt made on this Place, being
acquainted with its situation and are men of information and courage; - I sincerely hope that you will be able to effect the release of one
If not two of them. A few bomb shells thrown into this Town would
do damage and cause great alarm. Their Batteries are all in bad
order, and they are very bad Gunners.
We are still confined in the Palace, surrounded with guards, and I
write this letter without seeing the possibility of getting it out of our
prison, however, Magical aid may assist me.
Believe me to be with sincere wishes for success to attend your
plans, and Honor & Glory be the reward you meet with from your
country
Wq BAINBRIDQE
P. S. The Minister has informed me that Mr Cathcart would not
be received as Consul, but they will receive him as Negotiator. This
information is suflticient to convince me that it would be highly
impolitic for him to have any hand in the Negotiation, not alluding
to m y fault of Mq C's, but his standing with this Government.

5

ge

r

1

rrhe following wse written with "secret ink".]

NB b writing with lemmon juice or milk i t cannot be discovered
until it as been heated over the fire you may communicate freely

g

52'7

WARS W I T a BARBARY POWERS

in that writing ss I shall do after you advise me of the receipt of this
b y let me hear from you by all opportunities
[LC.

EPP, Vol. 10, Feb.-April 1804.1

To Captain Edward Reble, U. S. Raw, from Prime Minister to the Bashaw of

TripoIi

TRIPOLY
the 26th of March 1804
SIR,I have received the letter which you have done me the honor
to write; in answer to which, I: will teU you that I did not answer that
you wrote me from Malta, was the cause of having seen how you
treated our Prisoners against all laws. And if truly there is a Prisoner
on board of your Frigate in good health as your Officer has assured
me, send him on shore, and then we will treat with you in some
Negotiation
DGHIEB
(Signed in Arabic) SIDIMOHAMED
Prime Minisler to t h Bashmu of Tripoly
F C . EPP,LB,Dec. 1803-April 1804.1
126 March 18041
To Sidi Hohamed D'ghiea, Prime W s t e r to the Bashaw of Tripoli, from Captain
Edward Preble, U. S. Navy
EDWARD
PREBLE
Esql Commudr in Chief of the UniM Stdm
Sqwdrm stationed in the Mediterranean Sea, to SIDIMOHAMED
D'GHIESPrim Minblet to His E z e w the B a s h of TtipoZy
in Barbary.

HEALTH

I have not been honored with an answer to a letter which I wrote
you bearing date the 4th day of January last relative to an exchange
of Prisoners, although I understand you have r e d it, 1 now sfford
you an opportunity to conve an answer if ou think proper.
I have also to re uest of is Excellency t e Bashaw permission to
send on Shore Clot 'ng for the American Seamen and Marines who
are his prisoners; and should it be his pleasure to grant it, I will thank
ou to ~nformme in what manner, and to whom I am to send them.
wish ta be permitted to have the Clothing delivered to the Purser
Mr Keith Spence, to be distributed by him to the Men in order that
he m y be able to account for it
Any officer either Civil or Military that you may think roper to
soners
send off charged with your Answer, or to converse with the
I have on board shall bo well treated, and allowed to return whenever
he mav think proper
With the highest consideration and respect for your Character I
have signed this an board the United States Ship &n-stit.tltion this
26th day of March 1804
(Signed) EDWQ
PREBLE
[LC. EPP,LB, Dec. 1803-April 1804.1

L

d

E

f

L

To Captain W W m Beinbridge, U. S. Ravy, from Captain Edward Preble,

U. 8. Navy
UNITEDSTATES
SHIP CO~S@
Tripoly
lMarch 2?6'&1804 -

DEARSIBI have written to His Excellency the Bashaw's Minister
of Exterior Relations, requesting an answer to my letter of the 4th

528

NAV&

OPERATIONS FROM 1803 TO 180.4

January, and a t the same time permission to send some Clothing
on shore for your crew, and that it may be delivered to your Purser
to be distributed to them. I hope for their comfort he will grant
my request. I forward you letters from some of your friends in
America, and two exclusive of this from myself - Anythmg, and
e v e r y t b g I have that can contribute to your Comfort you may
command. I expect to have farther communication with the shore
and shall write you again. Adieu! for the present, and believe me
PC. EPP, LB, Dec. 1803-April 1804.1
Extract from Diary of Coptain Edward Preble, U. 8. Raw, Commodore of 8. 8.
Squadron in the Mediterranean, Monday, 26 March 1804

Moderate breezes & hazy; running in to the S. Wr for the Coast of
Tripol
From 4 to 6 exercised great guns, small arms, Boarders
Ll*
Midnight wore Ship, and brought to, under easy sail At
4 A. M.wore, made sail and stood for the land. At 5 aaw the 'land.
At 6 saw a sail in the W N W Bore up & gave chase; At 7 Made the
rivate Signal, and discovered the Chase to be the U. S. Brig Syren,
el Shewart. At 9 A. M. spoke her. ,,pol,
in si ht bearing S W;
6 leagues distant. Lt Stewart informed me he ha captured a ship
from Tripoly under Russian colors [Madona CatapoZkna] bound to
MaIta with horses, Bullocks and Sheep, which ship had carried 750
Troops from Smyrna to Tripoly for the Bashaw - At 11 A. M.
Trip01 bore S b W # Wt distance 5 Miles Hoisted our Colors,
and a
te flag a t the Fore for a Truce. At Noon pIeasant weather;
Observed 11 Gun boats a t Anchor within the Rocks and under cover
of the Batteries which appear to be Strong, and mounted with a
considerable number of cannon. - Cap6 Stewart acquainted me
that the Nautilus had been ran down by the S y m , owing to the
neglect of the Lieuti of the Watch, and that she had been Obliged
to leave the Station for the nearest Port to repair -

It

f

h

[LC.

EPP, Diary, 1803-1804.1

Extract from journal of Mdahipman F. Cornelius deKrdt, U.8. Navy, in U.8. Brig
Sha,of 18 guns, Lieutenant Charles Stewart,U. 8. Havy, commanding, Monday,
86 Xuoh 1804

Calm & pleas* Weather, Boarded fore & main tacks & wore to
the South the town Of Tripoli bore S % E 3 leagues At Jl past 4
wore to the N E & haul'd up main sail At 8 wore to the southws
At 12 wore to the S. W. Midnight light winds & pleas! At 4 wore
to the S. E. At 5 past 5 discover'd a large sail off our weather bow,
made sail, gave chace. At 7 TK'J to the S. W. took in top g d f
sails, stay sail, & square main sail At 8 haul'd up fore sail, down
jib, b r d ' d up after main sail. At 5 past 8 came u with the chace,
rov'd to be the Frigate Co71stitution (Comma E. reble) spoke us
k e r j d down the cutter & L* Stewart went on board. X ~ a s 9t
Lt Stewart ret'J run up the Cutter & made sail for the Ian At
t r the Cornme fired a gun to leeward & hoisted a White flag a t his
fore top gall$mast head as a flag of truce (about 4 mile off the T o m
of Tripoli) the TripoIian gun boats suspitious that we might attack
them got near the town & arranged them selves across the channel
at $he mouth of the harbour, j4 past 11 tack'd & stood off shore,
inclining to Calm - Meridian the Town of Tripoli S J4 W dist 5

g

530

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1803 TO 1804

xmmswiea as we might want. Our dwelling wse furnished in a plain st le, and
we were supplied with freah provisions that were tolerably good. d e were
dowed to go to the front door, and to walk on the terrace or top of the house,

which commanded a handsome prospect of the harbour, the sea, the town, the
place, and the adjoining country. Here we could see our ship on the rocks,
full of Turks, and surrounded by their boats, and a constant stream of boats
going to, and bringing off, the plunder of the ship. We could see these robbers
running about town, with our uniform mats and other clothing on. The minister
of exteriour relations promised to be friendly, and collect as much of our clothing
and effecta as he could, and return them to us.
Nw. 3.-The Bashaw sent for the carpenter to go on board the ship; he went
and found six feet water in the hold. The carpenter's crew and fifty men were
ordered and carried on board to work a t night. A gale of wind and heavy sea
hove the ship off the rocks, and the carpenter returned.
Nos. 4.-In the morning lieutenants Hunt and Osborne, and myself, were a t
the Danish consul's observatory, on the top of his house, upon a plain with and
adjoining ours, which together made a large and handsome walk. We were
looking a t the ehip with Mr. Nissen's glass, when our drogerman came and informed us that the Bsshaw had ordered us not to walk upon the terrace any
more. We immediately returned to our house.
Nm.5.-Our new masters came and closed up the passage which led to the top
of the house; and a guard was set a t the front door to prevent our going into the
street. The minister sent his chief secretary with a parole of honour, written in
French, which we all signed.
Nos. 6.-We found that we were not allowed to go out, notwithstanding our
eigning the parole of honour. The minister of exteriour relations sent us word
that he had got eight of our trunks, which we might have for twelve hundred
dollars. We did not take them, nor thank him for his hospitality. We purchrrsed
new blanketa, sent to us by the Danish consul. The English consul, Mr.
M'Donald, paid us a visit and offered us every assistance in his power.
Nw. 8.-The Jewa purchased some of our clothing and offered it to us a t an
enormous price; but we purchased but little of it. The Bashaw sent for captain
Bainbridge and told him that John Wilson had informed that captain Bainbridge,
before hauling down the colours, threw over nineteen boxes of dollars and a large
bag of gold. Captain Bainbridge assured him it was false, and gave his word
and honour, that there was no monev thrown over to his knowledge; but that
the money in question was left a t Malta. In the evening, the Bashaw not being
eatided, sent for the captain's servant, and ordered him to be flogged if he did
not tell the truth concerning the money. The boy denied having any knowledge
of it. After repeating the threat several times, and the boy insisting that he
knew nothing about the money, he was acquitted. Wilson had turned traitor,
and given the enemy all the &stance in his power. He now acts as overseer
over our men.
Nm. 9.-Our captain established s credit with the Danish consul, who supplied
na with necessary proviaion, and with cloth for matrasaes. A guard was poated
at our door, to prevent our going into the street, or purchasing any books or
clothing.
Nw. 10.-Several Turks came and informed captain Bainbridge that the
Bashaw had been told that captain Rogers who commanded the U. S. frigate
John Adam, treated the Tripolitan prisoners taken last summer, very bad; and
that they feared we should suffer for it.
We have plenty of pomegranates, d a b and oranges. The Danish consul
vlsita w ev
Nou. t?i.-%$%inhtm
of exteriour relations sent his drogerman to captain
binbridge and informed him, that if he would send an immediate order to commodore Preble, to deliver up the Tripolitan prisonem captured by captain Rogers
last summer, amounting to about eighty in number, we might remain where we
wwe, but if he did not comply, we should fare worse. Captain Bainbridge replied
that he could not commmd commodore Preble, and therefore could not aomply
with his request. At 9, in the evening, a Tripolitan officer csme armed with two
istob and a sabre, and said, To night nothing; kcmorrow the MI&. We accordprepared for the castle.
au. 14.-Breakfaeted early, to be ready for our new habitation. At 9, A.M.
s guard came and ordered us to the castle. We formed agreeable to rank, and
rmvcbad to the castle. We were huddled into the moat gloomy cell, among our
mem, where therewae hardly room for us to stend. Here we spent the day without
food, and were scoffed at by our foes until night when, to our happy mtrprlse, we
to bur old p~ of -a.
m~nisterof erttaiow &tiom
conducted

4

b

WARS WITH BARBARY POWmS

531

sent for captain Bainbridge, and affected great aurpriee a t our going to the d e ,
ss ing that he knew nothing of the measure, which we all knew to be false. He
to& captain Bainbridge that we should remain where we were until he heard from

hie people, the p h n e r s , in the hands of the Americans.
Nm. 17.-Visited our sick, who were quartered in a small houae without a
floor, near the palace, and about half a mile from our lodgings. The Danish
consul supplied the sick with fresh provisions, by the request of csptain Bainbridge,
Now. 24.-The Bashaw refused to furnish necessary clothing for the sick, or
any thin for them to eat, bat sour filthy bread.-Captain Beinbridge contracted
with the(broiah consul to supply the sick with beef and uegetablea for soup every
rlnv
-J

-

Nov. 27.-Our men complained of their hard usage, in being com lled to &I
on the cold damp ground, to eat bad bread, to work hard, and to be Tmtinadoed
by their drivers.
Nov. 30.-One of our men in a fit of despair attempted to kill himself; but was
prevented by the Turks, when in the act of cutting his throat. The wound did
not prove mortal. I was permitted by the minister to call on the Spanish physician for medicine for Dr. Ridgley, who was then sick.
December 6.-The Bashaw sent for me to prescribe for himself and two offieem
of his body guard, and ordered me to get such medicine as wss necessary of the
minister, who had a medicine chest.
Dec. 6.-Visited the sick a t the palace, and found them all better. I was received
and treated very politely. The minister sent for me to cure him of a blindness in
the left eye. I prescribed for him with very little success.
Dw. 7.-Visited the ambsssador of Constantinople, who was affected with the
intermitting fever. Found my patients a t the palace almost well.
Dec. 12.-Wae called on by the general of Marine to visit his principal secretary.
Before I was permitted to give any medicine the Turks, aix in number, with
Hamel, our drogerman, summoned the sick man, and offered a prayer to Mahomet.
The sick man then told me that if I would cure him he would be very thankful,
and would s eak to the Bashaw in our favour.
Dec. 15.-%he B ~ s h a whad a schooner bunched, which was built by the Spanish
carpentam. She was tolerably handsome, and calculated to carry six guns. When
she was launched, three guns were fired from the batteries, and the eonsuls
hoisted all their colours. At sun set, a firing from the batteriea announced &he
commencement of the Mahometan Ramadam, continuing a lunar month, in
which they neither eat, drink, nor smoke, while the sun is above the horizon, but
feast a t night. I n walking through the town, to visit my patients, I found the
mosque and principal houses illuminated, and the people rejoicing. P m i n g the
coffee house with our drogerman, Lysle, a renegado Scotchman, who was now the
Tripolitan admiral, called me in to drink coffee with him and was very polite.
Dec. 16.-Visited the Marine secretary, and found him in astate of great debility.
Could not prevail on him to take any medicine, or the least kind of nourishment.
He said he would rather die than oflend Mahomet by breaking the Ramadam;
but would take whatever I should advise a t night.
Dec. 20.-The market was so poor that we could get nothing for dinner, but a
shoulder of poor dromedary.
(18041
January 1.-Was &led to visit the Bashaw's child, about eleven months old.
The Bashaw seemed much aEected on my pronouncing the cMd dangerous; and
wished me to pay every attention to it, saying, that m y thing he could Mord
should be a t my wrvice.
Jan. 2.-Found the Bashaw's child better, at which he expressed great satisfaction,and offered me a home and sewant to go to his gardens, about two mila
from town.
Jam. 14.-The minister of foreign &airs, Sidi Mahomet Docise, visited our
prison. The month's fasting (Ramadam) ended this day a t the change of the moon.
The Tripolitans fired a d u t e from our ahip which lay moored in the harbour withm sight of our window.
Jan. 16.-Capt. Bainbridge and lieutenant Porter were invited and accordingly
visited the Baehaw, with dl the consuls.
Jan. 19.-The Bashaw's agent sent us a present of h,coffee and sugfu, and a
lamb, probably to induce us to buy a quantity of old clothes taken from us, for
which thev asked 600 dollam.
Diet a t ' t h i ~time, two eggs and a piem of bread, yith rain water for breakfast
and supper; poor beef o r camel'e fleah, bread, and sometimes boiled cabbage, with
rain water for dinner.

532
--

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1803 TO 180.4

-

-

Fsbtuerp %-Was conducted to the csstle ta a t the Bashaw, whom I found
ing ever81 centinels, about fifty fierce yelping dogs, and three heavy
doom oaded with irons and bolts, which were opened for us by armed mameluka.
Prescribed for the Bashaw'e disorder.
Peb. 6.-The Bashaw sent for me to come to hi room in the castle. He ehook
hands with me, received me with much politenem, and requested me to pay every
attention to his family aa a physician.
Feb. 10.-The Bashaw gave the officers permimion to walk out into the town
and country, but not to visit the consuls nor the batteries. Our drogerman,
Hamet, was ordered to walk with ue and direct us where to go. We went out six
at a a e .
F&. 16.-Prescribed for the Bashaw's eldest daughter. Her husband offered
me many civilities. At 5 o'clock, P. M. were informed that two English mer&antmen were standing in for the harbour. They proved, however, to be two
vessels under the command of capt. Decatur. About 11, a t night, we were alarmed
by a most hideous yelling and screaming from one end of the town to the other,
and a firin of cannon from the castle. On getting up and opening the window
a the harbour, we saw the frigate Philadelphia in flames.
which f
Feb. 17.-The Turks appeared much disheartened a t the loss of their frigate.
A strong guard was put a t our door, and we were forbid going out. I waa forbid
visiting our sick. I t was reported that an American schooner and three boats
set fire to the ship. Two Turks escaped who told this news. They said that
eight Turks had charge of the ship, and they supposed the other six were carried
offby the Americans. Our drogerman informed us that we were to be removed
from our present habitation into the castle.
Feb. 18.-A guard of about twenty Turks was a t our door. I asked permission
to visit our sick, and wee refused. A gloomy aspect continued on the faces of the
inhabitant8 for the loaa of the frigate.
F&. 19.-Again asked permission to visit our sick, and was refused.
Fsb. 20.-Permitted to visit the sick.-Found the town full of country militia
snd our guard doubled.
Peb. 21.-Our prison waa kept full of Turks to guard us. The Bashaw, having
got a little over his fright, conrrented to let us remain where we were.
Feb. 24.-We were forbid sending letters to our friends, without first shewing
them to the Bashaw or his ministers. The last letters we received, were broken
open by the latter, before they were delivered to us.
March 1.-We were conducted to the castle.
Mar& 2.-Found our habitation very dark and smoky, having no light but
what came through a grated sky-light.
March &-Not allowed to visit the sick, and our drogerman waa forbid carrying letters to us.
March 4.-Captain Bainbridge received a letter from the ministers, reprimanding him on account of three men who floated ashore a few days after the burning
of the frigate. The Turks pretended that they were murdered after they were
made prisonera by the Amencam.
March 6.-In
close confinement. Hamet, our drogennan, waa taken from us.
The Bashsw suspected him of being too friendly to ua.
March 7.-The Tripolitans got the guns from the remains of our frigate,. and
mounted them on their batteriea. In trying them, several of the gun camagea
broke down, and one of the guns burst and killed one Turk and wounded four.
March 14-The Turlts seemed much alarmed, and placed a strong guard a t
our door, for what reason we knew not.
A i d 16.-The Baahaw aent word that I should have any thing I wanted, free
of expeam.
Murch 17.-Ordered not to send our 0 1 0 t h out to weah.
March 24-1 wae taken out of prison to vieit a mamehke's wife and child.
The miaMter of foreign affairs p i d w a viait, and said many clever things.
March 26.-A truce waa held between commodore Preble and the B&w.
jLO. Ba aoob.
captlva In Mpon." law.]

P"

--

WARS WITH BARBARY POWEBS
Act pe3.toining to the Navy
Act mpplemntay to the a&,

583

[27 March 18041

Chap. UII.-An
iniit2lled
d i n g jw a N a d Peace Estab14ahnunt,
and
Anjoy
Odot
~ncrpose~"
Be if enacted by the Senate and House of Represenfativea of the United &&a o America in Congress assembled,
That the President of t e United States be, and he ia
hereby authorized to attach to the navy ymd at Washington, and to the frigates and other vessels laid up in
ordinary in the Eastern Branch, a captain of the navy,
who shall have the eneral care and superintendence
of the same; and s& perform the duties of agent to
the navg department, and shall be entitled to receive
for his servicw, the pay and emoluments of a captain
commanding a squadron on separate service. (a) And
the President of the United States is hereby further
authorized to attach permmently to the said navy
yard and vesseh, one other commissioned officer of the
navy, who ahall receive for his services, the pay and
emoluments of a captain c o m m m d i a twenty gun
ship, one surgeon and one surgeon's mate of the navy,
who shall be severall dowed for their services, the
same pay, rations an emoluments, as are allowed to a
surgeon and to a s
mate in the army of the
Umted States;
one head carpenter,
one lumber, one
one head cooper,
two atswains, two gunners, one sail maker, one store
kee er, one purser, one clerk of the yard, and also,
suc seamen and marines, as in the opinion of the
President shall be deemed necessary: Prowide&, that the
number of seamen or marines,shall not at any time be
greater than what is at present authorized by the act to
which this is a supplement.
SEC.2. And be it further enacted, That that part of
the act to which this is a supplement, which sttachea to
each frigate laid up in ordinary, one sailing master, one
boatswain, one gunner, one carpenter, and one cpok,
one sejeant or corporal of marines and eight r n w e s ,
and to the large frigates twelve, and to the mall frigates ten seamen, and which declares that the sailing
master ahall have the care of the ship, and shall execute
such duties of a purser as may be necessary, shall be,
and hereby is repealed.
APPROVED,
March B7,1801j.

&

I!

d

L

E

w.8. fltatutea st Large, 1799-1812.1

TO Lieutenant Samuel Evans, U. 8.

Havy, Baltimore, Yd.,

from Secretary of the

Eavy

N a n DEPM~

March S!7,1804 Your letter of the 24') instant has been received.
You may alter the Shipping Papers, eo that the Responsibility of

534

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1803 TO 1804

the Sureties for the Seamen, Ordinary Seamen, and Boys, shall cease
on the delivery of the Persons entered on board of one of the Public
Ships in Ordinary a t this place.

[NDA. OSW, V d . 6,1802-1805.1
To Mrs. Tho-

B. Dorsey, Baltimore, Md.,from Becretary of the Havy

NAV.DEP
Mar $7,1804
l have received your letter of the 27. ins, and have the pleasure to
inform you that M' Dorsey was not on board of the Philadelphia a t
the time of her capture by the Tripolitans [NDA. GLB, Vol. 7, 1803-1805.1
To President Thomas Jefferson from Secretary of the X a ~ y

March 87, 1804
The PRESIDENT The motion for abolishing the Office of Lt Colq ComrndP of the
Marine Corps having been re'ected, I take the liberty to enclose a
nomination for that oEce. khe Gentleman proposed is now the
Senior Officer of the Corps. -

ROB)SMITH.

[Enclosure]

GeniIemen of the Senate,
I nominate

FRANKLIN
WHARTON,now Senior Officer in the Corps of M a k e s ,
tobe
Lieutenant Colonel Commandant of the Marine Corps.

-

[NDA. Nom. Appte., 1798-1820.1

127 March 18041
To Alexsnder Count de Woronzow (or Worontzoff), Ambassador of Llwsia to
London, England, from James Monroe, U. 6. Xinbter to London, Xngland

M! Monroe presents his compliments to the Count de Woronzow
and has the honor to inform him that he has just received a letter
from Mr Hanis, consul of the U.States of America a t S5 Petemburg,
containing a copy of a letter from the Chancellor of the Empire in
which that respectable Minister by order of the Emperor assures Mr
Harris in re 17 to his application on the subject that his Imperial
Majesty
interpose his good offices with the Ottoman Porte to
obtain thereby the restitution of the frigate & crew from the corsairs
of Tripoli which by being lately unfortunateIy stranded on that coast
fell into their hands. Mr Monroe will hasten to communicate thia
important information to his ovenunent, by whom he is well persuaded that i t will be receive with the high consideration which is
due to so signal a proof of the friendship of his Imperial Majesty for
the U - S t a h . Mr Monroe has the honor in the mean time to e g p r a
to the Count de Woronzow his own sensibility and to assure him of

d

%

535

WARS WITH BARBARY POWE&S

the pleasure with which he becomes to his Government the organ of a
communication so honorable & interesting to his Country

WIYPOLESTREET
March 27,1804.

-

JNA. SDA. Disp., Gt. Britain, Vol. 12,1803-1807.1
To lY[onsieuz Beaussier, Rench Charge dYAffairer and Commissary General,
'hipofi, from Captain Edward Preble, U. 6. navy

ConstWion MARCH
27th. 1804
SIR, My Boat attends you, and i t will afford me pleasure to welcome

you on board this Ship.
Citizen BEAUEISIER
Charge des A9awes
of t-he French Republic
Tripoli

[LC. EPP, LB, Dec. 1803-April 1804.1

[27 March 18041
T o Captain Edward Preble, U. 6. Navy, from lonsieur Beaussier, French Chars6
d'dffaires and Commissary General, Tripoli

LIBERTY. - - - - - EQUALITY
Tri oly in B m b q the 5th Germinal the twelfth Year of the Yrench
Re u lic One and Indivisible
R e Charge of Affairs of the French Republic- Commissary General of all Commercial Relations near the Bashaw. To Commodore
Edward Preble Commanding the Navd Forces of the United States

FI

of America in the Mediterranean on board the Frigate Cons&&
before the Harbour of Tripoly

COMMODORE.
I have r e d the letter which you have done me the honor to write

this day, and the Dispatches that i t mentions I will not have an
o portunity to write you before tomorrow Morning. Please to send
t e Boat after my letter
I have the honor to be with the highest consideration

g

B EAUSSZER
P. S. Conformable to your desire in your second letter, I will come
on board tomorrow. [LC. EPP, LB, Dec. 1803-April 1804.1

T o the Prime Minister to the Baahaw of Tripali, from Captain Edward Reble,
U. s. Nsvy

UNITEDSTATESSHIPCmtituiion
off Tripoly March 27th: 1804.
SIDIMOHAMED
D'GHIES,P r i m e Minister
To His &et&n.q the Bashaw of Tripoly
SIR, I am honored with your letter of yesterday's date, but must
confess myself at a loss to khow how I have merited the imputation
of having treated Prisoners contray to the dictates of humanity.
You certainly are not well informed with respect to my conduct
towards your feople f have (as my OfEicer observed to you) among others, rr prisoner thaf '
was taken out of the PRilrrdeEphia at the time she was set on fire;

536

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1805 TO 180.4

he was wounded, but from the kindness and attention he has received
is now well in health. I cannot however consent to send him on shore,
until a Cartel for the exchange of Prisoners is settled. But ou may,
as I have before observed, send an Officer to converse wit him I have sent my Boat on Shore with this letter, and to bring off Monsier Beaussier Charge des Affairs of the French Republic
[LC. EPP, LB, Dec. 1803-April 1804.1

g

To Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Navy, from Captain William Bainbridge,
U. 8. Bavy

TRIPOLY
March 87th 180.4.
DEARSIR, The Minister Sidi Mohamed Dghies, sends you many
compliments. As he must write in French, sa s it will take some time,
and your letter not of great import requests t at you will take this as
his answer, and sa s that you are permitted to send the clothug by
any Neutral Vesse but not in your Boats.

1'

E

KC. EPP, LB, Dec. 1803-April 1804.1
To Captain William Bainbridge, U. 8. Navy, from Captain Edward Preble,
U. 8. Navy

U S. SHIPCmstitulim off Tripoly
March 27th 1804
DEAR SIR I wrote you that the clothing for your Crew was all
made, and on board thLs Ship. I was however wrong. M' Higgins

was directed to provide and send it on board, but could not procure
Duck sufficient in Season. I have directed my Purser to send on
shore 280 Hats, part of which, will be straw as Kool cannot be procured. 280 Pair of Shoes, 280 Checked Shirts all the Duck Frocks
he has on hand amounting to 52 and Duck Jackets to complete 280
Frocks and Jackets. All the Duck Trowsers we have in the Ship
amounting to 189 pair, and as many of Blue to complete the number
280. I shall direct Mr Higgins to send over a Duck Frock and Trowsers
for each, by a Boat which he shall hire for the purpose, and at the
same time send you any Stores you or your Officers may want.
I have directed my Surgeon to put up a quantity of Medicine which
I suppose must be wanted by the Officers & Crew and I also send you
a couple of Bundles, and a case of Surgeon's Pocket Instruments
purchased by Mr Higgins for you. If you will make known to me
any thing wanted by yourself and Officers it shall be immediately
supplied. All the letters sent to Malta of last and this months date
from Trip01 , I forwarded to Gibraltar by an English Man of War.
One of my fficers went in charge of them, and will forward them to
your friends.
The First Consul of France the much celebrated Bouna~artehas
interested himself deeply in your situation. More of this h&eafter.
If an letters arrive from America for you, they shall be immediate1
forwar ed in some way or other. I enclose you an account of
Pulis which he is anxious to have paid. If you wish me to pay him,
lease to regulate the Bill,and I will do it. I took up two of our
gills fmm 6un,and paid him the Money One was in favour o the
Prime Minister for 300 Dollars, and the other in favour of Re Farquhnr
for the same sum, snd have laced this amount to your Account.
I armd you a cut from a &em Pa r with the President's Mesaage
relative to t6e conclusion of the Z o c o business, and whioh .~l1l

8

cf

id

9

537

WARS WITH BARBARY POWmS

insure you the valuation of your prize sent the Secretary, and which
he rec* previous to the message I shall endeavour to p r e v d on the
French Consul to send out a Neutral Vessel if there is on0 a t T r i p l y
to receive the clothing, and shall a t the same time send you a present
of Claret, Porter, Cider, Cheese, Coffee, Sugar &c* from my own
stores, which ou will do me a favour to accept of
Mr Izard te me you are grown thin, I fear my friend you let your
Misfortunes bear too heavy on your mind by which you may destroy
your health. Recollect that Destiny and not want of Courage has
deprived you of liberty, but not of honor. You will I hope e're long
revisit your Native Country, and meet the approbation of your fellow
Citizens and confidence of our Government.
[LC EPP, LB, Dec. 1803-April 1804.1

I

To Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Navy, from Captain William Bainbridge,
U. 6. Navy
TRIPOLI
IN BARBARY [March] 1804

DEARSIR,Excuse the brivity of my letter of yesterday, and impute
it to the hurry that Mt Izard was in, and the mistake that was made.
I have the honor of enclosing you a copy of my note sent to the
X.linister this day, accompanied by a copy of your letter of the 12*4
inst. to me; what effect it will have I cannot say -hope favorable if it i4 not, we must content ourselvas with our unfortunate lot,
and rely on our Country and its Valuable Officers to relieve us; m
mind was never adapted for a prison, but s h d bear my fate wi
fortitude: I hope a speedy peace will take place, but cannot expect
it incompatible to the Dignity of our Country; Vigerous e x e ~ o n s
ma crown our Vishes.
your friendly offers and kind assurances of your friendship I do
truly estimate, and regret most sincerely of being deprived of the
honor of serving under your command: I yet hope one day to have
that pleasure.
We witl thank vou for American & Ewfish News-papers (after
you have read them) as often as opportuniti offers. & the weather
begins now to be fine, I hope to have the pleasure of frequently hearing
from you; and will thank you to mention m your next whether Congress
has confirmed the valuation of the Mirboha.
Wishing you health & glory as the reward you meet with from your
Country.
[LC. EPP, Vol. 10, Feb.-April 1804.1

d

To the JKinieter of Foreign AEPire of the Bashow of Tripoli, from Captain William
Bainbridge, U. S. Navy

TRIPOLI
27'QMarch 1804
SIR,I do myself the honor of sending you a copy of C o m m o d o ~
Preble's letter to me of the 12 inst. in which you wiU parcieve hm
replies concern the inhumanity complained of in your letter of the
5; inat. YOU?%
also observe in hisletter that he entire1 disavow
3f giving Mr Schombrie, from Mdta the least authority or ssy negotlation whatever; therefore you wd be pleased to conalder that p
sons improper interference as unsuthorised by the United States;and
the assertions unfounded.

t'

538

NAVAL; OPEEATIONS FROM 1803 TO 1804

Acoept the assurance of my high consideration, and wishing!you

Health.
SIDIMUHAMMED
DGHIES

Minidcr o foreign A air8
to EIia
the B w g w

&

of Tripoti

[LC. EPP, Vol. 10, Feb.-April 1804.1
To Lieutenant Richard Somers, U. S. Bavy, commanding U. 6. Schooner Nmdilor,
from Brian YcDonogh, British Coned, Ripoli

SYRACUSE
HARBOR
March d P 1804
SIB Having been detained by the Brig S en of the United States
on my passage from Tripoli to Malta and rou ht into this Port, I
feel it a duty incumbent onme, to state to you ir, that my passage
to Malta is on his Bdanick Majestys S d e ; I therefore expect
you will embrace the earliest opportunity of obtaining for me, my
, such sccomodation which you may thmk most conto expedite the business whch I am e aged in
B~%oNom
H BP Majestys Consol
A true Copy from the Original

f

[LC. EPP, Vol. 10, Feb.-April 1804.1
To James Leander Cathcart, Leghorn,from Sir John Acton, Prime lldinister of State,
The Two Sicilies

NAPLES8P March 1804
(COPY
)
SIB, I represented to the Kin my Master, the demand made b
you in the name of the Commm er m Chief of the American s q u a Z
ron, for four Gun, and four Mortar Boats; and His Majesty delgned
to manifest no great distance from anting to the said Commander
the above mentioned Boats; but ss t e object which might form some
diEculty, would be the granting the corresponArtillery. In
speaking to the Sovereign on the subject, I informed hlm of this addition to the above mentioned demand. I therefore have to inform
you, that if the Commodore could take a trip to Naples, he would be
accomodated with every thing to his satisfaction
I therefore wait to hear from you again on the sub'ect, and in the
mean time, subscribe myself with distinct and imrnuta le esteem.

f

r

b

[LC.

EPP, Vol. 10, Feb.-April 1804.1

Extract from Xemorsndnm Book of Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Bavy, on b o d
U. 8. Frigate CbhWfan. 27 Xarch 1804

Sent a Flag with the letters OfEcer of the Flag saw Capt. Bainbridge.
PC,original,]
Extraat from Divy of Captain Edwud Reble, U. 8. Bavy, Commodore of U. 8.
Sqaodron in the Bediterraneon. Tuesday, &I Mach 1804

tooffTri 01 At

!k

past1ZP.M.filledBtstoodintowards

th%%n;
wind s%. ht reezes and pleasant weather. At 2 P. M.
a gun was fired and a w 'te Flag hoisted a t tbe Bsehsws Castle. At

WARS WITH BARBAXP POWEBS

539

% past 3 P. M. sent a Boat with a flag of Truce to the Town with a
Midshi man and a crew of 6 men. Mg Izard midshipman, wes
charge with dispatches from me to Capg Bainbridge, the Btrshewa
prime Minister, the French Comrnksrg General, and Ietfere from
some of the Officers prisoners in Tripoly. On the Boet approaching
tbe Rocks near the town,one of their Gun boato, took her xn tow,and
went in with her, at 9 P. M. the boat returned, and brought me a
letter of no import from the Prime Minister and another from the
French Charge d'Affaires acknowledging the reciept of the dispatches
I sent him,from his Court, and two short notes from the unfortunate
Cap5 Bainbridge whom Mg hard was permitted to see but with a
strong Guard attending - Moderate Breezes a3 night & Ieassnt
dt 9 A. M.calm, the Town of aipolg S b W M W distant 8 Kilts Anchored with our Stream in 35 fathQ Water, Gravelly bottom;
Hoisted a white flag and fired a gun, the Bashaw did the same at his
Castle - Sent Mr I z ~ r don shore with the Barge with 8 men & coxswain. At Noon pleasant
Boat not returned -

d

-

[LC. EPP, Diary, 1803-18011.1
Extract from log book kept by Sailing Master Nathaniel Bareden, U. S. Xavy, on
board U. S. Rigate Gnsiifdon, Tneeday, 27 Yarch 1804

by off Tripoly - At
ppast 12 filled 8t stood within 5 miles
of the own. As there was no white flag hoisted we tacked & stood
ofshore - The wind at this time S E which is nearly along shore At 2 P. M. observed the white flag hoisted on the Battery - Tacked
in towards the Harbor A t % ast 3 sent an Offjcer& boat on shore
! t & bro't to until we saw her enter the
under flag of Truce - Tacke
outer roadstead: She was there examined by one of the Bashaws gun
boats which m o m anied her into the Harbor At 6 P. M. stowe all the light sails and double reefed the Topsails The S Ten was Ordered to anchor in shore & hoist a ligbt as s Signal
for the 8owtitution's boat At
past 9 P. M. the Boat returned
From this time till 9 A. M. Moderate breezes from tbe Land &
pleasant weather At past 9 A. M. it fell a dead calm - Came to with the stream
Anchor in 33 fathoms, soft bottom - The Town of Triply S b W
M W by corn am nearly 9 Miles Sent an 0 cer & boats crew on ahore - Light airs or calms all the
forenoon -Ships company employed sta ing the topmash - Setting
up the rigging and cleaning between Dec s The Town of Tripoly is situated at the bottom of a circular Bay
with Groves of trees to the Eastward and a sandy desert to the S. W. &
W N: W as far as the Eye could reach - A long reef of black m h
to the Eastward of the Town - Nine Gun boats within them
The Entrance is defended by Batteries from the North shewing 72
Cannon These remarks were made last evening when we were about 4 M h
from the Town bearing S b E by Compass Noon light airs from the S S W.
[LC. EPP, Log Cmiiiution, 1803-1804.1

!

-

ff

I

-

540

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 180s TO 1804

Rxtrsct &am journal of HidshipmanF. Dornelina degroflt, U.6. lUavy, in W. S. Brig
&en of 18 guns, Lientenant Charles Stewart,U.S. Hovy, commanding, Tnesdpy,
87 ldprch 1804

Commences gentle breezes & pleas! in Co: with the Commodore

% past 2 fili'd away & stood to the Sg at 3 tack'd the main topsail,

the Commodore sent a flag off truice in the town of Tripoli same
gt
o the
E At 6 tack'd to the Southd At 7
the Town of Tripoli bore South disc 6 miles ' K g to the S. W At 4c;
past 7 took in fore sail, jib & after main sail. A t 8 beat to quartem
& prepsr'd for Action Iower'd the topsails on the cap & came too w i d
the Stream Anchor in 20 fathoms, Tripoli bearing S % E 4 miles. At
4f; past 8 the flag of truice that was sent to Tripoli return'd, Run up
the S t r e m & stood 0% At 9 hove the main topsail to the mast Midnight light airs & lead At [space] the boat went on board the
Commodore ~t 3 fill'cfawtq & stood to the N W following the motions
of the Commodore At4 wore to the Sg & set after main sail. At
past 7 Lt Stewart went on board the Commodore. At 8 sounded in
45 fathoms Meridian Light airs & plead Crew employ'd middle stitching sails
kc. Lat. Obs: 32'58' N.

8

t i m e tiU'd sway K

rnDA.1
Xo Secretary of State from Josef Yannrdi, U. 8. Consul, Cadiz, Spah

AMERICAN
CONBULATE
Cadiz 28'@March 1804.
RESPECTED
SIR - I had the honour of writing you on the 26'8
instant I have now that of inclosing you Copy of a Letter received from
Charles Pinckne~Esqre our Minister at Madrid concerning the Quwenteen on Amencan Vessels, and in consequence of orders from said
Court, the Quarenteen of 40 days which was laid here on Vessels
from Philad, Baltimore & New Y ork, are now reduced to fifteen days
on1 , and from the remaining Ports Ten days as before.
I?&hand you Copy of a Letter just received from Lerett Harris
our Consul at St Petersburg concerning the brave & Gallant OEcers
of the United States Shi Phihhlphia, which no doubt will please
you in every respect; the fetter which Cap$say Consul Harris inclose8
me for Comodom E. Preble, I have immediately forwarded to Chsd
Gavino to be sent without delay. [SDA. CL, C&,

L

1

0

L

Vol. 1, 1793-1805.1
@l&elm No.11

T o l d Y d , U. 8. Conad, Codiz, Sp*,

from Charlee Pinckney, U. 8. m
t
s
r

to Y . d n d , Spain

Circular*
MADRID8'4 March 1804.
DEAR
Sm I am to inform you that by an oEcid Letter just received
from ECia ExoeUenc De Pedro Cevallos, first Secretary of State &
of Dispatch, he
me officially that the Quarantine on qur
V e ifl now reduced to fifteen days of observation, which notam
I unmedmtely transmit to you for your information & Govegnm~t-

&-

[SDd CL, Cadir, VoL 1,1793-1806.1

WARS WITH BARBARY POWER#

-

541
--

[Enclamre No. A
To Joref Ymardi, U. 8. Consul, Cediz, Spain, from Lerett HPrris, U. 8. Conrnt
Qeneral,St. Peteraburg, Bmdrr
CONSULATE
OF THE UNITEDSTATES
OF AMERICA

St PETEBL~BURG
28 January -

7*QFebnulry 1804

-

SIR. I hasten to transmit the inclosed Copy of a Letter I have
received from the Grand Chancellor of this Em ire, in answer to
M ofEcid note I addressed him on the Subject o the fatal disaster
which hes befel a Frigate of our Government in the Mediterranean.
The interest which his Imperial Majesty has deigned on this occasion
so honorably to testify, cannot fail to be a Subject of the highest
felicitrttion to every American, and the more, as so important and
gracious an intercession, is calculated to lead to presages equdy
aue icious.
?ou will embrace Sir, the earliest means to transmit the inclosed
Letter to the Commander of the Squadron, and unless you are sble
to forward it immediately, its importance justifies you to dispatch
a Special Messenger to that effect, except on its receipt, ypu ase
apprised, that effectual measures have been otherwise taken to hberate
the Ship & Crew.

P

[SDA. CL, Cadiz, Vol, 1, 1793-1805.1
[~ndmm
NO.a]

To Levett Harris, U. 8. C o n d General, St. Petersburg, Raasia, from the ttrond
Chancellor of the Russian Empire or Buaeian Ambassador to London, England
(Ilts~llollorfromtk OriOrlpfnal tn Etmcl

-)

SIB: I made Known to the Emperor the note you ad&&

to
me under d a b of the 209 of this Month, b which you Sollicit our
intercession near the Ottoman Port in beha f of the Crew of one of
the Ships of War of the United States of America that have been
made Prisoners by the Pirates of Tripoly.
It is with great pleasure I announce to y?u that his Imperial
Majesty, guided by the most favorabIe disppsltlons for your Government, has given me orders to direct his M h s t e r at Constantinople to
make the Strongest representation to the Turkish Court in order that
a Firman be dispatched to the Bey of Tripoly, to liberate not only
the Crew, but the Vsssel itself.
These orders Sir; will be expedited to Constantinople by the first
Courier, and I have not a doubt that the representation which will in
cons uence be made by our Minister Mr De Italinsky will have their

9

2

full e ect.
It is extremely agreable to me to add to this information, the most

positive assurance that the Emperor peculiarly gratified in according
this mark of his Interest for the United States, will not be less so on
all occasions wherein He may be able to give them new roofs of it,
and of which it is his Majesty's desire that you expr y acquaint
your Government.
Signed ALEXANDEB
Count de Wormtw#
[BDA. CL, Csdis, Vol. 1,1793-1805.)

J

542

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM

1803 TO 180.4

To Secretary of State from Joseph Barnes, U. S. Consul, 8idy

LEGHORN
Mar.

SIB,

*

*

*

*

*

*

1804

*

I have r e d a Letter from my Agent Mr Gibbs at Palermo,
dated Feb. 23'@ enclosing me a co y of a Letter from Commodore
Preble, requesting Gun Boats & ortars: & also a Letter from the
Party who Acts for the U. S. S uadron at Syracuse, giving an Account
of the fortunate event of the estruction of the Frigate Philadelphia,
in the Harbor of Tripoli: As you will have, no doubt, receo the particulars by Various means 'tis unnecessary to take up your time farther
on this Subject.
In regard to the request of Commodore Preble for Gun Boats, &
Mortars -tho' my interfering was not very pleasant on two Accounts,
yet I did not delay one Moment to reply, & offer him my persond
Services with the Neapolitan Govt and any Sum of money he might
want that I could command -: The Success & prosperity of our
Country's cause being in my opinion paramount to all other considerations, I need not, I am Sensible Sir,take up much of your time in
Stating the Aukward and unpleasant redicament in which I am
placed.--l't17 An application to Genera Acton to induce him to Assist
the Americans with Gun Boats, Mortars & when no rep1 had been made
to his Overtures for More than twelve months certa' y came forward
with a bad grace. 2ng'7 I am not even known as Agent for the
SQvadron, tho' Consul for Sicily, as Englishmen and Italians are
appointed by some person or other, but by whom I do not knuw;
nor, should I have been applied to on this affair but from supposing
I might have some weeht with General Acton, And knowing that I
could command a considerable sum of money of my own; as well as
obtain any further Sum that may be wanting. Commodore Preble is to be in Naples on the first of April; I have
written General Acton, and made the best apology I could for not
having answered his former propositions: I have also written
Commodore Preble, that should he think it requisite I will join him on
the Shortest notice - Had I, Sir, been Possessed of the Same powers
which the Consuls of all other Nations are; Commodore Preble would
have had the Gun Boats, & Mortars, & all other Matters he wanted,
more than a Month past - After various fruitless applications in
Sicily he is Obliged to go to Naples, which is consequently a considerable sacrifice of time & Public Money; exclusive of the risk of
Some of the Barbarians getting out. I flatter m self however he will
Succeed in obtaining the Gun-Boats & Mortars, &otwithstanding the
difficulties which have Occurred: I shall use every exertion in my
power. * * :
[NA. SDA. CL,Leghorn, Vol. 1, Oct. 1793-Dec. 1806.1

2

i

f

J

TO Captain Edward Preble, U. 8. Navy, from Monsieur Beausuer, French Chwg6
d'bflaires and Commissary @enerd,Tripoli

TRIPOLI
I N BARBARY
g8'P March 1804
SIB, On the 26'b inst you sent me a letter from the Minister of
foreign &airs, and wrote me that you desired to see me on board,
before pre88nting myself on the 27't I obtained an Audience of the
-w,
when I informed bim of the lively interest the first Co~fed

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS
-

-

--

-

543

-

took in the destiny of the American Prisionm, and of his desire soon
to hear of their deliverance, and of a solid and advantageous peace
between the two parties - The Prince answered me, h t he was
delighted with the intervention of the First Consul in the &air, and
in Consideration of which, he would not avail himself of all the advantages which the chances of War had given him - He advised me
to persuade you, to send on shore, the Prisioner taken on board the
Phzladelphk, in order to interogate him freely, as it respects the treatment he has received - also that of his Comrades, and destroy the
eneral Credited opinion among the inhabitants that the have been
!hassacred - The Bashaw was very much astonish to see me
return without bringing this Man - and more so was Sidi Mohammet
Dghies, his rime Minister, who had suggested & advised this, favor
but to faceitate your interest - by the good effects the liberai
release of this prisioner would have in the Negociation without any
kind of prejudice to you - I assure you from my own knowledge
how much this condescention on your part, would facilitate obstacles,
and not pass without Compensation - I once more invite you Sir,
to accede to this necessary measure, and you will afterwards receive
permission to land, the Medicine C l o t h , and the Provissions for
the OfEicers You ask'd me when I was on board what I thought would be the
price of the Regency for the Ransom of the Prisioners? I here repeat
to you I think adviseable for both parties to treat of Peace and Ransom
a t the same time, in so much as the Bashaw intends it should be so,
and will never agree to give up the P d o n e r s before having received
the sum agreed upon, whatever shall be the guarantee they may offer
him, that the exorbitant sum demanded, and obtained a t *em
of
the Portuguese, the Negociation of M' Schembri, supported b the
testimony of the English pro-Consul, the Convention made wi& the
Batavians in perfect peace, & in presence of a strong Squadron, the
Agreement made with Sweeden for a Small number of prisioners taken
in the service of Commerce, the Nulity of a Carteel of Exchange
(as the Regency's of Barbary are accustomed to recover from such
Colours, from which the Enemy, take Tripoline Subjects & merchandize), all the preparations made against every attack whatever, all
these Considerations make me fear, that the Bashaws pretentions
will be a t least 500,000 Dollars On my return from the Frigate I did not fail to inform the prince
what were your approaching and formidable resources, of the attack
you intend to take, in case there is no hope of a reasonable accomodation - that you intend to send a Ship to Alexandria, to bring down
his Brother Sidi Acmet and firmly establish h i a t Bengaza - that
the U. States do not solict for Peace, they desire only to treat for the
deliverance of Prisionen by means of a Ransom that should not be
too exorbitant, that they would sooner sacrifice these Prisioners than
subscribe, or submit, to Conditions incompatible with the honor and
dignity of the Nation, that they do not intend to pay an thing for
Peace, nor to imitate those powers who pay them annual ributes that in the present instance, they only intend to treat for the Ransom
of riaionen, and that the present Consul shall not be refused in case
of eace I t did not a pear to me that these resolutions had any i m p d o n
on the epirit o the Bashaw - I suggested that too much tenacity on

J

B

I

g

!

544

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1803 TO 1804

his part in these exorbitant pretentions, might displease the first Consul; to which he answered whatever deference that ays to the desires
of his Friend Buonaparte, he cannot believe that e will divest him

E

of the advantages acquired by the Chances of War of three years
without intermission - and as to the rest he was ready to defend himself, being in no fear of the threats of placing his Brother on the
Throne, & to occasion a Civil War - Since he only sent him from his
Governm[ent] a t Derne, because he had began to Vex & discontent the
people, but not from dread of any injury he might be able to do - he
added his Brother was without means, inclined to drunkeness and
incapable of acquiring partizans, all these assertions are truths Perceiving that these Conferences fatigued the Prince, I took my
leave, and retired, to be renewed when I receive your answer I thought Sir, It would not be my duty to conceal from you, a11
that has been said, on each side in the two Conferences which I have
had with the Bashaw -that you may regulate our conduct thereby
after mature reflection & deliberation I oug t to inform you, that
whatever be the Success of your efforts to chastise the regency, your
Government will have a great addition too the expence, without the
sdvantage of recovering the prisioners, who are shut up in the Castle,
from whence it will be impossible to facilitate or effect their escape and the more damage you cause to be done to the Country, the higher
will be their pretentions, be it from Avarice or from obstinacv, this a t
least, I have reason to apprehend - I cannot continue the functions
of arbitrator & conciliator, in shewin rcyself equitable, impartial and
a Friend to peace, except you enab e me to answer every objection
that they will not fail to make - The Blockade without doubt ought
to cease, to Merchant Vessels during the Nepociation Have you full power to act, and to Negotiate according to Circums f a m ? or, w
ill it be necessary to wait the Sanction of Government,
which could not foresee the Circumstance of 300 prisioners falling into
th power of the Regency - Being authorized yourself to determine
irrevocably, will i t require much time to arrive thus far? What is
the Maximum of the Sum that you can offer to conclude a Treaty of
Peace and to obtain a deliverance of the Prisioners
I cannot end this letter without begging you to accept the thanks
for the distinguished honor and politeness you shew'd me on board
your Frigate [LC. EPP, Vol. 10, Feb.-April 1804.1

h

-

P

Preble, U. 8. Navy, Commodore of U. 8.
Squadron in the Mediterranean, Wednesday, 28 March 1804
Li h t breezes from the N N W, and pleasant Weather. At 2
P. h f our Boat returned from the Shore, and brought off the French
Charge des M a k e s Saluted him with 5 Guns on his entering and
leaving the Ship - He dined on board, and returned to the Shore in
the Barge a t 5 P. M. - He informed me, while on board, that he
had communicated to the Bashaw his Orders from the first Consul to
act as mediator, and endeavor to bring about a peace: but that he
was confident it could not be done but by first ransoming the Officers
and Crew of the Philadelphia, and that the Bashaw will expect a ve
large sum of money, say a t least $250,000. for ransom & y e *
wishedme to fix on tt sum that I supposed OUT Gtovernmentw o d &sent
to pay; this, I did not think. proper to do; He obeervd that the
Sxtrod from Diary of Captain Edward

%

W m S WITR BARBARY POWERS

545

Bashaw would not consent to a Cartel for exchange of prisonem and
did not intend to acknowledge any as prisoners in our possession,
but such aa were taken under his Own fl . - He likewise observed
that we could not be permitted to land $e Cloathing and Stores for
Our Officers & Men m any 0 t h way, t b by sending them in a
Neutral Vessel. I am confident that the French, English and Swedish
Consuls are all in $he Baahaw's Interest, That the Danish Consul ie
the only respectable character among them, and he is not permitted
to visit us. We must therefore depend wholly on our own exertions
for effecting a peace, which can only he done by an increase of our
force, and a Number of Gun & Mortar boats to batter down his
Castle and town -. At 9 P. M. weighed & made sail. Hoisted
lights, let off rockete, & fired guns for the Boat; At 12 Midnight she
returned.
Mr Izard reported that he was not permitted to land, and that a
strong guard was placed over the boat while she was detained at the
Wharf The Weather having a stormy appearance, we stood to the Northward all night - At 9 A. M. tacked to the S Wg - Wind N Wt
Syren in Comp?
At Noon TripoTy S Wt 30 Miea ilistmt [LC. EPP,Diary, 1803-1804.1

-

Extract from journal of Hidshipman F. Cornelius delhfft, IT. 6. Navy, in U. 8. Brig
Shn o f 18 guns, Liedtenant Charles Stewart, U. 6. Navy, commanding, Wedneeday, 28 March 1804

Commences with light airs & pleas$ Standmg of[f~& on the Town
of Tripoli the Commodore sent his barge in the town. At 2 the Barge
return'd with the French Consul went on board the Commq & was
saluted with 5 guns. At % past 3 took in sail under the lee of the
Commodore he lying at Anchor. At 4 Tripoli bearing S. S. W 3
leagues. At 5 'I<Qto the WestwQ X past 5 sounded in 30 fathoms
8: set top gall$ sails. At 6 the French Consul left the Commodore &
was agam saluted with 5 guns E d to the N. E. At 9 saw a light,
near Tripoli. :h past 9 the light appear'd to approach us, call'd a11
hands for Action. At 10 the light came along side, (we having a light
which we shew'd now & then for the Commodores boat Which had
taken the French Consul on shore) prov'd to be the Commodores
barge from Tripoli. % past 10 made sail & stood to the N W # past
11 back'd the main topsail, sent the Commeq barge on b@of him he
getting under way Latt: Obs: 33'30' N.
[NDA.]
To Captain Edward Reble, IJ. 8. Navy, from Captain Willipm Bainbridge,
U. 6. Baog

TRIPOLIBARBARY
2gt@March 1804
DEARSIR,Last evening the Minister of foreign AfFairs for this
Regency handed me your much esteemed favor of the 27Q inst., with
some others for my Officers. My letter of yesterday, accompanying
this, pleads the brivity of mine to ou by Mr Ieard.
The cloathing you mentioned of flaving sent has not yet reached us,
I hope they will soon

I presume for the want of a conveyance

-

546

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1803 TO 1804

arrive, as the Crew is much in want of them; but I am truly sensible
of every exertion of yours to relieve theirs and my own wants - in
fact your attention to us in our unfortunate situation insures to you
the grateful remembrance of many brave unfortunate men.
Enclosed you will receive Mr Yulos's Acct certified by the Purser
and Myself, and will thank you to have i t settled. Doctr Ridgely
received the case of Instruments
I sincerely thank you for the attention to our letters sent for America, and your goodness in promising the forwarding of those which
may arrive from there. Mr Izard's report is true - I am quite thin;
your sympathy I justly estimate, and hope it is unnecessary for me to
say that I truly believe your friendship sincere; and anxiously wish for
an investigation of my conduct before the Tribunal of our Country,
but in spite of every effort of my own, and our good advice, I cannot
prevent sad reflections; my character!
loss of services to my
country! And my Family, are painful subjects to contemplate on in a
close Prison in Tripoli.
P. S. enclosed you will receive triplicate of my letter of the 16t"
ultq respecting three persons that joined the Philad' in Gibralter which I will thank you to reply to
[LC. EPP,Vol. 10,Feb.-April 1804.1

&

To Lieutenant Isaac Chauncey, U. S. Navy, Washington, D. C., from Secretary of
the Navy

NAVYDEPT
March SO, 1804 You will take the Command of the frigate John Adam and use
your utmost exertions to prepare her for &a. [NDA. OSW, Vol. 6, 1802-1805.1
To Secretary of the Navy from Secretary of State

DEPARTMENT
OF STATE
March SOt@1804.
SIR. The Minister of His Majesty, the Emperor of Germany, a t
Madrid, having represented to Mr Pinkney, that irregularities have
taken place, with respect to the Imperial Polacre Paula [Paulina],
Caps Radich, captured last year by the Naval Squadron of the U.
States and carried to Malta, I request you to be pleased to furnish
me with the report of the officers concerned in the capture and management of the prize, that proper instructions may be forwarded to
Mr Pinckney concerning the complaint of the Imperial Minister. In
particular it is desired to know, whether a t any time after the capture
an offer was made to Cap$ Rrtdich of the release of his Vessel and the
payment of freight, and whether she has ever been released, a d d ] on
what terms, or if yet detained, under what suggestion or right.
[NA. SDA. Dom. L., Vol. 14, May 1802-May 1805.1
To Csptain Edward Preble, U. 8. Ravy, from Captain Stephen Decotur, Jr.,
U. 6. Xovy, commanding U. 8. Schooner Enlctprfze

MESBINA
March SOt+ 1804.

SIB,I had the honor of writing you from Palermo informing
of m intention to sppear off Tunis. after getting a supply of
and Gater. On my arrival a t Tunis I found the Triplitan in the

ds

547

WARS WIT23 BARBARY POWERS

same state I had left him that is, laying in the Mole stript & entirely
deserted by her men On my arrival here, I applied to Mr Broadbent
to effect the repairs of the Schooner. I am sorry to inform you on
opening the Seiling, I found her in a much worse state, than I had any
idea of. To give her a sufficient repair would be a lengthy and expensive Job. which I know is not your intention consequentIy I shall
only do what she cannot do without to make her safe in any season.
According to your directions I have examined the Gun Boats here,
there are Six equipt and in good order. about 20 Gun and Mortar
Boats hauled up which wants considerable repairs
The Carpenter informs me he will complete me in 12 days. I
shall urge him to effect it in less. Permit me to assure you Sir, I
shall join you as early as possible.
[LC. EPP, LB, Dec. 1803-April 1804.1
Extract from Diary of Captain Edward PrebIs, TJ. 8. Navy, Commodore of U. S.
Squadron in the Xediterranean, Friday, 30 March 1804

Fresh breezes & pleasant weather. Wind Variable from W to N W.
Tacked Ship for the Coast; At 6 P. M. the City of Tripoly S b W 8
or 9 Miles: Tacked off shore: Wind very light, h o s t calm; At
9 P. M. a sfrong gale sprang up suddenly from the N W Qwhich obliged
us to take in all our light sails, reef topsails & courses & send down
royal and top gall$Yards At 1 A. M. i t blew very heavy; Launched
top gall? Masts and rigged in the Jib boom; At noon under Close
reefed fore & main topsails and Storm Stay Sails. Syren in company. - Tripoly bore S b W
W distance 82 Miles. Latitude
Observed 34O12' No:
[LC. EPP, Diary, 1803-1804.1
To Lieutenant Isaac Chauncey, U. S. Navy, Waehington, D. C., from Secretary of
the Navy

NAVYDEPM*
March 31,1804 You will proceed to h'ew York and contract with Mr Chees[e]man
for twenty four pound Gun Carriages for the frigate Uniied Stabes, on
the best terms in your power. You and Cap%Barron d
ldetermine
as to the number wanted. Likewise as to the dimensions &$ and you
will contract accordingly. In case you should not be able to procure
all the Gun Carnages wanted in New York, procure as many as you
can there and on your return to the City of Phil*, see the Agent &
Contract for the residue.You will prior to leaving this for New York, consult with Cap'
Cassin and ascertain from him how many Sailing Masters, Boatswains,
Gunners, Carpenters & Sail-Makers are here and qualsed for their
respective Stations. We want Officers of these descriptions for the
5 Vessels now fitting out. After ascertaining how many are hem
that are good, ou will h o w how many are wanted, and m u r e
them in New ork, and send them to this place immediate y with
assurance that on their arrival here they shall receive from the
government their appointments. You will also rocure as many good Ship Carpenters to come to
this place to wor upon the Ships now fitting out a s may be in your

I7

E

f'

548

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1803 TO 1804

power. Get them on the best terms racticable, but don't s d e r
terms to revent your getting them. 54'e must have them. You
also while you are in New York give your assistannoe and
advice to the recruitin officer stationed there. The Agent a t New
- & the Agent in Phil* will each render
you every necessary assistance. -

d;

%ark

[NDA. OSW, Vol. 6, 1802-1805.1

To Yidshipmrn John 1.Qardner, 0.6. Navy, Philadelphia, Pa., from Becretary
of the Hsvy

NAVYDEPMT
March 41,1804 -

28Q inst Lieu1 Cox is ordered to this lace - so that the execution of the
recruiting orders devolves upon%ou.
arter Masters and Quarter Gunners may be entered, but as it
not be possible for you to ascertain in all c w s whether they are
fit for the Station or not, you had better enter them subject to the
condition, that they shaJl be confirmed if found competent to the
duties. Cases however occuning where the Individuals are personally known to you, to be qualified for the Stations, you may engage
them without being subject to this condition. Cases occurring where persons wishing to enter ss Ordinary Seamen, are known to you to have been six or eight years a t Sea, you
may allow $10 p' month if they will not enter for less - but first try
a t $8 - If they will not take that sum, offer $9 - and finally if
they will not take $9, give $10 if you are obliged to give 12 to Able
Seamen. Let me hear from you frequently. -

I have r e d your letter of the

2

[NDA. OSW, Vol. 6,1802-1805.)
Extract from journal of U. S. Brig Argus, Lieutenant Ieaac Hull,U. S. Xavy,
commanding, Battuday, 31 March 1804

These 24 hours begins with fresh breezes and Clear Weather the
Convoy in Company At 9 P M. fired s Gun and made the Sigi for
the Convoy to make more Sail set and took in Ssil as Occasion
Required. WDA pbotoetst.]
IMrPct from Diary of Captain Edward Preble, U. 8. Navy, commodore of U. 8.
Bqnodron in the Ibeditsrranean, Satarday, Sf March 1804

Strong Gales from the N Wr & cloudy, Squally weather. Under
close reefed topsails & reefed Courses. Standing to the N N E.
A t 6 P.M. mustered all hands to Quarters. At 8 A. M. the Sycn
fwo leagues off our lee beam - bore down to her. At 10 A. M.
wore to the S Wr. At noon fresh gales and a rough Sea - Latitude
Obd 35'00' No: Triply bore S S W distant 129 Miles - Eat
point of Malts N 5 E. 49 Miles [LC. EPP, D i m , 1803-1804.1

