NAVAL OPERATIONS
FROM APRIL TO SEPTEMBER 6, 1804

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS
Extract from jownsl of U. S. Brig Argw. Lieutenant Isaac Hull, U. S. Bavy,
commanding, Sunday, 1 Apnl 1804

at 5 Cape Poirchee bearing X % W in a range with mount Etna
at 6 the town of Syracuse bore r\' T T by N at 7 the town N IT' at
j4 past 8 Spoke the U, S. Schooner Vixen Cap' Smith came on board
us, at 9 Cap5 Sommers of the U. S. Schooner Naz~tiluscame on board
us a t dayhght employed beating in to the harbour of Syracuse a t
8 Spoke the Ship Tinilla of boston from Mnlta to Messina the town
bearing N N TT, set the larboard Studding sails and bore away for
Malta in Compy with the Vixen the convoy having got in
[XDA photostat.]
Extract from Diary of Captain Edward Preble, U. 6. Navy, Commodore of U. S.
Squadron in the Mediterranean, Sunday, 1 April 1804

Strong Gales from the N K IT & Cloudy 'Teather; Standing to
the W S W under close reefed topsails and Courses. At 2 P. M.
more moderate. Made more Sail; At 6 Swayed up top gall' Masts
At 8 A. M. up top gall! Yards. At 10 A. M. Made Signal for Cap!
Stewart; he came on board: I gave him orders to proceed to Tunis
Bay, in company with this Ship, as I think it necessaq to display some
forces before Tunis, in order to check their intention of hostilities
towards us - Supplied the Siren with a qunntity of Kood 8- Coal.
At Koon laying to, Supplied the Syren with a topmast studding sail
boom to mako her a Jihb boom. Latitude observed 34'00' Korth Tripoly bore South dist 60 Miles. Lampedosa K S TT M IT. disc
98 hfiles
[LC. EPP, Dlary, 1803-1804.1
Extract from journal of Midshipman P.Cornelius deKrafft, U. S. Navy, in U. S. Brig
Siren of 18 guns, Lieutenant Charles Stewart, U. 6. Navy, commanding, Sunday,
1 April 1804

At j4 past 7 the Commodore made sipnnl, prepare to send up top
gall$ yards. At 8 sent up top gall3 yards A t >4 past 8 TKa to the
N N K. -4t 1 1 the Commodore made signal for all Commanders to
repair on board him, back'd the main topsail, lowr'd down the cutter,
Lt Stewart went on board the Commodore with the first Officer of
the Prize ship Aiadona de Catupoliagne. j4 past 11 bmil'd up aftsr
main sail haul'd down fore top mast stay s! - the boat return'd
with the 1" Officer of the prize went on bc the Coxnm?again Meridian
moderate breezes & pleasf boarded fore tack must.erd the crew
Latt: Obs: 34'1' N.
[XDA.]
1

2

NAVAL OPERATIONS, APRIESEPTEMBER 6, 1804

To Sdshipman John Id. Gardrier, U. S. Navy, Philadelphia, Pa., from Secretary
of the Navy

NAVY
DEP~M~
April 9,1804 You will consider yourself berehy authorized and directed to stop
any h4idshi men passing through Philadelphia (and not ordered
upon specia similnr service) and order them to your assistance.
They will be useful in bringing the Men round here. Continue to
write to me daily. N: B: you may enter 8 or 10 quarter gunners @ $18. -

P

[NDA. OSW, Val. 6. 1802-1805.1
To Lieutenant Charles Ludlow, U. S. Ravy, New Pork,BT. Y., from Secretary of the
Navy

NAVYDEPMT

April 2,1804 -

I have recei~edyour Letter of the 28" ultimo. You may ship 6 or 8 Boatsu-ah's Mates @ $19 per month, and
3 quarter gunners a t 518 - 2 Yeomen of the Gun Room @ $18.
2 Coxswains @ $18, and 1 or 2 good Coopers, Stewards, Arnlourcrs,
and Masters at Arms @ $18 - You may also enter 30 Boys a t not
exceeding 6$ per month. You will consid~ryourself hereby empowered and directed to stop
any of the hlidshipmen passing through New York. f mean a n that
may not be ordered upon similar special duty, rind order t l ~ e mto
join you and assist you in the exrcution of your instructions. You may so alter the shippinr paprrs, thnt the responsibility of
the Landlords mng extend no farther than that the hien sliall enter
on board of the I e s s ~ l sin which they are to be brought to this place
and that they shall sail in such vessels. [NDA. OSW, Vol. 6, 1802-1805.)
To Walter Jones*, Alexandria. Va.. from Secretary of the Navy

N A V DEP
.

Ap. Sd 1804

I send you t h ~log- Rook of t h ~Fripntc f h ~ n a p ~ a l13
- ~ ' P WI'ork
and a. Journal Krpt by Cap"o1in Rodprrs on hoard thc John Adam8 [* T h e 8ecretsr;v of the Nevv on 27 March 1804 r ~ q ~ l e ~ t ehis
r l ~crviresrn
Judge Advocate of a Court of Enquiry into the conduct of Captain Richard V.
Morris, U. S. Navy.]
[NDA. GLB, Vol. 7, 1803-1805 1

To William Smith, Sr., Navy Agent, Charleston. S. C., from Secretary of the Navy

NAV.DEP
Apl 9 1804

Mr Gndsden FOPS to Chnrleston for the pu ose of entering 100
able Searn~nto serve on board the f r i ~ a I?nitcd
t~
taks Mc is irlsLructed
to allow 10$ pr m e and to give 2 months ~ d v n n c eupon responsible
security being ~ i v e n- but I fear thnt hr will not he able to pmcure
the men upon these terms - Finding that you cannot succeed on
these terms you may instruct Mr Gndstlcn to offer three months
advance - failing to procure them for three months advnnco, you

T

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

3

may instruct him to offer four - if he should fail on these terms he
may offer 12%pr m Q& 2 months advance failing for 2 months advance
3 or 4 may be offered and finally if it should be found impracticable
to procure the men on these terms you may instruct Ms Gadsden
to allow to the Landlords 2 dollars for each person entered - they
can certainly procure them and failing in all other means we must
make it their interest to exert themselves I Send you by the mail 2000 dollars should you want more money
I presume you may negotiate a bill on me for the am"ou may want
and you may draw a t sight
Let me request you to give Mr Gadsden every assistance in your
power - it is very imporbnt that the men sbould be brol~gfithere
as soon as possible - You must procure a vessel in season to bring
them here Let me hear from you frequently [NDA. GLB, Vol. 7, 1803-1805.1
To Midshipman Christopher Gadsden, Jr., U. 6. Navy, Washington, D. C., from
Secretary of the Navy

NAVYDEPT-

April 3.1804 You will repair immediately to Charleston S C. and there open
Rendezvous and use your utmost efforts to enter immediately 100
Able Seamen or if you can procure them 120. Blank Shipping papers
are enclosed. The hlen may be allowed $10 per month and 2 months
advance upon their giving responsible security. Failing to procure
then1 on these terms you will apply to the Agent and take instructions
from him on the subject. The responsibility of the Sureties for the
Seamen mi11 cease upon their nppearing on board of the Vessel or
Vessels brin ing them here, and upon the Vessels sailing for this place.
You will juige of the Exp~diencpof sending off s detachment of the
Men before the whole number shall proceed on, and should a detachment be sent, M! Marshall must accompany it. Confer with the
Agent upon this
The Agent wi furnish
-you with the necessary monies and render
you every other assistance in his power. Write to me by every Mail informing me of the progress you may
be making. -

rint

[NDA. OSW, Vol. 6, 1802-1805.1
To Midshipman Winlock Clarke, U. S. Nnoy, Navy Yard, Washington, D. C., from
Secretary of the l e v y

NAVYDEPMT
-

April 5.1804 You will immediately repair to AIexandria and open a rendezvous
and endeavour to entcr 50 Able Seamen, 50 Ordinary Seamen and
10 Boys. You will re ort daily your progress and usc every exertion
to ensure success.
Seamen to be allowed $10 pr month ;Ordinary
Seamen $8, and Boys $6, to be entered to serve 2 years; to receive 2
months advnnce u on giving responsible security. If on trial you f n d that Men cannot be entered on these Terms,
ou may offer 3 months advance or 4 if i t sbould be an inducement.
%ailing on these Terms you may oEer SG!
month and 2 mo, advance. -

A~P~

4

NAVAL OPERATIOiYS, APRIL-SEPTELI~BER6, 1804

You w
ill rrceive an advance of $600 and will make your requisitions
for any sum as it may be wanted. Blank Shi ping Popers are enclosed. The responsibility of the Sureties wil cease on the hlon
being delivered to Cap' Cassin at the Navy Yard here. -

P

[ND.4.

OSW, Vol. 6, 1802-1805.1

To Tobias Lear, U. S. Consul General, Algiers, from Captain William Bainbridge,
U. S. Navy

TRIPOLI
BARBARE3* April 1804
(red July 1I 'Q 1804from
& Consul of France)
DEAR
SIR, Your friendly letter of the 16'h Decern?, reached me on
the
of February, and was immediately answered. On the 17Q
of that month, the day the Frigate was burnt in this harbour, our
prison was surrounded with guards, and were c,ut off from every
communication mith all persons here. On the first of March we were
taken from the house which we had occupied since that unfortunate
day, the 31" Octobr last, and were moved to apartments within the
Castle, vhere the Basham lives, and have been kept closely confined
there until yesterday, when myself and four O5cers wcre furnished
with mules and liberty to take a ride in the Country, under Guard.
This indulgence of exercise was embraced after so long a confinement;
the Minister of foreign Affairs for this Regency, a very polite man,
hss assured me that the liberty of breathing the fresh air shall be
continued, but we have not permission to have access to the Consuls,
nor they to us: - this we should estimate more than the liberty of
walking out, but am doubtful of obtaining it.
On the 26th ult? Commodore Preble was off here, and sent a Boat
on shore, requesting permission to land some cloathing for our seamen,
who are much in want, which was refused; but gave permission for
his sending them in some Neutral Vessel, and 1 am in hopes of soon
receiving them from Malta. Mr Beaussier, Commissary General
and Charge Affairs for the French Republic to this Regency, went on
board the C o d t u i w n when off here, but I am ignorant of every thing
that took place.
Since our being here five of the Crew have turned Renegadoes, and
two died - the compliment at present is $00. We are all in tolerable
health, but extremely anxious to hear from you.
Commodore Preble sent us in February last one thousand dollars;
Mr Davis has remitted eight hundred; I haye drawn the following
Bills, viz. On Tunis - one thousand dollars, on Leghorn - five
hundred, on Malta six hnndred, - all which firnds have answered our
necessities, and left about five hundred dolls. on hand: I expect
soon another remittance from Tunis.
I sincerely hope that ou are comfortably settled, and that Mrq
Lear enjoys health and p easure in the climate of Algiers: Please to
tender her my best respect and grateful remembrance. I enclose this
to my friend Thaindle, and send i t to the Minister of Foreign Affairs
to be delivered Mr Beaussier to forward.
I omit writing to 0,Bricn on the uncertainty of his being with you.
Believe me my dear friend to be with sincere wishes for the happiness of yourself and family,
P. S. The great and constant attention which Mr Davis, charge of
Mairs a t Tunis, has paid to relieve our situation all in his power,

9

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

5

claims my duty in making it known to the Government - I have
therefore to request you will bc pleased to mention it in your letters
to the Secretary of State, that we have received from him every assistance which his situation could possibly give.
[Stephen Decatur Col.]
To Purser Benjamin Alline, U. S. Navy, from Secretary of the Navy

NAVYDEP!
April 4. 1804 You will procced from this place by the most convenient Route to
Chilicothe, where you will receive the sum of $20,000 for the use of
the Marines now a t Kew Orleans or proceeding there, or that may
hereafter be stationed at that place or in its Vicinity.
From Chilicothe you will proceed by the most convenient route to
New Orleans which you are to consider as your Station. To the Marines that are or may be stationed a t Kew Orleans or in
it's Vicinity, you are to act as Pay-Master 8E Quarter-Master. Your general duties will be, to keep all the accounts in relation to
pay and Clothing. The provisions are to be furnished by the Contractor for the Army, to whom the Secretary of War has @en the
requisite Instructions on the subject. The Commanding Officer of the Marines at New Orleans mill make
his requisitions upon you for all Articles in the Quarter-hiaster's &
Barrack-Master's Departments - that are not to bc supplied by the
Commanding Officer of the hlarine Corps, which Articles you are to
furnish accordingly. For your services you will receive the Pay and Rations to which
your Warrant as Purser in the Navy entitles you, and a Commission
(to be hereafter fixed by me) upon all purchases made by you upon
the requisitions of the Commanding Officer of the Marines a t or near
New Orleans. You will receive from the Accountant of the Navy detailed Instructions in relation to the Forms in is-hich your accounts are to be kept
and returned to this Office. [NDA. OSW, Vol. 6, 1802-1803.1
To Midshipman Edward Bennett. U. S. Navy, Washington, D. C., from Secretary
of the Navy

NAVYDEPMT
April 4,1804 You will repair immediately to Norfolk and there open Rendezvous
and use your exertions to enter 150 Able Seamen, 50 Ordinary Seamen,
and 20 Boys. To Able Seamen you will allow $10 per month. To
Ordinary Seamen $8 - m d to Boys $6. The whole to be entered to
serve two years. Two months advance may be given on the customary security being given. Should You not be able to procure the Men
on these Terms, you will apply to the Agent for his Instructions.
The responsibility of the Sureties for the Seamen m-ill cease upon the
delivery of the lMen on board of the Vessels which d l bring them to
this place and on such Vessels sailing from Norfolk. You will judge
of the expediency of sending off detachments of Men as you may enter
them. The Agent will G s upon the Conveyauce and you will consult
with him on this subject. I n case you send off Detachments a Midshipman must accompany them.

6

NAVAL OPERATIONS, APRIL-SEPTEMBER 6, I804

M' Bedinger will furnish you with the necessary monies and render
you eve other assistance. ~ i d s % f i t c h e l is
l ordered to place himself under your Command.
Other assistance shall be sent to you in time. Blank Shipping Papers you will herewith Receive. You will give me daily information of the progress you may be
making in the execution of these orders. [NDA. OSW, Vol. 6, 1802-1805.1
To Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Navy, from John Gavino, U. 6. Consul, Gibraltar

GIBRALTAR
4 April 1804.
DEAR
SIR,I have not heard from you since my last respects to you
under date 22nd Ulto. pr the victualing ship Woodrop Sims Captain
Reddick, who proceeded for Syracuse under convoy of the Argw captain Hull to whom 1 advanced supplies to the Amount of $1069-10 Your last Dispatch for the Navy Department have been for some days
on board the Ship Shepherdess Captain OBrien bound to New York,
and detained by contrary winds. We have had late arrivals from the
U S in 32 days - a t the time of their departure the loss of the Philadelphia had not reached there - nor do they know of any Frigates
getting ready for these seas - I herewith hand you a letter from Consul
Kirkpatrick, and another from Consul Yznardi - By the latter you
will see the friendly interposition of the Emperor of Russia with the
Ottoman Porte on behalf of the crew of the Philadelphia, which may
have a good effect. At any rate it is a proof of his friendship towards
our Government
We lately had a cutter from England with dispatches for the Navy
Comer here and Lord Neilson - She did not anchor but proceeded
immediately to the fleet - All that transpired was that the King had
got better, and now it is reported a great expedition was going on in
England - An embargo was laid in all the Ports on shipping of every
denomination
[LC. EPP, LB, April-Xov. 1804.1
To George Davis, U. S. Charge d'Affaires, Tunis, from Captain Edward Preble,
U. 6. Navy

UNITED
STATESSHIPConstitution

Tunis Bay 4th April 1804
DEARSIR,I anchored here last evening, and am in bopes to see
you on bonrd in the course of this day. If you can send me a quantity
of fresh Stock, Vegetables, and Fruit, it will be acceptable, as we have
some Invalids. I am not so well myself as to be able personally to
pay my respects to His Highness the Bey of Tunis, but have some
communications to make to him through you, and wish to see you as
soon as possible PS. As I intend leaving this place tomorrow you will oblige me by
rmitting your Drogerman to purchase me the follow supply of
g e s h Provisions Viz - 5 Bullocks - 30 Dozen Fowls 4 Dozen
Pidgeons - 30 Sheep - 1000 Eggs - Plenty of Cabbages - Oranges
& Lemons &c%nd some corn for the Stock -

7

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

Extract from Memorandum Book of Captain Edward Reble, U.6. Navy, on board
U. 6. Frigate Constilrdion. 4 April 1804

Anchd. a t Tunis Bay. Syren in company.
[LC origi~lal.]
Extract from log book kept by Saillng Master Nathaniel Haraden, U. S. Navy, on
board U. 6. Frigate Gnrfitution, Wednesday, 4 April 1804

hloderate breezes from the W S W - Employed working ship to
windward between Zernbra Island & Cape Farma - At 2 P. ht.
the wind shifted from W S W to N b E which is fair for Tunis Hallled over for Cape Farina, till it bore by compass N W b W
W
VC'e then bore up for Cape Carthage which bore S W 5 lengues This Cape fornis the North entrance to the Auchorage a t Tunis As
you haul in with cape farina you will observe sotlie broken sand
putchrs ~.esc~mt~ling
snow, and a Watch Tower to the west of them,
ant! some buildings to the West of them, and some bl~ildi~lgs
near the
shore on t h socrth
~
side - Cape Carthage is of a moderate height
wit11 an old watch tower on ~t and is hlghrr than any projectillg point
between it and cape farina - Ten miles to the N E of Cape Carthape we hacl 24 fathoms soft bottom, a t 6 pm anchor'd with the
small Bower in 10 fathoms water - Veered to one third of a cable We are now at Anchor In the outer road stead leading to Tunis which
bears West 9 miles, Cape Cttrthage N N u'V nearly 3 hliles - Goletta
Castle which guards the Entrance to Tunls bears W b S W S 5 hliies It shews ncar about 50 Guns, and a fort nearly on a level with the Sea
si~ews17 large guns A little to the S. W. of the Castle near Cape
Cartllnge is a small Castle shrwirlg 8 Guns We are secure in this
situation from the winds esce tlng between N E b E & N b E. The
S E wirtd has a reach of 10 Sli es - Cleared ship & slept at Quarters
during night with springs in readiness - Moderate t h o ' the
Xight - Syren In company. - At 6 A. M. hoisted a Jack & fired
a gun as a signal for a shore boat - A4ade signal for the Syren to
weigl~and for her Captam. At 10 she weighed & stood up the harbor - This forenoon stayed the Topmests & set up the rigging
Surgeons report 7 sick, 8 C O I I V ~ ~&' 2 discharged
Noon moderate breezes from the E N E -

r

[LC.

EPP, Log Comfttutzon, 1803-1804.1

Extract from journal of Midshipman F. Cornelius defiafft, U. S. Navy, in U. S. Brig
Siren of 18 guns. Lieutenant Chwles Stewart, U. 6. Navy, commanding, Wednesday, 4 April 1804

At % past 7 took in top gall? sails, down jib took in all sail & came
too in 10 fathoms water abreast of the City of Carthage in Tunis
bay, prepar'd the boardiug pikes, battle axes, the marines of the
watch under arms Midnight clear & pleast all the watch under arms. At % past
6 Lr Stewart went on board the Commodore P? signal $ ast 7 got
pr signal of the Commc Li Stewart return' with the
Pilot of t e Frigate, Hove up made sail & stood farther up the bay
under
of Tunis At 9 mann'd the cutter, the Pilot went to the town in her Meridian back'd the main topsail -

waK

[NDA.]

1

8

NAVAL OPERATIONS, APRIL-SEPTEMBEB 6, 1804

To Lieutenant Charles Ludlow, U. 6. Navy, H e w York,N. Y,,from Secretary of the

NAVYd ~ p t
April 6,1804 If it will benefit
I have received y o u letter of the 21st ultimo.the Recruiting service, you mag enter all the Men (which you have
been directed to procure) for the Frigate President. You may also
mention that you are to be one of the Of£icers of that Frigate. you have acted correctly in detaining the blidsfiipmen to assist
pou. You have anticipated my orders to you on the sub'ects which
You will perceive expressly inrests you with authority an directions
to detain any that might be useful. K.B. I enclose the rates of Wages allowed to Petty M c e r s . -

d

{XDA. OSnr, Val. 6 , 1802-1805.1

To Tobias Lear, U. S. Consul General, Algiers, from Captain William Bainbridge,
U. S. Navy
T R I ~ OBARBARY
LI
5 t h April 1804
recg 29 June 1804

D E ~ SIR,
R I this moment received your much esteemed favor of
the 12tV~ebruary,and yours of the l G t h December came to h a d
on the 8t"f February. I have written to you at the severd following
dates, Viz. - 12'QJanuary, 9 t h February, and 3* of April, and hope
that they will safely reach you, as I have been particular in detailing
our unfortunate situation. I n mine of the 3'4 illst$I informed you that
on the l e t of March we were moved from the house that we had occupied, to apartments witlun the Castle; they are not so good as those
we left, but are cornfortablc ones, and wcre we only permitted to h a w
comm~mication~ v i t hany of the Consuls here, our situation would be
rendered as comfortable as could be expected for prisoners. Our
people are obligcd to work, and a t present are in want of cloathing,
which I expect everj- hour from Malta: I am sorry to observe that there
are some unthinking wretches amorgst them who will sell their only
shirt for n drink of grog.
After having received a letter from Mc Catbcart, and seen the
one lxe m a t e to 3lr Nessen, Danish Consul at this place, I am not
astonished to hear of his arrogance, and assuming self-c~nscquencr
in addressing you; - the man certainly must be dcrangrd in his intellectuals. or lost to all reflection; for my own part I considcr h P C . - as
a private citizen, and have informed him in my answer to his letter,
that by the eclrly attention you had paid to our misfortune we were
provided for the present, and for the future should make my call for
supplies on the Commodore and yourself: I bope my dear Col! that
ou =-ill not let the absurd vanity of a weak man disturb your passions.
ft mag appear like p e n t ingratitude in me (which heaven forbid that
any instance of my life should show) to treat that Gentleman's officious
kindness in this manner; but I consider i t in the light that you do.
On the 26$hult? Commodore Preble was off hcre and sent a Boat on
shore with letters; bhe day follooc~ing hir Bcaussier, Commissary
General for the French Republic a t thls Regency, went on board the
Constitution, and had an intemieu- with the Commodore, - my not
having access to Mr Beaussier prevents my being informed of
particulars.

W'ARS UTITHBARBARY POWERS

9

Respecting the English mcntioned in your letter, I suppose something
will be done. The British Consul a t this place lpft here about the
2StQ of last month.
I n my last I gave a statement of the Bills I have drawn, and the
monies which had been received by me, and the sum a t present on
hand; I annex a duplicate of that part of my letter to the bottom of
this, from which you will percieve that the early provision you made for
us has been more than sufficient for our immediate wants. hiyself
and Officers feel fully sensible of the interest you have taken to alleviate
the misfortune of us and tlle Crew, and permit me again to repeat my
assurances to you that your kind attention will ever be gratefully
remembered by me. By letters from bl' Davis (who has been extremely attentire to our unfortunate situation) t 1 k day received I am
advised of a Bill he has sent in my favor, for one thousand dollars,
which I expect ~villcome to haild in a day or two.
Ff my friend O.Brien and family are still with you please to present
my best respects to them, and tell 0.Brien I think he has been a little
oeglegcnt in not writing me - I wish him and his much happiness;
I was in hopes of seeing him before he sailed for America; in my former
letters I have express myself thereon. Remember me to hlr Thainville Br. family; I wrote to him on the gt? February and 3'3 instant. I
will also thank you to give my compliments to Consul Bbeii, who was
very polite and atteutire to me w11en a t Algiers.
hly Officers and self are much obligctl to hlrg L e ~ for
r her kind remembrance and good wishes; please to tender her my. best wishes for
her happiness. After my leaving Barbary, no inducement could make
me wish to set font in it ugain, esccpt to visit Algiers, and under your
roof to hare the pleasure of expressing the fcelings of my soul for your
attention in the hour of misfortune
Belicve me, my friend, that it requires more than the fortitude of
man to bear my daily reflections: Injurious reports, loss of services
to my Country, wife and child in America, are painful subjects for
rontemplation in n close prison in Tripoli. I scnd this open to the
hlinistcr of Forcign Affairs to be sent to the French Commissary here,
to forward to you
Extract from last letter.
Commodore Preble sent us in Februars Inst, One thousand dolls.;
Mr Davis has remitted eight hundred; I harc d r a m the following
Bills - On Tunis for One thousand dolls., on Leghorn for five hundred, on h l d t a for six hundred, - all which funds have answered our
necessities, and left five hundred dolls. on hand.
[NA. SDA. CL, Algiers, Vol. 7, Part 1, Jan. 1804-Kov. 1805.1
To Stephen Cathalan, Jr., U. S. Commercial Agent, Xarseilles, France, from
Robert R. Livingston, U. S. W s t e r to Paris, France

COPY
PARIS A p d 180.6
SIR I have receiv* your favor of the 26tQMarch - I believe that
Bombardes might be obtained here with the convience tlio' not with
the Direct approbation of Government but as neither Con~modore
PrebIe nor M' Cathcart have writen alone t.o me on the subject I C ~ D not undertake to do any thing in i t 8: the rather ns I have procured

10 ATAVAL OPERATIONS, APRIGSEPTEIlBER 6,1804
the interposition of this government with the Dey fo eflect a peace &
I am not without hopes New negotiations are on foot for that purpose in consequence of the instructioils I have forwarded to Commodore Prebie
[XA. SDA. CL, Marseilles, Vol. 2, March 1803-Nov. 1827.1

To the Bey of Tunis from Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Navy

U: S. SRIPCon.*iitUtion
Tunis Bay 5'P A p d 1804

(COPY)

MAYITPLEASE
YOUREXCELLENCY.
Not Iong sinoe a letter came io to
my hands, written by Your Excellency to Commodore Xlorris, relativa to the conduct of Mr Cathcart when he last presented himself a t
Tunis; and also respecting some Prize-Goods alledged to be Tunisian
property, captured and detained by one of tke American Squadron.
1 immediately forwarded Your Excellency's letter to the Presiclent of
the United States, and am confident that he will disnpprove in the
most pointed mariner, an hasty and improper conduct of hfc Cnthcart's towards Your Excel ency; and that fie will promptly cause strict
justice to be rendered to the Party claiming the goods csptured and
detained as aforesaid ISot being particularly acquainted with the
circumstances relative to that capture and detention, I could not take
upon myself to regulate the business, and considered i t much more
proper, to refer the whole to my Government, as Commodore Morris
would be there present to answer for his conduct.
I hare sent a Vessel to Algiers for Col: Lear Consul General of the
United States, who is soon expected, and wilt have the honor (with
Pour Excellency's permission) to visit Tunis. He is fully empowered
by the President of the United States, to regulate all our affairs with
Your Excellency, and I hope it will be done to your satisfaction. I
regret that the present state of my health, and the hurry I am in to
execute an importaut business, which requires my immediate attention, will deprive me of the honor of personally paying my respects to
Your Excellency a t pour Castle; and beg Your Excellency to be assured, that nothing short of the most urgent necessity to leave this
Bay immediately, could have prevented me from lar~dinga t Tunis.
I have every reason to believe, that the President of the United
States, will confirm Mr Davis (our present Charge des Affairs near
Your Exceilency) as our Consul for the Regency of Tunis; and in the
mean time, i t will be pleasing to our Government, that Your Excellency considers him as their proper representative.
I expect very soon the arrival of several Ships of T a r from the
United States, and it is probable by some of them, such instructions
relative to the conduct of hrIr Ca thcart, and the business of the PrizeGoods wiU be received, as to give Your Excellency every satisfaction.
His Excellency

9

HAMOUDA
BASHAW
BEY

of Tunis

[NA. SDA. CL, Tunis, Vol. 2. Part 2, 1803-1806.1

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

11

Presumably to Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Navy, from the Seamen of U. 6.
Schooner Enterprize

MESSINA
April 6'h 1804
HONORED
SIR,We the Crew of this Schooner actuated by a consciousness of having discharged our dut b the utmost es far as we
engaged in support of the rights a n 8 independence of Amerima,
against the Enemies of that happy Nation, beg leave to solicit tne
favor of your attention to our rights as freemen. We, Sir, have
served America six months over our time. Some of us have been two
years and three Months and some more from our dearest ties; while
our Wives & families left in an unprotected state, perhaps labouring
under the most distressed circumsta.nces for want of that suppi which
they have a just claim on us, but our long absence has rendered
impracticable. Can we then call ourselves hfen if we do not cast
our thoughts on our families, most of whom exist in that Country
Or may we
that we have risked our lives to defend and protect -?
expect to be impressed in a sorvice, whose liberty 8nd independence
our fathers fought and bled to establish and defend - against tyranny
& oppression?
The time has again expired that we expected B-ould arrive and with
it our discharge, but which at present we are without knowing resting however on your goodness - we trust you will appeal to our
worthy Captain for his testimony of our conduct as a means of establishing ourselves in your opinion in so much so, as to procure the
favour of your compliance with the request of Your Obr f-Tbip Servants.
Seamen of the UNITED
STATES
SCHOONER
Enterprize
[LC. EPP, LB, Dec. 1803-April 1804.1
Extract from journal of U. S. Brig Argus, Lieutenant Isaec Hull,U. S. Navy,
commanding, Thursday, 5 Aprrl 1804

At Anchor in Syracuse harbr These 24 hours Commence with
light breezes hoisted in the launch the Vizen saiied in the night [NDA photostat.]
Extract from Diary of Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Navy, Commodore of U. S.
Squadron m the lediterzanean, Thursday, 6 April 1804

Kind S E. Moderate & pleasant. At 5 P. M. the Syren brought
the Consul dow-n & he came on board with his drogerman. Saluted
him with 5 Guns He informed me the Tunisians were quiet at
present: and that Ca t Decatur had left, this place about two weeks
since, after having B ockaded a Tripoline Polacre of 16 Guns for 16
Days, and obliging her to dismantle & haul up, and the crew to go
home from Tripoly for the fear of going to sea, and falling in with
our cruizers. At 10 A. 11.hlr Davis our Consul left us, in the Pinnace
for Tunis. I wrote to the Bashaw by him

f'

(LC. EPP, Diary, 1803-1804.1
Extract from journal of Midshipman F. Corneliue deKrafft, U. 6. Navy, in U. 6. Brig
Siren of 18 guns,Lieutenant Charles Stewart, U. 6. Navy, commanding, Thursday,
6 April 1804

Commences fresh breezes clear & pleas? westher. % past Meridian
the Cutter retum'd. At 1 the Commq made signal to speak us, run
up the Cuttor mnde sail & beat out of the harbour A t H past 2 came

12 ilTAV A L OPERATIOhTS,APRIL-SEPTEMBER 6 , 1804
too with the stitrbd a ~ ~ c h oinr 10 fathoms, Cape Carthage bearing
N IT. Point Soliman E 4! S Lt Stewart went on bg the CommQ At
4 a signal from the Cornme to get under way, brought too. M past
4 LC Steu~artretnrn'd run up the cutter, made sail & stood up the
bay. At 5 Mr D a ~ + sour Consul came on b q n a shore boat. Wore
round & stood for the Cornmy % past 5 came too again. At 6 Li
Stewart, &- the wnsu! went on bg the C o r n ? who fired a salute of
five guns - Sfidnight all the watch under arms Lt Sten-art return'd
run up tbe cutter. Light airs 8- p1eas-t
S Lr Stewart went on
board the Commc At 10 Ll Stewart return'd, the Consul left the
Commodore, who fired a salute of 5 guns. 3; past 10 the C o m d went
to Tunis XIeridian light airs from the West & warm weather. )4 past
Meridian Li Stewart wrcnt on b? the Comrnc At 10 he return'd Midnight light airs & variable. (NB those remarks include 36 Hours.)
[NDA.]
To General William Allan from Midshipman William Henry Allen, U. S. Navy

NEWPORK
6 f h April 1804
DEARFATHER
TTe arrived here to day at Meridian 30 hours from
Ken-port where we arrived a t 5 P kI. of the 4th Inst and did not leave
it untill the next monImmediately after my landing here f had the luck (1 cannot yet
yet determine whether it is good or bad) to fall in with Cnptn [Isaac]
Chauncy direct from ITashington who being ernpowcrd by Secy of
the Savy to Stop any officer, has detained me here to take charge of
a schooner hound round to the city with naval storcs and seaman:
he Informs me that there are now fitting out the frigate President of
44 guns tbc U. S. of 44 the the ConsleUalwn & Conpess of 36 & J .
Adams of 32 guns Captn Jam. {Samuel]Barron m Commander in the
Philadelphia goes oxit in the President he being o der than Preblc will
supercede 1:im in the command of the Squadron the Congress, Captn
Rodgers chose in preference to the C7. S. which James Barron is to
comnand &- Captains Campbell $ Chauncy the ConsteUation 6. John
Adams - This looks a little like doing something this summer the
U. S. & Presiden.t mount 30 - 24 pounders on the gun deck the Congress & Consfella.f.lon28-18 pounders and the J. Adurns 24-12
pounders * * *

?'

[Huntington Library Quarterly.]

I6 April 18041
Soundings off Cape Carthage and vicinity

The old castle on cape Carthage bearing N, 9' X N, f4 mile, you
have 7 fathoms. Steering 14. S IT pr Compass K mile from the shore
you have 4 fathoms from Carthage up to a rocky point on which there
is a low battery of four Guns.
Goletta W b N 1 & ?4 Mile)
Cape Carthage N E '% E & You have 4% fat119
Cimario E N E The round white fort J1' k IT,Cape Carthsge and Cape Farina shut
in, you have 5 fathoms
TUNIB
BAYApn'l Cth1804.
[LC. EPP, Vol. 10, Feb.-April 1804.1

V'ARS U'ITIT BARBARY PO WEBS

13

To Captain Edward Preble, U. 6. Navy, from George Davis, U. 6. Charge d9ABaires,

Tunis

AMERICAN
HOUSE,
Tunis April 6* 1804.
SIR,I have this moment returned from Bardo, after a warm and
menacing conversation with His Excellency, which I have not time
to give you in detail; suffice it to say, that the subject is the immediate
return, or payment for the Tunisian property captd and sold as already
stated you. He refused to open the letter you addressed him, and
directed me to say, that he will receive no excuse of any kind for a
further delay. I informed His Excellency that Consul Lear was
daily expected, who would settle all difficulties and that you had not
the authority to answer his clainls; be observed "I have the power to
capture your Vessels, and prty myself," adding "let us not discuss
t h s subject any longer it will only lead to .rvtlrm remarks. Apprize
the Admiral that thls affair must be settled before he leaves the h ~ r bour, his answer d l guide my conduct.
I state you thus briefly the situation of affairs,and send you express
my Drogerman for your reply, whom I beg you not to detain longer
than you possibly can avoid: he will return this evening, in order that
I may go to the Palace in the morning.
I would come on board myself but should be too much fatigued to
return this evening. There are other reasons which induce me to
remain, and which shall be stated you, when I have the pleasure of
seeing you.
[LC. EPP, LB, Dec. 1803-April 1804.1
To George Davis, U. S. Charge d'Afaires, Tunis, from Captain Edward Prebie,
U. S. l e v y

(COPY
1

U. S. SHIPConsnstitulion
Tunis Buy April 6Q 180.4.

DEARSIR, I have this moment recg Your letter of this date, in
answer to which I have only to observe that if His Excellency the Bey
had read my letter to him of yesterday's date, I presume he could not
but have been satisfied with the information it contained relative to
the prize-Goods captured by Commodore Morris' Squadron; but as
he will not attend to my communications and absolutely refuses to
mad my letter, how is i t possible for me to Satisfy him? The only
answer that I can give to his demand of Settlement for those goods
before this Ship leaves the Bay, is that I am under the necessity of
leaving it tomorrow and shall most certainly leave it in the course of
the diy.
I am not authorized to say more to His ExcT on the Subject of the
Captured goods, than I had already said, and if he should declare
war as he threatens I nm confident he must have alreadv resolt-ed on
it, without this frivolous pretext. On Your answer %illdepend my
future movements with the Naval force under my Command.
I shall positively sail by 3. PM. tomorrow and wish first to See
You on board if possible.
[KA.

SDA. CL, Tunie, Vol. 2, Part 2, 1803-1806.1

14 XAVAL OPERATIONS, APRILSEPTEMBER 6 , 1804
-act

from journal of U. 6. Brig d ~ y sLieutenant
.
Isanc Ed,U. S. Navy,
commandmg, Friday, 6 April 1804

At 10 AM, weighed anchor and made sail out of the harbour [of
Syracuse] bound to the Westward - * * * Draught of Water
Bft 14 feet 4 Inchq - F o n d 12 feet 2 Inches
[NDA photostat.]
Extract from journal of Midshipman F. Cornelius deKratrt, U. S. Navy, in IT. S. Brig
Sinn of 18 guns, Lieutenant Charles Stewart, U. S. Navy, commanding, Friday,
6 April 1804

f

Light Airs & variable. Crew employ'd repairing sails ma
nippers &c 4 c Rind from the PIT East fresh & pleast At 6 s s i p a
from the Cornme to get under way. At % p a t 6 weigh'd & stood out
of the bay. Lt Stewart came on board. At 7 came too in 6 fathoms.
At K past 7 beat to quarters cast loose the guns, set the watch each
man under arms Mid night dark & heavy gales. [KDA.]

To lieutenant John Casein, U. S. Bavy, Rsvy Yard, Washington, D. C., from
Secretary of the Navy

NAVY
DEP~
A p d 7,1804 I yesterday received a letter from the Kary Constructor informing
me that he has engaged 15 or 16 workmen exclusive of his Foreman and
,4pprentice, at Phil*, and expects 6 or 6 from Balt9 That to the
Carpenters from Phil* he had enpaged to give a per diem allo~vanceof
$2 50/100 u-ith an allowance of 16%to each for his Espences down and
two days work lost. Those from Baltimore he has engaged a t $2 p'
day with an allo~~ance
of $5 to each for their expences in coming here.
His Foreman he has engaged at $3 25/100 per day with his expences
here and back after continuing six months if he should choose to
return a t that time. The whole he has engaged to allow Grog twice
a day while at work.
confirm and let the Purser of the
All these engagements you
Yard pay the Men immediately for their Expences down agreeahl to
the rates stipulated between Mc Doughty and them. lnsteacf of
allowing Grog, allow to each of these men an addition to their pr
diem allowance of pay, 6 cents per day. You may also allow to the
Plumbers Men 6 cents per day each in lieu of Grog. hlr Doughty has suggested that it will probably be expedient to
raise the allowance of some of the Persons heretofore employed under
him. Of this you will judge and act accordingly, but the rates of
their pay, if encreased must not exceed the allowance made to the
hlen procured by hlr Doughty in Phi"M'
Doughty has also mentioned that it u-ill probably be expedient to raise the Rages of the
Mastmakers to $2 50/100. Of thi. you will also judge. - The plumber
is to be allowed for his service 166 66 2/3$ p' month commencing from
the 1'3 of the present month April 1804
[KDA. 0 8 W , Vol. 6, 1802-1805 1
Extract from Hemorandurn Book of Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Navy, on board
u. S. Frigate ~ ~ u t f t u l i o7n April
,
1804

Put to sea in a gale from the N. W.
[LC original.J

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

15

Extract from Diary of Captain Edward Preble, U. B. Navy, Commodore of U. 8.
Squadron in the Mediterranean, Saturday, 7 April 1804

Moderate Breezes from the R7 N W. & cloudy. At Anchor in
Tunis Bay, Syren in company, At 5 P. M. a shore boat came off
with the Drogerrnan of our Consul who brought me a letter from him
which informed me that the Bey insisted on my landing to pay my
respects to him, and to pay for certain Tunisian property taken by
Cornmra Morris's Squadron. I answered the letter by saying I knew
nothing of the property in question, and that an appearance of a gale
obIiged to put to sea immediately, Ordered the Syren to stand into
the bay and anchor abreast of the Goletta to recieve any communication from the Consul; At 6 P. M with the Wind from the N W b N,
weighed anchor and stood to sea under close reefed topsails & Courses;
Blowing very heavy. At Midnight passed Zembra Island: about 5
miles on Our lee Beam. At Jh past 2 A. M. i t bore S b Vi 3 leagues.
At 4 A. M it blew a heavy Gale; Handed fore & Mizen top Sails and
launched top gallt Masts. A t 6 A. M. the gale had increased with
Violent Squalls - handed the foresail. A t 7 9.M. we were 30 Miles
to the North of Cape Bon. Wore Ship to the W S 'St'. & brought to
under reefed mainsail & storm stay s~ils: A heavy Sea. At Noon
saw Cape Bon S S TT disc about 20 hiiles - * * *
[LC. EPP, Diary, 1803-1804.1
Extract from log book kept by Sailing Master Nathaniel Earaden, U. S. Navy, on
board U. S. Frigate GmtiWion. Saturday, 7 April 1804

Moderate breezes from the W N IT.
At single anchor in Tunis Bay - At 4 P. M. a shore boat came off Towards evening the weather became clo~ldyand overcast and had the
appearance of a gnle from the Northq Secured the Guns, Keighed &
came to sail under three reefed topsails & Courses.
The Syren stood farther into thc Bay and Anchored - TTe carried
a press of sail in order to weather Zembra Island situated 10 miles to
the N N W of Cape Bon and hearing from us E N E. 24 Miles A t Midnight passed Zembra Island nearly 5 Miles on our Lee
Beam - A t ): past 2 A. M. took our departure from it bewing
S h IT,8 miles By 4,4. M.we hnd handed the fore and Mizen Toptop pnll' >fasts.
sails & I,al~ncI~ed
By 6 A. 31. it blew a violent gnle from the S N TT with a h e a w sea
& frequent squnlls - Reefed the foresail, IIsnded it Q the Main T
sail.
By 7 A. hi, we were near 33 Miles to the Northwq of Cape Bon, at
which time we wore to the W S IT in order to avoid dangers which lye
between Cape Ron 6 the Island of Maritimo
Brought to under reefed Mainsail & storm stay sails - The ship
Iabors & pitches heavy - Set forurard the fore runners & tackles in
order to ease the bowsprit - The weather was hnzy & overcast with
heavy pates all the forenoon & the larid was obscilred till a little before
noon when we saw Cape Bon bearing S S R K IT distant by our
obserrn tion 14 Miles The Gale continues from the N N W.
Latitude observed 37'22' N.
[LC.

EPP, Log Constiiulion,1803-1804.1

Extract from journal of Midshipman F. Cornelius dexrafft, U. S. Navy. in U.S. Brig
Siren of 18 guns, Lieutenant Charles Stewart, U. S. Navy. commanding, Saturday,
7 April 1804

Commences with stiff gale, & cloudy squally weather.
4 hoisted
out the barge & sent M r Budd with the Tunissian (that had staid on
board all night) on shore. % past 7 the barge return'd, let her astern
& po.yJd out more cable, over hauIJd a range of the LG cable K past
9 unbent top ga,ll sails & bent the old Ones - Meridian still blowing
very heavy from tho N. N i T crew employ'd middle stitching sails
blacking h a m $ cloths &c a t 7 beat to quarters h gave the watch
their arms Midnight strong gales & cloudy. [WDA.]
--

-

Extract from journal of Midshipman F. Cornelius dexrafft, U. 8. Navy, in U.S. Brig
Siren of 18 guns, Lieutenant Charles Stewart, U. 6. Navy, commanding, Sundry,
8 April 1804

Meridian the dmerican C'onsul & his Attendants came on board,
in a shore boat & brot with them a great quantity of sheep, Vegitables,
Poultry 8: Fruit. - At 6 hoisted out the barge a t 7 hoisted her in
again hiidnight moderate breezes $ pleas? u-ind N by W all the watch
under arms. [XDA.]
To Secretary of the Navy from Lieutenant Isaac Chauncey, U. S. Bavy

NEWYORKApril 9'h 1804.
SIR.I did not arrive here untill the evening of the 5'h Ins$ owing
to the extreme badness of t,heroads - I lost no time in making arrangements for the business that I was sent upon, however, Mr Cheeseman's
being out of town. prevented my closing tor the Gun Carriages untill
the Day following. when he contracted to furnish 30 Gun Carriages
for 24 Pounders all compleat, made of the best materials, on, or
before t.he 21"! of May nest, it was the shortest time that he would
contract for, he also declined contracting for a specific sum, but
would furnish the materials, and get the work done on the best
terms possible, I hope the time &. terms will meet with your
approbation. I also send 03, this Day, seven Ship Carpenters, under charge of
hfr Allen, 1%-ho1 detained for that purpose. it is all that. I could prevail on t o go this day, but tomorrou- I expect 12 or 14 more \rill
follo~v,I hove agreed to pay them two Do119 per Day - wwliile t h ~ y
are employed at the Xavy Yard. at Washington (Sundays excepted)
the pay to commence from the Day that they report themselves to
the Kah-y Office, or C f ~ p % ~ a a n , also to pay their expencee to and
from Washington - they however are to procure their own board
& Lodging, and be responsible for all expences they may be a t
TVhile a t Washington those are the best terms on which I wuld
procure good Carpenters here, 1 see but little prospect at present of procuring any suitable charecters for Lfasters, Boatswains, or Gunners, shdl however exert
myself to procure at least one of each Description before I leave
this. -

WARS WITH BARBARY POVC-ERS

17

Lt Ludlow has already sent off near seventy men under charge
hfr Leacmft, and will on JVednesday next most probably send off
fifty or sixty more, Mr Ludlow appears to be making use of every

exertion to procure the number of recruits ordered, & in my opinion
the service would suffer nothing here from my a.bsence, therefore
with that impression, as soon as the other business that was entrusted
to me is compleated, I shall return to Washington with all possible
dispatch, [NDA.

MC LB, 1804-5.1

To Captain Edward Preble, 0 . 6 . Navy, from George Davis,U. S. Charge d'bffaires,
Tunis
ON BOARD
THE U. STATES
BRIGSyren
April .9Q 1804

SIR I have the satisfaction t,o inform you, that all is again quiet
here, for six weeks, at the expiration of which term, satisfaction
must be made for the captured goods in question
I mucll regret not hnving the pleasure of seeing you again as it
would probably have amused you, to have received a detail of the
ncgociation - Capt. Stewart !\-ill make you acquainted, with circumstances - on your return, should you be desirous of seeing, me
be pleased to fire one Gun, and make the signal sending your boat
on shore - weather &F permitting [LC. EPP, Vol. 10, Feb.-April 1804.1
To Monsieur d'oubril. Russian Charge d'bffaires. Paris, France, from Robert B.
Livingston, U. S. Minister to Paris, France

PARIS
gt@April 1804
The undersigned Minister Plenipotentiary of the United States of
America, has the honor to trnnsmit to LTr Oubril charge des affairs
of his I . M. the Emperor of all the Rlissias the copy of a note that he
has just received from the Consul of the United States at Petersburgh
by which the Grand Chancellor has been pleased to communicate the
intention of his Imperial Majesty to interpose his good offices with
the Porte in behalf of the brave but uilfortunate men t'hat were captured by the Tripolitans. Permit me Sir, to express to you the high sense that the President
of the United States d l not fail to entertain of this new proof of the
humanity of his Imperial Majestr, & of that liberal policy which has
induced him to extend his benevolent views to the happiness of Citizens
of a remote quarter of the globe - Be assured, Sir, that this trait
of humanity will not fail to add to the respect with which Iris wise
& virtuous administration has already inspired the Government &
inhabitants of the United States, & iricreasc thcir wish to bind niore
closely the ties which Commerce has tllrcady begun to form between
the two nations I pray you Sir, to accept the assurances of my high consideration
(Signed) ROB^ R. LIVINGSTON
[NA. SDA.

D i ~ p .France,
,
Vol. 9, 1803-1805.1

18 A7ATT14LOPERATIONS, APRIL-SEPTEiWBER 6. 1804
To Lieutenant Colonel Commandant Franklin Wharton, U. S. l a r i n e Corps, from
Secretary of the Navy

KAVYD E P M ~
9 April 1804.
SIR,Tour letter of the 7'h Instant reached me this morning.
I regret, Sir, that you have been under the necessity of nlnking an
appeal to me on such an occasion as I was in hopes that the Gentlemen
of tho Staff x-ould have rolunteered their services. However the
public service must not - shall not sufier. You will therefore order
the Gentlemen of the Staff to perform the requisite duties in the line,
and to share with their Brother Officers, the duties of acting ns Officers
of the day.
[NDA. CSMC, LB, 1803-1820 ]
Extract from journal of U. S. Brig Argus. Lreutenant Isasc Hull. U. S, Navy,
command~ng,l o n d e y , 9 April 1804

stood in for the I-Tarhour 'of Spmcuse] ~t X/ past Seven brought
too with the Starbd Anchor in [space] futlioms K a t e r jND.4 photostat.]
Extract from journal of Midshipman F. Cornelius deKrafft. U 8.Navy, in U.S. Brig
Siren of 16 guns, Leutenant Charles Stewart, U. S. Navy, commanding, Monday,
9 April 1804

At 4 the shore boat & crew went off for Tunis, low-er'd down the
cutter S t 8 31: Budd, went on shore in the cutter with the American
Consul
KB (Those remarks include 12 hours.)
[NDA.]
To Lieutenant Isaac Chauncey, U. 6. Navy. Mew York, IJ. Y., from Secretary of the
Havg

NAVY
DEP~

April 10, 1804 Since you left this it hns been determined that the Frigate U~~i2ed
Stales shall not go out, in the present expedition. If therefore you
should not have made the Contract for the Gun Carriages, you will
decline doing it, but if you should have made the Contract, let the
persons with whom you have made i t go on with it. We must comply
wit-h our Engagements. -

R 8 SMITH

(-Returned

as a dead letter -)

[NDA. OSW, VOI. 6, 1802-1805.J
Extract from jonrnal of U. 8. Brig Argus. Lieutenant Isaac Hull, U. S. Navy,
commanding, Tuesday, 10 April 1804

[At anchor in Syracuse Harbor.] These 24 hours Commence with
mode Breezes Employed with the prize brig Transfers long boat
bringing off Water and a t other Necessary duty [NDA photoatst.]

WARS U71TH BARBARY POWERS

19

Extract from log book kept by Sailing Master Nathaniel Haraden, U. S. Navy, on
board U. 6. Frigate Cowlitufion, Tuesday, 10 April 1804

At 7 A. M. hoisted English Colors which the strange sail answered
with Knpusine IT-e then made the private signal to a sail to the S IT which was
answered by tlie Syren which we left at Tunis on Saturday evening
last. If-e cut the Clinch of the small bower and reberit it At Noon becalrned 3 Miles north from Zembra Sounded 114
fathoms hard bottom - Sisteen sicli-The Commodore is still confined with a fever. Syren in company. [LC. LPP, Log Constitulion, 1803- 1804.1
Extract from journal of Midshipman F Cornelius deKrafft. U. S. Navy, in U. S. Bng
Siren of 18 guns, Lieutenant Charles Stewart, U. S. Navy. command~ng,Tuesday,
10 April 1804
At 4 P. b i got under way & made sail out of the harbour, a sail in

sight out side of tbe harbour suppos'd to be the Cornnlodore hfidnight gentle breezes 8. pleas! llaul'd up fore sail &. hove tile main top
sail to the mast - At 1/2 past 9 made signal to tlie Commodore which
was answerd. At % past 11 the Commodore spoke us Br requested
Lf Stewart to come on board. At 5Zeridian L' Stewart went on board
the Commodore, same time came along side the Cornme* Launch
Sent part of the sheep, poultry, & fruit on board. Condemn'd 3%
fathoms of the Starbg Cable.
[NDA.]
To Captain James Barron, U. S. Navy, Washington, D. C., from Secretary of the
Navy

NAVYDEPM'
April 11. 1604 You will take Command of the Frigate Essex, and order under your
Command all the Officers attached to the Frigate United States. [NDA. OSW, Vol. 6 , 1802-1805.1

[I 1 April 18041
To Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Navy, from Richard Farquhar, Malta

MAYIT PLEASE
YOUREXCELLENCY
I t gave me greate Pleasure to
hear of the Success the Vessels had under your Escellencys Command
and also to think the Prizes turned out as I discrihed them. I have
more Information to give but I am a little afraid
Mr Schemhrie is taking every step Possible to recover the Vessels &
Cargos, he will Stick a t nothing to gain his Point. but I hope he will be
defeatod in every attempt he is taking npainst America. - (for he has
said to the Bashaw it is better to make Peace now which will prevent
the Americans from assisting your Brother and recommence war when
their Vessels is gone home then you will have an oppertnmty of revenging Burning the Frigate and murdring your People) this speuch was
much ap lauded and ho got a Rich Breast Pin in a present he knew
that the E!l ashaw had Swore by h/Eahomat to be revenged for Bnming
the Frigate. he has reported all over Malta that Your Escelleccy
sent him to Tripoli to make Yeuce for America and he offered three
Hundread Thousand Dollars for it I took the Liberty of contradicting
those reports as I knew he disobliged Commodore hlorris much by

20 ATA4TrAL OPEBATIOAiS, APBILSEP TEMBER 6, 1804
Such Stonies & by uTitting to the Bashaw that the Commodore had a
Vast deal of Cash in tiis Frigate to pay for Peace and the Bashaws
expectatio~isWRS raised on that Accour t which made him so displeased when Commodore bionis offered lour Thousand Dollars it is
reported the Bashaw will r\7.aiiePeace now upon moderate terms with
America and soon make TTar again. We have been waitsing for your
Excellency Sending the Brig as every thing is reqdy as agreed on and
I am convinced the Bashaw of Derna is marchng to that PIace in
hopes of t.he Brigs arriving soon
MALTAApril I I t @ 1804
[LC. EPP, Vol. 10, Feb.-April l804.J
Extract from journal of U. S. Brig Argur. Lieutenant Isaac Hull, U. 6. Navy,
commanding, Wednesday. 11 Aprrl 1804

At ,4nchor in Syracuse harbour Arrirpd the U. S. Schooner
Nnuiilu3 from a Cruise having Sustained much damage in a Gale of
wind off Tripoli being obliged to throw 4 of her gulls Overboard [NDA photostat.]
Extract from journal of Yidshjpman F. Cornelius deKrefft, U. S. Navy, in U. S. Brlg
Sirrn of 18 guns, Leutenant Charles Stewart, U. S. Navy, commanding, Wednesday, 11 A p r ~ l1804

At Y past Meridian Lt Stewart, returnd on board, brad up the
yards & made soil to the Sd & Wg
Latt: Obn: 36'43' N.
[KDA.]
To Lieutenant John Cussin. U. S. Navy, Navy Yard, Washington, D. C., from
Secretary of the Navy

NAVY
DEFT
April 1.2. 1804 -

The Law supplementnrp to the Act entituled "An Act providing
for a Knval Peace Establishrent and for other purposes", provides
for the Appointment to the Navy Yard a t Kashington and to the
Frigates & other Vessels laid up in ordinary in the Eastern Branch,
the following Officers, viz f
1 Captain in the E n v y - to have the general care and superintendence of the Yard & g and to perform the duties of Agent
to the Navy Department. 1 Commissioned Officer in the Navy, who shall receive for his
services the pay and Emoluments of a Captain Commanding a 20 Gun Ship. 1 Sailing Master 1 Surgeon and 1 Snrgeon's Mate. 1 Purser.
1 Storekeeper.
1 Clerk of the Yard.
1 Head. Carpenter.
1 Plumber 1 Head Blockmaker.
1 Head Cooper. 2 Boatswains 2 Gunners &
1 Sailmaker

-

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

21

I n virtue of this Law the President of the United States has been
pleased to appoint you to the second station therein provided for,
vizr a ComnJssioned Officer in the Navy, with the Pay and emoluments of a Captain Commanding a 20 Gun Slip. As no officer has as yet been appointed to the first Station, you are
to perform such parts of the duties of that Station as your other occupations will permit - as the Command will always devolve upon
the Officer second in Rank, when the First Officer is absent. As you
are too constantly empiqyed in the Yard to admit of your attending
to the duties of Agent to this Depcrtment, we shall not impose those
duties upon you; but until a Captain in the h'avy shall be appointed
to the first Station, you are to consider yourself as possessing a Command over all the Officers attached to the Yard, or to the Vessels in
Ordinary. I enclose letters to
Mr Lovell - Sailing blaster,
hlr Doughty - Head Carpenter. Mr King - Plumber. hfr Hanson - Purser Smallwood. Clerk of the Yard -- attaching them to the
Yard in virtue of the above recited Law, and directing them
to report tllemselves to the Commanding Officer of the Pard. Dr Bullus is the Surgeon and 3fr Jn? Harrison the Surgeon's
Ivlate. You will report to me the names of the persons filling the Stations
of head blockrnaker, head cooper, Boatswains, gunners, and Sailmaker - the rate of wages respectively allowed to them, and whether
they are are competent to the duties of the Oaces they repectively
fill. K i t h respect to a storekeeper. we hare not had time to make a proper
election for that office. I t is obviously an highly important ofice great attelltion & knowledge of Accounts, are required for the discharge of tlie duties wlicll it imposes. \Ye must therefore be careful
in rnnkir (7 this Appointment. If yo11 hnve anF person in view, who
is p r f e c h qualified for tlris OfTire, let nle h o w his unme and i t shall
be considered. ]Tllen our leisure shall permit we shall prescribe a system for the
Govenlment of the l'ard - in the mean time the public business
wid not suffer by baing committed to your direction. We trust that
you will eshibit exemplary conduct in the discharge of your own
duties, and enforce among the other Officers of the Yard the observance of their respective duties. And I recommend that You write
imrneclintelp circular letters to the Ofhers of the Yard, directing
tllem to attend unremittingly to their duties, and it would be proper
that they shouicl know at what Hours their Sertices are required. I
wnd You n draft of a Circular for this purpose, with blanks as to the
Hours, which you nil1 fill up. Your pay & c commenced 2?gth A4arch 1804. [KDA. OSW, Vol. 6 , 1802-1805 ]

22 hTAT7ALOPERATIONS, APRIESEPTEMBER 6 , 1804
To Bobert B. Livingston, U. S. Minister to Paris, bance, from Thomas Appleton,
U. S. Consul, Leghorn

LEGEORN
l Z t @ April 1804.
SIR I had the honor of Addressing you on the 2Stb of March the present serves principally to inclose you a letter from Corn?
Preble which came under corer to me
In that which I have received from him dated the lat* of March a t
Syracuse, it Appears it was his intention to proceed the next day for
the bay of Tripoli, and from thence off Tunis; as hc expresses much
apprehension of a speedy rupture with the latter r vency; but as I
presume he has fuiiy explained to you bow justifyab e are his fears,
and how incompetent are his present forces to oppose the power of
these united regencies, I shall not further enlarge u on it Corn? Preble has doubtless mentioned to you the enefih he expects
will be derived to our captives a t Tripoli, from the instructions of the
first Consul, as he has achcowledged to me the receipt of your letter. I now enclose you an extract of a letter from Mr Biddle a young
Midshipman of the PhiEadelphia by which you d l see the indignant
treatment, our unhappy Countrymen have already experienced, and
the rigour they expected would be again exercised towards them. Com? Prcble in his letter to me, says, that the tripoline prisoners of
distinction who were in his power, was a sure pledge of the good treatment of the Americans at Tripoli. - I am inclined to think, however,
our Commander has not been apprised of a maxim of the Bey's, to
wit, that if a Mussdman surrenders himself to a christian, he merits
every species of inhumanity that the latter may please to inflict upon
him. - Nor am I less apprehensive that he too easily persuades
himself, he shall be able to obtain both a release of our prisoners, and
a peace honorable to the United States. - I t has ever Appeared to
me that our government had conceived this war as a contest only
with the Bey of Tripoli; but I have long since given it tw my opinion
to M' Madison, that the principle we contend for, if once established
with this power, would strike a t the foundation of the political existence of every regency in Barbary, this truth, I c a ~ o doubt
t
for a
moment they are fully pursuaded of, nor do I hwitate to believe, that
the other Beys will openly, or in a more disguised manner, make i t a
common cause. -

7

E

[XA. 8DA. Disp., France, Vol. 9. 1803-1805.1
Extract from Memorandum Book of Captsln Edward Preble, U. 6. Bevy, on board
U. 6.Fngate Conslitulion. 12 April 1804

Anchd. in AIalta harbour.
[LC original.]
Extract from Diary of Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Raog. Commodore of U. 8.
Squadron in the Mediterranean, Thursday. 12 April 1804

Wind N N E. Fresh Galcs & Cloudy Weather - Steerinu S E b E
for llaltn, At 3 P. 31. snw Gozo, a. strlall Istand 7 or 8 MiLs to the
N W of Malta At 5 P. M. we were up with the N Wt pl of Malta.
At 7 saw Vtll~ttelight S S E. At R P. M. took in Small Sails $ bro't
to. At 2 A. hl. Strong Galcs from K b b,Reefed topsails & down top
gall! Yards. - At 7 A. XI. mn into Vnlette harbor, and moor~d
ship - Sailors repairing the damages our rigginc. sustained in the heavy
gale of 1as~Sunday N'e are in Quarantine. The Vixen a t Anchor bere ILC. EPP, Diary, 1803- 1804 1

23

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS
To Thomas Fitzsimons, Philadelphia, Pa., from Secretary of State

(private)

DEPARTMENT
OF STATE,
April 18th 1804.
SIR. Your letter addressed to the Department of State enquiring
whether Government mean to pursue any measures for the relief of
the Officers and crew of the Frigate Philadelphia, and whether anything can be pointed out as proper to be done by the friends of the
prisoners? has been received - I have preferred to make the answer
private.
The sympathy of the Executive for the condition of the captives is
limited only by the superior consideration of the public good. This
would be injuriously affected by too unbounded a desire to release
them, in the double view of pecuniary sacrifices which might spring
from it. and the encouragement it might hold out to the other Barbary
States, and even to Tripoli, to re eat their aggressions. Measures are
therefore in active preparation or exhibiting and employing an imposing force to compel the Bashaa to terms which map be admissible.
I n the meantime it must be a satisfaction to the friends of the prisoners
to know that thcy mill be amply supplied ~ v i t hnecessaries; and that
the First Consul of France has directed his Commissary a t Tripoli to
interpose in their behalf, which if it should not greatly facilitate the
conclusion of an accommodation will a t least contribute to soffen the
rigor of their situation. No means exist, and perhaps none ought to
exist, for restraining the private endeavours of the friends of the
prisoners to relieve them; but it ought certainly to be well considered,
whether their measures by impressing the Bashaw with an opinion of
an undue solicitude to relieve them, and possiblv thwarting the
negotiations of the Executive, may not have a tendency to protract
the sufferings of those unhappy men.
[KA. SDA. Dom. L,Vol. 14, May 1802-May 1805.3

i'

To Secretary of State from Thomas Appleton, U. S. Consul, Leghorn

LEGRORN
ISthA p d 1804.
SIR At the moment of the de arture of a Vessel for the U: States,
there has been handed me two ettcrs from Com? Preble in date of
the lathand 19'b of hzlarch a t Syracuse. - As it is nlnong the possible
events that he had no opportunity from thence to convey to you, the
intelligence he has transmitted me, I avail myself of a Brig bound to
hlartha's Vineyard, to forward you some extracts from them. - After
having acknowledg'd the receipt of a letter from the first Consul of
france to his Agent a t Tripoli, he adds in the letter of the lSth "I
arrived here last night to take in provision, and water, and Sail Again
have
for the Coast of Tri oli to-morrow" - in that of the 19'"'I
this moment receive intelligence from a gentleman just Arrived from
Tunis, that the Bey of that regency is equipping his whole Naval
force with the Utmost expedition, and i t is whispered that his Object
is, the American Commrrce, from various circumstances 1 believe
there is much truth in the conjecture. - three of their fri ates from 24.
to 32. guns are now fitting out a t Malta - onp frigate o 32. guns and
a number of smaller Vessrls are getting ready a t Tunis. - I shall
Visit Tunis Bay immediately, with as many of the Squadron as can
be Collected off Tri oli, to endeavour to learn what the intentions of
the Bey are, and sha I write you the moment I can come a t the truth -

P

B

I

Y

24 NAVAL OPERATIO-VS, APRIL-SEPTEMBER 6, 1804
the Bey is very much dissatisfied that the U: States will not give hixu
a frigate which he has demanded of them as a present - and this is to
be his pretext for War." - Be rtssured Sir, I shall continue to advise
you of every event which comes to my Knowledge relative to the
Affairs of Barbary. [NA. SDA.

CL, Leghorn, Vol. I, Oct. 1793-Dec. 1806.1

Extract from journal of U. S. Brig Argus, Lieutenant Isartc Hull, U. S. Navy,
commanding, Friday, 13 April 1804

At Anchor in Syracuse Harbour Arrived the United States Brig
Syren from a Cruise [NDA photostat.]
Extract from Diary of Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Navy, Commodore of U. S.
Squadron in the Mediterranean, Friday, 13 April 1804

Strong Gales from the N b W. rec'd on board a large Quantity of
Slop Cloathing - Lt Smith informed me that he arrived a t Algiers
and delivered the dispatches for ColQ Lear, and returned 10 days
since with Mr O'brien late the U. S. Consul at that place; He came
here by m request to assist in any negotiation with Tripoly, as he
understan s the language of the Country; Ordered the Vixen to
sail for Tripoly. ,4t 4 P M she got under way. M' Obrien came on
board with his Baggage. At 7 P. M. having completed our business
here
weighed our Anchors and put to Sea - Steered to the N E for
Zyracuse
Lat,itude Observed 36'131 No: Cape Passari a t Noon bore N E b
N X N 12 Leagues

J'

(LC. EPP, Diary, 1803-1804.1
Extract from Yemorandum Book of Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Nary, on board
U. S. Frigate Conslitdon, 13 April 1804

Vuen brought me letters from our Consul at Algiem. hlr. Obrian
joined us.
[LC original.]
Extract from journal of Midshipman P. Cornelius dekrafft, U.S. Navy, in U. 6. Brig
Siren of 18 guns, Lieutenant Charles Stewart, U. S. Navy, commanding, Friday,
13 April 1804

At '/2 past 1 light breezes from the Sq all sail set standing in for the
harbour of Syracuse. At 2 came too in 6 fathoms with the larboard
bower the light house bearing E by S 5 S the (Argus Brig & Schooner
Nautilus) store ship (Woodmp Simms) $ the two prizes to the Siren
a t anchor in the harbour % past 3 Lr Hull 8: Slimmer's came along
sicle, hoisted out the barge & launch, lowr'd down the cutter. K
past 4 moor'd with the stream to the N E Ends with light airs from
the S. E & fine weather
NB (those remarks include 36 hours)
[NDA.]
To Charles Maurice de Talleyrand-P6rigord. French Minister of Exterior Affairs,
from Robert B. Livingston, U. S. Minister to Paris, Prance

PARIS
lJt@
A p d 1804.
The undersigned Minister Plcnipotentia of the United States
has the honor to transmit to the Minister or foreign Relations the
Copy of a note from the Grand Chancellor of Russia written by orders

7

B7ARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

25

of His Imperial Majesty the Emperor of d the Russias on the Subject of the unfortunate crew of the Philadelphia frigate captured by
the Tripolitans The Minister m-ill obsc~vvethat H. I. M. has warmly interrested
himself in their behalf, & given Instructions to his Ambassador a t
the Porte to procure a f m a n to the Bey of Tripoli for the release of
the Prisoners; an order which he may found upon the injustice of the
war on the part of the Pacha who without provocation has broken the
perpetual peace that the U. S. had purchased. - Tho &st Consul
having on the earliest notice been pleased to manifest a Strong interest
in the fate of these unhappy men as well as in the reestablishment
of the peace between the U. S. & Tripoly & taken measures which
the undersigned has reason to hope m i l l prove efficacious in swornplishing the object in which the first Consul has had the goodness to
take so great an interest - The undersigned has thought it proper
to make this communication with a view to leave it to the Judgement
of the French Government how far the concurrence of the Ambassador
of France at the Porte in the Steps that may be taken by the Ambassador of France a t the Porte may come in aid of the measures t.hat
the Grst Consul has already been pleased to take with the Dey of
Tripoli. The undersigned is assured that the President & people of the
United States will be extremely flattered by the marks of attention
that they have received from the two most distinguished powers of
Europe, Q will hope from their Joint efforts some future day an extinction of acts of barbarism which the narrow views of Commerce have
too long tolerated to the disgrace of Europe The undersigned has the honor to renew to his Excellency the
h4inister of Exterior Relations his assurances of high consideration [NA. SDA.

Disp., France, Vol. 9, 1803-1805.1

Extract from journal of U. S. Brig Argus, Lieutenant Isaac Hull, U. S. Navy,
commanding, Saturday, 14 April 1804

[Syracuse] These 24 hours Commence with fine Pleasant Weather
raked the rllain mast b Carrying the heel of it two Inches and an
half forward hands emp oycd at turning in the dead eyes of the main
rigging setting it up and other Necessary duty -

9

[IiDA photostat.]
Extract from Memorandum Book of Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Navy, on board
U. S. Frigate Gmtitution, 14 April 1804

Sailed for Syracuse.
[LC original.]
Extract from log book kept by Sailing Master Nathaniel Haraden, U. S. Navy. on
board U. 6. Frigate Constitution, Saturday, 14 April 1804

Light airs from the N N W - Standing athwart the Channell of
Malta in order to make Cape Passari bearing N E 10 Leagues The N N W wind continued light till sun down when we had light
airs from thc S E - Hauled up E N E in order to pass Cape Passari
Moderate Breezes with a light haze, during the night At 2 A. M. we judge ourselves to be abreast of Cape Passari Regular soundings from 42 to 52 fathf sometimes mud and at other
times brown sand

26 NAVAL OPERATIONS, APRIX-SEPTEMBER 6,1804
At day light saw the Cape bearing N W 4 leagues - This Cape
is a barren desolate Island nearly two leagues in circumferance Upon i t stands a large square watch tower - You have white water
nearly 4 Miles from the Cape - We have come over this colored
water several times - Our soundings were from 17 to 20 fathoms
nearly three miles to the S E of this Cape. From day light till noon
light airs and variable from the eastward - Employed worhnp ship
to Windward between Cape Passari and Saragosa which borc a t Noon
N E b N 5 leagues and the Cape S W b W ji W 4 leagues Several small craft in shore: fired a gun and hoisted English colors Surgeons report 6 sick, 7 convalescent & 5 discharged The Commodore is on the recovery - He attendg the deck.
[LC. EPP, Log Constitution, 1803-1804.1
Extract from journal of Midshipman F. Cornelius dekrafft, U. S. Navy, in U. S. Brig
Siren of 18 guns, Lieutenent Charles Stew~rt,U. 6.Navy,commanding, Saturday,
14 April 1804

Meridian Lieut- Summers & Hull came on board, gentle breezes
from the S S E & pleas' At H past 3 P. M the Constitution came too
in the harbour. r e d a quantity of mutton & Potatoes for the use of
the crew, Carpenters em loy'd fitting capstern. ends with moderate
breezes 8: pleas! wind S.

E

1NDA.J
To Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Navy, from Lieutenant Charles Stewart, U. 6.
Navy

Siren SIRACUSE
April llitO 1804
SIRI t is some time since I informed you how much the Siren would
be distress'd by the removal of Mr Brook. The Snilirlg Master Mr
Harrison was then under charges, (Officialy reported to you) tttnt 1
presumed was sufficient to point out, his unfitness: for a station so
important: & I have not one under the grade of Lieut, (except Mr
Brook) that can stow or take charge of the hold - Yesterday I
informed you Mr Harrison was going on shore in such a state of health
that he is render'd unserticeable, even were he otherwise competent
to the duties of his station - I did not presume Sir you would impute to me an intention of delaying the execution of your orders of
this morning to Mr Brook, nor do I perceive any passage in my note
to you, which justifies such an insinuation [LC. EPP, Vol. 10,Feb.-April 1804.1
To Lieutenant Isaac Hull, U. 1. Xavy, commanding U. 6. Brig Argus, from
Captdn Edward Preble, U. 6. Navy

U.S. SHIPConstifution
Syrame Harb: l j t hApril 1804
SIR,YOUwill immediately proceed to the Blockade of Tripoly, and
cruise on that Station until further Orders.
[LC. EPP, Order Book, May 1803-June 1805.1

W A R S WITH BARBARY POWERS

27

To Lieutenant W. M. Livingston, U. S. Navy, of U. 6. Brig Argw, from
Captain Edward Preble, U. 8. Bavy

U S. SHIP Con~titution
Syracuse Harb. 16'h Ap' 1804
SIR. I have r e d your letter of this date enclosing your commission
and tendering your resignation and requesting permission to go home.
You have my permission to return to the United States by any conveyance you please, and I shall forward our resignation to the Navy
You ma,y rest
Office for the acceptance of the Honb9Qecretary
assured, that your resignation will readily be accepted; of course you
will no longer consider yourself an Officer in the Eavy, nor at liberty
to wear the uniform of it.
[LC. EPP, Order Book, May 1803-June 1805.1
To Midshipman Edward N. Cox, U. 6. Navy, from Captain Edward Preble,
U. S. Navy

UNITED
STATES
SHIPConstitution

Syracuse Harbour 15'h April 1804
SIR Agreeable to your request by letter of this date, you are permitted to return to the United States for the recovery of your health.
Mr EDWARD
N. Cox
Sailf Master of U S Schooner Nnutilvs
[LC. EPP, Order Book, May 1803-June 1805.1
Extract from journal of U. 8. Brig Argw, Lieutenant Isaac Hull, U. 6. Navy,
commanding. Sunday, 15 April 1804

At Single Anchor in Syracuse harbr
These 24 hours Commence with Moderate and fine Weather a t
2 P M, the U. S. Ship Constitzction Commodore Preble appeared off
the harbour at 4 P, M, she brought to in the harbour of Syracuse
hoisted the guard
and rowed guard thro, the night Lieutenant
Livingston left the Bng this day being permitted to resign At Meridian V'eighed anchor and proceeded to sea on a Cruise - a heavy
swell from the Eastward and the wind dying away the CommodQ
made the Sig1 to return came too with the larbg Anchor
[NDA photostat.]
Extract from Pemorandum Book of Captain Edward Preble, U.S. Navy, on board
U. S. Frigate Gmtitrdion. 15 April 1804

Arrived and anchd. in SIvracuse Harbour.
[LC original.]
Extract from Diary of Captain Edward Preble, U. 6. Bavy, Commodore of U. S.
Squadron in the Mediterranean, Sunday. 15 April 1804

Wind E S E. Standing in for Syracuse harbour. At % past 3
P. M. entered and anchored in 7 fathoms - Found the Syren,

A r g y , & Nautilus a t Anchor and the ship mbodrop Sirns, Mills
Redd~ckMaster from Norfolk loaded with stores for the Squ~dron;
The Argus convoyed her up. Considering our situation with Tunis,
I have thought prudent to keep the Argus aloft, and have this day
ordered her and the Syren to sail for the Blockade of Tripoly; The
Naudilwr having recieved considersble damage & lost 4 of her guns
in a heavy gale of wind off Tripoly I ordered her to hlessina to repair,

28 NAVAL OPERATIONS. APRIL-SEPTEMBER

6 . 1804

and from thence, Off Tripoly - Lieutt Livingston of the Argvs
sent in his resignation; his Conduct has been for Q long time very
incorrect; I therefore enclosed his Commission to the Secretary of
the Navy.
[LC. EPP, Diary, 1803-1804.1
Extract from journal of Midshipman F. Cornelius deKrafft, U. S. Nsvy, in U. S. Brig
Siren of 18 guns, Lieutenant Charles Stewart, 0.S. Navy, commanding, Sunday,
15 April 1804

Calm & pleast At 4 A l l light airs from the northward. At 7
hoisted out the barge, rec* a quantity of mutton & Potatoes. Meridian gentle breezes & pleast crew em loy'd hoisting in w a k r
& provisions. At 2 P. Ji sent 18 men on oard the Prize Brig to
discharge her. Recd on board 400 round 21'b shot 18 bbls pork 16
bbls beef & fill'd 16 casks of water. At 6 the men ret.urn'd from the
Prize brig (Transjer) Midnight light airs from the Ed -

1

[NDA.]
To Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Navy, from Lieutenant Richard Somers, U.S. Navy

UNITED
STATES
SCHOONER
Nautilus
16th April 1801

SIR. Agreeably to your orders of the 9th of hlarch, I sailed in
company with the Brig Syren on a cruise off Tripoly but was obliged
to leave the station and return to this port (Symcuse) for repairs
in consequence of damages recq from the Syren's running foul of us
on the 20 of that month. I enclose to you the report of the Officer
commanding the deck a t the time the Nautilus being run foul of, for
your examination likewise the report of the damages.
After having repaired those damages, I returned immediately and
cruised off Tripoly several days. from thence I was obliged to return
into port, from having sustained damages in a gale of wind by shipping
a sea which carried away all my Bulwarks from the Gangway forward
to the Bridle port, and filling the decks full of water so as to endanger
our going down; - were obliged to heave over four of her Guns for
the preservation of the Vessel. On examination since my ret.urn here,
I find the stantions are ge:lerally all rotten, and not able to support
the recoil of the Guns. I believe those that were carried away by
the sea, were previously broken by the recoil of the Guns, when firing
a t the Gun Boats
I have to request you will permit me to repair to some place where
I may refit.
[LC. EPP, Order Book, M a y 1803-June 1805.1
To Sailing Master Humphrey Magrath, U. S. Navy. of U. S. Brig Argur, from Captain
Edward Preble. U. 8. Navy

U S. SHIPConstitution
Syracuse Harbr 16'h Api.! 1804
SIR,Agreeable t o your request to return to the U S for the recovery
of your health, you are hereby permitted to return in the Store Ship
Bdsey Walk.
[LC. EPP, Order Book, May 1803-June 1805.1

29

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

To Sailing Yaater Samnel B. Brooke, U. 8. Navy, of U. S. Brig Sir= from Captain
Edward Preble, U. S. navy

U

S. SHIPC m t i 2 U t h

April 1804
SIR, YOUwill immediate1 repair on board the United States Brig
Argus, and take char e as aster of that Vessel under the command of
LWommandant Hu
Syracz~seHarbour 16th

fi d

[LC. EPP, Order Book, M a y 1803-June 1805.1
To Sailing Master Alexander C. Hamson, U. S. Navy. of U. S. Brig Siren, from
Captain Edward Prebie, U. 6 . Navy

UNITED
STATES
SKIPConstitution

Syracuse I~arbourl l j r h April 1804
SIR I hnre r e d your letter of this date, directed to Lt Comm!
Stewart, stating that your health renders it necessary that you should
return to the U S for its recovery; and requesting my permission that
you may return, which I now grant you; and you are a t liberty to
return in the Prize Ship Captured by the Syren.
[LC.

CPP, Order Book, May 1803-June 1805.1

Certlflcate concerning Peter F. Crocillo, from Captain Edward Preble,
U. S. Navy

UNITED
STATES
FRIGATE

Constitution 16th April 1804.
This is to certify that P ~ t e rF. CrociUo has serred as Surgeon's
Mate in the Navy of the U. States from 20th December 1803 to the
16th April 1804 a t which date he is discharged having no further need
for his serrices.
(Signed) EDWARD
PREBLE
[LC. EPP, Order Book, Mcy 1803-June 1S05.1

To C~ptainEdward Preble, U. 6. Navy. from Joseph Barnes,U. S. Cons.&
Sicily

LEQHOI~N
April 16, 1804
SIR,I have had the pleasure of writing you two Letters to the care
of hlessrWnlconett & Co Na Ips, & one to the care of h4essrq Fred4
Degen & Co - which no dou t you will have r ~ c e t
A report has been circulated here that four Corsairs, of Barbary,
Supposed to be Tripolines, were off Ssrdjnia; I have taken considemble
trouble to ascertain the Sourse of this matter, & all that I can Learn
is, t l ~ a Some
t
time Since four Barbary Corsairs were off Sardinia, but
to which of the States they belonged was not known
This however I believe, had they been Tripolines me Should have
heard more of them. I understand you may have the Gun Boats necessary for your
Expedition from Naples, tho' not the powder BaIls as re uisite - I n
consequence I have written to Genoa, Q Venice on the 8lib'ect - I
shall only add, while I remain in this part of Italy, which will e about
a month longer, you may command me a t pleasure in any Matter in

c

6

30 NAT7AL OPERATIONS, RPRILSEPTEMBER 6, 1804
which I can be useful to my country - Independent of my of my
OEcial capacity or interest. In haste I remain with respect & esteem
Your obedk Serr
J: BARNES
E D WPREBLE
~
Esqr
Commander in chief of the U. S. Squadron
[LC. EPP, Vol. 10, Feb.-April 1804.1
Extract from journal of U. S. Brig Argus, Lieutenant Isaac Hull,U. S. Navy,
commanding, Mouday, 16 April 1804

These 24 hours Commences with light airs and Variable at 5 AM
moderate breezes and Clear Teather weighed Anchor and made sail
p! Captain Hull went on hoard the Commodore at 6 A'lr H,
at
Magrath left the Brig having obtained permission to return home and
Mr Brooke came on board and Succeeded him as Sailing Master at
8 Captain Hull returned made sail and stood out of the harbour [of
S.vacuse]
[NDA photostat.]
Extract from log book of U. S. Brig Argus. 18 gilns, kept by Sailing Master Samuel B.
Brooke, U. S. Navy, Lieutenant Isaac Hull, U. S. Navy, commanding, Monday,
16 Aprll 1804

This day begins with light airs & Variable at 5 AM moderate
breezes and clear weighed anchor and made sail a t 6 Mr H. MFGrath
left the brig with permission to return to the Uruted States and Mr
Brooke came on board to succeed him a t K past 8 strong breizes
close reeft the topsails reeft the boom mainsail sent down the top
Gallant yards furled the mainsail launched the flying Jib boom and
ringtail Boom at 11 set the main storm staysail At Meridian fresh breezes and Clear Weather with a heavy swell
from the S. 'AT, East point of Sicily bore N N W. Cape Passari
W. b N.
[LC. EPP, Argus, 1804.1
Extract from Diary of Captain Edward Preble, U. 6. Navy, Commodore of
Squadron in the Mediterranean, Monday, 16 April 1804

U. 6.

Wind S E. Moderate. M' Magrath Master of the Argus, Mr
Cox Master of the Nautilus & Mr Harrison Master of the Syren
applied for permission to go home on account of ill health which I
granted Ordered Mr Brooks to the Argus, M' Burrows to the Syren,
and M' Casson to the hTautilusas Masters - Commenced taking in
water and provisions for 5 Months - The Argus sailed for the
Tripolitan Coast. [LC. EPP, Diary, 1803-1804.1
Extract from log book kept by Sailing Master Nathaniel Haraden, U. 6. Navy, on
board U. S. Frigate Conslilution. Monday, 16 April 1804

Moderate breezes from the S E. At single anchor in Saragosa.
Syren, Argua & Nautilus in company At 2 P. M. the Argw weighed
& attempted to proceed to sea - She reanchored towards Evening The Nautilus is in a disabled state occassioned by a heavy gale off
Tripolr. Recieved the 20 Gang Casks lent the Syren full of water by
a shore boat. Moderate breezes from the S E. till midnight when we

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

31

had a breeze from the IT N W - At Day light sent the large cutter
on the watering serxjce - She made one Trip. The shore surf prevents her landing at the watering plare. At 9 A. M. strong breezes Down Top Gg Yards - Employed clearing Ship, stowing the fore and
main holds - Surgeons report the same as yesterday except the case
of the Boatswain added Noon strong breezes from the N I T - Saw
two sail in the Offing ullder Jury topmasts - The Argus sailed on a
cmize off Tripoly [LC. EPP, Log Constitution, 1803-1804.1
Extract from journal of Midshipman F. Cornelius deKrafft, U. 6 . Navy, in U.S Brig
Siren of 18 guns, Lieutenant Charles Stewart,D. S. Navy, commandmg, Monday,
16 April 1804

[At Syracuse] At 8 am M r S. B. Brooke left the Siren & join'd
the U S. Brig nrgus as Sinster. At 5 P. M. M' Brown left the Prize
ship (Madona [Catapoliana]) & join'd us. rcc* a quantity of bread,
flower, vinegar &c kc., and 1 cable from the Transfer. a t 6 r e d a
qunntity of wood &c. Ends with fresh gales & clcnr pIcns! weather
with a heavy sea [NDA.]

--

To Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Navy, from James Leander Cathcart,
Naples

NAPLES
, ~ P R I L 17'? 1804
DEARSIRYour very acceptable favors of the 31st of January &
19'" of February dettrmintd me to proccrd to Naples but being
unwilling to take so long a Journey without some probability of
succtes, I wrote to his Excellency General Acton on the subject of
your request, a copy of which u-ith his answer [27 March] are enclosed
(N?" & 2) beixg thus assured that I did not risk the mortification
attending a refusal, I first ship'd the cloathing for the prisoners on
board a small Spanish vessel bound to Naples & then purchased s
carriage & came post to this City where I arrived on the 12@Inst without happening to any accident exccpt the loss of a wheel which was
replaced at Iionie, & having caught n very riolent cold by laying in
damp shcets a t rz miserable tavern on the road. Having arrived before
the vessal which brought the prisoners cloathing had finish'd her
Quarantine & mine being liliewise onboard I could not wait upon
General Acton until yesterday, cP: Lace now the satisfaction to inform
you that 1 was receiv'd by him with every mark of respect & after
Informing him that you had intended to call here yourself, and had
desired me to mcet you but was prevented by the menaces of the Bey
of Tunis, I open'd the subject of my mission and after discussion
obtain'd the romise of four large gun boats & four Mortar bortts
(Carrying eig to?. inch mortars) compleatly equip'd with artillery,
Mortars, arnmunltlon bombs balls & every other apparatus, to be
delirer'd to you on demand at Messina; tho ordcr for that purpose
will be forwarded to the Count Turn6 Commander in Chief afloat
at that place, & in his absence to the Governor of Messina, so that
you have now nothing to do but to c d or send for them when ever
you think proper; during discussion the Gennral ask'd if we wish'd
them to be mm'd with their people, after paying him a compliment
for this fresh mark of his Sovereigns condescension d: good will towards

e

32 NAT'AL OPERATIONS, ,4 PBIL-SEPTEMBER 6,1804
us, I inform'd his Excellencp that you had not instructed me to make
the demand, but from the consequences which might arise from the
ignorance of each others lanquage I presumed you intended to man
them from your own Squadron By the Generals answer to my letter you will see that those boats
and artilleq are only lent, & it is natursl to suppose that they will
expect to receive them again in the same order that they are deliver'd
to you, and that the ammunition that rnoy he expended must either
be replac@or paid for in cash; those arrangements you will be better
able to make yourself a t Messina, than I can here, especially as the
General has promised not only in this instance but in every other
to facilitate your accomodation with all his influence I n conversation his Excellency inform'd me that they have a t
sea four Frigates 6r two Corvrtts, ihat two Frigates cF the two Corvetts
are recall'd & that a seventy four which is now a fiting out and nearly
ready for sea is to supply their place and with the rernnining two
Frigates are destin~dfor the protection of their coast & commerce
against the piratical States of Barbary I have thougilt it necessary to give you this information that in
case of a War with Tunis, you n ~ i q h th o w what force this government intends to maintain at sea whirh will serve you rts a gilide in
any temporary arrangrmellts you may deem expedient to make
with them for the protection of our trade untill you receive a re-inforcement to Four Squadron which I presume government will see the
necessity of and act immediatdy General Acton has likewise given me permission to deposit the
cloathing for the prisoners in his hlajesty's stores where you will
find them subject to your o r d ~ r s31'
, hlatthiew our Consul here being
charged with their care untill you send for them - I have likewise
deposited two thousand spanish dollars in the hnnds of h1' Frederick
Degen subject to your orders for the use of the Captives a t Tripoli
whlch if they should not want you will please to inform me, that
I may draw upon him for the nmmount to serve for any other purpose
that may occur Yours of the 18t%q1 I receiv'd here on the 13t!' insf & consequently
Will return to Leghorn irk a few days ha\-ing terminated my business
I presume to your satisfaction; I need not mention to you how much
mortified I am at the disappointment, especially a t the moment that
the measures which I have so streneouslg reccommended to government for more than four years are about bein put into execution,
to see a person of Mr OBriens character who as for ever pursued
measures diametrically opposite to mine sent on to negotiate a Treat?
with a nation who has treated us with sl~chindignity is really mortlfying, instead of a person calculated to inspire those people with exalted
ideas of our intrepidity & to stamp them with a decided dread of
our arms, to see one arrn'd with all the mean intrigue & low artifice
of that sink of perfidy and corruption the Sanhedrlm of Algiers sent
on to beg a peace through the influence of such perfidious mediators
engenders the most unplnming reflections: should he succcod, do you
imagine a peace so procured could possibly be permanent; belleve
me not Sir, would they not have reason to conclude tbat we would
accede to any terms to preserve a peace which we had stoop'd to procure by such unworthy means, &- would we not have reason to suppose
they would commit annual depredations upon our commerce when

I

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

33

they would find by experience that they had nothug to fear from us:
Those people must not be humour'd but beaten, you wisely observe,
& you have it now in your power to do do it most effectually & thereby
found a peace both honorable &- permanent, concessions to one State
stimulates the avarice of the others, & untill the whole are convinced
that we are not in the habit of brooking insult with impunity we may
calculate upon annual outrage & indignity, from one or the other
continually As you are the only person who perfectly coincides in opinion with
me relative to the measures which ought to be pursued with the
Barbary States, I think it possible that a t some future period you
may wish me to accompany you; I am allways ready to serve my
Country & wiIl embarlc a t a moments warning when ever you think
proper to send for me notwithstanding that I have suffer'd more than
can well be imagined since I have been in the service by the deep
design envy and malice of some, & by the gross ignorance cupidity
misrepresentation & imbecility of others with whom I have unfortunately been connected, I will never refuse my services but must
beg leave to observe that I am determined never to be leagued or have
any communication direct or indirect with either Davis or OBrien, for
neither the one nor the other have ever pursued any one measure
calculated to promote either the honor or interest of their country
since they have been in Barbary; the one is cultirateing the good
graces of the Bey of Tunis & ministers in order to be appointed Consul;
the other has been the mere echo of the Algerine Jews ever since he
has been in Barbary You will now have an opportunity to judge for yourself & this caution may tend to prevent your becoming a dupe to their deception &
artifice Wishing your success in all your enterprizes may equal your most
sanguine expectations I hare the honor to subscribe myself with
respectfull esteem
P S: I forgot to inform you that on tho l l t Qof March the Imperial
Pollacca call'd La Benecolenza Capt$ Luca Lucovich arrived a t Leghorn from Tripoli in eight days loaded with Madder root, Sena, Ostrich
feathers, & some gold dust, the property of the Bashau- of Tripoli &
his subjects consign'd to Arbib a Tripoline Jeu- -said vessel when ber
Quarantine is out will take in a return cargo for Tripoli supposed to
be very rich, if you 1001~out for her, you wdl have a great chance to
fall in with her as she performs a long Quarantine, her cargo will be
entirely Tripoline property [LC. EPP, Vol. 11, April-June 1804.1
To Captain Stephen Decatnr, Jr., U. S. Navy, commanding U. S. Schooner Etdcrprize,
from Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Navy

UNITED
STATES
SHIPCmtifufbn

Syraeuse Harbour 17'h April 180.4
SIR,I wish you to come here with the Enterprize as soon as possible, as 1 have some important business for you; however if you cannot
reach this within four days, you will be too late, nnd in that case, you
will proceed immediately off Tripoly where you w4l find the Syren,
Argus, and Vixen and cruise there 'till further orders.

34 NAVAL OPERATIONS, APRIL-SEPTEMBER 6, 1804
Send me the odour of roses by the bearer, which Mr Davis purchased
for me.
Lt Commt DECATUR
Enterprize a t Messina
[LC. EPP, Order Book, May 1803-June 1805.1

[17 ,4pril 18041
To Midshipman William Burrows, U. S. Navy, from Captain Edward Preble,
U. S. Navy

SIR YOUare hereby appointed Sailing hfaster of the U. S. Brig
Syren. You will therefor repair on board said Brig and take upon
yourself the charge and duty of Sailing Master agreeable to the regulations of the service, for which this shall be your suflicient warrant.
Given under my hand on board
the U. S. Ship Constitution
this 17 day of April 1804
PREBLE
Signed, EDWARD
[LC. EPP, Order Book, May 1803-June 1805.1
To Lieutenant John B. Dent, U. S. Navy, ordered to command U. S. Brig Scour#e,
from Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Navy

U. S. SHIPConstitution
Syracuse Harbour, l7th April 1804
SIR YOUare hereby Ordered and directed to take the Command of
the United States Brig Scourge and fit her for a Cruise with aIl possible
expedition - hfake out Indents of what is wanting in the different
Departments, for my approbation, and I shall give an order on
George Dyson Esqr Xavy Agent for such supplies as are necessary. [NHF. Dent's LB.]

[17 April 18041
To lidshipman Charles Morris, U. S. Navy, from Captain Edward Preble,
U. 6. Navy

SIR YOUare hereby appointed Sailing Master of the U. S. Brig
Scourge. You will therefor repair on board said Brig and take up011
yourself the charge and duty of Sailing Master agreeable to t,he
regulations of the Service for which this shall be your sufficient Warrant
Given under my hand on board
the United States Ship Constitution
this 17 Day of April 1804.
PREBLE
Signed, EDWARD
[LC. EPP, Order Book, May 1803-June 1805.1

[17 April 18041
To Xidehipman Ralph Izard, Jr., U. S. Navy, from Captain Edward Preble,
U. 8. Navy

SIR YOU are hereby appointed Lieutenant of the U. S. Brig
Scourge. You will therefor repair on board said Brig and take upon

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

35

yourself the Charge and duty of Lieutenant agreeable to the regulations of the Service for which this shall be your sufficient Authority Given under my hand on board
the Unites States Ship Constitution
this 17 Day of April 1804
Signed E: PREBLE
[LC. EPP, Order Book, May 1803-June 1805.1
[17 April 18041
To Midshipman Henry Wadsworth, U. 6. Navy, from Captain Edward h e b l e ,
U. S. Navy

SIR YOUare hereby appointed Lieutr of the U. S. Brig Scourge;
You will therefore repair on board said Brig and take upon yourself
the charge and duty of Lieutenant agreeable to the regulations of the
service for which this shall be your Sufficient Authority.
Given under my hand on board the United States ship Con,stitutGm
this 17 day of April 1804
[LC. EPP, Order Book, M a y 1803-June 1805.1
Extract from Memorandum Book of Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Navy, on board
U. S. Frigate Constitution, 17 April 1804

Commissioned the Scourge. A gale from the westward.
[LC original.]
Extract from Diary of Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Navy, Commodore of U. 6.
Squadron in the Med~terranean,Tuesday, 17 April 1804

Vind N T1'. -4 strong Gale - Laying at Anchor in Syracuse,
Siren & '17isen in company - At 2 P. ?ct.launched top gall; masts.
S t 3 P. M. let o the best bower anchor; I t blew excessively hard; in
the night it mo$crated. In the morning up top Gallf Masts & weighed
the Best bower reciering water R stores: In consequence of the loss
of the Philadelphia & the damage the A7autilz~shas sustained, I am
at a loss for a sufficient number of Vessels, to Blockade Tripoly and
'FTatch Tunis. I have therefor thought it adviseable to commission
the Transfer Brig, prize to the Syren after havine had her Valued by
Mr OBrien, 1Mr Dyson, and Caps Reddick. This Vessel sailed for
Tripoly, from Malta, with powder R other stores belonLging to the
Tripoliie Consul, who knew the Port wns blockaded by us; She arrived
safe two davs after the Burning of the Frigate: She delivered all her
Powder to the Rashnw, and sold her other stores, and took on board
6000. GallQf Oil & sailed for Malta in the Night, but, was met with
by the Syren close in with the Tripoline Batteries, and detained for
adjudication; her papers are sent home by L? Stewart to obtain her
condemnation, and as he is certain of obtaining it, he has sold her to
me for Acct of tlle U. S. for 5000 Dolla, agreeable to her Valuation;
The money to be paid by the Secretary of the Navy when the Copy
of Condemnation is produced. I have appointed L t Dent to comniand
her, Mr f adsworth & Mr Izard acting Lieutenants of her, Mr Morris
acting Master & Doctor Marshall acting Surgeon; Mr Green from the
Nautilus acting purser; Mr Rowe & Mr Davis h4idsllipmen from this
ship to serve on board of her; John MWate boats~vainsMate of this
ship to be acting boatswain, and have given her 22 able 8. Ordv
Seamen & Marines from this ship & ten men from the Syren, and

36 NAT7fi OPERATIOLVS, APRIL-SEP TEMBER 6, 1804
ordered her to be equipped for a cruize off Tripoly as soon as possible.
I have named her the Scourge She mounts 16 Six pounders, & is a
good Cruizer - The Store Ship U*oodrop Sims brought me out
dispatches from the Navy Office.
[LC. EPP, Diary, 1803-180.I.j
Extract from journal of M~dshipmanCharles Morris, Jr., U. S. Navy, on board
U. S. Brig Scourge. U. S Frigate Constifution snd IT. S. Brig Argus, from 17 April to
8 August 1804

April 17@ joined the U S. Brig Scourge as Master 'n obedience to
orders recieved from Commodore PrebIe - Employed getting her
ready for sea until1 >fay S t Q when we sailed for Tripoli and arrived
off there on the 1 0 ' b
Continued to cruise off the Harbor untill August 2n4 when I received orders to join the U. S. Frigate Constitution until1 further
orders.
;4ugust Sth receiv~\dorders from the Commodore to join the U. S.
Bng Argus, Lt Cornma~ldantHull as one of her Lieutenants.
[Mrs. C. E. Fox original. liD.4 photostat.]
Extract from journal of Midshipman F. Cornelius deKrafft, U.6.Navy, in U. S Brig
Siren of 18 guns, Lieutenant Charles Stewart, U. S. Navy, commanding, Tuesday,
17 April 1804

[,4t Syracuse] Commences with fresh breezes from the S S \T 8:
pleast. weather hands employ'd stowing hold &c. recd for use of the
crew mutton &c. Meridian clear & pleas; sent 10 men on board
the Prize brig to discharge her, At 7 the men return'd from the
Prize, Rec* from shore a quantity of Provisions &c. &c - Ends
with light ails from the i t * fine agreertble weather. [NDX.]
To Midshipmen Christopher Gadsden, Jr., U. S. Navy, Charleston, S. C., from
Secretary of the Navy

NAVY
DEPM~
April 18.1804 You will proceed to this place immediately on receiving this letter,
with all the men you may have engaged. On your u-ay up,
stop a t Hampton, and finding the public Ships there, you w*iljou
deliver
yill
the Bien agreeably to the order of the Commodore who will give
the Captain of your Ship a letter to D! Bedirlger Esqr upon which he
will pay the Charter agreeably to Bill of Lading. Not finding the
public Ships tct Hampton, you wiil proceed to this place with all
practicable dispatch, unless you should on your way up the Potoumac
meet the public Ships, in which case you will deliver the Men agreeably
to the Commodore's Order. [NDA. OSW,Vol. 6, 1802-1805.1

TO George Davis, 0.6. Charge diAffaires, Tunis, from Captain Edward Preble,
U. S. Navy

UNITED
STATEB
SHIPCorntit~lio?~

Syracwe Harbour 18'b April 1804
DEARSIB The &en arrived here without Col Lear, who could not
leave his station at present.

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

3'7

Mr OBrien came up in her to assist me in any negotiation with
Tripoly. I expect he will be of much service as he speaks the language
of Barbary, and has had long experience in the manners, habits, and
Customs of its Inhabitants.
I enclose you a letter from the Dep: of State I have put i t under a
fresh cover, as the original (you will observe) is pretty well worn out
by travelling. I hope e're this, the Bey is in better humour, than when
I left you. I think it will be well to pay him for the goods he complains
of having been detained belonging to his Subjects. hou-ever I suppose
in your letters from the department of State you will hnve r e d
instructions respecting that business; if not, I know from a perusal
of copies of Col: Lear's letters to you, that it is his wish that tbe claim
of the Bey should be paid and you ought to have no hesitation in
satisfying him on that head immediately.
Captain Decatur u-ill have the honor to deliver you this; and I
shall visit your Bay in a few days myself. Adieu! and believe me with
great respect.
[LC. EPP, LB, Dec. 1803-April 1804.1
Extract from log book kept by Sail~ngMaster Nathaniel Haraden, U. S. Navy, on
board 0.6 . Frigate Conslilufion, Wednesday, 18 April 1804

Fresh Breezes from IT N W. - At anchor in Saragosa Syren &
Nautilus in company - I T atering ship By 2 P. M. the R N K
wind encreased to a strong breeze. Discharged the three shore boats
with directions for them to attend to~norrowmorning - Sent three
officers and a party of men to assist in getting ready for heaving out
the U. S. Brig Scourge late the Transfer Towards evening the weather
moderated ,4t day light two shore boats came alongside and took
empty water casks - Kecieved in the course of the forenoon 75
Gang casks of TVater Recie~edfrom the M'oodrop Sims Store Ship 27 Bolts of russia
canvass, 22 bolts of which were damaged by the leaking of the Store
Ships decks - Nine bolts of N Q2 & three bolts NO 1 English. 144
Pounds sewing twine - Sixty two lb of the twine was damaged &
tottally unserviceable We also recieved six coils of running rigging
The damaged canvass was ordered to be scrubbed in order to take
out the black mouldy places
At 9 A. M. anchored liere the U. S. Schooner Enterprize, returned
from Messina where she has under one some repairs.
Surgeons report 7 sick, 5 Coxma escent and 7 discharged from the
sick list This day were discharged from the Constitution on promotion to
the Scourge, Mr Izard Musters Mate, hIr IYadsworth & M' hlorris
Midshipmen
Noon light airs from E S E.

7

[LC.

EPP, Log Constitution, 1803-1804.1

Extract from journal of Midshipman F. Cornelius deXrafft, U.S. N a v , in U. S. Brig
Siren of 18 guns. Lieutenant Charles Stewart, U. S. Navy, commanding, Wednesday, 18 April 1804

Commences with moderate breezes from the N. W. u-ith Pleas!
weather Roc4 a quantity of mutton & Vegitables. At 9 the Enterprize came too in the harbour [Syracuse] -

38 NAVAL OPERATIONS, APRILSEPTEMBER 6, 1804
Meridian Calm. At 1 P. M unmoor'd At 3 a light breeze from t.he
N'J6. hoisted in the Launch M' IT.Burrows join'd us as S a h g Master
(from the Nautilus) At 7 M' A. Harrison left the Syren & went on
bwthe Prize Brig (belonging to the Xautilus) as passenger, on Acc!

of his ill state of health, bound to America Ite'd from shore a quantity of Russia Duck, 2 coils of rope & a
number of otlier necessary articles, Sent on board the Prize slup
(Illadonia [Calaydiana])some bread & beef survey'd & condemn'd
98'bs of Bread, Ends with ge~ltlebreezes from the N. E. overtlaul'd
a range of the Ld Cable, u-eather appy very unfavourable.
[NDA.]
To President Thomas Jefferson. MontlcelIo, from Secretary of the Navy

SAVY
DEPJ
April 19, 1804 I have the honor herewith to transmit to you, for your consideration,
a copy of the opinion on the Conduct of Cap$ [liichard] V. hlorris,
formed and pronounced by the Court of Enquiry instituted agreeably
to your directions for that special purpose. [ X D h . Nom. Appta., 1798-1820.1
[Enciosure]

Concerning Court of Inquiry on Captain Richard Valentine Horris, U,S. Navy

The report of the court is in the iollowkg words. &'FRIDAT
13th April, 1804.
"PRESENT,
"The same members of the court, as before, and the judge advocate.
The court was cleared and proceeded to form and pronounce their
opinion as follows, viz.
"This court having carefully examined and deliberately weighed the
evidence produced, and all that was nlled ed by captain Richard V.
Morris in expianation or in vindication of is conduct, Do REPORT as
their opinion that the said captain Morris did not conduct himself in
his command of the Mediterranean squadron, with the dilkence or
activity necessary to execute the important duties of his statlon; but
that he is censurable for his inactive and dilatory conduct of the
squadron under hi command, in these instances, viz.
"1st. In remaining with and detaining hi squadron a t Malta,
without necessity or any adequate object, answerable to the length of
his stay and detention aforesaid, that is to say, from the 5th to the
30th day of January 1803, also from the 1 1 th to the 19th day of February 1803, and also, from the 1st to the 21st day of May 1803.
"2d. I n carrying his whole squadron on the 19th day of February
1803 from Malta to Tunis Bay, and thence down to Gibraltar, and not
returning with or sending back any part of his squadron till the month
of May following; having in the mean time, no art of h i squadron on
the station left to cruize off the coast of ~ r i ~ oor
e ,otherwise protect
our commerce in that quarter as occasion might serve.
"3d. In remaining with and detaining his squadron at Gibraltar
without necessit or any adequate object, till too late in the s ring of
the year 1803 ; t at is to say, from the 23d day of March to t e 1 l th
day of April, 1803.

%

B

i

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

39

"4th. I n not proceeding with, or sending any part of hi squadron
(after the one unsuccessful attempt in the month of January 1803) to
the coast of Tripoli, till he sent Captain Rodgers from Malta with the
frigate John Adams alone, on the 5th of Pvlay 1803, who arrived with
his frigate before Tripoli on the 8th of hlay following.
"5th. I n not going sooner than the 22d of May 1803 to the coast of
Tripoli.
"6th. In quitting the blockade of Tripoli, on the 10th June 1803,
in the frigate New-York accompanied by the schooner Enterprize,
without necessity or any adequate object, and never afterwards
appearing on the coast of Tripoh.
"7th. In raisin the blockade of Tripoli on the 26th June 1803; and
carrying the who e squadron from thence to Malta, Messina, Naples,
Leghorn, &c. without necessity or any adequate object, and never
afterwards sending any part of the squadron to the coast of Tripoli.
"And this court do further report. that as to the period that the
Mediterranean squadron was under the command of Captain Morris
from the 25th May 1802, when he first arrived in the Mediterranean,
to the 5th January 1803, when he was joined a t Malta by captain
James Barron with the frigate New-York, and by captain John Rodgers
with the frigate John Adams, there are no facts disclosed bz the
eridence, sufficiently clear ant1 explicit whereon to ground any censure
of the conduct of captain hlorris, in his command aforesaid, or whereon
to form any specific opinion sufficiently satisfactory to the judgment
and conscience of this court.
"WHEREFORE,
they have limittcd the expression of their opinion
to such periods of his command, and to such parts of his conduct, as
they could from the evidence, fairly and clearlj pass an opinion
upon."
"GIVENunder our hands this 13th day of April 1804."
(Signed) "SAMUEL
BARRON,
President,
HUGHG. CAMPBELL,
JOHNCASSIN."
[See documents under dste of 31 August 1503, in "Naval Documents related to
the United State, Wars w ~ t l the
i Barbary Powers," Volume 11.1
[LC. "Defence of Conl~uodoreMorris" by Morris, E 335, MS.]

k

To Lieutenant John Cassin, U. S. Navy, Navy Yard, Washington, D. C., from
Secretary of the Navy

KAVYD E PApril
~
19. 1804 ESTIMATE
OF PROVISIONS
to be sent out in the John Adams, store
ship. Beef- - - - - .._
_ -450 Barrels
Pork- - _
- - - . 400 Barrels
Flour--- - _ .
- ._ . - 150 Barrels
Suet - - - _ _ - - - . - - - - - - - - - . - - - - _ 12,000 Lbs
Bread - - - _ . - - _ - - - - - - - - .- 140,000 Lbs
Cheese- - - _ - _ - - - - - - - - - - - - _ 10,000 Lbs
_ . _ - -3000 Lbs
Butter, - - - - - - - - - - Rice - - - - - --------- 4,000 Pints say lb.
Pease - - - ..- - --- - - . - -450 Bushels
Molasses - - _ - _ - _ _ - - - - - - - - - - - - - 1500 Gallons
Vinegar - - - - _ - _ _ _ . . - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - ..- - - 1500 Gallons
Spirit,, ,- - - - - - - - - _ - - - - - - - - - .- - - - - - - - _ -3,550 Gallons
I

40 NAVAL OPERATIONS. APRIL-SEPTEMBER 6. 1801
Above you have an invoice of the Provisions estimated for the John
Adam, and which it is intended to put on board of her. There wiU
also be a few Tons of Cordage and some spare Canvas. Judge from
this Invoice whether the John Adams will not carry more Beef and
Pork, and communicate your opinion on the subject without delay.
Should there be more Beef and Pork now on board than is contemplated by this Invoice, it must remain on board, and if you sllould be
of the opinion, that after receiving the other articles, there will not
be room for more Beef and Pork than is mentioned in the Invoice or
than is now on Board, or that being room for more Beef & Pork, they
may be conveniently stowed an Board after the other articles shall be
put in, you d l go on with all possible dispatch in stowing the other
articles on Board. - 31' Miller and hlc Smith, Bakers, will deliver
the Bread - &I' Brent will deliver the Flour, Cheese, Butter & q PDA.

OS'N, F'ol. 6, 1802-1805.3

To Secretary of the Navy from Captain Edward h e b l e , U. 6 . Navy

UNITED
STATESSHIP Constitution
Syracuse Harbour l g t @A p d 1804
SIR. On the 15th of March, I had the honor to forward you Triplicate dispatches from Malta. I sent them by a British Man of T a r
to Gibraltar, in charge of one of my Midshipmen, who u-as to forward
them by three different Vessels, and return and join me again.
I then sailed for the Coast of Tripoly, which port the Syren and
Nautdu-s were blockading. I carried with me a letter written b order
of the First Consul of France, by the Minister of Foreign A airs to
the French Commissary General st Tripoly directing him to endeavour
to procure the release of our Country Men and effect a Peace between
the United States and that Reaency
On the 26th in sight of ~ r i ~ o1bfell
, in with the Syren she had a few
days before captured n. Greek built ship under Russian Colours.
This ship sailed from Smlvrna with a Cargo of Powder, Shot, ShipTimbers, Guns, and 75 Turkish Soldiers recruits on account of the
Bashaw of Tripol . The Pilot has declared on Oath, that the Captain, himself, an all the crew knew of the blockade of Tripoly by
our Squadron previous to sailin from Srnyma; and that in consequcnce of that Itnowledge they c eared out for Gerbn in the Kingdom
of Tunis, but that his agreement with the Captain and Mercharlt was,
to Pilot her into Tripoly, and that they ran for that Port which thev
entered in safety in a gale of wind from the Eastward. You will
please to observe that I was obliged to haul off from the Coast the
day before (21itb dec' last) on account of the same Gale which enabled
that vessel to enter with safety. On tho 27th Lrlto. she left Tripoly
with a Cargo of Sheep & Bullocks bound to Malta on account of the
Tripoline Consul, and was met with by the Syren off the Harbour of
Tripoly and captured by that Vessel - This capture is certainly a legal
one on the part of Lieu$ Stewart. He will immediately send her
papers to his Agent in Philadelphia, in charge of a Midshipman who
was present a t the capture, in order that she may be condemned, and
a copy of her condemnation sent out; in the mean time she will be
detained at Malta I cannot spare men to send a large Iight ship
home, and her Cargo of live stock must necessarily be sold here. A
few days after the aforesaid capture, the Syren fell in with a Brig of

2-

d'

F

U'ARS WITH BARBARY POUTERS

41

16 Guns owned by the Tripoline Consul a t Malta. She has for a long
time past been employed in carrying Powder and other Military
Stores to Tripoly and is supposed to belong to the Bashaw but covered
by his Consul. She sailed from Malta for Tripoly with Powder and
supplies for the Bashaw, and took a favorable opportunity after a gale
to slip in, altho' they knew of the Blockade but in coming out with a
Cargo of about 6000 Gallons of Oil she was captured under the Guns of
the Tripoline Castle by the Syren and sent into this Port - a Brig
sailed from Malta in company with the aforesaid Brig, which also
belonged to Malta, and was chartered by the Tripoline Consul - her
cargo consisted of Plank and Nails for building Gun Boats - Building
Stone for the Bashaw's New Forts, and about 20 bales of Hemp.
Flax, Wool, and Turkish Clothing belonging to 8 Tripolines who were
passengers on board her, She cleared out for Gerba in the Kingdom of
Tunis, but was met with by the Nautilus to the Eastward of Tripoly
in the Night standing in for the City with a free wind, the fires a t the
City then in sight. Lieu! Somers sent her in here for examination,
and on searching her a great number of letters for Tripoly were found
secreted under the Transom cieling and the Bnshaw of Tripoly's passport to the Tripolines found on board,
were all armed with
hluskets, Pistols & Sabres The Mate who is brother to the Captain
has also acknowledged on oath before a Blagistrate, that they were
bound direct from Malta to Tripoly, but cleared out for Gerba to
avoid our Cruisers. She had no Invoice of Cargo nor a single letter
for Gerba. Governour Ball at Malta told me that he considered those
captures as perfect!y legal, as he hnd given public Notice of the
Rlockad~,and had forbid any commllnication with Tripoly. Lt
Somers will send llis prim- home for adjudication and to take the
papers of thc othcr Vesst~lsthat they may be condemned. The 16
Gun Brig [Tran.$cr, 17 March 18041 was built for a Cruiser, and
is a very fine \-essel. She has 16 Six Pounders a great number of
Muskets, Iilunderbusscs, Cutlasses Pistols, and other Military Stores
excepting Powder, the whole of which, she left with the Bashaw of
Tripoly, and was to take a fresh supply a t Malta, I have had her
Valued by three Gentlemen of character, who have estimated her
Value at five thousnnd dollars as she stands with all her stores kc.
and a t thnt valuation I have taken her into the Serrice of the United
States under the name of the Scourge and have appointed Lieut Dent
to command her. I have been induced to do this, as I am in want of
Cruisers - The Nautilus has lately suffered so much in a pale of wind
off Tripoly (in which she was near being lost, having all one side of
her Waist stovr in - and three of her Guns carried orerbg & lost) as
render it necessary to send her to Messina to undergo a thorough
ropair. She is very rotten, and never was strong enough for a
Cruiser. The Enter rise has just returned from that pIace, where
she has been repairel.
On the 27th Ulto I hoisted the white flag, and fired a Gun off the
Harbour of Tripoly where I was at Anchor The Bashaw answered
by doing the same. I then sent a Boat on shore with an Officer
(hf' Izard) in charge of the letters from hfr Talleyrand to the French
Commissary General and letters to Captain Bambridge. Mr Izard
was nllowed to see Captain B-in the Bashaw's Castle, where he and
his Officers are confined under a strong Guard, but he was not allowed

42 NAT?A.L OPERATIONS. APRIL-SEPTEMBER 6, 1804
to see any of the other prisoners. The letters were delivered among
which was one from me to the Basham's Prime Minister proposing an
exchange of Prisoners, which he did not accede to The 28th I again sent my boat on shore when the French Commissary
General came off. he observed he would do all in his power to endeavour to effect the release of the American Prisoners, and to bring
about n. Peace; but that we must not expect to accomplish the ransom
of the Prisoners for less than 200.000 Dollars unless we could show
more force before Tripaly than we have yet been able to show However i t is generally supposed, and I have goad reason to believe
that the Commissary is altogether in the interest of the Bashaw and
wishes to make as good a bargain for him as possible Tile Consuls
are all intriguing for themselves and against us, and do not wish us to
have Peace with Tripoly, as they are certain that such an event will
be the Signal for War with some oC them. I suspect we must depend
altogether on ourselves. The Bashaw is daily gaining strength - he
has now 14 Gun-Boats - and a Gang of Carpenters from Spain are
building him several more - He is also building several new Butteries
to the East and West of the Town on which he employs all the Crew
of the Philadelphia. If I had two more frigates, and a few Gun and
hlortar Boats, I should be able most certainly to subdue him directly.
I have been endeavouring to procure the Gun and hlortar Boats from
the Keapolitan Government, but fear I shall not succeed, as the
British Government are working against us to prevent it - FTould i t
not be well to build 10 or 12 Gun arid AIortar-Boats on a large Construction, and send out here against nest year, if we should not have
force sufficient to subdue Tripoly tELis? I however hope yet to bring
the Bashaw to terms soon, as I am taking measures to destroy his
Gun Boats, and the small t o m s 011 his Coast in order to distress the
I~lhabitants,and drive them into the Citx upon him - I solicited
p e w o n to send on shore a t Tripoly clothing for the Prisoners
PC-hchwas not obtained but I expect soon u-ill be.
On the 5th instant I went to Tunis, to see how our affajrs stand
there - hP Davis came on board - every thing mas quiet, but the
Bey is fitting all his cruisers & threatens to take our Vessels, if he is
not in SLY weeks paid for the Tunisian property captured by Commodore Morris' S uadron He insisted on my landing to pay my respects
to him a t his Eastle, this I declined but wrote to him a copy of the
letter I enclose you - On the 7th a heavy Gale of wind Came on
which obliged me to leave the Bay and put to Sea - a Tripoline
Xebeck of 16 Guns was hauled up within the Gouletta dismantled
and the crew gone home. in consequence of having been blockaded
by the Enterprize for a fortnight previous to her going to hlsssina for
repairs. The other Tripoline Cruisers are hauled up in Tripoly,
where I hope yet to destroy them.
I touched at Malta where I found the Vixen from Algiers which
brought $1; OBrien late Consul who has Volunteered his services with
me for the Summer; from his knowledge of the language and disposition of the Barbarians I expect he will be of great service particularly
in sny negotiation. I have rec* letters from Col Lear and from the
Department of State for k f r Davis a t Tunis. Mr OBrien sails immediately in the Enterprize for that place with those letters and I hope
every thing will be settled to our satisfaction with that Regency; but
we must not rely too much on that hope unless we have more force

43

WARS 'CVITH BARBARY PO WEBS

out - On my arrival here, I found the Ship U700drop Sims with a
cargo of provisions and Stores and some canvass arid cordage which
is much wanted. We are now plentifully supplied with provisions
for some time to come. The Argu.s convoyed the Store Ship here, and
is now off Tripoly with the Vixen; the Syren sails this evening to join
them and the Enterprize wiU proceed there from Tunis after landing
Captain ORrien; and I shall sail from this in two days for Tunis and
take him on board again.
The Scourge will be fitted from this Ship's Stores and Manned by
the different Vessels of the Squadron and will be ready to sail in a fern
days for the Blockade I have appointed hiIr bl-adsworth and Mc
Izard acting Lieutenants of her, and l l r C Morris, Acting Master
.Mr Brooks has been appointed Master of the Argus, in place of Mr
Magratb permitted to return to the U S by his own request on account
of ill health - M
F Harrison Master of the Syren, and hi: Cox master
of the Arautilus have likewise been pernritted to go home on acc? of
their health, and M r Burrows appointed to the former, and M: Casson
to the latter as acting Masters Mr Livingston has written me a letter,
and requested permission to resign, to save himself from a trial by
Court Martial for serious charges. I now enlcose you his commission,
which I hope you will accept to save the feelings of his friends. He
goes home m the Store Ship. h!fr Ridglej- and XI! Israel stand next
for promotion as they axe certainly two of the smartest Officers of
their rank in the service.
I am bong with your letters of the 24 Jan: 4th and 9th FebrT I
am glad the John Adams is coming out, as I shall have occasion for
per] before Tripoly, if she is so situated with respect to her orders that
I c ~ employ
u
her on that station. The men she is to bring out for
this ship and for the Enterprize will be acceptable as the crew of that
vessel is impatient to return to the United States
You may rely with confidence that I shall conduct the blockade of
Tripoly with hscretion, and shall pay proper respect to the rights of
Neutrality agreeable to the wishes of the President.
Slop clothing of every description can be procured here on better
terms than in America, exceptirig blue TToolen Trowsers and Jackets,
the only clothing necessary to be sent out. The Mediterranean passes
you sent out, ought to have been bottoms or regular passes m the
place of To s. The Barbary Cruisers have the Tops, and should one
of our sma CnJsers fall in with one of their Frigates she would be
sent into Port, if she could not produce a ass-port, by which much
troublo and diRlc~dtymight be created. h e Algerines sent in two
French Brigs of T a r under similar circumstsnces. I wish you to send
out a roper pass for each of the Squadron: the new passes wiIl be
best f. they are sent out whole, we can cut them here. hlr Hunt
Midshipman on board this Ship, is very deaf, and does not promise
to make an Officer; I have therefore sent him to assist Mr Cox in conducting Lieu; Somer's prize to the Unitad States I enclose ou 8
list of the DEcers as they are now attached to the di8erent
of the Squadron
P S. I have not yet drawn a Bill s h e I left America excepting
the one I drew at Cadiz for 3500 dollars but P expect I shall be obliged
to, as the repairs of the Enterprize and Nautilus; - the purchase of
spirits and Wine &c* for the Squadmn; - the necessary supplies of

i

9&s

44 NAVAL OPERATIOA-S, APRIL-SEPTEMBER 6 , 1804
the Officers and Crew of the Philadelphia, and keeping the Officers
of the Squadron paid up, &ill soon expend the 55,000 dollars brought
out in tlus ship, and the Argw. The pay of the Oficers of the Squadron alone, is about 2300 dollars p' month, and without such pay,
they could not appear decent, or live comfortably All the Officers
and Men turned over from the last Squadron have been paid up on
board this ship. I can (if I should want) obtain Money a t Malta on
Par on London or perhaps something under, and opportunities may
offer to draw on the United States without loss I shall as soon as
possible, send a Vessel down to Gib? to replace the Argus, but cannot
at present spare one. I send you enclosed a number of letters for your
information - Signed E. P. [LC. EPP, LB, Dec. 1803-April 1804.1

[19 April 18041
To Midshipman Stephen Cassin, U. S. Navy, from Captain Edward Preble,

a. s. M ~ V Y
SIR You are hereby appointed Master of the U. S. Schooner
Naditus, You will therefor take u on yourself the charge and duty
of Master in her accordingly, ageab e to the regulations of the Service
for which this shall be your sufficient Werrant.
Given under my hand on board the
U. S. Ship Constitution this 19 day
of April 1804
Signed, EDWARD
PRFBLE
To LM~
STEPHER
CASSION

f

hereby appointed Master
of U. S. Schooner lVauliJw
[LC. EPP, Order Book, M a y 1803-June

1805.1

Extract from log book kept by Sailing Master Nathaniel Baraden, U. S. Navy, on
board U. S. Frrgate Conslil~rfion,Thursday. 19 April 1804

Moderate breezes from E S E. Employed watering ship and stowing the fore & main hold - Discharged the two boats which we
employed watering & gave them certificates for two days each
Towards Evening fresh breezes from the East$
At 1 A. M. the wind shifted in n. squall from E S E to R-S YY - Let
go the best bower. At 2 A. M. Launched Top Gall? Masts - From
this time till 8 A. llf. strong breezes from the K '(T- with light showers
by intervals - At 9 A. M. more moderate. Sent 3 officers & 30
Seamen to assist in refitting the rigging the U. S. Brig Scourge Recieved from the Constitutions stores on shore, 3 large Blocks, One
flying Jibb boom & One foretop -Mast Studdg S! Boom. Fresh Breezes
which prevent the watering service from going on. Made the Enterprize Signals N Q598 & 995 - Surgeons report 7 sick, 7 convalescent
Xoon fresh breezes from N N V*.
[LC. EPP, Log Constitution, 1803- 1804.1

45

M7ARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

To Midshipman Daniel Marray, U. S. Navy, Philadeiphia, Pa., from Secretary of
the nsvp

KAVYD E P ~

April 20. 1804 We have found it of great advantage in RaltQ,to open two Rendezvous for tho same Ship. If you should be of opinion that a similar
plan would be of seroice in Phil%lso, you will open a second Rendezvous at such House as upon a c.onsultation with Mr Harrison, may be
deemed most eligible. Such rendezvous you will place under the
direction of an Officer on whose abilities you can rely, to be considered
as a Branch of the Rendezvous under your Command.
[NDA. OSW, Vol. 6, 1802-1805.1
To Lieutenant Colonel Commandant Franklin Wharton, U. S. Marine Corps, from
Secretary of the Nary

NAVYD E P M ~
20 April 1804
SIR,R-e require for the Frigate President 1. Captain and 1 Lieutenant of Marines, and for the Frigates Congress, Constellation, and Essex
each 1 Lieutenant of hIarines. I wish to see you tornorro~vmorning
on the subject.
INDA. USMC, LB, 1804-1 820.1
To Captain Stephen Decatur, Jr., U. S. Navy, commanding U.S. Schooner E n w i r e ,
from Captain Edward h e b l e . U. S. Navy

U. S. SHTP
Cwstituiion
Syracuse Harbor Apt d l n' 1804

SIR You will proceed from this for Tunis. ?clr OBrian will take
passnge uu?tli you for that place where he is to be landed, from thence
you are to proceed directly for the blockade of Tripoly unless circumstances should induce hlr ORrien or J l r Davis our Chnrge d affaires at
that place to ad\-ise you to t l i ~contrary for the good of the Senice You will leave a letter with 11:Obrien or Mr Davis for me acquainting
me of your route [LC. EPP, Order Book, May 1803-June 1805.1
To John Broadbent, U.S. Navy Agent, Yessina, from Captain Edward Preble,
U. S. Navy

U S SHIPConstitution., S Y RHr
~
April 21st 1804.
DEARSIRI thank you for your kind attention to Cap: Decatur and
the assistance you have rendered him in the repairs of the Enterprize.
I have now to request your kind Ofices in ~ ~ V O I ofW Cnptain Somers
of the United States S: ATautilur who visits your place to repair some
damage which that vossel has sustained in a gale of wind off Tripoly.
I have nothing new to coinrnunioate, but expect ere long to see you a t
Messina. I have sent you by the Nautilus One thousand dollaxs for
which you will please to fonvQ me duplicate recei ts by Captain
Sorners, and debit me with the enpenccs on the ~aut$w
P. S. In lieu of the One thousand doll! mentioned Cap1 Decatur
sends you 962 2311 00 doll*

E P.

[LC. EPP, LB, Dec. 1803-April 1804.1

46 NAVAL OPERATIONS. APRILSEPTEMBER 6. 1804
To Lieutenant Richard Somers, U. S.Bavy, commanding U. S. Schooner N d i I a s ,
from Captain Edward Preble, 0.6. Navy

U . S. FRIGATE
Comtitution

Syracuse Harbor Ap! dl fi [ I 8041
SIR YOUd
lproceed to Messina, and repair the damage the Nautilus has sustained in a gale of Wind off Tripoly - Make your rcquisitions on h4' John Broadbent St he will furnish you: As soon as the
Nautilus is in order for sea proceed to this place, Take on board as
much prorisions and water as you with prudence can, and sail directly
to join the Squadron in the blockade of Tripoly -.
[LC. EPP, Order Book, May 1803-June 1805.1
To Captain Edwrtrd Preble, U. S. Navy, from Mrs. F. Leckie, Syracuse

SYRACUSE April 1804
SIR The Gorernour has this moment called upon me to
request that I would address you upon the subject of the dispute
which has unfortunately arisen between yourself and him. He desires me to represent to you, that the situation of his Court with the
French Government is such, that without disobeying the orders recd
he could not act otherwise than he has done, though on all occasions
it is his n-ish to convince you of the very high esteem and re ard which
he entertains for your person and the American Nation, tfie interest
of which, it will eyer be his desire to promote.
Let me, therefore, beg of you, that if you go to Naples you -411 not
represent his Conduct in such a manner as to injure or perhaps entirely ruin a man whose weakness is ever the cause of those disputes
which arise more from the bad adricc of those about him, tban from
any evil intention of his own.
You will hare the goodness to answer the present as soon as possible,
that I mag calm the fears of the Governour who though he affects
indifference is terribly frightened.
I remain D' Sir
Yours truly
3': LECKIE
DEAR

[LC. EPP, LB, Dec. 1803--4pril 1804.1
To S+bs. P. Leckie, Syracuse, from Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Navy

Constitution 2 1st APRIL 1804

DEARMADAM
I am hon* with your esteemed favor of thia morning

I am confident the Governour could not have re@ any Orders from
his Court to protect deserters from the United States Squadron to
oblge the French Government, or to insult our flag by forciblj- detaining our Officers on shore; of course he could have acted with more
propriety than he has done. He certainly has a very singular way of
discovering that attachment to the American Nation which he professes to have for it.
I am however willing to impute his conduct to the advice of secret
enemies he has about him, and can assure ou I liave no wish to
injure him, or to make any representations to is Court of his conduct,
but what my public character requires of mt. In compliance with
your request, which has been dictated by the goodness of your heart,
I shall endeavour to screen his conduct in such a manner as not to

t

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

47

injure him if it can possibly be avoided. The Governour in having
prevailed on you to become his advocate, has acted wisely for once in
his life, for be assured Madam it will ever afford me the highest satisfaction to have it in my power to oblge you.

MrP F LECKIE
[LC. EPP, LB, Dec. 1803-April 1804.1

[21 April 1804?]
To Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Navy, from the Governor of Syracuse

Your Excellv cannot be ignorant of my freindsllip toward you &
how much it becomes me to mentain that good harmony which
reigns between the King my master and the united States of America
you are much mistaken if you suppose that I had the most distant
thought of commitq the least hostile action against a Nation that I
so much respect not only for the regard they have for my Master tbe
King but also for the particular esteem I entertain for your good
self so much so that I immediately sent an officer & inform'd you of
my operation the moment I was pursuaded, that your laws & your
treat with france authorise you to do as you have - I have now
simp y to pray and in consideration to the friendship you have always
shewn be pleased to soften all in your power the punishment due to
your deserter & only be assured that I will always behave towards
you and your Squadron with every regard and attention as from the
first, moment you entered this port - I understand you are going
to naples to complain of my Conduct what ever mny befall me I will
never repine at any thing you may occation me, before we part I
desire to cxnbrace you at any place you may Judge most fit be it at
my Iiouse at A i r Leckies, or hlr Dysons where I may renew the proof
of my sincere freindsl~p& inalterable esteem with which I subscribe
myself
MARCELLO
D? GREGORIO
WIat pleasure it woud give me if you woud honor me with your
Company to hforrow to Dlne in Company with hIr Decatur

9

[LC. EPP! Vol. 9, Jan.-Feb. 1804.1
Extract from journal of U. S. Brig Argus, Lieutenant Isaac Hull, U. S. Navy,
commanding, Saturday, 21 April 1804

These 24 hours Commences with light airs and Clear Feather
saw a strange sail on our Feather bow made sail and gave Chace
at 4 Exchanged Signals with the U. S. Schooner Vixen at % past
Captain Smith of the T.'ixkn Came on board the Argus and returned
at8PM
At 10 L4M made all sail standing in for the fort to the Festwg of
Tripoli the Vixen and us fired several shot at the nbove fort which
was returned by both the forts T o r e Ship Empg as Necessal-g [NDA photostat.]

To Captain Edward Preble, U. 6. Navy, from James Leander Cathcart, Naples

NAPLESApril 22nQ1804
DEARSIR Enclosed are duplicates of my dispatch of the 17'b inst,
the originbl went by post the day of its date to Messina; I likewise
gave you the heads of the negotiation by two different conveyances
by Sea

-

APRIL-SEP TEMBER 6 , 1804
48 NA VAL OPEBATIOOhTS,

I now send you a Cypher [See Edward Preble Papers, vol. 11, doc.
2527; Library of Congress, Mss Div.] the Key (with me) you will
please to make the word Constantinople, I recommend to you to send
a copy of it to Capt?Bainbridge and fix on a, Key between yourselves
as by that means he may be able to forward you intelligence which
it would be imprudent to trust to legible characters: I would thank
you to inform him that I ndl write to him and use for the Key the word Philadelphia, by the time I expect he may have receiv'd
I send you the rough copy of the Treaty wich I
the Cypher
intended to present to the Basbnw of Tripoli &. its translation in
Italian, if the Tunisians keeps quiet; or if they do not & you can
prevail on the Xeapolitan government to keep in the Cruisers of
Tunis with their seventy four and two Frigates I hope to hear that
vou will force the Bashaw of Tripoli to sign it or one as honorable on
board your own ship; you may depend Sir a few Bombs will altar the
Bashaws opinion & get the bet,ter of his obstinacy much better and
sooner than the persuasive arguments of all the OBriens 8- ?rIoDonoghs
that ever left Ireland backd with the pretended influence of the Jews
of Algiers: I hope however that the sight of your force will effect
all you wish for in case of going to estremitys I regret from the inmost
recesses of my soul the dangerous sit~iationthet Capt"n.inbridge his
oEcers & crev would be placed in, as well as the necessity you would
be under to adopt a ripororrs retaliation repungnant to your feelings
& at which humanity shudders
Mr OBrien has thought proper to assert among other falsehoods that
the contents of the 14Q Article of the enclosed Treaty is without
foundation although I have proof in the hand u-riting of Farfara the
Bashaws interpreter to substantiate the fact; he has likewise declared
that the Bashaw of Tripolis pcrsonal pique to me would pscvenr him
from negotiating with me for peace; this I presume was the reason
government gave me orders to place the powers originally invested
in me in the hands of Colonel Lear: this likewise is false for I have
document to proFe that in July 1802 the Bashaw & his minister wish'd
me to come to Tripdi in preference to any other: I therefore request
that should you land in Tripoli you will be so good as to investigate
those matters 8: give justice to whom its due: I should be extremely
happy if et-ery hour of my administration was investigated by an
honest and impartial man who has no other views but the honor and
interest of his Country: but to be exposed to the malice envy 6
misrepresentations of a set of men destitute of every sense of honor &
adverse to every measure but those calculated to promote their own
case and emolument is distressing beyond descri tion: On investigation you will find Sir that I have neither stuged my interest or
ease since I have been in the service, had I ursued a different line of
conduct I should have been receiv'd at Ilgiers with distinguish'd
marks of approbation but being conscious from near 20 years observation that the humiiiating situation that the powers of Europe have
been reduced to a t different periods, has proceeded from their local
situation, commercial jealousies, and misrepresentation of their
Consuls who were more Intent on preserving their sdarys R- commercial priviledges than the true interest of their Country, & viewing our
situation entirely in a different point of view from any other, as a
rising nation with an increasing Navy & well knowing that the first
impressions made by us on those Barbarians would be the means of

-

49

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

their ranking us either with Great Britain and France or the small
tributary nations I determined to resist their impositions in the first
instance so far as prudence dictated and I was authorized by mg
instructions: I was and am sensible that a war with those powers B
by no means desirable but then Sir I am of opinion that it ought not
to be dreaded as so great a national calamity; if we intend to have
a Navy we must have officers & men and no place presents so good
a nursery for them at present as the Mediterranean; was I to dive
farther into oliticks perhaps I could prove to your satisfaction that
the war wit Tripoli so far from being a calamity has really been
attended with great national benefit, the effects of which will be more
visible in a few years: in fact Sir my conduct has been approved by
three administrations, I have honorable testimonials of it from the
President & Secreta of State Colonel Humphreys Mess3 Barlow
Donaldson Smith an others to which I am happy to add your own:
& therefore can have had no motive in view but the interest of my
Count and in future s h d despise the insinuations of those who have
ursue plans calculated to promote their own interest and ease though
shall never cease to regret the effects produced by their measures;
You certainly on viewing the history of the war with Tripoli will
agree with me that we have had one or two opportunitys of humbling
that Regency and of making peace with them on our own terms; if
those opportunitys were not embraced or if accidents has since h a p
pend which has marr'd those prospects it has not been through any
fault of mine but in consequence of measures over which I had no
control, I therefore am not responsible for the consequences: I have
acted from the certainty I feel in the success attending energetic
measures and I feel confident that if the other States remains quiet
this summer which will prevent the necessity of a division of your
force that you will prove the truth of my assertion by demonstration
which I most sincerely hope may be the case and that your exertions
may be crown'd with the most compleat success which will redound
to the immortal honor of yourself & the brave Officers m d Seamen
under your co~nmandThe bearer of this is Mr Spence a midshipman who was left sick a t
Leghorn & whom I have brought with me to this place on his way to
join the Squadron; he is the son of the purser of the Philadelphia now
a prisoner a t Tripoli; as his family has been unfortunate, & he has
not many opulent connections to bring him forward, I take the liberty
to recommend him to your notice and to request that should the command of the gunboats be given to midshipmen you will include him
in the number; he is in m opinion a very fine young man, ossesses
a nice sense of honor, an has been at sea since he was twe r e ears
if you should be inked
old four of which he has been in the Na
to favor my request I flatter myself that%r Spence will do honor to
your choice & my recommendation to hear from you as often as op ortunity serves I requegt
you to b 'eve that I continue with respect ull esteem
Enclosed is a letter from Mr Barnes
[LC. EPP, Vol. 11, April-June 1804.1

f

7

f

a

P

d

""9

-

P

50 NAVAL OPERATIONS, APRILSEPTEMBER

6, 1804

To Sir John Acton, Prime Xinister of State, The Two Mciliss, from Jarnee Leander
Cathcart, Napla8

NAPLES April $?Pq
1804.
Snt The undersign'd Agent of the United States of Bmerica embraces
this o portunit to iniorm your Excellency that he has inform'd
Como ore Preb e by post of the permission anted by his Sicilian
Majesty (QDC) to make use of four of his ajesty's gun & four of
his mortar boats artillery & other necessary apparatus: & now dispatches MT Rob$ Spence an Officer in the Navy of the United States
to Messina in order to convey the intelligence to said Commander
wherever he may be with the greatest possible dispatch: & at the
same time takes the liberty to remind your Excellency of the permission granted to deposit fourteen bales of cloathing for the Amencan
prisoners at Tripoli in his Majesty's stores untill call'd for by some
of our vessels of War & request your Excellency to grant the necessary
permit. While the undersign'd Agent takes a pleasure in expressing to your
Excellency the highest sense of his Majesty's goodness in granting so
promptly the request made by him on the part of Comodore Preble
he re uests to be permited the honor of testifying to your Excellency
the p easure he anticipates in informing his government of the very
polite reception he met from your Excellenc & the very friendly
part your Excellency was pleased to act in facgtating the request. Publick business demanding the presence of the undersign'd Agent
a t Leghorn he has requested the American Consul here to procure
him the necessary passport & profits of this opportunity to tender to
your Excellency the homage of his highest respect & arrogates the
honor of subscribing himself. -

l

f

3

i!

fLC. EPP, Val. 11, April-June 1804.1
To Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Bavy, from Marcello de Gregorio, Governor of
5yrrrcnse

April 29n.d 1804

I have endeavoured by every means to preserve the good hannony
established from the first moment your Excellency entered this Port,
but I cannot deny being much hurt a t the occurrence of this day as
it infringes the neutrality of the King m Master.
Notwithstanding I am certain that your Excellency will p r e m e
that goodness towards me which you have shown on all occasions,
and earnestly beg you only to suspend the Punishment of the sailor
taken on board of the French prize 'till such time as I can inform my
Sovereign of the circumstance, and receive an answer to know if his
sentiments correspond with yours that ou may in the mean time
keep him on board your Vessel, and terwards judge him as you
think fit. I am persuaded from your regard for me, you will grant
me this favour only reflecting that it will relieve me from all responsibility. I hope for your kind interposition to rove the good friendship that has existed between us, be assure I am forced to this
resource to avoid any difficulty with the French, as the Prize Captain
of the Privateer of said Nation firmly declares that he will give mformation to his Government With sentiments of the
eat respect I
sign myself Your Egcellency'e Moat devoted & Oblig
(Signed) MARCELLO
DE GREOORIO
[LC. EPP, LB,Dec. 1803-April 1804.1

J

8

2?

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

51

To Lieutenant Charles Stewart, U. 6. Navy, commanding U. 8. Brig S i r 4 from
Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Ravy

U. S. SHIPConstdution API 22'J 1804
Syracuse Harbor
SIRYOUwill sail immediately to join the Squadron in the Blockade
of Tripoly, take under Convoy to Malta the ship Woodrop Simms and
your prize, which you will see safe into that Port, and if necessary
ou may stop 24 hours at Malta to arrange the business of the Prize,
gut not longer. Cruize oB Tripoly untill I join you with this Ship Station the A r g m & Enterprize to the mTestQ
of the Town and take
your station with the Vizen to the Eastward of it, until farther orders.
[LC. EPP, Order Book, May 1803-June 1805.1
To James Simpson, U. 6. Consul, Tangier, Morocco, from Captain Edward Preble,
U. 6. Bavy

U S. FRIGATE
ConstitZLtion

SYRACUSE
HARBOUR
dbnd April 1804
DEARSIR I am honQwith your favor of the 22nd February 1804,
by Cap: Hull,and sincerely regret that there should be any further
cause of trouble as it respects the Mishotwh.
I have questioned Captain Smith on the subject of the money
said to be delivered in his presence, who denies having been present
at any such transaction, and as Lieu5 Cox is now in the United States,
it is not possible for me to throw any light on the subject. As to the
violence committed on Raiz Omar's teeth I think your enquiry very
proper, but I am rather induced to believe that these complaints
are founded in principles not very honorable to Omar. If, however,
i t should prove otherwise I agree with you that prompt satisfaction
should be made him.
I observe what you say respecting the arrival of the Gun Carriages
at Tangier. - As this present was promised by Govern*before the
violation and renewal of our treaty, it may be well tbat.it is carried
into effect; but I cannot but contemn the idea of supplpng the Barbary Bates with the means of defence for certain it IS, that their
avarice is stimulated iAnexact proportion to their ability to command.
You are so fully apprized-of my sentiments respecting the treatment
of these Barbarians that ~t is not necessary to dwell on the subject,
but rest assured Sir, that the more I am familiarized with their
character, the more firmly am I fixed in my first impressions.
I regret Sir, that it is not in my power to meet your wishes in sendiq
a ship of war on your coast as soon as the first of May. Independant
of the warfare mth Tripoly circumstances have made it necessary to
watch the motions of Tunis which makes it impossible to send a
vessel to Larach, 'till I have more force from the United States;
when this is the case I will lose no time in dispatch& one of my
squadron to Tangier to be employed on such servlce as cmumstances
may require - Kith you I duly appreciate the Presidents generous
approbation of the measures taken to re-establish peace with the
Emperor of Morocco.
I can sey in truth that I shall always feel obliged by any communication in which the intarest of our Country is concerned

52 NAVAL OPERATIONS, APRILSEPTEMBER 6,1804
Under the conviction that I shall in all cases meet your wrdial
co-operation
I subscribe myself with
Sentiments of esteem
Yr. M. Ob. Servt
(Signed) E PREBLE
JAMES SIMPSON
Esq;
U 8.Con& a1 Morocco
[LC. EPP, LB, Dec. 1803-April 1804.1
[22 April 18041
To Lieutenant Charles Stewart, U. 6. Navy, commanding U. S. Brig Siren, from
Captain Edward Preble, U. 6. Navy
SIR IrOu will turn over to the U. S. Brig Scourge L' Dent, as many

men as you can conveniently Spare
Cmstitution Ap! 22 1804
[LC. EPP, Order Book, May 1803-June 1805.1

To Midshipmen John Davis and John Bowe, U. 6. Mavy, from Captain Edward
Preble, U. S. Navy

U. S. SHIPConstitution
Apnl22Q1804.
SIR YOUwill repair on board the U. S. Brig Scourge, & place yourself under the Command of the Commanding OBicer [LC. EPP, Order Book, May 1803-June 1805.1
Extrsct from Xemorandum Book of Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Eiavy, on board
U. 8. Prigate

Gnrtitutlon.

22 April 1804

Some difficulty with the Govt. of Syracuse respecting the detention
of officers by closing the gates, which was adjusted next day.
[LC original.]
Extract from journal of U. S. Brig Argus, Lieutenant Isaac Hull,U. 6. Navy,
commanding, Sunday, 22 April 1804

This day begins with moderate and Pleasant Weather under easy
sail off the harbour of Tripoli which at ji past 2 bore SE, at 4 bore
away in CQand Exercised sails at 5 hauled our wind at Sundown
Tripoli bore SSE distt 6 Miles Sounded in 30 fathoms Water at 3
AM, Close reeft the topsails blowing Very heavy from the NorthQ
and Eastward sent down T. G. Yards and launched T. G. masts
the gale Increasing set and took in sail a s Necessary at % past 8 wore
Ship to the Southward Varionsly Employed
[NDA photostat.]
Extract from Diary of Captain Edward Preble. U. 6. Iavy, Commodore of U. 8.
Squadron in the lediterranean, Sunday, 22 April 1804

Wind S W. Moderate breezes & fair weather. I had this day an
unpleasant affair with the Governor of Syracuse, which originated in
his protecting a deserter from one of the Squadron. About 4 weeks
since a seaman deserted from the Ente tize, and was enticed on
Board a French privateer boat by her &cem, who promised him
protection, in consequence of which he did not conceal, from us, the

WARS WITH BARBARY P O W m S
-

53

--

knowledge of his being there. Cap*Smith being the Senior Officer in
Port a t that time applied Verbally to the Governor to have the
Deserter restored, but recieved no answer satisfactory; He then wrote
to him, but recieved no answer, and the deserter sailed on a c d e
in the Frenchman; this day the Deserter arrived in a Maltese Coaster,
prize to the French privateer. Lieutt Decatur sent his boat on board
of her and took his man out The Prize Master complained to the
Governor, who, without giving me notice of the Affair, shut the gates
of the Town, & detained by Force Lt Somere, Commander of the
Nautilwr & eight other Officers. He then sent off his Aid de Camp &
one of his Council to inform me that in consequence of Lt Decatur
having recovered his deserter, he the Governor had detained a number
of Officers belonging to the U. S. S uadron, And that they should not
be allowed to return on Board un& the Deserter was restored to the
Frenchman: I observed to the two gentlemen, that this conduct was
rash and improper, and an insult to our Flag, which I would not
submit to, and as i t was, at this time, past 8 OClock in the Evening,
they could not go on shore, untill all the Officers of the Squadron
were allowed to return to their respective Vessels. In the Morning,
I wrote a letter to the Governor, demanded the immediate and unconditional return of the Officers, and threatened to complain of his
Conduct to the King his Master; he immediately opened the Gates
for our Officers, and sent a deputation of Gentlemen off, and wrote
to me several letters, requesting I would forgive his hasty conduct,
and assuring me, that I might command him, on every Occasion.
In consequence of this humiliation, I released the deputation he sent
on board yesterday. I immediately after recieved a pressing invitation to dine with him, and an assurance of his unbounded friendship:
the Invitation I declined - At 10 A. M. the Woodrop Sims Store
Ship sailed for Malta, with her Cargo A report that the French
intend to take possession of this lace induces me to divide our provisions $ stores by sending that s 'p to that place The Syren Sailed
on a Cruize off Tripoly, with Orders to see the Store Ship into Malta.
The Enterprize sailed for Tunis with Orders to land Mr Obrien there,
and then to proceed off Tripoly to join the Squadron in the Blockade
of that place. I have sent Mr Obnan to Tunis to assist Mr Davis in
arranging our Affairs with that Re ency - Mr OBrien took dispatches from the Secretary of State or Mt Davis, and several letters
from me - The Nadilus sailed for Messina to be repaired
[LC. EPP,Diary, 1803-1804.1

E

F

Extract from log book kept by Soiling Master Nathaniel Earaden, U. 6. Navy, on
board U. S. Frigate Gndihdion, Sunday, ZZ April 1804

Moderate breszes from S W. At Anchor in Saragosa Syren,
Nautilus, Ente rize & Scourge in company This afternoon Capf
Decatur of the nterprize ap rehended a deserter from his Schooner
on board a French Prize - omplaint was made to the Governor of
the Port who immediately gave orders to detain an American Officer
who was on shore on libert . The Commodore retaliated b detaining
two Oflicers who came on oard the C d i f u f i o n- ~ i ~ wmade
a s
for the Squadron to clear for action The Batteries were manned
throughout the y h t - At 8 A. M. the business was adjusted perfectly to the satis action of the Commodore.

%

8

g

54 NAT7A.L OPERATIONS, APRIESEPTEMBER 6, 1804
Noon Moderate Breezes - Surgq report 7 sick, 9 convset At 10
A, M. sailed on a cruize off Tripoly the U. S. Bng Syren - She took
under convoy for Malta the Woodrop Sims Store Ship - The Enterprize sailed from this Port bound to Tunis with Consul Obrien.
Sailed also the Nautilus where she is ordered to recieve some repairs.
[LC. EPP, Log Constitution, 1803-1804.1
Extract from journal of Midshipman F. Cornelius deKrafft, U. S. Navy, in U.6. Brig
Simr of 18 guns, Lieutenant Charles Stewart, U. S. Navy, commanding, Sunday,
22 April 1804

Commences with light airs & variable. At 6 A. M hoisted in the
barge. The Commodore made signal for us & the Ederprize to get
. At past 7 the Enterprize weigh'd & stood out of the
harbour
under [ yracuse], made signal for our convoy to get under way.
ast 10 wind haul'd to the Ed weigh'd & stood out of the harbour.
he Nadilus's Prize & our ship under our convoy with the Store Ship
W o d m p Simms ahead. At 10 (our prize ship) not being able to beat
out of the harbour, wore round stood in & came too an anchor - saw
the Nautilus under way coming out. $/2 past 10 Lt Maxwell join'd us
agsin from the Prize - Meridian moderate breezes & pleas1 wind S. E
Ships Co: employ'd clearing decks kc.
(NB those remarks include 12 hours)

wag

%

[NDA.]
To Xidshipman Oliver E.Perry, U. 8. Bavy, Washington, D. C., from Secretary of
the Bavy

NAVYD E P M
A~
p d 23,1804You will consider yourself attached to the Frigate The ConsteZZutiola
as one of her Officers and will immediately report yourself to her
Commanding Officer. [NDA. OSW, Vol. 6, 1802-1805.1
To the Commanding OBcer of U. 8. Ship John A d a , from Captain Edward Preble,
IT. S. Bavy

U. S. SHIPC m t W w n
Syracuse Harbor Apt 2 9 1804
SIR I have been informed by letter from the Secretary of the Navy
that the U. S. Ship John Adurns armed en flute would arrive here b
the last of the present month with provisions & Stores for the ~ q u d
ron under my cornmmd; having on board 20 Men for this Ship & a
Crew for the Enterprize
On your arrival in this Port you will immediately fill up your water
casks from the fountain: and proceed with the provisions Stores and
men to join the Squadron off Tripoly - And to cruize there until1 you
fall in with me - You are not to deliver any Stores without my
written orders - You are to capture all vessels belonging to the
Bashaw of Tripoly or his subjects and to distress the Enemy by Every
means in your ower The Port of $rip01 has been declared by me, and is at present in a
state of blockade; you are not therefore to s d e r the Vessels of any
nation to enter that place while blockaded by us, and any vessels who
may endeavour to enter without permission from me for so doing,
You are to detain, and send into Malta for examination -

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

55

You are strictly to examine all vessels which you may happen to
fall in with, and sufEer no vessel whatever to pass without searching
her between decks. You are to succour a31 Vessels belonging to the
U. S. that may be attacked by the Enemy, or in their possession.
You are to respect the rights of Nations with whom we are a t
peace, and not to capture Vessels within the Jurisdictional limits or
under the protection of such nations Should you want money for the necessary expences of the U. S.
John A*,
under our command you are to draw on me for it,
expressing in your B
the purpose for which ou may draw, taking
m e that letters of advice accompan your BI& I t will be requisite
to use economy in the expenditure o such monies as you may recieve
of me for the Use of the U. S. Service as you are to hold yourself
accountable to the Navy Departc for it.
The Officers of our ship may recieve payment of money from time
to time, but no vance beyond what ma be due them You will keep me regularly informed o all your proceedutgs -

&

J

r'

9

[LC. EPP, Order Book, M a y 1803-June 1805.1
To Midshipman Thomas 0. Anderson, U. 6. Navy, from Captain Edward Preble,
U. 6. Navy

U. S. SHIPComtitzccio7b
Syracuse Harbor Apk 83' 1804
SIR YOUare to proceed to Malta in the Polacre Ship Madona
Catapoliana detained by the U. S. Brig Syren for carrying supplies of
Powder & other Military and Naval Stores to the Bashaw of Tripoly
in violation of the blockade of the Port of Tripoly in Barbary by the
U.S. Squadron under my command [LC. EPP, Order Book, M a y 1803-June 1805.1
To Assistant Surgeon Thomas Marshall, U. 6. Navy, from Captain Edward Preble,
U. 6. Navy

U. S. SHIPC m t i t u t h

April 2 9 1804
SIR YOUare hereby appointed Surgeon of the U. S Brig Scowge You will therefor repair on board said bri and take upon you the
charge of Surgeon in her Agreeable to the kegulations of the Navy:
And for so dolng this shall be your Authority
Given under my hand on board
the U. S. Ship Constitution the
23G day of April 1804.
Signed EDWARD
PBEBLE
[LC. EPP, Order Book, May 1803-June 1805.1

[23 April 18041
To the Governor of Syracuse from Captain Edward Preble, U. 8. Navy

Last night a Soldier deserted from your Garrison and swam off to
this Ship. If ou will send a Boat with an Officer to receive him, he
shall be imm iately delivered up.
Comtitdion 23'4 April 1804
EC. EPP,LB, Dec. 1803-April 1804.1

d'

56 NAVAL OPERATIONS, APRIL-SEPTEMBER 6, 1804
Extract from Dhry of Captain Edward Preble, U. 6. Navy. Commodore of U. S.
Bqnadron in the Mediterranean, Monday, !23 April 1804

At anchor in Syracuse. Scourge in company; Wind S E. sent a
number of our best seamen, to assist in ettkw her ready for sea:
Pleasant weather In the Evening, the wind shifted to the W ,
Completed our stock of all sorts of provisions for 5 months - Our
Carpenter, Armorer Sail Maker & Cooper at work for the Scourge A deserter from the Syracuse Garrison came on board & wanted to
enter - He was refused: He swam off from the Point Battery where
he was Centinel I wrote to the Governor, and informed him of this
circumstance, and desired him to send an Officer to recieve the D 4
serter, which he did, with a letter of thanks - .
[LC. EPP,Diary, 1803-1804.1

d

Extract from journal of Midshipman F. Cornelius deKroflt, U.8. Navy, in U. 8. Brig
Siren of 18 guns,Lieutenant Charles Stewart, U. 6. Navy, commanding, Monday,
!?.3 April 1804

Beating out of the Bay At j4 past 8 came too in the harbour of
Malta in 10 fathoms with the store ship - At 10 furld all sail &
hoisted out the barge (N. B. Those remarks include 36 hours.)
[NDA.]

To the Right Reverend Bishop Carroll, Baltimore, Md., from Secretary of the Navy

NAV.DEP
AH 2dth 1804
Your letter on the subject of Mr Benedict J. [or I.] Neale's wishep
has been received - If you could recommend this Gentleman from
personal Knowledge of his merits the recommendation would be
entitled to the hghest respect & I would with pleasure confer the
appointment upon him - His being of respectable connections and
good education is certainly in his favour but unhappily the respectibility of the Father does not always descend to his posterity - and
the d u e n c e s of the most correct education are too often destroyed
by inherent Vicious propensities In making appointments to Offices of honor, it is therefore all
important, that we scrupulously enquire into the previous conduct of
the applicants - the station of midshipman in the n a y is at present
a respectable and honorable station - but it is my msh to make it
still more so - You will readily percieve that this Object can never
be effected unless great Care is always taken to appoint none but
Gentlemen of most unexceptionable characters If Mr Neale will present himself to this Department with satisfactory
testimonials of his fitness for the station of midshipman his application shall be considered.
[NDA. GLB, Vol. 7, 1803-1805.1
To Captoin Anthony Gale, U. 6. Marine Corps, Philadelphia, Pa., from
Secretary of the Navy

NAV.DEP?
Ap 34s 1804

In consequence of the resignation of Lt Col. Burrows, Franklin
Wharton Esq. has been raised to the station of Lt Col. Commandant

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

57

of the Marine Corps - Being the Senior first Lieutenant in the Corps
ou will consider yourself as raised to the Station of Captain in the
b a r b e Corps, until the pleasure of the Senate shall be known - You
will receive Orders from Lt Col. Wharton to repair immediately to
this place prepared for actual Service [NDA. GLB, Vol. 7, 1803-1805.1
To Lieutenant John E. Dent, U. 6. Navy, commanding U. 6. Brig Scourge, from
Captain Edward Preble, U. 6. Navy

U. S. SHIPConstitution
i?4tQApril 1804

Syracuse Harbour

SIR As soon as the United States Brig Scourge is fully equiped and
read to Sail, you will proceed off Tripoly and join the Squadron in
the lockade of that lace. - You are to capture all Vessels belonging to the Bashaw of
or his Subjects and to Annoy and distress
the Enemy by every means in your power. - You are not to sufFer
the Vessels of any Nation to enter, or to have Commerce with Tri ly,
and any Vessels who may endeavour to enter that place, whilst B ockaded by us, without permission from me for so doing, you are to detain
and send into Malta for examination. - You are to respect the
Rights of Keutral Nations and not capture Vessels within the Jurisdictional limits or under the rotection of such Nations.
All sus icious Vessels whic you may happen to fall in with, you
are strict y to examine both with regard to papers and Crew; and
suffer no Vessels to pass without first searching her between Decks And you are at a31 tunes (as far as may be in your power) to succour,
Aid and free any American Vessel attacked by the Enemy or in their
possession. - Should you want Money for the necessary expences
of the Brig Scourge under your Command, you are to draw on me
only for it, expressmg in your Bills the purpose for which you may draw
taking particular care that Letters of advice accompany said Bills You are to use the most rigid economy in the expenditure of all such
Monies es you may occasionally receive of me for the use of the Umted
States Service and hold yourself Accountable to the Navy Department
for it. - The Officers of your Vessel may receive payments of Money
from time to time, but no advance beyond what may be due to them. You will loose no oppertunity of keeping me informed from time to
time of all your proceedings. [NHF. Dent's LB.]

8

$ripely

P"

E

P

[24 April 18041
To John Oreen, appointed Acting Purser, by Captain Edward Preble, U. 6. Raw

SIX I do hereby ap int you acting Purser of the U. S. Brig Scowge
under the command o Lt Comm* Dent - You will therefor immediately repair on board said Brig & take u on you the charge of Purser
in her agreeable to the regulations of the &av, and for so doing this
shall be your Authority -

P"

[LC, EPP, Order Book, M a y 1803-June 1805.1

58 NAVAL OPERATIONS, A P R I L S E P T E M B B 6,

1804

124 April 18041
To the Commodore or Commanding Ofacers of the U.8. Shipo of War before Tripoli,
from George Davis, U. 6. Charge d'Affairea, Tunrs

(COPY

GREETING

WHEREASHis Excellency Hamouda Bashaw
caused application to be made to me as the
United States of America for a Safe Conduct,
the Grand Signior, and his Suittg (to wit, Nine Servants, two Negrowomen, & one Negro boy) charged with Dispatches from His Exc?
the Capt. Bashaw, for the Bsshaw Bey of Tripoli, and now embarked
on board the Spanish Bombard La Vergine del Rosario Captain Francesco Della Torre, and navigated by Seven Seamen I have therefore granted a Passport to said Vessel, provided, she
embarks no kind of Merchandize of any nature, or takes on board
as passengers any others, than those above mentioned, nor goes, or
returns mth any Articles of provisions, or other Stores, than may be
for the prosecution of said Voyage. I t is therefore requested
necm?
of the ommanders of the Vessels of Tar of the United States to
permit said Vessel to pass & return from said port of Tripoli in Barbary, without hindrance, or molestation, in case the nature and intention of this Safe Conduct is not violated or abused. In witness whereof I have hereunto Set my
name and affixed the public Seal of Office,
(L. S.)
In Tunis this twent fourth day of April
one thousand eight undred and four -

E

(Signed) GEORGE
DAVIS
E C . EPP, Vol. 11, April-June 1804.1

To Tobiau Lear, U. 6. Consul General, Algiers, from George Davis, U. 8. Charge
d'Affaires, Tunis

SIR, I have the honor to inform you, that this mo
the U.
States Schooner Entcrpriu, anchored in the road of t D o u l e t t a
and about 6, in the evening, had the pleasure of receiving Mr ~ ~ r i e d
on shore, who delivered me the dispatches you did me the honor to
write, all of which have been heretofore duly acknowledged, except
N97&8.
I have to regret that my several communications of the 18'b & 22'J
Feb? - 7'h & 30'9 of March, have not been received, but which shall
be forwarded you by an express in two da s, when ou shall have a
full detail of our Affairs. -A Spanish Vesse sails for ripoli tomorrow
on board a Choux of the Grand
morning with my Passport, ha*
Signor, and which does not p e m t me to offer you any additional
remarks I have read to Mr OBrien, the several dispatches, I had the honor
to address you, as above stated, and beg you will do me the Justice
to attribute the non receipt of my letters, to some unaccountable
accident, rather than to a negligence of duty, or a want of that respect,

i

4

[NA. SDA. CL, Algiers, Vol. 7, Part 1, Jan. 1 W N o v . 1805.1

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

59

124 April 18041
To Tobias Lear, U. 8. Consul General, Algiers, from Bichard O'Brien, on board
U. 8. Schooner Enfuprize

Narrative or extract of remarks written at Sea
Dr SIB,I left you the 26Q of March and on the 2Bt@it came on to
blow a severe gale from the S. S. W. This drove us to the Nth of
Galita. we then steered for Syracuse and arrived there the 318t left there the 4tP of April, arrived at Malta the 6t@took lodgings and
landed my family on the 7*4 Let me inform you before Ifurther detail,
that none of ue were sick at Sea.
On the morning of the 12" of April arrived the Commodore at Malta
in the evening I bld adieu to my family and came on board the Commodore. We got under way, and arrived at Syracuse on the 14t@ On
the 229 I left the Commodore at the latter place, and came on board
the Enterprize, and is at sea destined for Tunis, which place I expect
to arrive at on, on the 24tP where the Enterprize is to land me, and is
to proceed afterwards on a cruize of[f] Tripoli. On the 28'h the Commodore is to call off Tunis, and I am again to go on board. We then
intend for Naples on the business of the Gun boat d ~ o n .You shall
then be informed of the result. At Syracuse we left the Commodore.
The Argvs & Vizen is cruizing off Tripoli - The Syren sailed with us
and is intended for Malta in order to convoy a Greek Russian Ship a
prize to the Syren and Nautulus and to convoy The Woodrop Sims,
Capt. Reddick a store Shi from the U. States for the fleet. The
Naufdus is intended for hfessiia to repair having been damaged &
shattered in a gale of Kq off Tripoli on the 7th & 8 of April in said gale
lost some of her Guns and had waiste stove in - The Commodore had
been of[fl Tripoli, had sent his boat on shore as a flag of truce landed
cloathing for the unfortunate prisoners. The French Consul came on
board, and recq the letter of the French Agent. wrote on our affairs,
said letter I do not calculate on, will be any essential service to us.
on either tacks of Peace or ransom. I t might be viewed as the 29
Volume of the mediation of France as turned out on the Swede Affairs.
relative to Tripoli - The Commodore & Siren proceeded to Tunis.
and no doubt, but Mr Davis, has detailed to you the result of what
passed there he put out from there in a severe gale of wind and arrived
there to bring awa the dispatches of MT
at Malta, 1
~ the Siren
2
Davis orgot to mention that at alta I left there three
Tunisian Corsairs, which had become letters of Marque and brought
to Malta cargoes of Cattle, which I beleive the make more on than
they would cruizin~,but I must observe that M?alta is the Arsenal for
Tunis. The Corsam that want repairs is loaded with Cattle and half
armed & half manned proceed to Malta their c oes payes for their
repairs. - Whilst a t Malta m best soundings in ormed me that they
ex ected that the first step t at would be taken by John Ball [or
B&?I would be to blockade his Brother untill that they were
more a t leasure to make an official visit As this was & is a matter of
opinion, We must view it as such untill the event will be reallized A t all events I pray God to protect You & Yours I find that our Squadron has taken and done as Vh
The Ketch [Mastwo]from Tripoli said Vessel afterwards was made
the machine which burned the ex P h W p h i a . A Maltise Brig with
Tripoli Passengers & Merchandize cleared out for Jirba, but was

d

J~L

i

?'

60 NAVAL OPERATIONS. APRIL-SEPTEMBER 6. 1804
catched entering Tripoli - Since the Mate & crew has declared in
t
. They were intended for Tripoli to land their merchandize
and p a s s e y r s and afterwards proceed for Girba. - A Brig of Malta
from Tripo , mounting 16 Guns and 45 men car Oyle Iron B a h t
kc. intended for Malta. This Vessel had been a ritish Brig of War,
we valued her with her Guns and apparal at 5 thousand dollars.
has taken her on the 17th into our service is Commanded by Lieu$
Dent, and Mr Izard as 2'3 will have 70 men destined for Tripoli
blockade a promising fine Vessel now the Scourge [formerly named
Transfer]. - A Rusian Greek or Neapolitan Polacre with cattle Sheep
& horses, from Tripoli for Malta, taken by the Siren and Nautvlvs having also on board M? Bryan MqDonogh he is now at Malta.
A new British Consul is expected at Tri oli. - I find that the Conde
Galino. The Agent of the Pacha of ripoli resident at Malta. The
Person that promised to obtain the Peace & Ransom for the U. States
with Tripoli. That this said person has been playing both a double
& treble game, but he has been punished in some respects for his
intended deception. For the three Vessels crossed & captured - he
has been the chief owner & freighter. - I t seems that Tunis & Tripoli
was negotiating relative to the frigate. The former was to give the
latter 2 small Xebeck's but the burning of the
roject. - The said Cond Gallino or Agent of
gad proposed the terms of Peace dr Ransom to the ommodore. This
false Prophet had a large sum of money owed to him by the Pacha
of Tripoh, and he wanted to purchase the frigate from Tri oli in order
to have on the business an oppertunity of paying himse f. But the
f ' ate was burned 36 hours before he arrived a t Tripoli. Thus
f 3 e d his plan of buying the frigate from the Pacha and selling her
to the Commodore - Whilst these schemes were going on to lull
& amuse, he was by his Agency the procurer of all wants of Stores
3 of his there trading
for Tripoli, but by being detected and ha
Vessels captured he has gained nothmg by s duplicity. So that
the prospect has turned out relative to the terms proposed by this
double faced Agent, as we in some respects feared would be its fate
or result - but this does not give any cause to dispair - a close
blockade and now & then other galling and distreasmg enterprizes
must convince the Government of Tripoli, that it is peace, that is
wanted and will tend to the interest of both parties. As yet I do not learn or conceive any reason to View our Mairs
with Tunis in any other l k h t then what our eneral opinion, was
and it 4 P. M. we
on them subjects, but as t h s is the 23g of
being to the East of Cape Bon 10 miles - I expect in 2 days to be
able to write you on the result of our endeavours a t Tunis. N.B. The Neapolitans has 3 Ships of the line 2 frigates and a
Corvetta at Sea - Nelson has not been to Malta - is off Toulon
I am sorry to have left the territory of Patroon Grandi without
receiving the requisite receipt or certificates from you for the articles
of the Govt of the U. States delivered by me to you, but hope you
will forward me the requisite on this tack by two different conveyances
b way of Tunis under cover to George Davis Esqr the American
bvarge drABairs, whoom I learn is thus officially confirmed by our
Government

%

I

P

"""L,

~~nfi

61

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

24tQof April here I am at Tunis at the house of Mr Davis - He
has wrote to you many letters, which you had a ri ht to have received
before and after I left you - You shall hear of a1 transactions whicb
shall turn up here during - The short time I shall here remain N. B. The Commodore has been sickly but well pleased with the
Belt present [NA. SDA. CL, Algiers, Vo1.7, Part 1, Jan. 1804-Nov. 1805.1

f

Extract from journal of U. 8. Brig Argus, Lieutenant Isaac Hull,U. S. Navy,
commanding, Tuesday, 24 April 1804

These 24 hours commence with heavy gales and Cloudy Weather
a t 3 P. M. got the main yard down at 4 the Vixen in sight astern
wore ship to the Southward a t 8 fresh breezes and Cloudy the Vizen
out of sight At midnight strong gales with a heavy sea made Si NQ4 to the
Vben which was Shewn 45 Minutes and not answere set and took
in sail as Necessary at j6 pt 11 Tkg to N, E, - At Meridian a very
heavy swell the Vizen in Sight astern Sounded in 110 Pasoft oozy
Bottom -

f

WDA photostat.]
Extract from log book kept by Sailing Master Nathaniel Haraden, U. S. Navy, on
board U. S. Rigate Comiifufion,Tuesday, 24 April 1804

Moderate breezes from E S E - At Anchor in Saragosa Scourge
in company - Condemned b surve 233 lb of cheese rotten, stinking
so 2 b Is beef "G, M Darde" - The
& unfit for men to eat.
cheese & beef were hove overboard - Condemned also 66 Ib Mouldy
bread
Towards evening the Weather became overcast & had the ap earance of a ale from the Esst@Down top galls Yards. At 11 l
! M.
let go the pbcst bower - Veered 20 fath%n each cable. At 8 A. M.
sailed for America the Maltese Brig prize to the Syren - She passed
the outer breakers with signal of distress flying Boats ordered in
readiness. She passed in safety A russian ship prize to the Syren
was under way for Malta - She was ordered to reanchor Employed workg up Junk &: cleaning ship Our Carpenters, Sail Makers
& Armorers employed about the Scourge. Strong E N E breezes
all forenoon with a swell setts into the Harbor.
Surgg report 7 sick, 4 convqa & 1 discharged.
[LC. EPP, Log Constitution, 1803-1804.1

A9

E

Extrpctn from journal of Surgeon Jonathan Cowdery, U. 6. Navy, from 84 April to
8 September 1804

[From 28 March to 13 April 1804, Surgeon Cowdery was ill ao nothing of
particular intarest was noted in his journal until 24 April.]
April d4. - John Morrison died, in consequence of a hurt he received a few
b y e before while a t work under the directions of his new masters. The Bashaw
permittad me, with two of my fellow officers, to o to his garden, conducted by a
guard of two T u r k , armed with pistola and satres, This precaut~on,they pretended WM taken to revent the wandering Arabs and Moors from robbing US;
but it wr. probably &one to prevent our escaping to the sgurdron, then oruising
of the harbour, in sight.
May 7.
Our boys caught a large aaorpion in the amall yard of our prison.

-

62 NAVAL OPERATIONS, APRILSEPTEMBER 6 , 1804
May If. - Our squadron appeared off the town. The Turks were a t their
quarters. They had twelve gun boats armed, manned, moored out in the harbour.
May 16. -Ten of our officers took a walk to the gardens under escort of a
guard. They returned with a variety of flowers and ripe apricots.
May 99. - A party of us, under escort as before, took a walk into the desert.
On our return we dined in the Bashaw's garden, under the shade of orange t r e e .
The dinner was prepared in the Turkish style, and we ate with wooden spoons-i t was simple and good. We visited several gardens, and were treated with as
much respect as could be expected or desired from a foe, who held us as prisoners
of war. On returning to town we saw two of our brigs a t anchor off the harbour,
aeeming to def all the force of Tripoli.
J u n e 27. - K r . Hodge our boatswain, Mr. Douglas the sail-maker, and Mr.
Fontaine the first master's mate were taken from the prison and set to work by
order of the Bashau-.
July 15. -The Bey was well enough to return to Tripoli. He called a t the
door of our prison, which was unlocked and the bolts and bars unloosed. I was
conducted to him when he expressed great satisfaction a t having recovered his
health, thanked me for my attendance, and promised to alleviate our misfortunes,
as far as was in his power. I was then sent back to prison. The Bashaw and
Bey spent a day alternately in town, on account of the expected attack by the
Americans.
July 31. - I was carried with my trunk and bed, to the castle, where a room
was provided for me, and the Bashaw informed me I must attend the Americans
and his family as a physician.
August 3.- The American squadron, under commodore Preble, consisting of
one frigate (the Constitution), two brigs, three schooners, and seven gun-boats,
a t about 2 o'clock, P. M. commenced an attack on the batteries and gun-boats of
Tripoli. I stood on the top of the castle, where I had a fair view of the engagement. Three of the enemy's gun-boats were captured by the Americans. Two
Turks swam on shore, and were carried before the Bashaw, who gave them a suit
of clothes and a few dollars. They said that many were killed on both sides.
Aug. 6. - The American squadron anchored off Tripoli, I was ordered to dress
the wound of a mameluke, who had his hand shattered by the bursting of a
blunderbuss. I amputated all his fingers but one, with a dull knife, and dressed
them in a bungling manner, in hopes of losing my credit as a surgeon in this part
of the country, for I expected to hare my hands full of wounded Turks in consequence of the exploits of my brave countryman.
Aug. 0.
At about 12 o'clock the dam gun of Tripoli was fired. The Tripolitana all took their stations, and went through the Mahometan prayer, by
kneeling and kissing the ground several times, with their faces towards the east,
sli with as much regularity as the exercise in a well disciplined army. Their
military mancevuring was a scene of the utmost confusion. I got permission t o
go on the top of the castle, where I had a most extensive view of the sea and land,
and saw the American squadron approaching the town. At about 1 o'clock the
attack commenced, and the battle soon became vigourous, with a tremendous
cannonading on both sides. I now beheld the melancholy catastrophe of the
explosion of one of our gun boats. I ssw the mangled bodies of my countrymen
precipitated into the air. For a few moments a general silence took place, when
the firing recommenced with unabated vigour. I saw the shells ex lode, and set
fire to the town in many places; but the houses being principally Built of stone,
mud and mortar, the fire did but little damage: the shells and shot, however,
battered the town very much, and almost destroyed some of the houses. The
firing ceased a t 4, P. M. when the ship John Adam8 joined the squadron. The
Bashaw bas a bomb proof room in his castle, where he staid during the action.
On hesring of the explosion of our gun boat, he ventured out to take a peep,
with the precaution of having a Marabewt or priest, to seal a amall piece of paper
on the top of his head, with a Turkish or Mahometan scrawl, with assurancee
that it would entirely secure him from all danger, but he soon returned to his
cell. The Turks all wear a paper of this kind, sewed up in a little velvet bag,
with assurances from the Marabewt that i t would protect them in the greatest
danger. The Marabewt gets a sum of money for these blessings. If a Turk gets
wounded or killed, it is supposed the bleased paper wes too old, or not placed in
a proper manner. In the time of action the Marabewt gets upon some secure
place and cries to Mahomet in the moat dismals yells to let them conquer their
enemies; and beckon to the vessels to run on shore or be destroyed. Such of our
crew as were able, were put to work, and drove about like horsea or mules.

-

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS
Aug. 10. -Lewis Heximer, who lately turned Turk, went by order of the
Baehaw. and told capt. Bainbridge, the particulars of the two late actions. The
Bashaw informed me that the lste commander of the schooner V k ,lieut. Smith,
waa commodore of the gun boats in the late setion, and was killed by a musket
shot through his head. Our men complained of being drove and beat about at
an unmerciful rate, in consequence of which they petitioned the Bashaw, in the
following terms:
"To his EzceUency the Grand Bashaw of W p o l i : The petition of the whole
of the American prisoners, most humbly sheweth:"That your humble petitioners, when doing with all their power, es the
are commanded, are most cruelly beaten by our wardens, stoned, insultex
and spit upon by the soldiers and others; required to carry burthens impossible
for us to sustain; and chased and bruised, until we are, or soon shall be,
unable to labour a t all.
"From the man acts of justice, kindness, and generosity we have experienced from your %cellency, we cannot suppose that such conduct is authorized by your commands; or that we should be punished for what is out of our
power to perform; or for the actions of others, which we have no agency in,
and which we cannot prevent.
"Returning your Excellency our sincere and humble thanks for your
bounty and privileges heretofore shewn, and relying on your goodness and
protection, we therefore most humbly pray, that your Excellency would
~nterposeyour royal authority, and grant us a speedy relief. And your
titioners, as in duty bound,,p'ill remain your Excellency's most humble,
a~thfuland obedient servants.
On the petition being ex lained to the Bashaw by Heximer, (or Hanzet
Amerikan, his new name) the gashaw forbid the Turks striking the prisoners.
Aug. 11. - The Bashaw sent for me, and, agreeably to his orders, I took a seat
by his side. He began conversation about m country, and our squadron, which
was then in sight, and consisted of eighteen. ffe said that for two dollars he could
repair all the damages that the bombardment did to his town; that but one man
was hurt by the shells; that what he had been offered for the American prisoners
was but fift dollars per man; that he would make them earn that sum in two
months. I&
asked me what I thought my country would give for me. I told
him I did not know. He said he would not take twenty thousand dollars for me;
to which I replied, that I might then expect to remain in slavery for life. He
me on the shoulder and said. 1must then content myself to stay with him.
asked to go and see our men, but he refused, saying, the hloors and Arabs would
kill me if the[yl could catch me.
Aug. 12. - Our squadron hoisted a flag of truce, sent in a brig and schooner and
fired a gun. The Bashaw did not, and swore he would not, answer it; and said
he would not treat with commodore Preble. A truce however was afterwards
held. Consul O'Brien wished to come on shore, but was refused.
Aug.. 16 - Another truce was held, when the Bashaw demanded one million of
dollars for our ransom. One hundred and twenty thousand dollars were offered
and refused.
Aug. 17 - The Bashaw informed me that fifteen Americans were found drifted
ashore a t the westward of the town, and that one of them was an officer with an
epaulet on the right shoulder. We supposed they were men destroyed by the
explosion of the gun boat, a t the late engagement. I asked permission to go with
two or three of our men and bury them, and the Baashaw told me I might go the
next day. Our equadron lay a t anchor off the harbour. The inhabitants had
chiefly moved out of the town, through fear of another bombardment; and the
Baahaw ate, drank and slept in his bomb proof room. Several tribes of the back
country inhabitants had lately come and offered their services to the Beshaw, were
not more than one thousand men. Many of them had muskeb without locks,
but had a sort of match to put fire to them. They were almost naked, half
8 h ~ e dand
, without discipline. When they are going to battle, or appear before
the Bashaw, the run to and fro, shaking their rusty muskets over their heads, all
crying Halaout &wg? (I am my father's eon.) Every tribe has r priest, or what
they call Marabewt, whose badge is a small green flag, which ia carried in his hand
or stuck up at his tent. The pretent great skill in prophecy, in which the
people put the utmoat faith. h e 7 prophecy sue- in battle: and for a amall
sum of money, insure any one agalnat wounds or death in fighting a Christian.
The often o on eminences, and beckon and sing to the American veesels fo run
on siors. ' h e y rophmied that another American v d res to go on the mob,
and the Baahaw Pull9 believed it.

p".

ytod

64 ATAVAL OPERATIONS, APRILSEPTEMBER 6, 1804
Aug. 18. - Was not permitted to bury our dead.

Our equadron stood out to

sea. At evening the Bashaw went to his country seat and the Bey came in to

keep the thmne till his father's return. They never both leave the castle. When
the Bashaw leaves it, the gates are shut till his return, for fear of incursion upon
the throne. I n the evening, the moon shining very bright, the prince or Bey
ordered out the band of music, which was very ordinary, and made Christians,
Turks, Arabs and Guinea Xegroes dance before him, according to the mode of their
respective countries, a t which he seemed highly diverted.
Aug. 19. - Between 9 and 10 o'clock in the evening, Mr. Church, a respectable
English gentleman was shot through the head in the street, on his return from
visiting his nei hbours.
Aug. 21.- fn the morning. between 2 o'clock and day light, two of our small
vessels hove about thirty shells, ss was supposed for the round fort, but they all
fell short of the mark. Such attempts served rather to encourage than to intimidate the Tripolitans; and the Bashaw- was in high spirits on the occasion.
Aug. 26. - Atabout 4oYclockP. M. the fellow who murdered Mr. Church, was
executed near the spot where the crime was committed. I t had therefore been a
custom in this country, when a person had committed murder, to fly to a tomb of
a Marabewt lor priest) where they were protected from justice, and a fee to a
Marabewt would procure them absolution. This fellow fled to a palace of this
kind immediately after killing Mr. Church. The English consul Mr. Langford,
on being informed of the murder, addressed the Bashaw, and demanded justice.
The Bashaw then found out by a boy, who accompanied the murderer when he
wmmitted the crime, the particulars of the affair; and immediately sent a file of
men and ordered them to prevent any person carrying food or drink to the
murderer. They watched him until night when the Bashaw sent his Marahewt,
who coaxed him away, brought him to the castle and confined him in irons. The
next day the Bashaw called his divan, when it was decided that the prisoner was
guilty of wilful murder, and onght to suffer death. I t appeared by the evidence
and confession of the prisoner, that Mr. Church had lent a sum of money to a
Spanish carpenter in this place: - that Mr. Church had pressed him for payment;
and that the carpenter's wife hired the Turk to kill Mr. Church for forty dollars.
The villain took his watch from his pocket after he had shot him. The boy who
accompanied him and carried a lantern was bsstinadoed with five hundred blows.
The carpenter's wife was ordered to leave Tripoli.
Aug. 27. - Our squadron stood towards the harbour.
Aug. 28. -About 4 o'clock in the morning, I was awoke by a heavy and incessant fire of cannon, and the pi hi st ling and rattling of shot all around me. On
1 found that our gun-boats were close in, and were firing upon the
%:%$?batteries.
Every gun in Tripoli that could be brought to bear, was
returning the fire. The Tripolibn gun boats were close under the castle for
protection. The firing continued until a few minu* after sun-rise, when one of
the largest gun boats ventured out, with an intention of boarding the neareat
American boat. As soon as she got within pistol shot, the Americans discharged
their piece, loaded with grape, and killed four and wounded two of the enemy,
they then put about and retreated. At the same time, commodore Preble bore
down and gave the batteries to the westward of the town two broadsides. The
squadron then stood out and anchored off the harbour. The damage done t o
the town was considerable. A large vessel was eunk in the harbour and others
damaged. Many men were killed and wounded.
Auq. 29. - The Bashaw sent me to his alace in the country, to see his eldest
son the Bey, whom I bled in the foot. Efe requested me to spend the day and
dine with him, which I did. He endeavoured to have the dinner in the Christian
style. It was set on a table, and consisted of a large dish of boiled rice and
stewed fowls, out of which we both ate, he with a wooden spoon, and I with a
silver one, without knife or fork. The prince's servant stood by him, and pulled
the fowl in amall pieces with his fingers, for the prince to eat. I made use of
my fingers and teeth to get mine in pieces. Our d-rt
was dates and watermelons. Our drink was Iagby, or the juice of the date tree, which we drank out
of a large gold cup. He shewed me the garden, and took great pains t o entertain
me.
Aug. 30. - A truce wrrs held, I took a ride upon a mule about eight miles to the
westward of the town, in company with my guide, Hamet, a Turkish officer, and
several footmen. I there saw a boat, which drifted on shore, with r deed man,
and several muskets and swords in it. The man appeared to have been shot
through the body with a cannon ball, which had a h pierced the bottom of the
h t . The Turlrish oBcer aoUe&& about twenty Arsbs, who hauled the bost

WARS WITH BARBARY POWE&S

65

upon the beach, dragged the dead man out of it, etri ped him entirely naked, and
left him on the beach. I tried in vain to hire the L a b s to bury the body; they
mid i t waa contrary to their religion to bury a Christian. I mked permission to
et him buried by our countrymen, some of my fellow prisoners, but was refused.
found that our men, who were destroyed by the e loaion of the gun-boat, on
the 9th inst. lay in a state of putrefaction on the b e a x They were anrrttered on
the shore for miles, and were torn in pieces by dogs. m he Bashaw had frequently
promised me that these men should be buried; but refused to let me take some of
our men to go and bur them.
September 2. - At a t o u t 4, P. M. our squadron commenced another attack on
the town in which eight of our gun boats drove sixteen Tripolitan gun boats
under the battery on the east side of the harbour; while the commodore bore
down and gave the batteries a t the west end of the town, several broadsides.
Many of his shot came into the town and castle. Two bomb-ketches were employed in heaving shells into the town. which did considerable damage to several
houses, and entirely destroyed the h o w of the Spanish carpenter, the Bashsw'e
naval contractor. I observed the utmost confusion and random-firing among the
. Two of their guns
Tripolitans. I t appeared they were almost out of
bursted, one of which was a n eighteen poubder of t e late Philadelphia frigate.
The men, women and children ran out of the town in the utmost terror and
distraction.
Sept. 3. - Had been to see the prince in the country, and was returning about
10 o'clock in the evening, with the Bashaw and suit, when we saw a most extraordinary light or flash, and heard beavfj report. We all wheeled about, and
made for the place we had left; but the ashaw soon altered hia mind, and proceeded to town, while I went to the country palace and staid all night. The explosion was a fire ship, sent into the harbour by commodore Preble, which did
but little damage.
-The Turks found ten dead men near the place where the vessel blew up,
on the evening of the 3d instant. The Bashaw and his people had a thanksgiving
to Mahomet on the occasion. Their ceremony was prayer in doleful tone, and
singing, accompanied with the sound of an instrument made by drawing a skin
over a hoop.
Sept. 6 . - More men were found, three of which appeared to be officers. By
permission, I took our boatswain and a gang of men, and buried theee M e s
a little east of the wall of the town. All that I saw, who appeared to have been
killed by the explosion, amounted to fourteen. The Bashaw's son-in-law told
me that six more had been found drifted on the western shore; but I could not
ascertain the truth of it.
[LC. Rare Book, "American Captives in Tripoli" 1806.1

f

kd"

To Samuel Brown, Navy Agent, Boston, Mass., from Secretary of the Ravy

NAV.DEP
26.April 1804
We must not let the wives and children of the unfortunate captives
suffer - at least we must relieve them as far as may be in our power therefore the allotments of pay by virtue of powers presented by the
officers and men we must contlnue to pay [NDA. GLB,Vol. 7, 1803-1805.1
To George Davis, U. 8. Charge d'Affaires, Tunis, from Richard O'Brien, Tunin

TUNIB
the %6'@of April 1804
SIR,When I left &em, and was intended for this place I had
reason to believe that Mr Lear the Consul General had forwnrded to
you the instructions or orders of the Government of the United States
relative to giving Tunis a fixed sum in cash annually to the amount of
ten thousand dollars pr annum in order to settle tbe affairs of the
United States with the Regency of Tunis on the basis of a lasting and
permanent peace But as I have not been f d e d by Consul Lear
with the copy of these instructions, and you declare to me that you

66 NAVAL OPERATlOhrS, APRILSEPTEMBER 6, 1804
have not r e d any such advice from Consul b a r , therefore in order
that no difliculties should arise in the negotiation for the final arrangement of our affairs for not being furnished with these instructions.
and I knowing that the Government of the United States have given
orders to that amount, I think i t prudent to declare to you as my
opinion, and authorise you by these presents to offer the Govenunent
of Tunis the sum of Nine or ten thousand dollars pr Annum in cash,
but to be paid every two years, in order to do away all claims and
pretentions of this Regency on the Government of the United States
of America and thereby to secure the Peace and friendship of this
Regency towards the United States. It is however to be observed
that on the business of the Annual or Berlnial stipulations with Tunis
that eight months will be required in order that it may be forwarded
to the Government of the United States and theirsanctionobtahed.
These terms are to be considered as independent of the consular
present which must not exceed ten thousand dollars the half in goods,
and half in cash. It is also necessary that the Governmt of Tunis be
made sensible that this stipulation on the part of the United States is
to commence from the date of their acquiesence. After this is agreed
to ou will draw on Mr Lear for the sum of four or five thousand
do ars twenty days after sight to make good the claim of Tunis for
Tunisian property captured and sold by the Americans some time
since. You will be pleased to communicate the result of the negotistions by a courier express to Tobias b a r Esqr Consul General for
the United States at Bl$ers. Enclosed you have a copy of Mr Lear's
letter to me on this subject.
(Signed) RICHARD
OBRIEN
[LC. EPP, LB, Dec. 1803-April 1804.1

li"

Erbact from journal of U. S. Brig Argus, Lieutenant Isaac Hull, U. 8. Bavy,
commanding, Wednesday, 26 April 1804

This da begins with hght breezes and a heavy swell from the E a s t
ward the ixen in Company a t 4 TKC ship made and Shortened sail
as Necessary Variously Employed -

5

WDA photostat.]
Extract from log book kept by Sailing Master BathanieI Earaden, U. S. Navy, on
board U. 8. Frigate Comlilution, Wednesday, 26 April 1804

Fresh breezes from E N E. At anchor in Sar osa. Scourge in
company. Ships compy employed washing their c oathes - At 3
the weather became moderate - Weighed the best bower - The
Principal Stores for fittin out the Scourge have been supplied by the
Cmtitutioa. At Midnig%t the Wind Veered to the N N W. At
8 A. M. shortened in on the small bower - Up top gall$ & royaI
ards Sent Mr Lewis Jouvas our cruizin Pilot on board a Maltese
rig prize to the Syren in order to procee hence to Malta. During
our stay in this Port which has been 12 days the ships cornpan have
had fresh revisions & Vegetables - Ships Draft 22 f t 11
forward, 21 t 6 difference 17 Inches - 83 Leagurs 72 butts & 50
gang casks of water on board making in all 37950
Surgeons report 8 sick 4 conv"ct Noon light airs from N E with a swell setting into the harbor -

T

8

g

P

[LC. EPP, Log Constitution, 1803-1804.1

%

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

67

To Midshipman John M. Oardner, U. 8. Bavy, Baltimore, Yd., from Secretary of
the Bevy

NAVY
DEP*
AM 126,1804 For what Vessel or Vessels were the 5 men lately apprehended by
ou, entered. They were shi ped in Philadelphia and deserted in the
f'otowmac. They state that t ey were entered for the Frigate Congress.
If so we must put them on board of that Ship. We must preserve
good faith with all.

%

[NDA. OSW, Vol. 6, 1802-1805.1
To Lieutenant John 6. H. Cox, U. 8. Bavy, Philadelphia, Pa., from Secretary of the
Bevy

NAVYDEPM~
April 26,1804 Your letter of the 20" instant tendering your Resignation has
been received. Your resignation is accepted.
You will make out your account for pay and transmit it to the
Accountant of the Navy who will have it adjusted. We have never received a Roll of the Crew of the Philadelphia a t
the time she captured the Mirboka therefore the distribution of the
prize money cannot now be made. [NDA. OSW, Vol. 6, 1802-1805.1
To Daniel Bedinger, Navy Agent and Superintendent of Navy Yard, Borfollr, Va.,
from Secretary of the Navy

Nav DEP
Ap %6* 1804
..We want a Bowsprit for the Frigate President of the following
dimensions
Extreme length- - , - - -- --- - --- _ _ - - - - - - 67 feet 6 inches
diameter in the Bed- - - - - - _- - - - - _ - _ _ - - - - - - - - - - - 32 inches
dq a t the outer end - - - - _ - _- - - - - - - - _ _ _ - - - - - 20%inches
dq a t the heel--- - - - - - - - - - - - - _ _ _ - - - - - - - - - - 27% inches
length out Board--- - - - - - - - - - - - - - _ _ - - - - - 40 feet 10 Fches
m Board - - - - - - - - - - _ _ - - - - - - - - - - - -25 feet 8 rnches
I am told Mr Hall is the best mast maker in norfolk for frigate
s ars speak to him and have the Bowsprit prepared without delay $he President will Stop a t Hampton where she will receive it If 8
solid stick cannot be procured that can be relied on tell Mf Hd to
build a Bowsprit Pray do not suffer the Fhgate P r e s W to be
delayed for want of a Bowsprit - Let me hear from you by return
of mail P S. Could you in the course of three week6 buy any Bills on
Leghorn or Naples - to what am$ & on what terms
[NDA. GLB, Vol. 7, 1803-1805.1
Extract from journal of U. 8. Brig A r m , Lieutenant Isaac Hull, U. S. Xavy,
commanding, Thursday, 26 April 1804

At 4 spoke the Vixen and sent the and sent the Jolly boat on board
Captain Smith came on board and returned on board the Schooner
at7PM,[NDA photostat.]

68 NAVAL OPERATIONS, APRILSEPTEMBER 6, 1804
Extract from log book kept by Sailing Master Nathaniel Haraden, U. 6. Navy, on
board U. S. Frigate Condlldfon, Thursday, 26 April 1804

Light breezes from the N E. At single Anchor in Saragosa At )4 past 12 weighed & proceeded to sea Left the Scourge refitting
with 37 men on board her John MqFate boatswains Mate of the
Comtitutwn has been appointed boatswain of the Scourge In
ceeding to Sea we had light and Variable airs with a heavy s w e r z
In passing the outer point it fell nearly calm. Bitted a range on
each bower cable. At 4 P. M. a dead calm with an o 5 g of two
miles from the outer oint At Sundown mustered at Quarters. Cape
Passari bore S W b !ITnearly 4 leagues Cape Porco N b E j4 E 9
miles From this time till da light we had calms or light airs from
the N W. Ships head to S S and S S W Saw Cape Passari at day
light bearing N W 4 or 5 leagues & six strange mil to tbe W b N
Gave chase under all plain sail. At 7 A. M. discovered them to be
ships of war standing for us - Cleared for action & slung the yards.
At W past 11 we boarded the headmost ship which was the Nea olitan
Commodore He had in company a Squadron of Six fine rigates
A t Noon Cape Passari bore N b W - The Neapolitan Squadron
parted company to the Eastward Latitude Obse 36'29' N.

P

[LC. EPP, Log Constitution, 1803-1804.1
Extract from journal of Xidshipmsn F. Cornelins deKraEt, U.S. Navy, in U.8. Brig
Sha, of 18 guns, Lieutenant Charles Stewart, U. 8. Navy, commanding, Thursday,
26 April 1804

Light airs & variabIe At 4 AM the Breeze sprung up from the

Nq - At 8 brought too on the larboard Cable & hove short. At

9 the Prize to the Nautilus arriv'd here from Syracuse. At 10 weigh'd
& stood out of the harbor [of Malta]
(N. B. These remarks include 12 hours)
INDA.1

To John (favino, U. 6. Consul, Gibraltar, from Tobias Lear, U. S. Consul General,
Algiers

AMERICAN
GARDEN,
near ALGIERS
April 27'4 1804
DEAR SIR The Spanish Courier which arrived yesterday from
Alicant brought me your acceptable favor of the 4'Q Inst and two
Packages from the U. S. which you had been so good as to forward
to Alicant. Your favor of the 26'4 Ultimo reached me a few days
since, by an extra opportunity from Alicant, as the Courier sads
unexpectedly) for Alicant this morning - I have only
again
time to s c owledge the rect. of your favors, and to thank you for
the communications made in them - Your alc of the Bags $20.50
is right and passed in Conformity. A Brig arrived here yesterday from Tunis which brings s report
that the British are makin great pre arations a t Malta to attack
this place, which has causes consideraI?le alarm, particular1 among
the Tribe of Israel - Our Affairs are at present in a g o o i footing
here to aU appearancee, but there are Uncertain Latitudes, ae says
my Predecessor, who saild on the 26 ultimo in the U. S. Schooner
Vuen for Syracuse, with his family.

-

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

69

Mr* Lear is in good health and joins me in resptt & affectionate
regards for your good sister, brother & self, and rememberance to all
a uaintances. have only time to say that I am with very sincere regard, Dear

Sir,

[Stephen Decatur Col. NDA photostat, Book A.]
To Bobert Montgomery, U. 6. Consul, Alicante, from Tobias Lear, U. 6. Conad
General, Algiers

AMERICAN
GARDEN
Near ALGIERS
Aptil R73P 1804
DEARSIR, As the Courier, which arrived yesterday, sails again
(very unexpectedly) at 10 o'clk this morning, I have but a single
moment to acknowledge the receipt of your several favors of the 15%Q
ultimo; the 7Q & 224 Inst - and to thank you most sincerely, for
their Contents, and for the kind attention which you shew to my
Letters, which I am afraid must at times, be very troublesome. The U. S. Schooner Vizen left this on the 26 ultimo with Mr OBrien
& family, to Touch at Tunis, and proceed to Syracuse. - we have
not heard from them since their departure, nor from the Commodore
I have heard nothing from the U. S. since the information of the
loss of the Philad, had reached them, there is no doubt however but
measures will be immediately taken to effect a ransom of our unfortunate Countrymen, if it should not be arranged before that time, and
should it be so arran ed that our Agency can be usefull in the way
you mention, I shall eel very appy to promote it. Mrp Lear is very thankful for your kind offer to execute any commissions for her, and as we doubt but they would be done in the most
satisfactory manner, but at present we are tolerabl well provided.
Should we remain here a year, you will,I am afraid e troubled very
often. The Only thing I think of at present, is to beg the favor If
there is any good Salmon, Mackrel, Shad, or Herrings a t Market, to
have a Cask of each sent by the first favorable opportunity. A Brig arrived here ywterday from Tunis which brings a report
that the British are making Great preparations at Malta to attack
this place; This has created some alarm, particularly among the Jews,
I do not however put much faith in reports from that quarter. The sudden return of the Courier, is, I presume owing to some pressin
demands which this Dey is said to have made on the Spanish Consup!
here. At present we stand well here; but that will not excuse an
under Security. Mrq Lear unites with me in best res ects & wishes for a pleasant
& safe Voyage for Mrr Montgomery to england. P.S. I trouble you to put the Enclosed letters for Mr Kirkpatrick
& Mr Gavino in the way to receive them.
[Stephen Decatur Col. NDA photostat, Book A.]

f

'h

g

To Midrrhipman Edward N. Cox, U. 6. Navy, from Captain Edward Preble,

U. 6. Navy

U. S. SHIPComtitutlon
April n t h 1804
SIR If Mr Higgins should think proper to sell the prize brig 8,F

CRleifio of which you are prize master, he has my permission to do it
a t Malta In that case, you will take passage in the Store Ship for

70 NAVAL OPERATIONS. APRILSEPTEMBER 6, 180.4
America & carry with ou all the letters & papers entrusted to your
charge excepting Mr iggins should wish to detain a part of the
Papers of that Vessel, but you must take particular care of the Papers
of the Transfer which are enclosed in a letter from Cap? Stewart
to the Jud e or his A ent in Philadelphia - If your prize is Sold in
Malta Mr k g & s wd direct you what to do with the People Mr EDW@
N Cox
Prize Master of Brig St Cmcciifiso
[LC. EPP, Order Book, Mag 1803-June 1805.1

2i

Extract from journal of U. S. Brig Argus. Lieutenant Isaac Hull, U. S. Navy,
commanding, Friday, 27 April 1804

These 24 hours Commence with light airs and Clear Weather at 4
the Eastermost land in sight bore SE westermost W b S at 5 Calm
drifting in Shore got the Sweeps out set all sail that would be Servicable and emp'J the Sweeps while Necessary set & took in Sail Occasionally
At AM, took in the small sails at )I past 9 bore away to the S o u t h d
set and took in S d Occasiondy
Latter part fine Weather Various? Employed
(NDA photostat.]
To Purser Buller Cocke, U. S. Navy, Norfolk, Va., from Secretary of the Navy
NAVY
DEP~
April 28: 1804 I have received your Letter of the 23'Jinstant. You shall be appointed Public Storekeeper at the Navy Yard at
this place. I am sensible of the great responsibility which is attached
to the Station, and that great attention and skill in accounts are
indispensably requisite to discharge with fidelity the duty which it
imposes. I will therefore allow you for your services a liberal compensation, say, 1500 dollars per h u m .
You will hold yourself prepared to proceed to this lace when
called upon. Knowing the situation of your family, I sha not order
you hither at an earlier period than the public Services shall require.
[NDA. O S W , Vol. 6, 1802-1805.j
[28 April 18041

E

Appointment of Bnller Cocke as Storekeeper

To all who shall see these Presents, GREETING.
KNOWYE that reposing specid trust and confidence in the patriotism, fidelity, and abilities of Buller Cocke, I do hereby appolnt him
Storekeeper under the Act of Congress entituled "an Act sup lemen3
tary to the Act entituled" "an Act providing for a ~ a v Peace
Establishment and for other purposes"; he is therefore carefd and
diligently to discharge the duties of Storekeeper, by doing a n f perall manner of things thereunto belonging, and he is to observe
'and
O fo
Y ow such orders and directions, from time to time, as he shall
receive from me, or his superior Oflicers set over him.
Given under my Hand and Seal of the
Department thu 2[8] day of April
1804 and in the 2QtQyear of
Independence. Rt SMITHSeery Navy.
[NDA. O S W , Vol. 6, 1802-1805.1

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

71

128 April 18041
To Captain Edward Preble, U. 8. Bavy, from Richard Farquhar,Malta

MAYIT PLEASE
Youa EXCELLENCY
I waited on Capt? Stewart to
know if he had any orders from Your Excellency to take the Bashaw
of Derna's Consul & me also some People I had Engaged to assist us
in Be aza but%apt' Stewart told me he had no orders I was astonished, to
think that their should be so much Cash laid out and that the Consd
and MF Clementee & me Should have been Ara
every
thrngand
for
three Monthes & kee ing forty Peo le in pay
that time
Purch[as]ing a Cargo wLch will not Se at any other Place. we therefore hope Your Excellency will let us know, I advanced ME Clemenb
one Hundred Dollars on Account of the men he took to Syracusa
MALTA
April 28 1804
[LC. EPP, Vol. 11, April-June 1804.1

fi

9

Extract from journal of U. 6. Brig Argus, Lieutenant Isaac Bull, U. 6. Maw,
commanding, Saturday, %8April 1804

At 1 Spoke the United States Brig Syren Cap, Hull went on board
backed the main top sail at 2 P, M, filled away made and shortened
sail as Necessary At Sundown Tripoli bore S W b S dish: 3 leagues
Brig and Schooner in Compr
[Tr'DAphotostat.]
Extract from log book kept by Sailing blaster Nathaniel Haraden, 0.6. Bavy, on
board U. S. Frigate Condtullon, Saturday, 28 April 1804

Fresh breezes from N N W. Standing off & on Valetta waiting
the return of the boat. At j 4 past 12 Mr Higgins the Navy Agent
came off in a shore boat - At 2 P. M. the cutter returned. By
j4 past two P. M. had dispatched the shore boats. ?Ye then bore
up to the S E to the assistance of the russian prize ship which as
I mentioned sailed from Saragosa two days ago. She had 4 feet
water in her hold - The Commodore ordered her to proceed round
the S E. point of Malta & anchor in the Harbor of Narsa Scirocco We then bore up in chase to the S E. Up top gall3 Pards At 6
P. M. spoke H B M brig Morgia~mfrom Trieste bound to Malta with
two ships under convoy From this time till dn light, light and Variable breezes from the
Punished Leon Cozzens and George
Simmons with 3 dozn lashes each, for drunkeness, neglect of dut &
disobedience of Orders - William B Brown with 2 dozen for stea%ng
& disobedience of orders - and Mathew Brophy with one dozen for
disobedience of Orders - At 10 A. M. calm. Out cutter - Valetta
Harbor N W b W ?$ W 7 or 8 Miles - The Commodore left the
ship in order to proceed to Malta in the cutter - A breeze springing
up he returned - Filled & stood in towards the Harbor From 9
A. M. till 11 a dead calm - From this time till noon light breezea
from S W b S - Noon Valetta Harbor W b N jh N - Surgeons
report 8 sick 3 convalescent
[LC. EPP, Log Constitution, 1803-1804.1

7

72 NAVAL OPERATIONS. APRIL-SEPTEMBER

6 , 1804

Extract from journal of Midshipman F. Cornelius deKrafft, U. 8. Navy, in U. 8. Brig
Sha, of 18 guns, Lieutenant Charlea Stewart, U. S. Navy, commanding, Saturday,
28 April 1804

Commences with fresh breezes & pleas3 At % past Meridian took
in sail & spoke the Argus & Vizen % past 1 L? Hull & Smith came
on board. At 2 iill'd away & made sail. At 3 discov'd the land
ahead Latt: Obs: 33' 1' N.
[NDA. I

[29 April 18041
To Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Wavy, from the Oflicers of the Gun Room of the
U. S. Frigate Gnstltufion

The OfEcers of the Gun Room request the pleasure of Comdrc
Preble's company to Dinner to day 2gtQAPRIL1804
[LC. EPP, Vol. 11, April-June 1804.1
To Tobias Leu, U. S. Consul General, Algiers, from Richard O'Brien, Tunis
TUNIS29'Q o j April 1804.
(COPY)

DEARSIR, On the evening of the 24t@I ot to Tunis, and on the
2PQwith Mr Davis had an audience with amed Pacha - We observed that the Presidents letter would give him a main view
that
the frigate he demanded he could not get - that he would be offered
something annually or biennially in cash and no stores. That the
goods of Tunis, taken by the Americans some time past would be
paid for to the am$ of 4 or 5 thousand dollars - Says the Pacha I
have not as yet read Your Government's letter - but I refer you to
the Sapatapa my Minister - We took our leave.
2StQ We had a long discusion with the Minister
no frigate We offered to give 8 or 10 Thsq $ - annually in cash, to give on
account of the goods 4 or 5 Thsg $. and we suppose the Consular
Present to the amount of 10 Thsg $ - he said he would consider of
it and talk with his Master. 29'"
went to Bardo with Mr Davis took my leave of the Pacha
asked him if he had any commands for the United States - he said
he would write the President and alluded we were friends - I am
now waiting ready to depart the moment the Commodore comes off
here - or if further attacked by the Bey or Minister to give them a
definitive answer, not to exceed the boundaries as detailed - in this
time does not permit me to add more at present - but hereafter you
shall have full details -

5

-

-

WA. SDA. CL, Algiers, Vol. 7, Part 1, Jan. 1 8 W N o v . 1805.1

[29 April 18041
Comments by George Davis and Richard O'Brien concerning Tunis

TUNIS2 7 APRIL
~ ~ 1804. This morning at 8 AM went to Bardo
the place of residence of the Pacha; about 9 AM we were admitted
to an audience. Mr Davis introduced me, and ave into the hands of
the Pacha the letters from the President of the . S. After some conversation we told the Bey that the President's letter would inform him

d

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS
of the heads of particulars. As he had the letter adjacent to him
unopened, we could not immediately commence on our mission; we
therefore waited the Bey's attack, and as we taIc]ked towards him, he
tacked from us. When on a second manoeuvre aa I had hold of the
Bey's hand, intimated that the Frigate he demanded he could not
get. That he would be offered something annually in cash, and no
stores. That the goods of Tunis condemn'd by the Americans would
be paid for to the amount of four or five thousand dollars. Says the
Pacha "I have not yet read your Govt*letter, but I refer you to the
Sapatapa my Minister" We took our leave and returned to Tunis.
2 8 ~ This
~ : morning Messr? Davis and OBrien went 12 miles into
the country to the seat of the Sapatapa or Minister of Tunis - he
recg us calmly and with a little stiffness, and in an hour gave us an
audience as follows "Well" eays he "you have seen the Bey" - Answer Yes: "What did you bring him"?
A letter from the President, which gave a refuaal of giving this Government a
frigate "What is the motive for this refusal"?
We want to keep all our own force.
T. - "Do you allude to your War with T r i p l y ? You there occupy but a
"small force, as I understand you have in Frigates, Brigs and Schooners to the
"number of 40 or 50 Sail - I do not as yet learn you have any ships of the line:
" - but if you cannot a t present give, or spare us a Frigate or Corvette -we will
"have patience until you are a t peace with Tripoly."
U S - We answ4 We must candidly assure you that you may forever extiinwish the idea or hope of getting a ship of War from the U S.
T - "Why do you give them to Algiers"?
U S - R e stipulated a t the Peace to give Algiers a Frigate; and as to the other
Corsairs, they were built and paid for a t the expence of Algiers; or taken on account
of the annuities, and Peace stipulations.
T. "Well if you do not give us the Frigate, you can give us the Cash or meam
"as a substitute to obtain one".
U S. We wish to preserve your friendship, and will give you t o the amount in
cash pr Annum or Bennial a t the rate of eight thoueand dollars.
T - "This is a small sum for our friendship! - Why not give us stores as you
"do to A1 'era"?
U. S. 8 e stipulated by treaty to do by Algiers as we have done; and with
Tunis made all our stipulatiolls good; and cannot conceive in justice, where you
b v e a ri ht or retence to have any claim on the U. 5.
T. - f i ~ h ganiarda,
e
Deans, Swedes, and most all other Nations who wish
"to secure our friendship with effective tokens and demonstrations of the same
"I ask you if your Governmmt has not an equal interest so to do"?
U. S. No
Our situation is superior to those mentioned Nations. Spain ia
in your power: - Those of the North have for 6 months in the Year a f r o s n
Ocean. they want to occupy their Vessels in the Winter Months in this Sea;
therefore they gain a Doubloon whereas we do not gain more than two dollars.
T - "Is not our friendship to be considered more important
We knew noth"inn about your Country - You came and demanded of us Peace and F'riendllsfii~."
U S. Yea, we did; and secured it by Treaty and Stipulations which we have
made good.
T - "When we want Peace with your Country and is very much in need of it,
"you ehdl know thereof; or when you see the ~mb-dors
of Tunis on the Mia"sion to Americs"
U S. Our 5 tern is Peace and Harmony
Yours is not; but i t must be evident to you, t r a t Peace must be to the advantage of both Nations; and p e r h a p
if the interest of both Nations could be viewed in its true li h t the bdanae m
favor of P a m , would be on the part or to the advantage of
T - "You have been three years at Wlu nith Tripoly; who has not the power
"that Tunis has
You have spent Millions & done nothing - You have lost a
"Frigate and her Crew
You are tired of the War and want peace."

-

-

-

-

funiuo~

- -

74 NAVAL OPERATIONS, APRILSEPTEMBER 6, 1804
U S. We hsve used but a small part of our force against Tripoly; his Cormaim
have been shut up them 3 years, and his port blockaded We have epent much
Mone , 8nd will spend more: the lm of the Frigate was an accident
but we
hsve %umther in s port called very strong. We repost, that, our system is
Peace and will continue the War to obtain it

-

-

The Minister of Tunis answered "that he would explain all we said
to his Master - We took our leave.
2 9 m OF APRIL went to Rardo with Mr Davis in order to take our
leave of the Pascha. He said he would write to the President, and
give his answer to Mr Davis - He said we were friends - we took
our leave.
We the undersigned do hereby certify that this paper as Narratived,
is the substance or purport of o m audience and conference with the
Bey of Tunis and his Minister
TUNIS
29th April 1804 (Signed) RICHQ
OBRIEN
GEORGE
DAVIS
[LC. EPP, LB, Dec. 1803-April 1804.1

IT. S. Brig A r m Lientenant Isaac Hull,U. 8. Haw,
commanding, Bunday, 29 April 1804

&trract from journal of

at % past 1 P. M, Wore Ship to the S, E, the Squadron &ed Several
Shot at a Battery to the Westward of Tripoli which was returned made
and Shortened sail Occasionally at Sun down the Syren and Vixen in
Company

mDA photostat.]
-act

from Diary of Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Navy, Commodore of 0.6.
Squadron in the Mehterranean, Sunday, 29 April 1804

b h t breezes from S S W. At 2 P. M. brought to under Topsails,
the Main topsail to the Mast. About 1 Mile from Valette, I embarked
in the Cutter for Malta, where I found the Store Ship Woodrop Sims
safe arrived. 1 also found here the Brig St Fv -380
prize to the
Nautdw & the Polacre prize to the Syren; both reported to me not
to be sea worthy to cross the Atlantic Ocean.- Desired the Agent to
h u l the Brig up, untill farther orders m d directed the prize master
to take passage with his dispatches in the Store Ship - The Lt
Stewart, I find, has left Orders to sell the Polacre - The three Tunisians etill in this Port, but nearly ready for Sea. At 7 P. M. I returned
on board The C u t b r wes hoisted in, and we made sail to the
Westwg It soon fell calm and remained So nll night - At 7 A.
M. a light breeze from S d. All sail set - Steered N N W E C . EPP, Diary, 1803-1804.1

Extmct from log book kept by Sailing Xaeter Batbaniel Heraden, U. 8. Ksvy, on
board U. 8. Rigate Comfit~lfon.Sunday, 29 April 1804

Light airs from S W b W. We are running in for the Harbor of
Valetta which bears W N W 7 Miles - At 2 P. M. wore off the hrtrbor
and brought to, one mile from the laad - The Commodore went on
shore in the cutter Mr Jouvas our cruizing Pilot who was sent on
board the russian ship at Saragoaa came on board havin moored her
safe in Malta. Ii'rom 8 P. M. till day light we were off aletta either
with a calm or light airs At 7 A. M,a light breeze sprang u from the
9 E. Made sll plain sail and set top gall%studdr mils. k m this

f

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

75

along shore to the North@between
time till noon we were r
Valetta & the North part of the sland of Gozo. Forenoon PleasantShi s compan cleaned and Mustered. Noon hght breezes from
S
Steerf
b W with an o f i g of 6 Miles E b S from the N.
part of GOZO.
Latitude Observed 36' 3' N.
[LC. EPP, Log Constitution, 1803-1804.1

""""r

2

w

Extract from journal of Midshipman F. Cornelius delhafft, U. S. Navy, in U. 8. Brig
Sim of 18 gum, Lieutenant Charlea Stewart, U. 6. Navy, commanding, Sunday,
89 April 1804

At 3 tack'd to the S. E standin in for a small fort to the W@of
Tripoli follow'd by the Argw & #*en.
At M past 3 commenc'd a
brisk fire on the fort & a small Battery close on the beach, & continued
the sport 'till % past 6. The enemy's shot flying over & in every
direction of us but to no effect. At 7 wore & stood off shore, the
flag of the upper fort, some distance from shore, having haul'd down
her coloura (after having sent 2 shot in it with our bow guns) & cem'd
past 7 Tripoli bore S. E took in sail At 8 reef'd topsails
firing
& wore to the S. W. % past 8 wore to the N E@- * * * % past
10 back'd the main top sail lowg down the cutter Lt Stewart went
close in shore 10 miles to westward of Tripoli in Order to sound At
% past 11 fill'd away [NDA.]
To Purser Bobert W. Goldsborough, U. S. Navy, from Secretary of the Navy

NAVYDEPM*
A p d SO, 1804 You are hereby ap ointed a Purser in the Navy. I enclose a blank
Oath of Allegiance w ich you will take and return to me with a letter
accepting thls Appointment from the date of which Acceptance your
pa and Emolumenb will commence. %ou will repair to this place immediately prepared for actual service and take passage on board of the Commodore's Ship for the
Mediterranean a s a Supernumerary Purser. While on board of the
Commodore's Ship you will act as his Clerk.
N. B. Warrant dated April 9, 1804, delivered May 28, 1804 -

E

[NDA. OSW, Vol. 6, 1802-1805.1
To Tobias Lear, U. 8. Consul General, Algiers, from Captain William Bainbridge,
U. 8. Navy

TRIPOLI
BARBARIE
90t4 A p d 1804
(red July 13'4 1804)
3 & 5'8 ins*
in the latter acknowledged the recei t of yours of the 12'h of Febru
last. Since my last nothing partic ar has occurred, except the dea
of one Seamen. Our Seamen are much in want of Cloathing which
I have been expecting every day for this month past from Malta;
but have not heard from Commodore Preble elnce the 27'4' of Msrch
when he had communication with this place as mentioned in my letters
of the 3 & 5'4 ins$
I feel very unhappy in not having heard from America; hope before
this, that you have received advices from Government.

DEARSIR I had the pleasure to write to you on the

3

S

76 NAVAL OPERATIONS. APRIL-SEP TEMBER 6 , 1804
As I know the satisfaction you feel in hearing from us, I shall frequently trouble you with my letters; altho they will be barren of news
and contain a repetition of close confinement and anxious feelings
Please to tender to Mr*Lear my best respects and sincere wishes
for her happiness and believe me to be D' ColQ
with grateful feelings for your attention
Your sincere but unhappy friend
Wg BAINBRIDGE
ColQLEAR,
C o d General, Algiers
[Written on back of letter: - "you will be pleased to scorch this letter and all

others from the same quarter, over a hot fire--(;. D. (George Davis)"]

[The following was written in lime juice and copied from photostats of the
original.]

This is wrote with lime juice which is not visible until heated by fire.
This information to you will enable us to correspond freely without
danger of detection as letters on common subjects will be permitted
to ass to and from our prison.
$he person who comes to negotiate with this overnment should
be a person of moderation and and address for on y such a character
will take with Sidi Muhammed Minister of Foreign Mairs, who is a
man of much penetration and great politeness and has the entire
confidence of the Bashaw. a generous fee properly given him would
in my opinion be attended with great advantage in negotiating - I
believe the Bashaw is desirous of peace but no doubt his demands
will be big. to effect it the United States must pay or attack him by
land 4 or 5000 troops properly commanded and landed without
giving him much time to collect his forces should be able to beat him
[or "to take Town"]
Pray let me hear from you as frequently as possible give me confidential information on the determination of our Government and inform
me how Algiers stands toward the United States. I am certain that
you will excuse these request[s] for the goodness of your heart will
surely feel my anxiety on these points.
The interest of France is very great hear if she offers her assistance
i t should be done by a French man direct from France and not through
their consul - [*I

f

[*There are about five more lines of this letter and four lineg of closing remark8
and signature. These, except for a few scattered words, are illegible.]
[Stephen Decatur Col.]
Extract from journal of U. 8. Brig Argua. Lieutenant Isaac Bull,U. 8. Bavy,
commanding, Monday, SO April 1804

These 24 hours Commence with fresh breezes and Clear Weather
past 1 P M, saw a small Vessel a t anchor under the land set all
sai
at and stood in a t % past 2 hove too and sent all the boats under
the Command of Lieu$ Blake to bring her out the boats returned a t
past 4 she proved a small sloo laden with earthen Ware Spoke
the U S. Schooner Enferpriu old A p o l i boro S. S. W distQ3 Leagues
made and set sail as Necess? got out a hauser and made the prize
fast astern -

?

[NDA photostat.)

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

77

Extract from joumd of Midshipman F. Cornelius deKraUt, U. 6. Ravy, in U. 6. Brig
Shcn of 18 gum, Lieutenant Charles Stewart,U. S. Bevy, commanding, Monday,
SO April 1804

Commences with clear & pleast weather. At 5 pt Meridian Lt
Stewart return'd, accompanied by Lt Smith, hoisted up the cutter.
* * * * * At % past 2 * * * Lt Smith went on board the V h n .
* * * [Meridian] Tripoli bearing S. S. W. The V k n s t i l l in Co: INDA.1

[May 18041
Statement of the Tunisian Naval Force

1

nine
On her main deck
Six Pdr"on her Quarter deck One year Old, Built at Port Farina, ready for Sea
deck
One D Q- - - -DQ- 28 Ekllteen pdr' On her gun
Quarter deck Building but not quite finished
Two Xebecks- - - - - - - - - - 34 Guns each 9 & 6 pdr', A present from Spain, Both new & ready for Sea.
D Q - - - - - - - - - - 32 Guns-French bullt & lately coppered a t Malta-Ready for Sea
One
Nine Sail of Xebecks & Polacres from 30 to 24 Guns - Some out & some read for Sea
DQ & DQ
" 16 to 12 Guns D Q- - - - - - - - - - - - 6 9
Ten Sailof
Ten Sail of
Dq
&
DQ
"
10 to 6 Guns D Q - -- - - - - - - - - - D Q
Thirty Row Gallies of 1 & 2 Guns & from 30 to 40 Men each D Q- - - - - - - - - - - - Dq
Ten Row boats mounting each 1 long Swivel & carrying 50 Men each.
Seventy four Sail in All This is the compliment of men established
N, B, - All their cruizes from 6 to 44 guns carry 10 Men to a gunby the Algerines to enable them to fight both broad sides at Once and leave a sufficient number for sail trimmers &
boarders May 1804 [LC. EPP, Order Book, May 1803-June 1806.1

One Frigate

1

79

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

[May 1804?]
Algerine Eavd Force

One frigate of - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - Portuguese Benguensa - - - - - - - - American Renegado- - - _ _ - _ _ - - Xebeck of- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - Polacre of- - - - _ _ - - _ - _ _ - - - - - - - Xebeck Vecho of-- - - - _ - - - _ - - _ Brig Philadelphia- - _ - - - - - - - - - Schooner Bowers [or bowers?]- - Xebeck of--- - - - - - - _ _ - _ _ - - _ - __
DQ of . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Schooner of - - - - - -- - - - - - - - - - - Forty or fifty gun boats -

44 Guns
44

DQ

34 Dq
32 DQ
18 DQ
26 D9
22 D?
16 DQ

34 Guns
18 DQ
14 D?

[LC. EPP, Order Book, May 1803-June 1805.1

To Captain Edward Preble, U.S. Navy, from George Davis, U. S. Charge d' Affaires,
Tunis

TUNISMay 1st 1804
10 P. M
SIR I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your several
communications, of the 17tP January 3 4 and 18th February and 18tQ
of A ril, all of which were handed me by the Ex Consul Mr OBrien his Ifxcellency the Bey, 'tho silent is far from bei ,in a better humour,
than when you left us ;notwithstanding, that his c aim for the Captured
property, will be settIed without delay hls demands, on the Government of the U. States far exceed, any
thmg anticipated - in an audience, with the Sapataps, on the 2PQ
Ultimo Mr OBrien & myself, informed him - the length to which we
should go-as yet he gives me to understand, it is too insi ificant for
his acceptance - one of his chief Agents, inform'd me t is evening,
that the Bey is resolved to give an absolute refusal to, the proffer,d
terms - the consequences of which I am not authorised even to
suggest - perhaps he will again write to the President, leaving us in
Statu quo, until1 an answer can be received - he probably waits the
arrival of the Russian Fleet in those Seas, and learn whether their
intentions are as is whisper,d, to make him a visit - or, what is more
probable, intends to see the result of our negotiation with Tripoli whatever may be his views, or intentions; it 1s of the first importance
that a vessel should look in here very frequently which will never be
detained longer, than to send my dispatches to you, on board - the
Tunisien property to the Amount of nearly five thousand dollam is to
be paid for immediately, agreable to the romise of Mr OBrien &
myself - a biU can not be negotiated on &em, for that amount and I have no funds will you accept one, on Col. Lear for five thousand
dollars, in order that the affair ma be closed? Will you make an Provisionar deposit here for the w e of our
country men a t Trip$? a Spanish Vessel, sailed a few da since for
that port with my passport, and a thousand dollars, a t e disposal
of Capt B -I have the honor to enclose a wpy for your information -GEORGE
DAVIS
[Surgeon, U.S. Navy]
[LC. EPP, Vol. 11, April-June 1804.1

f

P

tK"

80 NAVAL OPERATIONS, APRIL-SEPTEMBER 6, 1804
To Qeorge Davis, V. S. Charge d'Affairs,Tunis, from Bichard O'Brien

TUNIS
the 1st of May 1804.
Sir. I agree with you that sound policy and the Usanse of this
points out to you your true course of attacking the Bey
=I'%e
pockets of his Ministers of influence; and as it has already
been observed that there is no security for your making them just
compensations, you are hereby authorized to give the sum of five
thousand dolars as greasing fees, and render yourself responsible for
the payment of the same if possible in three months from this date,
or to be paid before your departure from this country provided this
sum will be the means of their accomplishmg the arrangement for
Eight fathoms in cash pr Annum, and a regalia in proportion, if done
for nine.
I shall also recommend to Government that ten fathoms be continued in the Consulate, that the remaining or extra two (if done for
Eight) and one (if for Nine) be continued as occasional doucers, and
Stand Bys to answer as Stays and Shrouds to steady the Mast, if
thus arranged.
The Consular Regalia or present for the Bey, Ministers and aids,
must depend on our Government forwarding, on their officially establishing or confirming the Consul at Tunis, the requisite articles &c?
to the amount I shall inform our Govt of as fully as within the
knowledge of Sir [R. O'Brien]
[LC. EPP, LB, Dec. 1803-April 1804.1
Extract from journal of U. S..Brig Arm, Lieutenant Isaac Hull, U. 6. Navy,
commandmg, Tuesday, 1 r a y 1804

[Off Tripoli.] These 24 hours Commence with fresh breezes and
clear at 8 strong Gales got down the Top Gallant Yards and took in
sail as Necessary the Emkrprize to windward at 11 the Prize parted
the hauser and west astern at 12 Tacked to the Sq Westw'J
[NDA photoatst.]

To George Davis, U. 8. Charge d'dffaires, Tunis, from Captain Edward Preble,
U. S. loavy

(COPY)

UNITED
STATESSHIP Constduiim

Tun& Bay 2q May 1804 SIR,The Ports of Farina, Bizerta, and Jerba, in the Kingdom of
Tunis, are places frequented by Tripolitan Cruisers whenever they
can escape from their own Ports, and should they capture an of
Our Merchant Vessels, those are the Ports they would be most d e l y
to send their Prizes to, not only so, but if the Tunisines should capture
our Vessels under the Consular Passport without giving us any previous notice those are the Ports they would be most likely to send
such Vessels to for the purpose of concealing their depredations from
Your knowledge as lon as possible. I therefore think it advisable
that You appoint a coddential Agent at each of these places in order
that You may receive the earliest intelligence of whatever may be
interesting to our Government. I have no doubt but such a measure
will be approved by the Honb@Secretary of State, and that a small
Sal
not exceeding one hundred and fifty Dollars pr annum would be
r
e
s
9
allowed to such Agents in order to msure thew fidelity. Should

81

WARS WITH BARBARY PO WEBS

any important event occur you will do well to hire a Swift S a i i
Boat, and send her to me off Tripoli with intelli ense.
I believe if the Government knew how much our private Secretary
is to be relied on in case of any accident to Yourself, and the immense
advantage he must on all occasions be to you from his thorough
knowledge of all the languages Spoken in the Tunisian Regency,
that they would not hesitate to allow You to retain him in Your
Service particularly as his dismission will lessen the Respectability
of Your Official appointment with the Regency. I should at any rate
advise you to retain him untill You can again hear from the Department of State.
[NA. SDA. CL, Tunis, Voi. 2, Part 2, 1803-1806.1

f

To Captain Richard V. Moms, U. 6. Navy, New York, 8. Y., from Secretary of the
Navy

NAVYDEPM*

May 2: 1804 Enclosed is a copy of the opinion of the Court of Enquiry [See
t 18031 in your case. Upon receiving this opinion I trans31
it to the President of the United States who is, at this time,
mitte
a t Monticello. He is expected at the Seat of Government in a few
days, and on his arrival, it will be determined what further proceedings shall be had on the Case. -

AT

[NDA. OSW, Vol. 6, 1802-1805.1
Extract from log book kept by Sailing Master Xathaniel Haraden, U. 6. Navy,
on board U. 8. Frigate GNiltution, Wednesday, 2 May 1804

Fresh breezes from S b W. - Working ship up Tunis ba . At
2 P. M. we tacked in 20 fathoms 1 % Miles E N E from Cape Cart ageStood over for Cape Tortas till 3 P. M. when we tacked & stood
up for the Anchorage At 4 P. M. came to, with the best bower in
Tunis Bay in 7 fathoms in muddy bottom. Veered 60 fathq and
furled sails Our situation is 3 miles from Cape Carthage bearing by compass
N b W - Cape Farina N b E. - Zembra Island N E b E 4: E Castle Golletta which guards the Entrance to Tunis W. nearly 6

K

Miles -

At Sundown fresh Breezes & Overcast weather Down top gall$
Yards & bent the sheet cable. Mustered the ships company watch
& watch & Employ'd them in washing & scrubbin their cloathes On
anchoring, hoisted a Jack & fired a gun as a Sign for a shore boat At 8 A. M. sent the Pinnace with the Pilot & six men on ahore. He
returned a t 11 A. M. with Consul O'Brien and Doctor Davis Saluted with 5 Guns.
Fresh breezea from S b E ad the forenoon Ships company fleeting
the fore topmast rigging and cleaning between decks.
[LC. EPP,Log Caslittdim, 1803-1804.1

S

82 NAVR1; OPERATIONS, APRILSEPTEMBER 6, 1804
To Tobiee Lecu, U. 8. Consul General, Algiers, from Captain Edward heble,
U. S. Navy

UNITED
STATES
SHIPCMZ8&&ion

Tunis Bay May 3G 1804.
Red June 8g 1804.
DEARSIB, I have been hone with your dispatches b the Vixen, for
which, accept my thanks. Be assured it is no small egree of ratification to me, that my conduct in these Seas meets your appro ation
The thanks of the President have been conveyed ta me by the Secretary of the Navy, and I have received a very flattering letter from
the Secretary of State: as a friend these circumstances w i l l please
you, and be assured is the highest reward I ever can receive for my
services.
Mr OBrien has settled his family st Malta; he came here last week
in the Enter rize from Syracuse, and I have now called in to take him
away Mr avis and himself have had a long conference with the
Bey; his demands are very imposing, but he knows his own interest
and exposed situation to our attacks too well to declare war against us.
However, nothing has so good an effect to convince him that he cannot
make war with impunity as frequently shewing a force in this Bay.
This being the only frigate we have in the Mediterranean, i t is to
be regretted that to keep this Regency in check, I am obliged occasionally to leave my Station before Tripoli. It is surprising that more
force has not been sent out - I am contemplating a bold stroke
against Tri oli - One successful dash a t them will effect a peace,
and make t em remember the war.
Mr Davis has no money and cannot negotiate bills: f t has become
necessary to pay the Bey of Tunis for the captured pro erty immediately; and to enable him to do this, I have su plied
with four
thousand dollars from this Ship, it being all t e money I have on
board excepting Gold, and have taken triplicate receipts for the same.
h m what I have seen of M' Davis, and from Mr OBrien's opinion
of him, I think the Government will do well to establish him as
Consul for this Regency. I have recommended his appointing a
confidentid Agent a t Ports Farina Bizerte & Jerba for the purpose of
vm me early intelligence of any movements interestrng to F:
fe
enclose you a copy of the letter, and give You ail the interestmg
information from this quarter. I have had the French Commissary
at Tripoli on board, and delivered him the origin& of which I send
you a cop by this conveyance; but M' Beaussier is too much in the
lnterest o the Bsshaw to serve us, and i t is for the interest of the
French Government that we should be a t war not only with Tripoli
but with Tunis, in order that we ma blockade the ports of the two
Regencies, and cut off all supplies o provisions from the British a t
Malta & Sicily if they should take possession of it. We must depend
on ourselves to effect Peace and protect our Commerce.
Present my best regards to MP Lear, and request her to accept my
thanks for her very elegant Present - this token of her wmideration
will ever be dear to me
P. S. We have captured four prizes, one of them a Brig of 16 Guns,
which I have taken into the service and given the Command to
Leu* Dent. f N k 8DA. CL,Algiers, Vol. 7, Part 1, Jsn. 1804-Nov. 1806.1

%

2;

E

i

A

P

9

&n

83

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

[3 May 18041
TO John 8. Y. Matthiew, U. 8. Consul, Naples, from N de Monzo,
Russian Counsellor and Agent General, Haples

The Underwritten Honorary Counsellor & Agent General of his
Imperial Majesty of all the Russias in the two Sicilies presents his
distinguished Compliments to Mr Jn? Matthiew Consul General of
the U. S. of America, & does himself the Honor to acquaint him
That from on the part [sic] of the Counsellor of State, and c o n s 4
Genl of his au ust Sovereign in Sicily, I t has been communicated to
his Imperial d j e s t y 7 scharge d'affaires to this Royal Court, That the
russian Polacca named the Madonna Catapologhi commanded b
Captain Goo* Morfino went out of the Port of Tripoli on the 29t
day of March of the current Year, and was hailed on the following
day by an American brig to bring too, which brig afterwards (against
all Rules established by Maritime Powers) carried the Polacca into
the Port of S acuse as a lawful Prize, owing to the Blockade of the
Port of Tripo ' by the American Squadron To be convinced of the Illegality & Injustice of this Procedure, it
is only necess
to take into just Consideration, that the above
Polacca departe from Smyrna on the 6 of November 1803 freighted
for Gerba, that in consequence of bad Weather, she was constrained
to enter Tripoli on the 26 Day of the following Month December,
where the Captain was obli ed by the Bashaw to unload his Cargoe
and to abide upwards of 2 onths ere he could recover his Freight
for the same
After this, having let his Polacca on Freight to Gaetano Schimbro
an english Subject to carry a Cargoe of Shee and Oxen for the British
Troops a t Malta, Captain Morfino departe from Tripoli on the said
29 da of March of the current Year and on the following one as is
alreadVy mentioned was taken at the distance of 80 Miles from that
Port.
These veridical and incontestible facts ou ht Sufficiently to convince the Consul Gent of the U. S that C a p t o o r f i n o leaving Smyrna
a t a time when the Port oi Tripoli was not as et in a state of Blockade,
could not consequently have any Notice t ereof, and so much the
more so since the Circular of Mr Matthieu bearing date of the 14*
Xmber 1803 notif 'ng the Blockade of Tripoli was not as et received
in those Parts; t erefore it cannot be said that Capt"orfino
has
contravened the official Notice of the Blockade of Tripoli by the forces
of the U. S of America, as he had not nor could he have any Indication
thereof The Writer moreover hopes that the Consul Gent will be pleazed
to weigh in his Mind that the Blockading of a Port prohibits other
Vessels going therein but not that of their coming out
The above Polacca having been thus carried into the Port of
S acuse where She has performed Quarantine and is not yet released;
t e Captain & Crew having been dsbanded contrary to eve
time Law and Rule & consequently ignorant of what Port the?Meolacca
ma have been conducted to for the formal decision of the Legality
or &egality of the seizure, The underwritten thinks himself authorized
both by the duties of his Station & the ties of Friendship which Subsist
& the U. S of America, to make the most
between his Sovere'
lively In~tancest o k r Matthieu that he will be pleazed to give

E

i=

Yf

b

i

f

g

P

F

i

84 NAVAL OPERATIONS, A?'RILSEPTEMBER 6, 1804
effectually and solicitously those Cautions which may contribute to
the regular and due Release of this Polacca
The Writer hopes for a quick and fortunate Issue to this his official
Letter and to have the satisfaction of making it known to the Charge
d'affaires of his Court in order that the same may render a just
Account of the Esteem in which the U. S of America hold the good
Correspondence which exists between them and his Imperial Majesty,
or of the Necessity of adopting those Measures which the Advantnge
and Security of his Subjects' Commerce may induce him to deem
seasonable and requisite Signed N DE MANZO
NAPLEB,
3G May 180.4
[LC. EPP,Vol. 11, April-June 1804.1
Extract from Memorandum Book of Captain Edwwd Preble, U. S. Navy, on board
0.S. Frigate Comtifufion,3 Hay 1804

Sailed for Naples.
[LC origid.1
Extract from Iog book kept by Sailing Master Nathaniel Haraden, 0, 8. Navy,
on board U. 8. Frigate Conrtiiulion. Thursday, 3 May 1804

Fresh Breezes & frequent squalls from the Southd Laying a t single
Anchor in Tunis Bay. Ships company employed working up Junk
Unbent the main top mast stay sail & bent a new one; the Old one cut
up to repair lower studdr sails.
At 4 P. M. let go the small bower. Fresh breezes from the Southa
thro' the night. At 8 A. M. shortened in 20 fathams - Sent up
Royal & top gallt Yards. At 10 A. M. sent the pinnace on shore to
land Consul Davis: Consul 0.Brien remains on board.
Towards noon, weighed & came to sail - Stowed the two Bowers
Surgeons report 7 sick, 5 convolescent & One dischargq Noon
laying to in Tunis Bay, waiting the return of the boat. Winds
Moderate from S S E.
[LC.EPP, Log Conslitution, 1803-1804.1
To Lieutenant Isasc Bull, U. 8. Navy, commanding U. 8. Brig Aqus, off Oibraltar,
from Secretruy of the Bevy

NAVYDEP*
May 4: 1804:
The Gun Carriages baving been delivered to the Emperor of
Morocco, and pacific dispositions towards us having been manifested
by him, it is conceived that your remaining with the Argzce in his
ne hbowhood to watch his movements, is now unnecessa . You
therefore, immediately on receiving this Letter rmee up the
Mediterranean and .*in the Commodore of the ~~uat8-011
Commodore Preb e is so far remote from Gilbratar, &d the conveyance of Letters from that place to him so difEicult and tedious, that
it IS more than probable he remaina unapprized of the proceedings in
that quarter. For this reason you receive these ordm immediately
from me. [NDA. LB, 1799-1807.1

7

d

1

85

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS
To Joeiah Fox, Washington, D. C., from Secretary of the Navy

NAV.D E P ~

May 4 t@ 1804
You will consider yourself as hereby appointed head Ship Carpenter
and Navy Constructor to this Department and you are hereby
attached to the Navy Yard a t Washin ton under the law supplementary to the act entitled an act provi 'ng for a naval peace establishment and for other purposes -you will take the accompanying oath
and return i t to this office with a letter accepting this appointment your pay will commence from the time your predecessor left the
office Your General duties will be to Keep regular accounts of all the
timber plank, scantling, and other materials in the Carpenters Department - that now are or that may hereafter be deposited in the
navy yard a t this place - to receive returns of the timbsr plank
scantling &q in all the navy ards in the United States - to keep
re lar accounts thereof so t at whenever called upon you will be
a b e to furnish us with particular information on the Subject - You
are to Superintend the building and repairing of all ships that may be
Ordered to be built or repaired at this place or when specitally directed,
when Ordered to be built or repaired a t any other place in the United
States - you are to make drafts and models of Vessels whenever
called upon you are to inspect and measure all the timber that may
hereafter be received a t the navy yard a t Washington - to attend to
the sizing of the Spars to see that the whole timber Spars &q are kept
in a State of preservation and when required you are to inspect into
the state of the public Timber plank &q in the different navy yards
of the United States to see that proper means are pursued for its
preservation In these your General duties will consist - as early as a general
System can be devised, it will be done and the duties of all the heads
of the different branches will be classified and made known to them
respectively You will then receive instructions more in detail for
the particular Government of your conduct The Timber &q now in the yard you will receive by inventory as
soon after the resent Squadron Sails as it can be effected that which
may hereafter e deposited there you will be charged with recei
Until the Squadron shall sail and the timber now in the
delivered over to you by inventory you will make your requisitions for
Timber required for the repairs of the Squadron going out, on CapQ
Cassin For your Services you will receive 2000 Dollars Pr annurn & the
public will Supply you with a House [NDA. GLB, Vol. 7, 1803-1805.1

&

i

Y

f

y
4
b
e

Extract from journal of U. S. Brig Artuc. Lieutenant Isaac Bull, U. 8. Navy,
commanding, Friday, 4 May 1804

At !4 past 7 saw a sail off the Weathr Quarter exchanged
the U. S. Brig S y ~ e nwore Ship t,o the N, E, at 8 Strong
Clear Weather
[NDA photostat.]

86 NAVAL OPERATIONS. APRILSEPTEMBER 6. 1804
To Captain Edward Preble, U. 6. Navy, from John S. M. Matthiew, U. 8. Consul,
Iaplea

Naples May 5" 1804

Sir,

Though I have not had the honor of a letter or any account from
you this good while however I think i t my duty to inform you that
Mr Cathcart who departed about eight days ago for Leghorn has
left with me a t your disposal 14 Bales with clothing for our people
in the hands of the Tripolines which with the consent of the Custom
House directors, I keep in a Warehouse until I receive your orders
about the same which I hope you will favour me with as soon as possible to save Magazine Rent
Enclosed I send you two billets I have r e d from the Russian Agent
General here, with my answers-with regard to the Russian Ship
taken by a Brig [Madona Catapoliana] of the fleet under your command as she came out from Tripoly. I pray you will give me your
instructions about this matter for my Governrnt
I must inform you that the strictest friendship passes between this
court and that of Russia, and the Agent here is making his endeavours
to have the King interfere that he may gain his point.
[LC. EPP, LB, April-h'ov. 1804.1
Extract from log book kept by Sailing Master Nathaniel Haraden, U. S. Navy,
on board U. S. Frigate Comtitution, Saturday, 6 May 1804

Light airs from the E N E--We are standing in for the N W point
of Sicily. At 2 P. M. boarded three Imperial ships from Leghorn
bound to Constantinople The E N E wind was light all the forenoon-Tacked as often as necessary.
At Sun down we were near1 3 Ieagues N W b N from a small village situated a t the bottom o the Mountains of Old Trapano-At 9
P. M. light ~ i r from
s
the W N W, which continued through the night
Steered E N E by compass, which is parralel to the shore At 10 P. M.
the weather became overcast4towed the light sailsAt 7 A. M. Saw the Island of Ustico bearing E N E nearly 7 leagues,
& Cape Galos which makes the starboard entrance to Palermo S E
b E--9 or 10 Leagues At 9 :A. M. the Wnze cleared away to the
West+ Saw three strange ships of war in that uarter They stood
for -We
fired a gun & shewed our colors- hey then changed
their course from E N E to S IT & hoisted Neapolitan ColorsSurgeons report 6 sick, 7 ConvalesctNoon hght from N b W
Steering N W b W by compass 5 leagues from Cape Galos; nearly
the same distance S W from the Island of Ustica-Standing in for
Cape Galos

P

%

[LC. EPP, Log Constitution, 1803-1804.1
To Bobert R. Livingston, U. S. Minister to Paris, France, from Stephen Cathdm,
Jr., U. 8. Commercial Agent, IYIaraeillee, France

MARSEILLES
@ May 1804
SIR I confirm you my respects of the 28" ultQ This is to advise
ou that by letters from &ers of the Jew house of Bace to their
gowe here 36 days date via Tunis, late Consul General, 0 rien had

3

as Minister Plenipotentiary of the United Statea to treat
left &ers
for a peace with Tripoly; they giving me this intelligence before yee-

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

87

terday evening added that Consul OBrien had arrived a t Tunis on
his way to Tripoly - Yesterday evening, the Foreign Relations Agent
in this place delivered me a packet containi a letter from my friend
Mr Beaussier a t T r i p l y , whereof there inc osed a copy requesting
you to forward i t to the Secretary of State a t Washrngton with the
one also inclosed from Cap$ Bainbridge; after your perusal for your
own private Government; as i t would not be proper, that friendly
confidential letters might be known by every body. On the moment of this mail's departure, I received a letter from
Geo: Davis Esqc charged with the U. S. Consulate a t Tunis, dated 27
Ap! with a heavy packet for the Frigate [sic] of State - he mentions
me nothing about misintelligence between Tunis & U. S. only that
Commodore Prebble is making preparations for a vigorous campaign
against Tripoli, & trusts we shall obtain by balls what was supposed
could not be procured with money. Consul OBrien was then with him [NA. SDA. Disp., France, Vol. 9, 1803-1805.1

?

To Captain William Bainbridge, U. S. Wavy, from Captain Alexander Murray,
U. 6. Navy

WASHINGTON
@@ May 1804
DEARSIR Your much esteemed favor of the gth Novr was this Day
received, & be assured that you have not a friend that feels a more
keen regret for your unhappy situation than myself, your observations are but too just in suposing that the unfortunate are ever liable
to censure, but a man in conscious rectitude of conduct need have no
fears from the Honest part of this World, your conduct wilI be investigated by Men who are your friends & 'ustice done ou under the
clearest conviction of your whole officia & officer e deportment
having been such as to do you Honor, I have never heard you censured
by any one, except ct regret that the ship had not been left in such a
state as to prevent her being serviceable to the Enemy, but it is evident you could not have supposed i t possible for her to have been
ot off from the situation she was in, those Ideas I trust will have
%utlittle influence, 6r you will not k d any aggravating circumstances
to add to your present affliction but be recieved here with every consoling attention & I beg you will not suffer any reflections to corrode
your peace of mind but look forward to a happier change of fortune,
who hath been hitherto very ni gardly in her distribution of favors
towards you, I, my friend have %ad many bitter draughts in my life
time, & some serious aggrevations, yet to encounter from too much
zeal in my Countrys service, but a conscious rectitude of mind s u p
rts me beyond dispair, & hope still inspires me I beg you wdl
g q u e n t l y let me hear from you L make my mrdial & condoling respects to all your OfXcers with assurances of my perfect regard &
believe me unfainedly
[NDA. A-4.1
Extract from journal of U. 8. Brig Argcu. Lieutenant Isaac Hull, U. S. Wavy,

1

oommanding, Sunday, 6 May 1804

9

These 24 hours Commences with strong gal- with a heavy sea At past 6 sent down the main yard saw a brig [on] our lee Quarter
which we supposed to be the Sywn [NDA photoatat.]

88 NAVAL OPERATIONS, APRIESEPTEMBER 6, 1804
To Captain Edward h e b l e , U. 6. Aevy, from Secretary of the Bavy

-

NAVY
D E PMay
~ 7.1804
In consequence of the Ca ture of the Philadel hia, information of
which we did not receive t$ the month of Marc last, we have put

1

into Commission
The Frigate President The Frigate Congress The Frigate ConsteUation
The Frigate Essez
all of which will sail, we hope, in the course
of the present month.
The John Adams armed en fEu2e and carrying provisions for the
Squadron will also sail in the course of the present Month. Your letters of the 17 & 20 January I received the 5*9 instant the afford us high satisfaction and fully justify us in having reposed
suc high confidence in you, and i t is with great pleasure that I repeat
to you the assurance that your whole conduct has received the unqu&ed approbation of the President of the United States, and that
his Confidence in you remain's unabated.INDA. LB. 1794.1807.1
To the Commanding Ofecer of any U. 6. Ship of War to arrive at Syracuse from

K

the United States, from Captain Edwmd Preble, U. S. Bevy

UNITED
STATESSHIPC O & ~ ~ O ? &

off Pdermo 7th May 1804 Sir, On your arrival a t Syracuse, you will take on board as much
provisions and water as you can conveniently stow;and as soon as

your ship is ready for sea, you will sail for the coast of Tripoly to join
the Squadron in the Blockade of that place. If you have any diaatches for me, leave them with Mr Dyson our Agent. I expect to
ge in Syracuse in ten days s t farthest You will find off Tripoly the
Syren, Argus, & Scourge Brigs, with the Vizen and Enterprize Schooners. I shall stop but one day a t Syracuse before I proceed to join
the Squadron.
[LC. EPP, LB, Dm. 1803-April 1804.1
To the Commanding OfEcer of U. 13. Ship john A d a , from Captain Edward
Preble, U. 8. B f v y
U. S. SHIPCb7186ifZCtion

of Palenno 7'h May 1804
SIR On your arrival at Syracuse notwithstanding the order I left
with Mb Dyson previous to my sailing from there you will remain in
that port until my arrival which I expect will be about 10 days.

v.EPP,LB, Dec. 1803-April 1804.1

Extract from Diary of Captain Edward Preble, U. 8. Eavy, Commodore of W. 6.
Squadron in the Afeditlerranean, Monday, 7 Hay 1804

fresh breezes from the S E, round cape Galos, a t 3 we weathered
the I s l ~ n d& stood into Palermo Bay, a t 4 took in sail & brought
too off the Town, sent a boat on shore, we were a t this time a mile
east of the mole head in 35 fathoms water, a t 6 the boat returned,
Mr Gibbs our agent came oE, delivered his Letters for the Squadron
to be sent fo Syracuse by a courier, at # past 7 He returned on

W'ARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

89

shore in a shore boat Several of which came off with a supply of
Vegitables, we made sail & steered to the N N E, a t 8 took our dearture from Cape Galos bearing W B S % S 3 leagues, Bound to
Kaples, a t 9 spoke a Ragusa Brig from Ragusa bound to the Levant,
fresh breezes all night, at 10 A M saw the land of Ischia to the
N El a t noon the Island of Ischia bore N b E E, variation corrected,
distant 12 leagues
[LC. EPP, Diary, 1803-1804.1
To Captain Edward Preble, U. 6. Navy, from James Mackenzie and A. Glennie,
London, England

LONDON
8" Mby 1804
SIR We have this day recieved your favor dated Harbor of Malta
7th March last.
A few days back we reciered an imperfect account from MessT*
John Ross & C Qof Malta, that your name had been forged on Bills
upon us which we did not credit, the bills in question having come
through so very respectable a channel with original & duplicate of
letters of advice from you, which being also forwarded by a very
respectable house at Lisbon, and accompanied the same Post by the
letter of Credit from M' Robert Smith Secretary to the Na
favor, Indorsed by Mr John Gavino with a date a t Gibr tar "Our
17th
Sepr 1803, all these regular circumstances combining, and having
never been favored with a letter from you, nor your Signature from
the Secretary of the Navy, as in former Instances, we could not
suspect that any forgery had been committed against you, and
therefore very readily accepted your bills, being desirous of aying
the respect due to the Signature of any Officer placed in so &gh a
station by the Government of the United States: If you had favored
us with a few lines inclosing the Secretary's letter of Credit in your
favor, and saying from the circumstance you now communicate, of
having brought specie out with you, that you would hare no occasion,
to make use of thc Credit for some time, i t would have prevented
the fraud b enabling us to detect it in the first Instance: As the
letters of a vice accompanied by the Secretary's letter of Credit in
our favor came forward through such regular channells, and the
sills were all presented by respectable houses we had no reason,
whatever, for suspicion, and therefore could not detect it
We regret very much that such a fraud should have been committed on you and the Government of the United States, and shall
thing in our power to trace it back to the Origin if possible:
do
t e present appearance of the matter, as far as we can judge
From
of it, the act must have been committed by some person who had
access to know that you had the Secretary's letter of Credit on us
and the time it was forwarded to us - We therefore suspect some
erson about yourself or in Mr Gavino's Office, or about him h a t is most to be lamented, that so much time has been lost in
finding out the fraud, that the money will be all dissipated The
circumstance of our not knowing an person of the name of Laurent
Brown, we coul not know here.
e are not even now informed of
the name of your Purser or Secretary, and several Bills have been
drawn upon us by the Commanders of United States Ships of War
payable to their Pursers & A GLENNIE
S i e d J A ~MACKENZIE

9'"

~7

eveT

J'

[LC. EPP, LB, April-Nov. 1804.1

d

90 ATAVAL OPERATIONS, APRILSEPTEMBER 6, 1804
Ertract from Diary of Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Hsvy, Commodore of U. 6.
Squadron in the Mediterranean, Wednesday, 9 May 1804
Calm at 1 P M cl light breeze from W S W, stood in for Naples

Bay passed between the Islands of Ischia & Capri, at 7 P M anchored
one mile from the City of Naples in 25 fathoms water muddy Bottom
the light house bearing N 5 W one mile, Fort Sr E h a N W B N the
north part of Capri Island S S FF' % W, 8 leagues, calm all night in
the morning the health Officer, and American Consul visited the
ship, obtained Pratick, at 10 A M went on shore, I waited on General
Acton the Neapolitan prime minister, and was favorably received, [LC. EPP, Diary, 1803-1804.1
Extract from journal of Midshipman F. Cornelius deKrafft, U. 6. Ravy, in U. 6.
Brig S i m of IS guns. Lieutenant Charles Stewart, U. 6. Navy, commanding,
Wednesday, 9 May 1804

% past 3 lowe down the cutter, bach'd the main topsail Lieu*
Stewart went on shore a t Lampadoza. At 5 Lt Stewart return'd,
run up the cutter fill'd away &. boarded fore tack At )ipast 7 the
E. end of Lampadoza bore N by E 3 miles. - A t % past 8 squar'd
the yards. At 9 sounded in 35 fathoms, grey sand & coral Latt: Obs 35' 6' K.
[NDA.]

[lo May 18041
To Sir John Acton, Prime Minister of State, The Two Sicilies, from Captah Edwsrd
PrebIe. U. S. Navy

To His Excellency General ACTON
His Sicilian Majesty's Minister o State
I t being mutually the Interest o His Sicilian Majesty and the
United States of America that the Corsairs of the Bashaw of Tri ol
m d the Sea Port T o m a t which they we fitted out, and by w 'c
they are protected should be destro ed. I am induced in behalf of
my Govenment, to request Your Acellency to grsnt me a supply
from some of His Ma'esty's Ports in Sicily of eight Gun and two
ort tar- oats prepared for Sea with a sfficient stock of Powder,
Shot Shells, Muskets Sabres &c* If those Boats could be loaned to
the U S: to be returned in as good order as when received; or in case
of their loss, to be paid for agreeable to a just estimation of their
Value, or replaced with new ones to be built for thst purpose, it would
be agreeable to us, as such Boats could not be navigated to the United
States We are also in want of eight long Brsss Cannon 24 or 32
pounders with Ship Carriages for two Vessels to act as floati
teries to go into the Harbour of Tripoly with the Gun-Boats, an take
bata position so near the shore that the Guns from the S p o l i n e Batteries cannot be brought to bear on them, but from whence the will
be able effectually to destroy the Bashaw's Castle, and also the $own.
Those Vessels and Gun-Boats wiLT enable us to enter the Harbour of
Bengaza and totally destroy that Town; the destruction of which, is
of importance, as the Bashaw intends building and equipping hie
hght Cruisers a t that place whilst Trip01 is blockaded. They will
likewise enable us to destroy Derna, and his other Sea Port Towns.
As the season is now arriving when Gun Boats can be employed to
most sdvmtage - Your Excellency's order for a prompt aupply of

f

&E

3

d

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

91

the above requisition will insure to His Sicilian M a j ~ t yand Your
Excellency the lasting gratitude of the U. S.

U S. S Constitution - NAPLEB
BAY- 10th May, 1804.
[LC. EPP, LB, Dec. 1803-April 1804.1
Extract from journal of U. S. Brig Argus. Lieutenant Isaac Hull, U. 6. Xavy,
commanding, Thursday, 10 May 1804

This day begins with light breezes and Pleasant Weather tacked
and Wore ship as Necessary the town of Tripoli bore SE b S . distance
7 miles a t 8 light breezes sounded in 75 fathoms Water At midnight light airs saw a light on shore sounded in 80 fathoms
Water Current setting W b N about 3 fathoms per hour set and took
in Sail Occasionally At Meridian light airs and Clear Weather Variously empe
[NDA photostat.]
Extract from Diary of Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Navy, Commodore of U. S.
Squadron in the Mediterranean, Thursday, 10 May 1804

ordered fresh Beef for the ships company while in port, I dined
with the prime minister, and presented him with an application in
writing for the loan of eight Gun boats, two bomb Vessels and eight
brass guns, with amunition &c, - which he promised to lay before the
King, and give me an answer as soon as possible, - at ji past 8 P M
on going to the mole to return on board, I found the Barge & Pinnace
there, the Pinnace was waiting for Lieut' Gordon & several other
Officers who had been ordered to return on board a t sun down, two
of her men had deserted after that time in the absence of the Midshi man,Mr. Page who had charge of her and who contrary to orders
ha left the boat, and allowed the people to go on shore, for which I
ordered him under an arrest to be tried by a court Martial, -

cf

[LC. EPP, Diary, 1803-1804.1

Extract from log book kept .by Sailing Master Nathaniel Haraden, U. S. Navy,

on board U, S. Fr~gateConstitufton. Thursday, 10 May 1804
Light breezes from the S W. At single Anchor in Naples bay Shi s company employed as Necessary Sail Makers employed in
ma ing a new sett of white hammock cloths - Liberty is granted
to the Officers on shore - Towards Evening calm - Hove up &
down to keep a clear Anchor Mustered ships company a t 'watch & Watch - Calm during the
night A. M. recieved 525 pounds fresh Beef - Ships company employed
shifting the fore top gall$ rigging setting up the bobstays & cleaning
shi - Carpenters repairing the Bill boards. furg! report 4 Sick, 7 Conveqt At 10. A. M. moderate breezes from S W - Veered to 60 fath*
[LC. EPP,Log Comtittction, 1803-1804.)

k"

92 NAVAL OPERATIONS, APRIL-SEPTEMBER 6, 1804
To Captain John Badgers, U. S. Bavy, commanding U. 8. Prigate Coryur. Hampton
Boads, Va., from Midshipman Johnston Blakely, U. 6. Navy

NORFOLK
llt@
May 1804.
SIR The Ship being still deficient in two American Ensigns which

the Agent says can be made here, you will be pleased to say if they
shall be procur'd
The whole morning has been spent in endeavors to ship men for the
Congress I am sorry to add without success. I have spoken to
every landlord of this place who have promised to make use of all
their exertions to procure them. The oak plank and scantling you
were pIeased to order will be sent to the ship tomorrow.
F.D.Roosevelt Col.]
To Stephen Cathaen, Jr., U. S. CommerciaI Agent, Earseilles, Rance, from
James Leander Cathcart, Leghorn

LEGHORN
May 11tB 1804 D ~ S I ROn my return from Naples I was honor'd with your esteem'd

COPY

favors of the 2gth of March & 6tQ& 20t@of April with their enclosures
a copy of the parts you desire shall be forwarded to the Departrnant
of State & to Commodore Preble by the h t conveyance My motive for going to Naples was in consequence of a request
from Comodore Preble to that purpose in order to roceed before
Tripoly with him he having promised to be a t Nap as on the 30t4
of March but being prevented by the threats of the Bey of Tunis he
was obliged to concentrate his little force & proceed before that place
since said period I have received no farther information from him. The Government of Na les has sent to Sea two large Frigates &
four corvettes to guard t eir coast $ mmoy the Tunisians shodd
they put to Ses this summer, a Seventy four gun ship is a fiting out
with all expedition & will be mann'd with the crews of the corvetts
which are recalled for that purpose the Seventy four & two large
Fri ates will be kept continually a t Sea: So that if the Tunitians do
dec are war against us this force will be of infinite Service to us untiU
a reinforcement arrives from the United States I have likewise procured from the Government of Naples the loan of four Bombardes &
four large Gun boats Artillery Mortars Bombs m u n i t . i o n & every
apparaties compleat. the Boats are ready for sea at Messina $ s n
order was forwuded to the Count Tourne or in his absence to the
governor of Messina to deliver them to Commodore Preble upon
dexnand before I left Naples, & to render him every service in ?si
power thus you are inform1$ that my Journey to Naples was not all
together unproductive of good effects as i t will prevent Ms Livingston
& yourself from being put to any inconvenience in consequence of the
Comodores or my letters on the subject of procuring Gun & Mortar
Boats artillery kc. & I request you to forward a Copy of tbis letter to
him & to render him by respects. - The destroying of the Philad*
reflects honor on Commodore Preble & the brave men that put his
orders into execution a few more such gallant actions will establish
our character in this Sea, & render the mediation of any government
unecessary.
I am ha py to Inform you that I have received permission to return
to the U, t a b s & request you to inform me if in your port there is

f'

.E

!i

$

93

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

any vessels bound to Baltimore with accomodations calculated for a
family c% if there are when they will be ready to Sail
True Copies MARSEILLES
the %$t@ May 1804
STEPHEN
CATHALAN
Junr
[NA. SDA. CL, Marseilles, Vol. 2, March 18WNov. 1827.1

[I1 May 18041
T o Midshipmen Octavins A. Page, U. 6. Navy, from Captain Edward Preble,
U. S. Navy

SIR YOU ill consider yourself under arrest for neglect of duty in
suffering two men to desert from a Boat under your charge when on
shore a t Naples last evening - You are therefore to answer for
your conduct before a Court Martial
U. S. SHIPCmtitution
Naples bay - May 11 th 1804
[LC. EPP, Order Book, May 1803-June 1805.1
T o Secretory of State from George Davis, U. S. Charge d'Affaires, Tunis

N Q14.
TUNIS
May l i t @1804.
SIR, The letter you did me the honor to write on the 26" December
1803 - was handed me, with its enclosures, on the evening of the 24*@
ultimo by Rich' O'Brien Es% who came here in the U. S. Schooner
Enterprize, at the request of t e Consul Gen! Lear, in order "to confer
with me, and ascertain the precise expectations of the Bay of Tunis,
and close our affairs with this Regency if it could be done on admissible terms" - (N 1, contains copies of Mr OBrien's communications to me.)
The President's letter was delivered to the Bey on the morning of
the 27@, when Mr O'Brien was presented; not as one authorized, to
enter into any negociation with His Excellency; but as the ex-Consul
of the U. S. for Algiers; who offer'd this mark of respect, to Hamouda
Bsshaw Bey of Tunis. - I have the honor to enclose you N Q 2,
all that transpired during Mr O'Brien's stay; and as worded by
himself. - On the evening of the 2 9 ' h a s sent for, by the Commercial Agent, who in the course of conversation, expatiated largely
on the adoantage8 resulting from our Peace with this Regency - and
contrasting it with the insignificancy of the offers made for its retention - These were answered by thewing, that the advantages were
mutual; and that his Master, had a greater commercial intorest, in
the preservation of the Peace with the U. S., than Mine;as we should
be enabled, to continue our Commerce in those Seas, in case of a war,
while all his Ports, would be placed, in the Situation that Tripoli now
is - he gave me many assurances, of his friendly influence, (which
has been ezercised on a former occaeion), and concluded with observing
that nothin would be done unless my visits were made alone Altha' His h
l was much the friend of Mr OB., and sensible of his
attention, he did not, wish him (MrOBv)to be informed of the manner
Affairs were transacted in his Regency. - Commodore Preble,
arrived on the even& of the In* h s t . , and Sailed with Mr OB. the
following afternoon - On the 34 visited the Sapatapa, a t the Cornmercial Agents, where the discussion was
renewed
the S a p
atepa, commenoed with obserPing that,
Master, had charged
Q

&*

-

94 NAVAL OPERATIONS, APRIL-SEPTEMBER 6 , 1804
"him to say, and me to make known to my Govt that Hamozlda Bashaw,
"was not a medicad, no^ men in distress - that he did not ask alms "and considered the offers made him, rather as an indignity than
"a mark of our friendship - With respect to the President's letter,

"which had been read, i t was most friendly and Satisfactory - he
"stated, that his Master expected we would observe the rule, of alI
"Christian Nations, towards him, that his political existence, not
"only urged him to repeat the request; but would force him to insist
"on a compliance with the Demand, (to wit) of sending a Regalia of
"Naval Stores, eve two years - that we had made too great a
"difference between%m and the Dey of Algiers; he w a s not injerior,
"and would be treated with the same respect - his Master asked no
"more than we gave there, and would receive no less - that if (as
"had been insinuated) we felt a disposition to change the System of
"Barbary; we had only to continue the war with Tripoli, and with"hold our Regalia from Algiers, and nothing would be expected from
"his Master." - Much was said by me, on our strict and religious
observance to Treaties; and which was offer'd as the sole reason for
having sent any Naval Stores to Algiers - he simply answered,
whatever may be the motives; the effect, with respect to my Master,
is still the same I then repeated, the arguments before stated, and concluded with
assuring him, that the expectations of the Bey, were most vain - that
the U. States, would never send a Cargo of Naval Stores, to the Regency of Tunis, if war should be the consequence. - On the 6'"
was sent for by the Sapatapa, when the same conversation was
repeated ;but with less warmth on his part - he thus concluded -"a
"handsome consular Regalia will certainly be sent to the Prime Min'lister & Sapatapa - in addition to which something is expected for
"Sidi Jussuph, the friend and advocate of Pour Govt; a Biennial
"Present in naval Stores to commence from this date, or their Value in
"Cash, agreable to what, they can be procured for in Trieste - on
"these terms alone, we shall continue long, and lasting Friends" - I
informed him that I would write - altho' I was well satisfied my Master, would never consent to any farther Sacrifices, than had been
already offered The Bey, and his Ministers are too much occupied a t this moment,
with the movements of the Grand Signior, and Emperor of Russia,
(from whom they have long expected an unpleasant visit) to determine
immediately on our Affairs - They also wait the result of our measures now in rosecution against Tripoli - And rest assured Sir, unless
a National &aater,
be established on the Ruins of that Pirate, we
shall never remain in Security with this. - I send a Copy of this
Dispatch by an express, to the Consul Geni Lear, whose advise on
this, and every other occasion, will guide my Conduct.
The Tunisien Property is paid for to the amount of four thousand
Six hundred & twenty three Dollars, including all demands for the
Charter of a Vessel to Malts, Demurage t c &c - The Demoiselle
Anne Porcile, has received her tiskara, the expencea of which I have
been compell'd to pay by order of the Bey - Altho' the Consulate
of the U. States a t this Regenc ,is placed far beneath that of an other
Nation - I should feel no re uctance; but rather a sensible p easure
by a prompt compliance with our orders, relative to the dismission
of the Secretary; was I not weiconvinoed i t would prove an injury to

9

7

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

95

the interest of m Country - there is a t all times, a great necessity
for a Confidenti Person, who is acquainted with the 1
-theI
Country, but under existing circumstances, an indispensa le oneOf
have therefore with the advice and consent of Commodore F'reble,
retained him until1 your farther orders; NQ3, is his letter on the
Subject -

2

Te8

[NYHS. Geo. Davis LB, Vol. 1.1
Extract from journal of U. S. Brig Argus. Lieutenant Isaac Hull, U. 8. Navy,
commanding, Friday, 11 May 1804

+

a t 7 the town of Tripoli bore S E E a t 8 spoke the U, S Schooner
Vixen Cap! Smith came on board sounded in 35 fathoms fine white
sand
a t 10 A M 3 strange sail in sight [NDA photostat.]
Extract from journal of Midshipman F. Cornelius deKrafft, U. 6. Navy, in U. 8.
Brig Siren of 18 guns, Lieutenant Charles Stewart, U. 6, Navy, commanding,
Friday, 11 May 1804

At 5 from the N W. At 6 saw 2 sail of[fJ the Starb'J bow, turn'd
the reefs out of the topsails, set top gall! sails, royals, stay sails, steering
sails, jib & flying jib, courses & after main sail in chace of the sail on
our larbg bow. At pas[t] 6 the chase prop4 to be one of the squadron,
squar'd the yards, took in square & after main sails, jib, sta
steering sails, in chase of a bng on our lee beam. At past 8 oisted
out the barge. Lt Ctlldwell went in her with the boats crew & 4
marines arm'd in chace of the above bri . At 9 discovq her to be the
U. S. Brig Scourge. 4 past 9 took in roy afs & made signal for the barge
to return. At 10 she return'd Latt 33' 24' N.

+

z

+

[NDA.]
To Secretary of the Navy from Captain John Bodgers, U. 8. Navy

U. S. FRIGATE
Congress
Navy Yard May 12. 1804
SIR I have this day rec'd (by your directions) extract of a Letter
from James Sim[p]son Esq:, to the Secretary of State, stating complaints of Passengers, and Araiz or Cap1 Omar of the Tri oline Ship
Meshouda, of losses sustain'd by them while in my custo y, without
mentioning any particulars, which can give me the least clue to what
he means; - After I consented to give up the M e s h d z to the
Emperor, I had the precaution (in Gibralta Bay) to send for the American & Moorish Consuls, and in their presence required the &emation
of both the Tripoline & Moorish Ca tr, relating to the treatment they
received on board the John Adams wing their Ca tivity; when these
people declared in the presence of both the Consufs, that their treatment was such, in every respect, as to reflect honor on the American
Nation. - This being confess'd, to convince them more plainly of
American generosity, to people with whoom they had but a few hours
before, been a t War, I made the Mishowla a present of a new Cable,
to prevent her being wrick'd, after she was out of my possession. The l'ripoline & Moorish Captv lived in the Gun Room of the John

B

I

96 NAVAL OPERATIONS, APRIL-SEPTEMBER 6, 1804
Adam, with the Lieutenants, and so far from sufferinga loss by their
Captivity; were supplied frequently with Clothes by the Gentlemen
with whoom they lived.(LC.

JRP, Letters & Orders, Book A, 1804-1805.1

To Captain Edward Preble, U.S. Navy, from George Davis, U.8. Charge dlAffaaires,

Tunis

TUNISMay l R t @1804
SIR I have the honor to enclose, for your information an extract,
from my present dispatch to the Honble The Secretary of State; by
which you will learn, the result of our negotiation with this Regency recent letters from Constantinople, having advised his Excellency the
Bey; that the Fleet of the Grand Signior is ordered to Sea, with all
possible expedition - and a Russian Force being daily expected in
those Seas; withdraws for the moment his attention from us - he has
long expected, an unpleasant visit from these quarters - and altho
the position of Europe, and probable movements of France, assign
lausible reasons for these Armaments - His Excellency wishes to
fully prepared, for an immediate nrangement, of the greater evil;
and take us at his leisure - There is dso a strong motive, wh His
Excellency, should at this time, be indecisive, in treating witi the
U. States - he waits the resu2t of your summer campaign, against
Tripoli - and on your success there; be assured Sir depends our
future respectability here - A National character is yet to be established, with these States - it must be dreadful to Barbary - or, we
shall ever, bow the neck, and receive the tributary yoke, of half a
dozen Pirates Your correct knowledge of the enemies position, and pro
manner of prosecuting the war; augurs Laurels, for yourself an new
dignities for your Country - Wishing you that success, which your
well digested plans, allows us to hope for
GEORGE
DAVIS
[LC. EPP,Vol. 11, April-June 1804.1

ci'O=d

Extract from journal of U. 6. Brig Argus, Lieutenant Isaac Hull, U. S. Bavy,
commanding, Saturday, 12 May 1804

all sail set in Chace st 3 P M hove to and spoke the U, S, Brig
Syren with Scourge and Enterpri~ Cap' Hull went on board the
Syren At sundown Tripoli bore S W b W j4 W distance 7 or 8 Miles
sounded in 48 fathoms water Bottom fine Yellow sand and Shells
tacked Occasionally
At Meridian fine Weather all the Squadron in Sight Tripoli
bearing S jl E
NDA photoetaf.I
Extrsct from Diug of Captain Edward Preble, U. 8. Navy, Commodore of U. 8.
Squadron m the Xed~terranean,Saturday, IB May 1804

moderate breezes and pleasant weather,

- Mr

Matthews our

mnaul applied to me to receive 14 Balm & Boxes of clothing on board
to be conveyed to Tripoli on account of James h d e r Cathcart
Esqr for fhe uee of the Prisoners captured in the P h W p h i a which
were m r d i q g l y taken on Board, [LC.

EPP, Diary, 1808-1W1

97

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

Extract from journal of Wdshipman F. Cornelius degrafft, U. S. Ravy, in U. S.
Brig Siren of 18 guns, Lieutenant Charles Stewart, U. S. Ravy, commending,
Saturday, 1%May 1804

K past 2 spoke the Argus Lt Hull the Scourge Lt Dent, the Vixen
Lt Smith, the LieutP8came on board. At [space] spoke the Ente~prize
L+Decatur came on b'J - At 6 finishld blacking the bends, hoisted in
the boats & stow'd them. At 7 the Commanders return'd on board
their respective vessels. Tripoli bore South 3 leagues.
Midnight clear & pleast all the squadron in sight * * *
Latt: Obs: 33O 6' N.
[NDA.]

[13 May 18043
To Captain Edward Preble, U. 8. navy, from Archibald McMillan

HONORD
SIR I presume the nature of my address, will ic some
measure plead my apology for the Liberty I t&e in thus troubling
you Being Sir, a native of America & a number of Years from that
Country and being anxious to return, I most humbly entreat you if
possible, Sir, to endeavor to extricate me from this Service, on my
entering - into that of the united States' - I never received any
entering Money in the British. Service, as I was a prest-man - and
that there is several men who knows me on board your Ship - that
knows all my family & connections and the State that I am h m , &
the small Estate of my own, in the Town of Salem - the names are
M' Steel Sail-Maker; - Glover - Osborne - Camel - & Downs ARCH@
M~MILLAN
On Board H: M: S: Kent
Naples Bay, May IS, 1804.
[LC. EPP, Vol. 11, April-June 1804.1
To Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Xavy, from Sir John Acton, Prime Minister of
State. The Two Sicilies

NAPLESlSth May 1804
Having had the Pleasure to place under the eyes of the King my
Sovereign Your Excellency's favor of the 10 Int with which you have
been pleased to make known to me the Determinations of the Government of the United States of America which you are charged with
against the Regency of Tripoli and our Desire to have for this Purpose
Eight Gun Boats and Two bomb essels, with a discreet Quantity of
Warlike ammunitions, and more over Eight brass Guns, of 24 or 32
Pounds Metal, with their Tackle or Carriages, So as to Serve for
floating Batteries; I have the Satisfaction of being able to assure our
Excellency, that his Majesty, alwa s favorably inclined towards t ose
States with which He is in Frien ship, embraces very willingly this
Opportunity of favoring the Government of the United States of
America, by seconding its Operations against the Common Enemies.
And he has in consequence given Orders that there be placed a t your
Disposal the Vessels, Tackle & Ammunition which you ask for, and
tJuGt under the Title of a friendly Loan; reducing only to Six, the
Number of the Gun boats, in case it should not be otherwise feasible.
I am at the same time desirous of making known to your Excellency

q

J'

K

98 NAVAL OPERATIONS, APRIL-SEPTEMBER 6, 1804
that You may understand direct relative to this Affair, with the
Commander of the Royal Navy, Brigadier Count di Thurn to whom
the necessary Orders have been given, and in the meantime I have
the Honor to Subscribe Myself &q
Signed GIOVANNI
ACTON
[LC. EPP, Vol. 11, April-June 1804.1
Extract from log book of U. 8. Brig Argus. 18 Guns, kept by Sailing Master Samuel
B. Brooke, U. S. Navy, Lieutenant Isaac Hull, U. S. Navy, commanding, Sunday,
IS May 1804

These 24 hours Commence with mod.? and Clear Weather standing
in for Tripoli a t 4 P M, close in with the town fired 2, 18 pound shot
a t it which done no damage immediately all the batterys were open'de
on us but without effect the Syren Enterprize and Vizen firing a t a
s m d battery West of Tripoli &st? about 1 Ieague a Number of Gunboats came out to the reef firing at us at sunset the town bore SEg E,
sounded in 35 P
q fine White sand lay too At 10 P M filled away under em sail to the NW, At 2 AM wore
ship a t sunrise Tripoli bore S E b S % distj 3 leagues the other Cruizers
in sight sent Henry Fleck, John Akerman, Rob$ Barney, Sam! Blyth
& James Roberts seamen and Pat. Lynch and WillmBonny marines
on board the Scourge At Meridian Pleasent Weather empd as Necessary -

i!

[LC. EPP, Argus, 1804.1
Extract from journal of U. S. Brig Argus. Lieutenant Isaac Hull, U. S. Bavy,
commanding, Sunday, IS May 1804

These 24 hours Commence with moderate Clear Weather standing
in for Tripoli at 4 P, M, being Close in with the town fired 2 Eighteen
Pound Shot which did no damage Immediately the Batterys were
all open'd on us but without effect, the Squadron firing a t a small
Battery to the Westward of Tripoli fresh breezes at 10 AM sent Henry
Fleck, John Akerman, Robert Barny, Sam1 Blyth, and James Roberts
Seams Pats Lynch & Wm Bonny Marc on board the U, S, Brig
Swurge
[NDA photostat.]
Extract from Diary of Captain Edward Preble, 0.6. Bavy, Commodore of U. 8.
Squadron in the Mediterranean, Sunday, IS May 1804

pleasant weather, - Received a letter from General Acton the
pnme minister with an order from the King to su ply me with six
cannon for floatin Batteries with Powder & shott, or them, six Gun
Boats & two Born Vessels, armed & equipped with military & Naval
Stores to operate against Tripoly the order expressed that this sup ly
was to be considered as a fnendy loan from the Kmg of the ~ i c g e s
to the United States, entered 5 seamen who said they were Americans
$ did not belong to any ship
[LC. EPP, Diary, 1803-1804.1

%

P

Ertmct from journal of Midshipman F. Cornelius deXrafft, U. 8. Navy, in U. 8.
Brig Sirm of 18 guns, Lieutenant Charles Stewart, U. 8. Bavy, commanding,
Sunday, IS May 1804

At 4 took in after main sail & stood in for the small fort to the

Westward of Tripoli At 5 past fore commenced s heavy fire on the

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

99

fort, which they return'd assisted by a small battery on the beach Same time the remainder of the squadron commenc'd a fire on the
town, immediately after 10 gun boats stood out & attacked them
assisted by the batteries of the Town - At 5 hove about & made all
sail to attack the gun boats - j4 past 5 the gun boats hove about &
stood in for the town took in sail & bore down for the squadron. At
ast 7 hove too Lt Stewart went on b@the Enterprize. 11 he return'd
d away & made sail - Midnight light airs & pleas* At 4 wore
to the S. W. 7 made all sail in chace of 2 sail of[fj our lee bow At 8
the chace prov@to be the Ar us & Enterprize - At 10 took in sad Meridian fresh breezes & p east carried away the fore & sprung the
main top gall* masts & yards, three men from the V h & Enterprize
assisting the carpenter & Armourer. Latt: Obs: 33" 8' N.

&

!i

[NDA.]
To Captain Samuel Barron, U. 8. Navy, Washington, D. C., from Secretary of the
Ravy

NAVYDEPM!
May 14,1804 I n all cases where Apprentices are entered for the Navy Service
and claimed by their Masters, they must be given up. If they should
have any of the Advances made them by the Public, i t must be
delivered up to the Recruiting Officer. Be pleased to give directions
accordingly.
[NDA. OSW, Vol. 6, 1802-1805.1
To Captain Edward Preble, U. 6. Navy, from James Leader Cathcart, Leghorn

LEGHORN
May Idt+ 1804.

D? SIR. By my letters of the 17th 22"@& 24'P UltQ& enclosures

will be inform'd of my opperations a t Naples copys of the whole
fdueouforwarded
to you by MI Spence which I hope you will receive in
season. -

A few days after my arrival a t Leghorn I receiv'd leave from the
President to return to the United States which I intend to benefit by
immediately & again beg leave to renew m request that you would
if compatible with the service permit one o our small vessels to convey myself & family to Gibraltar this request includes more than my
personal safety for should I be captured, the United States in honor
would be bound to redeem me if you cannot grant my request I must
run the risk as I have been so little the favorite of Mammon since I
have been in the Service that I can't stay here above six or eight weeks
without oing in debt which I dont contemplate. I sho d be happy to hear from you as soon as possible & remain
very respectfully. [LC. EPP,Vol. 11, April-June 1804.1

9

3

[14 May 18041
To Sir John Acton, Prime Minister of State, The Two Sicilies, from Captain
Edward Preble, U. 8. Blavy

His Excellency General ACTON
His Sicilucn Majesty's Minister of Rate &c*
I n addition to what I had the honor to represent to your Excellency
a few days since relative to the extraordinary Quarantme to which the

100 NAVAL OPERATIONS. APRIL-SEPTEMBER 6 . 180L
vessels of the United States are subjected in this Port, I herewith
take the liberty agreeable to your Excellency's permission to transmit
to you the memorandum enclosed [*] - setting forth a precise statement of facts, and the disadvantages which result from it to the commerce of the United States with this Country fully persuaded of the
friend1 disposition of Your Excellency towards the Government of
the U and of pour inclination to favour its interest. I beg leave to
request that you will be pleased to give the matter its just consideration, and to cause such orders to be given as will tend to do away
the grievance in question; and that the American Vessels may be as
favorably rec* in this port as they are in the other ports of the Mediterranean. If your Excellency can consistently allow me to make
an early report to my Government of the successful issue of this
application, I should consider i t as a peculiar favour, and be happ
in remembering i t with those sentiments of gratitude with whic
I have the honor to subscribe myself
14th MAY1804

8.

E

[*To be found in below-mentioned source, on pp 234-236.1
[LC. EPP, LB, Dee. 1803-April 1804.1
Extract from log book of U. S. Brig Argus. 18 Gnns, kept by Sailing Master Samuel
B. Brooke, U. 5. Navy, Lieutenant Isaac Hull, U. S. Navy, commanding,
Monday, 14 Yay 1804

This day begins with light breezes and Pleasant Weather the

Enterprize in C Q standing in for Tripoli at 2 made sail the Schooner
Astern at 4 old Tripoli bore E % S distt 3 or 4 leagues a t 5 the
Enterprize N Q361 & 434 saw 5 sail at anchor under the land sent a
boat on board the Enterprize the land bore south distt 3 leagues
Late Obs* 33' 05' N.
[LC. EPP, Argus, 1804.1
Extract from journal of U. S. Brig Argw. Lieutenant Isaac Hull, U. 6. Bavy,
commanding, Monday, 14 May 1804

First part of these 24 hours pleasant Weather Enter n'ze in Comstanding in for Tripoli a t 4 old Tripoli bore E j4 Diste 3 or 4
"any
Miles a t 5 the Enterprize made the Sigi 361 and 434 saw 5 small sail
a t anchor under the land Middle part fresh Breezes and Cloudy Standing off Shore sound4
frequently as per log and tacked when Necessary a t % past 9 AM
Captain Decatur Came on board sent a Kedge anchor and hauser
on Board the Enterprize
At Meridian pleasant Weather the Enterprize in Cq Variously
Emps

Q

[NDA photostat.]
Extract from Diary of Captain Edward Preble, U. 8. Navy, Commodore of 0.8.
Squadron in the Mediterranean, Monday, 14 May 1804

Pleasant weather received an order from the Prime Minister on
to
Count de Thurn commander in cheif of the Neapolitan Na
deliver me six peices of 24 pound Cannon with carriages B9 comyeat
and a quantity of Match Rope, Powder, Ball & grape shott su cieni
for one hundred rounds to each Gun, and likewise an order for Six

fd'

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

101

Gun Boats & two Bomb Vessels compleatly fitted with Guns, Mortars,
Powder, Shott, Shells &c to be delivered a t Massina, the whole to be
considered as a friendly loan from the King of Naples to the United
States for the reduction of Tripoly
[LC. EPP, Diary, 1803-1804.1
Extract from journal of Midshipman F. Cornelius deKrafft, U. 6. Ravy, in U. 6.
Brig Siren of 18 Guns, Lieutenant Charles Stewart, U. 6. Navy, commanding,
Monday, 14 May 1804

j4 past 3 sent the cutter on board the Vixen with a Kedge Anchor kc.
At 4 took in fore sail & fore top mast stay sail, hoisted out the barge.
sent the boats crew & 4 marines well arm'd in Co: with the Vixens
boats on board the Vixen the Cap3 went in the barge ashore with
the Vixen's 20 miles to the Eastwa of Tripoli in order to plunder, a
few minutes Previous to their landing the turks on shore saluted
them with a few musket-shot, which was return'd by the boats &
the turks were obliged to retreat in the bushes. At 7 finding the
Inhabitants gathering very numerous & night approaching thought i t
most prudent to return to the boats & return on board. At 10 the
barge return'd fill'd away & stood to the Nd The Scourge in Co.
[NDA.]

[15 May 18041
Clothing for U. 6. Prisoners in Tripoli
INVOICE O F CLOATHINO PREPARED FOR TRIPOLY

KCN - N Q1 @ 3 - - - - - - - - - 4 - 7- - - - - - - - - 8 - 9- - - - - - - - - 10- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

1

628 Shirts
300 cloth Jackets & Trowsers 9 Bales
300 duck
DQ
DQ
300 PI Shoes - a box

11-------------12 - 13 - - - - - - - - - - 320
300 ailors
DQ Hats
- a box
- 2 boxes
14- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Officers Cloathng 2 DQ.
NAPLESMay 16" 1804

gr

Recievctd on board the U. S. Ship Constitution (from John Matthiew
Esquire U. S. Consul at Naples fourteen bales, in boxes, of cloathing,
on acct & risk of JuQL. Cathcart Es to be delivered to Keith Spence,
purser of the late U. S. Frigate hdadelphia, in Tripoly, for the
American Officers & Crew Prisoners there, if willing to recieve them,
If not, to be delivered to WmHiggins Esqr U. S. Naval Agmt in Mdta
at the disposition of the said Ja* L Cathcart Signed EDWQ
PREBLE
[LC. EPP, Order Book, May 1803June 1805.1

F

To James Leander Cathcart, Leghorn, from Captain Edward h e b l e , U. S. Navy

UNITEDSTATESSHIP Constitution
Naples Bay 15'QMay 1804.
SIR. I arrived here the 7tQinsnt & have not been able to effect any
thing with this Government until this day, notwithstanding promises,
I found that nothing could be done without a memorial to the King,
which I accordingly sent in, & have at length obtained what I asked for,

102 NAVAL OPERATIONS, APRILSEPTEMBER 6, 1804
& shall leave this tomorrow. I regret that you had left here previous
to my arrival, & that you did not leave me a few lines respecting the
clotfung. Mr Spence the Purser of the late Frigate Philadelphia has
been supplied by me with six months clothing for all the crew of that
shi and the O£&cers have been furnished with what the wanted.
I
however endeavour to prevail on them to take rom your
supply what they may want in future; but as they must pay for what
they receive, i t will depend on the price whether the OfEcers will
receive any of the clothing provided for them: n o w can be done
until an Invoice is furnished. It will be well to write to Mr Higgins and authorise him to dispose
of the clothing to the Pursers of the Squadron, who will readily purchase it, if i t is laid in as reasonably as they can procure i t a t Malta.
I shall do all in my power that it may be expended in the Squadron. Mr OBrien is with me; we have been a t Tunis, & I beleive we are
in no danger of a War with that Regenc a t present. - Doctor Davis
is confirmed by our government & his a l a q &c establish'd the same
as the former Consul. I am in momentary expectation of the arrival
of three fngatesfrom the United States, & with the assistance of the
gun & mortar boats I hope to be able to give a good account of our
a$sirs with Tripoly before the summer closes. I understand you left
some money here a t my disposal but ras you have left me no advice
respecting the business, I cannot with propriety take it. [NA. SDA. CL,Tripoli, Yol. 2, 1801-1805.1

3

gal

B

To Bobert B. Livingston, U. 6. Minister

to Paris, France, from Csptoin Edward
Preble, U. S. Navy

UNITED
STATESSHIP C01EStitutio-n
Naples Bay May 16th 1804.
SIR, Since last I had the honor to write ou, I have again visited
Tripoly, and I find nothing can be done wit that Regency without a
sum of money which it would be mortifying and disgraceful to the
United States to pay. I have therefore come here to obtain the loan
of some Gun Boats and Bomb Vessels which owing to the situation of
the harbour of Tripoly are absolutely necessary to enable me to bring
the Bashaw of Tripoly to our own terms. His Sicilian Majesty sensible
that we are fi hting his battles as well as our own, has readily granted
me whatever have required, and I sail immediately to commence my
operations. On my way here I touched a t Tunis, and from the
information I recq from our Consular Agent, I believe the Bey will
consider it more for his interest to keep in peace with us, than to
declare War, whilst we have a Squadron in these Seas, and I am now
c o d d e n t that we have nothing to fear from
The Barbary Powers are waiting the issue of
and will be governed by i t in their conduct
be such as to make them fear and respect us. No
uadron has yet anived.
Excellency ROB^ R: LIVINGSTON
Minister Plenipolentiarg Jrona
th.e United State6 of America
To th+?French Republic, Paria
ILC. EPP, LB,Dec. 1803-April 1804.1

i

f

%

WARS WITH BARBRRY POWERS

103

To Secretary of the Navy from Captain Edward Preble, U. S, Navy

U S. SHIP Cmtitzcth
Naples Bay May 16" 1804
SIR, I was in Tunis Bay a few days since where Mr OBrien again
joined me. I enclose for your information a detail (29 April 18041 of
what passed between him, Mr Davis, and the Bey. His Highness is
dissatisfied with our refusing to give him a Frigate, and pretends that
the ten thousand dollars pr Annum offered him by our Government is
a consideration for his friendship. I believe it would
have been or our Interest not to have given him a cent; his ports are
all so exposed, that I do not believe he will dare to declare War, and
if he does, I a m convinced he will re ent it, However much will
depend on our success with Tripoly. it as become absolutely necessary to our National and Naval Character in the Eastern World,
that we humble that Re ency and bring the Bashaw to our own terms
this cannot be done wit out the assistance of Gun Boats and Bomk
Vessels &c+ I therefore came here to obtain them, and have succeeded.
I enclose you a copy of my application, and the answer. His Sicilian
Majesty considering that it is asmuch for the interest of his
as for the United States that the Corsairs of Tripoly sho d be
destroyed, has loaned us Six Gun Boats and two Bomb Vessels, with
Arms and Ammunition &c+they are to be immediately got ready at
Messina, for which place I shall sail this evening with the Royal
order for them. The absolute necessity that something prompt and
decisive should be done in order to make us respected in these seas I
hope will plead my apology with the President for the measures, I
have ado ted to procure the means. Tripoly is a t present effectually
blockade by all the Vessels of the Squadron excepting this Ship, and
the Nautilus whose repairs are not yet finished. I have not yet heard
of the arrival of the John Adam in these seas, but hope I soon shall as
we d l be in great want of men in our attack on the Barbarians I
hope ere long to be able to advise you of a successful termination of
the War with Tripoly.
A favourable opportunity to draw on you for 5000 dollars for the use
uadron a t 2% pr Cent advance, has induced me to do so in
favor
Of
the of rederick Degen & Cq This is the only Bill I have drawn
excepting the one a t Cadiz for 3500 dollars in November last.
The rigorous quarantine our Merchant Vessels are obliged to perform here, has induced me to represent to this Government the injury
our Mercantile Interest sustains in come uence thereof, General
Acton the prime Minister has assured me t a t something favorable
shall be immediately done with respect to this business.

tri9

E

"h

?fdom

g

%

1

[LC. EPP, LB, Dec. 1803-April 1804.1

[I5 May 18041
To Signore MaresciPllo Marchese Eepluga, Meesina, from General Bartolommer
Portegnerra, Naples

COPY
The Kin having been pleased to accede to the demands made by
Mf Preble Eommander in chief of the Ses forces of the United States
of h e r i o a in the Mediterranean has ordered that the Department of

I04 NAV" OPERATIONS, APRILSEPTEMBER

6, 1804

Messins deliver to him by way of Loan Sii Gunboats and two Bomb
ketches to be employed in an hostile expedition qainst the Barbary
powers, and it is his pleasure that the same be furnished with a
complete inventory, manned with not less than five nor more than 15
Seamen besides their respective Masters. - and that over and above
said equipment two Cannoneers most skilled in the use of the mortar
be embarked on board the said Bomb ketches And for this purpose
the Brigadier General Thurn is to come to an understanding personnslly with hhe said American Commander accordmg to the orders
received - I t is his Majestys intention that the consignment of the
said boats be made with Duplicate Inventories signed by the American
Commander and by the Commctnder of the Department of Messina
with whom they may serve as Documents on the restitution And that
the men who shall serve on board the said vessels to the number
indicated shall be a t the charge & expence of the Americans from
the moment the boats shall be consigned until their restitution - I t
is his Majesty's intention that Six Cannons of the CaIibre of 24
furnished with their Carriages, implements, and ammunition for 150
shot with ball be provided by the said Department according to the
wishes manifested by the said Commander - I communicate this to
you in his Majeatys name for your information and execution on your
part

BARTOLOMMES
FOBTEGUERRA

NAPLES16'h May 1804

S~"?ARES~IALLO
MARCHESE
ESPLUGA
- Messina

L C . EPP, Vol. 11, April-June 1804.1

Guns and Ammunition Beceived by Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Ravy, from
lsples
GUNNER8 STORES REC'D FROM THE ARSENAL AT NAPLEB

Six guns--- - - - - - 24 P."q

Six carriages- - - -24 linch pins - 12 forelocks
Six Beds
Twelve Coins
Seventy four bbb powder - 24 Cantar & 48 Rottolo
Three hundred & 75 Parcht Cartridges.. - - .- . 24
Two hundred & 25 fiani
DQ
DQ
Six hundred round shot- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - ,- - Dc
Sixty Grape- - - ,- - - ,D Q- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - DO
Two Ladles- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - DQ
Two Wonns - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - _ - - - - - - - - - - - - - - DQ
Six Spunges & rammers- - - - - - - - - - - - ,- - - - - - - DQ
One hundred & 47 lb Match rope
Six Cannon Cartridge boxes [LC. EPP, Order Book, May 1803-June 1805.1
Ertroct from journal of U. S. Brig Argus. Lieutenant Iraac Bull, U. S. Bavy,
commanding, Tuesday, 16 Xay 1804

These 24 hours Cornmenee with Moderate breezes and Clear Weather EiEtetprize in CQat 4 4, M, saw a S d off our lee bow made sail
in Chace at 3 past came u wifh the Chace she proved to be a Spsnish
Ketch from Tunis boun to Tripoli with a pass from the American

f

105

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

Consul a t Tunis tacked Ship as Necessary the Schooner and Ketch
in Company at 3 past 7 made the land at 9 AM saw a small Latteen
boat under the land hove too and sent the boats on Shore under the
orders of Lieu1 Vanscblaick a t 10 the boats returned pr Sigl without
the boat fired three Shot on Shore fine pleas! Weather
[NDA phosostst.]
Extract from log book of U. S. Brig Argus, 18 Guns, kept by Sailing Master Samuel
B. Brooke, U. S. Navy, Lieutenant Isaac Hull, U. S. Navy, commanding,
Tuesday, 16 May 1804

These 24 hours Commence with fine Weather the Enterprize in
Company a t 4 P M saw a sail off the lee bow made sail and gave
chace at % past 4 came u with her she proved to be a Ketch from
Tunis bound to Tripoli wit a pass from the american Consul a t Tunis
at j4 past tack$ ship at 8 in T. G sails and tacked At midnight hght airs and Clear wore ship to thc S. E. the Schooner
in sight A, M, At past 7 saw the land ahead hauled the foresail up
the Schooner out of sight a t 9 saw a Small latteen boat under the
land bore away sent the boats under the Command of Lieu,
Vanscaick on shore a t 10 they returned without the boat fired
3 Shot a t some Turks on shore filled away a t Meridian fine Weather
[LC. EPP,Argus, 1804.1

%

Extract from journal of Midshipman F. Cornelius deKrafft. U. 6. Bavy, in U. 6.
Brig Siren of 18 guns, Lieutenant Charles Stewart, U. 6. Navy, commanding,
Tuesday, 15 May 1804

At 9 AM discovg a brig & Ketch bore away & made all sail in
chase % past 11 came up with the Ketch, she pro+ to be spanish
from Tunis bound to Tripoli - Meridian Lying bye the Ketch to
lcward Tripoli bearing S E 3 leagues Latt: Obs: 33' 00' N.
[NDA.]
To Richard V. Morris, former Captain, U.S. Navy, New York, N. Y., from Secretory
of the Navy

NAVYDEP!May 16,1804: With my Letter to ou of the 2q instant I transmitted to ou a copy
of the opinion of the ourt appointed to enquire into your onduct as
Commanding Officer of the late Squadron of armed Vessels of the
United States, in the Mediterranean. This opinion having satisfied
the President that it is not the public Interest that you should be
longer continued in command in the Navy of the United States, I
have i t in chazge from him to inform you, that he has revoked your
Commission. - [See 31 August 1803.1
[NDA. OSW,Vol. 6, 1802-1805.1

8

8

Extract from Diary of Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Navy, Commodore of U. 8.
Squadron in the Mediterranean, Wednesday, 16 May 1804

Pleasant weather, Received on board the six cannon before
mentioned with nmmunition &c for them, from the Neapolitan arsenal,
Ships draft 22 feet 9 aft 21.5 forward 6 sick, 5 convalescent.
[LC. EPP, Diary, 1803-1804.1

106 NAVAL OPERATIONS, APRILSEPTEMBER 6, 1804
Extract from log book kept by Sailing Master Nathaniel Haraden, U. S. Bevy,
on board U. S. Frigate h l i l u l o n , Wednesday, 16 May 1804

Moderate breezes from the Westq - At Single Anchor in Naples
bay -Towards evening recieved by a flota from shore 6'24 pounders 624 round shot - 73% bbls powder 4406 lbs The Six guns were
complete with carriages, rammers & Ladles - Charles Smith Seaman attempted to desert. He was detected and confined. A. M.
rec'd 523 lb fresh beef Ships draft 22 ft 9 In & 21 ft 5 I n - Ships
company employed as necessary Surgeons report 6 sick 5 convalesct
Noon hght airs from the Westward [LC. EPP, Log Constitution, 1803-1804.1
Extract from journal of Midshipman F. Cornelius deKrafft, U. S. Navy, in U. 8.
Brig Siren of 18 guns, Lieutenant Charles Stewart, U. S. Navy, commanding,
Wednesday, 16 May 1804

Light airs & pleast At 1 dismiss'd the Ketch & permitted her to
Enter the harbour of Tripoli 3h past 1 fill'd away & wore to the SQ&
Eg Single reef'd the topsails boarded fore & Main tacks & set after
main sail - 2 T E Q to the N E & spoke the Argw Lc Stewart went on
board of her At % past 5 'IKg to the S. Ea At % past 7 ' I K g to the
N E. At 8 took in courses, top galls sails, fore top mast stay sail &
hove too Lt Stewart retQ Midnight light airs & clear fill'd away At 4 T E g to the S. Eg At 6 discovQa sail on our lee bow made sail &
gave chace. At % past 6 hauld our wind again. took in fore sail &
top gall5 sails At 7 wore to the N E, the Argus & Scourge in sight hove too. At 9
fill'd away. 11brail'd after main sail - Meridian wore to the S E Light airs & pleas! Latt Obs 33' 16' N.
[NDA.]
Extract from journal of U. 6. Brig Argus. Lieutenant Isaac Hull, U. S. Navy,
commanding, Thursday, 17 May 1804

the Scourge to Windward bore down & Joined us Cap? Hull
went on board Tripoli bore S W b W % W at 6 hove too under
To sails head to the Northward & EastwQ Syren and Scourge in
Sig t a t 4 AM filled away the head S W set and took in sail
Occasionally [NDA photostst.]
118 May 18041

g

To BSa~terCommandant Isaac Channcey, U. 6. Navy, Washington, D. C., from
Secretary of the Navy

NAVYD E P M
May
~ 21,1804 The President of the United States having been pleased to raise you
to the Station of Master Commandant in the Navy, I have the
pleasure herewith to transmit to you your Commission bearing date
18th M a y 1804 - to rank Nq 4 of the Masters Commandants commissioned on that day. Similar Letter to Cap$ Go Cox. Care of Commre Barron - To
rank NQ8. JNDA. OSW, Vol. 6, 1802-1805.1

107

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

[I8 May 18041
Appointments to rank of Master Commandant

NAVYD E P M ~
May 29: 1804 To Chg Stewart esquire. Commander of the Siren
Isaac Hull esquire
Commander of the Argus
John Smith esquire Commander of the Vimm
Rg Somers esquire
Commander of the Nauti22~8
Care of COMM"

Mediterranean

SIR, The President of the United Statm having been pleased to
raise you to the rank of Master Commandant, I herewith enclose you
your Commission.
Rt SMITH
[NDA. OSW, Vol. 6, 1802-1805.1
[I8 May 18041
To Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Navy, from. P.. d'Karpow, Russian Charge
d'Affaires, The Two Slches

SIR Having been informed by the Consul General appointed by
my august Sovereign a t Messina, that a Brig belonging to your
uadron had a t the distance of 80 miles from Tripoli, captured
erchant Vessel named the Virgin o Catapolaghi [Madona Catspolianu],commanded b George Mor o, under Russian Colours,
which port she had left [reighted for Malta; and that the above mentioned Vessel having been carried into S p c u s e was there declared a
lawful prize; I in consequence directed the Agent b e l o y ~to my
Court here, to make the necessary representations on the su ject to the
American Consul General.
These representations were made in three notes bearing date the
3g 4t5 & 10tQinstants, which were communicated to you.
I n answer to these notes you produced through the channel of the
American Consul General the copies of certain Documents, on the
th of which you considered yourself authorised to seize the said
stre?
Vease , and to dismiss Her crew - These documents consist of the
copy of a Convention agreed on between the Master & his Pilot;
and of two simple atteatations of the latter declaring. First. That
on the 5'@of November, the da of the Vessels departure from Smyrna,
it was already notorious that t e Port of Tripoli was blockaded by an
American Naval Force.
Secondly. That in consequence of his knowing this circumstance,
the Master, whose Vessel was freighted to Tripoli, had taken the
precaution to clear her for Gerba These then Sir, are the only grounds on which you found your
reasons for considering the above mentioned Vessel a lawful prize:
But I must object to them.
First. That the official Communication of the Blockade of Tripoli
having been made by the American Consul Genl on the 14*@of December 1803, in consequence of a letter he received from you dated from
Gibraltar the 12'5 of the preceding November, it is not ssible, that
on the 5 s of that month, the da on which the Vesse s d e d from
S m p m your dispositions should ave been known there. B e s i d ~ ,

%

L

E

Z

P"

108 NAVAL OPERATIOA'S. APRIL-SEPTEMBER 6 . 180.4
on the supposition that they were, allow me to observe to you, that
Towns & Ports should be blockaded, not by Manifestoes only, but by
a military force; and a t the period alluded to, there can have been none,
as the Vessel in Entering the port of Tripoli met with no opposition. With regard to the second point, had the Vessel being freighted any
where but a t Smyrna, I am ready to admit the possibility of the
Captains having had the precaution to frame two contracts, one real,
the other simulated, but as all Contracts are drawn up in the Consular
Chancellors Office a t Smyma, I can not for a moment su pose that the
Russian Consular Chancellors (Mice can have been gufty of such an
irregularity.
Independent of these objections, do you imagine Sir, that the simple
deposition of a Mercenary Pilot, either guided by the motives of
revenge or venality, is sufficient to justify your measures? I t would
be the height of justice, as well as pregnant with many inconveniences I must in addition to these remarks, observe, that though the
Maritime Laws of all Nations Forbid in case of Blockade, the Entrance
of Vessels into the Blockaded ports, they do not prevent their leaving them. This is a point universally known, & which cannot be
controverted I flatter myself Sir,that in consequence of what I have had the
honor to represent to you, you will not resist the just demand I here
make that the Vessel in question with her Cargo be restored, & the
master of her indemnified for the Injury sustained by his detainder. The Government to which I belong having never submitted to the
arbitrary measures of any power, can not see her flag insulted, with
indifference, & I trust Sir that a proper regard for the harmony subsisting between my Au ust Sovereign & your Government, will Induce
you to avoid the risk o interruptin that good understanding, by persisting in considering the Vessel I c aim as a just prize; and that you
will Enable me to make a satisfactory report of the affair to my Court.
[LC. EPP, Vol. 9,Jan.-Feb. 1804.1

I

f

To Tobias Lear, U. S. Consul General, Algiers, from George Davis, U. 8. Charge
d'Affaues, Turn
Kp

9.

(Copy)

TVNISMay 18tp 1804.
Re& June let

SIR, An express for the Bey of Constantine, allows me to inform
you, that on the 15* inst. 1 had the pleasure to forward you by a
Courier express, a dispatch containing the result of our negotiation,
with this Regency; copies of my accounts, and triplicates of my former
Communications; all of which I trust have come safe to hand. The
Courier is to bring your answer in 26 days from the day he left Tunis,
and receives one hundred and sixty Piastres; if latter one hundred &
fifty; and if in less time a tllfling presant.
It is with pain I announce to you a return of difficulties; the Be
yesterday ordered me to leave his Regenc , having been informld:
that my Passport for the Spanish Bombar to enter Tri oli, with a
Choux of the Grand S' ior, had not been respected; the $easel bein3
forced into the Island o'$
Jerba, where she now 1s -As also that sever
Sandals of the Island Jerba, had been captured by the Americans Some conversation with the Minister rendered him less violent;
when he directed me to write to the Commodore, & inform him, that

g

109

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

unless the said Sandals were returned without dela , and ample Justice rendered for all injuries sustained, that he wo d without hesitation adopt such measures as would enable him to pay himself; and in
case his Subjects were again molested in any one instance; he would
not even allow me time, to make a statement to any Person - I t is
certain that as long as our difficulty continues with Tripoli, we
sha 1 never be free'd from these complaints - A Statement shall be
made to the Commodore, without delay; and you will be pleased to
direct the measures which are to be taken by me. [NA. SDA. CL, Algiers, Vol. 7, Part 1, Jan. 1804-Nov. 1805.1

d

ve7

To Captain Edward Preble, U.8. Navy, from QeorgeDavis,U. 8. Charge d'dffeires,
Tunis

TUNIS
May 18Q 1804.
SIR, I t is to be regretted, that unforseen, and incalculable occurrences so happily combine with the Policy of these States, as ever to
coincide & support their views - (to wit) that a Nation shall never
be free'd from a demand - one difficulty is no sooner settled than
another presents itself. - On the 17Q was sent for by the Bey, whom
I met passing from the hall of Justice to the audience chamber - he
stop ed, and in a perempto & menacing tone demanded if the American onsul was present. - offered him the usual mark of submissive
respect - when he thus addressed me - Go - leave instantly rnv
regency - You wish war with all the world, and since You hace resolved
to -force me into, I am contented. - These words were frequently
repested; and without allowing me time to demand the cause of his
displeasure, retired to his chamber. - I addressed myself to the
Sapatapa; who informed me, that two Sandals, belonging to the Island
of Jerba, had been captured by our Cruisers; and that I had deceived
his Master, in the Passport given for the Chaoux of the Grand Signor
to enter Tripoli - that the Vessel had been boarded by an American
Brig & Schooner, and detained three hours, when one of the Commanders informed the C ~ p t of
. the Bombard, that the Passport was
not valid - that he might enter Tripoli; but if he attempted to come
out, the Vessel would be captured; and all on board without distinction considered as enemies, a ~ made
d
prisoners of war - in consequence of which the Commander desisted from his voyage, & put into
Jerba, where he now is - I informed the Sapatapa, that these dficulties should be corrected - that with respect to the Capture, I would
be fully informed by the Commodore, and ample Justice should be
rendered without any delay - that the Passport should be renewed,
and no future difficulties would arise; assuring him that so conscious
was I of its bein respected, that I had placed on board that Vessel
one thousand Do ars, for the use of the Americans a t Tripoli. - Some
time after, was called for by the Bey; who directed me to write You,
that the Vessel should be immediately returned with a just recompense, for all damages sustained by the Claimants - that unless this
was acquiesced to immediately, he s h d be compelled to ajy himself that he would receive no excuses for delays in aranging t e affair - he
also desired me to state, that if his Subjects, were again molested by
any of our Cruisers, he would drive me from his Regency, without a
hearing.

7

6

6

E

110 NAVAL OPERATIONS, APRIL-SEPTEMBER 6, 1804
It is very certain, that we shall never be freed from similar complaints, and outrages on the laws of Nations, as long as our difficulty
continues with Tripoli - these are ewils without a remedy; for where one
arty alone, has the right to accuse, adjudge, & condemn - there is
gut a partial field for reasoning or argument; on this point you will be
pleased not only to instruct me fully, but inform me of the measures
you wish taken - I can only say, that procrastination is ever
attended with serious evils; and that the usual interest for delays with
this Regency, in similar transactions, is more than Cent per Cent.
I cannot omit expressing my surprize a t the non respect shewn to
my Passport; and which circumstance I am satisfied is not only without Your knowledge; but will meet Your earnest disapprobation.
Such occurrences not only tend to lessen my respectability with this
Gov; as a public character; but involve me personally.
You are too well convinced of my desire, to see crown'd with success
Your unceasing exertions; to suppose that any measures of mine shall
ever tend to lessen the effect of Your projected plans [LC. EPP, Vol. 11, April-June 1804.1
To Brigadier Count d'Thnm, Commander in Chief of His Sicilian Majesty's Navy,
from Captain Edward Preble, U. 8. Navy

MAY 18th 1804

I have the honor to enclose ou a set of private Signals between the

d

ships of War of His Sicilian ajesty and those of the United States.
[LC. EPP, LB, Dec. 1803-April 1804.)

Extract from log book kept by Sailing Master Nathaniel Haraden, U. 8. Navy,
on board U. S. Frigate Cbnstflution. Friday, 18 May 1804

Moderate breezes from the W. S. W - At Single Anchor in
Naples - Recieved this afternoon - Rec'd this afternoon 70 boxes
candles art mould & part not - Supposed to contain nearly 11000
lb Wt. %eparted this life Jacob Hendrickson, killed by a fall from
the fore Catharpins - In the evening his body was committed to the
deep - Discharged three Seamen who had entered three days ago They were deserters from a ship in the Harbor - Towards evenin
made ready for weighing - At Sundown calm which continued t%
midnight when a Lght breeze s rang up from S W b S which is right
into the Harbour - At 8 A. . i t had encreased to a gale Veered
to 80 fathf let go the small bower - Veered to a cable & half on the
best bower & unslung the lower Yards
(LC. EPP, Log Conetilution, 1803-1804.1

6

To P. d'Karpow, Bnssian Charge d'bffaires, The Two Sicilies, from Captain
Edward Preble, U. S. Navy

UNITEDSTATESSHIP ConditZGbion
Under sail NAPLES
BAY

May 1&h. 180.4.
SIR,I have this morning recq a letter from you of yesterday's date,
which was brought on board a t a late hour lsst
ht and after I had
retired to rest. The papers respecting the Po ackre in question
which I desired the Consul of the U S to present to you are not the

?

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

111

only documents which I have to confirm me in my opinion of the
legality of the detention of that Vessel. But those papers alone I
supposed would have been satisfactory to you. I shall however write
you more fully from Malta on my arrival there: At present I shall
only observe that Captain Marfino has made many misrepresentations, and that you must know that the Vessel detained cannot be
declared a ood prize until legally condemned by the Court of Admiralty of t e United States. The Boat by which I send you this, is
passing towards the shore, and only leaves me time to subscribe
myself.
P. D'KARPOW
Esqr
Charge d7Aflairsfrom His Im erial Majesty the Em eror
o j Russia, to His Majesty t& King o j the. two
&c*
[LC. EPP, LB, Dec. 1803-April 1804.1

%

sJL

Extract from journal of U. 6. Brig Argus. Master Commandant Isaac Hull, U. 6.
Navy, commanding, Saturday, 19 May 1804

These 24 hours Commence with moderate Breezes and pleasant
Weather a t 4 P, M, the Town of Tripoli bore SSE % E the Syren and
Enter rize in Company At %idnight moderate breezes and pleasant Weather tacked Ship
Occasionally made and Shortened Sail as Necessary
At 8 AM, both brigs and Schooner Enterprize in Sight.
At Meridian Tripoli bore SWbS distl 4 Leagues [NDA photostat.]
Extract from Diary of Captain Edward Preble, U. 8. Navy, Commodore of U. S.
Squadron in the Mediterranean, Saturday, 19 May 1804

At anchor in Naples Bay, the Gale from the S W B W blowing
into the Bay still continues which Keeps us here, a t 3 P M the gale
abated unmoored, in tho Night calm, at 1 A hl a light Breeze from
the E N E, weighed and made sail out of the Bay, a t day light becalmed 3 leagues from ;he City, - Boarded the Schooner Betsey,
Wellman master from Boston 60 days out received some Letters
and Newspapers, stood for the Island of Capri, [LC. EPP, Diary, 1803-1804.)

[20 May 18041
To Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Navy, from Midshipman-~ctavi* A. ~ & e ,
U. S. Navy

SIR I take the liberty notwithstanding our declaration a t the
time you arrested me to Solicit a release. &en you diliberate cool
on my conduct and hear my defence you will I am confident acknowl
edge it not so culpabable as you a t first thought it - But relesse
me from a confinement which is particularly distressing a t this time
on the Eve of our Expedetion to Tripoli the only op ortunity for a
long time an officer in our service will probably have o distinguishing
himself. When you Coneider that a Court Martial is a t d times disw e a b l e and in very few Instances honorable you will I am Induced
to beleive overlook the imprudence (I can call it by no harsher name)
I was guilty of without brmging me to trial
MAY.804 1804 [LC. EPP, Vol. 11, April-June 1804.1

f

112 NAVAL OPERATIONS, RPRIGSEPTEMBER 6, 1804
To Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Navy, from John Gavino. U. 13. Consul,
Gibraltar

GIBRALTER
May 20th 1804.
DEARSIR My last to you was the 25th Ulto: Pr Duplicate on the
subject of the Bills order Laurent Roberts, on which subject I could

not get the least information either regarding the bills or the person,
which am sorry for, but hope Mackenzie & Glennie will be able to
clear i t up, to whom $ See? of the Navy have Faitten several letters
thereon.
On the 4th Inst. Mr Lewis delivered me your duplicate of 7th March
& by post I recieved that of 19Ch DP, informing me of your apprehensions regarding the Tunisians $q which will lay before the Commr of
such State Vessels as may drop in here: the report from the U. S. is,
that five frigates were preparing for these seas Vizl United Stutes,
Congrms, President, John Adums & Constemion with two Brigs, two
Schooners and a Gun Boat, but have not learned the names of the
Commanders excepf Cap t Jamarron who, they say, has the first - If
this force joins you, I hope you will bring theBnrbarians to terms - All
quiet with the Empr of Moi~occoAs to News, have none; -

*

*

*

*

*

*

*

[LC. EPP, LB, April-Nov. 1804.1
To Captain Edward Preble, U. 6. Navy, from Captain William Bainbridge, IT. 6.
Navy

TRIPOLI
20" May 1804
DEARSIR Since you was off here on the 2fitbf March I have done

myself the honor of writing to you a t the following dates. 27, 29,
3Ot@of March, 30t@of April and gt@ of May in all of which I have
expressed the great want of Cloathing for our Seamen - I have made
every exertion in my power to rocure a supply in this place, but am
only able to get a few shirts an trowsere made in the course of man
days; not near adequate to their constant demands - I sincerely wis
that you ma be enabled to send us a supply immediatei .
Since my ast letters nothing particular has transpiredl
I enclose you an answer to your letter whichyou did me the honor
to write conveying the the thanks of the President of the United States
and the Secretwy of the Navy respecting the capture of the Moorish
ship Mirboha.
We are d1 extremely anxious to hear from you.
[LC. EPP, VoI. 11, April-June 1804.1

$

E

9

-

To Tobiaa b a r , U. S. Consul General, Algiers, from Captain William Bainbridge,
U. 6. Navy

TRIPOLI
BARBARY
got$Mav 1804

( r e d 19'Q Augt - )

DEABSIR,I this day received your much esteemed letter of the
24'h of February, - yours of the lZtQ of the same month came to hand
on the 5t4 dtQ.I done myself the leasure of writing to you on the
3g, St4, & 30tQultq and hope they
reach you. The long detention
and uncertainty of letters between this place and Algiers may leave
you a length of time without letters from me; if this should be the

d

WRRS WITH BARBARY POWERS

113

case, I pray that you will not attribute i t to neglect or want of attention in keepi you informed of our situation; for exclusive of conceiving i t my uty, I alwa s feel pleasure in addressing a Friend. To
my letters of last month refer you for our situation, - no chsnge
since has taken place. Our people are much in want of c l o a t h ,
which I have dail expected for these two months past from Commodore Preble: I o every thmg in my power to procure cloathing in
this place, but with diillculty can only get a small suppl , not near
sufficient for their constant demand. I trust that you w d d o me the
justice to believe that no exertions of mine will be wanting to render
the unfortunate seamens situation as comfortable as lays in my power.
I am happy to say, owing to your attention in so early placing
funds in the hands of Mr Davis a t Tunis, whose attention claims my
thanks for his frequent remittances, we are provided with sufficient
funds: Articles, and not money are our wants.
I received a letter from my friend Consul Kirkpatrick a t Malaga,
which you notice in yours; I am very much obliged to him for his
enerous attention, and well know it proceeds from real friendship;
gut until I have reason to believe (which God forbid I ever should)
that I have forfeited the protection of my government I shall not
want other resources than through that channel; and if I did, believe
me my dear friend that I should most readily have called on you. It
was entirely unnecess
for you to have offered yourself personally
to me, the sympathy w ch you took in my misfortune was suflicient
to convince me that I was a t liberty to demand your services as a
friend.
We are waiting with the greatest anxiety for news from our Coun .
My best respects to Mrg Lear and believe me Dr ColQto be tr y
YoWmBNNBRIDGE
[Stephen Decatur Col.]

f

f

1

"K,

3

Extract from journal of U. 6. Brig Argus. l a s t e r Commandant Isaac Hull, U. 8.
Xavy, commanding, Sunday, I0 l a y 1804
a t ): past 4 hove to and spoke the Schooner Captain Decatur came

on board at 6 the town of Tripoli bore S b E distance 2 leagues set
and took in sail IS Necessary - * * * at % past 9 AM, heard the
report of 6 Guns to the Westward
[NDA photostat.]
Extract from log book kept by Sailing Master Nathaniel Hueden, U 6. Navy,
on board U. 6. Fngate Comtilutfon. Sunday, 20 Hay 1804

Moderate breezes from the West@ We are nearly 7 Miles to the
West0 of the City of Na les - At X past 12 the shore boat left us We filled and made all p ain sail for the passsge between Ca e Campinella and the East end of the Island of Capri. By 3 P. Af we were
thro - This assage is nearly 4 miles broad clear of danger and has
anchorage all t e way across - I n the middle 60 or 70 fath: - On
the Island side i t is defended by a Castle, and on the other side by a
nine gun battery - At % past 3 P. M. We set the Starboard Studdr
Sails and steered by compass S b E. in order to make the Island of
Stromboly which is situated nearly S E b S % S, 95 Miles -

I'

%

114 NAVAL OPERATIONS, APRILSEPTEMBER 6, 1804
The Wind was light and Variable till sundown, when it fell calm At Sundown we are 12 Miles S E b S from the Island of Capri, nearly
6 leagues W B N from Cape Livosa which is the Eastern point of the
Gulf of Salerno At 8 in the Evening a light breeze sprang up from
the West@which continued veering to the South@At M past 1 A. M. tacked to the South West. At 6 A. M. the Island of Capri bore by compass N b W )6 W near1
9 leagues. At 8 it bore b compass N % E. 12 leagues At 9 fres
breezes from the S E - towed the light sails & steered S W by
Compass On our leaving Naples, our intended passage for Saragosa was
through the Straits of Messina, but the Easterly winds prevailing
makes this passage hazardous, in consequence of which the ship was
ordered on a S W Cource, in order to pass round the Western part of
Sicily. At 11 mustered at Quarters
Surgeons report 5 sick & 7 convalescent At noon fresh breezes from S E b S. Overcast weather
Latitude Observed 39' 27' No:
[LC. EPP, Log Constitution, 1803-1804.1

B

E

To Captain Edward Preble, U. S. R a w , from Midshipman Edward R. Cox, U. 6.
Navy, prize master of St. Crucifiwo

MALTAMay g l "180,$
SIB The day I left Syracuse I met with a severe gale of wind which
did me so much damage that I thought it prudent to run into Malta;
the necessary expences that would attend her being refitted here would
be more than I thought proper to incur without the approbation of
Cap1 Somers I have therefore Sir with your consent landed every
thing in Charge of Mr Higgins and taken my passage in the Store
Ship Permit me Sir to thank you for the Politeness I have recieved
from you, and that you may be attended with success the ensuing
Summer is the sincere wish of
Signed E D WN~Cox
[LC. EPP,Order Book, May 1803-June 1805.1
To Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Navy, from Secretary of the Navy

NAVYD E P M22~ May 1804.
Commodore Ed'J PREBLE.
Mediterranean.
Your Dispatches bearing date the 10th of December 1803, conveying
to us the unpleasant information of the accidental Loss of the Philadelphia, were not received till late in the month of March last. The
President immediately determined to put in Commission and to send
to the Mediterranean a force which would be able beyond the possibilit of a doubt, to coerce the Enemy to a peace upon Terms compati le with our Honor and our Interest. A due regard to our situation with Tripoli and precautionary considerations in relation to the
other Barbary Powers, demanded that our forces in that quarter
should be so far augmented aa to leave no doubt of our compelling
the existing Enemy to submit to our own terms, and of effectual]
checking an hostile dispositions that might be entertained towar
ue by any o the other Barbary Powers.

g

7

2

VALE TTE.

115

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

The following Frigates have accordrngly been put in Commission
and will soon proceed to the Mediterranean. President-- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -Commodore B m n .
Congress-- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -Captain Rodgers
ESsez- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -Caps Je Barron.
CmhUatwn- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - --Cap$ Campbell. Your good sense will perceive that we have thus been unavoidably
constrained to supersede you in a Command in which you have acquitted yourself in a manner honorable to yourself and useful to your
Country and in all respects perfectly satisfactory to us. The only
Captains in the Navy now in the U. States junior to yourself are
Captains James Barron and Campbell, and as the Frigates cannot be
commanded but b Captains, we of necessity have been obliged to
send out two Gent emen senior to yourself in Commission. Be assured, Sir, that no want of coddence in you has been mingled
with the Considerations which have imposed upon us the necessity
of this measure. You have fufilled our highest expectations and The
President has given it in an especial charge to me, to declare that he
has the highest Confidence in your Activity, Judgment and Valour.
Through me he desires to convey to you his Thanks for the very
important services which you have rendered to your Country, and I
beg you to be assured, Sir, that it affords me great personal satisfaction
to be the medium of conveying to you his sentiments in relation to
your Conduct. ,-

T

[NDA. LB, 1799-1807.1
Extract from journal of U. 8. Brig Argus. Master Commandant Isaac Hull, U. 8.
Bevy, commanding, Tuesday, 22 May 1804

*

*

*

*

*

*

Latter part a t 6 Saw 2 Strange sail ahead set and took in Sail
Occa.? a t 8 Exchanged Sigl' with the U. S. Brig Syren - People
Variously Empq Both Brigs in Sight [NDA photostat.]

[23 May 18041
Circular to Collectors of Customs from Secretary of State

Notice is hereby given, that it has been deemed expedient to change
the form of the Mediterranean pass r t issued to Vessels of the
United States; that from the eighth ay of July next, those of the
new form will be issued a t the Custom-houses to every Vessel, for
which application may be made on a compliance with the terms prescribed by law and surrendering the former passport of which she
may be possessed, if any, in which latter case no fees will be re uired
for the exchange; and that by an arrangment agreed upon wit the
Barbary powers, with whom we are a t peace, either the old or the
new form of passport will be sufficient to protect the Vessels of the
United States from capture until the l o t of July 1805, after which the
old form of passport will be unavailable and the new one alone in use.
JAMES
MADISON.
DEP*OF STATE,
2$QMay 1804.
NOTE- The Printers of the laws of the U. States, were requested
to insert the above in their Gazettes twice a week, for the space of

go

B

116 NAVAL OPERATIONS, APRIL-SEPTEMBER 6 , 1804
six months - and the Collectors of the Customs, to keep a copy of
i t posted up in their offices.
[NA. SDA. Dom. L., Vol. 14, May 1802-May 1805.1
To Secretary of State from Joseph Pnlis, U. S. Consul, Malta

MALTA23'Q May 1804.
HONOR'^ SIR I hare the honour to inform your honour that few

days since has pass'd this Island five Russian Frigates who have
arrived a t Corfu, landed their Troops, and lodged them in the respective Forts & Castels. And are daily expected According to the Levant News about
fifteen Russian Men of War. - The Grand Caire after a very
sanguine Battle has been restored to the Grand Signor. - Commodore Preble days past has entered this port with Consul O'Brien
on board who proceeded for Tunis, and are daily expected, We have
no intelligence of any Tripoline Cruisers being at Sea, of which I
strickly inform the Commodore, and other of our Cruisers by every
Conveyance. [NA. SDA.

CL, Malts, Vol. 1, 1801-1834.1

124 May 18041
[NOTE: A document dated 24 May 1804 indicates that Stephen Cathalan, Jr.,
was appointed U . 6. Vice Consul, 17 June 1790; U. 5. Commercial Agent, 8 July
1801; that he was a native of France but was recognized as a Citizen of the United
States although he had not received Certificate of Naturalization.]
mA. SDA. CL, Marseilles, Vol. 2, March 1803-Xov. 1827.1
To Master Commandant Ieaac Chauncey, 8.S. Navy, commanding 0.6. Frigate
John Adam, from Secretary of the l a v y

NAVYD E P ~$4: May 1804 Herewith you will receive your authority to subdue, seize and make
prize of all vessels, goods, and effects belonging to the Bashaw of
Tripoli or to his Subjects & also the Statute upon which that Authority
is founded.
I n executing the duties arising out of this Commission you will
attend to the following regulations and Instructions.
Your Commission extending on1 to the vessels, goods, and effects
belonging to the Bashaw of Tripo ' or to his Subjects, you will bear
in mind that the Rights of all other Nations are to be duly respected;
that we are a t peace and wish to continue a t peace with them, and
that an American Commander ought to be as much dstinguished
for his attention and adherence to all the rights of humanity and
hos itality as by his firmness in support of the Honor of his Country.$ou are to refrain from exercmng the powers of capturing or of
re-capturing in waters within the jurisdictional limits and under the
protection of any other nation, in order that their peace and Sovereignty may remain unviolated. We shall scrupulously and without
Indulgence examine that Conduct which shall bring us into collision
with an other ower.
All d s s e l s , Eoods and Effects captured in virtue of your Commission, are, if practicable, to be sent into some port in the United
States to be proceeded against & distributed according to Law a d
you will keep m mind that a Vessel captured by you cannot be adjudi-

2:

117

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

cated by an of our Courts unless she be brought into some Port of
the United tates. All prizes sent into port must be accompanied by all passes, CharterParties, Commissions, Bills of Lading, Invoices, Letters and other
Documents and Writings found on Board which are to be directed to
the Judge of the District to which such -prize may be ordered to
proceed.You are as far as may be in your power to aid and free any public
or private American Vessel attacked by the Enemy or in their
possession.
On your return home Convoy must be given to our Merchant
Vessels. You will not suffer your ship to be detained in port for
any unreasonable length of time. Give as much previous notice a t
The places where ou may intend giving Convoy as may be in your
power, and state t e time of your Sailing and in no instance will you
delay sailing longer than 48 hours after the time you shall fix on for
sfding.
However on the subject of Convoy and with respect to the disposition of any Prisoners you may take and on all other Subjects
not herein expressly provided for, you will receive particular Instructions from the Commodore.
Should any other of the Barbary Powers declare War against us,
i t is The Command of the President that you protect our Commerce
by all the means in your power.
John Gavino Esquire is our Agent at Gibraltar and Degen, Purviance & C? are our Agents a t Leghorn. We shall also have Agents
a t Naples, Syracuse and Malta, all of whom will render you every
assistance that may be necessary.
The Seamen, Ordinary Seamen and Boys of your present Crew
are to be transferred to the Enterprize or to such other of the public
vessels now in the Mediterranean as may be directed by the Commodore, who will take measures to furnish you with a Crew for your
return. However I have written to Commodore Preble particularly
on this subject and you will take his orders. INDA. LB, 1799-1807.1
To Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Navy, from Monsieur Beaussier, Rench Charge

g

K

dlAffaires and Commissary General, Tripoli

TRIPOLIin BARBARY
24" May 1804
Sir, Not haring had the honor of hearing from you since the
28th March last as you quitted these coasts in a Gale of wind I could
not find an opportunity of leting you hear from me I this day profit
of a Speronare returning to Malta to transmit you the Letter which
I wrote you the day after I left the Frigate & which I have ke t seald
by me in hopes of seeing you soon return. I have learnt t a t you
went to Tunis from which lace you saild on the gth dpril & arriving
at Malta ou receiv'd on goard MI OBrien ex-consul of the U S a t
Algiers 8 e S a v e d a t Tunis on the 24 of said Month in the S[qhooner
Enterpri8e
They write from Le horn that M: Cathcart ex Consul in this
Regency is gone by lant f to Naples from whence He intends going to
Syracuse or Malta The Treatment of prisoners & slaves far from being worse is better
by Intrest with Sidi Mahomet Dghies I procure them all the m-

g

118 NAVAL OPERATIONS, RPRIL-SEPTEMBER 6, 1804
d u k n c e s which depend on my perseverence to claim to alleviate
t h m unha py situation
I have t e honor to salute you

.E

WC. EPP, Vol. 11, April-June 1804.1
-act

BEAUSSIER

from journal of U. S. Brig Argus, Master Commandant Isaac Bull, U. 8.
Navy, commanding, Thursday, 24 May 1804

These 24 hours Commence with fresh breezes and Clear Weather a t
4 the town of Tripoli bore SbW distt about 4 leagues set and took in

sail Occasionally
At Midnigh fresh breezes and Clear wore Ship to the Sa&Wq made
and Shortened Sail frequently as Occasion required a t 3 past 10
Spoke the Scourge Captain Dent Came on board At Meridian dp Weather people Variously Employed [NDA photostat.]
Extract from Diary of Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Navy, Commodore of U. 8.
Squadron in the lediterranean, Thursday, 24 May 1804

Light breezes from the Northward standing in for the Straits of
Messma the entrance bearing S S E, 2 leagues, at 3 Calm made
signal for a Pilot, a boat from a Greek ship was spoken with from
Constmtinople & Messina, a t 5 P N a Pilot Boat came off & left
a Pilot who informed us that we must wait untillmorning to pass the
straits the wind and current being contrary a t present, Spoke an
Imperial Brig from Triest for Barcelona, and the American Ship
General Waine from Messina for Christians in Norway a Strong
Current setting us to the Northward &: westward, a light Breeze
through the night & calm all the morning, Entrance of the Straits
bears S 3 E, 4 leagues, Scaled the six new 24 pounders and loaded
them for service, at noon a light breeze from the westward made
sail for the Straits, [LC.

EPP, Diary, 1803-1804.1

Extract from journal of Midshipman F. Cornelius deKrafft, U. 8. Navy, in U. 6.
Brig Siren of 18 guns, Master Commandant Charles Stewart, U. S. Xavy,
commanding, Thursday, 24 May 1804

Freah breezes & a heavy sea the Scourge on our weather bow At 3
past 6 saw 2 sail to leeward, turn'd the reef out of the fore sail, set top
gall5 sails & square mQail At 10 haul'd up square main sail. At 3
past 10 exchanged signds. At ji past 11 back'd the rnv top sail spoke
the Enterprize. Ll Decatur came on board made the land ahead. Latt Obs 3 3 O 6' N.
[NDA.]
TOm t e r Commandant Ieaac Cha~ncey,U. 6. Navy, commanding U. S. Frigate
John Adam, from Secretary of the Navy

NAVYD E P M ~26, May 1804 Presuming that The John Adams is now nearly completed for Sea,
I have to direct that you weigh Anchor without any avoidable dela
and proceed immediately to Gibraltar where if necessary you w
water your Ship and where you may probably gain information with
respect to the dispositions entertained towards us by Morocco and

3

119

WRRS WITH BARBARY POWERS

other powers which may be useful to yourself and to the Commodore
aloft. You may also know where the Squadron may be.
From Gibraltar you will proceed to Algiers where you will see the
Consul General of the United States, Mr Lear, to whom ou will
communicate the number of Vessels we have sent out t o re- orce the
Squadron and from whom you may also receive much information
useful to yourself and to the Commodore aloft. Without waiting a t
m e r s any longer than cannot be avoided, you will proceed to Syracuse, Malta, or such other of the neighbouring Islands or Places as may
have been fixed on by the Commodore of the Squadron for a Deposit
of the provisions, and deliver the Provisions a t such place to such
person, or persons and under such arrangements as may be prescribed
by The Commodore. of all which M' Gavino Consul a t Gibraltar, can,
I presume, give you particular information. After delivering all the provisions you may have on Board excepting
such as you may want for the use of the Ship, you will receive your
further orders from the Commodore of the Squadron who will direct
you to return immediately to the United States unless your Services
in the Mediterranean should be imperatively required. If you should
receive no orders from the Commodore either before or after you land
the provisions and should not have heard from him or have seen him,
you will, after landing your Provisions, proceed in search of him, and
when you shall fall in with him, communicate your orders to him and
also what you may have done under them. Be pleased to deliver the enclosed Letters directed to Commodore
Preble and to John Gavino Esqr Gibraltar. You have on board six
thousand Dollars in specie which you will deliver to John Gavino
Esquire a t Gibraltar, taking his receipt therefor. I have also advanced to your Purser 2000 Dollars to pay for small Expences a t the
ports you may touch at.
You will write to me on leaving Hampton, on your arrival at and
leaving Gibraltar, and on your arrival a t and leaving Algiers, and by
all convenient opportilnitics you will keep me informed of your
proceedings. As you have already been furnished with all the Instructions and
Authorizations requisite for the government of your conduct on a
Cruise I have only to subjoin my best wishes for your prosperity. -

d'

[NDA. LB, 1799-1807.1
Extract from journal of U. S. Brig Argus. Master Commandant Isaac Hull, U. 8.
Navy, commanding, Friday, 96 May 1804

These 24 hours Commence with mode Breezes and Clear pleasant
Weather the Syren Scourge and Enter rize in CQa t 4 Tripoli bore
SSE Diste 3 leagues Set and took in sa' Occasionally At 1 AM hove too at 6 filled away to the Southwq and Eastwg
Tripoli bearing SbW # W distq 9 or 10 Miles a t 11 made the S
gg5
to the Brig and Schooner in Sight At Meridian Tripoli bore WbS
distp 4 leagues Emp"
Necessary

i'

%!

[NDA photostat.]

120 NAVAL OPERATIONS, APRIL-SEPTEMBER 6, 1804
Extract from Diary of Captain Edward Preble, U. 8. Navy, Commodore of U. 8.
Squadron in the Xediterranean, Friday, 36 Hay 1804

A Gentle breeze from the Northward & Westward, a t 4 P M entered the Straits of Messina, this passage is about 3 miles wide a t the
Fan, and is considered dangerous on account of the violence of the
current High water at 9 OClock full & change, steered from the
enterance of the Straits for the Port of Massina, which is situated S W,
about 3 leagues distance, - a t 6 P M anchored at the entrance of the
Port in 24 fathoms water and moored with a Hawser fast to the shore,
the light house bears S E B S, half a mile from the tower of Faro
N E B E 8 miles, three Neapolitan Frigates sailed on a Cruize, established guard boats to prevent surprize, found here the Nautilw
new coppered, but the re airs of her upper works not yet finished
Visited Six Gun boats w 'ch are ready for sea intended for our
service, [LC. EPP, Disry, 1803-1804.1

L

126 Mfiy 18041
To William Eaton, appointed U. 6. Navy Agent for the Barbary Begencies,
from Secretary of the Navy

NAV.D E P ~
May 80,1804
Herewith you will receive an appointment as navy agent for the
several Barbary Regencies You will receive instructions from and obey the Orders of Commodore Barron and will render to our Squadron in the mediterranean
every assistance in your power.
As a com ensation for your services you will be allowed at the rate
of 1200 Do ars Pr annum and the Rations of a Lieutenant in the
Navy of the United States

P1

[Enclosure]

[26 May 18041

COMMISSION

To dl who 8 h d l see these presents GREETING
Know ye that reposing special trust and confidence in the Zeal
fidelity and Abilities of William Eaton I do hereby ap oint him agent
erica for the
of the navy Department of the United States of
Several Barbary Regencies In Testimony whereof I have hereunto Subscribed my name
and affixed the Seal of the Navy Dept of the U. S of America
at the City of Washington this 26. May 1804.
[NDA. GLB,Vol. 7, 1803-1805.1

L

To Captain Edward Preble, U. 6. Navy, from Captain Stephen Decatur, Jr.,
U. 8. Navy

UNITED
STATESSCHOONER
EnierpPize

O$ Tripoli May 2?FQ
1804
SIR,I proceeded agreeable to orders with Consul Obrian to Tunis
where I arrived in E' ht and Forty hours; the da after my llrrivd
was informed by our?!harge de Maim that he ha no dispatches for

i

WARS WITH BARBARY POWmS

121

you when I got under way, in heaving up I parted my cable and lost
my anchor, - I left a t Tunis a Tunisian Frigate of 32 Guns, and
four Xebecs, the Xebecs appeared ready for sea; The day after I
left the roads I boarded a Tunisian Tartan loaded with Cannon &
bound to Ferrina, the same day spoke a spanish ship from Tunis
bound to Susa, on the Twenty Eighth boarded an Imperial Brig
from S haxa bound to Triest, on the 2gt"oarded
a Spanish Ketch
from unis bound to Tripoli with an Ambassadore of the Grand
Seniors on board, this Ketch had M r Davis passport on board she
had also one thousand dollars on board for Cap9 Bainbridge and a
package for the Danish Consul, the Passport is directed to ou and
all commanders of American Cruizers that might fall in wi& her, a
Copy of which passport with the Manifest I inclose you, conceiving
that M r Davis would not give a passport of this nature without your
permission, & the inconvenience The stopping her would occasion
to our prissioners, I suffered her to pass After Assertaining she had
nothing more on board than the permission specified,-The same day I
Joined Lieut Hull to the westward of Tripoli where I have continued
to Cruize up to this period, - We have had a great deal of Bad
weather and I am sorry to inform you we are very sickly, since my
being on the station I have lost one man, and have had one t h d of
the Crew sick with fever, I have now six days provissions on Board & shall leave the station
this Evening or tommorrow morning
[LC. EPP, Vol. 11, April-June 1804.1

4

To Robert R. Livingston, U. S. Minister to Paris, France, from Captain Edward
Preble, U. S. Bavy

UNITED
STATESSHIP CowtitUtion
Messina Harbour 86th May 1804
SIR,I have the honor to enclose you duplicate of my letter from
Naples of the 15th i n ~ t a n t ,since which time nothing material haa
transpired. I arrived here yesterday and find that the Gun Boats
which the King of Naples has loaned us are all ready for Sea, but the
Bomb Vessels require repairs to make them serviceable which it will
take two or three weeks to effect; as soon as they are finished I shall
commence my operations against Tripoly.
[LC. EPP, LB, Dec. 1803-April 1804.1
Extract from journal of U, S. Brig Argus, Master Commandant Isaac Ed, U. S.
Bavy, commanding, Saturday, 26 Hay 1804

Cruising on and off Tripoli
This day begins with light breezes and Clear Weather a t 3 Captains
Stewart Decatur and Dent came on board set and took in sail Occas?
At 10 the Captains returned on board their Respective Ship a t
sunrise the town of Tripoli bore W S W diste 8 miles a t j4 past 10
filled away standing in for the town in Company with the k e n [NDA photostat.]

122 NAVAL OPERATIONS, APRIGSEPTEMBER 6, 1804
To John Broadbent, U. S. Navy Agent, Messina, from Cap*
U. 6. Navy

Edward Preble

U. S. SHIPConatitUtion
Messina hrbor May S7'@1804
SIR I do hereby appoint you Agent for the S uadron of the U. S.
under my command in the Mediterranean, Aut orizing you to p u chase supplies as may be wanted for the use of the Said Squadron, to
issue the same and to transact all such business as is generally transacted by Agents.
You FOiU a t all times supply the ships & vessels of the Squadron
with such articles as they may want, on the requisition of their
respective commanders, taking Duplicate Reciepts for the same -.
From the representation I have made to the Navy Department,
I have no doubt that the President of the U. S. will confirm you as
Navy Agent for this place
[LC. EPP, Order Book, May 1803-June 1805.1

1

To Captain William Bainbridge, U. S. Navy, from George Davis, U. S, Charge
d'dffaues, Tunis

TUNIS
May 27'9 1804.
SIR,A Vessel sailed for Tripoli with my Passport on the 24'5 ultimo,
having on b a r d one thousand Dollars for the use of the W c e r s &
Seamen, a t which period I ofler'd you a line, forwarding a t the same
time several letters from the Commodore, Consul Lear &c &c - all
of which I trust have come safe to hand.
The reports relative to the Situation of our Officers & Seamen, are
different; all however combine in speaking much of the humane
an kind attention of the Prime Minister Mahomed Dghies. - It is
most certain, that the restrictions under which you are placed, with
respect to receiving communications from your friends; and a prevention of seeing the Consuls, are unprecedented severities; but as sound
Policy on the part of E s Excellency, urges a mitigation of this rigour;
I trust, interested motives, (if humane ones, are u1
have ere
this relaxed the Gfllling chain.
The incalculable movements of all Europe, predict a new era, big
d h the fate of Kingdoms, States, Empires, & M70rlds. - An epocha,
more replete, with the destiny of Governments, than any period since
the downfd of Rome. Recent arrivals from Marseilles inform us,
that Bonaparte, is actually declared Emperor of the @auk, King of
Namrre & Italy,to be continued in his descendants. Private letters
to various characters, state, that he is to be divorced, and marries the
Sister of Alexander the Emperor of Russia. - his brother also forms
some Ro d connection, to provide against the failure of issue on the
art of t e first. - What d be the probable result? The fate o j the
P m r 8 , the commerr& ezidence of &eat Bvilain, tFR Ottoman
Enzpire, are all inmlped in such an event.
A Russian fleet is daily expected in these Serts, consisting of thirty
Sail - the fleet of the Grand Signior, is ordered to Sea with all posof NAPLEB,
has now, a Maritime
sible expedition - even FERDINAND
force cruising in two divisione-€?harIes of Spain, seems also to have
taken a decisive part ainet that Power, whom he o h t most to
dread: in a word each ower, seeme pre ruing for self efence; and
in such a way, tis wholly leaves in the fiefd of conjecture, tbe W o w

'9

K ~ rc n

Y

1

WARS WITH BARBARY POWEBS

123

politicians of Tunis. - I much regret that your immediate position
does not allow me to offer any comments on the picture before us.
Commodore Preble, sailed from this Port, on the 2q Inst. with MT
O'Brien; from whom I have the pleasure to enclose you a letter. - I
have recently received several packages from my friends in the U.
States, with letters from Government of 26tQ December, and fancy
that Cathcart, is now biting with Sorrow the dust of his folly. - I
have reason to Suppose that Commode Morris, has resign'd; the
motives for which, are unknown to me; or at least offered in such a
way as does not authorize me to enter into a detail [NYHS. Geo. Davis LB, Vol. 1.1
Extract from Diary of Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Navy, Commodore of U. 8.
Squadron in the Mediterranean, Sunday, 27 May 1804

The General of the marine department, Admiral Espluger informed
me I might take possession of the six Gun boats, and that the two
Bomb Vessels would be ready in three weeks, received a supply of
six hundred rounds of Powder &- Shott for the Gun Boats, the Neapolitan Powder is not so strong by one third as the American, arrived
and sailed his Britanic majestys Ship Maidstone, Surgeons report 5
sick, 7 convalescent
[LC. EPP,Diary, 1803-1804.1
Extract from journal of U. S. Brig Argus, Master Commandant Isaac Bull, U. S.
Navy, commanding, Sunday, 27 May 1804

Cruizing on and off Tripoli
a t 1 P ht, Caps Hull went on board the Syren & returned at # past 6
filled away and wore Ship to the S W,
[NDA photostat.]
Extract from journal of Midshipman F. Cornelius deKrafft, U. S. Navy, in U. S.
Brig Siren of 18 guns, Haster Commandant Charles Stewart, U. S. Navy,
commanding, S ~ d a y 27
, May 1804

Light breezes & pleasant, the Argus in Co: At 1 hove too. Lieu!
Hull came on board. At 5 Lf Hull return'd fill'd away. At 7
Tri oli bore S # W 4 leagues. At 8 reef'd the topsails - The Argus
in 0:
Latt: Obs: 33'4' N

E

[NDA.]
To Master Commandant Isaac Chauncey, U. 6. Navy, Washington, D. C., from
Secretary of the Navy

NAVYD E P ~- May 28,1804

-

I enclose letters directed to Frederick Degen eaqr Na les Will' Higgins esqr
~ J ta
George Dyson esqr
Syracuse containing their Appointments as Navy Agents at the places of their
respective residencies. Be pleased to forward them by the earliest
conveyance.
INDA. OSW,Vol. 6, 1802-1805.1

124 NAVAL OPERATIONS, APRILSEPTEMBER 6 , 1804
To Degen, Purviance & Co., Leghorn, from Secretary of the Navy

Nav. DEP*May 28'Q 1804

The following Gentlemen are appointed navy agents for this Department Viz Frederick Degen Esq for Naples
George Dyson Esq - for Syracuse
William Higgins Esq for Malta
They are empowered to draw on you for the amount of the Supplies
that may be furnished by them respectively to our Squadron their
bills must be Countersigned by the Officer Commanding the Ship
that receives the Supplies
[NDA. GLB,Vol. 7, 1803-1805.1
To James Monroe, 0.S. Minister to London, England, from James Mackenzie
and A. Qlennie, London, England

NEW BROAD
STREET,May 88'h 1804
SIR We beg leave to lay before your Excellency the enclosed copy
of correspondance by which i t will appertr that a fraud to the extent
of $4000. Sterling has been committed on the United States of
America and Commrq Edward Preble commanding their Squadron in
the Mediterranean - Your Excell? will fhd that as agents to the
Navy department of the U. S. we received a letter of the 14t@July
1803 from Rob$Smith Esqr the Secretary of that department advising
us of the Squadron & that the commanding Officers would draw on
us for the Disbursements of their Vessels - This letter was received
by us on the 9th of November last; it was forwarded by Mr JnQGavino
the Agent of the United States a t Gibraltar and its authenticity is
not questioned - . By the same post we received the letter purporting to be from Commr"dw.
Preble under date of 27th of Septemr and
Stated in the correspondence advising his havin drawn upon us six
setts of Bills of Exchange, makmg in the who e £4000. Sterling,
which bills were presented for acceptance by respectable merchants
on the 9th & 15th of November, were imm? accepted by us & paid the
24 & 8'h December following - . On the 15'h of Novemr we wrote
Commq Edw. Preble acknowledging the receipt of his letter & of the
Honor paid to his drafts - On the 8" of Decemr following we wrote
to Robs Smith Esqr Secretary acknowledging the receipt of his letter
of credit and with advice of our having honored the Bills of Commrq
Preble for £4000. and placed the same to the debit of the Navy Department, & on the 27'Q Feb? we forwarded the Original bills to
Robt Smith Esq? the Secretary in America which we are directed in
all cases to do - We could not be aware of any irregularity and
were therefore much surprized to receive a letter from Commrc
Preble under date of the 7tchMarch last, a copy of which & our reply
thereto, our Excell? will find in the correspondence and we trust your
Excr d s e e that i t was not in our power to act in any other manner
than we did - The letter of credit from the Secreta
camewas
by forthe
same post with the letter of Advice of the Bills; the atter
warded b the res ectable house of Mayne & Brown of Lisbon & who
superscri ed the !
Ietter as having forwarded it, and the respect that
was due to the Bills of an Officer placed in so high a station by the
United States made us immr honor them - The respectable hande

f

7

g

125

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

through which the bills had passed & by whom they were presented
together with the letter of credit from the Secretary that sccompanied them made i t impossible to suspect, & the want of being furnished with the Commodores Signature made i t equally impossible
to detect, as he had not before drawn any bills upon us -. Under
these circumstances we have to hope that your Excellency will be
satisfied that no possible blame can attach to us, that we had not the
means of prevention and that ou will represent i t to the goverment
of the United States according y - I t is impossible for us to suggest
by what means the fraud has been committed; but it must be obvious
that it has been done by some person in the confidence of the Commodore & well acquainted with his Authority - By our enquiries
here we have reason to think that the bills came through Cadk to
Lisbon, and as the Original bills were sent to America before any
suspicion arose, and what occurred h a . taken place in a foreign
country, there does not appear any act which we as individuals can
do, to unravel the m stery - But you Exc? in your official capacity
may do more, & we eg to submit to you the Propriety of your writing to the Minister or Consul of the U. S. at Lisbon to ascertain from
the House of Mayne & Brown there, the means by which & the Person
a t Cadiz from whom they received the same, and to furnish the
Minister or Consul at the latter place with information from which
& what your Excellency may write him,he must not only be able to
trace the fraud to it's Original source, but may be able to obtain
that redress through the means of a public minister which Individuals
resident here could not do in a distant country If your Excellency should approve the measure we beg leave to
offer our assistance m any way that we can to furnish the means of
en uiry and shall with much pleasure wait on you a t any time you
be pleased to appoint [LC. EPP, LB, April-Nov. 1804.1

i

g

d

Navy, from James Simpson, U. 6. Consul,
Tangier, Yorocco
COPYTANGIER May 1804.DEARSIR My last respects to you was the 226 Feb? since when I
have not been favoured with any from you. - The Emperours new
Ship Maimom of 30 Guns and Seventy Men is about to sail from
Salle for Lisbon, to be there Coppered and her e uipment completed - the two Ships at Larach are getting ready or Sea, but no
time has yet been fixed upon for their departure. - The Galleys will
no doubt also Cruize as usual. - The Mother and Family of a
young Man named Mohamet Ben Ally Ben Seid, who was on board
the Vessel you captured some time since comeing from Trip01 , have
a plied to me for his enlargement, and as I can vouch for his eing a
Jative of this place, and that his Famil and connections are all here,
I doubt not but you will give him his li erty, in conformity to the engagements to that effect in the Treaty of 1786. - Your speedy
answer on this point will be very acceptable. The Empemur expressed himself highly satisfied with the Present
of the Gun Carriages - but I am sorry to say they are all for Sea
and not land Service. - I have however told them they will answer
for both; my chief fear is that they will be found short for the Guns
when they come to make use of them. To Captain Edward Preble, U. S.

9

%

g

126 NAVAL OPERATIONS, APRIL-SEPTEMBER 5. 1804
Your Navy Agent to whose care the shipment was trusted sent
but one handspike for each Carriage, which has obliged me to have a
hundred made at Cadiz, that the want might not be reported to the
Emperour. MTBSimpson joins me in every good wish to you, and I beg you
will be assured I am
[LC. EPP, Vol. 11, April-June 1804.1
To James L. Cathcart, Leghorn, from Captain Edward Preble, U. 8. Navy
UNITEDSTATESSHIPConstitution

Messina Hz May 28th 1804.
DEARSIR I am hond with your esteemed favor of the 14th instant
but have not yet received either of the letters you mention to have
written me last month. I think it probable they may have been
sent to Malta.
I sail from this in a few hours with six sail of Gun Boats, and shall
have two Bomb-Vessels ready in 20 days. The Gun Boats are in
fine order; if I can reach Tripoly with this force added to our own
Vessels, I think it probable the Bashaw's Gun Boats and Cruisers
may meet the fate they long since ought to have met with; and his
old walls rattle about his ears.
I am obliged to lay up two of our Schooners in order to mann the
Gun Boats, as no reinforcement has yet arrived, which makes it impossible for me to send a Vessel to Leghorn. I t would afford me
pleasure if I could do it, but I must first have a look at Tripoly. I
do not apprehend you will be in any danger from the Barbary Cruisers
in going to Gibraltar
I beg you to accept my best wishes for a pleasant and safe passage,
and to believe me respectfully
P C . EPP, LB, Dec. 1803-April 1804.1
To John Broadbent, U. 8. Bavy Agent, Messina, from Captain Edward Preble,
U, 8. Bavy

UNITEDSTATESSHIP Constitution

Messinu Harbour 38*@May 1804.

SIR YOU are requested to pay Monthly to the families of the
Ninety six Neapolitans employed in the service of the United States
on board the Gun Boats loaned to us by the King of Naples one half
their monthly pay as it becomes due - Thqir p a , is to be double
what they a t present receive from the Neapohtan ovenunent.
[LC. EPP, LB, Dee. 1803-April 1804.1
To Lieutenant Richard Somere, U. 8. Navy, commanding U. 8. Schooner
Nautilus,from Captain Edward Preble, U. 8. Navy
U. S. FRIGATE CO'?Mt'ddo7t

May 38t41804
SIR You will proceed from this port direct for Syracuse with the
Gun boats of the U. S. NQ1, NQ2, NQ3, NQ4, NQ5, & NQ6 laced
under your command, and on our snival there, wait my arther

N9

P

Orders - You will leave the autilus under the direction of Lt Reid
until1 her repaim are completed, & leave with him the Sail; Master,

WARS WITIT BARBARY POWERS

127

Boatswain, Gunner, Cook, 6 or 8 Seamen & a guard of Marines You will e v e MT Reid orders to prepare the Nautilus for Sea, as soon
as possible
P C . EPP, Order Book, May 1803-June 1805.1

Edract from journal of U.6. Brig Argtu. Master Commandant Isaac Hull,U.6. Navy,
commanding, Yonday, 28 l a y 1804

At 8 AM Tripoli bore SSE 6 E distt 8 hliles
At Meridian Spoke the U. S Brig S y e n the Scourge and Vizen in
Company
[NDA photostat.]
To Lieutenant John Caasin, U. S. Navy, Navy Yard, Washington. D. C., from
Captain John Bodgera, U. S. Bavy

U. S. FRIGATE
Congress One Mile
above Maryland Point May 29% 1804
SIR I left Alex+yesterday morning about 9 O'Clock, and anchor'd
here at 5 the same Evening, Twenty one feet was the least Warter I
had coming over Matta Woman Shoal, altho I cross'd i t in the last
quarter of the Ebb. I am now filling up all my Wsrter, but wilI not
venture to take my Guns on board, untill I pass Maryland Point, so
soon as the Wind changes, which is now a t S. E. I shall proceed s
few Miles down for that purpose, - If the Wind shifts in our favour
I am in hopes yet to be in Hampton Rhoads, with all our Guns & the
Schooners Cargo of Beff & Pork, which accompanied me here, on
board, in 3 or 4 days - Nothing shdl prevent me from getting out
of the Potomack as soon as possible, on man accounts, I t appears
to me im ssible that a crew can be hedthg, w L e drinking this warter
in an un ermented state. A number of our people have got a Cursed
Desuntary already I send you two small lists which I beg your attendance to forwarding
as soon as possible - King, has got the dimentiom of every thing
in the Iron way, inserted in the list, as also the Block maker, I think
i t advisable that you put the Powder & such rovision as you have
to send down into good Craft, in w e they ave to follow me to
Hamton Roads - be pleased to send three looking Glasses by some
conveyance which were shipped round from Balto. in the Schoo. PoUy
& Satly, Keith master which I have not yet recieved. [LC. JRP, Letters & Orders, Book A, 1804-1505.1

P"

g

To Captain John Rodgers, U. S. Bavy, commanding U. S. Rigate &we=, from
Secretary of the Bavy

NAW DEP*2gt@May I804 Herewith you will receive your authority to subdue, seize and make
nze of dl vessels, ods, and effecb belonging to the Bashaw of
h p o l i or to his ~ u g e c t s ,and also the Statute upon which that
Authority is founded.
You will place yourself under the command of Commodore Samuel
B m o n and obey such orders as you may receive from him.
I8imilsr letters sent to Captain Jamea Banon of t h e &aex and Captain

G.Campbell of the C o ~ f d W hdated
,
29 M a y 1804.1
WDA. LB,:1794-1807.1

128 NAV& OPERATIONS, APRIL-SEPTEMBER 6,1804
To Captain Edward Preble, 0. 6. Navy, *om Secretary of the Navy

NAw DEP t 29 May I804 Capt Chauncey is the Bearer of this Letter. He commands the
Store-Ship John Adam, having on board for the use of our public
Shi , Bread, Beef, Pork $9 per Invoice which he wiil hand to you.
~ g o u l dyou have an Expedition on foot in which you may require
immediately the services of the John Adams, you will detain her for
such an Enterprize. If you should not require the services of the
John Adam, you d
lorder Cap$Chauncey to return immediately to
the Eastern Branch touchmg however on his way out of the Mediterranean a t such ports for Convoy as you may direct. It is intended
to keep the John A h constantly employed as a Provision Vessel,
therefore you will perceive that it will not be proper to detain her
longer than is absolutely necessary. I enclose Letters to M' Stewart, Mr Hull, h.lr Smith and MF Somers,
containing their Commissions as Masters Commandants in the Navy.
I also enclose a letter for h4c Dent, containing his Commission as a
Lieutenant Commandant, and s letter to bl' Morris with his Warrant
as a Purser,alI of which be pIeased ta deliver. [NDA. LB, 1799-1807.1
Extract from journal of U. S. Brig Argus, M~eterCommandant Isaac Bull, U. S.
Navy, commanding,Tuesday, 29 Hay 1804

Cruizing on and off Tripoli
a t 3 Cap$ Dent Came on board and returned to the Scourge at 8,
Wore Ship to the Northw* Tripoli bearing S, S, W,
[RTDA photostat.]
Brtraat from Diary of Captain Edward Preble, U. 8. Navy, Commodore of U. 8.
Squadron in the Mediterranean, Tuesday, '29 Yap 1804

Moderate breezes from the N & E and pleasant weather, I this day
ordered Lieutenant Somers to take command of the Gun Boats for
the present with all of the Officers and Crew of the Nautitua to man
them, except one Lieutenant, the master, Boatswain, Clerk, and a few
etty officerssnd twehe or fifteen men to take care of her and prepare
Eer for sea as Bwn as her repsirs are finished, I dso agreed with the
Generd of Marines to ship Fifteen Neapolitans to serve in each Boat
under our flag, sent two Midshipman on board each Boat from this
sbip to assist in sailing them to Syracuse, - The boats me all Sloop
Rigged with a latteen sail & Jib, they are about 25 tons and one long
24 pounder in the Bow, I have engaged two Bombardiers here for
the mortar boats, [LC. EPP, Diary, 1803-1804.1
Extract from log book kept by Sailing Xaater Nathaniel Hamden, U. S. Bevy,
on board U. S. Frigate C01wtihrfim. Tueeday, e9 Yay 1804

Moderate breezes from the N E. - At Single Anchor in Messina The Commodore hss selected from ra number ;6 Gun boats & 2 Mortar
Boats which are to be employed againet T r i p l y - The Bombards
me under repair & will not be ready for some time - This day Cspt
Somers with all the crew of the Nautilus (a few exce ted who sre left
to take care of her) was ordered on board the Six un bocbte which

&

WARS WITH BARBABY POWERS

129

are now under American colors The following Mates & Midshipmen
were appointed to them from the Constitution Viz Messrc Reid &
Deacon Mates - Messr* Brown, Ridgely, Laws, Nicholson, Hall,
Casey & Marcellin Midshipmen.
These Gun boats are about 25 Tons, Sloop rigged with a Lateen
sail c a r e One 24 P* - Fifteen Sicilians are attached to each
besides the Nautilw's men - Supplied them this day (for which
the Purser of the Nautilw reciepts) with 6 Barrf beef, 1029 Ib bread lent them also 14 bags. A Bombardier is also employed by the Commodore to attend the repair of the Bombards We also supplied the
Gun boats with 46 bbls of Naples powder, 41%rottolo each make 1903
rottolo deduct 8 rottolo pr bbl leaves 1535 rottolo
One hundred Rottolo is equal to 180 English Ib, which makes the
powder supplied the gun boats 2763 lb. - Surgeons report same as
yesterday
[LC. EPP,Log Constitution, 1803-1804.1
To Secretary of the Navy from laster Commandant Isaac Channcey, U. 8, Navy

U. S. FRIGATE
John Adam 30*h MAY1804
SIR I herewith transmit you a Cop of the Muster Roll of this
day, by which you will perceive that have the whole Number of
Men and Boys contemplated for this Ship, but not of that Description
ordered; We have sixteen Ordinary Seamen and Nine Boys instead
of that Number of Seamen; We also have four uarter Masters
and four Boatswains Mates more than we are entitle to, but can be
made to do Duty as Seamen, and rated on the Books as such
I dso have the honor of informing You, that the John Adams is
now ready to roceed for Hampton Roads the first fair Wind, I have
the Honor to e
[NDA. MC LB, 1804-5.1

f

8

!

[About 30 May 1804?]
Concerning "Free Flags" and "Subject Flags"

Memo.
There are various Countries who in their commercial arrangements
with the court of Naples have stipulated peculiar and very advantaow priviledges for their Merchant Vessels such as England, France,
fi?olland, the Ottoman Empire b. some others, in come uence of which
he advantages
the flags of these Nations are here deemed freeJlas8.
arising to these Nations are, that their Vessels are not subject to visit
of the Custom House. They are relieved from the necessity of manifesting their Cargoes within a limited period after their arrival need
only m d e s t their respective package^ as they wish to land them.
everythmg when once on board the Vessels is free from search, and
their sides are sacred even from the approach of an armed force of
the Country. The Veasele of the Nations not having a commercial
treat are deemed Su 'ectJlag8, among which are the Americans, Danes
SW&
&c*and are o li ed to give in a manifest of their whole Cargoes within 24 H o w 8 t e r they receive prattique to make known
thus the exact contente of the Cargoes they bri to enter into Bonds
to produce certificates of landing of any goods w ch once manifested
they may wish to carry elsewhere to produce these Bonds from the

9.

?I

"eh,

130 NAVAL OPERATIONS. APRIL-SEPTEMBER 6 . 1804
place for which they clear them out they are subject on their arrival,
a t their departure, and even a t any intermediate period to the search
of the Custom House and the slightest irregularity or disagreement
with the manifest or clearance subjects them to the most serious consequences, even to the forfeiture of Vessel and Cargo The many
advantages in favor of the former are too obvious to need comment,
and it is no less so, how beneficial it would be to the United States,
if by some arrangement with the Neapolitan Government their Vessels could be placed on the footing of the most favored Nations KC. EPP, LB, Dec. 1803-ApriI 1804.1
To Secretary of the Navy from Captain Edward Preble, U. 6. Navy

UNITEDSTATESSHIP Constitaim
Syracuse Harbour $Otb May 1804
SIR I had the honor to enclose you triplicate dispatches from
Naples Bay the 15th instant. I left that Bay on the 20tQand arrived
a t Messina the 25* where the Nautilus was still repairing. I regret
that it has been found necessary to give her a thorough repair, and
new copper her. She has been coppered with the copper brought out
in this Ship. Her repairs will be finished in three weeks. At Messina
I r e d six Gun Boats, each carrying a long 24 pounder with a sufEcient
quantity of Shot, Powder, Small Arms &c+ - and arrived here this
morning with them. I have taken the principal part of the Officers
and Crew of the Nautilus to bring them round to this Harbour leaving
however the 1st Lieut and a sufficient number of the crew to get her
in readiness for sea when her repairs are finished. The two Bomb
Vessels which we are to have are repairing with great expedition and
will be ready for sea in 12 or 14 days a t farthest; as soon as they are
compleated for service they will sail for Tripoly with the Gun Boats.
I have been obliged to discharge a part of the Crew of the Enterprize,
and with the remainder of them and the crew of the Nautilus I shall
mann the Gun & Mortar Boats. I t is to be hoped some reinforcement to the Squadron will shortly arrive, otherwise we shall attack
Tripoly under many disadvantages, but as the season for Action will
soon pass away we must make an attem t which if i t succeeds will
be the more glorious to the Officers an Seamen of the S uadron.
The Bashaw has encreased his Batteries and Gun Boats, an considem himself so safe as to defy our utmost exertions against him, a
short time will determine how far he is right
I have 'ust received intelligence of the sailing of twelve sail of
Tunisian &misers from their Bay, and shall sail immediately for it to
learn their object. The Officers prisoners a t Tripoly continue to be
close confined and well treated. the Seamen and Marines are obliged
to work hard, fare hard, and are badly treatred. - I shall go from
Tunis Bay off Tripoly.
Our Brigs and Schooners have had several spats with the Enemy's
Gun Boats and Batteries, but little damage has been done -I have
24 pounders which I
borrowed from the King of Naples six lo
intend to put on the deck of some Merchant"$essel to be hired for the
purpose as a floatin Battery, but have mounted them on the upper
deck of this Ship. &hey are fine Battering Cannon, and I expect will
do good service PC. EPP, LB, Apd-Nov. 1804.1

B

1

131

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

Extract from Diary of Captain Edward Reble, 0.8. Navy, Commodore of U. 8.
Squadron in the Mediterranean, Wednesday, 30 Xay 1804

At anchor in Massina, Gave a receipt to the General of Marina
for the Six Gun Boats and their military & Naval Stores, appointed
Mr Broadbent Naval Agent for the uadron, and left orders with
him to pay the families of those Neapo 'tans in our service half their
monthy pay as it becomes due, hoisted the United States Flag on
each of the Boats, at 10 A M weighed & sailed with the six Gun
boats in company, they are distinguished by numbers Vizc KOQ1, 2,
3 , 4 , 5 & 6, at noon we were about 3 leagues S W from Massina

"t

[LC. EPP, Diary, 1803-1804.1
Extract from log book kept by Sailing Master Nathaniel Haraden, U. 6. Navy,
on board U. 8. Frigate Constttutio~Wednesday, SO May 1804

Moderate breezes from the Eastward. At Single Anchor in Messina - clearing Ship for Sea - At 6 P. M. made the Signal to the
Gun boats to prepare to Sail - Supplied them with an Ensign & pendant each, exclusive of 22 signal flags made from the Old signals belonging to the Constitdon - Moderate breezes from N E during the
night. At 7 A. M. the wind shifted to N N W - ran a Kedge out to
the Eastward, two hundred fath-t
9 A. M. a shore boat came
alongside with 9 hands as assistants or Pilots - At 10 A. M, weighed,
slipped the Hawsers, and came to sail - At this time our 6 gun
boats were under weigh & running out in the Offing One of our cutters was left with the shore boat in order to bring off the Hawser &
Kedge which they did by 11 A. M. Bore up and made sail thro' the
Straits to the Southe in Order to proceed to Saragosa, bearing from
us S b W % W 66 Miles - The Squadron of Gun Boats S W near 6
Miles Lt Somers of the Nautilus is Commanding Officer of the Gun
boats
The direct course thro' the Straits of Messina is S W near1 20
Miles - There is no danger 50 fath? from shore on either si e These Streights should never be attempted in a gale of Wind - There
are two low points on Sicily side & one the other side - The Ebb
which runs to the North'J will b
you home on Sicily side; and the
Flood which runs to the Southg wil bring you home on the other side.
There is Anchorage on either side In some places One cable's length
& in other places two, from the shore
Surgeons report 5 sick, 6 convalescent.
We are 9 Miles S W from Messins - The Squadron of Gun boats
S W - 2 Miles -.
[LC. EPP, Log Constitution, 1803-1804.1

B

9

To John Bandolph, Jr., Farmville, Va., from Secretary of the Navy

NAV.D E PMay
~
31. 1804

I have received your
I enclose a letter to
deliver at Ham ton - the Squadron will

?

in the course o two weeks from this date
Orders for your friend to be received on board of such ship aa can
most conveniently afford him room - The ships will all go in the h t
instance to Gibraltar thence proceed to Syracuse - The John A h

132 NAVAL OPERATIONS, APRIL-SEPTEMBER 6, 1804
a Provision ship armed en$& will return immediately touching probably a t Naples & Leghorn on her way out of the Mediterranean to
afford convoy to our merchant Vessels - If your Friend pleases he
may return in the John Adums he could join her a t Naples or Leghorn
[NDA. GLB, Vol. 7, 1803-1805.1

[31 May 18041
To Captain Samuel Barron, IT. S. Wavy, from President Thomas Jefferson

THOMAS
JEFFERSON
-

President of the United States of
America
INSTRUCTIONS (Seal)

To Commodore Samuel Barron Commanding a Squadron of Armed
Vessels belonging to the United States: Given a t the City of Washington in the District of Columbia this
31.st. Day of May, in the Year of our Lord, one thousand eight
hundred and four, and in the 38* Year of our Independence WHEREAS, i t is declared by the Act entitled "an Act for the
protection of the Commerce and Seamen of the United States, against
the Tripolitan Cruisers" That it Shall be lawful fully to equip, Officer,
Man and employ, Such of the Armed Vessels of the United States,
as may be judged requisite by the President of the United States, for
protecting effectually the Commerce and Seamen thereof, on the
Atlantic Ocean, the Mediterranean and adjoining Seas: and also,
that i t shall be lawful for the President of the United States to instruct
the Commanders of the respective public Vessels, to subdue, seize,
and make prize, of all vessels, goods and effects, belonging to the Bey
of Tripoli or to his Sub'ects WHEREFORE, an in pursuance of the said Statute, You are
hereby authorized and directed to subdue, seize, and make rize, of
i , to
all vessels, goods and effects, belonging to the Bey of ~ r i ~ o for
his subjects, and to bring or send the same into port, to be proceeded
against and distributed according to Law AND in virtue of the Act of Congress entitled. "an Act further to
protect the Commerce and Seamen of the United States, against the
Barbary powers". You will consider Yourself hereby further authorised and directed to proceed against any other of the Barbary Powers
which may commit hostiIities against the United States, in the same
manner, and to the same extent, as You have been Authorized and
directed to proceed against the Vessels, goods, and effects belonging
to the Bashaw of Tripoli or to his Subjects Sign4 - TH.JEFFERSON
Preeident of the United St&8 of America
(seal)
By command of the President of the United States of America
Sign4 Rt SMITH

d

Secretary of the Navy

[Mrs.James 8. Barron original, and NDA. LB, 1799-1807.1

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

133

To Captain Bomuel Banon, U. 8. Ravy, from Becretary of the Xavy

NAVYDEPM~
May 31,1804-

Sensible as you must be that i t is the interest as well as the disposition of the United States to maintain the rights of Neutral nations,
you will, I trust, cautiously avoid whatever may ap ear to you to be
incompatible with those rights. It is, however, cfeemed necessary
and I am charged by the President to state to you what, in his opinion,
characterizes a Blockade. I have therefore to inform you that the
Trade of a neutral nation in articles not contraband, cannot be rightfully obstructed to any Port not actually blockaded by a force so disposed before it as to create an evident danger of entering it. Whenever
therefore you shall have thus formed a Blockade of the port of Tripoli,
you will have a right to prevent any vessel from entering it and to
capture for adjudication any vessel that shall attempt to enter the
same with a knowledge of the existence of the Blockade. You will
however not take as prize an vessel attempting to enter the port of
Tripoli without such knowle&e; but in every case of an attempt to
enter without a previous knowledge of the existence of the Blockade,
ou will give the Commanding Officer of such vessel notice of such
Slockade and forewarn him from entering. And if after such a notXoation such vessel should again attempt to enter the same port, you will
be justifiable in sending her into port for adjudication.
You will, Sir, hence perceive that you are to consider circular communications to the neutral powers not as evidences that every person
attempting to enter had previous knowledge of the Blockade, but
merely as friendly notifications to them of the Blockade in order that
they might make the necessary arrangements for the dis-continuance
of all commerce with such Blockaded port. [NDA. LB, 1799-1807.1
To Captain Samuel Barron, U. S. Navy, from Secretary of the Navy

NAVYD E PMay
~ 31,1804 Herewith you will receive your Authority to subdue, seize, and
make prize of all Vessels, Goods, and Effects belonging to the Bashaw
of Tripoli or to his subjects, which likewise comprehends your Authority to subdue, seize, and make prize of all Vessels, Goods, and Effects
belonging to any other of the Barbary Powers, which may commit
hostilities against the United States.
In executing the duties arising out of your Commission, you will
attend to the following regulations & instructions.
Your Commission extendmg only to the Vessels, Goods, and
Effects belongin to the Bashaw of Tripoli or to his Subjects, and to
the vessels, goo s and effects of any other of the Barbary Powers
which may commit hostilities against the United States, you will
bear in mind that the rights of all other nations are to be duly respected: that we are a t peace and wish to continue a t peace with them
and that we are desirous of being distinguished for our attention and
adherence to all the Rights of humanity and hospitality, as well as
for finnness in support of the honor of our Country. You are to refrain from exercising the powers of capturing, o r of
re-capturing in waters within the jurisdichonal Limits of any nahon
a t peace with us. The Marine League is the distance from the Shores

3

134 NAVAL OPERATIONS, APRIGSEPTEMBER

6, 1804

on which our Government acts. We must respect their Sovereignty.
We s h d scrupuIously and without Indulgence examine Chat conduct
which shall bring us into Collision with any other power.
All vessels, goods, and effects captured in virtue of your Commission, must, if practicable, be sent into some port of the United
States, and to be proceeded against and distributed according to
Law. They must be accompanied by all passes, charter-parties, commissions, Bills of Lading,Invoices, Letters and other Documents and
writings found on Board, which are ~LIbe directed to the Judge of the
District to which such prize may be ordered to proceed. You will
keep in mind that a Vessel captured by you cannot be adjudicated by
any of our Courts unless she be brought into some port of the United
states.
In all Cases of re-capture ou will endeavour to accommodate the
owner or owners of the Vesse s re-captured, by making such Arrangements with them as will permit them to prosecute their voyages.
With respect to Prisoners, i t will be desireable if a cartel can be
established to effect an exchange. If this should be found impracticable, you will then dispose of the Prisoners to any of the powers a t
war with their respective Countries with a reservation that they shall
be restored to the United States in the event of their demanding them
on an adjustment of their Merences. If this plan should dso be found
impracticable, you will dispose of the Prisoners at your discretion, so
as not to be a t any Expence to the United States if i t can be properly
avoided. All the Officers under our Command will receive their Instructions
from you for the p m e r J a s well ss for The particular government of
their Conduct. They are all clothed with Commissions to subdue,
seize, and make prize of all vessels, goods and effects belonging to
The Bashaw of Tripoli or to his Subjects. They w i l l take their orders
from you with respect to their conduct towards any other of The
Barbary Powers that may Commit hostilities, against the United
states. As the OfXcers of the Squadron will occasiond require advances of
mall aums of money to procure Clothing suita le to their stations,
and other Articles, they may be indulged; care however must be taken
that the sums advanced do not exceed the amounts due.
With respect to payments to Marines abroad, you may make
occasional advances to the Officers Commanding the Marines on
board of the respective Ships, to make s m d payments to the privatesBut these advances must not exceed one third of the Sums due.

3

E

[NDA. LB. 1799-1807.1

To Captain Samuel Bsrron, U. 8. Navy, from Secretary of the Xavp
NAVYD E P ~May 31.1804 With respect to the Crew of the late fngate Phdladelphia, now
Captives in Tripoli, i t becomes us to d e v i a t e their sufferings as far
as we can consistently do it. With this view we think i t will be
expedient to transmit to Ms Keith Spence s m d sums of mone from
time to time, to be by him applied to the urchase of such C othing
and Provisions as Csptein Bainbri e or in !si absence Lt Porter may
deem neceesary for the comfort o the crew. - Mr Keith Spenw
wrrs &hep u m of the PRWEphia and Has the acoounts of the crew

"H

r'

WARS WITH BARBARY POWEBS

135

and knows what is due each individual, and the component arts of
the ration. It will be well for you to require of him a due ro of the
Crew, and you will instruct him in the issues of revisions not to
exceed the rations allowed by Law, and in the pure me and issues of
Clothing he must be governed entirely by Captain Bainbridge or in
his absence by Lt Porter. He must keep the original Bills of purchase
upon which he may charge for his Trouble and responsibility 10 pg
Cent. These Bills must be signed by Cap! Bainbridge or Lieu'
Porter, and must be exhibited to this department in the settlement
of The Accounts of Mr Spence. Upon the purchase of provisions,
which must be under the same restrictions, he is to charge nothing for
his Trouble.
I am not certain that Clothing can be purchased in Tripoli. You
will be better able to ascertain on your mlivd in that quarter, and will
use your discretion either to send to M' S ence funds for purchasi
them in Tripoli, or send the Clothing itse f to Mc Spence. You
judge which will be most expedient, and you will also judge as to the
manner of furnishing the Supplies. Probably it will be the better
plan to send them to some foreign Agent in that Regency, of friendly
dispositions towards us, with directions to deliver them as they may
be required. I commit the Subject, however, entirely to your
discretion.
We do not conceive that i t would be proper to advance any money
to the privates of the Crew. -

fi

%

P

3

[XDA. LB, 1794-1807.1
To Captain Ssmuel Barron, U. S. Navy, from Secretary of the Navy
NAVYD E P ~May $1. 1804 -

The Establishment of an Hospital for the Sick and Disabled Seamen
of the Squadron, has been heretofore allowed, but no such establishment has as yet, I believe, been made. Care must be taken of our
Seamen and great advankges will result from their being made
sensible that we regard them as an useful Class of Citizens and in all
respects deserving of our Care and Attention. I deem it therefore
proper to invest you with a discretionary power to establish an
Hospitd in Syracuse, if permitted, or in some other of the most
healthy ports in the vicinity of Tripoli. You may commit the
Superintendency of it to one of the Surgeons of the Fleet and if necessary allow him a Mate. A Chest of PvIedicines was sent out to Gibraltar to be used in such an establishment. Should you find it there,
you will take it with you and use it if you find it necessary, and another
will go out in the present Squadron.
P. S. Doctor Cutbush being the oldest Surgeon in the Squadron,
you will appoint him to the Hospital.
[NDA. LB, 179S1807.1

-

To Captain Samuel Barron, U. 0. Bavy, from Secretary of the Navy

NAVYD E PMay
~ $1,1804 Captain W* Bainbridge having solicited an investigation of his
conduct with respect to the loss of the late frigate P h W p h i a , I have
to direct that should Capo Bainbridge be released from Captivity, you

136 N A V B OPERATIONS, APRIL-SEPTEMBER 6, 1804
will take some convenient opportunity while in the Mediterranean, and
call a court of enquiry upon him. You will appoint Cap5 John
Rodgers, Captain Jay Banon, & Cap$Hugh G. Campbell members of
The Court, with directions to enquire into the circumstances, and to
report to you their opinion thereon, which you will transmit to me. [NDA. LB, 1794-1807.1

To Captain Edward Preble, U. 8. Navy, from Secretary of the Navy

Naw D E P MMay
~ 81,1804 The John Adums carries out a Crew entered for two years. This
Crew you must put on Board of The Enterprize, if you cannot re-enter
the present Crew of the Enterprize which however it is hoped you will
be able to do. You may offer to the Able Seamen 12 - to the
ordinary Seamen 8, and to the Boys 6 Dollars. If you cannot re-enter
them they must be put on Board of The John Adam and sent to this
The ubject
is submitted to your discretion. COmT
with her.
[KDA. LB, 1799-1807.1
To Master Commandant Charles Stewart, U. 8. Navy, commanding U. 8. Brig 9nn.
from Midshipman Thomas 0. Anderson, U. 6. Navy

Siren MAY31'; 1804
SIR- I have to inform you of the desertion of five of the men under
my charge from on board the Polacre Ship M a d m [Catapoliana]
lying in the harbor of Malta - On the 9" of May George Brown
and Wm Hays ran from the Ship in the night and went on board an
English Privateer in the harbor under under Quarantine - The
Moment I found out that they had deserted, I went alongside of the
Privateer and demanded them The Captain a t first denied having
them on board but at length acknowledged they were on board, that
it was impossible for him to deliver them up, he having recieved
Orders from Governor Ball not to deliver up any man who called
himself an Englishman & put himself under his protection
May 15'4 William Van Dyke, John Bennett and Wm Due were
taken out of the ship by Lieut Parker of the British frigate Narcissw,
while I was on Shore - I went on board the Frigate and demanded
them of the Captain as American Seamen, but was preremptorily
refused - The reason he assigned was that they called themselves
Englishmen, and had applied to him to take them out of the Ship - I
expostulated with him on the Impropriety of taking American Seamen
out of a Prize belonging to a cruizer of the U. S. - He shewed me an
act that had passed for every Commander in the British Na
take his Majest 'a Subjects where they found them - I told t em
they were not nglishmen, but Americans - He said they Called
themselves Englishmen that they had placed themselves under his
protection and that it was more than his Commission was Worth to
give them up You may be aasured Sir that no endeavors were neglected by me to
recover them and I am Sorry to say there were inefectual-

E

[LC. EPP, Order Book, May 1803-June 1805.1

'E"

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

137

To William Eiggina, U. S. Bavy Agent, Malta, from Maater Commandant lrorc
Hull, U. 8. Bavy

UNITEDSTATESBRIGArgus
ofl Tripoli 31 May 1804
SIR, I take the liberty to send to your care the Ketch Virgine Del
R o s a ~ Prize
,
to the United States Brig A r m , taken lea
Port of Tripoli, I have given Mr Stewart Orders to follow yo=%
tions concerning her, and any other difEculties that may happen him,
ou will learn by the enclosed passport from Consul Davis, and other
gapem, that this Vessel has been sufIered to enter the Port of Tripoli
with an Embassador of the Grand Signior and his Suite, but we now
find her leaving that Port with a number of Slaves on board, which
I have nofdoubt belongs to the Bashaw of Tripoli I am in hopes to be
in Malta before the Ketch gets Pratique but should I not, I wish you
to me your own judgment as respects the Embassador and his Suite,
but dl,except such as entered the port of Tripoli with him, I wish to
have remain on board until further Orders. - I shall be thankfull to
ou for any services rendered Mr Stewart, and your attention to the
%nee Mr Blake left this some days since for Malts, should he be
there'he may be of service in searching the Vessel, and attending to the
Crew & Q Your obedt Servf
(Signed) ISAAC
H m
[NDA. Isaac Hull LB, 1803-1804.1
Extract from log book of U. 8, Brig Argus. 18 (funs,kept by Sailing Master Samuel
B. Brooke, U. 6. Navy, Easter Commandant Isaac E d ,U. 8. Bavy, commanding,

Thursday, Sl May 1804

These 24 hours Commence with Calm and Sultry Weather At 6 wore ship to the S & E Tripoli bore S E 3 Leagues At midnight fine Weather
At 4 AM light breezes At sunrise wore shi and backed the maintopsail Tripoli S W
b S 4 leagues at 8 fi ed away saw a strange sail under the land
towards at 11 boarded her she proved to be a Ketch from
with an Ambisador and Presents to the Grand Signor
of her and sent Mr Stewart Mr Pettigrew and the following men on board of her Viz Livingston Barns, Mathew Pease
JosQMurray Geoo Thorn Jag Hoyt SeamP & Fred8 Smith John
Wilton & Ja* Edlin Marines ordered her for Malta
[LC. EPP, Argzcs, 1804.1

B

&act

from joumal of U. 8. Brig Argus, Master Commandant Isaac Hull, U. S.
Navy, commanding, Thursday, S1 May 1804

Cruiziig on and off Tri oli
This da begin* with
and Sultry Weather Wore Ship to the
N E Tripo ' bearing S M E 3 leagues set and took in sail as Necessary
At 8 AM, saw a Sail under the land Stand6 towards us at 11 boarded
her ahe roved to be a Ketch from Tripoli bound to Malta with an
Ambass!
a or and presents for for the Grand Signior took possesion
of her and Sent her to Malta The Syrm Scourge and V i in compmy* * *

%

[NDA photoetat.]

db

138 NAVAL OPERATIONS, APRILSEPTEMBER 6, 1804
gxtrrrct from log book kept by Sailing Master Nathaniel Earaden, U. 8. Navy,
on board U. S. Frigate Constitulion. Thursday, 31 May 1804

Moderate breezes from N E & pleasant weather. Running along
the side of Sicily between the Gulf of Catania and the Port of Augusta
it fell calm.
with an O h g of 7 Miles - Towards eve
At 8 P. M. Augusta light house bore N
b W ?4 W 6 miles At
Sundown Saragosa in sight from the mast head bearing by compass
S E newly 8 leagues From this time till 2 A. M. light breezes from the E. At )4 past
2 A. M. being dark & hazy & supposing the ship to have ran her
distance we brought to, till day light, when we made sail for Saragosa
bearing W b N. 4 leagues Unstowed the two bowers Light airs or calms till % past 11 A. M. a t which time we came to
in Saragosa in 8 faths % of a Mile W b N from the Light house
Veered to 20 fathoms on the small bower & furled sails. Found
here the U. S. Schooner Enterprize Ll Decatur and Ll Somers with
the 6 gun boats which parted company from us at 10 last evening On anchoring mctde the necessary arrangements for watering shi 20,000 Gallons are wanted to compleat our water - Noon i g h t
Airs from E S E.
Surgeons report 5 sick, 4 convalesc~

=?

[LC. EPP, Log Constitution, 1803-1804.1
To Accountant of the Navy from Secretary of the Bavy

NAV.D E PJune
~ I** 1804
Surgeons and Surgeons mates in the Army being allowed Quarters
and to draw Wood a t the rate of One Cord Pr month from the 1'
October to the 1'8 April and half that Quantity for the other months
of the year and the Surgeons and Surgeons mates of the Navy Stationed a t the navy yard a t Washington being allowed by Law the
same pay and Emoluments; and as I can see no good reason why an
equivalent in mone should not be allowed, in lieu of the Quarters
and Wood, especia y as by allowing it the Commission to the Contractor for the Rent and Purchases will be saved - You will therefore
allow to these officers a t the rate of ten dollars P' month in lieu of
Quarters and the Value of Wood they may be entitled to draw estimated a t the Contract Price or Price paid for Wood Supplied a t the
Marine Barracks -

d

[NDA. GLB, Vol. 7, 1803-1805.1
To Captain Samuel Barron, U. 8. Navy, from Secretary of the Navy

Commodore S. BARBON.
I enclose Commissions for
hlr H. I. Reed
S. Vanschaick
C. Gadsden.
J. T. Leonard.
J. Maxwell

Fv:x
0.H.

.;

Perry.

NAVYDEPM~
June 1, 1804.

J. hi. Gardner
W. Crane
S. G. Blodget Same date
J. Gibbon
A. C . Harrison
D. T. Pattarson
Dl Murray,

1

to be Lieutenante in the Navy of the United States. -

139

WRRS WITH BARBABY POWERS

Let it be known to each of these Gentlemen that such Commisaione
ctre in your possession and will be delivered when they shall appl to
you to be examined and found upon examination to be qualifiedfor
the Station. They are arranged in the preceding List agreeably to
rank. To avoid heart burnings i t would be desirable that this relative
rank should be preserved. If an application for examination should
be made to you by any one of the Gentlemen on this List junior to
the others who may not have applied, you will notify such senior
o£Ecers of the circumstance and also the Officers junior to the A plicant
and inform the Senior Officersthat they may be first examine If they
please - If they decline the offer, the 'unior Officer must then be
mamined and if he should be found c p a d e d for the Station, you ma
deliver his Commission, numbering it agreeably to merit. S&
however keeping in view that where there is only a shade of difference,
and the Senior Officer shall possess qualities which will render him
conspicuous a t some future day, the date of warrant is to be respected,
but m Cases where the junior Officer shall be decidedly superior, you
will give h i rank.
You will not be unmindful of the situation and rights of the unfortunate Midshipmen in Captivity.
There will be several Gentlemen in the Squadron acting as Lieutenants for whom you have no Commissions. Let it be known that
they will be examined under the regulations prescribed for the exsmination of those for whom you have Commissions and that Midshipmen
are not to be promoted in the Navy as a matter of right sccording to
the date of their warrmh. You will keep me informed of all the
examinations that may be made.
Mr MFGrath Sailing Master of The Argus haa resigned - You
ma give him a assage to this country in the John Adans. you
appoint hie uocessor which may be X I ! Suggs or such other
Officer as you may judge most expedient to appoint.
Mr Bsker, Purser of the Siren, has also resigned, Mc Harris, a
Passenger in the Congress, is to take his place, and Mr B a k a is to be
permitted to return to the United States in the John Adam.
Doctor Marshall now in the Siren is to be removed to the Con&&
lation, and Doctor Archer now in the C o n s W i o n is to supply Doctor
Marshall's place as Surgeon of the Siren.
Lieus Livingston I fear is not qualified for the high station he holds
in the Navy. It may be proper to order him home in the John
Adam. You will however exercise your discretion on the subjeot.
The Ships going out are not oflicered a p e a b l y to our wishes. On
your arrival in the Mediterranean you wdl make such disposition of
the O f f i m as may be most advisable.
I have 'ven directions to Commodore Preble to re-enter if prscticable the &ew of the Enterprize whose terms of service have expired.
It will be very agreeable if they can be re-entered - Seamen at 12s
ordinary at 8$ and Boys a t 6$ - If they cannot be re-entered they
are to come home in the John Adam and the Crew of The John
Adam are to be attached to such vessel or Vessels as may be judged
most advisable. The John Adam is to return to the United States
immediately after Landing her provisions unless her Services shall be
imperatively required for some expedition that may be on foot.
It le intended to keep her constantly amployecl as a provision V e d .

f

wd

8

140 NAVAL OPERATIONS, APRILSEPTEMBER 6, 1804
It will be well to direct her on her way home to touch a t Naples and
Leghorn to afford Convoy to our Merchant Vessels. P D A . LB, 1799-1807.1
To Midshipman John B. Nicholson, U. S. Navy, Washington, D. C., from Secretaxy
of the Bavy

NAVY DEPM~
June 1,1804.
You will consider yourself attached to the Frigate The John Adam
as one of her Officers and will immediately report yourself to her
Commanding Officer. If on the arrival of the John Adams in the
Mediterranean the Commodore should not have occasion for her but
should order her to return to the United States, you will then report
yourself to the Commodore, shew him this Letter and he will assign
you s station on board of one of the public ships under his Command.
[NDA. OSW, Vol. G, 1802-1805.1
To Joseph Barnes, U. S. Consul, Naples, from Captain Edward Preble, U. 6. Bavy

UNITEDSTATEBSHIPC072&&

Syramise Harbour 1' Juw 1804
f

SIR. On my arrival here yesterday, I was honored with your
several letters of the 28" March 6th and 16th of April - I was
ktely a t Naples and obtained the Ring's order for Six Gun and two

Mortar Boats - a number of Battering Cannon - 200 3arreIs of
Powder - Muskets, Pistoh, and every article which I requested for
an attack on Tripoly The Gun Boats are now in this Port under the
Flag of the United States - the Bombards are not yet ready, as
soon as they are, we shall commence our operations and I hope with
success. I thank you for your obliginf: offers of Money &c*but have
no occasion to draw on London even If I had, you need be under no
a prehension that I should be imposed on for want of a knowledge of
&change, which by the way is much more favorable to the drawer a t
Malta, than any other place in the AIediterranean.
I did not bring out any letters for you, as I observed in s former
letter, but a few days since a Gentleman came on board at Messina
with a packet from the state Department for you, which I presume
is what you have been waiting for - the Packet cover was worn out,
and had the appearance of having travelled much.
I hope on the receipt of your papers you will visit Sicily as some
very serious representations have been already made, and more will
be made to our Government by the Masters and Supercargoes of our
Merchant Vessels of the inconveniencies they suffer for want of a
Consul in the Island of Sicily. I likewise hope you will see the
necessity of appointing such characters for Vice Consuls in the different ports, as I can employ for Navy Agents, you must be well
aware of the advantages arising to our Commerce from ha
Merchants of respectability for Vice Consuls, I have a pointed
Gibbs Mr Broadbent, and Mr Dyson as agenta for the nited Statea
~ ~ u s d r oa tnPalermo Messina and Syracuse from the respectability
of thaw Gentlemen and their steady attention to the concerns of the
Squadron, I have been induced to mention them in v
favorable
terms to our Government. The above named Agents w ether they

S

S

7%

WARS WITR BARBARY POWERS

141

are Consuls or not, will receive the consignments of every American
Cargo, and all the business of the Navy Department.
[LC. EPP, LB, April-Nov. 1804.1
To James Lewder Cethcart, Leghorn, from Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Bavy

UNITED
STATES
SHIPCmtd2lth
Syrme Harbour 1a' June 1804.
Dr SIR. I arrived here yesterday with the six Gun boats which I
mentioned in my letter from Messina, & am honored with your several
communications of the l7$* 18'b & 24'h of A ril with their enclosures.
I sincerely thank you for your exertions wit the Neapolitan Government in the procuration of gun & mortar boats, but regret that your
journey has been attended with so many unpleasant circumstances as
ou mention. The six Boats which I have here, carry each a long
%rench 24 pounder, & will have 40 Men. The mortar boats are repairing & will be ready in three weeks, aa
soon as they are compleated for service, I shall commence an attack
on Tripoli, & hope by exertion, to bring the Bashaw to terms of Peace
honorable to the United States; for be assured, to no other terms shall
I consent. - Mq OBrien is not authorised (as you supposed) to b
or to negotiate a Peace with Tripoli: that power was delegated to
Lear, who has delegated it to ma. h.lr OBrien came up for the purpose
of affording me what assistance the knowledge he has of the Berb
langua e can give me, as in case of negotiation, a person who
faithf ufiy interpret whatever I may be disposed to make known to &he
Bashaw, is of the first consequence; this I am confident Mr OBrien
will do, & I can assure you, that you mistake that part of bis character, which leads you t~ beleive he wishes us to p u r c h e or beg a
Peace, as he is as anxious that we should beat them into it, as I am
myself I value the national character of my Country too highly, to
consent to a peace which the most powerful Nation in Europe would
blush to make. - It is to be regreted that any circumstance should
have deprived us of your services. I thank you for tho Tripolitan Treaty, & for the Cypher, both of
w@, may be useful, I shall attend to the key with you which you
request; but I request you, by no means to write in Cypher to Captain
B -, as it will create suspicion, & cause him to be ill used; and
deprive him of any future correspondence, all letters to, or from the
Prisoners are opened ;the Officers are all confined in one 1 e mom in
the centre of the Basham's Castle, and none of the Cons s allowed
to see or speak to them. I do not allow any officer of the Squadron to
write to them at present, for fear of some irnprudent communication. I shall attend to the enquiry & investigation of the Affairs you
wish me to,should I land at Tripoly; & be assured, I have no doubt
of our zed to serve our country on every occasion. $, will be well for you to forward the Invoice of the 14 bales of
clothing as. soon as ossible, a s the Pursers cannot distribute any,
until it arrives, the c othing shall be attended to, the money I shall
not want, you will therefore, give your orders to Mr Degen res ecting
it. I wish it was in my power to send a vessel to take you to Gi raltar,
but it is not at present. I am expecting a re-inforcement of two or three frigates, but whether
they arrive or not I shdl make the attempt to subdue, the stubborn
temper of the ~ a a h s w.

E

3

3

7

f

142 NAVAL OPERATION8, APRIESEPTEMBER 6. 1804
I wish you 8 prosperous & pleasant passage
remain with much respect. [NA.

the United St&%,

$

SDA. CL, Tripoli, Vol. 2, 1801-1805.1

Extract from journal of U. 6. Brig Argus. Muster Commandant Isuac Ed, U. 8.
Ravy, commanding, Friday, 1 June 1804

Cruizing on and off Tripoli This day bagins with hght airs and
Sdtry Wr Caph H a went on board the prize sent some provisions
on b a d of her the kjast-er of the prize and 6 men came on board us
a t 4 AM, the Ketch in Cq wore ship to the Westward a t 5 Wore
again to the Eestward and sent the boat on board the prize at 6
the boat returned wore ship and made sail a t 9 saw s Strange sail
tacked at 11 3 Strange sail in Sight tacked to the Westward [NDA photostat.]
Extrrrct from Diary of Captain Edward Reble, U. 6. Bavy, Commodore of U. 8.
Squaebon in the Mediterranean, Friday, 1 June 1804

Light Eastly winds & pleasant weather the Enterprize & six
Gun boats in company, employed 5 Boats to bring off Water,
directed the Ketch Intriped to be fitted up ss a Hospital Ship, to
receive the sick from The Enterprize the crew of that Vessel being
unhealthy, in consequence of the time of service of that Vessels Crew
having long since expired I ordered twelve of the Crew to be discharged, who insisted on bein released, the remainder were prevailed
on to remain a few weeks onger, Received several letters from
Naples & Leghorn, and one from Portland in America, -

7

fLC. EPP, Diary, 1803-1804.1
Erhrrct from log book kept by Sailing Master Nathaniel Haruden, U. 6. Buvy,
on board U. 8. Frigate Conaiitufion, Friday, 1 Jane 1804

Moderate breezes from the Eastward - At single anchor in
Saragosa. Enterprize & 6 Gun boats in company The Intre
which we left under charge of a Midshipman & three seamen, t
day hauled out into the road - At sundown calm - Hove up and
down in Order to keep a dear AnchorAt 8 P. M. mustered the
larboard watch as an anchor watch - A t day li ht five shore boats
came along side for Empty water oaeks ~ e c i e v e this
l forenoon, 120
gang cash Water Surgeons report 6 Sick - 2 wnv'Qt & 1 discharged Among the
sick is Lt Elbert of a fever
Noon light breezes from the South$
[LC. EPP, Log Constitution, 1803-1804.1

g

To the U. 8. Consl~lsin Europe from Bbcretrry of Btpte

(Circular)
DEPARTMENT
OF STATE,
8Q1804.
SIR. On receiving information of the Ims of the P h W p h i a ,
an act of Congress wm passed whereby a Million of dollars, was
appropriated to enabIe the President to impart such vigor to the conduct of the war, 88 might a t once change the exultation of the enemy
in his casual fortune into a more proper sentiment of fear and prepare

WARS WIT73 BARBARY POWmS

143

the way for a speedy & lasting peace with B a r b q . The five following frigates have therefore been ap inted to 4 into the Mediterranean, and will proceed without de ay, viz.
The President of 44 guns- - , - - - -Commodore
- - - - - S. Barren.
The Congress of 36 dQ-- - - - - - - - - - - - Cap5 Rodgers.
The Constellation 36 d - - - - - ,- - - - - - Cap+Campbell.
The Essez- - - 32-d,Q- - - - - - Cap*
,-J. Barron.
--& The John Adams armed en flute,
Cap! Chauncey.
making our whole force in that Sea to amount to 6 frigates & five
Sloops of war.
It having been found necessary to change the form of the Mediterranean Passport now in use, arrangements have been made with the
Barbary powers, by which either the old or the new form will be
sufficient to protect our Vessels until the 1" of July 1805, after which
the new form only will be valid.

P"

'-

To the Con& of the
U: States, at Naples. Cadiz,

JAMESI~J~ADIBON.

Mdaga, Leghorn, Marsailles.
Cette, Genoa, Sicily, Trieste, M d a ,

Barcelona d Qibrdtar,

WA. SDA. Despatches t o Consuls, Vol. 1, Oct. 1800-Feb.1817.1

To Captain Samuel Barron, U. 6. Ravy, from Secretary of the Xavy
NAVY
D E P24
~ June 1804

-

It will be proper that you issue to the Commanders of the several
veasels of your Squadron, instructions, directing them to require
their Midshipmen to do duty in the Tops and to perform such other

services as t s 1 contribute to their improvement m Seamanship and
the other Branches of their profession.
[NDA. LB,1799-1807.1

To Cmptrrin William Beinbridge, U. 6. Navy, Tripoli, irom Secretary of the Bsvg
NAVYD E P ~2nd Jww 1806

-

I have received your communication announcing the loss of the
Frigate Philadelphia and agreeably to your request I hare directed

the Commodore of the Squadron to institute a Court of Enquiry
upon your Conduct in that affair,when you shdl be enlarged.
From the high charater you and your Officers previously sustained, I cannot but indulge a sanguine hope, that the Court mtry find
no cause to pass a censure upon your Conduct. [NDA. LB, 1799-1807.)

To Captain Stephen Decatnr, Yr., U. 6. How,cornman*
0.S. Schooner LhferpIoc,
from CapBdwsrd Preble, U. 8. Navy

U.S. SHIPCORS#~U&~L

Syraczlse June Se 1804
SIR YOUwill sail as soon as possible with the Enfe
your command, & proceed to join the Squadron in the

144 NAVAL OPERATIONS, APRIL-SEP TEMBER 6, 1804
Tripoly. You may touch at Malta for such provisions & stores as
you cannot be furnished with from the U. S. Stores at Syracuse I expect to joint the Squadron off Tripoly in a few days
[LC. EPP, Order Book, May 1803-June 1805.1
Extraot from log book of U. 8. Brig Argus, 18 GUM, kept by Sailing M ~ t e Sa~alql
r
B. Brooke, U. S. Navy, Master Commandant Isaac Hull,U. S. Navy, aommmdmg,
Saturday, 2 June 1804
This day begins with moderate & Clear Weather all sail set on a

Wind the Vizen Syren and Scourge in Sight At 4 P M. the town of
Tripoli bore W b S Mustered the Crew at Quarters at 5 in Courses
and down flying Jib At 6 the town of Tripoli bore So distant about
6 or 7 miles
At midnight Calm and Clear Weather At 4 AM sounded in 45 fath? water At 6 Tripoli bore S b E distr about 3 leagues At 8 let a reef out of the top sails and set T. G. Sails At 9 loosed
all sails to Dry and set all sail necessary
At Meridian Moderate and pleasant Weather Tripoli S fi E dist'
8 miles Latic Obserd 33' 05' N.
[LC. EPP, Argus, 1804.1
To Degen, Purviance & Co., Leghorn, from Secretary of the Navy

NAV.D E PJURR
~
3Q 1804
We have a Squadron of Ships which will sail from the United States
in the Course of two weeks for the Mediterranean to consist of
The Frigate Pregidenf Commodore S. B m n .
The Frigate Congress Ca ? John Rodgers
The Frigate Comlelhtia t a p ? H. G . Campbell
The Frigate Essex CapVames Barron
The Frigate John Adums armed en Jute a store Ship Commanded
by Cap? Isaac Chauncey
These ships are intended as a reinforcement to our Squadron at
present in the Mediterranean and their respective Commanders are
mstructed to draw u on you for the Disbursements of their Vessels
in the manner prescri?I ed to our former S
As it may be frequent] convenient
for our Cornmanders to draw upon Kaples it
Deposit a Credit for that purpose with Frederick Degen Esq navy
agent [Same letter, without the last paragraph, sent to James Mackenzie & A. Glennie, London, dated 2 June 1804.1
[NDA. GLB, Vol. 7, 1803-1805.1
--

To Secretary of State from Captain Edward Preble, U. 8. Bavy

UNITEDSTATESSHIP C&itUth
Syracuse Harbour S@June 1804 SIR I am honored with your favor of the 26th December last the
contenk of which to me was highly flattering, and be assured that my
first and most ardent wish is, that I may continue to merit the approbation and confidence of my Country.

145

W;ARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

I take the liberty of enclosing for your perusal a letter and memorandum which I presented to Genersl Acton, Prime Minister of the
Neapolitan Government respecting a grievance of such magnitude thst
I could not pass it without remonstrance and I hope and trust that
Government will not construe this interference into an over step of
the power vested in me especially when they consider the serious consequences attending this unprecedented restriction on our Commerce.
Although I did not tarry at Naples long enough to receive the
Minist er'a official declaration that the grievance was removed. Yet
I had his verbal rtssurmces that it should be done immediate1 . I
likewise enclose for your perusal a memorandum of commercis advantages that other Nations have over ours by virtue of certain regulations mutually agreed upon and I cannot but suggest Sir that the
want of these necessary regulations with this Government must be
attributed in a. great measure to a want of Consuls or Agents of
character and information.
I t is said that a hla'or Barnes has the appointment of Consul to
this Government, but t at gentleman has not been in Sicily or Naples
this long time. I am informed t h t he is speculating at Le horn, in
truth he is spoken of with no great degree of respect by gen emen of
respectability in this Country. I t may be needless for me to remark
how natural it is for National Character to be judged from that of an
individual, more especially when such individual supports a commission snd National Uniform.
Under the impression that Government will (as far as may ly in
their power) remedy this grievance

L

f

[See 14 M a y 1804.1
[LC. EPP, LB, April-Nov. 1804.1

To John Brosdbent, U. S.

Xsvy Agent, Xesains, from Captain Edward Preble,
U. 6 . Navy

UNITED
STATEBSHIPCmcit*
Syracuse Harbour 9* June 1804.
DEABSIR I arrived here the morning after 1 left you. the Gun
Boats behaved well. I rely much on your exertions and friendly
ng the equipment of the Bomb Vessels and the Navtilw,
off
butera
the
ofBom Vessels are of the first consequence, I sail this evenkg
to the Southward.
I have nothing new to communicate - pleaae deliver the enclosed
to Mt Gorham.
[LC. EPP, LB, April-Nov. 1804.J
To Lieutenant Bicbard Somere, U. 6. Navy, from Captain Edward Preble, U. S.
RwY

U. S. SHIPComtitzlth

Harbollr June Sa 1804
SIR YOUWill remain in this harbour with the gun boats of the
U. S. Vii NQ1, N9 2, NQ3, N9 4, NQ5, & Ng 6 under your commmd
until1 farther ordm irom me. I t is expected that you will st all times
keep them in s state of preparation for Action, & exercise the men b
getting under way as often ae every other day & oftener if you t h d
proper I wish the Utmost harmony may subsist between the Citizens
S-e

146 NAVAL OPERATIONS, APRIL-SEPTEMBER 6, 1804
of the U. S. engaged on board of them whether they were born in
Bmerica or elsewhere - You will take the Ketch Intre id under
your charge, and your Surgeon is to attend to the sick on oard her,
and direct him occasionally to visit the Castle where the Tripoline
Prisoners are confined and attend to the Sick there; - I send you
letters to be delivered to the John Adams & one to any other ship
that may arrive in my absence.
I expect to return in ten days - Keep up a correspondence with
Mr Broadbent & Lt Reed, that you may be able to acquaint me, on
my ret.urn of the State & Condition of the two Bombards & the
Nautilus at Messins. - The same rules are to be observed on board
the Gun boats as on board the other Vessels of War.
[LC. EPP, Order Book, May 1803-June 1805.1

f

To whom not indicated from Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Bavy

JUNE34 1804
SIR I t is necessary that all the Neapolitans on board the Gun

boats subscribe to the same articles of Agreement which the Seamen
of the Ships of war of the U. S. do, leaving the space appropriated to
each Captains name blank - You will see this done tomorrow Fill up three of the Commanders names with our own, L+J. Decatur
& Lt Beinbridge, and leave the other three b snks -

i

[LC. EPP, Order Book, May 1803-June 1805.1
To Captain Edward Preble, U. 6. Navy, from Monsieur Beaussier, French Charge
d'Affaires & Commissary General. Tripoli

TRIPOLY
June Jq 1804

SIR Independant of this Certificate that will be presented you, I

have the honor to inform you that there are French Merchants of
Marseilles who were proprietors of the Ligurian prize taken by a
Corsair of this regency and restituted a t my request by the Pacha Citizen Didier Genevay authorized is come to recieve the Vessel, and
is embarked thereon on his return: He will bring you this Letter The good & perfect Intelligence which exists between the U. S. of
America & the French Republic assures me that you will let pass
freely said French property which has been masked only to preserve
it from the Capture of the Enemy P. S. The Treatment of Prisoners is as much better as possible They cannot account for the retard of the Cloathing [LC. EPP, LB, April-Xov. 1804.1
Extract from journal of U. S. Brig Argus, raster Commandant Isaac Ha,U. 8.
Bavy, commanding, Sunday, S June 1804

Cruizing on and off Tripoli at K past [sic] standing in for the town
fired two shot which were not returned wore Ship and stood off
the town bearing S E b S distance about 4 miles AM at 5 saw a sad
stand; out of Tripoli she proved to be a Spanish Ketch bound to
Syracuse
[NDA photoatst.]

WARS W I m BARBARY POWmS

147

Extract from log book of D.8. Brig Argm, 18 grins, kept by Saiting Ma~terBarnuel
B. Brooke, U.8. Ravy, Master CommandantIsaac Hull, U.8. Navy, commanding,
Bunday, 3 June 1804

This day begins with moderate and fine Weather a t past 1 P M
Tacked to the N, E, At 5 standing in for the fort to the Westward of Tripoli fired 2
shot which was not returned Wore ship tacked and Stood for the
town fired 2 Shot a t i t wore Ship and stood Off a t 6 stand5 off
under Topsails mainsail and Jib Tripoli bore about S E b S dist!
about 2 Leagues
At Sundown Tripoli bore S E b E distr 4 miles
At 11 wore Ship to the N & E, At X past saw a Sail standing out of
Tripoli - At Meridian boarded her she proved to be a Spanish
Ketch bound to Syracuse Tripoli bore S b E distr 3 Leagues
Latq Obsq 33' 13' N.
[LC. EPP, Argus, 1804.1
Extract from log book kept by Sailing Master Bathaniel Harden, U. S. Bavy,
on boprd U. 8. Frigate Conditution. Sunday, 9 June 1804

Light airs from the Southe - At S i l e Anchor in Saragosa.
Entetprize &: Gun boats in com my The following mates & midshipmen were ordered to rejoin t e Condituiion from the Gun boats.
M? Reid, MessrQNicholson, Hall, Casey & Laws Towards evening
the Enterprize sailed on a cruize 08Tripoly Completed our water having recieved 375 Gang Casks which contains 20.625 Gall? Supplied the Gun boats with 54 Barrels of Naples Powder containing
3,256 English pounds.
At Day Iight sent the large cutter on shore after rum We recieved from the Constit.IltiORg Stores at Syracuse 24 Trucks
for 24 Pounders, and a number of Blocks from the PAWelphi&'s
stores.
Surgeons report 6 sick, 4 convdesct
Noon hght airs from the Westward -

:

[LC. EPP, Log Constitution, 1803-1804.1
To Lieutenant Colonel Commandant Franklin Wharton, U. 6. Marine Corps, from
Captain John Bodgers, U. 6. Navy

U. STATE^ FRIGATE
Congress, Potomack

June hth 1804

SIR I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your Letter
of the 29" hto,this Ins?,the subject of which is painful to me indeed,
not only becarlse Mr Shields who is under my command, should SO
commit himself as dare offer 'C7iolence to a Seargent or Sentry of the
Corps, but particularly that he should behave so unlike a Gentleman
$ Officer as to use insulting Language of yourself and Mr Fenwick.
Mq Shields I wrested immediately on receipt of your Lotter and herein
enclose you the Charges with which he is furnished and a k c h I shall
Exhibite a t his trial. - You will oblige me by furnishing the Evidence in su port of these Chargm, previous to the Squadron leaving
Hamptoq Ifhoadee as I am determned such unwarrantable conduct
shall recave the reward it merits -

148 hTAVALOPERATIONS. APRIL-SEPTEMBER 6, 1804
P. S. I shall apply to the Commanding Officer for a Court Martial
on Mr Shields the Instant the Evidence is furnished.
[LC. JRP, Letters & Orders, Book A, 1804-1805.1
To Captain Samuel Barron, 0.8. Navy, from Secretary of the Navy

NAVYD E PJune
~ 4:1804 You will take in the Squadron not exceeding 3 months' water
including the ground Tier, & it is our expectation that you will, if
practicable, take out 6 months' provisions. If you do not, I fear
ou will experience embarrassments in your operations in the
hediterraneao.
[NDA.

OSW, Vol. 6, 1802-1805.1

To Captain Samuel Barron, U. S. Navy, from Secretary of the Navy

NAVYD E P M
June
~ 4: 1804 You will consider yourself authorized to employ as many gun-boats
to aid your operations in the Mediterranean as you may think proper.
They may be hired or accepted on loan. [NDA.

LB, 1799-1807.1

To Richolas C. Nissen, Danish Consul, Tripoli, from Tobias Leer, U. 8. Consul
General, Algiers

(COPY)
ALGIERSJune dth 1804.
SIR, It is with great satisfaction that I have the honor to inform
You that, in a letter which I received a short time since, from the
Secretary of State of the United States, he has directed me, by order
of the President of the United States, to present You with a snuff-box
ornamented in a suitable manner, and particularly with the Arms of
the United States, to mark i t as a National Present; in acknowledgement of Your good Offices and services rendered in attending to the
Subsistance and accommodation of Captain [Andrew] Morris & crew
of an American Vessel [Franklin]which was captured last year by
one of the Bashaw's Cruizers.
I shall write to Leghorn, by a Vessel which sails in a few days
from hence, to have the said order executed, which when done shall
be forwarded with a letter expressive of the sentiments which dictated
the 'ft.
I r a v e not yet received a line from the United States since they
have heard of the loss of the Philad* and the unhappy captivity of
our Citizens. Your kind attentions to Captain Bainbridge, his
officers, and crew, so far as you have been able to give them, *U
afford another cause of grateful sensibility towards you, which m11
not be forgotten neither by my Countrymen nor our Government.
Accept, my dear Sir, my tribute of thanks for Your benevolent acts
and intentione towards m unfortunate fellow Citizens. I am persuaded that the same goo&ess of heart which prompted you to give
them all the alleviation in your power, will still influence you to
continue those attentions. I am in anxious and dail expectation of
receiving from my Government orders which will ai!! ord substantial
relief to my unfortunate Countrymen In the mean time it may
not be roper to say more on this subject.
Tbia yetter is committed to the care of your worthy cole
who puts it under cover to Your Consul in Tunis I ne nothwOy
aey

r

WARS WITH BA1ZBARY POWERS

149

how happy I should be to hear from You through this, or any other
channel.
[NA. SDA. CL,Algiers, Crol. 7, Part 1, Jan. 1804-Nov. 1805.1
To Tobias Lear, U. 6. Conaal Qenerd, Algiers,from Captain William Bainbridge,
U. 6. Navy

Triplicate
TRIPOLI
BARBARY
JUWdth1804
DEARSIR,I done myself the pleasure to write you on the 20tQultQ
in which I mentioned that 1 was daily ex ecting to he= from Com"
Preble, and receive a supply of doathing or our seamen, which they
stand much in need of; I have not yet had the pleasure of hearing
from him, but presume that it cannot be long before he will appear
off here with news from our Government, for we have not he& s
word from America in answer to our letters announcing our unfortum t e captivity. This detention of news from our friends in tbat
quarter makes the hours pass heavily with us; and the long time it
takes for letters to come from Algiers deprives us of the pleasure of
hearing from you as frequently as we could wish, as your letters
always give us consolation & information.
No change has taken place since my letter of the 20th of last month,
except the seamen have been removed from the appartments they
occupied to others much more commodious; - their present prison
is an excellent buildipg: The change has relieved me from much
anxiety on their acct, fearful that the hot months of July & August
would be attended with serious effects, owing to the cooped-up situation they were in, but they now enjoy much purer air than their

f

mcers.

Your letters of the 16tb Decemr lZth &: 24tQFebru? have been
received. I have wrote you under 9 different dates, probably some
may miscarry - should you not hear from me as often as you might
expect I hope you will not attribute it to neglect; for, exclusive of my
duty to keep you informed of our situation, I feel much pleasure in
correspondmg with you, and am sorry that I have not a more interestscene to write of than the walls of a close prison afford.
ith respectful compliments to hlrq Lear, and best wishes for the
happiness of yourself

"w

[gtephen Decetur Col.]
To George Dyson, U. 8. Bsvy Agent, Syracuse, from Master Commandant Isaac
Hull, U. 8. Navy

UNITED
STATESBRIGA r m
03Tripoli dtQ June 1804
SIR,f send to your care the Ketch Le SF Jean Buptiste Prize to the
United States Brig Argus, m d Schooner Vixen, you d please supply
M' Henley with what Provisions he may want for his crew. - I
have given him Orders to advise with you on a31 matters relative to
the Prize, and will thank you to render him any service he may stand
in need of, I shall be in Syracuse in a few days, when I shall determine what can be done with her.
[NDA. IsaacElullLB, 1803-1804.1

-

150 NAVAL OPERATIONS. APRIL-SEPTEMBER 6.180L
Extract from log book of U.S. Brig A r p , 18 guns, kept by 8
Master Bpmnel
B. Brooke, U.6. Iavy, Mmter Commandant Isaac Bull, U. S. Navy, commonding,
Xonday, 4 June 1804

This day begins with fresh breezes and Clear Weather at % past
Merid" sent Geoq Owiin Qr master and Wm Dougharty, 0.Seaman
onboard the Ketch and provisions a t 1 saw a sad ahead made all
sail in C Q with the V h n a t 3 Spoke a Tunisian Galley from a
Cruise the Vken in Chace of the other sail wore Ship and stood
in Shore a t 6 in top Gall4 sails j4 past 7 reeft the topsails & tacked
Ship to the PJorthwg & Eastwc b r d e d up the mainsail and haul'd
down the Jib a t 3 T,kQto the SouthwQ set the B. mainsail and
Jib a t 6 let the reefs out of the topsails and set T.G. Sails At 8
Tripoli bore S % W distc3 or 4 leagues a t !4 past 9 stand5 in for the
town *ed 3 Shot a t it, wore Ship and Stood off hauled up the
foresail down Jib and brailed up the Boom Mainsail At Meridian Tripoli bore S E b S X S disc 3 Leag'
Late Obs@33' 03' N.
&C.

EPP, Argw, 1804.1

To Secretary of the I a v y from Captain John Bodgers. U. 6. Navy

U. S. FRIGATE
Congress, St MARYE

June 6tP 1804
SIR I have the honor to acquaint you the Congress the Congress
anchor'd here last evening at Sun Set, in company with the Prepident, - and that I am this instant getting underweigh to proceed
to Hampton Road, haling a l l the Guns on board & such provisions as
followed in Craft, I am so
I did not take all the Guns on b o d at
the mouth of the Eastern ranch, as I am now perfectly satisfied
there is water s a c i e n t for the largest ship in our service with all her
Guns & Provisions on board -

"PI

[LC. JRP, Letters & Orders, Book A, 1804-1805.1

[5 June 18041
Concerning Thomas Woods, prisoner a6 Ban Lncar

MEMORKAL
of a number of American Citizens to Joseph Yznardy

Esquire, Consul for the United States of America, resident a t the
cit of Cadiz.
the undersigned Citizens of the United States of America
Hearing, with the deepest regret and commiseration, the shock&
calamities which an American Seaman, Thomas Woods, during a confinement of near1 three years in a dismal prison a t San Lucar, has
sufFered, and stlJcontinues to su8er; feel ourselvee compelled from
motives of humanity, R E S P E ~ F U L L Yto intreat ou'l make use of the
iduence vested in you as Consul of the Unite States, to have this,
our ill-md, unfortunate countryman released from imprisonment;
and that you will extend to him the provision allowed by government
for citizens in his predicament. - Your memorialists beg leave
further to observe, that from recent accounts received from the
prisoner, his health of late haa become very much impded, and if
speedy relief is not administered it may arrive too - late. - Con-

%E

1

WARS WITIi BARBARY POWERS

151

fiding in your willmgness to serve this unfortunafe man, your hsernorielista ray ou to accept the assurances of their respect.
C ~ 5 {me
Z 11804.
C I3 SEAMAN
T ~ o WILLSON
e
[IIILLBON?~
SAM$
PECK
GEOW, ELROY
C E ARHWD
~
HU BOIT
JOHNGRAVES
DAN!TRUMAN
ISAAC
ATKINE
[NA. 8DA. CL,Cadiz, Vol. 1, 1791-1805.1
[5 June 18041
To Lieutensnt Joseph Tarbell, U. S. Navy, from Captain Edward Preble,U. S. Navy

SIR The irninent danger which you a few moments since ran this
ship into, either through neglect or want of Judgement obhges me to
withdraw my confidence in you, so far as to consider it imprudent
that you should in future be intrusted with the charge of a watch on
board her as her loss would involve incalculttble consequences to the
U. S. - You will therefore consider yourself as a supernumerary
until1 ordered to some other Vessel of less consequence Given on board the U, S, ship Co'~~~titutwn
June 6th 1804 at % past
2 P. M. off the ISLAND OF MALTA.
S i e d , EDWARD
PREBLE
L* TARBELL
of the Navy
Present.
[LC. EPP, Order Book, May 1803-June 1805.1
[About 5 June 1804?]
To the Commander of any 0. 6. Ship of War at Tripoli from Oeorge Davis, U. S.
C h q 6 d'Bflaires, Tunis
To the Commander of any of the United State8 Ships of War before

Tripoly

GREETING

There is embarked on board Said Bombard La 'C'ergenia del Rowrio,
three boxes & one Jar marked NGN the Property of C N Nipsen
Esquire the Danish Consul at Tripoly: as also one box marked W 8 contain' one thousand doliars for said Consul Nissen a t the disposal
of c s P 3 6 Bainbridge In witness whereof I horeunto
&,s--)
Set my name
DAVZB
Signed, GEORGE
[LC. EPP, Order Book, M a y 1803-June 1805.1
Exttact from journal of U. 6. Brig Arpu, =aster Commandant Isolrc Bull, U. 6.
Navy, commanding, Tneadsy, 6 June 1804

Cruizing on and off Tripoli These 24 hours Commences with h e
Clear Weather at Meridian sent Geo?O w h Q' master and Wq Dougherty 0.Seaman on board the prize with Provisions at 1 saw 2 S d
ahead made dl sail in Corn 7 with the V k at 3 Spoke a T u n k b
Galley from a Cruke the
in chace of the other sail

3-

[NDA phobmtat]

152 NAVAL OPERATIONS. APRILSEPTEMBER 6. 180A
Extract from Diary of Captain Edward Preble, U. 9. navy, Cammodore of U. 5.
Squadron in the Mediterranean, Tuesday, 6 June 1804

Wind S W and pleasant, working towards Cape Psssari, three
ships of War in sight, in the S E, quarter, standing towards us, a t
4 spoke an Imperial Brig from the Levant bound to Alicant, a t
3 P M discovered the three strange ships to be Frigates, at 5 having a proached within two miles and they not answering the private
S i a , beat to quarters and cleared ship for Action, a t 6 they
hoisted Neapolitan colours, a t past 6 spoke them, a Boat came
from the commodore to receive Private Signals, which I gave them,
three ships of this Squadron left hfassina the 25'@Ultimo on a cruize
against the Barbary States, a t Midnight passed Cape Passaro with
a moderate Breeze from the N W, Stood to the Southward & West-.
ward for Malta, a t 6 saw that Island the S E, end bearing S W
B W, [LC. EPP, Diary, 1803-1804.1

P

To Captain Samuel Barron, U. 8. Navy, from Secretary of the Xavy

NAVYD E P MJune
~ 6.1804 Commodore S. BARRON.
With this you will receive Letter N" - containing our Instructions for the general government of your Conduct on a 8mise. [Nos.
1 to 6 are dated 31 May 1804.1
2. Letter laying down the principles of Blockade.
3. Letter of instructions in relation to OEcers.
4. Letter of Instructions in relation to the Crew of The Philadelphia now captives in Tripoli.
5. Letter authorizing the establishment of an Hospital.
Ng 6. Letter ordering a Court of Enquiry upon Cap%Bttinbridge. 7. Letter directing that Midshipmen shall do duty in The
Tops. - 12 June 1804.1
The loss of the frigate Philadelphia which may have operated with
the Barbary Regencies to the prejudice of our national Cbrrtcter, and
has subjected a number of our Fellow Citizens to the Condition of
Slaves, re uires our attention. All that a sound mind, an ardent
Zeal and aring valor could achieve with the force committed to
Commodore Preble, has been performed by him, His force. however,
is not ade uate to the accomplishment of our purposes, we therefore
have put our additional Vessels in commission and the President
having the highest confidence in your judgment, valor and enterprize
has been pleased to confer upon you the Command of all our forces
in The Mediterranean which on your arrival there will consist of
The frigate President of 44 guns.
of 36 guns.
The frigate Congress
The frigate Constitdon
of 44 guns.
The frigate &sea:
of 32 guns.
of 36 gum.
The frigate CmteWation
The Brig Siren
of 16 guns.
The Brig ATgzts
of 16 guns.
The schooner Vizen
of 12 guns.
The schooner ,Ya~lilus
of 12 guns.
The schooner Enterprize
The John Adam8 armed enjlute
Of 1 w2 'ch
r is
a to be employed ae a

B
9

Transport Ship. -

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

153

With this force it is conceived that no doubt whatever can exist of
your coercing Tri oli to a Treaty upon our own Terms and of your
preventing the e ects of hostile dispositions which may be entertained towards ue on the part of any other of the Barbary Powers. The varying Aspects of our Affairs in the Mediterranean - the
great distance between this Country and the probable placea of your
o erations render it improper to prescribe to you any particular course
o Conduct. We therefore leave you unrestrained in your movements
and at libert to pursue the dictates of your own judgment, subject
to the ener accompanying Instructions.
I t is owever the expectation of the President that you will without
intermission maintain during the Season in which i t may be safely
done, as eaectual Blockade of Tripoli, and that you will by all other
means in your power annoy the Enemy so as to force him to a peace
honorable to the United States, and it is submitted to you whether
such Blockade i t would not be adviseable to keep some of your
qua on c r u i s i i off Cape Bon.
With respect to the Ex-Bashaw of Tripoli, we have no ob'ection to
you availing yourself of his co-operation with you against h p o l i if you shall upon a full view of the subject after your a n i v d upon the
Station, consider his co-opera tion expedient. The subject is committed entirely to your discretion. In such an event you will, i t is
believed, find hlr Eaton extremely useful to you.
You will keep a vigilant Eye over the movements of all the other
Barbary Powers, & communicate frequently with our C o d s a t
Algrers, Tunis, and Tangier. and should any of these Powers be induced
to declare or wage war against the W t e d States, it is the Command
of the President and you are hereby instructed to protect our Commerce b all the means in your power against them.
COP $obias Lear our Consul General a t Algiers is invested by the
President with full power and authority to negociate a Treaty of
Peace with the Bashaw of Tripoli, and also to adjust such terms of
conciliation as ma be found necessary with any of the other Barbary
Powers. He is t erefore to be conveyed by you to any of these
Regencies as he ma request of you, and you will cordidly co-operate
with him in all suc measures as may be deemed the best calculated
to effectuate a termination of The war with Tripoli and to ensure a
continuance of the friendship and respect of the other Barbary Powers.
Colonel Lear has made some advances on account of the Crew of the
late frigate Philadelphia. You will ascertain from him what the
amount may be and reimburse him out of the funds a t your Command. For the Disbursements of your Squadron, you have on Board of
our Ship 20,000 Dollars, and a credit is deposited for ou with Mesar@
b Q ~ e n e idie Glennie, London, and Mess" Degen, & urviaoce, Leghorn, who will also deposit a credit for you with Frederick Degen
esquire a t Naples. In all your Bills you will bo particularly careful
to mention the purposes for which they are drawn.
The following Gentlemen are our Agents,
Meesr+D en & Purviance -Leghorn.
-Naples
Frederick egen EspT

8

P

f S

:-%

f~

E

5

%

154 NAVAL OPERATIONS, APRILSEPTEMBER 6, 1804
a t Syracuse a t Malta John Gavino Esqr
a t Gibraltar
a t Marseilles and Toulon. Stephen CathaIan Esqr
They will all give to your Squadron every assistance in their power.
Mr Eaton is our Agent for the Barbary Regencies. He is to be suffered to return to The United States whenever he shall request it.
We have a deposit of provisions in Syracuse which with the Cargo
of The John Adam will, we calculate, be sufficient for the Squadron
till the h t December next. We shall immediately send a small vessel carrying about 800 Barrels with provisions to be landed a t Gibraltar where she will probably arrive before the Squadron. The S uadmn can call there and replenish should this Vessel have mrive8. If
she should not have arrived the Squadron will roceed aloft and the
provisions to be carried out in this s m d vesse will be deposited in
Gibraltar subject to your orders for the use of the Squadron. In a
few weeks we shall send you another Provision Vessel with directions
to go first to Gibraltar, thence to proceed aloft if required. I enclose a Letter to Commodore Preble left open. You will be
pleased to deliver i t to him yourself without Sealing it. I also enclose
a Letter for Cap$ Bainbridge which you will be pleased to forward.
As soon as your Squadron is ready for Sea you will we h Anchor
you can
and proceed off Tripoli with all practicable dispatch.
take out in the Squadron, a Bowsprit from Norfolk for the CMLditution i t will be desireable - If you cannot take it out we shall shortly
send i t by a Provision Vessel.
You WIIIkeep me constantly informed of all your proceedings.
I have only to subjoin my wishes for your success and glory. George Dyson E s r

William Higgins I&q:

P

8

[NDA. LB, 1794-1807.1

To J o b hnavino, U. S. Consul, Gibraltar, from Secretary of the Navy

NAV.D E PJune
~ 6's 1804
This letter will be handed to you by Captain John Grayson having
on board of the schooner Eleanor under his command provisions for
the use of our Squadron Pr bill of lading enclosed - my object in
sending this small vessel to ou is to replenish the Squadron now going
out on their arrival a t Gibr tar -should the Squadron be in Gibraltar
when the Eleano~shall arrive then inform Cap? JnP Grayson that he
is to deliver her cargo agreeably to the Orders of the Commodore it ma be taken from on board the Schooner EZeanot immediately
into t e s h i p of the Squadron - But if Cap' J n QGrayson should
arrive a t Gibraltar before the Squadron or not till the Squadron
shaU have left Gibraltar you will have the provisions landed without
delay and Deposited in Store giving the requisite information to the
Commodore of the uadron
Let me Khow whet er the Cargo has been delivered in good Order
& when you shall have received it if not in good Order state particularly
the deficiencies -

9

ft

"h

F D A . GLB, Vol. 7, 1803-1805.1

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS
To Tobias LOW, U. 8. Consul General, Algiers, from Bmetary of Stnte
DEPARTMENT
OF STATEJUW6
'8 1804

Sra,

[Added to circular of Secretary of S a t e of 2 June 1804 sent t o T o b h Lear?

wee the following:]

Commodore Barron has orders to provide at a suitable time for
our joining him in order to the negotiation of a peace with Tripoli.
%hiswe hope may now be effected under the operation and auspices
of the force in the hands of that Officer without any price or pecuniary
concession whatever. Sbould adverse events or circumstances of
which you can best ju e and which are not foreseen here, render the
sacrifice preferable to a protraccampaign abortive, an a pecuni
tion of the war, you are
ee in the last instance and
in that only to the terms
my letter to M' Cathcart
of the gtQ of April 1803, with such modifications as msy be convenient.
Of the Twenty thousand dollars permitted to be given as the first
purchese & Consular present, five thousand are to be retained until
a Consul for Tri oli to be commissioned by the President shall arrive.
Should you be a le to reduce the terms, as may be expected, you will
retain a proportionate sum for this object. On peace being made ou
have authorit to place a t Tripoli a temporasg Agent to atten to
or the ransom of the Prisoners, if a ransom be unavoidour &airs.
able, you may stipulate sum not exceeding five hundred dollars for
each prisoner includmg CMicers, but deducting from the number in
the hands of the Bashaw, those promised to Cap$Dale t o be rdeased
in return for the release of some of the Bashaw's Subjects who had
been captured by him, and also as many as may be considered an
equivdent for the captures of Cap$Preble.
A desirable shape to give the ransom money would be an annuity
payable in four or five instalmenb. This rate of ransom must not be
yielded however without such a change in our affairs by accident to
the Squadron or by other powers joining against us in the war as is
very unlikely to happen; and you will bear in mind that the sum of
500 Dollars pr msn connected with terms which were otherwise
favorable was the voluntary offer of the Bashaw to Capf Preble in
the month of January
to the reverse which he has since experienced, and to his know
of the force now sent against him.
Of the co-o eration
Elder Brother of the Bashaw of Tripoli,
we are still w&mg to avail ourselves, if the Commodore should ju e
that it may be useful, and to engage which as well as to render it t e
more effectual he has discretionary authorit to grant him pecuniary
or other subsidies not exceeding twenty t ousand dollam; but the
less reliance is placed upon his aid, as the force under the orders of
the Commodore is deemed suEcient for any exercise of coercion which
the obstinacy of the Bashaw may demand. The power of negotiation
is confided to you in the first instance, but in case of accident i t is to
devolve on the acting Commander of the usdron.
A very elegant sabre, prepared in Lon on, and intended for a
resent, the motive of whicb no longer exists is delivered to Commodore
gsrmn to be deposited in your hands, nnd which you may a pl to
purpoae. Ita value in London was [679] ~ o u n &{kg . n e ~ x me e which waa returned to this Department b MI
W* Eston. The encloeed sdvartisment will inform you o the

9

!

B

P

K

2

9

9

156 NAVAL OPERATIONS. APRIL-SEPTEMBER 6 , 1804
manner of carrying into effect the proposed change in the Mediterranean passport. The Navy Department have made an arrangement for repaying you the advances stated, in your letter of the 24
Decf to have been made for the relief of the OfEcers and Crew of the
Philadelphia. Exclusive of this, the following conjectural estimate
is made of the state of our pecuniary transactions.
You were provided with funds to the amot of - - - - - - - ----- $97.000
Instead of 24.000, which you was to receive from
Mr Cathcart ;you r e d from him in Cash- - - - - - - - 12.000
A Consular present which you suppose will sell
20.000
for . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32.000
24.000
Add the difference- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 8.000
$105.000
(Note - I t is supposed another estimate ought to follow) [*I
From a quantity of Brass now on hand i t is in our power to furnish
the 10 twenty four pounders and five eighteen pounders requested
by the Dey of Algiers. The will not perhaps cost without freight
more than Eighteen thousan dollars & if the would be taken for a
yeam annuity as M? OBrien suggests, it wo$d be an advantageous
measure to send them, but if otherwise, as he im
es the rate a t
which the Danes & Swedes & Spaniards furnish
loss of not more than a fourth or a third upon the
remittance preferable in a high degree to the list handed you by the
Minister of Marine on the 26'4 Decr last. I t is believed that they can
be prepared in two Months. I n the mean time the Cargo of the
SaUy, which was wrecked near Si Lucar will be repeated, with such
additions as are hinted in our letter of the 24" Decr as substitutes
for part of the list of the &I inister of Marine. The articles of that
list being so disadvantageous you will lose no opportunity of obtaining
its retraction, as respects the powder, cordage & cable; and if the
money is received at the rate of 30,000 dollars pr. year, accordmg to
the undertaking of the Jews, after the brass guns, timber &v are forwarded there will be nothing due even for the current years annuity,
consequently there will be no claim to the list being remitted, at least
for the present. The ransom money of the prisoners is provided for
by a credit, which the Sec? of the Treasury has ven you on the
House of Sir Francis Baring & CP ; a copy of the etter to whom is
enclosed.
Mr Eaton has presented his accounts comprehending various
charges, for which the regular vouchem could not be rocured from
the nature of the case. I enclose an abstract of the who e and request
you will take a convenient o portunity of examining them either in
erson when you ma go to f u n i s , or thro' the medium of Dr Davis.
particular I wish or information respecting the cause of the detention of the &ria a t Tunis after her return from Gibraltar, and what
she could have chartered for per month; of the truth of the extortion

B

f

P

LI!

9

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

157

b the Bey's Minister, and any illustration you may be able to procure
o the transaction, which resulted in charging the sum stated for the
detention of the Ann Maria a t Tunis. Under the instructions formerly
given to Mr Cathcart to propose a periodical sum to be paid to Tunis,
and which have been repeated to you, he made the offer which they
authorised, but it was declined by the Bey 'B Minister. We are therefore now under no obligation to acceed to it; and unless the paciflcation with Tri oli should contrary to our expectation set a precedent,
you will be s' ent with res ect to the periodical payments to Tunis,&
even repel them if the su ject should be revived by the Bey. You
will judge from your c,omrnunications with Mr Davis and other means
of information, how far it may be requisite, if a favorable ~ccommodation takes place with Tripoli, for you to go to Tunis, for if the Bey
remains qmet, and does not expect you, and especially if the President's
last letter to him should have silenced his demands, it may be expedient
to avoid Tunis. But if his expectations of the Frigate or other exorbitant sacrifices render it necessary for you to come to a final explanation
with him you will concert with the Commodore the exhibition of such
views of his injust.ice & the Naval facdties of the U: States as may
repress or very much reduce his hopes of obtaining sacrifices from us;
for i t wes not only to over awe Tripoli, that the expense of equiping
this Squadron was incurred, but upon a calculation of its salutary
effect upon the other Regencies, and especially Tunis whose unfriendly
conduct might require its presence. I t is hardly necessarg to observe
that this remark IS not meant to prompt undue provocations to ww,
much less a commencement of it; Pour prudence will be a securit
that your communications with Tunis Rill be addressed to suc
motives only, as may have the best effect upon the preservation of
peace according to the circumstrtnces under which your intercourse
may be conducted.
Enclosed is a letter from the President to the Dey of Algiem, in
answer to his request for the C ~ n n o n .

3

B

i

E

[NA. EIDA. Despatches to Consuls, Vol. 1, Oct. 1800-Feb. 1817.1
[+Estirn&tewhich followed.]
Balance carried forward- - - - - - - - - - -- - - - - - - ----- - - - --- -- - - $105,000
Your Expenditurn and those of Mr OBrien h v e been for the
Consulsr present- - - - ..-- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -.- - - - - - 20,000
The Biennial reaent--- - - - - .- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -.- - - - - - 16,000
Account of 0 rien- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -- --- --- -. -4,OM.l
----Capr [Andrew] Morris and his crews ransom- - --.. _ - - - - - -._ _ - 6,800
,--

fl

46,800
You have further to expend for debt to the Jews - - - - - - - - - .- - 15,800
Dr Davis at Tun*
my--,- - - - - - - - - ------ - - - . - - ..- - - ..- - 4, Ooo
Yomelfforsslary &csay - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - . - -4-000
----------.-

-

May be wanted for purcfiasing peace with Tripoli and your

expences in going there and to Tunis------------------------- - - -

% 400
22 OM)

158 NAVAL OPERATIONS, APRIL-SEPTEMBER 6, 1804
On the other hand we Owed in Sept 1803 two years annuity t o
Algiers - say a t 30,000--- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -- - - - - - - - - So,OOo
We have remitted o n l y - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 14 000
46, 000
cash unappropriated in your hands- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 12 400
To be remitted from the Treasury . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

33, 600
20,000

Laving a debt of ..................................
13,600
But if the peace should be made with Tripoli without a pecuniary sacrifice or
with a small one, the whole or part of the 20,000 will be applicable to its discharge.
[Stephen Decatur Col.]
To James Simpson, U. S. Consul, Tangier, Morocco, from Secretary of State

[See Circular of 2 June 18041 On M? Lear's departure he was
furnished with a number of the tops of the new Mediterranean passport, which we wished to substitute for that now in use, and by the
same o portunity a copy of the new passport was sent to you. You
were d o requested to procure an understanding with the Emperors
Government in order that the change might be brought about mthout
inconvenience. Tho' you have not reported to me your proceedings
on the sub'ect, i t has been taken for granted that the arrangement
has been ehected; but least by any possibility it may be otherwise I
enclose another copy of the pass ort together with a copy of the
advertisment which has been pubE'shed to notif the change, and I
reaueat vour immediate attention to arranne the usiness on the ~rincipIea of the latter.
Cap9 Rodgers assures us that so far from the people of the Meshozbda
having cause of complaint, they expressly & pubhckly declared their
satisfaction with the treatment they experienced. I await however
the final report you intend to make before any opinion is formed of the
realitv of the com~laintor the satisfaction due. I n the mean time
as th;! demand is nbt large, a confidence is reposed in you to uiet it,
if it cannot be avoided before you receive instructions from vernment.
I a m $4

-

g

ed

JAMEB
MADIBON

[NA. SDA.

Despatchm to Consuls, Oct. 1800-Feb. 1817.1

To M. d'ltalinaky, Russian Ambassador to Constantinople, from Captain Edward
Preble, U. 8. Envy

UNITED
STATES
S. COR8titUtio7L
Malta Harbour 6th June 1804
SIR. I was this day honored with a letter from the American Consul
a t the Court of St Petersburg enclosing copy of a letter from Hie
Imperial Majesty's Chancellor to him, offermg to engage the Grand
S e i i o r to mediate for the release of our Countrg Men, Prieoners to
the Regency of Tripoly.

COMMODORE E D W A R D P R E B L E ,

U 5.

NAVY.

159

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

As His Majesty's intercession with the Ottoman Porte is through
you, I have taken the libert to enclose a co y of remonstrance made
to that Government t h u g the medium o the French and English
Ambassadors ; the facts therein contained will enable you to urge the
h a b l e intentions of your Sovereign with more propriety, and a
eater prospect of success; and thereb more M y cement that
r:srmny and good will which has so ong subsisted between the
Russian Empire and the U S of America
About two months since I captured a Ship [Madona Catrpoliana]
under Russian Colours which made shift to get into Tripoly mth Military Stores, and came out laden with property belonging to a Tripoline
Consul this was a most flagrant violation of the blockade, but so
deeply was I impressed by the generous interposition of His Russian
Ma'esty, that I this day released the ship. Indeed I feel mysell bound
by onor and inclination to promote the interests of your Country to
the extent of my power; and it is scarcely necessary to assure you that
my Government will accord with pleasure the high sence with which
they receive such noble proofs of disinterested friendship.
P. S. I am not as yet informed of the effect of my remonstrance
thro' the F & E Ambassadors. * * *

f'

i

b

[LC. EPP, LB, April-Nov. 1804.1

[6 June 18041
Certificate concerning Pilot Louis Jouvse or Jourv.sr

I certif that Louis Jouvas Served on board the U. S. Ship Con&&

d

un er my command as Pilot from October 19" 1804 [I8031 to
this day
Signed EDWARD
PREBLE
MALTAHARBOR June 6th 1804
[LC. EPP, Order Book, May 1803-June 1805.1

t&n

Extract from Diary of Captain Edward Preble, U. 6. Navy, Commodore of U. 8.
Squadron in the Mediterranean, Wednesday, 6 June 1804

moderate Breezes from the N W and pleasant a strong current
setting to the Eastward, Standing in for the Island of Malta on a
wind on the starboard tack all sail sett, - at about 20 minutes
past 2 P M as I was at dinner, a Midshipman came into the Cabbin &
lnformed me we were near the shore, I ordered him to go on deck
and tell the Officer to tack ship, the helm was immediately put down,
& as the ship came to, I observed from the Cabbin Ports that she was
near1 on shore, I uprang on deck and found her in stays not a cables
lengt from the shore, and the Rocks to be seen under her Bottom, I
met the Officer of the Watch Lieutenant Tarbel, at the head of the
Cabbin Gang way and took the Trum et from him,ordered him below,
and took charge of the deck, and got tf.le ship on the larboard tack, had
she missed stsys or shot half her length further a head in sta s she
would inevitably have struck the Rocks and probably woul have
been lost, as she was under a press of canvas with a fresh Breeze, for
this want of Judgment, or neglect of duty in Lieus Tarbell in endangering the shi , I suspended him from duty, and suspecti a design on
the Part o the masti Pilot to lase the ship I ordered%
oodined
in imna, -- at 6 P
working to windward to gain Valstte Hu-

h

i"

'l

3

160 NAVAL OPERATIONS. APRILSEPTEMBER 6 . 180.d
bow, at 6 Anchored in 13 fathoms water in the outer Harbour, Ordered the Pilot out of Irons and to be discharged from the United
States Service, - Punished two seamen with 12 lashes each for
neglect of duty, [LC. EPP, Diary, 1803-1804.1
Wrect from log book kept by Sailing Master %stbaniel Hareden, U. S. Havy,
on board U. S. FngPte Gmtitution, Wednesday, 6 Jane 1804

Moderate breezes from hT W - We are standing in for the Island
in till j4 past 2 when
of Malta under all plain sail - wntjn. s
we tacked off shore - When the ship came ead to wind she was
not more than a cables length from n. low Point which is 4 or 5 Miles to
the S E of the Harbor of Valekta - The Bottom was Visible and spparendy bold home to the shore - The Commodore and all the gun
room M c e m were at dinner except Lieutt Tarbell the Officer of the
Watch The coasting or cruizing Pilot was also on deck at the time the
ship was standmg in - The M c e r of the Watch was ordered below
& suspended from duty - The Pilot was immediately Ordered in
double Irons on suspicion of attempting to run the ship on shore
From this time till 5 P. hl Employed working to windwq in.order to
anchor in Valetta - At 6 P. M. came to in the Outer harbor in
Valetta in 13 fathoms hluddy bottom Furled sails & moored half a
cable each way with the small bower $ stream - Shi s company
employed thro' the night scrubbing hammocks - The P' ot who was
confined, was this day discharged from the U. S. Service -cutter watering ship - Punished FC'p Harrison & Jnq Russell seamen with 12
lashes each for Neglect of duty - Rec'd 3 casks MoIasses containg31a
Gall! - Noon calm

S

EPP, Log Conslitulion, 1803-1804.1

[LC.

To Captain Samuel Barron, U. 8. Navy, from Secretary of the Havy
NAVYD E P7~ June 1804 -

Cornmodore SAM!BARRON.
Herewith you will receive a Copy of a letter which I have this day
written to Capt Isaac Chauncey. Should the Squadron arrive at Gibrdtar before Captain Chauncey,
it might, should Tunis have commenced hostilities against us, be
prudent to order one of the Ships of your Squadron to wait at Gibraltar
the arrival of the John Adams, to accompany her aloft. You will
exercise your soundest discretion on this point.
END A.

LB, 1799-1807.1

To Master Commandant Isaac Chauncey, U. 8. Navy, commanding U. S. S.
john Admnr, from Secretary of the Bavy

NAVYD E PJune
~ 7,18041 have r e d in the Newspapers an extract of a Letter stated to
have been written by Commodore Preble dated 19th March 1804;
which furnishes ground for apprehending that at that eriod the
Bey of Tunis meditated hostile movements towards us. t is stated
that he was then equipping hie whole naval force with the utmoet
expedition; that it was whispered that his object was the American

i'

161

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

Commerce, and that from various circumstances Commodore Preble
gave faith to the report.
Although we have no official information on this sub'ect, yet it
behoves us to be on our guard. On your arrival a t Gi raltar you
will therefore endeavour to possess yourself of information as to the
dispositions actually entertamed towards us by the Bey of Tunis, and
if ou find he has commenced hostilities against us, or should not be
ab e to ascertain to your satisfaction that he has not commenced
hostilities against us, ou will remain at Gibraltar until the arrival
of the outward boun Squadron, unless we should sooner have a t
Gibraltar a force adequate to your protection, in which case you will
exercise our discretion, and act as Circumstances may direct. Shoul you remain at Gibraltar until the arrival of the outward
bound Squadron, you will be governed in your subsequent movements by such orders as you may receive from the Commodore. -

b

3

i

1

[NDA. LB, 1799-1807.1
To Levett Harris, U. 6. Consul General, St. Petersbnrg, Russia, from Captain
Edward Preble, U. 6. Navy

UNITEDSTATESSHIPConstituti(Mt
Malta Harbour 7th June 1804
SIR. About 2 months since one of our Brigs of War cruising off
Tripoly captured the Polacre Ship [Madonu] Catapoliana George
Morfino Master under Russian Colours which had made shift to get
into Tripoly a t a time when our Squadron had been driven off the
Coast for a few days by a gale of wind. She sailed from Smyrna
with a cargo consisting of Powder, Guns, Shot, Ship Timber &c+for
and on account of the Bashaw of Tripoly, and sailed from thence the
day on which we captured her with a cargo of Cattle for acct of the
Tripoline Consul at Malta; this was certainly a most flagrant violation of the Blockade, and of the law of Nations in such cases, and
obliged me to send all her papers home that the vessel might be
condemned in our Court of Admiralty but so deeply was I impressed
by the generous interposition of His Im erial Majesty, that I this
day released the ship as a compliment to k s flag, and shall be happ
a t all times to have it in my power to show how much i t is my
as well as that of our Government to promote on every occasion the
resent friendship and good understanding between His Imperial
h a j e s t y and the United States.
[LC. EPP, LB,April-Kov. 1804.1

d

To P. d'Karpow, Russian Charge d'Bffaires, The Two Sicilies, from Captain
Edward Preble, U. 6. Navy

UNITEDSTATESSHIP Constitution
Mdta Harbour 7th June 1804
SIR. To your remonstrance res ecting the ca ture of the Shi
called the Virgin of Cata o h h i [ Qdona Catapo iana] commande
by George Morfino under ussian colours. I have to obseme that I
have not only the attestation of the Pilot that they were apprized of
the Blockade of Tripoly before leaving Smyrna - but of several of
the Crew likewise, and the Master himself acknowledges that he was
aware of the circumstance before he went on the Coast; and that

W

Kr

P

5

162 NAVAL OPERATIONS, APRILSEP TEMBER 6. 1804
Tripoly was not blockaded simply by manifest I would observe that
at the time of the entrance of said ship, I was cruising off that Port,
but an east wind which prevented my laying close in with the Town
proved favorable to his Views. he entered it is true without molestation and su plied our declared Enemy with Naval and Military
Stores in tio ation of a close Naval Blockade of nearly four months,
for it is a fact of great notoriety that the port was blockaded two
months before my formal declaration thereof was made; and in truth
a variety of facts and circumstances evinced a disposition on the
part of the Master of said Ship to enter said port of Tripoly notwithstanding his knowledge of that circumstance, I have considered
it a duty incumbent on me to send the papers &c* of said Ship to
America for adjudication, and cannot doubt but she will be condemned.
That harmony and good understanding which has so long subsisted
between our Governments (as well as my own inclination) induced
me to pay the greatest deference to the reasons advanced in your
remonstrance, and were the circumstances literally those that you
have been pleased to state I cannot den but objections might be
advanced as to the propriety of detention, ut I beg you to be assured
Sir, that every circumstance seemed to be aggravated b implied
dece tion and that want of air dealing which but too requently
invo ves Governments as we as individuals in painful litigations
and even now that I am under the fullest conviction that the Ship
would be condemned in any Admiralty Court in Europe, I have been
induced to restore her to the commander as a compliment to the
Russian Flag, and an earnest of the high opinion I have of the magnanimity and of the disinterested friendship that His Imperial
Majesty has been pleased to evince for the United States of America
of the nature of which you will be informed by the enclosed letter
from the Chancellor of the Russias to our Consul resident at St
Petersburg which I r e d two days since. All I can do, must be deemed but a poor compensation when
compared with the admiration, and the very high sence with which
my Government will receive such honorable testimonies of your
Sovereign's good will towards them, and for which they will not fail
to give ample proofs when opportunity offers.
His Excellency P. D'KARPOW
His Imperial Magesty the Emperor of Ru8&'8

P

t

9

t

f

Mini&er at Naples -

[LC. EPP,LB, April-Nov. 1804.1
Extract from journal of U. 8. Brig Argus, Master Commandant Inuc Bull, 0.8.
Navy, commanding, Thursday, 7 June 1804

Cruizing on and off Tripoli at 2 P M Cap" Smith and Dent came
on board Tripoli bore S E b S % S. distt 6 miles at 8 light airs
Inclinable to Calm Sounded in 48 fathoms Water bottom fine
Grey sand the Captq Returned on board their Ships a t midnight
heard several heavy guns fired at j4 past 6 AM. saw the V'izen to
the Eastwe and several gun boats standin from the lend at 9 light
airs standing to the Eastwe
past t e Scourge made the Sgi
NQ216

i

[NDA photostat.]

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

163

Extract from log book of II. 8. Brig Arm, 18 guns, kept by Sailing X ~ t e rSamuel
B. Brooke, U. 8. Haw, Xaater Commandant Iaaec H d l , U.8. Xavy, commanding,
Thursday, 7 June 1804

This day Commences with Mod* and clear Weather a t 3 past
Merids Spoke the U. S. Schooner Vizen
At 1 saw a sail to the esstw@ made sail in chace a t 4 spoke the
U. S Schooner Enterprize last from Syracuse At sundown Tripoli
bore S E b S distt 6 miles At midnight light breezes and Pleasent At 3 AM made sail to the Eastwe at 5 hauled up the Courses and
hove too Tripoli S 3 E the Scourge in Sight At 10 in top Galls d s and wore ship at 11 set T. G. sails & fl
Jib fired several Shot at the Gun boats which was returned by tK"p
em
and the Bstterys Wore Ship and stood off LatP Obse 3 3 O 00' N.
[LC. EPP, Argus, 1804.1
Extract from Diary of Captain Edward Reble, U. 6. Navy, Commodore of U. 8.
Squadron in the lediterranean, Thursday, 7 June 1804

made a complimentary visit to the Governor Sir Alexander Ball
who returned it on board, filled up our water, Mr Eiggins reported
the Cargo of Provissions & Stores delivered by ship Betsey Walk
Ca teh Reddick was very much dam ed, deficient, and in very
b.8 order, - Received a letter from r Levett Harris our Consul
at St Petersburg, enclosing a copy of one from the Chancellor of the
Emperor of Russia to the Russian Minister at the Ottoman Court by
order of his Imperial Majesty, directing the said Russia minister to
desire the Grand Senior to send a Fireman to Tripoli, to endeavour
to obtain the releclse and Restoration of the Americans taken in the
late Frigate PhWelphia, in consequence of the friendly interference
of the Russian Monarch. I this day as a compliment to his flag
ordered the Vessel Cdapolianu from Tripoly detained by Captain
Stewart under Russian Colours far a ololation of Blocade to be
released, and the Brigantine St F! CA-wi@o a Maltese Vessel under
English Colours, detamed by the Nautilus for the same reason to be
@en up to the owner for three hundred dollars he giving s full
indemnification and acquittal of all claims for damages, but the Cargo
remains unsold at Syracuse, - A Spanish Vessel arrived sent in by
the Argus with an Ambassador of the Grand Senior on Board with h~
suite consistin of about thirty Persons, this is the same Vessel that
entered Tripo y from Tunis with a passport from Mr Davis our
Charge de Affairs a t that place, -

3

f

[LC. EPP, Diary, 1803-1804.1
Extract from journal of Midshipman F. Cornelina deKrafft, U. 6. Navy, in U. 8.
Brig Siren of 18 guns, M ~ t wCommandant Chnrlea Stewsrt, U. 6. Bavy,
commmding, Thursday, 7 June 1804

[Cruising in company with Argtls, Vixen and Scourge almost continuousl since 27 May 1804.1 past 6 s uar'd the yards & stood in
for the arbour of Malta At 9 p w ' d t e Commodore at Anchor.
At 10 came too with the starboard bower in 13 fathoms, furI'd all
sail. (Those remarks include 36 hours.)

E

[NDA.]

+

1

164 NAVAL OPERATIONS, APRILSEPTEMBER 6, 1804
To Secretary of the Navy from Captain John Bodgem, U. 8. Navy

U. S. FRIGATE
Congress
Harnpton Road June 8Q 1804.
SIR I have the honor to inform you the Congress anchor'd in this
Road at 6 P. M. this day after a Passage of nine Days, from Alex*,
and without any unpleasant occurrence, further than is common with
a ship of such heavey draught of Water, and a raw undisciplined
Crew, - I have this Ins*dispatched an Officer to Norfolk to attend
to the getting on board the Spars, Cordage $ 9 which you ordered to be
rocured here, and to ship 10 or 12 Seamen, in the place of that
&umber of Miserable Wretches which Mr Gardiner shi ped in
Bait', all of whom I shall be obliged to discharge being tot& unfit
for service The Congress can be made ready for Sea in 24 Hours [LC. JRP, Letters & Orders, Book A, 1804-1805.1
To Captain Edwiud Preble, U. 6. Navy, from Tobiss tear, U. S. Consul General,
Algiers

A L ~ I E RJune
S 8th 1804
DEARSIR I have recieved with much satisfaction the esteemed favor
which you did me the honor to write on the 3 W a y with its enclosures - I feel very happy in the just approbation which which
you have received from our Government of your conduct To a mind
like yours i t must afford a gratification beyond any pecuniav
consideration.
I agree with you that we can expect no efficient interference in our
favor from the Quarter mentioned - The present State of things
makes i t politic for other nations that we should be a t war with
TripolyBefore this you must have heard from Mr Davis on the Subject of
the complaints of the Bey of Tunis respecting the Tunisian Sandals
and the stopping the Spanish Vessel golng to Tripoly with his Passport: I have written to him on this Sub'ect, referring to you for all
matters of this kind, and observing that the Bey of Tunis wished for
a war with us he would not fail to make i t upon the Ground of which
he complains, however unjustifiable it may be, but if that was not
his wish, he would be satisfied with ro er explanations in cases of
6avis7sletter to our Consuls
this Nature - I shall send copies of
in Europe by the first opportunity - I am stiU without a line from
the United States since they must have heard of the loss of the Phila&el hia and captivity of our Citizens - This Event will probably
ma e some change in their Orders res ecting Barbary &am: or at
any rate makes the Orders recieved w en we left the United States,
as they relate to Tripoly, inapplicable; - I recieved a Commbsion
from the Secretary of State to make Peace with Tri oly but as i t
was sent before the News of the Philadelphia had reac ed the United
States, i t was predicated on the then state of our M a i m I wait
anxious1 to hear farther from home -. I think it certain that a
force wd be sent out.
As there is a great difficulty in Transferring money from hence to
Tunis I have written to Mr Davis, that I should requestJ(-.ou
furnish such funds as might be n e c e a s q for our unfortunate ituens
in captivity until some efficient measures are taken by the Govern-

d

%

g

f

"

165

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

rnent respecting them - By s letter from Cap? B. of the 5th of April,
I was happy to learn that he had recieved s&cient for their immediate wants, and had 500 Dollq in hand, m d hourly e ected
cloathing from Malta-.
If in your power, I know you mill urnish
the necessary for our Citizens in Tripoly - Should you not be able to
do it, I have desired Cap$ B. to inform Mq Davis who is directed to
obtain money by a dft on me d any rate for that purpose
We are in a continual state of Agitation here from the e ectation
of a Visit from the British. The Cruizers are all in port an"gwe have
no arrivals - No news, but reports in abundance.
As I send this by a Courier which has been dispatched to me by
Mr Davis, I cannot be very fuU, as it i uncertain when i t may reach
you and its route circuitous. I enclose a letter for yourself & one
for L e u t t Commt Decatur which came into my hands some time since:
but no o portunity hss Offered for forwarding them - M'" Lear is in
good he th & sends her best regards & wishes to her [you].
Wishing you all access, health & happiness

9

3

[LC. EPP, LB, April-Nov. 1804.1

To Captsh William Bainbridge, U. 6. LBavy, Tripoli, from Tobias Leer, U. 8.
Consul Qenerel,Algiers

ALGIER~
JURR8% 1804
DEARSIR,I had the pleasure to receive your acceptable favor of

the 5* of A p d , on the 2'J instant, and was very happy to hear that
yourself and Officers were comfortably situated, and the means of
su port had reached ou.
have not receive r Line from the U.States since they r u s t have
heared of your misfortune. I a m in hourly expectation of letters from
our Government; and I need not say how happy it wP make me if they
should expediate the deliverance of yourself and our fellow Citizens
from Captivity. - I assure you my dear Bainbridge, I have a most
heartfelt leasure in knowbg that I have, in any measure, been the
cause of omfort or Consolation to you & those about you. We
know that among a Crew of a ship of war there will be some unthinking
wretches who will sacrifice the Comforts or necessaries of tomorrow, for
the beastly luxuries of to day. I t is the case with people of this
description of all Nations
As there is a very great dif5culty in transferring money from hence
to Tripoli, I have written to Commodore Preble, request6 that he
would furnish what might be necessary untill some efficient arrangement shg be made by our Governm? for your refief; but in case he
cannot do it, I pray you to write to MF Davis a t Tunis who has my
Instructions, in that event to obtain money by a Draft on me, at any
sacrifice.
We are here without any arrivals or news of any kind; but there is a
continual agitation on accounf of the Reports that the English are
Coming, in force, to settle their affairs with this Regency. The sensibility which you express for the attentions & services
which I have been able to render to yourself $ our unfortunate fellow
Citizens, ia a higher compe[n]sation than could be bestowed by other
means. I pray you to keep your Spirits, and exercise your patience
for a little time. 1 know our Situation must be ttfflictf to a mind
like yours; but remember t a t your Countrymen sympathize in your

B

f

8

g

166 NAVAL OPERATIONS. APRPRIESEPTEMBER 6.1804
af£lictions, and that the sun will by & bye dispel the clouds which now
hang over you. When relived from your Captivity you will be received by your friends an[dJ those most dear to you with more joy
than if ou had returned home ladened with unweadiey wealth
I enc ose letters for you which have been some time here, hop'
for an opportunit of forwarding them. They are duplicates?
presume, of what had the pleasure to forward in my letter of the
24'P of March. MT Bille,the Danish Consul, & Mr ThaIijnville & his family take e,
liveb interest in your unfortunate situation. They always enquire
after you & desire the best regards & wishes to be given to you.
Mr. Lear sends her best prayers & wishes for the health and speedy
deliverance of ourself, your Officers and our other fellow Citizens. Beleive me to e my Dear Bainbridge,

9

9

%

[Stephen Deestur Col. NDA photostat, Book A.]
To George Davis, U. S. Charge d'Affaires, f i n i s , from Tobias Lear, U. 8. Consul
General, Algierr

(Copy) N Q9.
SIB,

*

ALGIERB
June 8'h 1804.

*

*

*

*

*

*

In stead of replying to all the foregoing letters, in the order of their
dates, I shall first touch upon the more important subjects of the two

Isst; observing that after the departure of Mr OBrien from this place
for Tunis, nothing occured to make it necessa for me to write to
you even if a good opportunity had offered unt I should hear from
you upon his arrival in Tunis. I n my letter to Mr OBrien, when he left this, a copy of which is
enclosed, You will see that he had no powers from me to make a final
arrangemt with the Bey of Tunis; he was only desired to ascertain, if
possible, in con'unction with Yourself, the ultimate expectations or
demands of the ey on our Govr - He knew that I had not forwarded
to you any instructions or orders of our Government, relative to giving
a fixed sum to Tunis Annually or Biennially; for when he spoke to me
on the subject, I told him I thought i t unnecess
a t this time, as he
knew perfectly well what those terms were, w ch the Govt had
limited; and that I wished to hear further from the Government after
they knew of our late misfortune, before the zlltimatum was brought
forward. He should have made a fair statement of that matter to
You. In his letter to you of the 25 of April, he has taken up the pro er
idea on this subject. I n his letter to You, of the h t of May, as
given you a ower with respect to 5000 dollars, which he certainly
was not strict y warranted in doing. - I state these things that You
may see the ground on which they Stand. - And as I am ersuded
it was done for the best, according to our &airs stood wit the Regency of Tunis, I do, for Your satisfaction confirm them.
I now enclose you an extract from the Instructions of the Secretary
of State relating to Tunis. Nothing ki said of a regalia, on the rece
tion of a Consul; but that is a C O B ~ Oso~ fullJ e~tablished,that
sum of ten thousand dollars partly in cash and partly in goods (not
Navd Stores) would be allowed of course. Or the whole of the
Consular Present
h t be in goods, if more agreeable, not exceeding
the ten thoussnd do ars. -

3.

B

"%

g

P

Y,

&

1

167

WARS WITH BARBARY POWEBS

I n Your letter to the Secretary of State (copy of which You have
aent me) You quote my letter to Mr OBrien thus "to ascertain the
precise expectations of the Bey of Tunis, and dose our & a h with
this Re ency if i t could be done on admissible terms". - My letter
to him ou will see is thus, "endeavour to ascertain the precise expectations of the Bey of Tunis from the United States, that our &airs
with that Regency m y be settled; if it can be done on admissible terms".
I t is only neecssary for me to state the true expression. - If You have
had an erronious copy ven You, I am sorry for the mistake.
I n the same letter IFou mention, that, in Your conversation with
the Sapatapa on the 6(4 of Ma , he, acquiesed in the proposition of a
bienniel Regalia in Cash equ to what would purchase a Regalia of
Naval Stores in Trieste. But neither the amou[n]t in Cash, nor the
quantum of Stores are mentioned. It is certainly necessary that the
sum should be limitted; or s t least that the Stores should be specified
and their quantity ascertained. Without this we are left ailoat, a t
their mercy, for their own prices and quantity.
After having made these remarks I can o[nJlly say, that the expectation of the Bey's receiving a frigate, or a Regalia in stores, being done
away, is obtaining two important points, which would never I think,
have been yielded by our Government. As to the Cash payment a
few thousand dollars could be no object, provided, by sacrificing them,
we could be placed upon the ground of security with respect to Peace,
so far as it can be ascertained in these Regencies
In your letter to the Secretary of State dated April 8'b (an extract
of which You have forwarded to me in Yours of the 24 ide) it appears,
that the Bey refused, in the most pointed terms, to acknowledge me as
an official character, if I should come to Tunis, and that he would have
no convetmtion or negocidwn of any kind with an other person but
Yourself. I t seems, however, that both the Bey & apatapa had much
conversation with Mr OBrien, on our affairs with the Regency while
he was there, and that the principal oints of ne ociation were discussed by Mr OBrien, and pretty we undorstoo , before the Commercial Agent desired, on the evening of the 29*h of April, that y o u
visits to the Palace might be made done when You wished to enter upon
business - I mention this merely to shew the inconsistency of
conduct
The return of difficulties stated in Your letter of the 18U of May
seems to have dons away all the previous understanding, and
us upon a ground wbere we can look only for War; for I resume it has
been an uniform h e of conduct observed by our Vesse lately in the
blockade of Tripoli, to revent the enterance of any Vessel whatever,
and that the Tunesian andals have been often turned back; whether
they have been captured or destroyed without some outrageous violation on their part of the usuages of blockaded Ports, is a point on
which I am not abfe to speak; but I persume neither has been done by
the orders of the Commodore. - It lay wholly with the Commodore
to respect Your Passport or not; and I presume you explained the
matter to him when you saw him and are able to judge how far the
the Spanish Vessel has been stopld by his orders.
It 1s very certain, as you observe, that so long as our War may continue with Tripoli, we shall have diculties, of s similar nature to
those stated, to to encounter with Tunis. If the Bey of Tunis wishes

h

2

#

B
d"

E

8

168 NAVAL OPERATIONS, APRIESEPTEMBE' 6 , 1804
a war with the United States, he wdi, undoubtedly make these things
the ground of it, however unjustifiable; but should that not be the
case he will be satisfied with proper explainations, and where his subjects may have sustained an injury of no great magnitude, there
would be no difficulty in making them a compensation, provided the
case should merit i t or policy demand it, to continue the peace, and
the amount be not very large. I n cases of magnitude s reference must
be made to our Government, which the Bey will not refuse if he is not
disposed for war. - I shall, however, transmit copies of your letter of
the lStP of May to our Consuls in Europe by the earliest opportunity
that our Vessels may have a due caution given them.
Your bills upon me of the 2gt@of April, fa+ Seigr Saul Levi Brahm
for two thousand Spanish dollars has been paid; and I am very sorry
that You could not negociate another in the same way without too
great a sacrifice, as money cannot be sent from hence at present without great risque, and the heaw drafts 1have been obliged to make on
Leghorn to pay our Annuities here (wh is done up to the j t h of March
last) makes me rather averse to drawing for more from that quarter
until I shall hear from thence. I sh&, however, enclose You a letter
of credit on Messrs Degen & Purviance of that place for two thousand
Dollars
I have examined your accounts and transmit herewith one copy,
with the notes as you will see.
If you will refer to my letter by Mr OBrien, You will find that I
didnot accuse you of neglect of duty or inattentionin not having written
to me; but imputed the non recQof Ietters from you to causes which
we could neither of us controd. I think from my letters as well as
from my conduct towards you, you cannot infer that I wish to give
you pain, or embarrass your situation; but the station in which I am
placed makes it a duty incumbent upon me to be frank in my
communications.
Xn a letter which I had the honor to write the Secv of State on the
14'?1Feba I observed,
"I have said nothing on the Subject of my recognizing Dr Davis, as Charge
"d'Mairs of the United States in Tunis; because I conceived the propriety
<'ofthe measure too apparent to need a comment. You have undoubtedly
"been informed of every thing relating to him in the Affair of Mr Cathoart
"at Tunis. I received it from both parties and could not find anything
"criminal in Mr Davis' conduct. It was necessary to have some one there
"on the part of the U. S. He appears to stand well with the Bey and
'lRegency - is said to be a Gentleman of talents 8nd well qualified for the
"place, and I trust that the President will not think I have acted amiss in
"what I have done with respect to him."

I have detained the Courier which You sent from the second of this
month to the present time, in hourly expectation of receiving orders
from our Government respecting Tunis $ Tripoli, predicated on their
knowledge of the loss of the Philade & the Captivity of our Citizens;
but 3 cannot feel justified in detaining him longer. And as I have not
received a line from the United States since they must have heard of our
misfortune a t Tripoli, I can only say that we must endeavour to keep
our ground a t Tunis,in the best manner we can, without making too
great sacrifices, un[t]ill we hear from our Governmt - The moment
any thing arrives here of importance to our afFairs in this Sea, I shall
dispatch a Courier to You; and, in the mean time, I place p a t c o d dence in Your address and influence to keep us from Nnning on a lee
shore there.

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

169

In my letter to the Secretary of State mentioning the loss of the
&p I observed, that the loss of this Ship and captivity of our

Philad,

Citizens must either be followed immediately with a force sd3cient
to reduce Tripoli to terms a t once, and keep others in check - or we
must submit to an unconditional tribute to all the Regencies - Or,
withdraw our Commerce wholly from this Sea, keeping, however, a
force to guard the Straits, which would be attended with an expence
fully e ual to attaining the b t Object. - I wait most anxiously to
know t e determination of the Governmt upon this event, as it has
materially chan ed the face of our Affairs in this Sea, and makes former
orders inaplicab e to the present State of thmgs.
I n a letter from the Sec? of State, (red 26@ of Ap!) dated in Jan?
I r e d a Commission, in due form, to make Peace with Tripoli; but
the late event has made it necessary for me to wait new orders before
I proceed in the business. I have also a letter patent from the President to the Bey of Tunis, to settle Affairs with him; but on this subject
it is unnecessary for me to sa more than is contained in this letter.
I enclose letters for the ommodore, Mr OBrien, Captain Bainbridge, and from the Sweedish and Danish Consul's here to theirrespective Colleagues in Tunis, also two letters from a Domestic of mine, who
resided some time in Tunis, to his friends there.
Reports and letters have come here informing that the English are
about to pay a visit to this place very soon. This has caused considerable alarm and much agitation, particularly among the Jews, and
keeps every thing in a state of suspence. The Cruizers of this Regency
have not yet gone out, and I presume will not go, until the intentions
of the English with respect to this Re ency is known.
We have no arrivals - no news. - !'he information which you gave
me from Marseilles, has not been rece here thought
[sic] any other
channel. By a letter which I r e d from Captain Bainbridge of the 5$h of Api
(enclosed with the duplicates & triplicates of your former dispatches)
I am happy to learn that the wants of our Citizens have been supplied
by the funds remitted them through Yourself and other channels
and that ho had then 500 Dollars on hand. Cloathing he expected
every hour from Malta. As i t will be more in the power of the
Commodore to furnish future funds for the support of our unfortunate Citizens, than to send them from hence, I shall write to him on
the subject, and also to Captain B. whom I shall desire, in case the
necessary support could not be sent by the Commodore, that he we
apply to you; in which case You must get the means of immediate
up port by a draft on me. - By a Vessel which sails from hence for
Leghorn in a few da s, I shall advise Messrs Degen & Purviance of
the letter of credit wru'ch I send You -

1

";

6'

[NA. SDA. CL, Algiers, Vol. 7, Part 1, Jan. 18WNov. 1805.1
To Richard O'Brien from Tobias Lear, U. S. Consul General, Algiers

ALGIERSJune 8*P1804.
DEARSIR, I have duly recg your favors of the 22e & 2gtQ of a ril,

and feel much obliged by the communication thus contained. - k h e
fsir train on which our &airs appeared to be when you left Tunis has
been in'terrupted, as you have undoubtedly learned from Mr Davis,
by a Complaint of the Bey that the Sandals of his Regency had been

170 NAVAL OPERATIONS. APRIL-SEPTEMBER 6. 18OL

-

-

taken by the Am. Vessels off Tripoli, and that a Spanish Vessel, with
MTDavis', Passport, had been prevented from entering that Port. These are matters which relate to the department of the Commodore,
who I know will do whatever is right in them. - As I have not r e d
a line from the U. States sin& they must have heared of the loss of
the P h W l p h i a & Captivity of our Citizens, I have told M' Davis
that the understanding with Tunis respecting an annual or biennial
payment in Cash was the Only thing we could do at present with that
Regency. If the Bey was determined on war; he would make it at
all events; if he was not, he would be satisfied with proper explainstions of any thmg which might occur with respect to Tripoli, and wait
for further Orders from home.
We are here retty much in the same state you left us No arrivals
no news; but ontinual reports of a Visit from the English, which
causes much agitation & alarm at times, among the Gentlemen of
the Black Robe
The hurry & bustle at our departure caused me to forget to
ou the receipt for Artic es recq from you on account of the
now enclose one receipt, and shall forward a duplicate, by another
opportunity. We were very glad to hear that you had so favorable a Pass e to
Syracuse, and that no one sdered from sea sickness. ~ ' . % a r
unites with me in Compliments & best wishes to MF6 OBrien Yourself
& little ones. I enclose several letters which have come here for you since your
departure. You have them in the state I received them
As I send this by the way of Tunis, and it is uncertain when it
may reach you, I can only say that we are here as you left us, - We
reside at the Garden, in which I have endeavoured to make some
improvements, and I am afraid I am laying out more money than I
ought in justice to myself; but it affords me some amusement

8

3

f

8g

[Stephen Decatur Col. KDA photostat, Book A.]
To Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Navy, from Master Commandant Charles
Stewart, U. 6. Navy

Siren MALTA- June 8'Q1804
SIR Herewith I send you a copy [31 May 18041 of Mr Anderson's
Communication relative to five Deserters from the Prize Ship M a d m
Catapoliana under his charge - I must however observe he neglected
to make those Circumstances known to Lt Comt Smith (who was
here at the time) until1 after those Vessels had Sailed I also be leave to inform you that I have two Deserters now on
board and k v e deferred punishing them that you may make an
example which I trust will prevent such practices in future fiC.

EPP, Order Book, May 1803-June 1805.1

Extract from journal of U. 8. Brig Argus, Master Commandant Isaac Hull, U. 8.
Navy, commanding, Friday, 8 June 1804

Cruiz' off and on Tripoli This day begins with moderate breezes
and &?%eather
at 1 sew a sail to the Eastward made mil in
chase at 4 spoke the U. S. Schooner Enterprize from Syracuse at
Sundown Tripoli bore S E b S distance about 6 miles at 3 made sail
to the Eastward set and took in Sail Occasionally 'JKq and wore
Ship when Necessary in Cq with the V k and 2WerP';ze

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

171

At 4 ast 11 AM fked Several shot at the gunboats which was
r e t m a f by them and the Batteries wore ship At Meridian fine
Weather
(NDA photostat.]
Extract from log book kept by Sailing Master Nathaniel Earaden, U. S. IFavy,
on board U. 6. Frigate Gmriiiuiion, Friday, 8 June 1804

Light Airs from the East@,Moored in Valetta. Noah Morse &
Francis Hopkins who were sent to the Hospital from this ship are
dead - A t 7 P, M anchored here from a cruize off Tripoly the
U. S. Brig Syren Calms or light airs thro' the night - At 6 A. M.
unmoored Ship. & hove short in order to proceed to Sea - In the
Act of weighmg the Wind sprang up from the Eastward which is
right into the harbor - Rec'd two men belonging to Malta as cruizing
or wasting Pilots for the Cmtitutwn Noon Moderate breezes from Eastwg [LC. EPP, Log Constitution, 1803-1804.1
To Secretory of the Navy from Secretary of State

DEPARTMENT
OF STATEJune gtQ1804.
SIR. I have the honor to inform you that the President has deter-

mined to send to the Dey of Algiers ten brass twenty four pounders,
and five brass eighteen pounders, with Carriages and the necessary
a paratus complete. They are to be long guns fit for batteries. He
so wishes the Cargo of the Ship SaU lost off St Lucar, be repeated
and another Cargo to be ship ed to t f e Dey to consist of plank and
timber of good quality, of sm& s p m for topmasts, top gallant masts,
sail-booms, and stuff for handles of rammers, spunges and
ladles or cannon of different calibers, from 48 to 6 pounders. The
Kinds of timber and planks for this last Cargo may be selected from
the list out of which the last shipments, were made, and the proportions of the whole Cargo regulated by m attention to the stowage
and assortment. The Cannon can be cast a t Foxalls furnace out of
some brass belonging to the public. I t is desirable that the above
should be collected and forwarded a s soon as is practicable.

J

steeriY

[NA. SDA. Dom. L, Vol. 14, May 1802-May 1805.1
To Thomas Appleton, U. S. Consul, Leghorn, from Tobias Lear, U. S. Consl~l
Qeneral, Algiers

ALGIERS,June 9'9 1804
SIR, I embrace the only opportunity which has offered to your
Port since I have been here, to acknowledge the receipt of our
acceptable favors of the 2 2 h f Novr 15 of Febr di 10tQof ~ ~ osr
well as to tht~nliyou for the communications made by them, and for
your very kind offer of services. The Port of Alicant affords the most direct & fre uent communication with this place; but itr~great distance from ghorn has prevented my profiting by that Channel, unless there was something
special to forward
V%ere is no interdiction to my entering into Commercial business;
but since I have been here, I have found so many Public duties to
attend to that I ah* not have been able to have profited by corn-

L

$

172 NAVAL OPERATIONS, APRILSEPTEMBER 6. 1804
merce if any object had offered, which however has not been the case;
for the dispute between the British and this Regency haa suspended
every thing of a Commercial nature here for some time past, and its
effects will continue untill their differences are settled. Should any
object present in future worth attendmg to I shall not be unmindful
of your friendly offer.
The loss of the Philadelphia, and unfortunate Captivity of our
Citizens, has materially changed the face of our Affairs, from what
they WP have been had not that event happened. Since the news
of this misfortune reached the United States, I have not received a
line from thence, but am in daily expectation of Orders from Government, predicated on that event. With This Re ency we appear to stand well. I was so fortunate
as to effect a f
payment of our Annuities in Cash, on the !jt4 of
March last. This besides being a great pecuniary advantage to the
U. S. secures, in some measure, our peace for a time here, so far as
it can be done by removing complaints arising from deficiency of
fulfilling our stipulations by treaty
The Bey of Tunis is threatening us very hard, as you will See by
the Extract of a letter from Mr Davis to me which I enclose for your
information, and request you will give the same a Circulation to
guard our commerce, as much as possible, against the event of a war
with that power. I cannot help thinking however that the Be
knows too well his own exposed Situation to break with us on lig
grounds while we have a force in his Neighbourhood to annoy him,
and I am persuaded that no justzjiuble cause for war will be given
him b our Vessels. - A few days Previous to the late affair of the
Sand s &q mentioned in Mr Davis' Letter, our affairs with the Bay
of Tunis were getting into a favorable train, he had given up the
Idea of receiving a Frigate, or a regalia in Naval Stores; and the
understanding between us seemed to promise a favorable termination
of all complaints.
Whatever can be effected by our small force in this sea to protect
our Commerce & annoy the enemy, I am persuaded will be done:
And if any ob'ect of Enterprize which talants can suggest, and boldness, tempere with Prudence, can execute, I know our Commodore
will avail himself of it.
of the U. S. Brig
The letter and small box brot by Ca t-tewart
Synm from Messr' Bacri; were deliverelto David Cot% Baori, in my
presence, here.
I shall always feel obliged by letters & information from you
whenever opportunities offer, and wish I could give you somethin
in return; but we are barren here, excepting in the loc
in"rmt%
events, w ch could not amuse. - The account you give me of Mr
Livingston's returning & General Smith succeeding him is the only
information I have recd on that Subject. You know of Mr Livingston's meritorious exertions to interes[t] the Govg of France in the redemption of our Unfortunate fellow Citizens a t Tripoli, and mediate
for a peace. - I have no faith in their effects. - I t is convenient
for France, while a t war with Great Britain, that we shg blockade the
Port of Tripoli, which will deprive the English of one Source of
Supplies for Malta. Ever since the appearance of Lord Nelson, off here in January,
we have had constant reports of the English coming, in force; which

K

2

d

S

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

173

hm occasioned continual Alarms & Agitation. I do not myself beleive they will come while a t W B with
~
France; For when they do
appear it will probably be in Great force, which they cannot well
spare a t present in this Sea.
f. S. The Cruizers have not been out this Season, and I presume
will not go out while their differencia with G. B. continue. JUW l r t h 1804
The sailing of the Ship for Leghorn, which was to have been on the
lot@inst was revented, by the arrival of the Britisfi] Ship of War,
the Superb, apt-eets,
who brot a person (Bryan MqDono
Esq., late from Tripoli) to treat in congunction with Capt K, on t e
differences between the British & this Regency. There is yet no
conclusion of this Business. The Superb is still here, but there seems
not to be a good understanding on the Subject

8

Th

[Stephen Decatur Col. NDA photostat, Book A.]

[9 June 18041
To Captain Edward Preble, U. 6. Ipavy, from the Wardroom Oificera of the U.6.
m a t e ~oditution

SIR We venture to address you in behalf of our Mess Mate, Lieutt
Tarbell. A retrospect of his deportment heretofore, as an Gentleman,
& correct Officer, prior to the unfortunate evening of the 5'b ins$,
induces us powerfull to exert ourselves, that, if consistent, he may
be ordered again to &s duty with us as usual.
M' Tarbell is conscious of his error, and says 'twas founded on his
too great confidence in the Pilot - We believe this to be the case
sincerely. - We have always considered Mc Tarbell to be one of
our most correct Officers, and the circumstance above alluded to,
which has incurred your displeasure, mill, he says, be tm lesson which
he never can lose sight of.
Frigate Constitution Saturday Morning June 9'h 1804
NATH EARADEN
T, ROBINSON
CHAPGORDON
SAM!ELBERT
JNP

HALL

ROBERT
GREENLEAF
JAQ
FELLS
(LC. EPP,VoI.

11, April-June 1804.1

To Lieutenant Joreph Tarbell, U. 8. Navy, from Capwin Edward Preble, U.6. Bavy
Constdu&n JUNE 9'Q 1804

SIR On a retrospective view of the general tenor of your past
conduct as an OfEcer, I am induced to believe that too much confidence
&lonein the Pilot mi ht have occasioned your imprudent a proach to
the shore with this hip on the 5'P Inst so near as to en anger her
safety while under your charge as Officer of the Watch:From t h
Cicum8tance7 and a solicitation on the part of your brother Officers
highly honorable to you t b t you may still continue among them, I
am induced to direct that you return to your duty in full confidence
that you will in future be more guarded in your conduct. -

I

{LC. EPP, Order Book, May 1803-June 1805.1

S

174 NAVAL OPERATIONS, A P R I L S E P P T E E R 6, 1804
To Captain John Rodgers, U. S. Navy, from Lieutenant Colonel Commandant
Ranblin Wharton, U. 8. Marine Corps

WABEINGTON
Jane gtB 1804
SIR I am honor'd by your Letter of the 4" covering copy of cause
of arrest served on M' Shields. I regret that it bas been m Misfortune, to be compelI'd to interfere with the conduct of the $onng
Gentlemen of the Navy. It has been, & always shall be my wish rather to promote their
reputation, than to offer injury to it: this unfortunately, is the second
instance since I have commanded here. I have done nothing more
however than my duty in reporting. I now wish to be as friend , as
a parently I have been hostile trusting to the cool reflection o the
dktlernen, who I am sure, must acquit me of an intentional Injustice. I have recieved a Letter from Mr Shie ds, acknowledgmg

9

4

initation at the moment but disavowing parts of the Charges: he has
made amends sdliciently to me, by the Politeness, of that Letter, and
I must now become his friend, his Advocate: You will of course confer
on me, an obligation, a favour, I shall not forget, by removal of arrest,
and restoring him to his Duty. I , in asking this from you Sir, withhold the Evidence you request: fully convinced that you will not differ
from me in the termination of this unpleasant affairWishing you Health & Happiness,
[LC. JRP, Letters k Orders, 1804-1805.1
Extracts from journal of U. 6. Brig Argus. Meeter Commandant Isaac Hull, U. 8.
Navy, commanding, Saturday, 9 Jnne 1804

CruiziryZ on and off Tripoli These 24 hours Commences with fine
easant Weather and Clear Captn? Smith and Decatur came onard a t 3 all the Capt"P went onboard the Vixen a t 4 Tripoli bore
S E b S at 6 Cap* Hull returned on board

sb

[NDA photostst.]
Ertract from Hemorandurn Book of Captain Edwerd Preble, U. 6. Ravy, on boiard
U. 8. Fkigete C b d t u t i o ~9 Jnne 1804

Sailed from Malta for the Coast of Tripoly.
L C original.]

Extraot from log book kept by Sailing Iba~terWathoniel Haraden, U. 8. Navy,
on board U. 8. Frigate Codihrlion, Baturday, 9 June 1804

Light airs from the E. At Single Anchor in Valetta. Ships draft
abaft 22% Inches & forward 21X2 Inches - Rec'd 22 gang casks of
of wster by the cutter. At 6 P. M. Weighed and warped out of the
Harbour - Wa ing out till 9 P. M. when a light breeze sprang up
off shore - In'g,at, b. made sail to the Eastward of Malta - Rec'd
in Mdfa Robert Corbett belo
to the U. S. Schooner Na.Utilw1
& Emanuel Peterson who also be onged to her; the latter was brought
on board ss a deserter. Wind light & Variable between S E & S W
during the ' ht - Tacked as necessary in Order to work round the
S E part a%alta - At day light we were 4 le es E b S from
Vdette - Ships company from da light till 7 A. r B c r u b b y ,their
oloathes. At 6 A. M. s dead calm w&ch continued till 9 when n meze
sprang up fromE S E - Set the larboard stud* sails and steared S W

Y

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

175

in order to ass the S E end of Malta which bore W. S. W - 4 leaguesThe wind gad shifted by 11 A. M. to 6 S E - In studdg sailsEmployed clearing up the Decks, clean=Ship & stowing the anchorsConsul OBrien still remains on board - When in Mdta this last
time we opened the scuttles in the Gun room & those of the Warrant
OfEcers store rooms forward - They are all well lined with thick
cloth Noon Moderate breezes from S b E and pleasant weather - We
are S E ?4 E 4 lewues from the S E Part of Malta
Left & Malta ;he Sywn refitting lor a cruize off Tripoly.
Latitude Obsg 35' 39' N.
[LC. EPP, Log Conslitdion, 1803-1804.1
Extract from journal of William Eaton, U. 8. Rsvy Agent for the Bsrbary Bagsncis~,
from 9 Jnne to %6Jnne 1804

9, Arrived at Norfolk; crossed by packet to Hampton - Took
lodgings at Jone's tavern, kept b Cheeseman - Found the Cmgre88
in the roads - She arrived the ay preceeding 11. The ConsteUatwn left the Eastern Branch.
13. The President arrived in Harnpton roads.
14. The &sez arrived 15. The John Adam 21. The ColLeteUation 26. The John Adam went to sea -

d

[H. E. Huntington M A G , EA 206.)
To Captain Samuel Barron, U. 8. lavy, Hampton, Va., from Captain Hugh O.
Campbell, U. S. navy

CmteWim, EASTERN
BRANCH.
dune lot@1804 Sra We have as et but one Cabb on board, a second is promised
on Wednesday, whic will Enable me to leave the Branch Immediate1
after as all the tradesmen d l be clear of the ship by t b t time - H 1
is up from the &a, he left that ship at Maryland point the day before
yeaterdt~y- I am Sir.With Much Esteem
[Mrs. James S. Bsrron Col.]

i:

9

To Jamer Leander CathcPrt, Leghorn, from Sscrstvp of State
DEPARTMENT
OF STATE

Junc 10's 1801;.
SIR. The latest letters I have received from you are those of the
18, 21, & 27 March. I had before received several copies of your

accounb, which are now in the Treasury Department in a course of
invest' ation and settlement.
By ommodore Barron who is proceeding to the Mediterrsnean,
with five additional Fri stes, one of which is armed m$&; I take occasion to mention, that i after receiving my last letter, which permitted
you to return to the United States, as soon as your convenience might
require, you should have continued with Commodore Preble's Squadron, your conduct is approved by the President; but if after the snivd
of the new Commodore, as there will be several GentIemen under his

8

!

176 NAVAL OPERATIONS, APRILSEPTEMBER

6, 1804

Command, who have some scquaintance with Barbary Affairs, and
there will be less inducement to the abandonment of your wishes;
your stay in the Mediterranean will recur to the footing pointed out
in my letter above referred to. Enclosed is a copy of the act of Congress for raising a revenue & making appropriation for defraying the
expense of the war with Tripoli.
[NA. SDA. Despatches to Consuls, Oct. f8OO-Feb. 1817.1

To Alexander, Count de Worontzow (or Worontzoff), Lord Chancellor of Bussis,
from Secretmy of State

DEPARTMENT
OF STATE
June 10" 1804.

The COUNTWOROXTZOW.
Lord &7u:eUor of the Empire of Rwsia.
SIR. The President of the United States has received fmm their
Consul a t St Petersburg, the information communicated by your
Exoellency on the 25Q of Janu
last, that his Imperial Majesty
would e m p l o ~his good offices, wit the Turkish Government, for the
restoration of an American Frigate with her Crew, which having
foundered near Tripoli fell into the hands of its Bashaw.
This friendly interposition is received, Sir, by the President with
all the sensibihty which it is calculated to inspire. Altho' t,hemeasures
taken by the Govr of the United States, in consiquence of the accident
a t Triopli, and which will be followed up with the requisite vigor,
promise to repair the loss, and to bring the Bashaw to proper terms
of peace, yet it is a circumstance as flattering in itself, as i t must be
favorable in its effects to find in so illustreous and powerful a sovereign,
so distinguished a mark of attention to the interests of the U: States.
The President sees in it a ray of that luminous benevolance which
shines in the character of his Imperial Majesty, and which emanating
from the best feelings of the heart gives the brightest ornament to the
attributes of his high s[t]ation. The generous instruction ven to
his Ambassador a t Constantinople, excites in this view the ess surprize, but it is for the same reason stamped with the purer value. I
am charged by the President to convey to you these sentiments with
a. request that his Imperial Majesty may accept them as an expression
at once of the President's exalted esteem, and as an acknowledgment
on the part of the U: States for the particular act of kindness, which
his Majesty has been pleased to exercise. The assurances which
our Excelle[nc]y has added of the friendly interest which his Imperial
Lajes t will continue to take in what concerns the United States, are
Sir, f y appreciated by the President, and afford the greater satisfaction as they correspond with the disposition which his Imperial
Majesty, will always witness in the United States, to cultivate good
will, and the interchange of good o5ces with other nations, and
especially with one, whose Sovereign merits them by his honorable
& beneficent example. I t only remains to thank your Excellency for
the politeness and patronage experienced on this occasion by the
Consul of the United States, and to tender to you the distbgukhed
respect & consideration, which our celebrated merifs demand, and
with whicb I have the honor to e &Q

9

e'

d

g

[NA. SDA. Despatches to Consuls, Oct. 1800-Feb.1817.1

WRRS WITH BARBARY POWERS

177

Extract from Diary of Captain Edward Preble, U. 8. Ravy, Commodore of U. S.
Squadron in the Mediterranean, Sunday 10 June 1804

Moderate Breezes from the S W, standing to the westward by the
wind, spoke a Greek ship from the Levant for Malta, at % past
N N E 7 leagues & the S W,
steered S W B S for Tripoly,
of the Solicitations
A M mustered all
all the Cloathing
[LC. EPP, Diary,

1803-1804.1

To Captain Edward Preble, U. 8. Navy, from James Leander Cathcsrt, Leghorn

LEGHORN
June l l t h1804.
Dr SIR. I receiv'd your receipt for the cloathing deliver'd to you
by Mr Matthiew in due season, $ your letter of the 15'h of May was
deliver'd to me by Mt Frederick Degen of Knples on the 2Qinsnt I a m
extremely sorry that they dont seem to breath the same sentiments
relative to my exertions in favor of the prisoners at Tripoli that your
former letters did, & that ou look upon the dictates of humanity as
a mercantile speculation, ut dont wonder a t it in the least when I
consider that you are treating with an American Consul who has been
some time in the mediterranean; that honorable title has unfortunately
devolved upon characters who with their Vice's, Navy Agents, &
their Agents, has (with some few exceptions) furnish'd the Agents of
other nations uith a comparative term of reproach; I have pursued a
different line of conduct & have represented many facts relative to
them to government which I will substantiate on my arrival in the
United States, the only visible effect that the[y] hare had, is the honor
of their implacable enmity which I shall endeavor to perpetuate; the
papers herewith enclosed is s a c i e n t document to prove that I have
reap'd no benefit from those exertions, on the contrary much trouble
& anxiety; I proposed to myself the pleasure of my fellow Citizens
approbation as a su5cient indemnity for my trouble but as I am
deprived of that satisfaction I am determined to sustain no loss, &
have charged those articles to government, trusting to their equity
for my re-imbursment; I presume th~I_v]are cheaper than any other
person would procure them, for the[y] were mostly cut out in my
house and M r q a t h c a r t inspected t>lieirmaking in order to economue,
I therefore conclude that if the prisontm do not want them, that the
Pursers of the Squadron will find it to their advantage to purchase
them, the Sailors cloathing are valued in Spanish dollars the whole of
the accompt is translated & a copy is herewith enclosed with the
corresponding vouchers consequently they will only have to debit
themselves for the ammf & forwa,rd the Secretary of State a bill of
exchange, or order upon the Navy Department for the sum of
$433 1.7/100 the cost & charges of the goods in question; I am extremely
sorry I have put myself to such trouble & expence to serve people
who seems so insensible of it. The two thousand dollars I deposited in the hands of Mr Degen a t
Naples, subject to your order was likewise intended for the use of the
prisoners a t Tripoh of which I duly infonn'd you by post, & by Mr

c

178 NAVAL OPERATIONS. APRILSEPTEMBER 6. I804
Robert Spence, after receiving your letter of the 18'Q of March &
peruseing the one you wrote to Mr Mathieu of the 1gt&itwas impossible
that I should expect you at Kaples before you touch'd at Malta
I directed my letters, had I the most
have arrived in ten days after my depardone myself the pleasure of waiting
have render'd you no further service than
what I have done already.
M: OBrien's being with you by Mr Lear's appointment & Mr Davis
being c o h ' d in the Consulate by government does not alter my
opinion of them, any more than it will tend to prove them honest
men; I regret you have such iniquitous associates.
Major Barnes call'd at my house the other evening R. inform'd me
that Fredh Degen since he has been here has made a point to publish
in company that it was entirely oweing to his influence that you
procured what you wanted at Naples, this induces me to forward you
copys of my last note to General Acton & his answer with their translations whch will prove Mr Degen's assertion to be false, for I transacted my business without his assistance; & you may depend Sir that
orders were forwarded to Messina to give you whatever you wanted
before I left Naples, though General Acton re eted that you had not
come to Naples, with the ship, as he prefer' your taking the Artillery and ammunition from that place, as you are already inform'd by
the copy of his letter to me of the 27'bf March. By letters from Marseilles I am inform'd that Mon9 Beaussier
Commercial Agent of France at Tripoli has wrote under date of the
1" of April, that he has receiv'd instructions from his government to
intercede with the Bashaw of Tripoli to procure a peace for the United
States, & that in consequence thereof the Bashaw has lower'd his
extrav ant demand to the moderate sum of $500,000 & that it is
hoped t at he will still abate something more; this is thought by
some of our fellow Citizens to be a very favorable circumstance; I
am of a different opinion & dont hesitate to assert that sueing for the
intercession of any nation with the States of Barbary is unwise bad
policy, & de ading; but as I have deliver'd my sentiments on this
subject aJrea y I shall forbear repitition. To pa 500,000 or even the
ance when (on the
third part of it to Tripoli by the mediation of
arrival of the three Frigates you daily ex ect) you will have so respectable a force under your command, woul most undoubtedly stimulate
the Chiefs of the other States to declare war against us: I hope a more
honorable termination of the War; so far we have exactly co-mcided in
opinion, & I most sincerely hope that we may not differ in the last &
most essential act. We have no direct conveyance to the United States from this port
& my family will be increased the latter end of Septr; if I can't get a
conveyance in all this month I will not be able to leave Leghorn until
November I shall probabl be obliged to redraw for part of the two
tbousq doll+which I left at aples subject to your order, to serve my
culinary \Tes;
if I do, you shall be duly inform'd of it, I regret
very muc t t none of our public vessels are 01 home soon as it
would be an amazing accomodation to me, esl es the economy
attending the thmg is of some moment in the present state of my
private affairs. -

r

7,

7

K

i'

5

% "3

W A R S WITH BARBARY POWERS

179

t

You have not acknowle ed the receipt of any of my letters since
the one enclosing the plan o the Gunboat; ? have you receiv'd the plan
of a mortar boat with my communications of feb? 19'4 & March the
5" 4 26') as well aa those by Mr Spence. While I remain in Europe I should be hap y in hearing of your
success, & I request you to command me wit out reserve in every
thing that my services can be of use to you or the public [LC. EPP, Vol. 11, April-June 1804.1

%

Extract from journal of U. 8. Brig Arm. Yollter Commandant Isaac Hull, U. 8.
Eavy, commanding, Monday, 11 June 1804

[Blockading off Tripoli.]
At Meridian fine pleasant Wr Scollrge Vixen and EnterP+ize in
Company
[NDA photostat.]

[12 June 18041
To Captain Samuel Barron, U. 8. Navy, from Captain John Rodgara, U. 8. Bavy

SIR Not understanding your S i a l I have sent a Boat to know
what you wish to communicate
JUNE12 '4 1804
[Mrs.Jamea 5. B a m n Col.]
To Prime Minister to the Bashaw of Tripoli, from Captain Edward Preble, U. 8.
Navy

UNITED
STATEG
SHIPComtitution
O$ Tripoly J w 1 9 4 1804.
His Excellency SIDIMUHAMMED
DQHIES
Prime Minister to His EzceU? the Baehaw of Tripoly.
SIR I beg leave to recommend to you Mr OBrien the bearer of this

letter who is authorized by me to treat for the randsom of the American
Prisoners at Tripoly and whatever he may do I will ratify and confirm.
I wish permission to send clothing and stores on shore for Captain
Bainbridge and his O£Ecex-sand Crew, and if you wish me to send the
prisoner taken in the Philadelphia on shore, it shall be done, if you
promise to return me an American seaman in exchange or send the
same man back again. I would freely give him to you, but my
orders from my Government does not permit it.
I beg you to accept m best thanks for your friendly attention to
Captain Bainbridge and ve the honor to be

L

[LC. EPP, LB, April-Nov. 1804.1
To Cap*

W i h m Bainbridge, U. 8. Bavy, from C a p e Sdwud Prsble, U. 8.

UNITEDSTATEB
SHIPC~18-?b
Of Tripoly . J w 1Rte 1804
DEABSIR I am honored with your letters of the 27'4 -29th March,
the first enciosing a copy of your Note to the Minister of the Bashaw
and the latter a triplicate of ours of 16th of February mpecting the
four Men taken on board in ibralfer Bay - also your two letters of

6

180 NAVAL OPERATIONS, APRILSEPTEMBER 6 , 1804
the 20th UltQ- Mr Pulis' account which you mention to have enclosed, I have not received - I wish you would send i t by Mr OBrien
as I presume i t was left out b Mistake The four Men reed on boar a t Gibraltar are to be clothed &c*the
same as the rest of the Crew - I regret that I was not permitted to
send the clothing for the People and Stores for yourself and Officers
on shore when I was off here last - I have on hand a large supply
prepared for you, and shall send on shore as soon as permission is
obtained I expected when I last left here to have returned to this Station
sooner but my absence hss been necessary - I send this by Mr OBrien
who has letters in charge for you and your Officers The Con.gress Captain J. B[arron] Essex which is to be brought out for Captain C.
S[tewart] of the Syren, and the John Adams Chancy, are on their way
to join our Squadron - The President Captain S. B[arro11] and two
others are to compose a separate Squadron without the Mediterranean
to rendezvous a t Gibraltar.
If your Officers wish to be provided with clothing I will send them a
suit or two each, as may be most agreeable to them and as many
shirts as they choose - Write me by M' OBrien and send me a
memorandum of all you want that I can provide you with, and i t
shall be sent on shore if he obtains permission for that purpose.
The Emperor of Russia has interested himself warm1 with the
Ottoman Court in your favour - Bounaparte is declared mperor of
France, and King of Navarre and Italy. I have not any News Papers
to send you, nor nay news from home.
I ho e Mr OBrien will be permitted to see you, Adieu for the present
and be 'eve me with real esteem

1

6

\

[LC. EPP, LB, April-Nov. 1804.1
To Monsieur Beaussier, French Charge d'Affaires, Tripoli, from Captain Edward
Preble, U. 6. Navy

COPY

UNITEDSTATES
SHIP CwtitZLtion
O$ Tripoly 12th June 1804.
SIR,I am honq with your letters of the 2gth March and 24Q of
Ma ,which were received but a few days since, otherwise, I should have
rep ied to them sooner.
I shall immediately send copies of them to my Governmt and to
our Minister a t Paris, in order that they may be acquainted that the
intervention of the First Consul, through the Charge dlAfFairs of the
French Republic a t Tripoly, is not likely to have the effect which (I
believe) the might have expected. I cannot but suppose the First
Consul will eel somewhat mortified that through his influence you have
not been able even to obtain permission to land the necessary clothing
& Stores which the American Prisoners are suffering for want of. I t
is probable the First Consul expected his mediation would have had
more weight with the Bashaw of Tripoly than it a pears to have had.
I have no objection to sending the Prisoner on srlore who was taken
in the Philadelphia, provided they will send me an American Seaman
in exchange.
The Bashaw's pretentions to the enormous sum you mention, is,
on his part, a vain one; nor will he ever obtain a tenth part of i t for
the nmdsom. The negotiation for randsom md Peace must be separate, as we will not pay one dollar for P w .

I'

9

I now again inform you, that neither Mr Schimbri nor the English
pro-consul had any authority from me to make any Negotiationwhatever, or any way interfere in the affairs of the United States a t Tripoly,
and I am astonished at their assurance.
I am authorized to randsom our Prisoners, and to make peace,
when i t can be done on terms consistant with the honor and
the United States; and the stipulated sum for randsom will
in cash immediately on the release of the Prisoners.
Mr OBrien will deliver you this. That Gentleman is authorized
to make an offer to the Bashaw; any assistance you can render him in
any negotiation with the Bashaw, I shall consider myself under obligations to you for. The blockade must continue while the negotiation
is going on, and for ever after, until a treaty of Peace is signed between
the two Nations. Any treaty of Peace must be subject to the h a 1
satisfaction of the President of the United States.
I have clothing and stores on board for the Prisoners, and wish
permission may be obtained to land them.
I t will always afford me pleasure to see you on board.
MT OBrien will make known the terms I have authorized him to
offer for thr randsom of the Prisoners, and will consult you previous
to making it.
I feel e~tremelyobliged to you, for your friendly Offices towards
Captain Bainbridge his Officers and Crow, and beg you to accept my
warmest thanks.

y:2i

[Stephen Decatur Col.]

Extract from journal of 0 . 8. Brig Arttu. Master Commandant Isaac Bull, U. 8.
Navy, commanding, Tuesday, 1% June 1804

This day begins with Moderate breezes and fine pleasant Weather
Tacked and Wore Shi and Set and took in Sail fre uently, as Occasion
required a t Sundown ripoli bore South 6. or 7 A e s at Midnight Tacked to the Southwq and Westward sounded in 8
fathm*Bottom fine yellow Sand a t Su[n]rise Tripoli bore South the
Scourge F'iren and Enterprize in Sight a t 11 saw a Strange sail bearing
ENE made sail in Chace At Meridian Dq Weather

$

[KDA photostat.]
Extract from journal of Middipman F. Cornelius deKrafft, U. 8. Haw, in U. 8. Brig
Siren of 18 gum, Master Commandant Charlee Stewart, 0.6.Navy, commonding,
Tuesday, 1%June 1804

At 9 hoisted out the boats At 10 weigh'd & made sail, plying out
of the harbour [of Malta]. At % past 11 came too in 5 fathoms, the
weather calm At meridian sent out a warp & bmu h t too, light airs
& warm, Came on board Mr JnP Pettegrew Mids%J'pman (with an
intention to join the ATW) & 8 men belonging to the Argw, which
having been sent in a Ketch Prize to the Argus.
N. B. Those remarks include 12 hours.
[NDA.]

182 NAVAL OPERATIONS, APRIL-SEPTEMBER 6, 1804
T o John Cbalmers, Bavy Yard, Waehhgton, D. C., from Charlea W. Goldtiborough,
for Secretary of the Bavy
Nav. D E P19
~ June 1804

I am informed that the frigate Consleuation k now waiting for her
ccbbles - for want of them the whole uadron will be detained as
it is not intended that the other Ships sh sail until the CmteUation
Joins them You will hence perceive the necessity of preparing the Cables with
all Practicable expedition - I know when I announce the &cumstance to the Secretary that it will give him Great Concern -

3

[NDA. GLB, Vol. 7, 1803-1805.1

To Secretary of the Ravy from Master Commandant Isaac Chauncey, U. 6. Bavy

U.S. SHIPJohn Adam
Hampton Roads lStVune 2804
SIR I have the Pleesure of informing you that about an Eour
since 1 let go my Anchor in this Place, where I found the President
and Congress the Essez will be in this Afternoon - I passed her tbis
Morning at Anchor about fifteen Miles horn this Place waiting for
the flood Tide to make.
I shall proceed to Norfolk as soon as the Shi is moored, where I
hope to compleat my Business by tomorrow, an be ready to proceed
agreeable to your Orders the k t fair Wind.

B

[NDA. MC LB, 1804-5.1

To Benjrrmin King, Havy Yard, Woshin@on, D. C., from Captain John Bodgers,
U. S. Bavy

U.S . FRIGATE
Congtcss

Hamptan R. June C
IY
t
@
1804
SIR I have sent you back the rings you sent for the Congress'
conductors, and the Spires you sent with them are but little better;
d t h o necessity has forced me to keep them. You decieved me in
every promise you made, and in almost every peice of Work ou did
for the Ship; however be assured you have more particularly ecieved
yourself. [LC. JRP, Letters & Orders, Book A, 1804-1805.1

'f

f 13 June 18041
To Captain Edward Preble, U. 8. Mavy, from Morter Commandant
Charles Btewart, U. S. Haw

EEPORT
OF THE PROCEEDINGS,
OCCURBENCEB
8 9 OF

THE

U.S. BRIO.

Siren
SIR Pursuant to your order of the 22q April we sailed at 8 A. M.
the Ships Woodrop Smms and M&
Cahpoliane in company - the
Wind Setting in prevented the prize from getting out and I accordingly
proceeded with the Woodrop Simms for Malta which place we arrived
a t the 230 A eevere gale from the N. E. prevented m leaving Malta
untilI the 26'c following, when we sailed to join t e blockade off
Tripoli - On the 28'4 we met with the Bri$ A T ~ W
and Schooner
V h , the Entet 'ze not having arrived I dvected Lieu3 Cornme
Hull to take the Kstern Station with thrt Schooner when she joined;

E

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

183

the Vixen I kept in Compm with me - The next day discove
to the %Vatward dong shore, we stood in an
compelled h e x e Shelter under the two Batteries, thrown up on
point Gargash, 4 miles to the Westward of Tripoli; a few shot were
exchanged with the Batteries at a great range, without producing
any eflect - The 2 g May at night we were separated from the
Vizen and driven as far as Lapadossct by a violent gale from S. E.
which continued without intermission untill the 9'Q when it abated,
and we regained our Station - the l l t P , which day the Schr E&rprize & Brig Scourge joined the Blockade; The 13th Standing toward
the town of Tri oli with all our force, drew from their Batteries, Gun
Boats and Bas aw's Castle a heavy and incessant fire for about
15 Minutes without however doi any damc~geto the vessels but I
have since understood that one o their heavy Cannon bursted and
that they sustained some other damage On the 15" we boarded a Ketch under Spanish Colours from Tunis
bound to Tripoli; she having Consul Davis's passport and nothmg
onboard but what was specified in it I permitted her after a thorough
examination to go in, she had also been overhauled by the A t p
and Enterprize On the 4 t P June we left the Station, having only 6 days wood
water &F onboard - We took Old Tripoli in our Rout, thtnking it
probable somethug was there On the 6'h we chaced two Galleys;
and got nearly within gunshot of them after a laborious days work
at the Sweeps favored by a hght breeze, which dying away at 8 P. M.,
they made their escape - On the 8tQwe [hIS mutilated]
P: S: The Vixen left the Station on the 14*@0fMay for Malta to
replenish her Stores - returned on the 28'P to the Station
The En&rp'ize left the Station for Syracuse on the 26t@May Commodore E D WPREBLE
~

9

a small sail

g

June 1804
[LC. EPP, Vol. 11, April-Juue 1804.1
T o Richard O'Brien, Tripoli, from Captain Bdward Preble, U. 8. Navy

COPY

UNITED
STATES
SHIPCodzltion
Of Tripoly June 1St@1804

SIR,I t is my request that you go on shore a t Tripoly, for the purpose
of endeavouring to negotiate for the ransom of the American Prisoners
in that place.
You are hereby fully authorized, to offer the Bashaw forty thousand
dollars for the ransom of Capt Bainbridge and the Officers & crew of

Statea, enter into
I will, how-

but h l d the Consul
be given ae a Consular

184 NAVAL OPERATIONS, APRIL-SEPTEMBER 6, 1804
Endeavour to see Captain Bainbridge, and to procure permission
to land clothing and provisions for him & his Officers. The Tripoline
captured in the Phihiklphia, I will send on shore, if the Bashaw will
pass his word to send me off an American Prisoner in exchange for
him.
[NA. SDA. CL, Algiers, Vol. 7, Part 1, Jan. 1804-h'ov. 1805.1
To Captain Edward heble, U. S. N a q , from Monsieur Bepuesier, French Chore6
d'dffaires and Commissary General, Tripoli
TRIPOLY
OF BARBARY

the 24 Prairial Year 12. - IS June 1804.
The Charge D'Maires of the French Republic and General Commercial Agent near the Pacha to Commodore Preble Commanding the
Naval forces of the United States of America in the Mediterranean.
SIR. This day and a t this moment of 4 past twelve I recive the
honor of your letter of yesterday in re ly to mine of the 28 March &
24 May last, I have myself a considera le ago forwarded Copies of the
first to my Government.
You acquaint me that the mediation of the &-st Consul through
my Channel will not probably be attended, with the effect which
Your Government looked for, that the first Consul will be somewbat
mortified to observe that his infiuence has not been able to obtain
even the permission to land the Necessaries for the American Prisoners
and that the h t Consul possibly expect that his interference would
have greater weight with the Pacha - I have fulfilled with all the
Gile and intelligence of which I was capable th[e] Commission that
had been conftded to me - I have not Committed the name of the
first Consul, nor the Di ty of my Government as you appear to
believe - It is yourself ommodore who in rigor could be accused of
this by the offer truly ridiculous and offensive abruptly made after an
absence of two Months and a half, which breaks off all Conference
and negociation that could only be renewed with difEculty What must be my surprise to learn that at the moment Mr OBrien
ought to have conferred with me before making the proposal you had
authorised him to do, he directly acquits himself of his Commission
a t the Castle without waiting that I found the means to speak with
him And tbat upon the answer made him by the Prince and his
Minister he took his leave and returned on board your frigate after
having however obtained the facult , which you had three months
ast, to land the Neceswries for the risoners in a Neutral Bottom confess to You Commodora tbat it was not decent my soliciting the
p o d OfEces of the first Consul when the intention was to propose so
lllsigpificant a Sum as 40,000 Dollars for the Ransom of 300 Prisoners
and the conclusion of Peace - France in interposing in this Affair
[had the] right to expect to be seconded b the two Parties, I had
disposed the Regenc to listen to reamnab e terms of Peace and to
soften the fate of d e Prisoners which daily receives aleviation This was my Mission, but the Pacha naturall felt himself offended a t
an offer, worse than that made by Commo ore Morris s t an Epoch
when none of your Countrymen were deprived of their liberty.
Without doubt you are not ignorant Commodore that the Ransom of
a single CabbinLboy is four to five hundred Dollars and that Mr
Csthcart proposed three Years ago a t the time of the Declaration of

E

b

f

$

f
d'

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

185

War the same Sum of 40,000 only to suspend hostilities for ten Months.
Accept Commodore the assurances of my high consideration &ca
P S. the 14 June. I flattered myself to have been able to send you
yesterday or this da my Answer, but it appears you have also given
up the intention of andjng the Cloathing for the Prisoners since you
left the Road this morning without makin the Signal agreed upon and
to which the Pacha is always ready to rep y - I therefore give Course
to this letter by the way of Tunis addressed to you at Malta Malta the 20 July 1804
A True Copy translation WmHiggens

P

f

[LC. EPP, Vol. 11, April-June 1804.1
Extract from journal of U. 6. Brig Argus. Master Commandant Isaac Hull,U.8. Bavy,
commanding, Wednesday, 13 June 1804

Cruizing on and off Tripoli This day begins with fresh breezes &
Clear Weather still in Chace of the sbsange sail a t 1 Tacked to the
N Q a t 2 shortened sail and hove too alongside the U. S. frigate
Constitution Commode Preble - the Commode made the Sigi N Q995
Cap* Hull went on board a t 4 past 4 the Cornrnod"ade
the Sigl
N?571 filled away standing in for the town of Tripoli with the Squadron in Comp? a t 8 Ca $ Hull returned at 7 AM Squadron in
Comp? the Commode fire a Gun & hoisted a fiag o Truice which the
Squad? also, did at 4 past 8 the Commode came too about 5 miles off
Tripoli and sent his boat on Shore a t 11 stands on and off under
easy sail. Variously Empg

f

[NDA photostat.]
Extract from log book of U. S. Brig Argus. 18 Guns, kept by Sailing Master Samuel
B. Brooke, U.6. Navy, Master Commandant Isaac Hull, U. 6. Navy, commanding,
Wednesday, IS June 1804

At 6 standing in for Tripoli in CQwith the Squadron hoisted a flag
of Truice 3 past 8 the Commodore Came too about 5 miles from the
town a t lj past his boat went on Shore a t 11 let a reef out of the
topsails standing off and on under easy sail At meridian pleasent
Tripoli bore South,
Late Obsg 3 3 O 00' N.
[LC. EPP, Artus, 1804.1
Extract from Pemorandum Book of Captain Edward Preble, U. 6. Navy, on board
U. S. Frigate Coiutifufion.13 June 1804

Sent Mr. Obrian on shore a t Tripoly under a Flag. He returned
same day.
[LCoriginal.]
Extract from Diary of Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Raw, Commodore of U. 8.
Squadron m the Mediterranean, Wednesday, 13 June 1804

Fresh Breezes from the E S E, - a t 1 the Scourge made the
Private signal for American Vessels of War, - a t 2 P M the Argzts,
Vixen, Enterprize and Scourge Joined company, made the Signal for
all Captains, - a t 3 P M Bore up for the Town of Tripoli then in si ht
bearing S W B W 4 leagues, made the Signal to the Squadron to fo ow

lf

186 NAVAL OPERATIONS, APRIL-SEPTEMBER 6, 1804
my motions, - at M past 4 P M, wore shi & stood off shore the Town
then besring SQ3 miles distance, 17 fat oms water saw an armed
Brig & Schooner and 17 Gun Boab at anchor inside the Reef, sent the
Argw & Enterprize to the Westward & the Vixen & Scourge to the
Eastward to look out, & lay too off the Town all night, - a t 4 A M
stood in for the Town, and at 9 A M Fired a Gun and hoisted a White
flag a t the Fore top Gall! mast head, with our colours in their places,
which was answered by the Bashaw with a White Flag at the Castle &
a gun, - a t 10 A M Anchored with the Small Bower in 24 Fathoms
water, the Town of Tripoli bearing by compass S S W distant 4 miles,
a t noon I sent Mr Obrian on shore in the Barge, with Lieutenant Gordon as Officer of the Boat, - I instructed Mr Obrian to endeavour to
procure permission to land some cloathing, Stores & Cash for the use
of Cap$Bainbridge and his Officers & Crew, -and to OfFer the Bashaw
& his Officers fifty thousand dollars for their Ransom, and to release
all the Triplines in our possession, and also agreed to establish Peace
and give 10,000 dollars as a present with the first Consul that
is appointed if the Bashaw would accept of the 50,000 dollars for the
Ransom of the Prisoners We have been engaged in watering & provisioning the Vtren & Scourge all this morning, - at noon wind E
S E, fresh Breezes and a considerably heavy sea, -

g

[LC. EPP, Diary, 1803-1804.1
To Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Bavy, from Captain William Bainbridge, U. S.
Navy

TRIPOLY
BARBARY
14th June 1804
DEARSIR, I was much disappointed in not receiving a line from
ou yesterday when the Boat came on Shore - the pleasure that your
Ltters always affords us added to the anxiety to hear from you on
eneral Subjects - Altho' I was disappointed, I rest assured on your
friendship and on your every exertion to relieve us from our unfortunate situation The letters that I received esterday were five from America, but
of an old date. One from &mu1 Kirkpatrick, One from consul
Montgomery, with two copies of ColQLears letters of December and
February - and a Copy of a letter from the Honb'c C. Pinckney a t
Madrid to ColQLear - this last copy reached me without any intimation accompanying it - I have m o t e you Eight or ten letters since
the 26th March; As I have not the Satisfaction to know when my
letters leave this place, I cannot calculate the probable time of theu
r e a c h you - My Several letters informs you of the want of cloathing for our Seamen - They have lately been moved to a more spacious
and better prison than they heretofore occupied - Indeed this [or
their] change has been a very edvant eous one, and that of the Officers
on the h t of March much for the Zorse - and we feel it every day
more forcibly on account of the increasing heat of the Weather I should have been extremely happy to have seen my friend Consul
OBrien, but an unnecessary rigour prevented my having that pleasure
Please to present my respects to him -

Signed Wq BAINBRIDGE

P. S. I have no letters from you since the 27'Q March

187

W m S WITH BARBARY POWERS

- [Wdtem in lime juice.]
DEAR
SIR I have wrote you several letters in lime juice and gave
my opinion respecting all Consuls in this place - No de endance can
Secret C o m m u n ~ i o nunder same date.

?

be put in any of them except the Danish who is a man o honor, and I
do not believe the others are - Of the F. C. you need not expect
any services against the interest of this place - Whoever negotiates
should remain on shore, and take them in the time when they tappem
in the best humour - They have a frightful idea of Bombs in thk
place - In my former letters I have mentioned ta probability of an
Escape - Since writing them, a Vessel laying in the Harbour with a
Boat out induced the attempt which was found and will be found
impracticable from the Vi ' ance of the Guards on the Top of the
Castle. The OfEcers were ortunate in making good their retreat I am extremely anxious to hear the determination of Government
and what is the demand of the Bashaw - Place no confidence in
MoDonough - It is his infamous behaviour, & the folly of Consul C.
that we are indebted for this War with Tripoly I trust my dear Sir that you will endeavour to give us our letters
from America: that, md hearing from you, is the only small consolation we can receive in our present situation May success crown all your u n d e r t a m prays Yours trul
(Signed)
B
(LC. EPP, LB, April-Nov. 1804.1

?

dp

114 June-5 July 18041
To Secretary of the Xavy from Captain Bdward Preble, U. S. Baeg

U.S. SHIPCcm&itution

Tripoly June 14th 1804

SIR I had the Honor to write you from Syracuse the 30th Ulto.
& forwarded Triplicates which I have not failed to do of all my com-

munications since I arrived in these seas but have no doubt that
many miscarry - I have not been honored with a letter from you
since the news of the loss of the Philadelphia reached America ected; Your letter of
The John Adurns has been lo anxiously
the 9th February mentioned t a t she woul be here by the last
ofA d I b e been Obliged to discharge 14 of the crew of the En.kqwiu
who would not consent to remain longer, the remainder have volunteered their services in the Gun boats Yesterday I anchored off the Harbor, and sent MF O'Brian on shore
under a flag of Truce to endeavour to ransom our unfortunate Countrymen, and, if the bashaw should desire it, to ~ k b l i e hPeace - I
thou ht Pro er to m&e an attem t to ransom them revious to 8n
atk&, f e d d that if we succee ed in destroying e Town and
shipping that the Barbarians might commit some &cta of inhumanity
on their Prisoners - Mr OBrien did not succeed in his Mission He
landed at Noon and returned on board at j4 past 2 P. M. - You
will see by his instructions how far he was authorized to go for the
ransom - I presume if the terms had been accepted that our
Govenzment would have been Satisfied, but aa they were refused
we have no alternative but to oblige him to aceept them or Otbers
more favorable to us. I have however written to Cap$ Bainbridge

=7l

S

9

t%

188 NAVAL OPERATIONS, APRIL-SEPTEMBER 6, 1804
and have authorized him to repeat the same Offer to the Bashaw
with the addition of ten thousand dollars to the Prime minister to
be secretly given him if he effects the ransom & peace; His influence
a t Court renders this Step necessary I do not expect that these
terms, or indeed any reasonable ones will be acceptable to the Bashaw
untill we make a general attack by Cannonading & Bombarding the
Town - I am confident when that takes lace that we shall soon
have Peace on conditions that we may not b ush to acknowledge When h/Ir OBrian came from Algiers he brought me a letter from
Col"ear
which advised me to Offer the Bashaw 600 Dollars ransom
for each of the Officers & Crew of the Philadelphia, provided he would
make eace without any money or annual stipulation and without a
Consu ar present, excepting with the first Consul appointed b the
President - I a m confident was I to make the Offer it woI$ d be
accepted immediately, but it would be imprudent to offer a sum
which would stimulate the avarice of the other Barbary Powers M' OBrien while on shore was not allowed to see any of the Prisoners
neither would the Bashaw permit him to see either of the Consuls
or deliver letters except some for Cap: Bainbridge which were delivered to the Bashaw himself - IIe Promised to permit cloathing
& provisions to be sent on shore for the prisoners but whilst we were
putting them in the Boat he hauled down the white flag - This
breach of promise is to be lamented as the Sailors are in great want;
indeed they are almost naked.
The Syren Argus, Enterprize Vixen & Scourge are now in Sight:
The Port is constantly kept closely blockaded, and (I think) the
Bashaw will soon be sick of the War
TUNISBAY. June 20th.
I left Tripoly the 16th Inst: blockaded by the Syren, &en &
Scourge and came here with the A r m & Enterprize in Company
You will see by Mc Davis's letters that the Bey is not satisfied with
us, and it is therefore necessary to keep a good look out in this Quarter,
particularly as the Tripolines have a small Xebeck hauled up here She is however stripped & disarmed & her crew gone home by land,
in consequence of having been for some time blockaded by the
Enterprize We have visited this bay several times lately, it is absolutely
necessary frequently to shew a force before their Ports in order to
check their Piratical disposition The Bey threatens, but I do not believe will make war against us
if we succeed in punishing Tripoly, or if more forte arrives - The
Bey, among other things, complains of our cruizers having destroyed
some Sandals or open boats attempting to enter Tripoly which he
says were from Jerba in his Regency. I t is true that boats have
been driven on shore near Tripoly but as the People belongin to
them immediately absconded to alarm the Troops stationed a ong
the Coast, it is not possible for us to know where they were from, but
it is evident we have a right to take or destroy them when succouring
our Enemy.
The Tunisians have about 20 Cruizers a t Sea: One Frigate of 36
Guns, and several smaller armed vessels are a t Anchor in this Bay
and ready to sail. When I was here last month I let Mr Davis have
$4000. to pay a demand of the Bashaw's which the Secretary of

P

I'

f

189

WARS WITH BARBARY POWEBS

State authorized, but which Mr Davis could not satisfy without
borrowing that sum to make up what he was deficient. I shall d
on ColQLear to return me the money when Opportunit Offers June 22e Sent the Ente 'za to Syracuse with rdem to have
the Gun boats ready for s t a g 23Q - Left Tunis Bay, & the 24th touched a t Malta for intelligence and sailed the same day, & the 26th arrived a t Syracuse where
we found the Enterprize and the Six Gun boats - Whilst Off Tripoly
we arted with most of our water and provisions to the Syren Vixen
& courge to prevent the necessity of their leaving the Station; We
are now replacing it - Recieved letters from Messina informing
me that the bomb Vessels will be ready in a few days 29th. The A r g w having had her spars & rigging overhauled and
taken on board as much provisions &- water as she couId conveniently
carry, sailed again for Trip01 , but with orders to Touch a t Malta
& convoy over a small Vesse under Neutral Colors with provisions
and cloathing for the Officers & Crew of the P h M p h i a Having this day completed our stock of Water and taken on board
5 months provisions of all sorts, we sailed for Messina
June 30th - Arrived a t Messina - The Enterprize in com any
We find here the Nautilus - Her repairs are completed an she
will be ready for Sea in four days - One of the bomb Vessels is
completed for Sea, and the other will be ready for Sea in a few days
We shall take them under convoy for Tripoly, but we shall touch a t
Svracuse for the Gun boats to join us - The Nautilus has been
h o s t wholly rebuilt and uite new coppered, her repairs will cost
upwards of three thousand oflars
July 5th: We have taken on board here 700 bomb Shells and
Powder in proportion and the bomb Vessels being ready we sail
to-morrow Morning I hope my next letter will announce to you our success agruinst
Tripoly, the restoration of our unfortunate countrymen to the Sweets
, and our Country an honorable peace - Our Squadron
is small ut composed of young men whose anxiety to distinguish
themselves gives me well founded hopes of Success - I regret that
we have not another frigate or two here a t this moment, but it will
not do to delay time as we have only about Eight weeks more of this
Year that Gun boats can remain out with safety in these Sew.
The Provisions that came out in the Woodrop Sims was delivered
in excessive bad Order - Many of the Casks of Rice, Butter
were without heads &- some not half full - the Beef & Pork bad1
hooped & without Pickle. the Canvass was almost every bo t
damaged and the twine wet & rotten, so much so indeed, tw to render
both useless for sails - The Damage has been occasioned by careless
and bad Stow e in a leaky ship When I left ripoly there was not one Vessel in Port except their
cruizers - A French Vessel left it about 3 weelis since and was
captured b the Arqus & Vixen & sent to Malta, but as she was forced
o ga 'Pripobe Cruizer two years since, and has lately
into ~ r i ~ by
been given up m consequence of a demand from the french Government I ordered her immediate release The Imperial Ruasian Polacre Madona Catapoliantz, captured by
the Syren having left Smyrna for Tripoly previous to m OfEcial
declaration of the Blockade, although the Cap$ acknow edges he

B

d

r

t

I

Libertg

&Q'

r'

4

9

190 NAVAL OPEBATIONS, APAPRILSEPTEMBE& 6, 1804

knew the place was blockaded by our ships left so much room for

Litigation, and the Russian Minister a t the Court of Naples having
demanded her, the Vessel old and of little vdue and a fair opportunity
offering,by giving her up, to pay a Compliment to the Russian flag,
I concluded to do it as the Emperor hss interested himself in our
Tripolitan affairs as you will see by my dispatches A s m d brig belonging to Malta which was captured by the Naufilm
the 16q February off Tri oly was Ordered home in charge of an
Officerof that Vessel (Mr ox who had obtained permission to return
home for his health) having met with bad weather and the Vessel
being old and leaky, put into Malta, where she was claimed by the
former Owners - They founded their Claim on her being in an
English Port and not condemned; as she had been cleared for Jerba in
Tunis,and the Vessel of little vdue in Order to prevent litigation and
expence, we concluded to restore her to the former Owners for 300
Dollars, they resigning up the Cargo as Tripoline Property, and giving
a full & complete indemnification against all future claims or damsgesThe Papers of all the Vessels detained have been sent home by the
Captors and consigned to Judge Peters of Phildelphia in order to obtain their condemnation - The Papers of the Brig Tramjeer captured
by the Syren have been sent by Lt Stewart to Philadelphia. I wrote
you some time ago, that in consequence of the loss of the Philadelphia,
and the necessity of repa*
the Enterprize and NazLtilzls, I had in
order more effectually to keep up the Blockade taken her into service
after having her valued - No demand has or will be made of her as
the Governor of Malta acknowledges her to be a good prize - I
wish her Condemnation to be sent out as soon as she is condemned,
and if G-overnment do not wish to continue her in service she can be
sold for more money here than she has been Valued at - I mentioned in a former letter that L! Dent was commanding the Scourge &
that Mr Wadsworth & Mr Izard were Acting as Lieutenants & Mr
Morris as Master of her - Their conduct has been meritorious, &
I hope in due time they may be confirmed The conduct of the Spaniards is rather hostile towards us - They
have sent fourteen Ship Carpenters to Tripoly who have built, and
still continue to build gun boats for the bashaw - These Carpenters, our Co118ular Agent at Tunis informs me went to Tripoly with
the Passport of Mr Pinckney our Minister at Madrid - If so, They
must have decieved him - There wear the Spanish Cocktrde and
are regularly paid every week by the Consul of that Nation P. S. I have made such arrangemente, that I can supply the
Squadron with any Quantity of Brandy at 75 cents p' Gallon which
makes it unnecessary to send out any more Spirits

43

[LC.

EPP, LB, April-Nov. 1804.1

To Hutsr Commnndopt I#aac Ha, U. 8. Bavy, comm.nding 11. 8. Brig Arptr.
from Captain Edward Preble, U. 8. Bavp

U.S. S. c'on8titIltion
Of TripoZy J'1c?te 14Q 1803 [1804].
SIB You will proceed off Old Tripoly and cruize four degs and st
the expiration of that time proceed to Malta and lend such of the
People captured in your prizes as wish to be landed there, the re-

191

WARS WITII BABBARY POWEES

meinder you will proceed to S p c u s e with, after tsking in, such
supplies at Malta as ou may stand in need of - You will wait 8%
Syracuse my farther grders
[LC. EPP,Order Book, M a y 1803-June 1805.1
[14 June 18041
To Hanter Commandant Charles Stewart, U. S. Navy, commanding U. 6. Brig Sfrm,
from Captain Edward Reble, U. 8. Navy

SIR YOUwill attend closely to the Blockade of Tripoly untiU my
return to this Station, the V k n t Scourge will remain with you, the
A r p is to 90 into Port to recruit her Stock of Provisions & Wafer &
land her P m n e r s but is k t to proceed off Old Tripoly whither the
V k n is to accompany her & cruize three days, & then return to
join you
The British Consul is to be allowed to 1snd with his family &
baggage when he appesrs off here in a ship of War
Signed EDWAXD
PREBLE
P. S. The E d r p r i z e accompanies me to Tunis
u. S. Ship cmtilution
O# Tripoly June 149 1804
[LC. EPP, Order Book, M a y 1803-June 1805.1
To Lieutenant John H. Dent, 0 . 8. Navy, commanding U. 6. Brig
Captain Edward Preble, U. 6. Xavg

&urge,

from

U. S. S H ~Cmtitution
P
o$ ~ r i p oJUW
l ~ 1 4 1804.
~
SIR YOUWill remain on the Station off Trip01 and attend to the
Orders of the Commanding Officer and wait till arther Orders from
me

i

-

[LC. EPP, Order Book, May le03-June 1805.1
Extract from journal of U.S. Brig A r m Master Commandant Isaac Hull,U. S. Navy,
commending, Thwday, 14 Jnne 1804

standing on and Off Tripoli at 4 the Commodores boat returned
from Shore he hauled down the flag of Truce Observed by the
Squadron Commodore made the Si NQ 600, sent the lsunch on
board the Commodore set and too in Sail as Occasion required
At 8 Tripoli bore S b W distance 4 leagues tacked and wore Ship as
Necessary At 9 Cap$ Hull went on board the CommodQ at 10 he
returned -

f

[NDA photostat.]
Extract from Hernormdam Book of Captain Edward Rsble, 1D. 8. Navy, on board

U. 8. m

t e-C

I4 Jnne 1804

Sailed for Tunis. Argus and E n f e u in company.
[LC original.]
&tract from Diary of Captain Edward Preble, 0. 8. Navy, Cornmodom of U. S.
Sqolrdron in the Mediterropeop, Thnnday, 14 June 1SM

Stro Breezes from the E 8 E, at Anchor N N E from the Town
of Tripo y,
at 5 past 2 P M the Boat returned from the Shore,

T -

192 NAVAL OPERATIONS, APRIL-SEPTEMBER 6, 1804
Mr Obrian Reported that he was ermitted to land, and had m
audience of the Bashaw and his prime inister, - when he made the
Bashaw the Offer which he was authorized to make for the Ransom
of our unfortunate Countrymen, and also propositions for peace,
The Tyrant refused to accept of either on the principal of his right to
expect more money, He also refused to allow Mr Obrian to see or
ape& to either of the Consuls or any of our Prisioners or to deliver
any letters to them, but promised to continue the White Flag until1
night to give me an opportunity t o land the Cloathing which I ordered
immediately to be got read for sending on shore, it was directly
hoisted up on the gang way, gut before we had time to put i t into the
Boat the white Flag was hauled down at the Bashaws Castle, this was
about 48 minutes past 3 OCIock PM, this circumstance precluded the
possibility of sending a Boat on Shore and the Cloathing &c was
returned to the store Rooms, - thus ended this attempt to release
our countryman & restore peace, - We have now nothing to expect
from the justice or humanity of the T p n t of Tripoly but must
endeavour to beat & distress his savage highness into a disposition
more favourable to our views than what he at present possesses, this Afternoon we gave the Vixen a hawser & rode her astern in order
the more readily to compleate her supplies of water and provissions 8:
Stores, - towards night several of the enemies gun Boats weighed
& went into the i ~ e Harbour,
r
- We lay at Anchor all night, the
V k n & Enterprize was ordered to look out to the Westward and the
Argw & Scourge to the Eastward, - in the morning they a l l joined
company, continued to send supplies on board the Brigs and Schooners,
made several signals to the different Vessels, - at $ past 9 we weighed
& brought to head to the Northward Wind W N W, - I wrote
letters by Mr Obrian to the Prime minister, Captain Bainbridge the
Danish & French Consuls, but they were all returned excepting the
ministers & the French Consuls which were delivered to the minister
a t noon Tripoly bore S W B S 4 leagues distant, -

k

[LC. EPP, Diary, 1803-1804.1
fitract from log book kept by Eailing Master Nathaniel Haraden, U. S. Navy, on
board U. S. Frigate Comtifulion, Thnrsdep, 14 J u e 1804

Strong breezes from E S E. At Single Anchor four miles N b E
5 E from Tripoly - Squadron in company. Employed suppl ing

the Squadron with Water and Provisions - At X past 2 the goat
returned from Tripoly - At 4 P. M. the white Flag was hauled
down a t Tri oly which was also done by the Squadron This afternoon
we rode the k e n by a Hawser in order to get on board all her water The Sea however was so eat that we could not complete it In this
service we were assisted y the Argus's launch which in the evening
we hoisted in along with our boats - Our large cutter is stove badly
in her upper works Veered to fifty fathoms.
Towards the evening Several of the Enemy's Gun Boats which
were moored within the Reef as a line of Defence weighed & ran into
the Harbor The E S E &d continued strong till 2 A. M. when i t came moderate
Shortened in to 50 fathe
A t Day light out two Boats for watering the Viwn and Scourge
then in sight standing towar& us

5

f'

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

193

At 7 A. M. the Vixen & Scourge joined us - A strong current
prevented them from keeping near the ship
At ji past 9 weighed & brought to; ships head to N E.
At 2 P. M. made the Scourge Signal NQ995
At 4 " Argus's Signal NQ600
At 5 "
Enierprize Signal 995
At 9 A. M. Scourges Signal NQ600
At 10 A. M. Scourges Signal 216
Moderate breezes from W N W all forenoon Employed in supplying the Vixen & Scourge with water and Provisions.
Noon the Town of Tripoly in sight bearing S W b S 4 leagues
Squadron in company
Latitude Observed 33' 00' N.
[LC. EPP, Log Constitution, 1803-1804.1
To Captain John Bodgers, U. S. Navy, commanding U. S. Prigate Congrus, from
Captain Samuel Barron, U. 6. Navy

U. STATESFRIGATE
President

Circular,

June 15t@1804
SIR I t is requested by the Secretary of the Navy that you take in,
not exceeding three months Water, including ground tier - and it is
expected, if practicable, to take out Six months provisions I t is likewise required that you report an opinion as to the Sails
of your Ship, I mean as to the manner in which they have been made,
whether perfectly suitable for Men of War or not [LC. JRP, Letters & Orders, 1804-1805.1
-

To Benjamin King, Navy Yard, Washington, D. C., from Captain John Rodgers,
U. S. Navy

U. STATESFRIGATE
Congress

June
1804 SIR Your conduct has been so Derogatory to the principles of
truth & so particularly neglectful of the Work you had to do for the
Congress, that I am determined to make a report of the same to the
Governs - A Man in your situation ought a t least to be a Man of
principle & truth; as by your want of Boath, I shall be forced to go to
Sea, without many Articles which are of the Utmost Importance You say you have sent the Pump Geer, which is every thing you had
orders for I n reply I ask if you have sent the Hoops for our lower mast Heads,
Swifter Bolts [or Botts] for lower rigging, Train ta.kle Bolts [or Botts]
for upper & lower Deck, Bolts & Swivels for Cranes of quarter boats,
Mizen Topgallant Studdingsail boom Irons, rungs for conductors and
many other articles of less M[a]gnitude which you promised faithfully
to do, - I t is your Interest to ray that my Head may be Knock'd
off before I return, for be assure if you are not punished before that
period I will revenge the Injury you have done me, with my own
hands. The In'ury you have done the Goverment by your want of Veracity
is beyon my calculation a t present.

B

d

194 NAVXL OPERATIONS. MRILSEPTEMBER 6. 180.4
The Work of all the Ships might have been done in season, provided you had Employ'd proper hands, your reason for Employing
such creatures as you did, was very obvious to me I am with no more respect than is Due to Men of your principles
&F

$9

J. R.

[LC. JRP, Letters & Orders, Book A, 1804-1805.1
To Master Commandant Charles Stewart, U. 6. Navy, commanding U. 6. Brig Siren,
from Captain Edward Preble, U. 6. Navy

U. S. SHIPConstitution
03 Tripoly, June ltith1804
SIR M r O'Brien informs me that the Tripolines keep their small
schooner and a Galliot of four Guns constantly manned in order to
sweep out with the Seventeen Gun boats and attack any one of our
Brigs or schooners that may happen to be becalmed alone near the
Coast: I t will therefor be prudent for you to keep the Vixen constantlv
with you when you stand in near the town, that in case it should fall
calm, you may be able to support each other: And you will keep the
Scourge always at a prudent distance with out you, as I suspect the
Tripolines intend to attack her the first time they discover her alone
in a calm even if she should be at a considerable distance from the
land, if none of the other Vessels of the S uadron should be near enough
to support her - the Scourge being a d sailer and not well provided
with Sweeps She will require much of your attention.
You will see the propriety (now we are so near the time of Main
Attack) of not hazarding too much for the Sake merely of destroying
or cutting off a market or fish boat - The loss of any one of our vessels
at this time would be attended with incalculable consequences to the
Service - I have Ordered Cap1 Smith to join you immediately and
not to go to old Tripoly but shall look in there myself with the Argw
& Enterprize P. S. Cap1 OBrian had a private hint of their intentions when on
shore from an old friend of his: he also informed him that the Brig
has all her men, guns, Small arms & ammunition on board & can be
got ready for Sea in four hours. - E. P.

&

[LC. EPP, Order Book, May 1803-June 1805.1
To Master Commandant John Smith, U. 6. Navy, commanding U. 6. Schooner Virm
from Captain Edward Preble, U. 8. Navy

U. S. SHIPC01EBtitUtion

9ff TTipoly June 16Q 1804
SIR I n consequence of infomation which Mr OBrien has given me
that the Bashaw of Tripoly keeps his Schooner of eight guns & his
Galliot of four Guns constantly manned & ready to sweep out with the
17 Gun boats, to attempt to board the first of our Brigs or Schooners
that shall be becalmed alone near the coast in order to retrieve his
character with respect to the loss of the Philadelphia I have thought
proper to countermand your orders for proceeding off Old Tripoly,
and to direct that you remain on this Station in company with the
Syren & Scourge, and you will see the propriet of not approaching
alone too near the Town, as should the Wind aiI you, you must be

t'

WARS WITH B B R A R Y POWERS

195

convinced that any s irited exertions on the part of the Enemy with
their force would en anger the loss of Your Vessel, which would be
attended with serious consequences to the Service, particularly a t the
present moment, when we are so near the time of a General Attack
which I hope will deprive him of the Means of Anno ance Cap* OBrien recieved a private hint from an old L e n d a t Tripoly
of the intentions of the Tripolines -

1

[LC. EPP, Order Book, May 1803-June 1805.1
To Oeorge Davis, U. 6. Charge d'Affairee, Tunis, from Captain William Bainbridge,
U. 6. Bsvy

BARBARY
TRIPOLI16th June 1804 -

DEARSIR, I wrote you on the 4th inst. to which I refer for our

present situation. Enclosed you will receive the following letters:
for Mry B. G. Harrison Esq, and Savage & Degen, which I will thank
you to forward by the first safe conveyance - I have not heard from
ou since the 24th of April - I cannot acct for this long delay - I
Kope that you will not let an opportunity escape you of writing, to
me, for it seems that we are almost forgot by every one - No news
from America - none from Algiers smce the XtQfeb? - None
from the Commodore since the 27. of March, altho' he had a boat
on shore a t this lace three days sipce, but I had not the pleasure of
receiving a line rom him.
I wrote to Coll Lear on the 4tP inst. pray in your letters to him
mention that I frequently write to him (Signed) Wq BAINBRIDGE
Sympathetic ink [Writtenin lime juice.]
Dr SIR, On the 13tP inst. Com. P. sent a boat on shore a t this place,
Consul OBrien came in her remained on shore about 2. hours, I
received no letters from the Commodore or any m
e and did
not see OBrien - the Commode might have wntten an the letter
kept back - I have heard in a round about way that the Bashaw
demanded one million. OBrien offered forty thous'! they of course
very [vary] widely - the frigate left this yesterday without any
further intercourse with the shore - God knows what the intention
is I am entirely ignorant of the movements I am well convinced in
my mind that whoever comes here to treat should obtain permission
to remain on shore for several days and spend two or three of them
with the Minister before he had an audience with the Bashaw.
The french has great influence here; but we never shall feel any
salutary effect throu h their resent representative in fact we have
not been befriended
any 8onsul here exce t the Danish, he has
the inclination but not the abilities - I hear that Emperor Bonaarte had interested himself in our situation - We most assuredly
%ave not felt his influence for, or are kept more strict than Prisoner
enerally are in Barbary - Communicate this to Col. Lear Bt C.
- a few shells here m this hour would have a good effect - let
me hear from you Boon - W. B.

!

7

l

k.

[NYHS. Geo. Davis LB, Vol. I.]

196 NAVAL OPERATIONS, APRIL-SEPTEMBER 6, 1804
Extract from journal of U.S. Brig Argus, Master Commandant Isaac Hull, U.6. Navy,
commanding, Friday, 15 June 1804

Cruizing on and off Tripoli - a t 1 P M the Commodore made
the Sigk N Q276 made all sail in Chace she proved to be the U. S.
Brig Syren the Commode hoisted our Distinguishing flag made all
sail towards him Capt? Hull went on board of him and returned
at8PM[NDA photostat.]
Extract from Diary of Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Navy, Commodore of U. S.
Squadron in the Mediterranean, Friday, 15 Jnne 1804

Light breezes from the N N W, laying to off Tripoly, the Argus,
Vixen Enterprize & Scourge in company, - a t 2 P M a sail discovered in the N N W made the Argus & En2erpriZe signals to Chase, a t 3 P M the Enterprize made the Signal that the chase is a friend, a t 4 the Siren joined us from Jlalta, at j4 past 6 calm and a strong
Current setting to the S W made the signal for the Fleet to anchor
came to in 20 fathoms sandy Bottom covered in spots with small
Coral, Tripoly Bearing W B S distant 4 leagues, - the coast to the
S b E of us about 3 miles distance, - Cornpleated supplying the
Squadron with Stores, - a t 10 P M the Argus & Vixen we1 hed
m t h a li h t Breeze from the Westward they are ordered to ook
into Old ripoli the Argus then to proceed to Malta & Syracuse for
Stores &c and the Vixen to return off Tlipoly, - a.t 5 made the
S i a l to weigh weighed & stood to the W N W with the wind
from the S W, - at j: past 11 made a signal for Captains Smith
& Hull gave them fresh orders the Argw to accompany me and
the Vixen to remain on the station as I do not think i t prudent to
leave less than three Vessels off Trlpoly to keep up the Blockade, The Enterprize I have ordered to accompany me to Tunis, the
critical situation of our affairs with that Regency requires that we
shew a force in their Bay frequently to deter them from depradations
on our commerce, - a t noon fresh Breezes from .the Northward,
The Siren, Argus, fixen, Enterprize & Scourge in slght, - Tnpoly
bearing S B El 4 leagues distance took off the arrest from Mr Page
and ordered him on board the V&n

4

9

[LC. EPP, Diary, 1803-1804.1
Extract from journal of Midshipman F. Cornelius debafft, U. 8. Navy, in U. 8. Brig
Sfrm of 18 guns, Master Commandant CharIes Stewart, U. 8. Raw, commanding,
Friday, 15 Jnne 1804

3 past Mer"iscovld the afore mention'd vessels to be part of our
squadron. At 1 saw the land ahead. At 4 past 2 came up with the
squadron, hove too & spoke the Commodore. L*Stewart went on
board the Commv fill'd away again. At 2 hove too again, the
CommQastern. At 5 handed top gall$ sails, settled down the topsails & came too with the stream anchor p: signal of the Commq
about 10 miles to the E@of Tripoli, the Comme Argus, Scourge
& Vixen all came too a t the same time Midnight Calm. At 5 a signal from the CommQ to get under
ast 5 weig.hld & made sail to the N E@.
W"%tt!&: 33'4 N.
INDL1

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

197

Extract from journal of U. 8. Brig Argus, Master Commandant Isaac Hull, U. 8. Navy,
commanding, Saturday, 16 June 1804

the Cornmod? and Enter ze in Company at 4 the ComrnodQ
made Sig! NQ1036 made E a i l Tripoli E b S distp about 5 b a g ?
At X past 4 Commod"ade
Sig! N? 605 in Studding sails and made
all sail by the wind a t 5 Commode made Sig! No 571
[NDA photostat.]
Extract from log book kept by Sailing Master Nathaniel Haraden, U. S. Navy, on
board U. 6. Frigate Conalilulion, Saturday, 16 June 1804

Light breezes from the North$ cruizing off Tripoly

- Lieutq Hull

& Decatur waited on the Commodore pr Signal At M past hleridian
the wind shifted to E N E. At 1 P. M. we filled to the North$ - At
2 bore up to W N W & W S W. in order to examine the mast to the
West* The Argus & Enterprize Signals were made to follow the Cornmodore, and the Syrem, Vizen's & Scourge's Signals to keep their stations continued steering to W N W & W S W till )i past 5 P. M. when
we hauled on a wind to the North'Jand took our departure from Tripoly
bearing E b S % S. 19 Miles - the nearest part of the coast S S W,
8 Miles - Argus & Enterprize in company Punished William D a y
Seaman with 12 lashes for Drunkenness, and Exekiel Lombard Marine
with 12 lashes for Embezzlement of Spirits Sun down fresh breezes & pleasant

-

Made the signal to steer North, through the night which course
leads along the East coast of Tunis and to the passage between the
Islands of Kerkini and Lampidosa By % past 8 P. M. fresh breezes - Shortened sail for the Enterprize
to come up in Order to prevent separation - continued under easy
sail through the night At Day light Made all plain Sail except Staysails Argus & Enterprize in company. From Day light till 8 A. M. Ships company washing their cloathesFresh breezes & pleasant all the forenoon Made & shortened sail
as necessary for the Enterprize to keep company. At 11 A. M. the
wind shifted from E to N N E l which continued till noon with fresh
breezes I n top gall$sails & single reefed the To sails Our distance corrected since our departure!J esterday is nearly 130
Miles N b W % W which proves Heathers Chart Very much out of the
way in the Soundings and situation of the Island of Kerlrini At Noon our soundings were 20 fatht which we suppose to be t o the
Eastward of Kerkini Agreeable to Heather's chart we should be 7 Miles from it. which
proves he has placed it too far to the Eastwg
Surgeons report 10 sick 8 convalescent Latitude Observed 3 5 O 1' N.
[LC. EPP,Log Constitution, 1803-1804.1
Extract from journal kept by Purser John Darby, U. S. Navy, on board U. 8. 6.
John Adamr. Master Commandant Isaac Chauncey, U. S. Bevy, commanding,
probably Saturday, 16 June 1804

[Several lines of manuscript badly mutilated] delivering my Invoices
and original bills of slop Purchases, accompanyed by a letter to the
Secretary he examined the Bills and Wrote a letter to Capt Chauncey

198 NAVAL OPERATIONS, APRILSEPTEMBER 6, 1804
informing him that my Invoice and bills appeared perfectl Satisfactory, and ordered me to Join the ship again with all possible c espatch
r
I took Passage in the Stage at George Town for Porttobacco on
Monday Morning the lltQ Inst from there hired horses and proceeded
on to Leddlers Ferry expecting to overtake the ship there but she had
sailed from thence that morning. - I then hired Horses and proceeded
on for Hampton [Manuscript mutilated]
[NDA original. Miss Camilla S. McConnell.1
To Tobias Lear, U. S. Consul General, Algiers, from Captain William Bainbridge,
0. 6. Navy

TRIPOLIBARBARY
1Yt@June 180.4
(recq Augt 19. 1804)
DEARSIR, I wrote you on the 4* inst, in which I informed that we
were still closely confined under lock & key, and that this Government
has not relaxed in its severities to us m c e r s ; -that the crew had been
moved to a much more spacious prison than they had occupied. On
the 13" ins5 the Frigate Constitution came to an anchor off this port, the same day Consul 0.Brien came on shore, remained about two
hours; - I am ignorant of what transpired, for I was not allowed the
Liberty to see him, and did not receive a line from the Commodore or
himself. The Frigate left the coast the day following.
By Consul O.B. I received the copie of your letters of the 16t@
December & 12 Februr, with a copy of a letter from the HonbteC.
Pinckney, our Minister at Madrid to yourself. Those copies were all
handed me without a line from you, which makes me naturally conclude that your letters covering them must be withheld from me: - if
this is the case which I believe to be, the depriving us of any part of
the few letters that come for us is cruel. I presume that this Government calculates to compel the United States, by severeties on us unfortunate prisoners, to a speedy Peace; however, I have the consolation in
knowing that such measures will never be attended with the intended
effect ;and I declare that I will be a greater advocate for my Country's
treating generous1 with this Regency, by receiving liberal treatment
from them, than will be from the greatest regour that can be used.
I have done myself the pleasure of writing to Mr Pinckney, and
thanking him for the friendly interest he took to supply our wants, and
meliorate our situation I have informed him, by the provision which
ou have made, that we are amply supplied with cash; and as to the
%tters from Diplomatic Characters in Madrid I have had no intimation
of their being received, and most certainly we have not experienced
effects from such influence.
an d u t
$he lasTetter that I received from Commodore Preble waa dated
on the 27tPMarch, in which he says "That the Celebrated Bonaparte
has interested himself dee ly in your situation". I hope that we may
soon feel some efIects of t%I's p e a t influence; as yet we have certainly
been kept under closer restriction than what is customary even in
Barbary, or what the Swedes were in this Regency.
Your last letter was of the 2QtQ Febrr ; - I have a long while been
anxiously expecting to hear from you, but I do not, my dear Colq,
entertain the most distant idea of an inattention, I know it must
proceed from other causes. I shall o& add that your letters afiard

9

.

199

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

us much happiness, and we all rely on your friendly assistance in
relieving us from our hard destiny.
Please to present my best res ects to MrSLear, - I hope she finds
giers.
herself lessantly situated at Af'
I wdf thank ou to present my compliments to Mr Thainville &,
family, and to a my acquaintances in Algiers, particularly to Consul
Bille; - his colleague in this lace is one of the worthiest of men.
Believe me to be unfeigne y
Yours truly
Wm BAINBRIDGE

f

8

[Stephen Decatur Col.]
To George Davis,U. S. Charge d'lffairee, Tunis,from Captain William Bainbridge,
U. S. Navy

TRIPOLIBARBARY
1Yth June 1804.
DEARSIR, I have this moment received your favor of the 27tQ
ultQ,and am sorry to observe that you do not acknowledge the receipt
of my letters of the 5tp & 30tQof April, which ought to have reached
you previous to the date of yours. I frequently write to you, but as
I am never informed when my letters leave this place, I cannot conjecture the time that you ought to receive them, or form a robable
opinion of your ever receiving them. The extreme severity o keeping
us constantly under lock & key may originate from an idea of compelling terms sooner from the United States; but I am convinced i t will
have a contrary effect, for I declare that I would be a greater advocate
for m Country's treating generously with this Regency in receiving
libera treatment from them than I would be in the greatest Rigour
they can go to. You are equally with myself acquainted with the
disposition of Americans, and know that they may lead, but cunnot be
drove. How long our close confinement will continue God only knows,
or how long the War I cannot conjecture; I have consolation m knowing that my Country has great Strength, and that her political union
is every day growing stronger with the first Powers in Europe; and
should i t be our: fate toaremain here longer than we expect, we have
the consolation m knowing that the longer we remam the less expence
it will be to our Country to relieve us; snd the Marine force that she
is obliged to keep up by the Peace establishment is more than adequate
to any war she may be engaged in with this quarter of the world: this
you know to be fact as well as myself, and I only mention to let you
see, altho' deprived of liberty, I feel for the honor of my Country.
The letter you mentioned enclosed in yours I have not received; the keeping letters after the peruse them is t d y ungenerous.
I wrote you on the 1C@
in which I mentioned that Consul
OBrien was on Shore here on the 13t@,but I was a stranger to what
took lace, and continue to be so. The report you heard respecting
the dinister, Sidi Muhammed Dghies, is lust, - he is very polite
and attentive; which is the case with his Excellency when I see him,
but his measures are certainly Severe. I enclose you a letter for
ColQLear.
The picture you draw of Europe certainly paints a scene of a most
interesting epoch, and ere long great revolutlons must take place in
E u r o p ~and this part of the world. America's rising Glory wdl make

!'

9

Lt.,

200 NAVAL OPERATIONS, APRILSEPTEMBER 6 , 1804
her friendship Courted by the Nations which a t present form an
erroneous opinion of her strength & respectability.
You do not mention whether you have received your Diploma from
Government, - I wish it from my friendship, and for the good of my
Country.
When you write to our Consul General a t Algiers, please to inform
him that I frequently write to him, and hope that my letters reach
him.
Spnpalhetic ink [Written in lime juice.]
Dr SIR, Your letter of the 27tb Ma reached me on a half sheet of
paper under cover of another small ha f sheet - the half sheet forming
the sheet the letter was wrote on had been torn off - pray was this
done by you after your letter was wrote - I am fearful that some
discovery or suspicion has took place, perhaps the Danish Consul may
have done i t - I have not heard from him since the rect - Reports
says OB. offered 40, thousand, the Bashaw demanded one Million the Commodore would do well to get a bomb ketch or two, and every
night heave some shells into the Town, i t would drive all the Inhabitants and greatly tend towards a speedy & reasonable Peace - the
interfearence of B. has not been felt by us or never will if i t comes
through Beau. [Beaussier] here. - inform the Commdq of these circumstances - Shells - Shells we want - W. B.
Written in Sympathetic ink, accompanying a Duplicate of the 17'b of
June 1804 Dr SIR, I am anxious to hear from [you] in lime juice to give me
some ides of our probable fate, I am sorry to have it in my power
to observe that our situation is like no Ship performing quarantine. - I
receive no letters but from yourself, which I greatfully thank - I do
not accuse my friends if ought, but certainly my situation will justify
an expectation & desire of receiving letters from them - I hope that
Com. Preble, intends getting a Bomb Vessel and heave some Shells
into the Town which I conceive may be done without risque, and it
certainly would make the People extremely clamorous as they would
be obliged to fly to the Gardens where are no habitations to secure
them. - When you write to Mr Livingston a t Paris, I wish you
would mention that we have received no attention from the french
Consul or any advantage from the French influence in this place - if
the h t Consul has taken any measures to alleviate our situation
they have not had the effect for want of a roper Representative in
this place - France has great influence - ours, W. B.
[NYHS. Geo. Davk LB,Vol. 1.1

r

5

Extract from journal of U. S. Brig Argus, Maeter Commandant Isaac Hull, U.8. Bavy,
commanding, Sunday, 17 June 1804

This day begins with fresh Breezes and Squally the Commodore
and Enterprize astern sounded Occasionally in 13 fathoms water
bottom fine sand and Small Gravel At 2 the Commodore made the
Si! NQ 1196 sent down T. G. yards a t 5 sent them up again and
reeft the T. sails a t 7 all hands to Quarters and Exercis'd
set top Gall1 sails a t Midnight moderate and Cloudy
Daylight saw the land to windward Commodre & Enterprize in CQ
At meridian Cape bon bore NE j4 E People Emp'J as Necessary

K$r."t

[NDA photostat.]

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

20 1

Extract from log book kept by Sailing Paater Nathaniel Earaden, U. 8. Navy, on
board U. 8. Prigate Gnatitation. Sunday, 17 June 1804

Fresh breezes from N N E. We are standing in for the Eastern
Coast of Tunis near the Island of Kerkeni. A r p and Enterprize in
company. The Argus was ordered ahead to sound & communicate
her soundings to the Commodore, which she did. At 1 P. M. o w
depth was 16 fathoms. The water all round as far as could be seen
was colored, and in many places the bottom was visible - At 2
P. M. double reefed the topsails, and down top gall: Yards. - By
X past 2 P. M. the wind had shifted by degrees to East, and continued so till the afternoon with pleasant weather. At 4 P. M. up
Top gall$ Yards and out second reef from the Topsails At this time
we had deepened our water to 24 fath*
This afternoon we ran nearly 30 Miles over these banks between
the Islands of Kerkeni & Lam~idosa- We continued the lead all the
time & found the soundmga very regular, gradually deepening from
16 to 20 fathg
At Sundown saw the land bearing from W b N to N W b W, which
we supposed to be Cape Coria and the land to the South@of it. At
2 A. M. tacked to the East? At 4%A. M. tacked to the North@
At day light saw the land bearing from W b N to N N W As we
drew in to the land the wind Veered to the East which enabled us to
lay d o n parralel with the Coast - At 9 A. M. we passed with an
Ofling o four leagues the Town or port of Susa - I t appears to be
strongly built with a Castle fronting the Sea - The weather has
been pleasant with light winds all the forenoon - We are under all
plain sail standing to the N N E - the small town of Arraella bearing
by compass W S W, 5, leagues.
Cape Salimi and Cape Gobia which is the N E extreme of the land
in sight bears N E b N, 44 Miles
All this part of the coast appears in small hills sandy towards the
sea - Small villages every 6 or 7 Miles
Surgeons report 7 sick, 8 convQCt& 4 discharged Noon light airs
Argus & Enterprize in company
Latitude Observed 36' 07' North
[LC. EPP, Log Constitulion, 1803-1804.1

f

Presumably to Secretary of State from James Monroe, U. S. Minister to London,
England

N Q25. Duplicate
LONDONJune 18.1804.
SIR I received letely a letter from the house of Mackenzie &
Glennie of this city giving an account of a fraud which has been
ractised on them in the name of Commodore Preble, by which they
gave paid to his account in favor of the United-States £4000 Sterling.
I transmit ou a co y of their communication and beg to assure you
that I shal not fa' to make all the exertion in my power to trace
the fraud and recover the money if practicable from the authors
of it.
The state of affairs here continues t,o be fluctuating. The opposition against M' Pitt seems to be nearly as strong as i t was against
M' Addington. The King also continues indisposed, but in what
degree is unknown. The advocates for a regency appear to gain

9

,f'

202 N A V U OPERATlONS. APRILSEPTEMBER 6. 1804
strength. It is expected that a debate and division will take place
to-day in the House of Commons, that will furnish better data
whereon to form a better estimate of future events.
[NA. SDA. Disp., Gt. Britain, Vol. 11, 1803-1804.1

&tract from jonrnal of IT. 6. Brig Argus, Master Commandant Issac Bull, U.8.
Navy, commanding, Monday, 18 June 1804
a t 3 Tacked ship to the S E saw a sail on our Weather beam made

Sig! NQ433 to the Commode a t 4 the Cornmod? made our Sigi to
chace made all sail a t % past 5 Tacked and spoke the Chace she
roved a Ragusee from Tunis bound to Suisa Cornmods made the
! to bring her to him At 7 the land in Sight it b o ~ eN b E a t
10 u d y with thunder and lights a a Strange sail passed to leward
stan F S E a t 9 AM Commode made the Sigl 252 [or 23211 made
all sail in Chace At meridian in Chace Empg as Necessary

&

"a

photostat.]

Extract from log book kept by Sailing Master Nathaniel Haraden, U. 6. Bavy, on
board U. S.Fzigate Comfitutian,Monday, 18 June 1804

Moderate breezes from the Eastward. A r p & Enterprize in
company. We are under all plain saif s t a n k in for the t o m of
E m a t e which is situated on the Eastern coast of Tunis nearly 40
Miles to the Southward of Cape Bon - This part of the coast
appears to be well cultivated and is lined with Villages all along At 3. P. M. fresh breezes - Tacked to S S E 3 Miles from the shore Soundings 60 fathr - At X past 3 made signal for a general chase to
windward - funished James White, Thomas Jackson and Thomas
Jones Seamen with 12 lashes each for neglect of duty. At 6 P. M.
the chase was brought to by the Enterprize - Made signal to bring
the chase to the Commodore - We boarded her - A Ragusa ship
from Tunis bound to Suza
At Sundown a Squall rose from N N W with rain thunder & li htning - In third reef in the topsails and handed the Main ~ a i f
At Sundown we were 8 Miles from the coast. Cape Gobia N E nearly
8 leagues Off this Cape is shallow water which extends a long way
into the Sea. At ji p a t 7 P. M. filled to N E b E . wbich is nearly
parralel to this part of the coast and came by Cape Gobia with an
OfEng of 4 leagues Our soundings were from 25 to 15 fathoms.
At Day 1' ht out third reef from the Topsails and set the Main
sai~a b p g ~ Sails
t
At 6 A. M. saw Cape Bon bearing N W b W nearly ten leagues, and
s strange sail to the S E. At 7 A. M. saw two str e sails N N E - they are nearly in the
direction of Cape Bon, for w 'ch we are standing.
At 8 A M. made signal for a general chase. Strong breezes all the
forenoon - The AT , Enterprize & Cmitulion have been under a
press of sail afl the orenoon, chasing dead to windward
Noon the chase in sight from deck bearing N W % W
Latitude Observed 36' 52' North

"%

P"

fLC. EPP, Log Cmtitutim, 1803-1804.)

-

203

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS
To Captain John Rodgers, U. 6. Navy, commanding U. 8. Prigate
Captam Samuel Barron, U. S. Aavy

Conl(rcu.

from

U. S. FRIGATE
PretAent
Hampton roads lgt@June 1804
SIR Herewith you will recieve the Copy of a Letter, said to be
written by Robert Quinn, a Seaman on board the President: I t is so
calculated to excite a general mutiny; that it is necessary to take
promt & decissive measures to brin to punishment the Author. John Kirkpatrick a Landsman also elonging to the same Ship; has
been taken in the attempt to desert. I request you will summon a
Court Martial, a t which you will preside, to be held on board the
Co ress, for the trial of those delinquents as early as possible. *#am Eaton Esqr will act as Judge advocate on the occasion [LC. JRP, Letters & Orders, 1804-1805.3

%

Literal Copy of the Letter aUuded to
The horrid usage that has been carried on in this Ship of late by the
principal officers, is enough to turn every Mans Heart to wickedness,
we are Kept on Deck from 3 O'Clock in the morning till 8 at Night
there is no regulations in any one thmg, we have been on deck for
several days without one bit of Victuals, and durst not look for it, we
cannot wash a single article for fear of being cut in two, you expect
every thing done a t a word, there is no allowance made for our frigmg
day & night, but the time will come, when you will drive all thoughts
of fear out of our minds, tr ann is the begining of all mischief, and
generally is attended with ad ooings a t the latter end, any Commander or Captain that had the least feeling or thought, would not
suffer this horrid usage, it is almost impossible for us to live. The
President is arrived to such a pitch as to exceed the Hermwne, some
of our friends in America d: other parts shall know of this shortly and
in time we hope to et redress, Death is always superior to slavery.
We remain f o u r
UNHAPPYSLAVES
Address'd To Commodore BARRON
Ship President
[LC. JRP, Letters & Orders, 1804-1805.1

g g

To the German Ambassador, Paris, France, from Robert R. Livingston, U. S.
Minieter to Paris,France

Tript*
PARIS
lgt@June 1804.
THE UNDERSIGNED
MINISTERPLENIPOTENTIARY
OF THE UNITED
STATESOF AMERICA,
His Excellency the Ambassador of his Imperial Majesty the Emperor of
Germuny &c.
SIR, I have been honored by your note of the 26'Q of May, which
should not have remained thus long unnoticed but for my absence
from Paris. I am sorry to learn from it, that an insult has been offered
b Captain Sturt [Sterett], commanding the American Vessel the
$
+
z
d
by the capture and detention of the austrian Ship Psol*ro

204 NAVAL OPERATIONS, APRIL-SEPTEMBER 6, 1804
[Paulina]- I shall immediately transmit your Excellency," note to
my Government who I doubt not will give to his Imperial Majesty
every satisfaction on the subject which the nature of the case may
require. I t does not appear whether the Enterprize was a Government Vessel or a private ship, nor is there such a detail of circumstances as will serve as the basis of an accurate investigation of the
question of right or of the amount of damages - That these may be
properly brought forward, I pray Your Excellency to invite Captain
Radish to commence a prosecution in the Admiralty Courts of the
United States where he may be assured of a full hearing and the most
impartial justice - . Your Excellency will easily perceive how
difficult it will be in any other way to ascertain or recover the damages
he may have sustained particularly if the injury should have been
done by a private Ship.
I t gives me pleasure to assure Your Excellency that His Imperial
Majesty only does justice to sentiments of the American Government
when he supposes them animated with the desire to promote the
harmony and confirm the ties of friendship that subsist between the
two nations. His Imperial Majesty may be fully assured that nothing
will be wanting on the part of the Government of the United States
to confirm the opinion, and that while their Courts are open for the
redress of private injuries they d l themselves be ready to make
satisfaction for any indignity offered to his Majesty thro' the misconduct of persons under their command, nor will they fail to give such
orders as are best adapted to prevent a repetition of the offence.
[XA. SDA. Disp., France, Vol. 9, 1803-1805.1
To Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Navy, from George Davis, U. S. Charge d'Affaires,
Tunis

TUNIS,June l g t b 1804.
SIE. I have this moment cliscovered your Frigate, and as the hour
is too late to make application for com~ngon board. I dispatch you
the American Drogerman with my former communications.
I am very desirous to see you in person, as I have much to say to
you on our affairs here, as well as at Algiers; and my present feeble
health, does not allow me to enter into a u-ritten detail, having been
confined to my bed twelve days with a violent fever.
You will be pleased to send the Dro erman off at three in the
morning, in order that he may arrive a t unis time enough to go to
the Palace, and I will be at the Gouletta before twelve tomorrow if
possible
Trusting that your health is better than when I had the pleasure
of seeing you - I beg leave to assure you of the high consideration
with which I have the honor to be
P S I have the honor to enclose you two letters from C? Bainbridge

%

[LC. EPP, LB, April-h-ov. 1804.1
To George Davis, U. S. Charge d'bffaires, Tunis, from Captain Edward Preble,
U. S. Navy
UNITEDSTATES
SHIPConstitdion
Tunis Bay lgtQJune 1804.

SIR,I am this day honored with your letters of the ISth May and
19th June. I regret extremely your indisposition, but hope it d not

A T T A C K ON T R I P O L I . 3 AUGUST 1804

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

205

deprive me of the pleasuro of seeing you afloat tomorrow. Your
Drogerman shall be dispatched immediately, as I wish as much to see
you, as you do me.
I know nothing of the capture of the two Sandals you mention
belon 'ng to the Island of Jerba; and as to the examination of the
Vesse bearing your ssport with the Chouix of the Grand Seignior
on board, you well ow that every Vessel found on the Coast of
Tripoly while blockaded by the United States Squadron is liable to
examination; if not, we may as well give up the Blockade, as the Bashaw's friends by the abuse of passports, might with impunity supply
him with such Articles of Military Stores &c*as he is most in want of.
The Vessel with the Chouix of the Grand Seignior entered Tripoly
without any other molestation than a search. She was previously
forced into Jerba by a contrary Gale, but on her coming out of Tripoly,
was detained by one of our cruisers and sent into Malta whither she
was bound. I was a t Malta when she arrived, and released her i m m e
diately. I have now to observe, that passports for Tripoly while
blockaded by a Squadron under my Command, cannot in future be
respected, excepting such passport comes direct from the Navy Department of the U S. As to the Bey's threats we have little to fear from
them - Captain Samuel Barron in the President Captain James
Barron in the Congress - CapWChauncy in the Essex, and Captain
Shaw in the John Adams - and two Brigs are now I suppose in the
Mediterranean - Captain S- B- w-ith two Brigs, is to remain a t
Gibraltar as a check on our Enemies going into the Atlantic, and the
others are to join me here immediately - of course the Bey will suffer
by his temerity if he should attempt to pay himself, as he chuses to
term Piracy.
I shall leave this tomorrow by ten o'clock - I t is necessary that I
see you before I go, and equally so for me to know whether the Bev
intends to make War on us or not - if he is hostily inclined I shan
immediately take such measures as effectually to protect our Commerce, and punish him for his want of good Faith

ff

g

[LC. EPP,LB, April-Nov. 1804.1
To Captain William Bainbridge, U. S. Navy, from Captain Edward Preble, U. 6.
Navy
UNITEDSTATESSHIPConstitUbion

Tunis Bay 19th June 1804
I
am
honored
with
your
letter
of the 30th April, with all
DEARSIR
its contents. I regret extremely that your people should be in want
of clothing when I have a full supply for twelve months for them on
board this ship - I have also clothing for the Officers and a plentiful
stock of Stores for yourself and OfTicers. I was in hopes the Bashaw

would have permitted me to send the clothing and stores on shore the
13th instant - he romised Mr OBrien he would, but while we were
puttin them into t e Boat, he hauled down the white Flag - I
certain y made the Bashaw a handsome offer considering our means of
annoying him, Fifty thousand dollars as ransom, and ten thousand
for a Consular present, is a great deal of money, and I am convinced
he will yet repent not having accepted the generous terms.

";

E

206 N A V A OPERATIONS, APRILSEPTEMBER 6. 1804
You are a t liberty to offer them once more to him, through his
Prime Minister, and if he chooses to accept of them let him hoist the
white Flag, and fire a Gun when I appear off there again, and send a
Boat off with a Letter, as soon as I agree to the truce b answering his
Signal, which shall be immediately, for though I shal have i t in my
power to materially injure the Town and Inhabitants, a wish to avoid
the effusion of Blood, induces me to make him this offer that Peace
may be reestablished I shall have a treaty prepared, and as soon as i t is signed, and ou
are all released, the money shall be paid. The whole of the &ty
thousand dollars must be for ransom as we cannot pay one dollar for
Peace. the ten thousand dollr*shall be paid as a Consular present in
cash a t the arrival of the Consul from the United States, which shall
be in eight months from signing the Treaty - and the Treaty must
be subject to the h a 1 ratification of the President of the United
States
I would have you attend to the juice of this letter, and hope you will
find it sweet to the Palate I shall send you the clothing over in a Neutral
Vessel immediately.
[LC. EPP, LB, April-Nov. 1804.1

r'

To Tobias Lear, U. S. Consul General, Algiers, from Captain Edward Preble,
U. 6. Navy

UNITED
STATESSHIP ConstdzLtion

(COPY

Tunis Bay lgt@June 1804.
red July
1804.
DEARSIR,I had the honor to write you the 36 of Ma from this place,
and now enclose you a duplicate. Since that time t e Squadron has
closely blockaded Tripoly. The 4t@of May I left this Ba for Naples
and a plied to the King for the loan of Six Guns & two ortar Boats
comp etely prepared for service, with a sufficient Stock of Naval &
Military Stores for a Seige. I also applied for six long Battering
Cannon 26 pounders for the upper deck of this Ship, tho whole was
immediately granted - I took on board the Battering Cannon,
Nine hundred shot, and one hundred Barrels of Powder at Naples, and
sailed for Messina, where I remained three days, and sailed for S acuse with Six Gun boats under American Colours, each carrying a ong
26 pounder, and manned with 30 Americans. The Bombards will be
ready in a few days; I intend them to make a dash a t the Tripolitans,
and I hope with success.
I enclose You co ies of two letters from Mr Beaussier and my
readily discover he is no friend of ours; I also
answers - You
send you a copy of m instructions to Capt OBrien on the 13t@instant
when I sent h m on s ore a t Tri oly to endeavour to negotiate for the
ransom of our Countrymen, anBfor peace the Bmhaw d d d desire
2. I conceived your letter of the 236 of March by the Vixen sufficient
authority for me to say that I was empowered to ransom the prisoners,
and make peace whenever i t could be done consistent with the honor
& dignity of the United States. The terms offered I presume would
have been atisfactory to our Government, if they had been accepted,
and hope I shall be able ere long to oblige the Bashaw to accept, altho
he has been so imprudent
to refuse them

t

f

h9

r

d
i

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS
-

207

Captain OBrien will send you a long detail of his audience with the
Bashaw. Mf Davis will detail to You the State of our Affairs with
this Regency. The Bey of Tunis wmpla-ins of trifles, he says two
Sandals have been taken by our Cruizers. The fact is, that the Argus
chased a Sandal or Small open Boat, (not so large as our Cutter) on
shore one mile from the Batteries of Old Tri oly and took her ofF
under a heavy fire of Musketrg. from the {each. Captain Hull
suspected she was carrying Ammunition to Tri oly, but it proved she
but coarse Earthen ware. The bey of Tunis alledges
to Jerba, and on this trifiing &air, is, or pretends
angry, and demands restoration of the Vessel &
damages. The Boat & Cargo was not worth one hundred dollars,
and if she had been worth ten thousand, she would have been a good
prize: Capt Hull cut her adrift after he took her. The Emperor of
Russia has taken a favorable part with respect to our Countrymen
in Tripoli. He has written to the Grand S i i o r to send a Firman
thither, and demand the release of the Americans. I have written
M? Davis satisfactory answers to all the complaints of the Bey of
Tunis, and directed hun to forward copies to You. I wish should you
be applied to for a passport for any Vessel carrying an Ambassador to
go to Tripoli, you would give such passport to come to me off Tripoli,
but not to enter without my permission, as T wish to respect your
passports, and i t is possible we may at the time of an arrival be so
situated with respect to our operations against that place, as to render
it improper to permit a vessel to enter under any crcurnstsnces.
I have so much writing to do, that i t is imposs~blefor me to enclose
you at present copies of such correspondence with Russia, ConstantinopIe, France, &q &q as I wish. I hope ere long to be able to, as well
as a favorable account of our affairs with Tripoli.
The Congress Captain J. Barron, Essez Crtpt Chaunclely, who brings
her out to exchange with Stewart, and John Adams Capt [space] are
momently expected to join the Squadron. I suppose they are now in
the Mediterranean. I understand the President Capt S. Barron and
two Brigs are to compose a Squadron without the Mediterranean to
rendezvouse a t Gilbraltar, with such a force a t hand, we shall have
nothing to fear from the Powers of Barbary combined.
I t is fruly singular that the French Consul did not see Mr OBrien
when he landed a t Tripoli, notwithstanding he has instructions from
his Government to endeavour to procure the liberation of the officers
and crew of the Philadelphia. I wrote him by MT OBrien but received
no answer. I wish you to send copies of his letter to me of the 28'Q
March and my answer thereto to our Minister a t Paris, together with
copy of instructions to M' OBrien, and write him the conduct of M'
Beaussieur who never has been to see, or offered to relieve in any way
whatever our unfortunate Count men. I have thanked him for his
friendly attention to Ceptain Bain ridge and his OfXcers, because from
his own report, I sup sed he had been kind to them, but I have been
deceived; no one but
Nissen has ever paid them the least attention.
Give my best regards to MrBLear, and accept my best wishes for
your health 8r happiness.
I have not time to say more a t present as I sail this evening - the
want of more Frigates keeps me constantly on the fly.
P. S. Captain Bsinbrid e corn lains of the want of clothing for
his people. I have now on %oardt L s Ship a sdiicient quantity ready

!&

'x

208 NAVAL OPERATIOATS, APRILSEPTEMBER 6, 1804
made for them to last more than twelve months, but have not been
permitted to send them shore. I ho e to in a few days as well as a
quantity of Stores, and to a full supp y of Cash
INA. SDA. CL, Algiers, Vol. 7, Part 1, Jan. 1804-Nov. 1805; and Stephen

P

Decatur Col.]

Extract from Xemorandnm Book of Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Bavy, on board
U. S. Frigate GmtitIdion, 19 June 1804

Anchored in Tunis Bay.
[LC original.]
Extract from Diary of Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Navy, Commodore of U. 8.
Squadron in the Hediterrsnean, Tuesday, 19 June 1804

Strong Gales from the N W, I n chase working to windward, a t 3 P M the Enterprize Brought too one of the Vessels we are in
chase of a Spaniard from Gorgenta for Barcelona, - a t 5 P M the
Arqw Brought too t.he other a Ragusa from the Levant for Merseaes, - a t 8 Cspe Ban Bore West 3 miles, moderate Breezes &
pleasant weather, Sounded in 30 fathoms at 9 fresh Breezes working
to windward, - at 10 A. M weathered Zembra Island and entered
Tunis Bay, rat noon we =here 3 miles from Cape Carthage i t Bearing
S E B E, Saw 29 sail a t anchor in the Harbour amoung ~ * h i c were
h
one Frigate & five small Cruizers, Tunisines and one Tripoline
Polackre ship stripped & hauled up, the same Vessel has been m her
present situation for two or t h e e months past and her Crew gone to
Tripoly, [LC. EPP, Diary, 1803-1804.1
Extract from journal of U. S. Brig Argus, Master CommandantIsaac Hull, U.S. Navy,
commsnding, Tuesday, 19 June 1804

These 24 hours Commences with fresh breezes and pleasant W
b e d a Gun a t the Chace brought her too the [chase] proved a
Ragusee brig from Tunis bound to Suisa at 2 saw a strange sail to
the N E made the Sig! to the Commode the Enterprize boarded her
fired a Gun at a brig to windward she bore down for us & roved a
Ragusee brig 52 days from the Island of C ress bound to arsailles
bore away and spoke the Cornmod? At 6 ape bon bore N W j4 W
Distt 3 leagues At meridian standing in for the harbour of Tunis kept Employed
as Necessary

T

[NDA photostat.]
To Daniel Bedinger, Bavy Agent and Superintendent of Bavy Yard,Norfolk, Va.,
from Secretary of the Navy
NAV.D E PJune
~ 9U* 1804

I t is intended to Repeat the Cargo of the Ship SaUy freighted by you

last year with Timber and plank for Algiers and lost in the Bay of
St Lucar I herewith enclose you an invoice of the Cargo then ship ed which
ou will take immediate measures for procuring and you w charter ts
$-1
for the Voyage to be ready to receive the Cargo as soon as you
shall have procured it -

J

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

209

You will readily See that some latitude will be allowed you with
respect to breadth &$ of the Timber and Plank not supposing that a
perfect attention can be given to the invoice so as to make a correspondence in inches in every respect - it is desirabIe however that the
invoice be attended to as nearly as possible and that if there be any
Variation from it, it be an increase rather than a decrease in size I confidently hope that every exertion will be made by you to Expedite this Shipment - you will inform me as soon as you can ascertain
with tolerable percision the earliest period by which you can carry this
order into Effect
Your Requisitions for monies to carry this order into effect must be
made under the head of Barbary Negotiations and your accounts
Settled as they have been in Similar Cases [NDA. GLB, Vol. 7, 1803-1805.1
To Captain Edward Preble, U. 6. Navy, from George Davis, U. 6. Charg6 d'Affaires,

Tunis

TUNISJune W O q 1804.
10, Oclock AM SIR, The Oda Bashaw of the Gouletta, has not yet made his report
to the Bey, which form is necessary before I can obtain permission to
go on board; and as it is the hour you inform me, you should get underway, and their being no hopes of my receiving a permit to leave the
Gouletta this day, I send you an express.And in reply to your
favour of last evening, have only to observe that the individuals said
to be the owners of the Sandals, have been three times before the Bey
to repeat their complaint: one of them states, that his Sandal, was
captured in a Port of Tripoli, laden'd with salt fish, and earthen ware;
that he with his people made their escape before the Vessel was captured - Whatever therefore may be said in future by the complainants, it will not be attended to by me farther than, that of demanding
Justice for their false report You have been pleased to inform me that no Passport to enter
Tripoli, will be hereafter considered as valid; I have only to say, that
I must conform myself agreable to my situation here, & observe the
usages of other Nations under similar circumstances, towards these
States. - A safe conduct for an Ambassador of a Neutral Power,
to enter the Port of an Enemy, dtho' that Port be in a state of Blockade, is generally granted - I t shall not how-ever under any circumstances be granted by me, unless I am satisfied that a refusal would be
attended with an immediate difficulty.
I t is impossible for me to say, what are the absolute intentions sf
the Be , towards us; were I to deduce from his threats, they areunquestionab y hostile: it is however certain, that fear alone, will restrain
him from committing depredations on our commerce - You however
shall ever be advised of his movements, and no dii5culty will occur
without my being fully prepared to meet it I am much distressed at the non arrival of a Courier I dispatched to
Algiers on the 17Q ultimo - his delay strengthens the report of the
resent disordered state of that Regency; to wit, that the Dey, has
geen assassinated, as well as a great proportion of Jews; that the late
Prime Minister, is a t present on the Throne - that the other ports of
the Regency are in a more convulsed state - a new Prophet has arisen,

9

210 NAVAL OPERATIO~W,APRIL-SEPTEMBER 6 , 180.4
who, is followed by an immense Army of Bedouins, who are hastening
towards the Capital - this intelligence was given to the Bey by a
Rais of one of his Corsairs, and is generally credited a t the Palace;
I shall not fail to give you the earliest intelligence on this head Wishing you a prosperous cruise, and a continuance of health [LC. EPP,Vol. 11, April-June 1804.1
To George Davis, U. S. Charge d'Affaires, Tunis, from Captain Edward Preble,
U. S. Navy

UNITEDSTATESSHIPConstitution
Tunis Bay June both 1804.
SIR. I have recv your favor of this date in which you mention the
capture by our Squadron of two Sandals belonging to Jerba which
His Excellency the Bey of Tunis complains of. I have heard only of
the capture of an open Boat, she was chased on shore at old Tripoly,
and brought off by the Boats of the Argus Captain Hull - under a
heavy fire of Musketry - She was loaded with a quantity of coarse
Earthen Ware, and bound to Tripoly in direct violation of the
Blockade.
Soon after she was taken off Captain Hull finding she had not any
Military Stores on board, and the Boat an old crazy thing and cargo
of no Value, he cast her off, and suppose she drifted on shore on the
Coast. this boat having been defended as a Tripoline by the People
from the shore no compensation can be made for her. His Excellency
the Bey well knows that the coast of Tripoly is blockaded and ought
to forbid all communication by the Vessels of his Nation unless he
means to treat us as Enemies with respect to the Ambassador of the
Grand Seignior which you mention is expected from Algiers for Tripoly,
you may give him a passport to come to me off Tripoly without any
cargo whatever on board, and if circumstances does not render it very
imprudent I will permit him to enter, but if the Vessel attempts to
leave Tripoly with any other property or persons than what she carries
in, I will most certainly make prize of her.
[LC. EPP,LB, April-Nov. 1804.1
120 June 18041
To Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Navy, from Surgeon James Wells, U. S. Navy

SIR A small supply of Sheep, or Fowls, if they can conveniently
be procured, will essentially contribute to the recovery of the sick.
ComQEDQPREBLE.
Comma U, S, Ship Constitution
June 20tQ1804.
[LC. EPP, Vol. 11, April-June 1804.1
Extract from journal of U.6.Brig Argus, Master Commandant Isaac Hull,U. S. Navy,
commanding, Wednesday, 20 June 1804

standing in for the bay of Tunis with all necessary sail set Commodore and Enter rize in Comp? a t % past 12 Came to with the best
bower in 7 fat oms water the Commode hoisted our distinguishing
went onboard the fort of Tunie bore W b N the
flag Ca t-ull
high lan1 from S b W to N b W At 10 AM got under way standmg

'k

-

21 1

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

off & on a t 11 fired a Gun a[nd] hoisted the American Jack a t the
fore sent the barge on Shore for the Consul
[NDA photostat.]
Extract from log book kept by Sailing Master Nathaniel Haraden, U. S. Navy, on
board U. S. Frigate Coditution, Wednesday, 20 June 1804

Strong breezes from N N W - We are running in for Tunis bay
At % past 12 came to with the small bower in Tunis Bay in 7%fathv
water soft bottom Veered to 50 fathv and furled sails - The A r g w anchored in company, and the Enterprize was ordered to stand in to the upper roads
and send a boat on shore for the American Consul for whom we had
a signal flying Our bearings are, Cape Carthage N b W by compass 2 Miles
Cape Farina N b E. Golletta Castle W b S. 4 miles and Zembra
Island N E b E % E 24 Miles On our Anchoring here a signal gun was fked, which by neglect,
and contrary to Orders was loaded with a round shot but however,
it passed near two Vessels without accident - We were employed
all the afternoon in setting up the Topmast and top gall$ rigging At Sundown cleared ship for Action and primed the Guns - Ships
company at watch and watch through the Night. I n the morning
scrubbed hammocks and cloathes - Between 9 & 10 A. M. strong
breezes with rain From 10 till noon fresh breezes from N N W &
pleasant weather This forenoon Mr Davis U. S. Consul at Tunis
waited on the Commodore - At 11 A. M. loosed sails to dry.
Noon fresh breezes from N N W. Argus & Enterprize in company
[LC. EPP, Log Constitution, 1803-1804.1
To Secretary of the Navy from Master Commandant Isaac Chauncey, U. S. Navy

U. S. Frigate John Adnms
Hampton Roads 21 June 1804
SIR I have the honor of herewith Trnnsmitting to you Copies of
my Quarter Bill and Indent Book
There are several Men, borne on the Ship's Books as Seamen,
which I think must be reduced, but unwilling to do them any Injustice, I have deferred Rating them untill two Months hence when
I shall have an Opportunity of knowing them better.
I have been detained here longer than I expected; the few small
Articles wanted in the Different Departments M' Bedinger had more
Dficulty in procuring than he expected; in Fact the Main Top
Mast which was to have been ready last Saturday I shall have to go
to sea without, unless i t comes down early in the Morn? a t which
Time I propose to get under Way, and proceed agreeable to Orders - I
believe we have lost Not
by our Detention, for we have never
had a Wind proper to procee to sea with, since our Arrival in Hamp
ton Roads Your Orders of the 7t9 Inst I have received and shall overn myself
accordingly Our Ship Continues healthy the Crew o which I am
pleased with. The Officers for want of Experience have given me
some .Trouble the Midshipmen particularly; but hope that from
exacting a Rigid Adherence to the Regulations of the Service together
with their own Observations, that they will see the Necessity of
paying more Attention to Orders and their Duty

""9:

f

212 NAVAL OPERATIONS, APRILSEPTEMBER 6, 1804
I shall keep you informed by every Opportunity of my Proceedings
and situation
[NDA. MC LB, 1804-5.1
Extract from journal of U.8. Brig Argw. Master Commandant Isaac Bull, U. S. Bavy,
commanding, Thursday, 21 June 1804

This day begins with fresh breezes and pleasant Weather Laying
too in the harbour of Tunis wait? for the Consul at 2 M' Davis
fi past 2
came on board filled away and stood for the Commod-t
the Consul and Cap; Hull went onboard the Commode came to
an Anchor at j4 past 7 Cap; Hull returned onboard at 9 the U. S.
Schooner Enterprize went to sea at 5 AM rece 160 Gall9 water from
the Commode at 8 got under way stand? off and on at 10 the
Cornmod" Consul came on board run into 3%PP? water the Consul
went on shore at 11 hoisted red Colours and fired a Salute of 15
Guns Empq Occas?
[NDA photostat.]
Extract from log book of U. S. Brig Argm. 18 Guns, kept by Sailing Master Samuel
B. Brooke, U. S. Navy, Master Commandant Isaac Hull, U. S. Navy, commanding,
Thursday, 21 June 1804

(At anchor in Tunis Bay .)
At 8 [AM] got under way standing off & on under easy sail a t
past 10 the Commodore & Consul came on board run into 3%
fathoms water the Consul went on shore at 11 hoisted red Colours
& fired a salute of 15 Guns
[LC. EPP, Argus, 1804.1
Extract from Diary of Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Navy, Commodore of U. 6.
Squadron in the Mediterranean, Thursday, 21 June 1804

fresh Gales from the N N W, at anchor in Tunis Bay, Argus &
Enterprize in company, soon After noon our Consular agent, M r
Davis, came on Board, He informed me that the Bey of Tunis is
very much dissatisfied with the Government of the United States,
and appears to have hostile intentions altho He does not openly avow
them, - at 9 P Xf the Enterprize sailed for Syracuse, the Consul
remained on board d l night, and by him I wrote to Colo Lear &
Captain Bainbridge and desired him to forward the letters by express,a t 9 A M I went on board the Argus then under way and stood up
for the Goletta, sounded the Harbour within a quarter of a mile of
the Goletta & found 3 fathoms, a t half a mile distance 4% fathoms
& without that distance from 43; to 6 fathoms, for two miles to the
Eastward, - while sounding the Prime minister & suit came down
on the beach, where a Marque was prepared for him, - I directed
Captain Hull to salute him, - landed our Consul, [LC. EPP, Diary, 1803-1804.1
Extract from log book kept by Sailing Master Nathaniel Haraden, U. S. Bavy, on
board U. S. Frigate Comtitutlon, Thursday, 21 June 1804

Fresh breezes from N N W At Single Anchor in Tunis Bay -Argus & Enterprize in company

-

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

213

At 3 P. M. furled sails - At Sundown cleared ship for Action
At 9 P. M. the Enterprize sailed - Moderate breezes and cloudy
through the night At 9 A. M. Commodore Preble and the Consul went on board the
Argus: She weighed and stood in towards the Golletta Castle Secured the Guns & made the necessary arrangements for weighing
& going to Sea.
Noon moderate breezes from N b E with a swell setting into the bay.
Supplied the Argus with 220 G d P Water
[LC. EPP, Log Constitution, 180%-1804.1
To Marien Lamar, U. S. Consul, Madeira, from Secretary of State

DEPARTMENT
OF STATE,
June $91804.
SIR. I have received your letter of the 15rh January. The National dut , as it is called, levied by the Consuls on Vessels trading to
Madeira, eing unauthorized by law, you ought to cease demanding
it. I t was equally beyound the authority of your Predecessors to
engage a Physician to attend upon distressed Mariners, for a permanent yearly salary, * * * it ought not therefore to be continued by
you. As to the balance now due him, no more can be paid than his
actual services may be proved to be worth, and upon your being
satisfied by proper vouchers in this respect, you may pay him, reimbursing yourself by a draft on this Department. For the future you
will provide for the Seamen as economically as possible, as they are
thrown upon your care, and not by adopting permanent arrangements
requiring expenses whether there may be objects demanding relief
or not.
The Executive cannot empower you to lay a duty upon American
Vessels for the expenses of the Buoy imported by the British Factory:
nor is it probable that the Legislature would be induced to sanction it,
since the principle it embraces in admitting a foreign Company to levy
a discretionary tax within the jurisdiction of Portugal is not to be
reconciled with its rights and might lead to abuses by which the Citizens of the U: States might suffer.

g

[NA. SDA. Despatches to Consuls, Oct. 1800-Feb. 1817.1
To Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Navy, from Captain William Bainbridge, U. S.
Navy

TRIPOLY
BARBARY
June 2 9 180.4
DEARSIR I wrote to you on the 14th Ins: in which I mentioned
that I had not the pleasure of receiving a line from you since the 27th
March, and was much disappo~ntedin not having that satisfaction on
the 13th Inst by my friend hU OBrien - The Happiness which your
letters always affords us all makes us extremely anxious to hear from
you by every opportunity. Though disappointed in that pleasing
expectation we rest assured on your exertions to releive us from our
disagreeable situation Within these last three months I have wrote you many letters In all of them I have mentioned the great want of cloathing for our
Seamen - As I am never advised when my letters leave this place,
I cannot form an opinion when they will probably reach you -

214 NAVAL OPERATIONS, APRIL-SEPTEMBER 6. 1804
I am extremely anxious to receive letters from America in answer
to mine announcing the loss of the Frigate Philadelphia and rely on
your sending them to me if they come to your hands The Seamen have been removed to a spacious good prison, but the
Officers are still penned-up in close confinement, and in this hot
weather feel much the want of a few windoxs and doors to let in some
air - Of the former there is none: of the latter only one which is
kept bolted and locked, except when opened to hand in our prorisions However beleive us Americans, possessed with fortitude and every
sense of honor for Our Country - I know nothing of the interview
that Consul OBrien had the other day - I should have been much
gratified to have been permitted to see him - I should suppose in
Negotiating i t would be best to obtain permission for him to remain
on shore a few days Pray in your next advise me if you received my letter in answer to
yours conreying the thanks of the President for the capture of the
Mirboka - . Believe me to be with Sincere wishes to attend your
movements, and that I am with Esteem & great respect
1LC. EPf,LB, April-Nov. 1804.1
[FC7ritteni n lime juice - invisible writing.]
Dr SIR I hope that you will pardon me in offering the following
opinion as being the most ready expedient to make Tripoli and perticularlv the Bashaw feel the greatest effect of the American War.
A Bomb Ketch of a proper size for keeping the Sea - To come an
anchor every night or every other night and heave some bomb shells
in the Town mould occasion all the Inhabitants to leave it (as they have
dreadful Ideas of bombs and their houses slightly built) and fly to
the Gardens which have not buildings to receive them this would
put them to a very great inconveniency and make them extremely
clamorous and the Bashaw would feel uneasy to be kept out of the
Town
They are such bad marksmen that I presume a Ketch might anchor
a half mile distant from the batteries without danger of receiving
much or any damage - I candidly believe that heaving a few shells
even if was but once a week to keep them out of the Town for 3 months
that the Bashaw would be induced to come to moderate terms
Do not place confidence in any Consul or expect any service to be
rendered by any here except the Danish - you mentioned that BonapIm]te had interested himself in our situation if this wns the case we
have felt no effects from it, and i t must be owing to their Consul For France has great influence here - If you give Mr Livingston a
hint of this it may have some effect Believe me to be with Sincere regard
Yours
E. PREBLE
Esq

WB

[LC. EPP, Vol. 11, April-June 1804.1
To Tobias Lear, U. 6. Consul General, Algiers, from George Davis,
d'dffaires, Tunis

U. 6. Charge

TUNISJune 224 1804
SIR,I am this moment favoured, by the return Courier, with Your
communication of the gtQInst. and avail myself of an express (which

W'ARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

215

leaves this in two hours) to acknowledge its receipt. The short time
allowed me, does not permit that I should enter in full reply to your
last, now before me
The letters enclosed from Commodore Preble, who sailed from this
port last evening, will be in answer to the late complaints of the
Bey; which give me no uneasiness - No di culty shaU arise which I
will not be perfectly prepared to meet; and elieve shall be correct in
saying, that his threats are the result qffear, more than of a determination to take immediate hostile measures against us - The Comrnodore has shewn himself too frequently in this Bay not to have convinced His Excellency, that his movements are closely watched; and
I have strongly impressed the opinion that we have the full means in
those Seas, of checking, and punishing, any hostile measures which
his avarice might hurry him into - it only rests to observe, that we
have no security for a continuance of the Peace, excepting that which
arises from our Naval force in those seas; and it is more than robable,
that menaces will be daily repeated, until1 our affairs are fins y closed
with this Regency; but when I have solid reasons to believe, he will
capture our Vessels, you shall be apprized by a Sea conveyance, before
his plans can possibly be executed. The charges in my acct with the United States, which you have
been pleased to make exceptions t-o, are not onl founded on those
exhibited by Mr Eaton, (which however, is no r ufe for me) but from
the necessity of the thing - The Hontke the Secretary of State, has
been advised by letters bearing date October 2gt@and December 2gththat I was attending in my professional capacity, and at the particular
request of the Bey, the Chief of the Aga's, and that I visited him daily
a t the Palace, which is three miles from Tunis, - the Sapatapa Bey's Cousin, and other chief officers have also made application for
my medical aid; and as you must be sensible, that my acquiescence
is solely,in order to gain the means of being servicable to my Country. I t cannot be supposed, that I should in conse uence, be charged
with additional expences; from this statement I ave no doubt but
you will readily accord the propriety of the charge - if not, I shall be
compelled to curtail my visits to the Palace.
We have been given to understand, that Algiers is a t this moment
in a state of revolution, and that the Dey has been assasinated, as well,
as most of the Jews - This report has greatly exited my fears, as well
as the Commodore's for the safety of your family; Your letter therefore relieves me from the painful suspence, under which I have laboured
for eight da s. - h'ly health is extremely delicate, having been conged for fifteen days with a violent fever; should I continue
fined
to wing these warm months what I did last year, I shall be
to suffer
compelled to solicit for an immediate removal from this Regency.
I shall dispatch a Courier this eveni for Tripoli, (at the Commodore's request) by which occasion your"getter to Captain Bainbridge,
will be forwarded. - I have also the honor to enclose you two from
him & one from Mr O'Brien.
From the extravagant rice of Grain in this Regenc , and consequent distress of the eop e, my Drogerman has solicite some trifling
increase of pa , whic indeed is a t present insdlicient for the support
of one man - rom the circumstance of his havin a large family,whoom
I know are in distress; and in consideration of
long services to the

t

E

%

mJ

T

E P

1

&

216 NAVAL OPERATIOAVS,A P R I L S E P T E M B E R 6, 1804
United States, I have promised him the additional sum of thirty dollars
per Annurn; and which I trust will meet your approbation, as he is a t
this moment, particularly serviceable to me.
I beg leave to assure You of the high consideration, and profound
respect, with which I have the honor to be
P. S. The Courier, is to receive three Dollars from You, on his
delivering this dispatch; and the like sum from me when he brings
Your answer - I presume he will not stay more than one day in
&. iers. The Courier, who has this moment come for his pay, acknowledges
the receipt of ten dollars, but which he says was for his support in
Algiers, and in consideration of his detention [NA. SDA. CL, Algiers, Vol. 7, Part 1 , Jan. 1804-Nov. 1805.1
To George Davis, U. 6. Charge d'Affaires, Tunis, from Don Joseph Noguera,
Spanish Consul General, Tunis

TUNISJune 2 9 1804
The Undersigned Consul & Charge dlMairs of his Catholic IL1ajesty
has the honor to participate to the Charge dlAffairs of the United
States the Surprize with wluch he has heard the report spread in this
City of the Capture by the American Vessels of War blockading
Tripoly of the Spanish Vessel of Cap! Torres sailing from hence to
Tripoly, and conducting an envoy of the Grand Signior & furnished
with a passport of the Charge d7Mairesof the United States
The Consul of Spain does not presume to think without a very
serious infraction of the passport on the Part of the Captain that
such an unexpected calamity could have befallen him but his astonishment increases also in understanding by the same report that the
said Captain was actually in this place on board one of the American
Men of War not many days ago Not having recieved from said
Cap! Torres letter nor light of any kind on the business which without
an unpardonable negligence he ought to have imparted, and it would
be extremely extraordinary indeed if the participation of this event
to his Consul was denied him The Spanish Consul does neither presume to think that, that
would have been the case without well founded reasons; but as M'
Charge dlMaires ought to be better instructed than any person of
what has passed, and besides that his politeness is well known, the
Undersigned thinks it his duty to ask from Mr Davis all the insight
that it will be permitted him to give - In the meanwhile he has
the honor to sign himself with the highest consideration
JOSEPH
NOGUERA
[LC. EPP, LB, April-Nov. 1804.1

Spanish Consul General

[22 June 18041
To Don Joseph Noguera, Spanish Consul General, Tunis, from George Davis,
U. 6. Charge d'Affaires, Tunis

GEORGE
DAVISEsq. Charged with the A . a i ~ sof the United States of
America at Tunis
TO DONJOSEPH
NOGUERA
His Catholic Majesty's Consul General at

Tunis

SIR, I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of Your Official
communication of this date requesting to learn, whether the Spanish

WRRS WITH BARBARY POWERS

217

Bombard La Vergine del Rosario Capt. Francesco Della Torre, bearing my Passport to enter and return from the Port of Tripoli in
Barbary, had been captured by any of the U. States Vessels of War,
and the reasons for this conduct. - I have only to state that the
said Bombard on her passage to Tripoli, was visited by several of
the U States' Vessels of war, and permitted to enter that Port without
any molestation. That on sailing from said Port of Tripoli, bound
for the Island of Malta, she was again examined, and in direct violation of my Passport, was found to have on board, fourteen individuals
more than when she entered; and was accordingly sent into the
Island of Malta, for adjudication, her commander remaining on
board the U. States Brig, which had visited her: - but in consequence of the distinguished respect the Government of the U. States,
its Officers & Agents wishes to shew to His Catholic Majesty's flag,
the Commodore &- Commander in chief of the Squadron, caused her
to be released immediately, and presume that her Commander, has,
ere, this arrived a t Maltn.
I have also the honor to make known to You, that Passports
heretofore given for Vessels to enter the Ports of Tripoli, will not be
considered as valid; and, as the Vessel, carrying His Catholic Majesty's
Dispatches for that Port, is now at anchor in the road of the Gouletta,
my duty combines with my desire to endeavour to prevent any
interruption in her safe arrival - I would therefore advise the
Courier's going in search of the Commander in chief of the Squadron,
to whom, I will address a letter; it being necessary, in order, to enter
the Port of Tripoli, to receive a Safe Conduct from under his hand;
and should not circumstances render the measure very imprudent, I
trust my request will be acquiesced to TUNISJune ,224 1804 [LC. EPP, Vol. 11, April-June 1804 and Mrs. James S. Barron Col.]
Extract from journal of U. S. Brig Argw, Master Commandant Isaac Hull, U.S. Navy,
commanding, Friday, 22 June 1804

+

a t past 12 the Commod' retd onboard the Consti[tu]tion filled
away the main topsail and stood out of the bay of Tunis in Company
with the Commode at past 2 the fort of Tunis bore S W b W
dist! about 6 miles at 5 the Commode mad[e] Sig! N Q 275 a t 4
past he made Sig! 1074 Took in and Set sail as Necessary spoke
a Spanish brig from Trieste bound to Barcelona at 12 Cape Bon
bore E S E a Sail ir, Sight on our lee bow at 1 Came up with her
she provd a Ship the Commode9 boat boarded her At 8 AM PantaMeridian light breezes
laria bore S E $ E Cape Bon N W 4 N-t
the Commode in Compr Empd Occas?

+

[NDA photostat.]
Extract from Memorandum Book of Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Navy, on board
U. S. Frigate Constilullon, 22 June 1804

Sailed for Syracuse
[LC original.]

218 NAVAL OPERATIONS, APRILSEPTEMBER-6,

1804

Extract from Diary of Captain Edward Preble, U. 6. Navy, Commodore of U. 6.
Squadron in the Mediterranean, Friday, 22 June 1804

moderate Breezes from the N N E and pleasant weather at anchor
in Tunis Bay, a t j4 past noon I returned on board, weighed & sailed
out of the Bay, a t % past 3 P M weighed & sailed out of the Bay
spoke a Neapolitan Brig Prize to a Tunisian Corsair then in sight
which soon after passed us, - a t 5 P M made the Argus a signal to
chase N E B N, - which she spoke & reported a spaniard from the
Levant for Tunis, - at 10 passed Zembra Sctt Studing sails &
steered to the E B S, - at 10 gave chase to a sail a head, which a t
1 A M we Boarded 1 league N E from Cape Bon she was a spaniard
from Merseills bound for Susa & Monastere in the Kingdom of Tunis,
the Captain gave me a Packet of French News Papers, and I purchased
two Cases of Cordial and two Cases of Sirop from him for which I
paid him 50 Spanish dollars, - a t 3 A M made sail & pursued our
course S E B E to pass near the Island of Pmtalaria, - a t j4 past
4 A M Cape Bon bore 'AT B S 9 miles distant, light winds & pleasant
weather, - at 7 A M saw Pantalaria S E, steered for it until1 noon,
when the north point bore S E distance 4 leagues, Surgeons Report
9 Sick, & 7 convalescent, [LC. EPP, Diary, 1803-1804.1
Extract from journal kept by Purser John Darby, U. S. Navy, on board U. 6. 8.
John Adorns. Master Commandant Isaac Chauncey, U. S. Navy, commanding,
Friday, 22 June 1804

[Several lines of Manuscript mutilated] Roll and acct. of Allotmt
of Pay and forward them on to the Accountant of the Navy. - We
are now waiting for a Wind, having recevc our Sailing orders - this
day there was a Court Martial held on board of the Congress Frigate
on Two Seamen. one for Mutiny & the other for desertion the former
sentanced to have 320 Lashes, & the other 150 [NDA original.

Miss Camilla S. McConnell.]

123 June 18041
To Captain Samuel Barron, U. S. Navy, U. 6. Frigate Pruidenl, from Captain John
Rodgers, U. S. Navy

SIR I herein Enclose you the procedings of the Court Martial in
the Trial of Robert Quin & John Kirkpatrick and wait your orders
for adjourning the Court Sine Die
JN*RODGERS

JUNE
230 1804

Commodore SAM!BARRON
U S, Frigate President

[Mrs. James S. Barron original.]
Sentences of Courts Martial

FRIGATE
President JUNE
23. 1804
At a Court Martial-held this Day on the tr a1 of Robert Gwin on n
charge of mutiny and John Kirkpatrick for esertion, the following
sentences were decreed and approved -

J'

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

219

Robert Gwinn, on a charge of Mutiny to have his Head & Eye
brows shaved, branded in the forehead with the Word MUTINUS - to
receive Three hundred & twenty lashes, equally apportion'd along
side of the different ships of the Squadron with the Label MUTINEY
in large capital Letters inserted on its front, & to be Drum'd on shore
under a Gallows in a Boat tow'd stern foremast b a boat from each
ship in the Squadron, as unworthy of serving un er the Flag of the
United States John Kirkpatrick on a charge of Desertion, to recieve One hundred
& fifty Lashes, to be apportion'd along side the Different Ships in the
Squadron, during the execution of which sentence, he shall wear a
white Cap with a Label in Front, in Capital Letters - THE REWARD OF DESERTION, and afterwards to be return'd to Duty.
[LC. JRP, Letters & Orders, 1804-1805.1

B

To Captain John Rodgers, U. S. Navy, commanding U. S. Frigate Conpress, from
Captain Samuel Barron, U. S. Navy
GENERAL ORDERS

U. S. SHIPPresident
Hampton roads June 2Qrd 1804
The Commander in Chief of the Squadron cannot but express his
concern, and regrets that an incident should have occur'd which compels him to order the infliction of a punishment on individuals serving
under his command, both painful & degrading to the character of a
Seaman & Soldier- but viewing the crimes of mutiny and desertion
of a most henious nature, and justly meriting the most exemplary
punishment, & being determin'd never to pardon crimes, fraught with
such fatal consequences to the service, nor to mitigate in any degree
the Punishment, annex'd, by Law to such Crimes - approves the
sentence of the Court Martial of this Day, decreed agamst Robert
Quinn and John Kirkpatrick, and orders i t to be executed on Monday
next, at 8 O'clock Sign'd SAM!BARRON
[LC. JRP, Letters & Orders, 1804-1805.1
To Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Navy, from George Davis, U. S. Charge d'bffaires
at Tunis

TUNISJune 2QQ1804.
SIR I have the honor to enclose for your information a copy of a
letter* from his catholic Majestys Consul here, and answer - The
Occurrence is fortunate as i t will enable me to refuse on a solid foundation any passports that may be asked for hereafter by this re ency The Courier has been dispatched for Tripoly: but may. be dc ayed as
he is Obliged to pass from Zoara to the Coast of Tripoli in a boat, from
this circumstance it ma be adviseable, should you think proper to let
the Courier pass, to sen a duplicate of your letter to Cap1 B. by her I wish the Passport given b M' Pinckeny Counter-signed by Mr
Eaton & my-self was destroye & that he may not receive any thing
in vc~itinofrom you, as all such apers would be used to my injury
' h e r e was a Subject of
on board said Courier - I
here
presume he is left at Tunis: but i t will be well to ascertain the fact

9

B

-

CI

$ripely

220 NAVAL OPERATIONS, APRILSEPTEMBER 6, 1804
The Sapatapa was much gratified with your Salute, and would
have sent a regalia of Fresh Stock & g on board, had you made any
delay - I am again threatened with a return of fever
P. S. My Courier has returned from Algiers: I enclose under
cover to Mr Higgins a letter for Yourself & Mr OIBrienfrom ColQLear
*The letters enclosed were the two -,receding
[LC. EPP, LB, April-Nov. 1804.1
To Sir Alexander John Ball, Governor of Malta, from Captain Edward Preble,
U. S. Navy

UNITEDSTATESSHIPConstitution
June 2 9 1804
SIR YOUwill Oblige me extremely by allowing me to send to
Tripoly in the Vessel that the British Consul goes over in, a few Bales
of Cloathing for the American Prisoners who are almost naked I wish also to send some provisions and stores to be delivered to
Cap-ainbridge
(if permitted) but if not to be retained in possession
l
Capmainbridge is allowed to recieve them, Your
of the C o ~ s u untill
Influence with M: Langford will ensure his attention to my unfortunate
Countrymen - I have written to him on the Subject I enclose your Excellency a file of Paris papers down to the 9th
Inst. & presume they will be interesting, as they must be much later
than any you can have recieved a t Malta The Pilot I discharged when last at Malta, although a Frenchman
has been three years in the American Service - You will therefore
oblige me by releasing him from Confinement and sending him out of
the Island - I believe him to be a Villain but too dull an one to do
any injury to your Commerce - I t is possible some blame may be
attached to me for discharging him at Malta, which induces me to ask
this favor The American Consul at Tunis informed me that a revolution had
taken place in Algiers in favor of the English, they Dey has been assassinated, the whole of the Jews been put to death and all the Frenchmen
in the Regency been put in chains - This Intelligence was brought
to the Bashaw of Tunis from Algiers by one of his corsairs and believed
to be true
[LC. EPP, LB, April-Nov. 1804.1
To William Wsss Langford, British Consul General, Tripoli, from Captain Edward
Preble, U. 6. Navy

UNITEDSTATESFRIGATE
Congtitution
23rdJune 1804
SIR, I take the liberty to request that ou will do me the favour,
to take under your charge, a few Bales of c othing and some provisions
and stores, for the unfortunate American Prisioners, in Tripoli - I
should not trouble you with this business, if they were not almost
Naked.
I wish the clothing and stores to be delivered to Ca tain Bainbridge,
if he is allowed to receive them, but if not, you wil please to retain
the whole under your protection, until he is: I also wish to send over
some money to Mr Nissen the Danish Consul, to repay the sums he
has already advanced for them -

9

P

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

221

Your Freindly attention to our affairs, and any service you can render
our Countrymen in Barbary, will ever be gratifuliy acknowledged [The Admiralty, London. NDA photostat.]
To Captain Edward Preble, U. 6. Navy, from Sir Alexander John Ball, Governor
of Malta

MALTA
June 234 1804
SIR I am honored with your excellency's letter of this day's date
expressing your desire to send some clonthing by the British Consul
to the American Prisoners at Tripoly I have to regret that t4heBritish Consul sailed yesterday evening
for Tripoly - He would have felt highly gratified in rendering this
service to your unfortunate Countrymen If you can suggest any mode b which it can be conveyed I beg you
to command me, and that you w& be assured of the satisfaction I shall
at all times feel in executing your wishes
I shall immediately comply with your wish, and release the Frenchman who was your Pilot and whom I intended to confine a short time
to prevent his conveying Intelligence of the Trade carried on here P. S. I beg to thank you for the French Papers - I am surprized
at the report from Tunis & unless it were well authenticated I should
doubt it - Be assured we do not interfere wit,h the internal affairs
of the Government, & I do not know of any English Party A, J, B
[LC. EPP, LB, April-Nov. 1804.1
To Nicholas C. Nissen, Danish Consul, Tripoli, from George Davis, U. S. Charge
d'Affaires, Tunis

TUNIS
June 2 9 1804
SIR, I avail myself of a Courier, which leaves this for Tripoli, to
trouble you with a letter for Capt. Bainbridge. We learn through various channels, that the Emperor of Russia, has found his new created
Government, to wit, the Republic of the Seven Islands; an impolitic
establishment, and has taken possession of them. -He has also, placed
an Arsenal at, and fortified Corfu: the flect at Sea consists of forty three
Sail, with ten thousand troops on board, intended for the Protection
of Sicily, against all Powers. - I t has been reported and correctly
believed, that Algiers was in a state of revolution; the Dey assassinated,
and most of the influential Jcu-s. - I received last evening an express
from Algiers, in twelve days; by which I learn there is no truth in the
report. - The Jews, are much Alarmed, at the approaching visit
of the English; whom it is said, are resolved to make a severe &
decisive attack - none of their Cruizers, have yet been out. - There
is also a new Prophet arisen, who has an immense Srmy of Bedouins;
has actual1 made himself Master of Bona, and is marching towards
the capita[ - I thus give you- in detail, the only news we have at
this Regency,
Begging you, to accept my best wishes for your health & happiness,
NB. Your Drafts on me for the use of the American Officers &
Seamen s t Tripoly, will ever be honoured.

222 NAVAL OPERATIONS, APRIL-SEPTEMBER 6, 1804
Sympdhetic ink [Writtenin lime juice.]
All your letters have been received, with their enclosures. - I send
you this by a Courier express, whom you may expedite at your
easure - he is to receive no pay until1 he brings your answer. - The
etter for Capt. B. under the Commodore's cover is of great importance. - Should not the offer Capt. B. is empowered to make be
accepted, you may daily expect a warm attack - God bless you, and
believe me,
Yours with the highest regard and esteem,
G. D.
[NYHS. Geo. Davis LB, Vol. 1.1

f"

To Captain William Bainbridge, U. S. Navy, from George Davis, U. S. Charge
d 'Affaires, Tunis

TUNISJune 23* 1804.
MY DEARSIR, Since I had this pleasure, I have been confined to

my bed, almost constantly, with a violent fever; my health, Suffered
much during the last warm Season, and have much more to dread
from the approaching one. - I should sollicit for an immediate
removal from this Regency; did I not still cherish the hope of rendering myself serviceable to yourself and officers - rest assured, that
those who have been kind to you in your distress, will ever have a
Sincere and grateful friend in me - i t is however, certain, that
Political and interested motives, seems to have blocked up every
avenue, to the humane, and Sympathising feelings of most of those
Christians, who surround you.

*

*

*

*

*

*

*

Sympathetic ink [written in lime juice.]
Your letters to the Commodore, who, left this Bay, on the 20",
have been rec* and forward you by a Courier express his answer,
together with letters from Mr O'Brien, and Consul Lear. - In case
the offer, you are authorized to make, should not be accepted, keep
a good look out; and prepare yourself to profit of any advantages,
that may present themselves - for you may expect every hour
after the receipt of this letter, a warm attack, and in Such a way as
may induce the Bashaw, & Court to look for a little country air Should you have any thing to communicate, the Courier will not
make a detention of more than three days. - I have no recent news
from the U. States; but shall hear something from the New Squadron,
which we have reason to Suppose has arrived at Gibraltar. God prosper you in all your projects, and believe me Your affectionate friend G. D.
[NYHS. Geo. Davis LB, Vol. 1.1
123 June 18041
To Captain Edward Preble, U. 8. Navy, from the Wardroom Ofacera of the U. 8.
Prigate Constilulion

The Gentlemen of the Wardroom present their most respectfull
compliments to Commodore Preble, and request the pleasure of his
Company to dine with them tomorrow.
SATURDAY
EVENING
23'4 June 1804
[LC. EPP, Vol. 11, April-June 1804.1

223

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

Extract from journal of U. 8. Brig Argus. Master Commandant Isaac Hull,U.S. Navy,
commanding, Saturdey, 23 June 1804

a t midnight moderate breezes Pantalaria bore W 3 N at 3:
past 3 saw Cape Ruxo bearing N E b N Pantalaria W N N At
% past 9 the Cornmod' Spoke us and ordered us to proceed to Malta
[NDA photostat.]
Extract from Diary of Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Navy, Commodore of U. 6.
Squadron in the Mediterranean, Saturday, 23 June 1804

A description of the Tunisian Frigate which we left a t anchor in
Tunis Bay the 21"; ins;, Vizt darke coloured yellow sides with two
White mouldings above, stern almost pe endicular with an upright
Lion head painted yellow, Quarter gal eries shaped like a poop
Lanthern with green Venetian blinds and white mouldinp, upright
stern with Crescent Tafferel, two large plain white mouldmgs, green
Venetian blinds to all the Cabbin NTindows,- 26 Ports but only
24 guns on the main deck, the 2 Cabbin guns are Brass & Painted
Green, 8 Guns on the quarter deck, and two on the Fore castle, - no
quarte[r]s on the Spar deck except a Strip of Canvas painted Black,
Mizen mast shorter than common, very short Royal masts, Spritsail
& Spritsail topsail yards, - Inside work of the ship painted red
the Boat over the Stern has a White Bottom green wales and Red
Gunwale strait, moderate Breezes & pleasant weather steering to
the E S E, 2 leagues to the N W of Pantalaria, - a t 2 P M Calm, we were then 2 miles from the Town which is situated in a small
Bay on the N W side of the Island, i t is defended by a Castle in the
Center and a Battery of five guns at each extreme of the Town the
Bay is sheltered from S E & S W, winds, - at 3 P M a li ht breeze
sailing along side the North of the Island, - at 8 P M the ast point
bore W N W 9 miles, - a t 8 A M it Bore W N W, 11 or 12 leagues
saw the Island of Sicily bearing from N to N E l Argus in com any
15
a t noon, Latitude Observed 3 6 O 29' N, Gozo bears S E B
leagues

'P

fi

[LC. EPP, Diary, 1803-1804.1
Extract from journal of Midshipman F. Cornelius deKrafft, U. S. Navy, in U. S. Brig
Siren of 18 guns, Master Commandant Charles Stewart, U.S. Navy, commanding,
Saturday, 25 June 1804

At K past Meridian, saw the afore mention'd sail Standing
in for Tripoli, made all sail in chace of her again. At 2 in stay sails
& royals up courses & down flying jib. the Vixen brot the chace too
with a shot. fill'd away. At 3 Lt Smith came on board. At 4 set
courses & 'IkQ to the EQ. )4 past 4 haul'd up courses & brail'd after
main sail. At 6 Tripoli bore S. by E. 2 leagues. % past 6 wore to
the NWq At 7 back'd the main topsail. At j4 past 7 Ls Dent came
on board fdl'd away. [NDA.]

To Captain Edward Preble, U. 6. Navy, from Don Joseph Noguera, Spanish Consul
Qeneral, Tuus

TUNIS5'4th June 1804.
SIR Instructed by the Charge d1Maires of your Nation to this
Bey, that in future the pass orts given by the Agents of Your Government to Enter Tripoly wil not be considered of any force without

f

224 NAVAL OPERATIONS, APRILSEPTEMBER 6, 1804
your Special permission, and the Spanish Brig or Courier called
St Ferdinando Joseph Carera Master being here with the Ministerial

Correspondance abord of the Regencies of Tunis and Tripoly: I
think that my duty is to address you that he may ask your permission
to go into the Port of Tripoly to fulfil his mission, which is to deliver
the dispatches of Government to my Colleague in Tripoly, and to
return immediately with the Answers I dare flatter my-self Sir that this permission which I take the
liberty to solicit with such earnestness -411 be accorded and will be
in no shape prejudicial to your Undertaking as the captain assures
me that he has nothing on board but the dispatches and some trifles
which are of Very little consequence & which he brings from Spain
by Order of the Consul my Colleague and of some Spanish Individuals
residing in Tripoly which you can Verify; and farther I make bold to
hope that your goodness will not refuse what hfr Davis has almost
assured me d l be Granted, and that he would Support my prctensions by his good Offices I profit also by this Occasion to thank you for the liberty which
Mr Davis tells me you had Granted to Cap1 Torres taken by one of
your Squadron in coming out of Tripoly in consequence of transgressing the Passports given him.
Be pleased Sir to recieve my expressions of the most profound
respect & highest consideration with which,
[LC. EPP,LB, April-Kov. 1804.1
Extract from journal of U. S. Brig Argus. Master Commandant Isaac Hull, U.S. Navy,
commanding, Sunday, 24 June 1804

a t 1 let go the small bower Carried out a Kedge Anchor ahead
hove up the Anchor and Warped into the harbour of Rlalta at Y
past 2 came too with the Small bower in 13 fWater soft muddy
bottom
[NDA photostat.]
Extract from Diary of Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Navy, Commodore of U. S.
Squadron in the Mediterranean, Sunday, 24 June 1804

Wind N W steering to the S E B E , a t 3 P M saw Gozo, by
9 P M we were abreast of Gozo, bearing W S W 4 miies, steering for
Malta, at midnight abreast of Valctta Harbour the light House
bearing West half a mile distant, the Argus entered the Habour, at 8 A. M. hoisted a signal [a ellow flag] for quarantine having been
a t Tunis & Tripoly, - at 10 ad a muster of the ships company by
divisions and an examination of their cloathing &c, - at a 11 went
on shore and gave orders for a supply of Provisions & Stores for the
Argus, wrote to Governor Ball for the release of the Pilot we discharged when last here which he granted at noon I returned to the
ship to get under way, -

c

[LC. EPP, Diary, 1803-1804.1
To Anthony Merry, British Minister to the United States, from Secretary of State

DEPARTMENT
OF STATE,June 96'P 1804.
SIR, I have had the honor to receive and have laid before the
President our letter dated on yesterday, complaining of the steps
taken a t ew York for detaining certain British Ships of War, until

d

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

225

24 hours should have succeeded the departure of certain French Ships;
notwithstanding the desire of the British Commander to proceed to
Sea, before the time notified by the French Commander for the
Departure of the French Ships.
The rule established by the United States, in conformity to general
usage, is that no armed Vessel of a belligerent power, shall proceed to
Sea within less than 24 hours after the departure from the same Port
of Vessels armed or unarmed belonging to an adversary power. We
readily concur therefore in the generd positions, that Vessels hostile
to each other in the same Port at the same time, are equally free to
proceed to Sea in t'he order of time they may deem proper; the r e
straint of the rule falling on the armed vessels which may happen to
be the followers. You are equally well founded, Sir, in the justice
you do to the disposition of the U States to maintain the rule with a
sincere impartiality. They will be equally impartial in protecting
within their jurisdiction, the hostile Vessels, each against the other;
and in maintaining the rights of their own jurisdiction against either.
And the communications which wdl be made to the proper Officers at
Kew York will not lose sight of these just principles.
Having premised these observations, I am to subjoin that the real
cause of the proceedings of which you complain, does not warrant the
inferences into which you have been led.
I t appears that on the 17" instant prior to the outrage committed
by the British Commander in the American jurisdiction, the Mayor
of the City of New York on the application of the French Consul
there, requested of the British Consul, that the British Ships of War
might not sail until the expiration of 24 hours after the departure of
the French Vessels; which according to the notification given was to
take place with the first fair wind. I t does not appear, or rather the
contrary may be inferred, that the Xlayor had either notice or knowledge of any intention in the British Commander to proceed immediately to Sea.
On the morning of the l b * the Mayor became officially acquainted
with the violent proceedings of the British Commander, within the
Port of New York, and suspecting that he would be as ready to insult
the authority of the laws in one case, as he had been in another and
that he actually meditated a violation of the rule of 24 hours, addressed
on the same day a request to the Wardens of the Port, that the Pilots
might be prohibited from conducting the British Ships out of the Port,
until the French Ships should have had the benefit of the rule. This
request is founded expressly on his suspicion that the British Ships
would follow the French Ships within less than 24 hours after the
departure of the latter. And it cannot be d[o]ubted, that after what
had passed, ho was fully justified in such a suspicion.
I t cannot be irnproper to add, Sir, that whether the measure taken
to prevent the departure of the British Ships had or had not any other
object, than that of enforcing the rule of 24 hours, it is certain that
whose who had so flagrantly violated our laws, might well be suspected
of an intention to elude the punishment to which they had subjected
themselves; and that in that point of view also, every regular step
which might contribute to secure the execution of the laws against the
Offenders was strictly justifiable.
[NA. SDA. "Notea to Foreign Legatione in U. S", Vol. 1.1

226 NAVAL OPERATIONS, APRIL-SEPTEMBER 6,

1804

To Tobias Lear, U. S. Consul General, Algiers, from Secretary of State

DEPARTMENT
OF STATE,
June 25'P 1804.
SIR. I have the honor to enclose a list of the articles which it is
intended to send to Algiers with the brass Cannon requested by the
which is immediately to be
Dey. They will follow after the timber
shipped to replace the loss of the Sally's cargo. I t would be convenient
to us in collecting the Maritime stores for Algiers to have a table of
the dimensions most in use for the Navy of that Regency, as well as
the tar8 according to which the price exclusive of freight at which
they are received is regulated, and I request you to endeavour to
obtain and forward them to this Office.
Eastwardly winds having prevailed for many days, the Squadron
which has proceeded towards the Capes of the Chesapeake has probably been detained in the Bay. Their orders were forwarded this day
week.
[NA. SDA. Despatches to Consuls, Oct. 1800-Feb. 1817.1
Extract from journal of U. S. Brig Argus. Master Commandant Isaac Hull, U.S. Navy,
commanding, Monday, 25 June 1804

[At anchor in Malta Harbor.] These 24 l~oursCommences with
Pleasant breezes and Clear Weather the health Officer Came off and
informed us we could not obtain Pratique hoisted the Yellow flag
Observed the brigs draught of Water to be 13 feet Aft and 9% feet
forward Crew Employed Watering Rowed Guard during the night At meridian fine Weather Variously Employed
[NDA photostat.]
Extract from Diary of Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Navy, Commodore of U. S.
Squadron in the Mediterranean, Monday, 25 June 1804

Fresh Breezes from the Westward, at % past 12 weighed & sailed
steered N E for Cape Passaro, the S E point of Sicily, - at $6 past 7
we passed the Cape within half a mile & sterred on to the N E for
Cape Porcha, wind variable, - a t midnight boarded an English
Privateer from malta 8: her Prize, - at 11 A M anchored in Syracuse
Harbour in 7 faths Water all over this Harbour is soft Bottom and
good holding ground light house bears E B S $4 mile, met here the
six gun Boats and the Enterprize, -commenced fllmg water and taking
off provisions & Stores, [LC. EPP, Diary, 1803-1804.1
Extract from journal of U. S. Prigate John Admns, Master Commandant Isaac
Chauncey, U. 6 . Navy, commanding, Monday, 25 June 1804

Begins with light Airs from the Southward and Westward with
Clear Weather. At 5 A. M hove short, and at seven weighed with a
light Wind, from the S. W:
[LC. EPP, Journal, June to 6 August 1804.1
Extract from journal kept by Purser John Darby, U. 6 . Navy, on board U. S. S.
John A d m , Master Commandant Isaac Chauncey, 0.6. Navy, commanding,
Monday, 25 June 1804

[Several lines of manuscript mutilated] equal number of stripes

along side of each Ship. being five in the Squadron now laying in

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

227

Hampton Road. they both receid their proportion along side of the
President. and were towed by a boat from each ship along side the
Congress. where the Mutineer [Robert Quinn] after receiving 12
Stripes. fainted. he was then put into a boat, and caried onboard of
the President to receive the balance of his punishment as soon as he
was able to bare it. the Desertor [John Kirkpatrickl being a strong
Irishman, he was able to stand the whole of his punishment and was
taken from ship to ship untill he recevd the whole. Our ship was the
last that he came to. and I think a more Distressful sight I never
experianced: but I must confess that I was more distressed [several
lines of manuscript mutilated] The Procession was as follows: They ware both striped with a sheet thrown over their backs, each
of them had a White Cap on, the Words MUTINYwrote on one & the
OF DESSERTION
wrote on the other. they ware
Words, the RE~VARD
both tied in a boat caled a Launch, under a Gallows which was Erected
for the Purpose, and towed from ship to ship with five armed boats.
the deserter after receving his punishment was returned to the ship
again. but the Mutiner was to be set on shore after receiving his fuli
punishment. With the Words MUTINYbranded in his forehead but I have no Idea that he could survive the whole of it. but must die
under the opperation. It is to be sure most cruel punishment. but
the very existance of the Navy require it [NDA original. Miss Camilla S. McConnell.]
To Secretary of the Navy from Master Commandant Isaac Chauncey, U. S. Navy

U. S. SHIPJohn Adarns 26tb JUNE1804

The Light-House on Cape Henry bearing
South, Distant 2 Leagues. SIR I had the Honor of writing you on the 21" Inst$ since which
Time I have been lying at a single Anchor, Wind-bound, which has
continued blowing with but little Variation from N. E to E. S. E untill
this Morning, when we weigh'd with a light Air from the Westward,
that however soon left us, and we drifted down some Distance with
the Ebb-Tide untill we got a Breeze from about S. E by which w-e are
standing to sea and hope i t will not Eastern upon us before we clear
the Land, the Pilot will leave us in about half an hour by whom I forward this Letter.
I t was extremely mortifying to me to have been detained so long in
Hampton Roads; but I assure you that i t was unavoidable, which I
believe the Commodore, and the other Captains of the Squadron can
testify.
INDA.

MC LB. 1804-5.1

To Monsieur Beaussier, French Charge d'bffaires and Commissary General,
Tripoli, from Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Navy

U. S. SHIP Constitution
Malta June 26th 1804
SIR I had the honor to write you by Mr OBrien on the 13th Inst:
but as you did not please either to see him or write me an answer, I
have reason to expect that you would not give yourself any concern
in our Affairs at Tripoly - I have recieved your letter by the master
of the Ligurian Prize, and although I find her under Spanish Colors

228 NAVAL OPERATIONS, APRIESEPTEMBER 6, 180.4
with 1650 Spanish dollars belongi to residents in Tripoly; yet such
attention have I paid t.o your dec aration that I have released the
Vessel and Property, and have put the Frenchman Mr [space] in quiet
possession of both - I have sent the Cloathing & some Stores for
the American Prisoners over in a Neutral Vessel, and have consigned
it to his Excellency Sidi Mahomet D'Ghies requesting him to permlt
them to be delivered to the Danish Consul presuming that it would
not be agreeable to you to recieve them - If I am wrong in my conjecture, you cannot convince me of it more fully than by prevailing
on his Excellency to allow the Cloathing & Stores to be delivered to
Cap: Bainbridge Himself -

g

[LC. EPP, LB, April-Nov. 1804.1
Extract from journal of U.S. Brig Argus. Haster Commandant Isaac Hull, U.S. Navy,
commanding, Tuesday, 26 June 1804
At Anchor in Malta Harbour at ji past 10 Weighed Anchor Carried

a Kedge ahead and Warped some distance out of the harbour of
Malta at 12 let go the Anchor Crew Empq Watering
At 7 P M. Weighed anchor and stood out of the harbour of Malta
[XDA photostat.]
Extract from Diary of Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Navy, Commodore of U. S.
Squadron in the Mediterranean, Tuesday, 26 June 1804

Wind from the Eastward, ordered a Boat to row Guard to prevent
surprize, sent six boats to bring off Water & provisions, - Ordered
fresh Beef & Vegitables for the ships Crew, - Surgeons report 9
sick & 10 convalescent, - I this day released a Ketch sent in by
the Argw & Vixen, from Tripoly bound to this place, it appeared
by her Papers, among which was a Certificate from all the Consuls
that she was a French Vessel carried into Tripoly by a corsair &
detained two years, - and lately released in consequence of a demand
of her by the French Government, [LC. EPP, Diary, 1803-1804.1
Extract from log book kept by Sailing Master Nathaniel Haraden, U. S. Navy, on
board U. S. Frigate Comlitulion, Tuesday, 26 June 1804

Light airs from the Eastward - At single anchor in Saragosa Enterprize & six Gun boats in company. Employed making the
necessary arrangements for watering ship & recieving provisions Unbent the Mainsail to repair
At 8 P. M. armed a boat which continued outside of the Harbor
during the Night as a Guard boat
At day light six shore boats came and took away ten Gang Casks
each to be employed in watering ship Rec'd fresh beef and a Quantity
of Vegetables for the ships company. employed recieving in water
& provisions
Surgeons report 9 sick, 10 convalescent.
Noon moderate breezes from the Eastward
[LC. EPP, Log Constitution, 1803-1804.1

WARS W I T H BARBARY POWERS

229

Extract from journal of U. S. Frigate John Adam, Xaster Commandant Isaac
Chauncey, U. S. Navy, commanding, Tuesday, 26 June 1804

First Part frequent and heavy Squalls of Rain - At 6 P M
passed Cape Henry - At 8 the Light House bore S W W dist 6
Miles from which I take my Departure - detained the Pilot untill
Midnight, my Reason for doing this was that the Wind was falling
light and scant - At 11 the Wind hauling to about S. W. and a
fine Breeze I discharged him Ends with moderate Gales and hazy. Wind South.
[LC. EPP, Journal, June to 6 August 1804.1
Extract from journal kept by Purser John Darby, U. 6. Navy, on board U. S. S.
John Adms, Master Commandant Isaac Chauncey, U. S. Navy, commanding,
Tuesday, 26 June 1804

[Severallines of Manuscript mutilated.] Congress Essex & Constellation to sail in a few days. - a t 7. P. M. Cape Henry bore S. W. b
S. Dist. 4% miles Cape Charles N % E Dist 13 miles - at 8. Cape
Henry bore S. W. X W. Dist 2%Leagues. - a t 11 P. R4. the Pilot
left the ship. and we all delivered our letters for our friends. I set
up until1 about 12 OClock a t night. the Wind continuing light. a t
the Southwg 8: Westwg [NDA original.

Miss Camilla S. McConnell.]

Extract from journal of Midshipman F. Cornelius deKrafft, 0.S. Navy, in U. S. Brig
Siren of 18 guns, Master Commandant Charles Stewart, U. 6. Navy, commanding,
Tuesday, 26 June 1804

The Scourge in Co. Midnight moderate breezes & clear. % past
9 the land in sight, heard the report of Cannon call'd all hands, made
all sail & stood for Tripoli. At 10 discover'd the Vizen off our weather
bow & a large ship at anchor of[f] Tripoli. At $ past 10 the Vixen

made the signal that the strange ship was a friend - :7 past 10 saw
the ship had English colours flying. At 11 TKq to the N N E. Latt: Obs: 33' 13' N.
[NDA.]
To Prime Minister to the Bashaw of Tripoli, from Captain Edward Preble, U. S.
Navy

U. S. SHIPConstitution
June 27th 180.4
His Excellency SIDI MAH HOMED DGHIES
Prime Minister to His Excellency the Bashuw of Tripoly SIR- When I was off Tripoly on the 13th Inst - You consented
that some cloathing Bt other necessaries might be sent on shore for the
use of the American prisoners in your regency, But the white flag on
the castle was hauled down before we could get them out of the
Ship - and I am now induced to send them in a fi'eutral Vessel as
before suggested by yourself - I have taken the liberty to consign
them directly to you, to be delivered into the charge of i \ l r Nissen the
Danish Consul, unless your Excellency could find it consistant to
ermit them to be delivered directly into the charge of Capt Baingridge - Your Honorable 6- humane treatment of my countrymen,
heretofore, Justifies the confidence I now place in you, and rest as-

230 N A W OPERATIONS. APRIL-SEPTEMBER 6 , 1804
sured Sir, that my Government as well as all Europe must admire &
applaud the finer feelings of humanit,y, more especially when exerted
to alleviate the sufferings of those which were thrown into your
power by the Chances of War.
The Vessel which carries these over is an English Vessel and has
my passport. If you wish to send Dispatches to any of the European
Powers or Elsewhere, I promise you, that they shall be considered
as Sacred The enclosed letters to Cap' Bainbridge & Consul Kissen I beg you
will permit to be delivered to these Gentlemen.
[LC.

EPP, LB, April-Kov. 1804.1

To Captain William Bainbridge, U. S. Navy, from Captain Edward Preble, U. S.
Navy

U. S. SHIPConstitution
June 27th 1804

Dear Sir

*

*

*

*

*

*

*

[First four paragraphs are the same as the letter to Captain Bainbridge dated
19 June 1804.1

I have forwarded to you in an English Vessel from Malta 14 Bales
of cloathing Bt provisions Bi stores as pr Inroice and have consigned
the n-hole to Sidi lMohammed Dghies and requested him to permit
Mc Nissen the Danish Consul to take charge of them for you as it
will relieve his Excellency from any trouble respecting them and I
hope 3lr Nissen will excuse my troubling him with this commission
& he may rest assured that it will afford me the highest Satisfaction
to have it in my power to make him grateful returns - I feel sensible
I am under great Obligations to his Excellency the Bashaw for his
goodness in permitting me to send you, these necessary articles in a
ru'eutral Vessel Attend Particularly to this letter d all its contents as it may be
interesting to you - I have sent the Winter as well as the Summer
Cloathing [LC. EPP, LB, April-Kov. 1804.1
To William Eiggins, U. S. Navy Agent, Malta, from Captain Edward PrebIe,
U. S. Navy

U. S. SHIPConstitution
Syracuse June 27th 1804

DEARSIR I enclose you a copy of an Invoice of 14 Bales of Cloathing & Sundry Stores to be sent to Tripoly for the use of the Officers
&: Crew of the Philadelphia - I have consigned them to the Prime
Minister His Excellency Sidi Mahammed DGhies and have requested
him to permit them to be delivered to the Danish Consul or to Cap'
Bainbridge - Such of the Stores as I have put on board the Argus
I have marked with a A in the Margin - the remainder I wish you
to procure so as to conform exactly with the Invoice, & mark them
"Capt Bainbridge" - You will please to hire a Felucca or large
Sparonaro with English Colors and send them over immediately Cap$ Hull is to convoy her to Tri oly - I wish ou to prevail on
Sir A Ball to send two thousand
to the British 8onsul with orders
to supply Cap$B. with that amount, but let the money go over from

DOE'

WRRS WITH BARBARY POR7ERS

231

the Governor in his own name, and you replace it in Malta, & I will
give you bills for the amount when I arrive I enclose you a letter for Gov: Ball which you will seal & then
deliver Please to have all the cloathing marked "Cap+ Bainbridge" You
must not regard the Price of freight but procure it as cheap as you
can [LC.

EPP, LB, April-Kov. 1804.1

Extract from journal of U. S. Brig Argus. Master Commandant Isaac Hull, U. S. Navy
commanding, Wednesday, 27 June 1804

at X past 8 hove too and hoisted in the boats at 9 f l e d away and
made all sail by the wind the harbour of Malta bore S S W dist4
2 miles
At midnight fine Wr ji past Comrnited the body of Wm Adams
(Sea?) to the deep several Strange sail in Sight
[NDA photostat.]
Extract from log book kept by Sailing Master Nathaniel Haraden, U. S. Navy, on
board U. S. Frigate Conslilution. Wednesday, 27 June 1804

Light airs from the \Testward At Anchor in Saragosa - Enterprize &- 6 Gun boats in company.
At 9 P. hf. the Guard boat reported the arrival at this Port of the
Brig Argus which we left at Malta on hlonday last.
[LC. EPP, Log Constitution, 1803-1804.1
To Captain Daniel Carmick, U. S. Marine Corps, New Orleans, La., from Secretary
of the Navy

NAVY D E P A28
~ +J u n e 1804. SIR, Previous to the receipt of your's dated at New Orleans 13t@
May, the requisite arrangements had been made relative to the rank
of the respective Officers, and the necessary orders from Gen! Willrinson had been forwarded.
I t is directed that the Officers of the Marine Corps and those of the
Army shall take rank of each other agreeably to grade and the dates
of their commissions without reference t,o the particular services to
which they may have been originally designed, bearing in recollection
that tlie first consideration is concord and a desire to further by
every laudable and honorable means the good and prosperity of the
Country. I am sorry to learn so many of the troops are in bad health. The
utmost attention from t,he officers as well as from the Surgeons is
absolutely necessary on this subject.
The letter which you make mention of from Dr Rogers has not come
to hand.
[NDA.

USMC, LB, 1804-1820.1

To Daniel Bedinger, Navy Agent and Superintendent of Navy Yard, Norfolk, Va.,
from Secretary of the Navy

NAV.D E PJune
~ 28% 1804
I enclose you a list of Timber Plank Spars &o which with 10 brass
24 pounders and 5. Brass Eighteen pound Cannon with carriages $ 9

232 NAVAL OPERATIONS, APRIL-SEPTEMBER 6,

1804

complete will compose a second cargo to be sent to the Dey of Algiers you will immediately take measures for procuring the timber &o
agreeably to the list enclosed and will use every exertion to have it
completed in the shortest period possible The cannon will be procured at this place as soon as it is ready and
you shall have provided the Timber plank &q a Vessel must be chartered for the Voyage suitable for the Cargo but you will not enter into
contract for one until you hnve received directions from me
[KDA. GLB, Vol. 7, 1803-1806.1
To Joshua Wingate, Hallowell, District of Maine, from Secretary of the Navy

KAV.D E PJune
~
28% 1804
I t is intended to send to the Dey of Algiers a cargo of Timber plank
&$ of the quantity and Kind specified in the enclosed list As it can be advantageously procured on the Hennebeck River and
it having been intimated to me that it might probably be convenient
for you to attend to the Shipment during your stay in that Quarter,
I take the liberty to Request that you will procure it on the best
terms in your power and with all practicable dispatch it being desirable that the shipment be made as early as possible You may not be able to procure the Timber of the exact dimensions stated in the list without losing much time - some latitude
must therefore be allowed you not supposing that a perfect attention
can be given to the list so as to make a correspondence in inches in
I t is desirable however that the list be attended to as
near y respect
as possible and that if there be any Variation from it it be an
increase rather than a decrease in size You will also charter a Vessel for the cargo as soon as you shall hare
procured it on the best terms in your power The necessary monies for the purchase of the Timber &$ and payment of freight will be supplied on your Requisition and instructions
to the Captain of the Vessel will be given as soon as she is ready to
sail Should you not be able to attend to this Business during your stay
you will please offer it to your Father d o I am informed is in that
line - the usual Commission will be allowed - Please to let me hear
from you as soon as convenient [SDA. GLB, Vol. 7, 1803-1805.1

every

To Lieutenant Peter S. Ogilvie, U. S. Navy, Washington, D. C., from Secretary of
the Navy

KAV.DEP. 2gt@June 1804. You will immediately repair to Baltimore and open Rendezvous,
and use every exertion to procure 10 able, and 16 ordinary Seamen to
man the Gun-boat K? 1, building at this place: they must be entered
to serve two ears. Allow to able seamen 12 dollars, and to ordinary
seamen 8 do ars Pr month, and make them 4 months advance, on
receiving responsible security that they will be delivered to your
Officer, who will be charged to conduct them to this place.
Colonel Stricker, Navy Agent at Baltimore, will supply the necessary monies, and will direct you how far to go, should ou find it
impracticable, to enter the men on the Terms here stated? -

i;

233

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

Blank shipping papers are enclosed. One of the able seamen you
may enter as a Boatswain, and one as a Gunner. [NDA. Off. Comg. Gunboats, 1803-1808.1
To Josiah Fox, Washington, D. C., from Secretary of the Navy

NAV.D E P28.
~ June 1804
I t has been determined to build 2 other Gun Boats at the navy
yard a t this place agreeably t,o the draft whch you have furnished
with such improvements as we may from time to time suggest You will take immediate measures for procuring the materials that
may be necessary in the construction of these Boats by contract on
the best terms in your power, and build them under your Own Superintendance and with your Own men
Ascertain in the first instance what materials not applied to other
Purposes the yard can afford you and then make your contracts for
the remainder - The Kind of materials to be used is Submitted to
your own Judgment let them however be so prepared as to ensure
the duration of the Boats - much loss has been heretofore experienced
by inattention to this Subject
In the present instance I expect that Every injury from that Source
will be cautiously guarded against by your Knowledge of the Business Your Acquaintance with the Timber Business will, I hope, enable
you to make contracts to advantage both with respect to quality of
the materials and the men who may offer to contract for them - Be
careful that the persons to whom you give the preference be fully
able to perform all they undertake for
The whole Business may else be Submitted to delay and loss Money will be deposited with CapVingey subject to your Orders on
account of the Contracts you may make and you will draw- on him
in favor of the contractors agreeably to your Contract.
Small advances may be made should you be of Opinion it would
serve to Expedite the fulfilment of the contracts on their part
[NDA. G I B , Vol. 7, 1803-1805.1
Extracts from a letter from Midshipman Henry Wsdsworth, U. S. Navy

U N I T ESTATES
D
BRIGScourge 16,
J u n e 28th) 1804, of Tripoli.
DEARJACK,Let me now continue for your information the history
of the War - for to my friends everything which concerns t,he honor
of the Nation is interesting.
I t is two months since the Scourge left Syracuse; I have not since
leaving America been so lengthy a cruise.
10 days ago the Commodore arrived here and supplyed the Siren
Vixen and Scourge with water and provisions: We came to anchor
within gunshot of Tripoli and rec'd on board our Stores.

*

*

*

*

*

*

*

While we were fitting out the Scourge at Syracuse a Tuniseen cruiser
of 4 guns, came in the harbor in the afternoon. Tacked & stood out
again & the same evening landed about 4 miles above the Town and
took off some of the Inhabitants. -

234 NAVAL OPERATIONS, APRIL-SEPTEMBER 6, 1804
The Tuniseens, Tripolines and Algerines with whom they are at
war, come into their harbors in neutral Bottoms & walk publicly
about their streets. - The Commodore asked the governor why he
did not seize a number which were at Syracuse he answered that he
was afraid of offending the Minister, Sig. Acting.

*

*

*

*

*

*

*

Scourge July 16, 1804. The Squadron which has been cruizing off
the Port of Tripoli during the Summer has consisted of the Siren,
A~gus,Vixen, Enterprise, Bt Scourge. The Comr%as supplied them
all with Water 8: Provisions to prevent their going into Port. The
'17ixen and Enterprize are now in Port The Argus has lately been
in to Malta and convoyed a Ketch chartered for the purpose to
Tripoli with stores for the officers: the cargo amounted to 7000$,
which I fear has been siezed by the Bashaw, as the officers do not
mention their arrival in their prison: the Ketch returned yesterday &
I rec'd a letter from Mr Jones Midbwho was with me in the Chesapeak.
The inhabitants of Tripoli, the skipper of the Ketch says are all
moving out of the City: Famine rages & no supplies can be obtained.
The other morning we discovered a large Sparonao to whom we
gave chase &- she ran on shore a few miles \Test of the Town. The
Vixen anchored close in and made a riddling sieve of her in a short
time: she was laden with wheat which they got on shore, the Musketry
from shore fired t h o the I7i;cen's sails & 4 men were liilled in the
Siren's boat: being the only men in uniform they were picked out for
officersby the Tripolines: The shore being rocky they had good hiding
places to ply their musquetry from: by the Ketch we learn that there
were 150 killed 6i wounded on shore.
The Boats of the squadron frequently go on shore at a distance
from the Town for Sand to scrub our decks: 6- for amusement, to chase
& be chased by the Katioes, but they always retire before the people
begin to collect. The Gun Boats in number 18 often get under way
& work about the Harbor $ the Bank to the Eastward, where the
Philadelphia ran on shore & once or twice we have been a t it with
long shot, - but this the commodore has now forbid as it practices
them in firing.

*

*

*

*

*

*

*

[H. W. L. Dana Col.]
Extract from journal of U.6. Brig Argus. Master Commandant Isaac Bull, U. 6. Navy,
commanding, Thursday, 28 June 1804

Came too in the harbour of Syracuse found here the U. S. Ship
Constitution Schooner Enterprize and Six Gunboats - Our boats empq
Watering and Shore boats bringing Off Provisions [NDA photostat.]
Extract from Diary of Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Navy, Commodore of U. 6.
Squadron in the Mediterranean, Thursday, 28 June 1804

Wind, S El Argus, Enterprize & Gun Boats in corn any, - a t A M
the Enterprize sailed for Massina, sent the 14 B es of Cloathing
received a t Naples, on board the Argus to be carried to Malta, and
wrote orders to Mr Higgins to charter a small Vessel send them
together with a quantity of Stores as pr order Book, to Tripoly for

8

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

235

the use of the Prisioners, - I wrote to the Bashaws Prime minister
& consignd the whole to him, I also wrote Captain Bainbridge &
sent him Two Thousand dollars in Cash &: wrote the Danish & French
Consuls, [LC. EPP, Diary, 1803-1804.1
Extract from journal kept by Purser John Darby, U. S. Navy, on board U. 6. S.
John Adams, Master Commandant Isaac Chauncey, U. S. Navy, commanding,
Thursday, 28 June 1804

The Weather [sltill continues moderate and very pleasent Wind
still fare a t the southd 8E Westd. in Latitude 36. 34, Long. 72. 11.
found the Temperature of the air a t Noon 78. Water 77 - the sea
has a very pleasent appearance to me, and have no symtoms of
sea sickness - this day about half past Six in the eavning hlr
John D. Sears a Midshipman. fell 01-er board every exertion was
made to save him but to no effect. He was seen swiming some
distance a steam of the ship. the boat was immediately sent in
search of him and piclied up his hat and an oar which was thrown
to him. but could see nothing [Manuscript mutilated] His death is
much [llanuscript mutilated] officers on board. I t is said that he
is thc only child of a Widow Lady who lives a t Hever De Grace in
the State of Maryland - Her fealings no doubt must meet with a
severe shock on hearing this unfortunate news - and can better be
amagined than discribed - sawr several strange Sail to day but did
not speak any of them [KDA original.

Miss Camilla S. McConnell.]

Extract from journal of U. S. Frigate John Adam, Master Commandant Isaac
Chauncey, U. S. Navy, commanding, Thursday, 28 June 1804
First part Strong Gales a ~ Pleasant
d
- At !: past 6 P. h i Air

John D. Sears Midshipman, unfortunately fell overboard, and altho'
every exertion was made Use of to save him i t proved ineffectual Ends with pleasant Weather Wind N. W
[Left Cape Henry 26 June 1804.1
[LC. EPP, Journal, June to 6 August 1804.1
Extract from journal of Midshipman F. Cornelius deKrafft, U. S. Navy, in U. S. Brig
Siren of 18 guns, Master Commandant Charles Stewart, U. S. Navy, commanding,
Thursday, 28 June 1804

): past hier? came too with the Stream in 60 fathoms, Tripoli
bearing S. by W 4 leagues distt - At 6 Caps Smith came on board
>:
past 7 Tripoli bore S % W 3 leagues. :: past 7 parted the cable
in heaving up. At 3; past 8 set courses &: main top mast stay sail &
stood to the N E
Latt: Obs: 33' 17' N.
[NDA.]
To Secretary of the Navy from Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Navy

U. S. SHIPCon~titution
Messina June 29th 1804
SIR, Some few days ago I recieved a letter from hlessr". Mackenzie
& A. Glennie in London in answer to mine advising them of the bills

236 ILTAVAL OPERATIOhrS. APRILSEPTEMBER 6, 1804
for £4000 under date of the 27th September last being a Forgery as also a letter I some time since recieved from John Gavino Esquire and am sorry I cannot throw some light on this Villainous transaction
I have but little doubt however but that the matter will be so far
traced as to leave it out of the Power of Caprice to attach any censure
or suspicion on any officer of this Ship or Squadron - I wuld not
but feel a little hurt at the insinuation of hIessT?AM& G. knowing as
I: do the impractib5t;v of any of my Officers haring i t in their power
to be accessivy to a fraud which must have required time and the
deepest artifice The letter of Credit I delivered into Mr Gkno's hands on board
this Ship about the 15th or 26kh September advisrng him of its contents, and requesting that it might be sent by the first safe conveyance - In doing this I think 1 was correct, as there was a better
chance of it's meeting a safe conveyance from Gibraltar than from
any other Port in the mediterranean - And Surely I am justified in
giving it in charge of the American Consul at that place for the
Purpose of transmitting, more especially as the business with Morrocco
at thst time scarcely admitted of my being on shore and entirely
precluded me from an opportunity of finding a conveyance for it -.
When Ne consider all the circumstances of the letters &: Bills arriving
a t the same time in London, and the letter endorsed by Mr Ga.Fino
we have stsong grounds to suspect that the fraud originated in Mc
Gar.ino's oflice, but by whom time alone c a n develope - Certain it
is that no person in Iny Squadron could have negotiated bills for
£4000 in Gibraltar had I ttbsolutely drawn them without my having
been consulted, being as it were on the spot - Indep[end]ant of which
my OfEcers had no communication with the Office of
Gavino or,
scarcely, with the Shore Messr"4 & G. are pleased to observe that "had I enclosed the letter
of Credit informing them that I had Specie on board" &Fa the fraud
had not happened - How was 1 to foresee the necessity of informing them that I had cash on board? In truth it would seem that these
Gentlemen uvould justify their having accepted those bills at an
u n u d Sight, at the Expence of my prudence and the honor of
hfy Officers - But I hope & trust we shall all stand justified in
your Opinion: for Certain it is that every man who has a Credit
abroad is every day liable to the same Misfortune - If a Villain is
disposed to make use of mothers name, he can never want an opportunity I regret sincerely that this Fraud has taken place - The Duties of
my Office fall sufficiently heavy on me without the anxiety which
must necessarily attend even a possibility of being censured for an
act of Villainy which human wisdom could not foresee - I have
the honor to be with the highest consideration
N. B. In Messrq Mackenzies and Glennie's letter you'll observe
that they have substituted Laurent Brown for Laurent Roberts I
conclude this is merely a clerical mistake [LC. EPP, LB, ApriI-Nov. 1804.)

237

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

To James Mackenzie and A. Glennie, London, England, from Captain Edward
Preble, U. 6. Navy

U. S. FRIGATE
Constitut{ol~
Messina June 29th 1804
GENTLEMEN
I am honored with your favor of 8th May 1804
acknowledging the Reciept of mine of 7th March last You are pleased to suggest that had I enclosed the letter of Credit
in one of my own, and advised you of the Circumstance of my having
brought Specie with me, the Fraud had not happened - I would
ask you Gentlemen, u-as i t for human wisdon to see the necessity of
such a communication? And if we freely indulge and express our
suspicions, where may they not rest? We may as soon suspect the
Clerks in your Office as the Officers on board my ship: and when I
inform you that I delivered this letter of Credit into Mr Gavino's
hands about the 15th or 16 Septemr last, and that my Officers had no
communication with his Office or the Shore (being a t that time before
Tangier) you will acknowledge the propriety of the remark.
As I hare no clew whereby I can investigate this affair and as you
have honored these bills a t an unusual Sight, I trust you will spare no
ains in tracing this Villainous transaction to its Ori,ain that the
aneful breath of Suspicion may not fall upon the innocent I t is a great Source of regret to me that this Fraud has happened,
but I cannot but believe however that you will be able to bring its
author to light I n your letter advising me of your hating honored my bills, you
mentioned their having been drawn in favor of Laurent Roberts I n your letter of the 8th May you call him Laurent Brown - I wish
that in your next you will advise mc whether his name is Laurent
Roberts or Brown, as it is of importance to know in any enquiry I
may have i t in my power to make - I should like to be informed also
of the firm of the house u-lich tliese Bills went through a t Lisbon,
and by whom presented in London - Of this how-ever I may expect
to be informed when you hat-c made the necessary investigation -

E

[LC. EPP, LB, April-h-ov. 1804.1
To Robert B. Livingston, U. S. Minister to Paris, France, from Captain Edward
Preble, U. S. Navy

UNITED
STATES
SHIPConstitufion
Messina 29th June 1804
SIR - I had the honor to write you the 15th May last - After
having delivered the letter of h.Zr Tallqrand to the French Commissary
General [Beaussier] a t Tripoly - It was bhen my opinion that he
was too much in the Interest of the Rashaw to render us any service.
and I think the enclosed letter from him will convince you I was right;
he wrote me a letter in which he Observed that he had been very
attentive to our unfortunate Countrymen, for which I returned him
thanks in a letter, a copy of which accompanies this - But hlIr
Bcaussier docieved me He has not, I believe ever seen Ca t Bainbridge, or his Officers, or rendered them any assistance - ndeed I
believe ho is our Enemy, and urges the Bashaw to kee up the War that he and his Brother who is a Speculating Merc ant a t Tripoly
may be benefited by i t -.
I am told by our Consular Agent a t
Tunis that Mr Beausier has lately contracted with the Bashsw of

I'

!

238 ATAVAl; OPERATIONS. APRILSEPTEMBER 6. 1804
Tripoly to furnish him with 500 Barrels of Gun Powder, besides other
military stores to come from Marseilles - this I think looks rather
hostile than friendly; I understand he intends to land it in that part
of the Regency of Tunis nearest Tripoly to be transported by Land
to avoid our Cruizers If France inclines to act as Mediator - The Emperor must send a
Man from France for that Purpose. I did not suppose that when
France was to act as hlediator, that we were to pay half rt million of
Dollars for the Ransom of Prisoners and a Peace, for if we should
incline to acceed to the Bashaw's demands, we may have Peace
whenever we choose u-ithout the assistance of any other agent than
our Dollars I have borrowed Eiqht Gun & two Mortar Boats from the Neapolitan Government - The Gun boats are in the Port of Syracuse, and
I came here ?esterday to take the Bomb Vessels to join them, and
shall proceed with the u-hole for Tripoly, which town I intend to
bombard & cannonade until1 I can bring the Bashax to reasonable
terms - We continue to keep his Ports, closelv blockaded Tihen I wrote you last from Naples, I expected to hate been off
Tripoly with the Gun boats immediately, but they have required
more repairs than I expected Tunis threatens, but I do not believe will make war against us
while we have a respectable n a r d force in these seas Spain is hostile in her conduct towards us - There are now, in
Tri 01 14 Spanish Ship Carpenters sent from the King's Yards to
b d d gun Boats for the Bashan. - they r e a r the Spansh Cockade,
and I am well informed are regularly paid once a week by the Spanish
Consul - I am told that they went to Tripoly with the Passport of
Mr Pinckney our Minister at Madrid - If so, I fancy ho has been
decieved [LC. EPP, LB, April-Nov. 1804.1
To Thomas Appleton, U. S. Consul, Leghorn, from Captain Edward Preble, U, 6.
Navy

U. S. SHIPConstizu.ti~)n
Messina June 29th 1504

SIR I am honored with your much esteemed favor of the 21n!
Ulto - be asured I value your correspondance too highly to have
neglected writing you from Naples, as I am sorry you suppose.
Many of my friends, no doubt, think the same, and are justified in
the supposition from an unaccountable fabality attending letters
either to, or from me. I have not recieved a letter from the Navy
department but what bears date early than Intelligence of the loss
of the Philadelphia was recieved in the United States, although it is
eight months since that event - . At Naples I applied to the
Neapolitan Government for tbe loan of Six Gun, and two Mortar
boats, and for 6 long battering cannon with Powder Shot & shells
and all the necessary M i l i t a ~and Naval Stores for an attack on
Tripoly with them - this request was immediately, and in a handsome manner complied with, and I am now in possession of the
whole, and sail immediately for Tripoly to commence an attack which
I hope will bring the Bashaw to such terms of Peace as ure shall not
blush to accept of. His Harbour & Coast is at present closely block-

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

239

aded - I left Sight of i t the 14th: Inst: since which I have visited
Tunis His Tunisian Majesty threatens but I do not believe he will declare
war against us while we have a respectable force in these Seas Please to forward the letter for Mr Livingston as soon as possible The Mediation of France through their Consul a t Tripoly will be of
no use, but rather a disadvantage to us, as he is altogether in the
Bashaw's interest
[LC. EPP, LB, April-Nov. 1804.1
Extract from Diary of Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Navy, Commodore of U. S.
Squadron in the Mediterranean, Friday, 29 June 1804

Wind S W a t anchor in Syracuse Harbour, since our arrival
here we have taken on board five months provisions & stores &
filled up all our water Casks, - a t 9 weighed & sailed for Messina,
left the Gun Boats a t Anchor and the Argus ready for sea with orders
to proceed to Xlalta & Convoy over to Tripoly the Vessels with the
cloathing & Stores for the American Prisioners, and to remain a t the
Blocade of tliat Port, [LC. EPP, Dairy, 1803-1804.1
Presumably to Secretsry of the Navy from Captain John Rodgers, U. S. Navy

U. S. FRIGATE
Congress
Hampton roads June SO, 1804
DEARSIR At last I have the pleasure to inform you the Squadron
is ready for Sea, and that we shall sail tomorrow. - The Ships all
loolr extremely well, and I an1 in hopes the manner in which they
will be employ'd, will retract no merit from their appearance; either
in the Eyes of our ow-n Counterymen, or nations less interested.
It is impossible for me to express the conccrn, which I feel for the
Fatc of the Expedition; fccaling as an American, that if we act like
such, in deserl-irig thc confidence our Goverment has deposed in us;
that w e will not only receive the thanlrs of our Country (and command the rt~spectof our Encmys) but deserve its protection I n fine I feel sensible that if our opperations arc complently successful and decisive, we shall command the respect and admiration of all
the Civilized part of the TTorld, but if not successful (u-hich I flatter
myself there is but little fear of) we shall stamp a character derogatory
to the honor of our Country (and ourselves) u~hichages of success
will not complrtely remove. I feel a confidence that I shall always do my duty, so far as my
abilities will admit, in every situation my country may think proper
to honor me with, and I should thinli it unjust if nature had deprived
me of that susceptibility of Heart and Intellcctunl decernment which
alone makes Man superior to the commonality of other Animals;
I n tendering you my most sincere thanks, for the Interest you have
always appear'd to tnke in my Welfare, my ambition will never Know
any full period on this side the Grave, yet believe me i t will never
soar higher than deseruin ly to merit the compleat approbation of such
Men as yourself; and so f'ong as Honor, Virtue, Gratitude and aspiration to glorious actions, shall be deem'd Laudible companions for the
Souls of Men, be assured that the recollection of yourself will ever
prevent my doing wrong -

240 NAVAL OPERATIONS, APRIL-SEPTEMBER 6, 1804
I beg you to present my most dutiful respects to your amiable
Lady, for whose happiness as well as yours, I hope the alwise ruler
of the Universe will continue to be bountiful If it should be my fate never to see you again, and the cause such
as to make my Picture worthy of a Corner in your House, I beg ot
you to accept it as the greatest proof of the high respect, friendshp
and Esteem of your,
[LC. JRP, Letters & Orders, Book A, 1804-1805.1
To Captain Edward Preble, U.S. Navy, from James Simpson, U. S. Consul, Tangier,
Morocco

TANGIER
QOth June 1804. DEARSIR I had the pleasure of writinq you 22* Febr &2atQMay
both in duplicate to guard against miscarriage - but I have not yet
had the satisfaction of hearing from you. The Emperours three Ships have been fitted out & are in readyness
to put to Sea Maimom 30 Guns & 70 Men Commanded by Arraez Sebrah
Maimom 32 Guns 80 Men - - - - - _ - - - - - _ _Arraez
Auwed
Mirboha 14 Guns 50 Men _ _ _ _ _ _ - _ _ _ _ _ _ _ Arraez Lubarez
this is the same Ship he commanded last Cruize You will observe the compliment of Men of all these Vessels are
considerably reduced, which makes it be imagined they may be destined on some special Service, and not to Cruize. Reports hare gone abroad that Muley Soliman wishes to yield one
of these Ships to the Tripolines in lieu of the J4eshowla - if that plan
be pursued I think it very probable she may be left for them a t
Alpers or Tunis. Alcayde Hashash has nothing to do with the Armament of this
year - on the contrary in other respects he has lately felt the Emperours displeasure. JAMES
SIMPSON
Affairs are so far arranged between the Emperour of Germany and
Muley Soliman that these three Ships are provided with Imperial
Passports issued by the Spanish Consul, who has been the Mediator
on this occasion.
[LC. EPP, Vol. 12, June-August 1804.1
Extract from journal of U.8.Brig Argus. Master Commandant Isaac Hull,U.S. Bevy,
commanding, Saturday, 30 June 1804

at 5 Capt Hull with Consul OBrien came onboard with a Sicilian
Gentleman and 2 Servants Passengers At 6 weighed Anchor for
Malta At 3 past 6 the main topsail Tye parted by which accident
T h o W e r r y W" Clark 8: James Wilson fell the latter overboard and
the 2 former on deck badly Wounded made all Sail a t 9 tho9 merry
died of his wounds at 4 AM Committed the body to the deep At 7
boarded an English privateer from Malta on a cruise At 10 Cape
Passora bore N :h E Empd Occv
[NDA photostat.]

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

241

To Captain John Bodgers, U. 8. Navy, commanding U. 6. Frigate Congrw, from
Captain Samuel Barron, U. 6. Navy

U. S. FRIGATE
Presk%nt
Hampton roads July 1. 1804

CIRCULAR

SIR In case of Sepei-ationyou will proceed to Gibraltar, and there
wait the arrival of the Squadron - If circumstances make it absolutely necessary to proceed a loft, you will exercise your judgement in
this case, leaving for me all the information in your power [LC. JRP, Letters & Orders, 1804-1805.1

[l July 1804?]

To Secretary of the Navy from Captain John Bodgers, U. S. Navy

U. S. FRIGATE
Congress
Hampton roads July
SIR, I have the honor to Enclose you a Muster Roll of this Ships
Crew, including every Person, which left Washington in her, with
those shipp'd since, &. a seperate roll of those turn'd over to other
ships & sent to the Hospital at Washington, with such remarks as have
occur'd - Many of the Men (ship'd in Balt?) that stand charged
in the shipping articles with four Months advance, complain of not
receiving a single dollar, Bt no officer that recruited a t that place,
Except Lieut Evans, has produc'd a single Voucher to prove the
contrary hU Nicholson inform'd me that he took receipts for all the Moneys
he advanc'd, but the John Adums has sail'd without his producing
any hi: Gardiner acknowledges, that he never took any receipts, and
has nothing to prove the complaints of a number of men False, or
without Foundation, further than his own Word; MI Gardiners conduct as well as the Surgeons Mate, who attended the rendezvous, I
think highly reprehensible, having Shipp'd a Number of Miserable,
useless unsound wretches, perfectly unqualified for any Service [LC. JRP, Letters & Orders, Rook A, 1804-1805.1
To Secretary of the Navy from Captain John Bodgers, U. S. Navy

U. S. FRIGATE
Congress
H, Roads J u l y 1,1804
SIR, The S are Deck of this ship is so extremely lumberd with
Spars 61 plan!,
that it is impossible to Stow the Launch without
great inconvenience; and as she is an unweild , unservicible Boat that
will not carry a bower Anchor; I have thoug t proper to leave her a t
Norfolk [LC. JRP, Letters & Orders, Book A, 18041805.1

z

To Captain Edward Preble, U. 8. Navy, from Captain Thomas Brigge, B. I?., of
H. B. 116.8. Agfncomt

Agincourt, MALTA,July l a *1804
SIR I take the liberty of sending you a line by Mr Lewis who will
acquaint you how far we have been able to assist him in forwarding
your Dispatches. Still I cannot help expressing to you our regret
a t parting with him as he is an Active Excellent young man, and I
most sincerely hope his passage being delayed will not interfere with

242 NAVAL OPERATIONS, APRIL-SEPTEMBER 6, 1804
any preferment he might otherwise have met with: as every exertion
on h s part was used to facilitate the Service you were pleased to send
him on and he expressed the greatest anxiety to rejoin your Squadron.
Wishing you health & Success against your Enemies the Barbarians,
BRIGGS
Signed THOQ
N B - Mr Thompson Midshipman belonging to your Squadron
availed himself of this Opportunity for Malta in the A.gincourt T B
[LC. EPP, LB, April-Nov. 1804.1
To Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Navy, from Midshipman William Lewis, U. S. Navy

MALTA
July 1Q 1804
SIR I arrived here yesterday in the Agincourt after a passage of
5 weeks from Gibraltar - She Sailed two days after the Constitution
left this place (the 18th March) with Stores on board for the Fleet off
Toulon - Owing to this circumstance we did not arrive at Gibraltar
untill the 5th May. On the 7th May, a brig arrived there 22 days
from Boston - She brought Intelligence of 5 Frigates fitting out for
the Mediterranean Viz, the United Stcltes[*], the President, Constellation, Congress and John Adams - I could only learn that Cap!
J a QBarron Commanded the United States[*]
On the 9th I sent N ? 3 of your dispatches to Cadiz by an American
Gentleman going there, with a letter to Mr Iznardi, and on the 17th
I recieved his answer stating that he had forwarded it by an American
Ship bound to Alexandria in Virginia. The 13th May the True
American (ship) of New York & Brig Harriot of Beverly sailed for
these places - I sent Nq8 1 & 2 with the private letters by those
conveyances - The 22c I recieved several packets by the way of
Lisbon. One is directed to yourself; the others to Cap! Bainbridge
& Lieut t Commt Stewart & Decatur - I believe they are from the
Naval Department I have no other letters except one from Mr
Gavino to yourself but I collected all the Newspapers which fell in
my way according to your Orders - Mr Gadsden who was charged
with your dispatches for Government had a passage of 76 days The Intelligence of the loss of the Philadelphia arrived before him
and I understood had caused Universal Concern tbroughout the
United States - On the 24th May the Agincourt sailed for Gibraltar
with a convoy for this place - We had Easterly winds untill we
made the S W End of Sardinia The Ar.gw came in here this morning - Cap$ Hull advises me
to remain here with your letters untill your arrival from Mcssina I have thus Sir as briefly as possible given an account of my conduct
since leaving the Ship; and I hope you will be pleased to think I
have executed your commands as strictly & speedily as was in my
power [*The United States was not one of Commodore Barron's squadron.]
[LC. EPP, LB, April-Kov. 1804.1
Extract from journal of U. 8. Brig Artus, Haster Commandant Isaac Hull, U. S. Navy,
commanding, Sunday, 1 July 1804

At 3 made the Island of Malta bearin S W b W distt 5 or 6 Leagues
dist' 4 miles set and took in
At 8 the harbour of Malta bore W S
Sail aa Newasav

6

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

243

At midnight came to in the harbour of Malta in 13 PaWater [NDA photostat]
Extract from Diary of Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Navy, Commodore of U. S.
Squadron in the Mediterranean, Sunday, 1 July 1804

a t 1 P M anchored in 24 fathoms hard sandy Bottom in Massina
Roads abreast of the quarantine ground or Lazaretto and moored
with a Stream Cable on shore made fast to a tree, established a
guard Boat to prevent surprize or desertion, the Nautilius & Enterprize here, [LC. EPP, Diary, 1803-1 804.1
Extract from journal of William Eaton, U.S. Navy Agent for the Barbary Regencies,
from 1 July to 5 July 1804

July 1. [On board U. S. Frigate P~esiden.t.1 The Commodore embarked for sea [from Ca,pe Henry] 2'3 Becalmed.
36 5. a. m. weighed - Becalmed came to at 8. a. m.
4. 4. a. m. ot under way - Becalmed a t 12. Came to within
Cape enry 5. Put to sea. Fair wind Nothing remarkable on this passage except the multitudes of
black skins and black coats, negroes and methodist preachers, which infest this state; and which will revolutionize it -

Pr

[H. E. Huntington L&AG. EA 206.1
Extract from journal of U. S. Frigate John Adorns, Master Commandant Isaac
Chauncey, U. S. Navy, commanding, Sunday, 1 July 1804

I h d that the Ship steers extremely bad owing I presume to her
being so very deep in the Water. - Ends with strong Gales and
hazy Weather. - Wind S. W.
[LC. EPP, Journal, June to 6 August 1804.1
To James Maury, U. S. Consul, Liverpool, England, from Secretary of State

DEPARTMENT
OF STATE
Jdy 2'3 1804.
SIR. I have received your letter of the 4Q May last. By a law

passed during the last session of Congress, which will be transmitted
to you as soon as the volume is printed, a naturalised Citizen returning
to the Country from which he originated, and residing there a pear is
disqualified to hold a registered Vessel. But this as well as the position stated in m circular of the 1" of October do not affect the case
you put for so ution respecting itinerant or temporarily resident
Citizens, holding as American property Vessels not registered. In
fact as the laws now stand it is a mere question of National character;
and whenever you can satisfy yourself of an individual being bona
fide a Citizen, it follows that you ought to attest his property as
such; leaving it to those, who are so disposed, to contest in any particular case the relation existing between the asserted owner and the
Vessel as affected by his residence in a belligerent Country.

7

[N.4. SDA. Despatches to Consuls, Oct. 1800-Feb. 1817.1

244 NAVAL OPERATIONS, APRILSEPTE21IBER 6, 1804
Extract from journal of U.S. Brig Argus, Master CommandantIsaac Hull, U.S. Navy,
commanding, Monday, 2 July 1804

These 24 hours Commence with moderate breezes Obtained
Pratique At 8 Consul OBrien with the Sicilian Gentleman went on Shore
a t 10 Weighed Anchor and Warped up the harbour [of hiialta] at
12 brought too and moored ship [NDA photostat.]
Extract from Diary of Captain Edward Preble, U. 6. Navy, Commodore of U. S.
Squadron in the Mediterranean, Monday, 2 July 1804

Wind East, received a complimentary visit from the General of
Marines and from the Governor t,hrough his aid de Camp, I find
one of the Bomb Vessels loaned us by the King of Naples nearly ready
for sea, the other is not yet launched, but will be in a few days 9
sick & 7 convalescent is Reported, [LC. EPP, Dairy, 1803-1804.1
To William Wass Langford, British Consul General, Tripoli, from Sir Alexander
John Ball, Governor of Malta

MALTA,
$4 July 1804
SIR, I hare the honor to inclose a Bill of Lading for One hundred
and twenty five (125) Doublooms shipped on board the English
Bombard called the Eliza, Captain Francis Gilio to your address, by
order of Commodore Preble, Commander of the United States
Squadron for the use of Captain Bainbridge, and the unfortunate
American Prisoners in Tripoly.
Inclosed is a letter from the Commodore to you which I suppose
expresses his wish upon this subject, and I likewise forward a letter
to your address which having been brought with a number of others
directed to me was inadvertently opened but not read The Admiralty, London, NDA photostat.]

[3 July 18041
Concerning American Ship Eliza

SHIPPED, b y the Grace o j God, in good Order and well Conditioned, b y Messrg John Ross & C? for His Excellency Sir
alexander Ball Baronet &cQn and u p o n the good S h i p called the ELIZAwhereof i s &faster, under God, for this present
Voyage, francq Gilio - and now riding at anchor in the harbour of Maltn and b y God's Grace, bound for Tripoly to
8aU.

W. W. L ~ N G F O R DEsqu!

I

English Consul
a Sealed Bag Containing One hundred & twenty five Spanish Dubboons in Gold Tripoly
being marked and numbered a s i n the margin, and are to be delivered in the like good Order and well Conditioned, at
the aforesaid Port of Tripoly - (the Act of God, the King's Enemies, Fire and dl and every other Dangers and
Accidents o the Seas, Ricers, and A'avigation, of whatever Nature and K i n d soever ezcepted) unto Wm W . Langford
Esqu?Eng ish Consul - or to his Assigns, he or they paying Freight for the said Qoods grntus - with Primage and
Average accustomed. I n Witness whereof the hlnsfer or Purser of the said S h i p huth aflrrned to three Bills of Lading,
all o this Tenor and Date; the one of which three Bills being accomplished, the other two to stand void. And so God
aen the good Ship to her desired Port in Safety. A m e n . Dated in Malta 3. July 1804
Per Pad:
Francesco Gilio 10 Ignazio Cammilleri suo Scriuano

1

d'

[Maine HS.

NDA photostat.]

[Translation: For the Master Francesco Gilio, I Ignazio Cammilleri his Mate]

246 NAVAL OPERATIONS, APRIL-SEPTEMBER 6. 1804
[3 July 18041
Stores and Provisions Shipped on board the Eliza

Shipped by the Grace of God in good Order and well conditioned by

Wm Higgins American Xaval Agent, in & upon the good ship called
the Eliza whereof is master under God for this present Voyage Franc?

Gilio, & now riding at Anchor in the Harbour of Malta, & by God's
grace bound for the Squadron of the United States under the Command of Commodore Preble off Tripoly. The oods or Stores as
particularized on the back hereof being American roperty & shipped
for the use of said Squadron, being marked & numbered as in the
Mar,&; and are to be delivered in the like good Order & well conditioned to commodore Preble (the Acts of God, the Kings enemies,
Fire and all and Every other Dangers & Accidents of the Seas, Rivers
& Navigation of whatever nature & Kind soever excepted unto [space]
or his Assigns, he, or they paying frei ht for the said Goods nothing,
(the Vessel being the property of the . S. of America), with primage
& average accustomed - In Witness mereof the Master or Purser
of the Said Ship hath a h e d to three bills of lading, One of which
bills being accomplished, the other two to stand Void; And so God
Send the good Ship to her desired Port in Safety. Amen (Signed) Cross of X Cap: GIGLIO
Endorsed on the back as follows
15 Baskets fruit & Vegetables
2 Sacks Melons
8 barrels contg 24 dozflorters
Forty Sheep
20 Cantars Onions
100 bundles Hay
half a Salm of barley
20 pesati of PTood or about 103 English Cw! &
133 Iron bound Puncheons full of Water.
[LC. EPP, Order Book, May 1803-June 1805.j

i

6

Extract from journal of U. S. Frigate Congrus. Captain John Rodgers, U. S. Navy,
commanding, Tuesday, 3 July 1804

+

[At Hampton Roads, 1 and 2 July 1804.1 A. M. at past 4 the
commodore made The Signal Pi'?1205, at +past 5 weighed And made
sail the President Essez and Constellation in company.
At 6 light airs inclining to calm came too with our Larb'J bower in
4 less 6 fathmewater Pr Signal old point comfort bearing N E 3 N
Distance 4 miles
[USNA.]
Extract from Diary of Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Navy, Commodore of U. 6.
Squadron in the Mediterranean, Tuesday, 3 July 1804

Wind N E Nautilus & Enterprize in company, at 8 A M a strong
breeze from N B E, waiting for the Bomb Vessels, [LC. EPP, Diary, 1803-1804.1

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

247

To Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Navy, from John Gavino, U. S. Consul, Gibraltar

GIBRALTAR
4th J u l y 1804
DEARSIR. I have none of your favors since my last pr duplicate
under 4th UltQ One Via Leghorn, the other pr Palemo covering
dispatches from Consul Simpson Yesterday the [American] Schooner John Adums Cap* Rarnsdel
from Philadelphia touched into this bay and delivered the Health
Office boat a packet for me from the Navy dept & went immediately
without; Sailing for Leghorn - The Honb!Gec? of the Navy
inclosed me triplicate letters to be forwarded you; One by Caps Hull,
the other two by different conveyances. Wherefore, I now enclose
you One, by Post Via Leghorn, having no Sea conveyance for any
Port in Italy, or the Islands - I t informs you of four frigates coming
to reinforce you, besides the J o h n A d a m s armed en flute with Provisions - We have nothing new, nor have I heard any thing as yet
from Mackenzie & Glennie regarding the Bill affairs P. S. TWOPortuguese Vessels of the line are gone to cruize in
the Mediterranean - Herewith a dispatch from Consul Simpson A convoy of Victuallers & Store Ships have just arrived from England
for this place and Malta [LC.

EPP, LB, April-Nov. 1804.1

Extract from journal of U. S. Brig Argus. Master Commandant Isaac Hull,U.S. Navy,
commandmg, Wednesday, 4 July 1804

[Malta] Bt 5 P, M, Dan! Williams Seam? deserted from the
launch When on Duty at 6 Warped out from our moorings Weighed
Anchor and stood out under easy Sail at 8 Calm got out the Sweeps
and sent the Jolly boat arid barge to Assist the Spanish Ketch which
we had taken under Convoy with Cloathing &c for the Prisoners in
Tripoli At 2 AM the boats returned hoisted them At 6 AM saw
3 Strange sail took the Ketch in tow At Meridian fine Wr Variously
Empa
[NDA photostat.]
Extract from journal of U. S. Frigate Congress, Captain John Rodgers, U. S. Navy,
commanding, Wednesday, 4 July 1804

A. M. commences with hazey weather
At 4 past 3 the commodore made The Signal N Q 1205 a t past 3
Weighed and made sail the President Essex and ConsteUatzon in
company.
a t 3 past 7 old point comfort light bore west Distance 8 Miles ca e
Henry Light E. b S. Distance 4 leagues and cape Charles N E b
Distance 7 Leagues a t 10 calm Let go our larbe bower anchor in 74
Fathoms water cape Henry bearing S S E 5 Miles Wind E S. E.

b

[USNA]

248 2LTAVA.L OPERATIONS, APRIL-SEPTEMBER 6, 1804
Extract from Diary of Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Navy, Commodore of U. S.
Squadron in the Mediterranean, Wednesday, 4 July 1804

Wind N E, at Anchor in Messina, Enterprize & Nautilus in
company, sent [a boat] and an Officer with a party of men to the
arsenal to bring off Shells for the Bomb Vessels, one of those Vessels
got under way and exercised by throughing three undischarged shells
their f i s t range appeared to be about 1+mile with Neapolitan Powder
which is not so strong by one third as ours, each of the bomb Vessels
carries a 14 In Brass mortar cast in a solid brass Bed, - elevation of
4 5 O from a Horizontal plan on which the Bed slides & recoils, - the
Gun Boats carry each a 26 pounder forward sliding on a horizontal
plan when used in action, but when wanted to be secured in Bad
weather, it slides into the Hold on an inclined plan & the Hatches are
secured over it, This day being the anniversary of American Independence, I ordered a salute of 13 Guns to be fied in honor of that
great event, [LC. EPP, Diary, 1803-1804.1
To Sailing Master John P. Lovell, U. S. Navy, Washington, D. C., from Secretary
of the Navy

NAVY
D E ~5?July 1804 You will take the command of Gun Boat N? 1, and give every requisite attention to her equipment.
You will in due season receive from me such further instructio~lsas
may be deemed expedient. [NDA. OSW, Vol. 6, 1802-1805.1
To James Leander Cathcart, Leghorn, from Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Navy

UNITED
STATESFRIGATE
Constdution

Harbor of Messina 6@ J u l y 1804
DEARSIR,I arrived here the la!instant, and received your letter
of the l l t h LTlt? with its several enclosures. I know not what reason
you hsve to suppose that my sentiments of your exertions in favor
of the Prisioners at Tripoli have altered. I was somewhat cautious
in writing the Eleceipt I gave for the clothing: and you well know
that an invoice must be necessary to enable the P-mers to make
their charges against the people - But my sentiments of your
humane exertions are still the same. I enclose you a Copy of my
letter to General Acton, and his answer respecting the Gun Boats
&c"c+,
I am sensible however that your exertions were well intended, and that they had a good effect Mr Beaussier is a Friend of the Bashaw of Tripoly's, but no friend
I sent Mr Obrien on shore a t Tripoli the 14th Ult? to
of ours
procure permission to land clothing and stores for the Prisioners but
could not obtain it: He was not permitted to see the risioners or,
either of the Consuls - I authorised him to offer the ashaw two
hundred Dollars for each of the prisioners, and to say that I would not
give a Cent for peace or, Tribute - these terms he refused and I
am now determined to beat him into better humour: The Mortar
boats were completed yesterday, and I sail with them tomorrow
morning - the Gun boats join me off S acuse - I have 700 Bomb
Shells and plenty of shot to amuse the ashaw with -

-.

b

F

GUNBOAT ACTION OFF TRIPOLI.

3 AUGUST 1804.

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

249

No re-inforcement has yet arrived from America as expected, I
however think with you that we shall succeed, and the less force we
have the more honor I have recg your lans of the Gun & Mortar Boats and thank you
for them, I t is ro able I can accomodate you with a assage home
in some public F essel in the Autumn if your business c retain you till
then.
I h a m sent a small Vessel from Malta with all the clothing you
rorided, and a quantity of Stores $c+consigned to Sidi Mehomed
b ~ h i e s as
, be wrote me that I might send them in a Neutral Vessel

P

[Boston PL.

NDA photostat.]

TO Frederick Degen & Co., Leghorn*, from Captain Edwatd Preble, U. S. Navy

UNITEDSTATESSHIPConstitution
Messina July 6th 1804

GENTLEMEN,
I arrived here a few days since from the BIockade
to take sway the Bomb Vessels which are now ready; tomorrow I sail
again for Tripoly to commence an attack on the Town and Harbor,
and I hope in my next communication to acquaint you of Our Success - I beg you to do me the favor to forward the Packet which
accompanies this by the first Vessel that sails direct for America,
exceptin however the vessel of hfc Gorham's which is now here, and
goes to aples in a few days, as he has a duplicate of the same I beg you to accept my best wishes for your health 8: happiness and
am respectf uily Gentlemen

I$

[*Degen, Purviance & Co., were U. S. Agents in Leghorn, and Frederick Degen
waa U. S. Agent in Naples.]
[LC. EPP, LB, April-Xov. 1804.1
Extract from log book of U. 8. Brig Argus, 18 Guns, presumably kept by Sailing
Xaster Garnuel B. Brooke, U. S. Navy, Master Commandant Isaac Hull, lJ. S.
Navy, commanding, Thursday, 6 July 1804

Commences with mode Breezes & Pleasent IT' a Sail in sight on
the lee bow, cast off the Ketch bore away made sail in chace, a t %
past 2 came up with her, she proved a Ragusan Brig from Smyrna
to Leghorn with a Cargo of 180,000 Dollars filled away for the
Ketch, a t 10 saw a sail to windward, tacked and made sail in chace,
fired a Gun at her backed the main topsail & lowered down the
Jolly boat, she proved a Regusan, from Smyrna bound to Marsailles,
permitted her to pass, a t 5 past 7 AM filled aw8y to the S W, saw
the Ketch to Leward, bore away and took her in tow, set the Staysails, at % past 9 in Royals, and Top Gall1 Staysail
At Meridian fine Wr Empd as Necessary LatP. ObsO 3 3 O 39' N.
[LC. EPP, Argua, 1804.1

Extract from journal of U. 6. Frigate Congnss, Captain John Rodgers, U. S. Navy,
commending, Thursday, 6 July 1804

P M pleasant breezes and clear weather A. M. DQW' a t 4 the
commodore Made the Signal N Q1205 a t past 4 weighd and made
a i l the Presi&ent Essez and ConsteIEaiwn in comp? Made and shortened
sail occasionally

250 NAVAL OPERATIONS, APRIL-SEPTEMBER 6, 1804
At % past 6 discharged the pilot cape Henry Light house. bearing
S W % W Distance 3 miles
At 7 Cape Henry bore West 3 Leagues Distance From which I take
my departure it being I n latitude 36' 57' N Longitude 75' 56' W
[En route to the Mediterranean, in company with the above ships, Maderia
was sighted 28 July 1804.1
[USNA.]
Extract from journal of William Eaton, U. S. Navy Agent for the Barbary Regencies,
from 5 July to 12 August 1804

[On board the U. S. Frigate President.] From July 5 , the day of
leaving cape Henry, to the 21. day we made Pico the winds were
constantly strong and fair from the Soutbwest; & from this date till
making cape Spartel on the 12. August they were as constantly
strong and contrary; from the East, varying a little northerly and
southerly - The first 15. daps we considered our passage more than
two thirds made; the other thlrd was gained with dif3culty in 21 days.
During the whole passage the weather was extremely fine; not a
day but a ship's barge might have lived at sea without danger [H. E. Huntington L&AG, EA 206.1
To Josiah Fox from Secretary of the Navy

NAV.D E PJuly
~ 6th 1804
Mr JOSIAH
FOX
Naz~alConstructor,
I intend to build a t this Place under your Superintendance a Brig of
the following Dimensions Viz 64 feet Keel for Tonnage
30 feet Beam Moulded Breadth
13%feet Hold
Agreeably to the Model furnished by yourself with such improvements as we may from time to time Suggest It is only necessary to say to you that we wish to have this Brig
built of the best materials and in the shortest Practicable period You will therefore take immediate measures for procuring the
Timber and geting the different artificers and Workman together
[NDA. GLB, Vol. 7, 1803-1805.1

[6 July 18041
To Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Navy, from Lieutenant Samuel Elbert, U. S. Navy

SIR In consequence of some of my friends dineing a t our Table
on the fourth of July I drank more Wine than I otherwise should
have done, and their being an alteration in the Watches that night
did not recolect of promissing to stand the first Watch This is the first time sir that you have had reason to be displeased
withe me on this head therefore I beg you will look over it, promissing
you it shall be the last
Constitution JULY
6 9 1804
[LC. EPP, Vol. 12, June-August 1804.1

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

25 1

To Lieutenant Samuel Elbert, U. 6. Navy, from Captain Edward Preble, U. 6. Navy

Constitution JULY 6th 1804
SIR The Charge of the ship & responsibility for whatever may take
place resting with you when in Command of a Watch, and the General
printed instructions absolutely forbidding the deck ever to be left
without a Lieutl &"" Should impress your mind strongly with the
imp[r]opriety of being absent when i t is your tour of duty - The
Apology you have made for your neglect the 4th is however satisfactory - You will therefore return to your duty
[LC. EPP, Order Book, M a y 1803-June 1805.1
Presumably to Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Navy, from Monsieur Beaussier,
French Charge dlAffaires, Tripoli

TRIPOLY
of BARBARY
17 Messidor Year 16.
6 July 1804 -

SIR By the arrival this morning of the English Bombard Bearer
of the Necessaries for the Prisoners I received the letter which you
have done me the honor to write under date the 27 last Month.
I do not h o w to what nor to whom to attribute the prejudices
which hare been given to you against me they appear so deeply
rooted that it would be in vain to attempt doing them away. - Your
harsh and disobliging language towards the Agent of a respectable
Nation have filled me with wonder, not having neglected any thing
within my power to induce the Reagency to listen to reasonable
proposals The Offer which has been made by Air OBrien and which has been
renewed thro' CaptQBainbridge is too extravagant to be listened to
unless you put yourself in a situation to distress very sensibly this
town and its Inhabitants and in this case I ought to advert to you
that in all probability the Prisol~erswill, for greater precaution, be
sent into the Interior
You will have perceived by my letter of the 3 June, via Tunis, that
I had not either time to see hi: OBrien or to reply to you in consequence of his p[r]ecipitate return on board - I wrote you immediately
after the recei t of yours, but the landing of the Necessaries not
having taken p ace I could not forward my reply.
Whatever may be your Error Commodore I shall nevertheless continue my endeavours to find out, and to create oppertunities of being
of service directly or indirectly to your unfortunate Countrymen,
I have engaged the Pacha to permit that the Necessaries be deposited
in the American Consular house of which the key has been given to
Mr Spence who will dispose of the same according as CaptQ Bainbridge may direct him
I owe you many thanks for liberating u-ithout loss of time in Malta
the Legurien Prize, french Property - I did not t h i ~ kit necessary
to make mention neither in my letter nor in my Certificate of the
1650 Spanish Dollars which was the Amount of the Cargo restored,
that in realit never existed, had been sold and belonged to the same
Pro rietors, ut never to Tripoleene Sub'ects, nor ersons resident
in 'fnPo4 I cannot think that these h s t woul have incurred
Confiscation under such circumstance - It would have been more
agreeable that the Officer Commanding the Blockade had not carried
the Vessel to an Enemias Port when the Simulation might have
discovered.

?

c

B

252 NAVAL OPERATIONS, APRILSEPTEMBER 6, 1804
The Pacha has sent from his Service Sixty Turkish Soldiers, he has
received the balance of the 80,000 Dollars agreed to be paid him by
Admiral De Minter as likewise the two Annuities of 5,000 Dollars
each - he expects daily from Algiers Capidge Bachi, Officer of Consideration sent by the Grand Signor to confirm him in his title of
Pacha, which is renewed every five Pears, it is likely he will come by
Sea I beg you will accept the homage of my high Consideration &ca (Signed) BEAUSSIER
&rgd dlAffaires di His Majesty
the Emperor of the french
A true translation Malta 20 July 1804
W F Higgins
[LC. EPP, Vol. 12, June-August 1804.1
Extract from journal of U. S. Brig Argus, Master Commandant Isaac Hull,U.6. Navy,
commanding, Friday, 6 July 1804

the Ketch in tow saw a sail on our lee bow cast off the Ketch made
Sail in Chace at 7 backed the main topsail Spoke the U. S. Brig
Scourge Capt Dent Came on board he reto at 9 P. h1.
At 7 AM Capts Smith & Dent came on board at 8 Capt' Hull Smith
and Dent went on board the Syren Tripoli bore SbE distt 10 or 11
miles At Meridian fine Wr Emp* as Necessary
[KDA photostat.]
Extract from Diary of Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Bavy, Commodore of U. 6.
Squadron in the Mediterranean, Friday, 6 July 1804

Wind N & E and pleasant weather, took on board two 9 inch
howitzers 100 shells & 100 Rounds of grape shott for the same, borrowed
from the Neapolitm Government, took off several spare yards,
Anchors &c for the Boats the Enterprize sailed for Syracuse, [LC. EPP, Diary, 1803-1804.1
Extract from journal of Midshipman F. Cornelius deKrafft, U. S. Bavy, in U. 6. Brig
Siren of 18 guns, Master Commandant Charles Stewart, U. 6. Navy, commanding,
Friday, 6 July 1804

Throughout those 24 hours light airs, the Vixen in co: At 4 Lt
Stewart went in the Launch &- exercis'd the men. At 6 the launch
return'd hoisted in the boats. At 4 hoisted out the boats.
Midnight light airs & pleas; X past 4 discover'd 3 sail to leward
call'd all hands & made sail in chace, hove out a si a1 for the Vixen
to Chace a Ketch in the S E. At 6 made the signaEf the day which
was answer'd by 1 of the strange sails.
past 6 spoke the chace,
prov'd to be the Argus & Scourge. Meridian lying bye t,he Scourge & Argus to windward; the Vixen
in chase of the Ketch
Lying Off & on Shore abrea[s]t Tripoli. Latt: Obs: 33" 15' N.
[NDA.]

253

WARS ?T71TH BARBARY POWERS
To Archibald S. Bullock, Savannah, Georgia, from Secretary of the Navy

NAV.D E PJuly
~ 7'Q 1804
The practice of other nations in adapting the use of Gun Boats as a
means of Defence to Sea ports to ether with the opinion of their
efficacy held by professional men as induced the Government of
the United States to make the Experiment in our own Country.
Directions have accordingly been issued to agents at different places
for this purpose and copies of the enclosed draft forwarded with
such directions.
You will take immediate measures for Building at Savannah a Gun
Boat agreeably to the draft which you will herewith receive, of the
most durable materials that can be procured and of materials so prepared as to ensure this object - Different Kinds of Timber may be
required for different parts of the Boat: on this point you d l consult
with persons qualified to rkt.$ge advise You will Build by contract - Be careful that the person to whom
you give the preference be qualified to execute his contract perfectly
both with respect to Workmanship and Materials I n decidin your
Choice you will not be so much governed by a regard to the owest
terms that may be offered as by the capability of the Contractor to
fulfil his engagements - At the same time you will bear in mind that
throughout this Business every attention must be paid that no unnecessary expence whatever be incurred.
I t is presumed that you will meet with no difficulty in contracting
with a person to undertake the Business altogether - But Should
you meet with difficulties, you must then procure the materials
yourself and appoint a person to Superintend the Work - In Case
you are compelled to adopt this method, let your Superintendant be
qualified for the Duty - as the faithful execution of the Work will
in a great measure depend upon him. I request that you will be
particularly careful to select a man upon whom in this respect an
entire reliance may be had The Draft now sent must be closely adhered to and as the instructions by Mr Fox which accompany the draft are very plain and particular no misconception I presume can take place and no alteration
must be made
Instructions for Rigging and Equipment will be forwarded to you
in time Make your requisitions upon me for monies as you may want i t
and let an estimate of the cost as near as you can ascertain it accompany your first requisition Let me hear from you immediately upon this subject and let me
know from time to time the progress you may be making in the
execution of these instructions I have already informed you that Orders have been given a t other
Seaports for Gun Boats to be built upon the draft enclosed to you.
I indulge a hope that the one committed to your direction will
not be inferior in any Respect to those which may be built under
the direction of other agents The same to Wm Smith Senr Charleston SC
John Beekman New York
20 July 1804 George Harrison Phil*
24 "
" John Stricker Baltimore

%

f

254 NAVAL OPERATIONS. APRIL-SEPTEMBER 6. 180.4
20 July 1804 Sam1 Brown, Boston
27Q " " Woodbury Langdon Portsmouth [N. H.]

* * *

[NDA. GLB, Vol. 7,

1803-1805.1
(7 July 18041

To Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Navy, from Master Commandant Charles Etewart,
U. S. Navy

Syren Off TRIPOLY
8th July 1804
SIR Yesterday morning at day break a large Galliot was discovered
standing in for Tripoly: Chace was immediately given by the Argus,
Vixen, Scourge & Syren with a fine breeze from North: they put
immediately before the wind and stood for the shore At 5 30
I made the Signal for the Scourge to haul her wind - At 6 the wind
left us, then about gun shot from the chase which we Observed them
hauling on shore: Several shot were fired, but without producing any
effect, and they continued unlading her I then made the Signal for
Armed boats, and immediately dispatched the Syrens launch with a
12Lb Carronade, and barge with a heavy swivel under the command
of Lt Caldwell & Mr Dorsey Midshipman who advanced with the
Greatest Expedition & Spirit to the reef where they both grounded
and were momentarily exposod to a severe fire from the Enemy
(who were posted in great numbers behind the rocks and ridges of
Sand hills) however, they soon extricated themselves & took a position
from whence they kept up a brisk fire with the Caronade & Swivel
until1 the schooner Vixen by the Assistance of some boats towing &
her Sweeps gained a position to cover them.
The Rocks formed too Strong a breast work to admit of the Enemy's
being Dislodged, but from the fire of the Vixen & boats the Vessel
was cut to pieces - Seeing nothing farther could be effected I made
the Signal of recall that the boats might return to tow off their respective Ships I feel a particular degree of satisfaction in announcing to you, Sir,
the Grwt bravery and Exertions displayed by the Officers and men
employed in the boats & entertain no doubt but they would have
brought off the Vessel had they not been prevented by the reef on
which the Enemy had hauled her and on which our boats pounded,
notwithstanding the superior numbers of the Enemy (at least 1000
Men) and the Strong positions they had taken - Enclosed you have
a return of the killed & wounded on our side, but the Enemy must
have suffered severely from their great Numbers
(Signed) C H ASTEWART
~
P. S. They ran the Vessel on shore about 9 Miles to the Westward
of Tripoly abreast of the Second Tower

"

RETURN O F KILLED & WOUNDED EMPLOYED-IN

THE-BOATS 7TH JULY 1804

killed - Sirens launch
William Williams, Marine,
Thomas Riveness - D Q Wounded - D Q barge
- D Q launch
Samuel Henzie
- DQ DQ
DQ
- do
do
William Cooper - DP
[LC. EPP,LB, April-Nov. 1804.1

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS
To Captain Edward

255

Preble, U. 6. Navy, from William Wass Langford, British
Consul General, Tripoli

TRIPOLIin the West July Yth 1804
SIR On the receipt of your letter of the 39 inst I dispatched my
Drogerman to the Castle to inform the Bashaw that the Cargo of the
Vessel Just arrived consisted of Clothing &c &c for the use of the
American Prisoners; and further to say that I should be much obliged
to His Highness for His permission that the same should be immediately delivered to CaptQBainbridge. - I was much surprised, soon
after this step had been taken, to learn that Mr Higgins had consigned
the Cargo to Sidi Mahomet Dghize, a circumstance that, had the
Bashaw denied my request, would have prevented me the pleasure of
complying with your wishes in taking the same under my protection Enclosed I beg to transmit You a receipt of Consul Nissen's for the
Cash I delivered to Him, (& which I received from the Master of the
EZiza Bombard), as also Capt? Bainbridge's note relative to the
Articles I brought with me, whose directions expressed therein were
immediately observed. - I t is with concern that I inform You that
CaptWainbridge & His Officers are kept close Prisoners, & that it is
probable I may not be allowed to visit Him or to have the pleasure
of seenin Him at my House. The d e n whom I daily meet in the streets complain heavily of
bad living & hard work. Beleive me, Sir, I am ever ready a t the call of humanity; & on that
s
to assure YOUat Malta that it would at
account alone I ~ 7 a induced
all times afford me pleasure to alleviate the unfortunate situation of
your Brother Officers & Countrymen in this place by shewing them
every attention in m power; & I again beg to repeat that assurance,
& have the honor to e Sir,
your most Obedient Humble Servant
WILLIAMWASSLANGFORD
[LC. EPP, Vol. 12, June-August 1804.1

g

To Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Navy, from Captain William Bainbridge, U. 6.
Naw

TRIPOLY
- BARBARY
7th July 1804
DEARSIR Your favors, duplicates of the 12th Ulto: and your
last letter without date this moment reached me, the reception of
which gave me much pleasure as I had not heard from you since the
presume will be delivered as
27th March - The Cloathing
requested in your letter, to Sidi Mohammed DGhies minister of foreign
affairs to his Excellenc the Bashaw of Tripoly, to whose politeness
Myself and Officers fee much indebted. Please to send the Invoice
of all the Articles, that the Purser may be enabled to make the respective char es: We have not yet recieved the Invoice of the b t
Articles sent
MI Higgins The want of those prices greatly deranges the Pursers accounts, particularly in cases of loss of AcctQ
which may take place, and by having the charges he would be enabled
to close each Officers Acct Monthly, and place them in a Depot Excuse this much on Invoices - I t is to request your reminding Mr
Hig ' s of what I have in Several letters done without effect d?~ulis's Account was sent you in the letter advising the same,
but, as our letters recieve an Overhauling before they can clear out
from the Custom house here, I
ect it was mislaid - I will make it
out again, and forward it by this onveyance -

f

$

7

256 hTAVAL OPERATIONS, APRIL-SEPTEMBER 6 , 1804
I left a Uniform Coat with M' Pulis to have the Button holes
Worked: I wish you would recieve it from him: I t is a handsome
Cut Coat & I believe it will fit you: If so, please use it as your own:
for God only knows when I shall have an Occasion to appear in full
Unif o m .
There has been no changes in Our Situation since my letters of the
4th, 14th, & 22* Ulto.
Secret Communication under same date - [Ttlritben in lime juice.]
Dr SIR- In my letter of the 4th Inst. I informed you that an attempt
had been made to escape by Seizing a Merchant Vessel's boat in the
Harbour, but it was found to be impracticable to get from our Prison
undiscovered: We are so closely watched that the most daring attempt
cannot avail any thing, you need not therefore send a boat for us I have recieved no letters from Tunis or any since the 29th March
before this day; the letters which h4r OBrien brought were delivered me
but none from you or Col? Lear - there was none for any of my
OfEcers - \To have recieved no news from America since our unfortunate Captivity - I cannot account for the Silence of my friends You do not mention in your letters, whether you have recieved dispatches from Government: I presume you have I hope you will make Tripoly feel the Effects of your preparations.
Until she does I believe that the Bashaw will not accept of the terms
offered - I shall wait on the Minister, but I expect without effect The bribe should come through a negotiator sent here and not from
me: As I cannot let the Minister into the secret of the Juice I cannot
shew him any authority, and I am convinced he will not treat in any
manner with me being a prisoner He feels his Consequence - I
wish you had mentioned in Lime Juice whether the force mentioned
in your public writing is really coming or not. In my letter of the
14th Inst. I gave you my opinion that firing Shells into this town, if it
was only done in the night would drive all the inhabitants out into
the Country where there are not habitations to receive them, and by
continuing to heave them from time to time for a month or two, the
distress that the People would be in by being kept out of the town
would make them clamorous, and would have a tendency to incline
the Bashaw to come to moderate terms - He must certainly feel
the Effects of the War before he will accept any thing like the Sum
mentioned
I hope to God that you will have it in your Power to bring him to
moderate terms -You say that "I think you ought not to suffer my
"passion to injure the friendship between us, by prematurely censuring
"my friend" - I have never Entertained a thought that you was
not doing every thing in your power for us; but must certainly say
that I have been: and shall continue to be always anxious to hear
from you, but whenever I do not, I shall attribute it to other causes
than neglect - I hope that Mr. Higgins will not send us anything
from Malta with out we demand it: We wish to live cheap. as m fact
we have lost all relish for dainties except books which we are supplied
with - Our prison represents a College of Students - Your triangles would fly a long time before we would see them - I have seen
the Sea four times in 5 Months - Close kept under lock & key.
All honor attend you, prays
signed W B
[LC. EPP, Vol. 12, June-August 1804.1

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

257

Extract from journal of U. 8. Brig Argus, Master Commandant Laac Hull, U.8. Bavg,
commanding, Saturday, 7 July 1804

Syen and Seourge in Company at 4 Tk@Ship to the Northwe and
Westward Tripoli bore S j4 W a t j4 past 9 Sounded in 50 fathoms
water the Scourge made Sigl N Q 440 made Sail in Chace a t 8 saw a
Latteen boat standing in for the land at 8 she ran on Shore but found
it impossible to get her off it being Calm the boats took the Vixen in
tow and towed her within gun shot of her fired Several shot at her and
Stood off Employd as Necessary
[NDA photostat.]
Extract from log book kept by Sailing Master Nathaniel Baraden, U. S. Bavy, on
board U. 8. Frigate Condffution,Saturday, 7 July 1804

Moderate breezes from N N E. We are necessarily detained a t
Messina in fitting out the two bomb Ketches Nautilw in company Recieved this Afternoon from the Ordnance, ten small brass carriage guns
with all the Apparatus belonging to them - Also some cannisters
of shot - This afternoon a party of Officers & men were sent from
the Constitution to the Bombards to assist in warping them off and to
navigate them to Saragosa where they are to join our Squadron of
Gun boats.
Deserted from the cutter while on duty John Fitzgerald & Ja@
Eaton Seamen - A. M. Employed in supplying the Bombards with
provisions & in working up Junk Rec'd ten bbls Powder - Surgeons
report 5 sick and seven convalescent Noon moderate breezes from N N E.
[LC. EPP, Log Constitution, 1803-1804.1
Extract from journal of Midshipman F. Cornelius deXrafft, U. 6.Navy, in U. S. Brig
Stren of 18 guns, Master Cornmandent Charlee Stewart, U. S. Navy, commanding,
Saturday, 7 July 1804

Gentle breezes & pleasant standing off & on shore under easy sail,
the Argw, Scourge & Vixen in Company. Tripoli bearing South
6 miles distt. At 5 back'd the main topsail & sent the launch to
exercise. At 7 fiU'd away to the N@hoisted in the boats. At j4 past 5
saw a small sail close in shore, call'd all hands & made sail in chace.
At 6 arm'd the boats & sent them after her, (under the command of
Lt Caldwell & JnQDorsey) % past 6 saw the Argus's boats standing in
for the shore. At 10 the Launch commenc'd a brisk fire on the
Inhabitants ashore, which was return'd by them, they being very
numerous & conceal'd behind the rocks, & a number in the sail keep'
(with the rest of turks) a constant fire. j4 past 10 sent the cutter m
amunition for our boats. At 11 seeing the Inhabitants increasing
very fast, made signil for our boats to return on board, finding it was
impossible to destroy the vessel. At % past 11 the boats return'd
with 4 marines wounded. At Meridian 1 of the wounded marines b
the name of Wg Williams died of his wound which was in his s h o d
der. Marines Wounded
Thomp Rivenness
Ws Cooper
Sam1 Henry
W Williams

3

[NDA.]

258 NAVAL OPERATIONS, APRIL-SEPTEMBER 6,

1804

To Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Navy, from Captain William Bainbridge, U. 6.
Navy

BARBARIE
TRIPOLI8t9 JUlg 1804.

Dr SIR I wrote you yesterday acknowledging the contents of your
letter received with the cloathing and stores from Malta - I now
take further notice of i t - I this morning sent our Chief Guard to
Sidi Muhammed Dhgies to inform him that I wished an Audience
he returned with an answer that the Minister was disposed. I shall

therefore not have an oppertunity of seeing him to day and fearful
that the Vessel may Sail - I write these lines and enclose Mr Pulis's
Accot - he had blended a private charge with a public one which I
have seperated and hope that you will be so good, as to discharge
and place it to my private Accot - I have not received any letters
from you before this arrival, since the 27tQ of March - I mention
this to let. you know if any of your letters have miscarried We h d close confinement more disagreable every day on accot
of hot weather Secret Communication under same date. [Written i n lime juice.]
DEARSIR - I wrote you fully yesterday in lime juice examine all
my letters for secret writing - Since the 30th of April, except the
letter acknowledging the receipt of yours, conveying the Presidents
thanks, I believe I have wrote all with juice, and shall continue to
do so From the message that the Minister sent me I think it probable
that he will have nothing to say to me on the business of Peace, or
Ransom, situated as I am, a Prisoner Business of bribes should be conducted by a Negotiator sent for
the express purpose of treating, who ought to remain some days, on
shore and would be able to have private audience with the Minister
wbich I never can have: For I am only permitted to leave our Prison
when business requires it, and then under a very vigilant Guard, who
always remains with me in the presence of the Minister - And if
Sidi Mahommed was to send him awa , it would immediately create
suspicion against him in the mind o the Bashaw, on whose good
opinion his existence, as well as all other Tripolitans depends - I
am certain that I shall not be able to effect any thing with the Minister,
and I firmly believe that the Bashaw must receive a severe blow before
he will negotiate for the Sum offered and the sooner he receives it,
the better for us unfortunate Prisoners I believe he expects an attack for he has moved his family to the
Gardens, and comes in every Evening to remain the night in Town In two former letters I have mentioned that we find it from experiment impracticable to get from our Prison undiscovered: therefore
you need not send a Boat - A few days since our Boats[wain] and
Sail Maker were taken from our Prison to other Appartments, and
made to work - I have not forbid the crews working, as I have
strong reasons to beleive, it would only be attended with unpleasant
consequences without the desired effect.
The Men are comfortably lodged, and we are very badly: We feel
i t extremely this hot weather - I impute their nguor to us is in
expectation of making our Country come to terms - However you
may be assured that we shall [conduct] ourselves [like] Americans
by bearing with fortitude every riguor of our captivity -

t'

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

259

I hope to God that you will be enabled to reduce this place; but
don't you think that ships boats would answer better than Gun
boats? tbey would be more wieldy for attack in the Harbour which
must be sudden & furious - I build my hopes on the effects of Bomb
VesseIls - I wish to God our Country would send troops to take
the place - Fray inform me what effect the loss of the Frigate
P[hWelphia]had in America.
May prayers attend you for Success, on account of our liberation
& from yourself, &: squadron - Cursed fate! which deprives me from
sharing the danger & glory [LC. EPP, Vol. 12, June-August 1804.1
Extract from Memorandum Book of Captain Edward Preble, U. 6. Navy, on board
U. S. Frigate Comtitution. 8 July 1804

The Nautilus sails for Syracuse with two bomb vessels under convoy.
[LC original.]
Extract from Diary of Captain Edward Preble, U. 6. Navy, Commodore of U. S.
Squadron m the Mediterranean, Sunday, 8 July 1804

at anchor in Messina, Nautilw in company, sent four Midshipmen
and sixteen men on board the two Bomb Vessels, we have besides
our own men sixteen Bombardiers or Gunners m d seamen on board
each of the Bomb Vessels Bz Gun Boats shipped by permission of
their government, - a t 8 A M the Bombs being ready ordered them
to weigh with the IITaatdua& sail for Syracuse to join the Gun Boats, The settlement of accounts & passing receits for military stores detains
me here, [LC. EPP, Diary, 1803-1804.1
Extract from log book kept by Sailing Maater Nathaniel Baraden, U. S. Navy, on
board U. 6. Frigate Conrlilufion, Sunday, 8 July 1804

Moderate breezes from N E. At Anchor in Messina The Nautilus
&. two bombards in company. We this afternoon recieved 120 bbls
powder - Sent two Marines to each Bombard
A. M. at 8 we made the Signal for the Nautilus $ the two Bombards
to weigh & at 9 tbey s d e d from hence for Saragosa.
Rec'd a boat load of wood supposed to be nearly 4 cords of wood At Day light made the necessary arrangements for sailing Farther communication with the shore detained us - Surgeons
re ort 5 sick 4 cocvst Noon moderate breezes from N N E.
$n the morning we supplied the Bombards with twenty bbls
Powder
[LC. EPP, Log Conslitution, 1803-1804.1
Extract from journal of Alidshipman F. Corneliue d e h f f t , U.S. Bavy, in U. S. Brig
Siren of 18 guns, Ma~terCommandant Charles Stewart,U. 6. Navy, commanding,
Sunday, 8 July 1804

Standing off & on shore in eight of Tripoli
Midni h t moderate breezes & pleasant wore to the N. EQ At 10
unbent $ Old fore topsail ;k bmt a new one to the yard At 11
saw a large latine rigg'd boat a t anchor in shore made all sail &
stqod for her the Vizen in Co: the Argrcs & Scourge a great distance to

260 NAVAL OPERATIONS. APRIL-SEPTEMBER 6 , 1804
leeward. % past 11 shorten'd sail saw the boat to be the same that
we engag'd Yesterday. Meridian gentle breezes & pleast call'd all hands to quarters, cast
loose the guns & prepar'd to fire a t the boat. [XDA.]
Extract from journal of U.6. Brig Argus, Master Commandant Isaac Hull, U. 8. Navy,
commanding, Monday, 9 July 1804

Standing in for old Tripoli fired 2 Shot a t the fort hauled our wind
and stood off in Company with the Secvclrge heared a number of heavy
guns to the Southw*Tk* to the Sd & EQset and took in Sail OccasT At
midnight fine Wr The Syren and Vixen in Sight to the Westwg a t
7 AM, TkP to the SE and backed the M.T. Sail a t 9 filled away
standing in for Tripoli [NDA photostat.]
Extract from Mary of Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Navy, Commodore of U. 8.
Squadron in the Mediterranean, Monday, 9 July 1804

wind N E Fresh, a t 3 P M weighed & sailed for Syracuse, a t
5 spoke the Bittern Sloop of War steered to the S S W all night
under easey sail, - a t day light Syracuse Light house Bore S W
distan[ce] 2 leagues, the Nautilus & two Bombs to the Southward
made them a signal to haul on a wind to the northward, - a t 8
A M anchored in Syracuse Harbour with the Nautilus & Bombs in
company in found here in safety the Enterprize, six gun Boats with
the Ketch Intriped which I have converted into an hospital ship
for the sick, ordered off five shore Boats to Water us, [LC. EPP, Diary, 1803-1804.1
Extract from journal of Midshipman F. Cornelius defiafft, U. 6. Navy, in U.6. Brig
Siren of 18 guns, Master Commandant Charles Stewart, U. S. Navy, commanding,
Monday, 9 July 1804

[Standing off and on Tripoli.] Light winds & pleas, all hands a t
quarters Standing for the small sail a t anchor. % past Mer: back'd
the main top sail, the Vimn came too & commenc'd a heavy fire on
the vessel & the Inhabitants, which had collected to the amount of 1
or 2 thousand % past 1 the Vixen made signal for one of our boats,
arm'd the barge in readiness. At 2 commenc'd a brisk fire on the
vessel & castle % past 2 haul'd off shore & was follow'd by the Vixen
having damaged the boat considerably & wounded several of the
turks, (seeing them led off across horses) a t 3 saw the turks assemble
in great bodes wore round &; stood in shore - At 4 wore to the NWG
& single reef'd the topsails, Tripoli bearing E S E 3 leagues. % past
4 set main sail. At % past 7 Sam! Macey, a marine fell over board &
was drown'd. Midnight light airs & least handed top gall$ sails. % past 6 bore
hoisted out the boa& & set top gall'
down on the V*m & &gus,
sails. X past 9 back'd the main topsail & s oke the Argus a t 10
fill'd away. At 11 fill'd away - Meridian 'ght winds & pleasant
all sail set the A r m & Vixen in Co: Latt: Obs: 33' 14' N.

E

[NDA.]

WRRS WITH BARBARY POWERS

261

To Secretary of State from James Simpson, U. 8. Consul, Tangier, Morocco

79 - Triplicate
TANGIER
lo$@J@ 1804. SIR I avail of the opportunity of a Schooner for Boston has put
in here to take Water, to acquaint you that the Emperours three
N9

Ships have been fitted out,
Maimona of 30 Guns & 70 Men at Sall6 Maimona 32 Guns & 80 Men
Mirboha
14 Guns & 50 Men
you will observe the number of Men has been considerably reduced
from what they usualy carry, which marks their being more probably
intended for a special Service than for a Cruize. - Some time since
an Embassy arrived a t Mequinez from Algiers bringing various
articles of considerable value from the Dey for the Emperour. Permission has been granted to the Chief of that mission to load four
hundred Quintals of Copper and the like quantity of Saltpetre at
Mogadore duty free. - The Maimona sailed last week from Sall6
for that Port, its said to load those Articles and to take on board the
Ambassador and his Suite, with such return of Present as the Emperour
may have to send. I t is very generaly supposed here that the Larach Ships are intended
to accompan the Maimona to Algiers. - I have acquainted Commodore Preb e of all this and of my suspicion that the Emperour may
have a design of leavin at Tunis or Algiers one of these Ships for the
Tripolines in lieu of t e Mesh&.
- My perfect knowled e of
these people makes me sensible that what they cannot do ope y in
aid of each other against every Christian Nation, they will endeavour
to accomplish by Stratagem. The Spanish Consul General here by orders from his Court has
mediated with Muley Soliman on behalf of the Ernperour of Germany
and obtained an assurance that he will ratify the Peace made between
his Father & that Power so soon as an Ambassador shall be sent to
him for that effect, in consequence of which that Gentleman has
granted Austrian Passports for the Salle and Larach Ships.
Two Brigs of War under that Flag have been in this neighborhood
during the negotiation. The Batavian Consul General having been referred by His Majesty
to Alcayde Hashash for the final arrangement of his Nation's concerns
with this Country, went yesterday to Tetuan on that busyness. My next will advise the result, which I still apprehend will not be
very pleasant for the Republic, altho' the consideration of their
having no Commerce whatever to this part of the World at this time,
may prevent an immediate open rupture. -

9

%

3

[NA. SDA. CL, Tangier, Vol. 2, Jan. 1803-Oct. 1810.1
To Secretary of State from George Davis, U. S. Charge d'Affaires, Tunis

TUNIS
Jdy the lo* 1804 SIR,The affair of the Tunisien Sandal captured by the U. States
Brig Syen, as stated in the last I had the honor to address You,
COPY

has not since been made the subject of further discussion; but am
well convinced, that this trifl' occurrence will be hereafter the
basis of an extravagant deman? a similar circumstance happen'd
to the Swedes,who took a Sandal of the Island of Jerba, entering

262 NAVAL OPERATIONS, APRILSEPTEMBER 6. 1804
the Port of Tripoli, when blockaded by that Power: - no mention
was made of the circumstance here, until1 the Swedes had concluded
their peace, and withdrew their forces from Tripoli; when restitution
was demanded by the Tunisien Government; and who also, insisted
that the Cargo on board said boat, was valued a t 30,000, Piastres,
which Sum & for said demand has actually been paid. I state this
circumstance merely to shew, how far so trifling a pretext is made
the subject of serious difEculties; but am far removed from supposing
that one cent should ever be paid by us - On the contrary it is of the
k t importance, particularly a t this moment, not only to assume,
but support that decision, which is necessary to convince this Regency
of Our determination, not to permit an farther abuses or violat~onof
the Laws of Nations, even by His Exce ency's Subjects, in order that
the measures in prosecution for the perfect humiliation of our Enemy
ma not be thwarted. - this shall be advanced by me when necessary,
anc r supported with as much energy, as discretion, and the position
of M a i m w d l permit.
A new Prophet, whom it is said is revolutionizing Algiers, flnd is a t
this moment Master of Costantine, has given much uneasiness to this
Government: - he is accompanied by an immense Army of Bedouins,
& declares himself the enemy alone of the Turks & Jews.
But there is a more serious evil, which calls for the full attention
of His Excellency, and Council. The almost total loss of the last
year's Crop, has so far increased the price of Grain & consequent
misery of the People, as to threaten not only a famine, but a civil
comotion; which has evinced itself lately, by numbers being robbed,
and assassinated near the City. - (Grain is at this moment 150,
Piastres the Caffice - the general price, 50,) As yet no measures have
been taken by the Govl to calm the clamours of the People. We are
still left in the field of conjecture as to the real intentions of Russia
& the Grand Signior, with respect to Barbary; but most combine in
the opinion, that an unpleasant visit will be made to the different
Regencies, should not the comotions of Europe draw their attention
from the first object.
At length Naples has felt a S asm of energy ; and its Squadron for
Port; but we cannot imagine the
the first time made a visit to t
reasons which revented the Admiral's making himself Master of
the whole Navaf'force of this Regency. - On the 26* ultimo, one Ship
of the line and three frigates, entered the road of the Gouletta,
shewing English Colours; (most of the Corsairs were ready for Sea,
and anchored at a considerable distance from the Batteries) a frigate
laid dong aside of the Tuniaien frigate, and commenced the attack
by a general discharge of Musketry, shewing a t the same time the
Nea olitan flag; some of the Tunisiens on board the frigate instantly
cut er Cables, while others endeavoured to make their escape by
Swimming to the Shore; the Tunisien f ate, drifted under the forts,
receiving, without any resistance, the f force of the Enemy's great
Guns - She was completly equipped and ready for sea; nine of her
Crew were killed, about twenty wounded; and an equal number of
Prisoners made, which were taken up by the boats of the Neapolitans:
She is considerably damaged in her hull, has two shot between wind
& water, and her foremast, somewhat injured. There were no
Soldiers in the forts, except a few moors, who were not SufFicient to
man half a Dozen Guns - they notwithstanding kept up a tolerable

f

&,

g

3

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

263

brisk lire for nearly two hours after the Neapolitans had ceased, &
until1 they stood out of the Roadsted. - No damage was done to
any of the other Corsairs, and not one Captured, except a small
Galiotte off Porto farine.
[LC. EPP, Vol. 12, June-August 1804.1
To Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Navy, from Captain William Bainbridge, U. 8.
Navy

TRIPOLI
BARBARY
1OQ July 1804
DEARSIR, I wrote you on the 7Q & 8* Instances, which will go
by this conveyance. The Articles you sent to the care of Sidi Muhammed Dghies, Minister of Foreign affairs to His Excellency the
Bashaw, are landed, and the Minister has had them put very carefully
in a house and politely subjects them to my direction: this peice of
politeness is conformable to the tenor of his conduct towards myself
and officers, & his general character.
We are now largely supplied with every thing, and I hope that you
will not trouble yourself to send any thing more until I solicit the
same from you.
Please to send the Invoice by the first conveyance: I hope you will
find opportunities to forward us our letters from America.
Secret communication under same date. [written in lime juice.]
Dr SIR - I this day saw the Minister of Foreign affairs for this
Regency - I wrote to you on the 7 & 8 inst giving my opinion fully
on the effect of your offer and my suspicion that the Minister would
not treat, and to day's interview has confirmed them fully: he told
me that I was a Prisoner and that Tripoli would not treat with none
but a person sent expressly by the Government of the U S and that
the Bashaw was determined not to have any more communication
with you: that you may theaten, but will never convince, and says
from your threats he believes that you have no force: for if you but
finally offer 50 thousand dollars, and if you knock every house in
Tripoly down, this Government will not accede to your present
offer - Holland he says gave 80 thousand dollars, & Denmark 40
thousand to keep the friendship of Tripoli neither of them having a
Prisoner, and America only to give 50 for 300 Citizens & nothikg for
Amity! and muchmore too tedious & trifling to mention - What
I have related is verbatim of what he gave me - I hope you will
have it in your power to give the town a severe blow; but I am doubtful
if any attack but by land can force terms on the Bashaw - Whenever
a person comes here to negotiate, he should previous to his coming
obtain permission from this Government to remain on shore sever$
da s for the purpose of negotiating -.
h e n you do commence bombarding the Town, I hope that you
will contrnue the operation throughout the Autumn & Winter, by
getting a good Bomb Vessell, large enough to keep the Coast throughout the year; and frequently to heave shells on the Town a t night,
must inevitably greatly distress the Inhabitants.
Tripoli is much more vulnerable on the land side than i t is to Seaward: Would you not think it policy to let Lord Nelson claim the
English Subjects among our Crew? - 94 of them are of that Nation -

264 NAVAL OPERATIONS, APRIL-SEPTEMBER

6, 1804

I have informed you that you need not send a boat - I t is impraoticable for us to leave our prison God bless you, and Success attend your underumg prays your
friend

P. S. Your letter from Tunis this moment came to hand.

WB

[LC. EPP, Vol. 12, June-August 1804.1
To Tobias Lear, U. 8. Consul General, Algiers from Captain William Bainbridge,
U. 8. Navy

TRIPOLIBARBARY10 July 1804
red Augt 19 1804.
DEARSIR,I have not had the pleasure of hearing from you since the
24* of February. - I have wrote you many letters since that date,
and hope they have reached you.
In my last of the 1 7 s ultp, I mentioned that we were much in want
of cloathing for our seamen; on the 7 inst. a vessel arrived from
Malta with a large quantity shipped by Mr Higgins to the care of
Sidi Muhammed Dghies, minister of Foreign affairs to His Excellency the Bashaw, who has politely had them landed and delivered to
my charge. We are under many obligations to the above Minister.
I have nothing new since my last letter, but what I resume you
are informed of thro' Commodore Preble. I hope it w$wt be 10%
before I shall hear from you
The Copy of the HonJbleC. Pinkney's letter to you I have received;
I have written and thanked him for his attention, and informed him
that through you we are fully supplied: I hsve written to my friend
Consul Kirkpatrick to the same effect.
Please to present my respectful compliments to Mr*Lear, and believe me to be with esteem
[ThefoU0win.g zoas written in lime juice and copied from photographs or
photostat8 of the original.]
Dr SXRI hsve long been expecting the pleasure to [hear] from you
and must impute my not having that pleasure to miscarriage of your
letters
No doubt before this comes to your hands but that you will be
informed of Com Preble's sending Mr OBrien on here to offer 50/m[?]
dollars this offer as you might conclude was rejected with disdain
Mr OB came on shore very unexpectedly and with[out?] requesting
Permission to land and he made the offer directly on his landing I do not mean to censure him But it appears to me an irregular proceeding - The Signal established between the Bashaw & Com. was
merely for sending the Boat on shore and M' OBrien might have done
better to have waited until the Boat returned with permission for him
to land, but his coming in the first boat subject him to a disgraceful
detention on the beach [or "in the boatJ'] and kept him [?] for u p
wards an hour and instead of going immediately to the Bashaw's
Palace it would have been better for him to have gone to the Ministers house and had some private talks with him - I have receivd
letters from the Com [?I authorizing me to renew the offer he makes
very severe threats which I hO e he d be able to rnctt.de in case the
Regency does not comply. I %ave this day waited on the Minister

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

265

of foreign affairs for this Regency on the subject of the Com. letter
and received the answer that I expected which was I was a prisoner
therefore must have nothing to say [word illegible] on the bussiness
and that the Bashaw had signified [?]his determination of not having
any more communication with the Com. or any Person that he
might send and that this Regency never would treat, only with a
Person sent direct from the Government of the U States for that
purpose, and then to receive a proper sum something [?I like 150/m
[?I dollars - I endeavoured to find out the demands of the Bashaw
but could not - The Com appears sanguine on his arrangements
[2 words illegible] I hope it may prove successful But I am of an
opinion that the Bashaw of Tripoli cannot be forced into terms except
by landing troo s he is much more vulnerable by land than by sea
Nevertheless a %amassing bombardment will no doubt tend to make
the terms more moderate there is not a Consul of humanity or
Principle or rinciple in the place except the Danish who desires me
to request t a t you will not send [one line illegible] [unlfortunate
Citizens. Believe me my dear Colonel that threats will never do I greatly respect Com Preble but I imagine that he is not [word illegible,
familiar?] with national Character of Barbary I love my Country
sincerely feel for its honor and independence yet may viewthis
Regency in a different light and my opticks are not influenced by my
situation. I trust that I have fortitude to bear my lot be it what it
may. Do not [word illegible] impression. I t was necessaq to say
this much - - - - - - - that I am not ,- - - - by self [motives]

g

[About two lines ending this letter were illegible. In fact the entire portion of
the letter written in lime juice was read with great difEculty, some of it being
written over the writing in visible ink.]
[Stephen Decatur Col.]

Extract from journal of U. S. Brig Argus. Master Commandant Isaac Hull, U. S. Navy,
commanding, Tuesday, 10 July 1804

[Off Tripoli] Syren and Vixen in Company fired a Gun a t the fort
and stood off the Shore [NDA photoetat.]
Extract from Diary of Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Navy, Commodore of U. S.
Squadron in the Mediterranean, Tneeday, 10 July 1804

Wind E S E, a t anchor in Syracuse Harbour, Enterprize Nautilus,
six gun & two Bomb Vessels in company, this day cornpleated our
water & five months full allowance of Provisions Anchored here
the Jcclozluse British Brig of War Cap$ Strachey from a Cruize, we
are now loading a Neapolitan ship (which I ordered our agent to
charter) with water & provisions for our Squadron off Tripoly, two
Midshipmen & 10 men have been put on Board to Navigate her,
ships draft of water abaft 23 feet, forward 21 feet 8 Inches, [LC. EPP, Diary, 1803-1804.1
Extract from log book kept by Sailing Haster Nathaniel Haraden, U. S. Navy, on
board U. 6. Pryate GndfIutiOn,Tuesday, 10 July 1804

Moderate breezes from the Eastward At Anchor in Saragosa rize Nautilus Six Gun boats & two bombards in company
I'!he?ld
k t c h now the Intrepid which was employed in the Service

End

266 NAVAL OPERATIONS, APRIL-SEPTEMBER 6, 1804
of burning the Philadelphia remains here under charge of a midshipman
& 2 seamen
Recieved this afternoon from the Navy Agent at Saragosa 1373
Gall* of Rum, 772 Gall* Wine in nine of the ships water casks, and
3 loads of Wood supposed to be 5 Coards We also recieved by three
shore boats 82 Gang Casks of water
Anchored here H B M. Brig Jalouse from a cruize At Sun down
hove up & down in order to keep a clear anchor Calm through the night
At day light the three shore boats came along side & took away
Empty water casks
By 10 A. M. we recieved 40 Gang casks which complete our water
Ships draft abaft 23 feet
forward 21 feet 8 Inches}dxerence l6 Inches
Sailed H B M Brig Jalouss - An imperial ship [Sf. Gkisseppe]
of nearly two hundred tons is employed in the U.S. Service to carry
water to our Squadron stationed off Tripoly
This forenoon sent Of6cers with empty water casks to assist in
watering her
&C.

EPP, Log Constitulwn, 180.3-1804.1

Extract from journal of William Eaton, U. S. Agent for the Barbary Regencies,
10 and 12 July 1804

[On board U. S. Frigate President.] July 10. Lat. 36" 46'. Ion.
53 [12 July] The Congress, taking a reef in her main top sail, lost five
men overboard - The ship had eleven knots way upon her exertion was made to save the poor fellows; but in vain: they
perished - A painful sight
[H. E. Huntington L&AG, EA 206.1

Ev3

Extract from journal of U. 8. Prigate John A d m , Master Commandant Isaac
Chauncey, U. 8. Navy, commanding, Tuesday, 10 July 1804

First and Middle Part of these 24 Hours strong Gales and hazy
Weather, attended with fre uent heavy Squalls - found for
these last 24 Hours that the hip had made much Water, and on
Examination find that the Oakum is out of a Number of her Seams
in the Counter and that whenever she sends aft' that the Water Rushes
in in great Quantities in the Wooden End of the Whales on the Larboard Side aft, and under the Stool of the Gallery on the same Side,
therefore judge that the Oakum is out there also or that the Ends of
her Whales are rotten Wind S. W. b S.
[LC. EPP, Journal, June to 6 August 1804.1

1

To Samuel Brown, Navy Agent, Boston, Mass., from Secretary of the Navy

Nav D E P ~

July 12. 1804
You will be pleased to charter a Vessel on the best terms in your
power of a size sufficient to carry to the mediterranean the articles
mentioned in the following list -

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

267

450 Barrels of beef
360 DO-- ---- pork
125 Do------ flour
1626 Do- - - - - - bread abt 125,000 'Pa
150 Do------ rum
15 Do butter about - - - - - - - - 3000 'Pa
30 barrels of melasses abt 1500 Gall?
50 Barrels of Cheese ab+-- 10000 1Pm
600 Bolts of Rusia Duck & Canvass
40 Boxes of Spermacite Candles
10 Tons of assorted Cordage
2 Anchors Weighing from 4 to 5000
about 100 Barrels of powder
a Bowsprit for the Frigate Constitution
in four pieces and a few Spare Spars
300 Bushels Peas or Beans -

and you will also purchase all the above articles on the best terms
in your power excepting the following which we have on hand and
shall have at Norfolk ready for the Vessel to Receive when she shall
arrive there Viz
3166 Ib Cheese
125 B9 flour
600 bolts of Rusia Duck & Canvas.
40 boxes of Spermacite Candles 10 Tons of assorted Cordage
30 Barrels of Melasses
1626 Do - of Bread
100 Do - of Powder
a Bowsprit & Spare Spars
2 Anchors w* from 4 to 5000 IPs

If you should not be able to procure a Vessel of a size exactly suitable
to the Cargo it is not Very material so you can get one layer in which
case you will increase proportionally the quantity of articles to be
purchased and give me timely advice that we may make our arrangements here accordingly The Vessel so soon as she shall take in all that part of her cargo
which she is to receive a t Boston must be sent to Norfolk directed to
Daniel Bedinger Esq navy agent who will deliver to her Commander
the Residue of her cargo -Let me h o w what Insurtmce is a t Boston the Vessel must be engaged to go to Gibraltar, thence if re uired by
the Consul there to proceed aloft ns f a r as Syracuse or m h a . Let
me hear from you as to your Prospect of engaging a Vessel without
delay
[NDA.

GLB, Vol. 7, 1803-1805.1

To Commanders of any U. S. Ships of War arriving at Syracuse, from Captain
Edward Preble, U. 8. Bevy

u. s. S

~ CPm t i t d m

July 12th 1804
SIR I sail tomorrow mornin for Tri oly with the Enterprize
Nautilw, 6 Gun & two bomb $essels, t e S en Argus Vixen &

E

Scourge are now blockading that Port - I sh$attack the Town dc
Harbor immediate1 after my arrival and hope to succeed in bringing
the B h a w to an onorable peace - I have long been expect'
re-inforcement to the
and have been extremely anxious or
if my expectations have been well
an arrival from the
founded - Having no veasel in the Squadron excepting this ship

E

"8"

268 NAVAL OPERATIONS, APRIL-SEPTEMBER 6, 1804
whose cannon can make any Impression on the Bashaw's Walls I
expect we may suffer much. Of course you will see the neoessity of
sading immediately to our assistance after your arrival here without
waiting to land any thing you may have brought out for the Squadron
[LC.

EPP, LR, April-Nov. 1804.1

Extract from journal of U. 8. Rigate Congrus. Captain John Badgers, U. S. Navy,
commanding, Thursday, 12 Jnly 1804

[In company with the President, Essex and ConsteJZation, en route
to the Mediterranean.] P M fresh breezes and pleasant weather at
% past 12 the commodore made the signal NP 48. call'd all hands
to make sail set stay sails and starb* studding sails at 36 past 1
Down stay Sails & in top Gt Studding Sails at ji past 6 P. M. the
Commodore made the signal N? 571 calld all Hands to reef top sails
6 of the main top men in Laying out on the main top sail yard to reef
the Top sail caught hold of the points the sail being Slack, the sail
filld they broke their hold and fell 3 of Them over board and 3 on
deck rounded the ship too and cleard sway the stern cutter but
seeing nothing of them from the mast head filld & made sail. the 3
that fell on deck 2 expired Immediately the other is in a fair way to
recover
At Midnight fresh breezes and hazy weather From 12 till 4 made
and shortened sail Occasionally to Keep our station with the Commodore
At j4 past 7 set top G. sails at 9 set top mast & top G. studding

sails

At Meredian frish breezes and clear weather Temperature of air
75O Water 72O Sick 28.
Longitude Observed 50' 03' W.
Latitude Observed 36' 44' N.
[URNA.]
Extract from log book kept by Sailing Yaater Nathaniel Earaden, U. S. Navy, on
board U. 8. Frigate Conafiluiion, Thursday, 12 Jnly 1804

Moderate breezes from S W. At Anchor in Saragosa Nautilzls,
Enterprize, Six Gun boats and two Bombards in company. Employed
in watering the Store Ship & clearing the Squadron for Sea Mr
Haswell Midshipman was this day sent on board the Imperial Store
under Imperial
Ship (polacre SL. ChLisseppe] which is to be na-d
colors Completed her water this afternoon m t
1500 Gallq
Recieved from the Arsenal a kedge anchor with a stock Wt 920 lb
Sent Six seamen to the Imperial Storeship exclusive of the two
Officers
ht msde Signal to the Squadron to Weigh.
At day
6 A.
we weighed & stood out to Sea with the Enterprize
Nautilu8, Gun boats & bombards in company in order to proceed to
Malta
By 9 A M we had stron breezes from W S W. Made Signal to the
Bore up for Saragosa, 6r msde the
Squadron to return to
Enhrprize and Nautilus signal to examine three strange sail to the
S. E At j4 past 10 A. M. when nearly in the Act of coming to in Sar sa
the wind shifted from W N W to N E. Made S i a l to the squa%n

%

801%

269

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

to follow the Commodore and stood out in order to lead the Gun
boats & Bombards In working round the outer extreme (Cape Pork) the store ship
carried away her Main top gall? Mast. At this time the N N E

wind had increased to a stron breeze & the gun boats bein unable
to weather Cape Pork, we ma e the signal for Anchoring in aragosa
At Noon came to in Saragosa - All the Squadron except the
Nautilus BE. Enterprize in company Winds strong from E N E -

f

8

[LC. EPP, Log Constitutim, 1803-1804.1
To Captain Daniel Carmick, U. 6. Marine Corps, New Orleans, La., from Secretary
of the Navy

NAVYDEPMT.
13 Jdy 1804 SIR, I have rec* your letter dated 27th May 1804.
I am sorry that any dficulties should have arisen between you
and other gentlemen on the subject of your relative rank. It has been
determined that the Officers shall rank agreeably to date of Commission. You therefore rank all Captains whose Commissions are
dated subsequently to yours and you are ranked by all Captains
having senior Commissions to you.
[NDA. USMC,LB, 1804-1820.1
Extract from log book kept by Sailing Master Nathaniel Haraden, U. 6. Navy, on
board U. 6. Frigate Constitution. Friday, 13 July 1804

Strong breezes from N E. At anchor in Saragosa Gun boats
bombards & store ship in company At 1 P. M. made signal for all
commanding Officers of the Gun boats On anchoring we immediately employed three shore boats &
suppl ed them with 29 casks to complete the water of the store ship We d o sent an Officer & a party of Men to assist in repairing her
damages At 3 P. M. the Nautilus & Enterprize reanchored they report the
chases to be three Tunisians on a cruize a t Sun down Moderate, hove
up and down - Towards day light a breeze sprang up from N W At 5 A. M. made Signal for the Squadron to weigh & proceed to Sea.
At 6 weighed & stood to Sea in order to proceed to Malta In passing Cape Pork which is nearly 4 miles from Saragosa we
observed a small Xebeck under French colors - We brought her to
with a shot in consequence of the report of a Pirate cruizing about
here - She was commissioned by the French Consul a t Tunis
At 9 A. M. took the store ship in tow
All this forenoon we have had light breezes and Variable between
NNW&SE.
Transported for the purpose of Trimmin ship 10 Tons of cannister
shot from between Decks into the Gun oom, and about 12 Tons
of Shells from the forehold to between decks abreast of the Main
Mast Noon light breezes from S S W
Cape Pork N E b N 3 leagues - Cape Passari S W b S five Leagues
Nautilus Enterprize, Six Gun boats & two bombards in shore of
us to the Westward
Surgeons report 3 sick & 7 convalescent
Lat~tudeObserved 3 7 O 1' N.
[LC. EPP, Log Constitution,"l803-1804.J

d

270 NAVAL OPERATIONS, APRIESEPTEMBER 6, 1804
Extract from journal kept by Purser John Darby, U. 6. Navy, on board U. S. 6.
John Admnr. Master Commandant Isaac Chauncey, U. S. Navy, cornmallding,
Friday, 13 July 1804

[Three lines of manuscript mutilated.]
P M At 1.Pleasant Weather With moderate Breezes from the Sa & Wg
at 4 Air 74% Water 72% at half past 5 Discovered Land bearing
S. E b E. It being the Island of Sait Maria. or Sait Marys. one of
Western Islands at 8 the S. E. part of St Marys bore S. dist. 2%
Leagues. The Center of the Isl'd S W. 4 miles the N W Pt W % S.
dist. 3. leagues. the Air 73%Water 72. at 12 Midnight air 73%
Water 72. The Island of St Maria or St Marys is one of the Azories or Western
Islands situated in the Atlantic Ocean between 25 and 32 de ees of
W. Lon and between 37 & 40 N Lat 900 miles W. of Portug and as
many E: of Newfoundland - [Several lines of manuscript mutilated.]
There are nine of the Western Islands in Number Vizt St Maria, St
Michael, Terceira, St. George Graciosa Fayal, Pico - Flores. and
Corvo. the two Westernmost were named Flores and Corvo from the
abundance of Flowers on the one, and of Crows on the other This being the 17th day since we took our departure from the Capes
of Virginia nothing to me cou'd have been more pleasing than the
sight of land once more. this being the first time I ever left my
native Country. as we pased it several of the Gentlemen took the
different Views of the Island as presented to us -

f

[NDA original. Miss Camilla S. McConnell.1
Extract from Memorandum Book of Captain Edward Preble, U. 8. Navy, on board
U. 6. Frigate Gtutitulion, 14 July 1804

S d d for the seige of Tripoly with 2 bomb vessels 6 gun boats and
the Nautilw and Enterprise in company.
[LC original.]

Emact from Diary of Captain Edward Preble, U. 8. Navy, Commodore of U. 8.
Squadron in the Mediterranean, Saturday, 14 July 1804

Wind S S W working to windward along shore with the Nazltilw
Enterprize, Store Ship, 2 Bomb & 6 Gun Boats in company, - a t %
past 6 P M made the Signal for the fleet to Pre are to Anchor And
ze a signal to tow the rear Boat of t e 24" division, at %
past
the E7 nPk r ~
anchored in 10 fathoms water hard Bottom 2 miles off
shore, Cape Passaro bearin by compass South 9 miles made the
Signal for the Squadron to c ose & anchor to prevent separation, at
day li ht weighed with the uadron wind N E, at 7 A M passed
Cape assaro, at noon 20
es from the Cape, [LC. EPP, Diary, 1803-1804.3

%

S

5

2,

Extract from journal kept by Pusser John Derby, U. 8. Kavy, on board U. 8. 8.
John Adam, Master Commandant Isaac Chauncey, U. 8. Bavy, commanding,
Saturday, 14 July 1804

[Several lines of manuscript mutilated.] Course S. E b E % E.
[mutilated] morning the Temperature of Air was 73% Water 73. a t
8 Air 73%Water 72%.at Meridian Air 74%Water 73%-Wind W. b N.

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS
Wind W. N. W.
Course E S. E.
Distance pr Log. 174

271

Latitude in-- - - - - - - - - - 36.49
Long in by acct. ---- --,
- - -Long
in
by
observ
-------. .
Vanation - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -

PM
at. 1. Oclock this day Weather pleasant and light breezes at. 4.
air 74% Water 73. at 6. Air 74 Water 73. at 8 Air 73%Water 74.
at 12. Midnight Air 71. Water 74% I was ve much astonishd at
finding the Tem erature of the Air so much co der than the Water
we have had coo er pleasant weather - and by no means as hot as I
expected -

P

7

[NDA original. Miss Camilla S. McConnell.]
Extract from log book kept by Sailing Master Nathaniel Haraden, U. S. biavy, on
board U. 6. Frigate Gntlittrlion. Sunday, 16 July 1804

Light aim from S E. We take our departure for Malta from Cape
Passari bearing N E b N 20 M
iles The Wind was Very hght and
variable all the afternoon - Towards evening signal was made for
the Squadron to close. In order to prevent Separation we took four
of the gun boats m d the two bombards in tow - The Enterpriza
was ordered by signal to take the other two gun boats, and the Nautilus
the store ship.
Departed this life by falling from the Booms into the hold, David
Darling, boy. In the k t watch committed his body to the deep.
At Sundown Malta was in sight through the Haze bearing from
S W to S W b W 30 M
i
l
e
s Dist Light airs or calms through the night
till 4 A M when we had a breeze from S E.
At 5 past 4 A. M. Saw Malta S W nearly 24 Miles
Kept the 4 gun boats & two bombards in tow all the forenoon
standing in for Malta with light breezes Veering between S E 8:
S S W - As we drew in with the land we saw several strange sail in
shore - Among them two English Frigates
At Noon 10 Miles from the Harbor of Malta Squadron in company
Winds light from S W b S
Surgeons report 4 sick & 7 convalescent.
Latitude Observed 36' 08' N.
[LC. EPP, Log Constitution,1803-1804.1
To Captain W i a m Bainbridge, U. 6. Ravy, from George Davie, U. S. Chaw
d'waires, Tunis

TUNIS
July 16*Q1804.
SIR, I had this pleasure on the 234 ultQ,enclosing you letters from
Consul Lear, OBrien, &c. &c. all of which I trust have come to hand,
as I find you have really a sincere friend in the Prime Minister Sidi
Deghies - his attentions wiU not go unreward.ed.
I regret not being able to give you any news from America, but
wait with anxiety equal to your own, to hear something from that
quarter; the last papers, that fell into my hands, were forwarded
ou without a perusal here; since when, all is silent as the Grave.
f o u deaired to know whether the Preaident, had confirmed me a t
Tunis: the Honble the Seer of State, writes, that he has not yet
decided on my appointment, or of any other Person; in fact, I wish

272 NAVAL OPERATIONS. APRILSEPTEMBER 6. 180.4
to be different1 placed, and where I may be more immediately
useful to yours f and officers - I shall know ere long - and if my
wishes are c o n h e d , you will be made sensible, that the U. S. does
not possess an individual, who will so cheerfull Sacrifice private
views, ease and comfort, for the benefit of our ens aved Countrymen,
as myself. - I cherish the hope of giving you in Person, convincing
proofs of the honesty of my heart, in these declarations, and can only
add my prayers for your health kc. &c. Believe me F faithful friend

2

9

Tripoli Capt. Wm BAINBRIDGE,
N. B. I enclose a line for my friends Porter & Hunt Sympathetic ink [Written in lime juice.]
D' SIR, Your ransom might be effected here on admissible terms, if
our affairs were brought to a decision; but the pretentions of this
Regency, are beyond any thing the Govt will acquiesce to - I however have reduced them much, but have no authority to proceed in
such a manner, as would bring them to a final conclusion. - I made
application to Consul Lear, & OBrien, by letters bearing date Feb?
ISt@to let me come, and reside a t Tripoli, under the protection of some
Powerful Nation - I have the means of ensuring a favorable reception; prudent and discreet deportment would prevent difficulties,
and my head shall be sacrificed; if I would not open your Prison doors,
in three months; and with your assistance, place our affairs in such
a train as to ensure a Speedy peace - a dispatch to the Sec? of State,
(of same date) states the absolute necessity of a similar measure and for such powerful political reasons as induces me to hope something
of the kind will be done - the only motive which can induce me to
remain in Barbary, is the hope of unfettering your chains; and to
accomplish which, I know no danger - scorch all my letters - And
place full confidence on the eternal tho' feeble exertions, of your
friend. GEO.DAVIS[NYHS. Geo. Davis LB, Vol. 1.1
[16 July 18041
the diaries kept by Tobiaa Lear, U. S. Consul
General, Algiers, 1 January 1804 to 16 July 1804, to be found in the National
Archivee, State Department Records, Consular Letters, Algiers, Vol. 7, Part I,
January 1804 to November 1805.1
[NOTE: Attention is invited to

Extract from Memorandum Book of Captain Edward Reble, U. 6. Bavy, on board
U. 6.Rigate Conslifufion.16 July 1804

Anchd with the squadron a t Malta.
[LC original.]

Extract from Diary of Captain Edward Preble, U. 8. Bavy, Commodore of U. 8.
Bquadron in the Hediterranean, Monday, 16 July 1804

.

W i d Souther1 - a t 4 P M entered the harbour of Vdetta in
the Island of d k a , and Anchored with the
uadron, - a t 7
A M the V k n arrived to re air damages sustain in an action with
Tripoline Troops, Captain mith brought me a letter from Captain
Stewart of the Siren wherein he observes that on the 7* inst the

i

3

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

273

Siren & Vixen chased a Tripoline Galliot on shore about 9 miles to
the Westward of Tripoly, that the Boats of the S i ~ e nwas manned,
armed & dispatched with orders to take her off, that they accordingly
approached the shore under a heavy fire of musketry from 1000 or
more Tripolines, that the Vixen was ordered in shore to support the
boats which had grounded on a Reef and with difficulty was got off
after having lost 1 marine killed & 4 wounded, the Vizen opened a
Galling fire of Cannister shott on the Troops which did great execution
among them, but owing to the Reef over which the Barbarians had
hauled the Galliot after having taken every thing out of her, they
could not bring her off, he says the Officers & men behaved well, ordered the Boats to be employed to fill up our water, [LC. EPP, Diary, 1803-1804.1
Extract from logbook kept by Sailing Master Nathaniel Earaden, U. S. Bavg,
on board U. S. Frigate Co~titutian.Monday, 16 July 1804

Moderate breezes from S S W.
Standing in for the Harbour of Viletta which bears S W b W 9
Miles - As we drew in to the land the wind became favorable.
One Mile without the harbour we cast off the Gun $ bomb vessels ,4t 4 P. M. we came to in the Harbor of Villette with the Squadron
in company in 14 fathe Water The Gun boats are moored within
us with a fast on shore Towards evening ran the stream anchor out to the Eastward in
order to keep clear of the Bower In this situation we are one & a
half cables length from shore Moderate through the night.
Armed a boat as a guard boat through the night
At 7 A. M. anchored here the U. S. Schooner T7ixen from a cruize
off Tripoly - She reports some damages sustained in a small action
with one of the boats off Tripoly At 10 A. hl. recieved the &hdTa~s', &- Alesam&~'s launches to
complete our water Ships company watering & cleaning ship Surgeons report 4 sick 7 convspt
Noon fresh breezes from S W.
[LC. E P P , Log Constitution, 1803-1804.1
Extract from journal of Midshipman F. Cornelius deKrafft, U. S. Navy, in U. S. Brig
Siren of 18 guns, l a s t e r Commandant Charles Stewart, U. S. Navy, commanding,
Monday, 16 July 1804

[Lying off and on Tripoli since 9 July.] Midnight fresh gales &
clear. At 1"wore to the S. \Td !i past 9 saw a Ketch Standing out
of Tripoli % past 9 spoke the afore said K ~ t c h . hoisted out the
barge & sent her on board. K past 103she return'd dismiss'd the
Ketch & fill'd away recg from her a quantity of letters from our
prisoners. [NDA.]
To James Bazen, Newark, B. J., from Secretary of tho Navy

NAV.DEPAR~
July 17, 1804
I have received your letter of the 10. inst - Captain Bainbridge
has not forwarded to us a muster roll of the Philn after her capture

274 NAVAL OPERATIONS. APRILSEPTEMBER 6. 1804
by the Tripolitans, and as you state your son to have joined her a t
Malta i t is not in my power to inform you whether he was on board a t
the time of the capture or not [NDA. GLB, Vol. 7, 1803-1805.1
Extract from Diary of Captain Edward Preble, U. 6. Navy, Commodore of U. 6.
Squadron in the Mediterranean, Tuesday, 17 Jnly 1804

Wind S W a t anchor in Malta, ordered some Provisions shipped on
board the Store Ship for the Squadron off Tripoly, -Mr Lewis Midshipman joined this ship, I dispatched him on the 17Ch of March last
for Gibraltar with letters for the Navy department to be forwarded
From thence & return, and to Return to the S uadron, Governor Ball
called on board, as did Caps Somberg & Cap$ trac&]~yof the Royal
Navy, and some Officers of the army, among which was General
Ramsay

B

[LC.

EPP, Diary, 1803-1804.1

Extract from log book kept by Sailing Master Nathaniel Haroden, U. S. Navy, on
board U. S. Frigate Constitution. Tuesday, 17 July 1804

Fresh breezes from S W. At Anchor in Valette Nautilus Vixen,
Enterprize, 6 Gun boats & two Bombards in company.
Recieved this afternoon the 6 Guns 24 P*'* which we landed here

some time ago, also their carriages Recieved also from the Navy
agent for the use of the Squadron off Tripoly 92 bbls bread, 6 bbls
flour 7 bbls Pork, 3 bbls suet, 20 kegs of cheese, 11 casks of Peas,
1 Puncheon of blolasses or 122 Gall"
one pipe of Vinegar of 130
gallons - ITe rec'd also 57 gang casks of water which com letes
our quantity Towards evening Moderate breezes from the gouth
continued the guard boat thro' the night.
hlr Lewis hlidshipman who was sent to Gibraltar four months ago
rejoined the ship - Our carpenters & armorers fitting gun carriages
to our boats.
Yesterday Morning Sir A. J. Ball governor of Malta waited on
the Commodore.
Our Warrant Officers are Ordered on shore to select such articles
as are wanted in their several departments
Surgeons report 5 sick, 7 convvt
Iioon fresh breezes from S. W.
[I.C.

EPP, Log Consf~ l ~ ~ t1803-1804.1
i~m,

Extract from journal of G. S. Fr:gete Jo611 AQants. Master Commandant Isaac
Chauncey, U. S. Navy, commanding, Tuesday, 17 July 1804

Throughout ~ I I ~24P'Elours
P
modcrate Gales and Cloudy Weather At 4 A. 51. saw a Sail to t l ~ eSouthward of us standing to the Sout11ward. - At 4 saw a Fleet bearing East standi~lgto the S. W. AtC9saw a Frigate to the N W. standing after the Fleet, supposed it
to;be one of the Convoy - At 10 saw another Ship of T a r lying to,
to the Windward of 11s soon after observed her speak a Merchantman
and make sail after us - At 11 we made the Private Signal of the
Day established between the British Ships of War and our own,
kept-it abroad 30 Minutes, but it not being answered hauled it down soon-after the Ship to Windward made s Signal, but not being under-

275

W A R S WITH BARBARY POWERS

stood by us, she hauled it down - she then shewed English Colours,
which we answered by shewing ours - At Meridian spoke his
Majesty's Sloop of War King Fisher Capt. Crippen from Cork to the
West Indies with the Convoy to Leeward, who also inform'd me that
the Man of War a stern was his Britanic Majesty's Frigate the Diana,
also one of the Convoy he sent his Boat on Board to ask for News
&c the Officer of which informed me that they had been 15 Days
from Cork but no News - Ends with Pleasant Weather.Wind
N. N. E
[LC. EPP, Journal, June to 6 August 1804.1
TO Don Joseph Boguera, Spanish Consul General, Tunis, from Captain Edward
heble, U. 6. Bavy

U. S. SHIP Constitutim
Adalta July 18th. 1804
SIB I am honored with your letter of the 24th Ulto: and have to
inform you that the Critical Situation of our affairs with Tripoly
a t the present moment renders it impossible for me consistent with
prudence to permit the Courier St Fernando to proceed to Tripoly;
I have therefore warned the Master of that Vessel not to attempt it,
particularly as he has Articles in charge for our Enemies the Spanish
subjects who are building Gun boats for the Bashaw of Tripoly
The Spanish Vessel, Cap! Torres has been liberated agreeable to
the information given you by X l r Davis, notu-ithstanding the Violation of her Passport, but no indulgence of the same Nature will again
take place [LC.

EPP, LB, April-Nov. 1804.1

TO Tobias Lear, U. S. Consul General, Algiers, from George Davis, U. S. Charge
dlAffaires, Tunis

TUNISJuly l g t h 1804
red l g t h Augs 1804
SIR I had this pleasure on the 22'4 ultimo of which a duplicate is
enclosed; since that period no direct conveyance has offer'd for your
place. - Your favor of the 2'4 inst was receired on the 15th- I most
sincerely regret the recent risit of the Superb to your Regency; or that
any similar occurrence should tend to confirm my opinion, on the
probable result of the difficulties in question it strikes me as an
openiug plague, the baneful effects of which will not be confined, to
the local situation, that gave it birth ; but u-ill infect the Keighbouring
Regencies; where those, who have t h /cast
~ political health must expect a
serious and menacing attack. - While the great Powers continue to
suffer with impunity such indignities; what are the Secondaq Nations
to expect?
Our affairs here are in Statu quo: no farther mention has been made
of the Ce tured Saridnls & C ? for your information on that point &
others, I ave the honor to enclose you a Copy of my last to the
Honb!e the Secretary of State, His Excellency's silence on this Subject,
augurs more than his threats; of which we shall soon discover the
motive. - E c e y thing depends on the result of our summer cam aign
against Tr@oli. -it is from thence we are either to assume an sup
port a Nat~onalCharacter with these States; - or bow the neck and

g

B

276 NAVAL OPERATIONS. APRIL-SEPTEMBER 6. 180.4
answer to the eternal cry of give. - The season for operation is all
ready far advanced; that passed; and its effects known; we may prepare ourselves for a decisive arangement here - Whatever lays within
the exertions of one possessing so little influence; and with such partial
authority, shall be done by me. - my health, is still delicate, which
adds much to the irksomeness of a Post; at no period agreeable. I am this moment favored with Letters from Tripoli, and have the
pleasure to enclose you two from Captn Bainbridge. - Mr Nissen's
last communication, has renewed a Subject which I presumed, was
finally closed; to wit; the non payment of a bill of Exchange for one
thousmd dollars forwarded 24th March 1804. particularly so, as his
former letters gives me to understand, that all difficulties were done
away; and that from Capt-ainbrid
el acknowledge the receipt of
the money. - I enclose you NQ2, a opy of the correspondence on
this subject - I t is unnecessary to say, that no decisive measures
can be taken by me for the recovery of the money, untill a protest is
forwarded, and even then it should be done by His Danish Majesty's
Consul here, who appears on the face of the Bill as the purchaser. this precaution was taken from the advice that all letters to the
American prisoners as well as to Mr Nissen, were opened by the
Bashaw, as also from a knowledge of his Character; confidant that he
would not hesitate to seize on the Bill, and enforce the payment thus
i n voiding SyUa, we are nearly on Charibdis. I am informed here, that the Bill has been paid to the Bashaw, who,
has credited the Danish Consul with the amount, to be deducted
from their Biennial Cash payment due in January next; and which
information has some credit with me, as Mr Holck the Danish Consul
for this Regency, assures me officially that the Bill will be paid:
I however, shall apply to the Commercial Agent, for his interference;
and endeavour to close the business amicably. This circumstance
will shew how far I was correct in my letter to the Secv of State of the
17th Nov. 1803. - when assigning m reasons for addressing Mr
Beaussier in behalf of our unfortunate ountrymen. "I am not ignorant that Mr Nissen, His Danish hfajestys Consul
"was charged with our affairs by Mr Cathcart; but as his Government
"was fearful that their affairs might be embroiled in consequence of
"the information, he might give of tho Bashaw's movements; the only
"communication I have ever received from that quarter, was his
"regrets at not being able to fulfill the char e - I t is also of impor"tance that our ofiers, s h d be laced un er the protection of such a
"Representutiae as is respected dfPeard dch
dCa
- As an Individual
this Gentleman's, honourable, humane & friendly exertions, can
never be sufficiently recompensed by our Government, and for which
reason I have not yet insisted on his sending me the Bill regularly
protested ; but as a Public Agent in all such instances, he wants, that
Politid Health, which is necessary to give energy, to his actions. the error is not with the man. Be pleased to give your orders on this point, and ~ c c e p the
t assurances of the high consideration & profound respect, with which I have
the honor to be, Sir
(COPY1
[NA. SDA. CL, Algiers, Vol. 7, Part 1, Jan. 1804-Nov. 1805.1

8

8

d

277

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

To George Davis, U. S. Charge d'Aflaires, Tunis, from Captain Edward Preble,
U. 8. Havy

Constitution MALTA
July 18 [I8041
DEARSIR I am honQwith your favor of the 230 UltQ the present

situation of our affairs renders it impossible for me to suffer any Vessel to proceed to Tripoly particularly as I sail this day with Bomb &
Gun Vessels &c to attack that place, I have therefore advised the
Master of the Spanish Vessel to return to Tunis, particularly as I
understand she has articles on board for our worst of enemies the
Spanish car enters who are h&iing GiLn Boats for the Bashaw
I will en eavour to obtain and destroy the pasport you mention. -

*

d

*

*

*

*

*

I have not time to write ColQLear at this moment but shall as soon
as I return and send a Vessel down to carry the letters and shall order
her to touch a t Tunis for yours. [LC. EPP, Vol. 12, June-August 1804.1
To Archibald S. Bullock, Savannah, Ga., from Secretary of the Navy

NAY.DEP.18th July 1804.
The President of the United States has deemed i t expedient to send
to the coast of South Carolina & Georgia - Gun-boat NQ1, under
the command of Lieu! Command: John P. Lovell. You will be pleased to furnish upon Mr Lovells requisitions supplies
of provisions &g and render him every other necessary assistance in
your power.
[STJnilarletter to Mr. William Smith, Sr., Charleston, S. C.]
[hDA. Off. Comg. Gunboats, 1803-1808.1
To Sailing Master (acting as Lieutenant Commandant) John P. Lovell, U. S. Navy,
from Secretary of the Navy

Lt Cornm? JNQ
P. LOVELL.

NAV:DEP.18 July 1804.

Commands Gun-boat NQ1.
You will forthwith proceed with Gun-boat N Q 1 to the Port of
Charleston in the State of South Carolina, and after reporting yourself to the Governor of the State, and to the Collector of the Customs,
you will thence proceed to Savannah in the State of Georgia, where
you will also report yourself to the Governor of that State, and to
the Collector of the Customs. These two Ports you will consider as
the principal places of Rendezvous, and the Coast between Savannah
and Geor e Town as your Cruizing station. You will however repair
to any otpher part of the coast of South Carolina & Georgia, where
your services may be necessary. Witbin the territorial jurisdiction of the United States, i. e. within a
marine league of the margin of our coast, you will by all the means in
your power protect all vessels whatever as well neutrals as American,
against the aggressions of the armed ships of any nation whatever,
and you mill repress all infractions of Law which may be attempted
by any such armed vessel; but in all such cases, when ever the opinion
of the Governor of the State, wherein you may be, can be previously
obtained, you will not act but upon his requisition. -

278 NAVAL OPERATIONS, APRIL-SEPTEMBER 6 , 1804
Any pirate that may be found cruizing on our coast to the annoyance
of our commerce, either within or beyond our Jurisdictional limits,
you will take into some [port] of the United States for trial.
You will afford all practical aid to the enforcing of the revenue
Laws of the United States, and of the Health Laws of the States or
of the United States on such requisitions as from time to time shall
be made by a Collector of the Customs of either of the aforementioned
States. You wL1without delay communicate to this Department a copy
of every requisition that may be made as aforesaid by a Governor of
a State, or by a Collector of the Customs.
[NDA. Off. Comg. Gunboats, 1803-1808.1
To Lieutenant Colonel Commandant Franklin Wharton, U. 6. Harine Corps, from
Secretary of the Navy

NAV.DEP.July lgtP 1804
The Gun-boat N?1 under the command of Ilieut Commands Jn? P.
Lovell, requires a Guard of Marines to concist of a Serjeant a Corporal
and 12 privates.
You will be pleased to supply this Guard without delay. [NDA. Off. Comg. Gunboats, 1803-1808.1

--

Extract from journal of U. S. Frigate John Adam~. Master Commandant Isaac
Channcey, U. S. Navy. commanding, Wednesday, 18 July 1804

First and Middle Part of these 24 Hours fresh Breezes & flying
Clouds - At 2 Saw a sail to the Eastward standing to the S. W.
At past 2 saw another Sail standing to the Eastward a t 3 the
Ship we first saw standing to the S. W. passed to Windward of us
with a heavy press of Sail, she appeared to be a ship of war but shewed
no Colours or any Disposition to speak us At 4 passed to Windward
of a Brig standing to the Eastward - Ends with pleasant Weather Wind N. N. E.
[LC. EPP, Journal, June to 6 August 1804.1
Extract from journal kept by Purser John Darby, U. S. Navy, on board U. S. S.
John Adam, Master Commandant Isaac Chauncey, U. 8. Navy, commanding,
Wednesday, 18 July 1804

[Several lines of manuscript mutilated.] a Frigate to the N. W.
standing after the fleet. supposed to be one of the convoy at 10 saw
another ship of War lying too to, Windward. of us. soon clfter
observed her. speak. a Merchantman, and make sail after us. a t 11.
we made the private Signal of the day. established between the.
British ships of War. and our own. Kept it abroad 30 minutes, but
i t not being answered, hauled it down soon after the ship to Windward
made a Signal. but it not being answered by us. she hauled it down
she then shewed English colours. which we answered by. shewing
ours. - Took in Top gall; Sails and hauled the courses up - a t
Meridian Spoke his Britanic Majest s Sloop of War. King Fishers
Capt. Crippen, from Cork bound to t e West indies with the convoy
to Leward, Who also informed us that the Man of War a stern was
his Britanic Majestys [manuscript mutilated.]

g

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

279

at half past 12 the boat returned to her own ship - from this during
the whole day we discovered several sail one of which appeared to
be a frigate or Sloop of War but she discovered no inclination to speak
us as she mi ht easily have done it she being to Windward of us. and
we close ha 1 at Midnight fresh breezes & cloudy Weather Air
72 Water 73 -

f

[NDA original. Misa Camilla S. McConnell.]

[I8 July 18041
Resum6, presumably prepared in Navy Department about 1806 or 1807, concerning
the U. S. Gun Boat No. 1

GTJNBOATN? 1. Ordered to be built at M7ashington 21 Decr 1803.
Launched . . . . . . . . . . & ordered to sail to Southwd for the
purpose of protecting the rights of the Gnited States within their
Jurisdictional Limits 18 July 1804. Sailed 26th - Arrived at Charleston S. C 14 August. At Savanna 3: Septr While waiting to hear
from the Governor of Georgia were driven from nloorings by a dreadful
Storm & at length left dry in a Corn-Field on Whitemarsh Island
8 SeptF Got off 1 Kovember. Lieu! Lovell gare up command to
Lieu3 Magrath 22 Novr From this Time Lieu! Magrath acted under
orders of Lieu1 Murdoch Commanding NQ until N ? 1 was ordered
to Charleston to undergo repair's for a royage to the XIediterranean
if she was capable of performing it. E" continued to cruise in
Company w-ith N? 2 between Sava~ma6E G? Town S. C until 22 March
1805 then arrired at Charleston. Reported as not fit to cross the
Ocean 28 March. Lieutt Alagrath relieved by Lieutt Fanning
Alay 6, 1805. - Repaired 8: the Fixture of the Gun altered and the
Boat pronounced by Lieu! Fanning to be a safe Boat without the
Bars of our Harbours 8 July. Continued off Fort Johnston enforcing
the Quarantine Laws of the State, making short cruises till Septr
30 - 1805 when Lr Fanning died at Charleston. - Oct? 11 - L: Jar
Biddle was ordered to Charleston to take command. COMMISSION A N D W A R R A N T OFFICERS.

station
Coqfmander
II

24 Officer.
II

Pur~er
Surgeon
Gunner

1

Names
JnQPittman Lovell
Humphrey Magrath
Nathaniel Fanning. Peter S. Ogilvie.
John Mott. John Carr
Abraham Cordrcy
Alexr MqWilliams.
William Ta lor.
James A. d ~ e r .

[NDA. Ships' Service, 1801-1809.1

-

280 NAVAL OPERATIONS, APRIL-SEPTEMBER 6,

1804

To Sailing Master John P. Lovell, U. 6. Navy, Eastern Branch, Potamac, from
Secretary of the Navy

NAV:DEP.lQtQ
July 1804.
I t has been found impracticable to procure in time a Surgeon to
join Gun-boat N V at this place. Dr J Schoolfield of Portsmouth
Virginia, has been ordered to join you off Norfolk, where you will stop
for the purpose of receiting him on board. [NDA. Off. Comg. Gunboats, 1803-1808.1
To William Kirkpatrick, U. S. Consul, Mdaga, from Tobias Lear, U. 6. Consul
General, Algiers

ALGIERS
July lQtQ
1804.
DEARSIR I had the pleasure of writing a few line to you on the
27@ of April, a Copy of which is enclosed. Since that time I am
without any of your esteemed favors.
I enclose also extracts from letters of Commodore Preble & Mr
Davis to me, dated lgtQ & 22Q of June, which will shew you the
situation of our affairs with Tunis & Tripoli, SO far as they have come
to my knowledge. - Also the copy of a letter from our unfortunate
& worthy friend Capt? Bainbridge of the 20th of May which will inform you of his situation at that time.
The Cruizers of this Regency hare not been out this Season, owing
to the situat,ion of their affairs with the British
On the l o t h of June arrived here the British ship of war Superb,
the Honb'Wap? Keets, with a tender Brig. In her came Mr Bryan
MqDonough, late from Tripoli. - They remained here till the lgtQ
of June; had several conferences with the Dey; but departed without
doing any thin effectual. On the 5'h Ins! came a British Sloop of
War, with Mr b E ~ o n o u ~again:
h
from Lard Nelson, of Toulon, She
remained till the even? of 7t4 and then sailed, it is said, for Gibraltar.
It is now thought that matters are in a train of accomodation between G. B. and this Regency; and that a new Consul will be sent here.
A Moor, who calls himself a Marabout, has lately made his appearance in the neighbourhood of Constantine, drawn together many
Carbiles, and Captured 54 frenchmen, who were fishing for Coral on
the Coast, and Carried them into Captivity. Report says he has
attacked the City of Constantine with 30,000, Carbiles, and been
repulsed with considerable loss Other reports say he is still very
strong. On the 27Q of June the Dey sent out two Schooners of 14 &
16 Guns to et this Marabout; or a t least to prevent him from Capturing Vesse s on the coast, They have not yet returned; but their
Commander has come back and brot with him two prisoners, who are
said to be officers of the Marabout. Report now says the Marabout
is attached to the Interest of France; and that those Frenchmen, said
to be Captured, were sent over to twist him as Engineers &9
Two Yortuguise ships of war have been cruizing off this lace for
some time past; but they have not prevented the enterance o Vessels.
Very few, however, arrive.
I have not recQ a line from the U. S. since the Govt must have
heared of the Captivity of our Citizens. I have recq a special Commission to negociate with Tripoli; but it was sent before they had
heared of that event I shall hold myself in readiness to go to Tripoli
by the first Am. Vessel which comes here.

?

P

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

281

We have had, of late few arrivals, and still fewer opportunities
which could be relied upon, going to Europe, which will account for
your not having heared from me lately.
The attention of our mutual friend Montgomery in sending me
the Gazetts to the 28" of May, has given me information of the
important Change in the Gov$ of France & of the Change of the
Ministry in G. B. what events these changes will produce between
the two Countries, we are anxious to learn.
We continue to enjoy good health here and the weather has been,
as yet, ve temperate. Our Garden is pleasantly situated on the
Side of the ay, about two miles North] of the City, which gives us a
fine view of the sea & a pleasant air.
MTB Lem unites with me in respects & best wishes for the reestablishment of MFs Kirkpatrick's health, and for all felicity to yourself and family. -

Ti

[Stephen Decatur Col. NDA photostat, Book A.]
To Captain Samuel Barron, U. S. Navy, from James Simpson, U. 6. Consul,Tangier,
Morocco

(COPY)

TANGIER
18th July 1804

DEARSIR AS I have heard you may probably be soon a t Gibralter,

I think well to hand you Copy of my last Letter to Commodore
Preble for your Information
The Ship from Sally arrived a t Mogador on the 30th June to
take on board an Ambassador, come from Algiers t o Mully Suleman
and his Suit on their return to that Port with 20 Tons of Salt Petre
and the like Quantity of Copper which he had obtained permission
to load Duty free
By the last Advices the Larach Ships had not sailed. Two Gallies
a t Tituan are fitting and will be ready for Sea about the End of this
Month,
[NDA. MC LB, 1804-5.1
Extract from log book kept by Sailing Master Nathaniel Earaden, U. S. Navy, on
board U. 6. Frigate Gnsfifufion,Thursday, 19 July 1804

Fresh breezes from E N E. At Anchor in Vallette Squadron in
company
By 2 P. M. frequent Squalls & rain. Down royal & top all%
Yards. We brought home the stream anchor - By 3 P.
it
- dshore, and
became Moderate - Ran out a kedge to the S o u t h u ~ ~in
sighted the small bower which we found foul cleared it, and let it go.
Towards Evening the wind shifted in a squall from E N E to
N b W. - Let go the best bower and veered to one third of a cable
on the small bower
At Sundown sent two boats with Hawsers to assist the Enterprize
in proceeding to Sea. The wind being strong from N b W, her s~gnal
was made to re-anchor By 9 P. M. i t became moderate & continued
so during the night A. M, Sailed the U. S. Schooner Enterprize
At 10 weighed the kedge & the best bower
Ships company Employed as necessary
Rec'd Boatswains, Gunners & Carpenters Stores which will be
hereafter mentioned

2.

282 NAVAL OPERATIONS. APRIL-SEPTEMBER 6 , 1804
Discharged to sick Quarters Mr P Leonard Chaplain & Doctor
Simm Surgeons Mate
Surgeons report 3 sick, 5 convalescent.
Loosed the staysails & studding sails to dry
[LC. EPP, Log Constitution,1803-1804.1
To Captain Thomas Briggs,R.N , commanding H. B. M.S Aginrourt, from Captain
Edward Preble, U. S. Navy

Constitution JULY
20th 1804
DEARSIR I am honored with your much esteemed favor of the
l e t Inst, and beg you to accept my warmest thanks for your very
polite attention to Ms Lewis and h l r Thompson. I shall recollect
with satisfaction the favor you have co~ferredon me by the ready
accomodation you afforded them, and be assured it will afford me
sincere pleasure to have it in my power to reciprocate your good
Offices - I am much gratified that h 0 Lewis' good conduct while
in the Agincourt has impressed you with an opinion of him correspondant to my own - With wishes for your health &- prosperity
[LC. EPP, LB, April-Sor. 1804.1
Report of Survey of U. S. Provisions in care of William Higgins, U. S. Navy Agent,
Malta

MALTAJuly 20th 180.4
We the undersigned as pr order of Commodore Preble to survey the
Provisions belonging to the United States in the Stores of 11:William
Higgins Agent for the United States at Malta hare carefully surveyed
& examined the following provisions & find them not fit for use Viz
fifty Seven casks Butter
Three casks cheese
Three Barrells Beef
Six casks Bread
Four Barrells flour
Signed, RICH('SOMERS
Signed, JAMES
B DECATUR
Signed, CHAPL RIDGELY
[LC. EPP, Order Book, May 1803-June 1805.1
Extract from Diary of Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Navy, Commodore of U. S.
Squadron in the Mediterranean, Friday, 20 July 1804

Wind N W fresh Breezes, the Bombard which carried over to
Tripoly the cloathing & Stores for the Officers 83. Crew of the Philadelphia arrived the whole was landed & left a t the disposal of Cap1
Bainbridge, I received a receit from the Danish Consul Mr Nissen
for 125 spanish doubloons sent by me through the good Offices of
Governor Ball to the British Consul to be delivered to the Danish
Consul at Tripoly for Captain Bainbridge, receiving in Stores, at
noon a strong head wind from S S W, prevents ou<sailing, received
letters from Cap1 Bainbridge & the French Consul, [LC. EPP, Diary, 1803-1804.1

283

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

Extract from journal kept by Purser John Darby, U. S. Navy, on board U. 6. 6.
John A d a , Master Commandant Isaac Chauncey, U. S, Navy, commanding,
Friday, 20 July 1804

[Manuscript mutiliated.] this morning discovered a Brig on our
Larboard bow standing to the Wc a t half past 4 she passed us at
half past 7. discovered another sail on the lar bow standing to the
Nq. a t 8 Air 78% Water 71% a t Meridian Air 69. Water 71
Latitude in 35. 16.
At. 4. this evening Air 69%Water 70%. a t 6 Air 68 Water 71 a t
12 Midnight the Temperature of the Air Was 65%&. Water 69. Wind
N. N. E. & Variable [NDA original. Miss Camilla S. McConneU.1

To Robert Montgomery, U. S. Consul, Alicante, from Tobias Lear, U. 6. Consul
General, Algiers

ALGIERS
July $1 lt1804.
DEARSIR I had the pleasure of receiving your acceptable favor
of the lgt@UltQ,by the Courier, on the 2gt@Your letters of the 3c
of June & 24t@of April Via Oran did not get to my hands 'till the
1gtQinst
In the b t place let me beg you to accept my most cordial thanks
for the Gazetts, which you was so good as to forward me They were
the latest we had recd here, and the inportant information contained
in them was very interesting. So few arriva,ls as we have had of
late from Europe, has made all here interested in the even& of that
quarter, very anxious for news; and the still fewer opportunities
which me have had of late of transmitting let,ters, safely, to that
quarter, will account for your not having heared from me for some
time.
Mr Foley's letter from Oran, enclosing yours was dated the 4t@of
July. I shall write to him in a few days, by a Courier which will go
for that place, and shall feel very happy if it should be in my power
to be of Service to him, from your recommendation. Should an
agent be necessary for our affairs there, I shall not be inattentive to
your re uest. At present it will not be in my power to furnish
cash to %lr Foley, as the supplies which I have been obliged to send
to our unfortunate Citizens in Captivity a t Tripoli, & a cash Payment on Account of Annuities, which I effected here in March have
drained me very much; but I shall inform him that I will accept his
bills here & draw upon you for a reinboursement, which I presume
will answer every urpose
To give you af' the information which has come to me of late,
respecting our affairs in Tunis & Tripoli; I enclose Extracts from the
letters of Commodore Preble & Mr Davis to me under date of the
19'@& 22g of June, also a Copy of a letter from Capt-ainbridge
of
the 20t@of May. [See letter to William Kirkpatrick of 19 July 1804.1

*

*

*

*

*

*

*

P. S. I trouble you as usual with packages to forward Vizt one for
the Secretary of State, by the earliest safe conveyance, one for Consul
Kirkpatiick, and One for Consul Gavino, I will not add to your
trouble by any apology I shall only say, that any expence incurred
by my letters is a very fair charge against the Govenunr and will be
paid. [Stephen Decatur Col. N D A photostat, Book A.]

284 NAVAL OPERATIONS, APRIL-SEPTEMBER 6, 1804
To Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Navy, from James Simpson, U,S. Consul, Tengier,
JiIorocco

TANGIER
2241 July 1804. -

DEARSIR My last respects to you was the 30th June. I have now to advise that the Emperours Ship Maimona of 30 Guns

sailed from Salle for Mogadore where she takes in an Algerine who
came by land to the Emperour on busyness, and now returns to that
Port with twenty Ton of Copper and the like quantity of Salt petre
purchased a t Mogadore with funds provided by the Dey of Algiers. The other Maimonu of 32 Guns sailed some days ago from Larach to
the Southward, some say for SaDe & others pretend destined to join
Arraez Sebrah & that they are to proceed together to Algiers. The Mirboha Arraez Lubarez three days ago was outside of Larach
Bar waiting to receive one thousand Fanegnes Wheat destined for the
poor of Tripoly from the Emperour, - whether it be meant to attempt
to introduce this Wheat a t that Port, or if it is to be left a t one in the
Neighborhood I have not been able to discover. I n my Passports for these three Ships, entrance into Ports blockaded
by the Ships of War is expressly excepted & all the three Captains
have been personaly told by my Agents a t Larach & Salle that by the
latest advices Tripoly continued to be blockaded by a Squadron of
Vessels of War of the United States.
The two Tetuan Galleys will be ready for Sea by the end of this
Month. [LC. EPP, Vol. 12, June-August 1804.1
Extract from Diary of Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Navy, Commodore of U. 8.
Squadron in the Mediterranean, Saturday, 21 July 1804

Wind S S W, still a t anchor waiting a change of wind, William
Curtis Able Seaman deserted, He went on board the Enlerprize on
Liberty from Lieutenant Robinson and left her in a shore Boat, I have thought it prudent to procure here 4 or 5 Hawsers and two
additional Kedge Anchors for warping as they will probably be necessary in case of an attack on Tripoly, - a t 8 wind E N E made the
signal for sailing, weighed & warped out of the Harbour, ordered a
common spy glass for each Bomb & gun Vessel, to enable them to
distinguish signals a t Noon made sail & Brought to, to wait for the
Boats, ships draught 23 feet 3 inches abaft, 22 feet Forward, ILC. EPP,Diary, 1803-1804.1
Extract from log book kept by Sailing Master Nathaniel Haraden, U. 6. Navy, on
board U. S. Frigate Gnstilulion, Saturday, 21 July 1804

Moderate breezes from S S W. At Anchor in Valetta. At 3
P. M. weighed the stream - Towards evening fresh breezes from
S W. Wm Curtis Seaman deserted from the Constitution Recieved
from the Dock Yard 2 small kedges - One has a wooden stock
marked 631 lb, the other is iron stocked & is marked 557 lb - Continued the guard boat during the night.
% At day light hove short; Weighed and warped out of the Harbor a t
8 A. M. - Made signal for the Squadron to sail Viz 6 Gun boats,
2 bombards, the store ship, Vizen & Nautilw - In warping out we
were obliged,to slip a Hawser & kedge; The cutter & Barge were
sent to weighit.

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

285

At noon we brought to, One Mile without the Harbor in order to
take up our boats. Winds S S E with a swell from E N E.
Additional Signals were sent to the Gun boats & bombards, and
they each recieved from the Constitution One small Spy Glass
Ships draft F t In
Abaft 23 - 3
Forward 22 - 1- 3

Difference

[LC. EPP, Log Constitution,1803-1804.1
Extract from journal of William Eaton, U. S. Navy Agent for the Barbary Regencies,
21 July 1804

[On board U. S. Frigate President.] 21. Saturday. At Meridian,
made Pico - One of the Azores, or western Island - The winds had
been constantly fair [H. E. Huntington L&AG, EA 206.1
Extract from journal of U. S. Frigate John Admns. Master Commandant Isaac
Chauncey, U. S. Navy, commanding, Saturday, 21 July 1804

First Part of these 24 Hours fresh Breezes and fine clear WeatherAt 8 saw a Latteen rigged Vessel to leeward of us bore up to
speak her - call'd all hands to Quarters and got the Guns clear, she
proved to be a Portuguese Fishing Boat, a t 9 made Sail - At 4
A. M. saw the Land bearing from S. E to N. E. - At % past 4 saw
Cape Spartel bearing E b. S. about 6 Leagues Distant, Cape Trafalgar
bearing N E 94 N saw a Brig in Shore of us standing in - At 11
Mustered the People and read the Articles of War. Wind N. N. W.
[LC. EPP, Journal, June to 6 August 1804.1
Extract from journal kept by Purser John Darby, U. S. Navy, on board U. S. S.
John A d m , Master Commandant Isaac Chauncey, U. 6. Navy, commanding,
Saturday, 21 July 1804

[Manuscript mutilated.] Discovered a sail on our la bow [manuscript mutilated] At 5 the sail passed to the Windwg of us [manuscript mutilated] colours. she hoisted Danish a t 7 Discovered a sail
ahead a t % past 7 discovd another K p[o]int on the
bow at 8
saw another a t Maridian Air 67 Water 71% a t % past Eight this
Evening saw a sail on our Star!' bow at 3: past 8. caUd all hands to
quarters. bore up and gave chace to the'ail
to the Leward a t %
past 8 fired a musket to bring her too spoke her and found her to be
a Portugea Latteen boat'from'the Straits. a t 9. fled away the Topsails and gave the ship her course [NDA original. Miss Camilla S. McConnell.]
Extract from journal of U. 6. Frigate h,
Captain John Rodgers, U. S. Navy,
commanding, Sunday, 98 July 1804

P M First part fresh breezes and Cloudy weather. -at 1 saw the
Island of pic0 bearing N E%E. Made and shortened Sail occasionally At % past 5 the commodore made the Signal NP 572 soon after
made the signal NQ 1139 - a t X past 6 tack$ ship - at past 6

286 NAVAL OPERATIONS, APRIL-SEPTEMBER 6 . 1804
P. M. the west end of the Island of Fayal bore N j4 W. Distance 6
leagues - the East end N E b N 5 Leagues the Senter of Pico bore
E b N N. Distance 3 Leagues
At midnight fresh breezes and cloudy A. M. made and shortened sail occasionally To keep our station
with the squadron From 8 to 12 Squally w7ithrain at intervals
at 7 P M - Finding my reckoning to be 50 miles ahead of The
ship I take a fresh departure from Pico I t being in lat 38. 29 N
Long 28. 20 W it bearing from me E b N X N Distance 9 miles Longitude Observed 27' .57' W. Latitude Obsemed 37" 14' N.
[USNA.]
Extract from log book kept by Sailing Master Nathaniel Haraden, U. S. Navy, on
board U. S. Frigate Consiifufion. Sunday, 22 July 1804

Moderate breezes from S E b E - We are laying to without the
harbor waiting the Squadron to Join company and the barge & cutter
to return We took in tow- the 2 bombards & 3 of the Gun boat,s The Nadilus
& T'ixen were ordered p' Signal to take the other three boats in tow At 3 P. 31. bore up to the K I T
in order to: pass to 'the Westward of Gozo & proceed off Tripoly
By Sun down the wind had shifted by degrees to K E b N. Tacked
with the Squadron ctf shore to thr Eastu-ard - The N E extreme of
Gozo K W. 7 miles The land to the S o u t h b f Valetta S S E
4 leagues At 12 Midnight we had strong breezes from N E. Double reefed
the Topsails in order to ease the Gun boats
At 2 A. M. the East part of Malta bore S W two leagues Bore up
S. & S S W. in order to pass'qto-the Eastward'ofiMalta This is our last bearing from which we take our departure.
At Day light All the Squadron in Sight
At 8 A. M we suppose the East part of Malta bears (Variation
corrected) N K E. 19 Miles - We had a leading breeze till 10 A. M.
a t which time it fell calm From this time till noon light airs &
Variable
Punished cha"tap1es
Seaman with 36 lashes for drunkenness
breach of Trust & theft
Surgeons report 2 sick & 5 convalescent.
Noon calm.
East part of Malta supposed to bear N E b N % N. 32 Miles Latitude Observed 35" 23' K.
[T,C. EPP, Log Consrittctzon, 1803-1804.1
Extract from journal of William Eaton, U. 8. Navy Agent for the Barbary Regencies.
28 July 1804

[On board U. S. Frigate President.] 224 Winds shifted ahead
Stood in near the Islands [Azores] [H. E. Hu~lt,ingtonL$AG. EA 206.1

-

W A R S WITH BARBARY POWERS

287

Extract from journal of U. S. Frigate John Adams. Master Commandant Isaac
Channcey, 0. 6. Navy, commanding, Sunday, 22 July 1804

First Part of these 24 Hours light Airs from the Northward and fine
Pleasant Weather - At 1 F M. bent the Cables - At 4 Tangiers
bore S. W. Ape's Hill E b S. Gibralter N E b E - At 9 Light
Airs and variable standing into Gibralter Bay At 1 1 took in Sail and
anchored u-ith the Starboard Bower in 9 Fathoms Water - At 9
went ashore u-ith Letters and to make Arrangements to fill up our
Rater. found laying a t Gibralter I-I B. M. Frigates Meduza, Fish
Guard - La Provoyant and Termagant Sloop also 7 sail of American
Merchantmen but not one of them bound to the United States
[LC.

EPP, Journal, June to 6 August 1804.1

Extract from journal kept by Purser John Darby, U. S. Navy, on board U. S. S.
John Adams. Master Commandant Isaac Chauncey, U. S. Navy, commanding,
Sunday, 22 July 1804

At four Oclock this morning we discovered [manuscript mutilated]
bearing E. S. E . & Cape Trafalgar bearing [manuscript mutilated] we
stood along up the Mediterranean near the Barbary shore a t 12
Meridian Cape Spartel bore E. by S - Cape Trafalgar E. by K. Air
71%;Water 72%. we still continued to stand along the Barbary shore.
had a f i e T'iew of the Town of Tangiers and several small Touns on
the Spanisl~side. at 4. in the evening Tangers bearing S. W. Aps
Hill E. h S. Gibraltar Y. by E. Distance 5 Leagues. as we approached Elflopea Point u7c had a fine View of Bps Hill which is said
to be one of the Pillars of Ilcrcules. R e also had a handsom View of
Ceuta on the Barbary shore to the S. E. of Gibraltar, and a view of
Algesirus ant1 St. Rooke, on the Spanish Shore. at. half past 11. we
came to an Anchor in Gibraltar Bay. Europea Point bore South Xio:
Castle S. E. '4 E. Tou-n of St Roolie K. by E. Town of Algesirus W.
hv K - found here 3lajest-y~Ships ,Madusa 6: Fishgard, 6: Termwn
Sloop of War.
[KDA original.

Miss Caniilla 8. McConnell ]

To Secretary of the Navy from Master Commandant Isaac Chauncey, U. 6. Navy

U. S. SHIPJohn Adam
Qibrdter Bay $9J d y 1804
SIR I have the honor of informing you that I a r r i ~ e dhere in the
John Adums last Evening after a passage of 26 Days I shall fill my
Water tomorrow and proceed for Algiers and from thence to hlalta
agreeable to Orders from Commodore Preble. I t appears by the last
Accounts that we have nothing to apprehend from Tunis, tho' in
Commodore Preble's Letter of the 19tb 3Iarch to 31: G~T-ino
he was
very apprehensive of a Rupture with that Regency, but in another
Letter to the same Gentleman on the 22'4 April he is silent on that head.
and desires Ail? Garino to direct me to proceed to hfalta, where I
wou'd meet his Orders for the Government of my future Conduct,
therefore I presume if Commodore Preble had an Idea that there was
any thing to be apprehended from the Tunissians he wou'd not have
ordered me to Malta u~ithouta sufficient Protection more over some
Officers who have gone home in the Woodrough Sirns informed M'
Gavino that Commodore Preble had settled every thing amicably

288 NAVAI, OPERATIONS, APRIL-SEPTEMBER 6, 1804
with the Bey of Tunis, therefore combining all these Circumstances, I
presume that you vi-ill approve of my proceeding aloft without waiting
for the Squadron, I however shall guard against Accident as much as
possible, in Consequence of which I am taking down those Temporary
Births that were put up for the Officers on the Gun Deck, and shall
mount those Guns that I have now in the Waist on the Spar Deck in
their proper places on the Gun Deck where they can be managed with
e
Commodore Preble by a British Man
more Advantage. I h a ~ wrote
of War bound to Malta, advising him of my Arrival, also Commodore
Barron, Copies of both Letters I have the honor of inclosing you.
The Moors appear well disposed towards the Americans as yet, they
are however equipping all their Force their Object is not known -I also
inclose you Copies of two Letters from M' Simpson the one to Commodore Barron the other to Commodore Preble, but which he requested
the first American Commander that arrived to peruse and take Copies.
Ms Gavino shewed me two Letters that he has just received one from
Malaga the other from Cadiz mentioning that it was confidently
reported that Spain was on the Eve of a Rupture with the United
States but what Foundation they have for the Report he does not
h o w nor does he place any Confidence in the Report, as M; Pinchey
has not wrote him on the Subject. Capt. Gore of the 17Madusa who
is stationed off Cadiz told me today that within the last two Months
he had boarded a great Number of Spanish Transports full of all kinds
of warlike Stores, bound to the Spanish Settlements in America, combining these Circumstances with the Reports, to Use hfr OIBryan's
Expression it looks a little Squally
The John Adams behaved very well on the Passage except in her
steering which was owing I presume to her being so deep in the Water,
she also leaked more than I cou'd have wished her, die made when i t
blew hard from 6 to 8 Inches Per Hour; but I am in Hopes that she has
not damaged any Part of the Stores, the Crew has continued remarkably healthy; I am sorry however to be obliged to announce to
you the Loss of Midshipman Sears who unfortunately fell overboard
the 299 June, and notwithstanding every Exertion was made Use of to
save him i t proved uneffectual, the Ship was going nearly ten Knotts
a t the Time, and a considerable Sea on - I feel particularly for the
Loss of Mr Sears, as he bid fair to have made a valuable Officer, and
I understand that he was an only Son to a fond Mother.
The other Officers have conducted themselves with as much propriety as cou'd be expected considering their Ignorance of the Duties
of their Present situation
[NDA. M C LB, 1804-5.1
To Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Msvy, from Master Commandant Isaac Chauncey,
U. 6. Navy

U. S. SHIPJohn Adams GIBRALTER
BAY
$9July 1804
SIR I have the honor of informing you that I arrived here last

Night in 26 Days from Hampton Roads in the United States Ship
John Adams under my Command with Stores for the Squadron a list
of which I have the honor of inclosing you - I shall fill my water
(which is nearly out) and proceed to Algiers agreeable to Orders from
the Secretary of the Navy, where it is probable that I shall not be

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

289

detained but a few Hours, and then I shall proceed to Malta - agreeable to your Orders to Mr Gavino I shall not be detained here to exceed
48 Hours and shall use every Exertion to get to Malta as early as
possible.
The other Parts of the Squadron [of Commodore Barron] consisting
of the President, Congress, Constellation and Essex, wou'd leave
Hampton Roads in all probability on or before the 1" Inst therefore
may be hourly expected I have the honor to be
[NDA. MC LB, 1804-5; and LC.

EPP, Vol. 12.1

To Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Navy, from Master Commandant John Smith,
U. S. Navy

U. S. SCHOONER
Vixen JULY
23d 1804
SIR Conformable to a requisition of Lieutt Wm Crane, I have

arrested Lewis Warrington, Midshipman, for having treated him in
an insulting and disrespectful manner when in the execution of his
duty.
[LC. EPP, Order Book, May 1803-June 1805.1
Extract from Diary of Captain Edward Preble, U. 6. Navy, Commodore of U. 6.
Squadron in the Mediterranean, Monday, 23 July 1804

Wind variable from East to N W. Nautilus, Vixm, Store ship,
Bombs and Gun Vessels in company, - at 7 P M Observed the
north limbs of the moon to be eclipsed, but a thick cloud covering soon
after, we could not see the ending of it, - at 10 P hf the wind shifted
to the N E carried a light a t the mizen Peak during the night, - The
larboard Bower Cable was reported to be much worn and injured by
severice 'examined &: found it not t r u s t ~ o r t h y , ordered 20 fathoms
cut off, and turned into the Boatswains Stores as Junk, - our Carpenters are fitting small Brass carriage guns for our Boats, -'
I have
ordered one Iron 4 pound Carronade, and a 4 pound Brass gun for the
Cutter, a Brass 4 pounder for the Barge, a Brass 1+ pounder for the
Pinnace, a Brass 1: pounder for the small Cutter and an Iron 4 pound
Carronade for the Jolly Boat, - at Noon Observed in Latitude
34O 30' Nq Tripoly Bearing S S W 94 miles distance, [LC. EPP, Diary, 1803-1804.1

--

Extract from log book kept by Sailing Master Nathaniel Haraden, U. S. Navy, on
board U. 6. Frigate Constiiuiion, Monday, 23 July 1804

Light airs & variable Nautilm, Vixen, 6 Gun boats, 2 bombards & the store ship in
company.
Wind light & Variable all the afternoon
Employed in making & shortening sail in order to keep clear of the
Gun boats & bombards which we have in tow:
Towards7Sun down it became cloudy and Overcast weather with
light airs &%hazy weather This Evening there was an Eclipse of the
moon part Visible here At 10 P. M. the wind shiftod to N N E - carried a light during the
night in order to prevent se aration
At day light saw all the quadron.

8

290 NAVAL OPERATIOOVS,APRIL-SEP TEiMBER 6, 1804
The Clew of the Main Topsail pave may this morning - Unbent
the sail, and bent another cut 20 fathg from t h small
~
bower, that
quantity being unserviceable, for which the boatswain is charged a
Ton of Junk.
Carpenters are rmployed in fitting bow ch~sersto t,he cutter, Barge,
Pinnace, and to the boat recieved in Messina.
Sail Mahcrs repairing the main topsail
Ships company cfcaning ship, making wads, & bending the small
bower cable All these 24 hours a rough Sea, & light wind
Our observation & dead reckoning agree
Noon Tripoly supposed to bear S W b S S. 100 Miles
Surgeons report 4 sick, 4 convnlescont.
Latitude Obserred 34' 30' N.

+

[LC.

EPP, Log Constztutzon, 1803-1804.1

Extract from journal of U. S. Frigate John Adams. Master Commandant Isaac
Chauncey, lJ. S, navy, commanding, Monday, 25 July 1804

Throughout these 24 Hours strong Gales from the West and fine
Weather - At 6 A. hl. Two Lighters came alongside for Water
Casks; filled them wit.h empty Casks and scnt them on Shore with
Officers and Men to fill T a t e r - H. 3 hi Frignte Fish Guard went
to sea bound to the Eastward. [LC. EPP, Journal, June to 6 August 1804.1
Extract from journal kept by Purser John Darby, U. S. Navy, on board U. S. S.
John Adams. Master Commandant Isaac Channcey, U. S. Navy, commanding,
Monday, 23 July 1804

[Manuscript mutilated.] early this morning had a ful View of the
Town and Harbour - and the Spanish shore. Blgesirus and St:
Rooke laying on the oposite side of the bay. being garrisoned
T o m s . there are a number of shiping laying in here. some British
men of War. and a Portugal seventy four. gun ship laying at Algesirus - at 8. Oclock this morning we saluted the Town of Gibrnlter
and the Salut,e was returned from the British fort. at. about 10
Oclock Doctr Griffin and my self went on shore. at the Rock. took a
View of the town and f~rtificat~ions.I t is certainly the strongest
garrison'd place in the world. and is made so much so by Saturc and
art that it may bid defiance to all the World. it is said that thcre are.
about. 5,000 Regular British troops here and the best disciplined of
any Troops in the World. I t is astonishing to behold the work done
here by the British. it is impossible [manuscript mutilated] of assending
the top of the Rock [manuscript mutilated] ashore so late prevented
my Visiting the [manuscript mutilated] as I was informed. that it
would take at least a day to assend it nnd take a View of all the
Gallerys & chambers excavated out of the Rock. Here. I met with several Americans. We Iearned here that Bonaparte had declared himself Emperor of the Gauls and that one of his
brothers is to be King of the Scicilys: there is also a report here that
there is a prospect of Rupture between Spain and the United States. If
this be true there can be no doubt but what Bonnparte is at the
bottom of it. We are informed here that Tunis is a t peace with us.
none of our Mediterranean Squadron is here all of them being up a

LIEUTENANT STEPHEN DECATUR AND

A TRIPOLITAN GUNBOAT.
MIDSHIPMAN
T H O M A S MACDONOUG1-1 BOARDING

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

291

Loft. as the Phrase is. - the Doct' and myself Returned on b u d
of the ship about 9. Oclock. that being the hour which the gates closes.
after which no person can get in or out of the Garrison [NDA original.

Miss Camilla S. McConnell.]

To Captain Samuel Barron, U. 6.Navy, from Master Commandant Isaac Channcey,
U. 5. navy

U. S. SHIPJohn Adams

Gibralter Bay ddth July 1804
SIR I have the pleasure of inforr ling you that I arrived here late
in the Evening of the 22e Ins? after a Passage of 26 days. Yesterday
was so boisterous that we could not Water, but will compleat watering
to Day, and tomorrow Morning proceed for Algiers. From the Tenor
of Commodore Preblels last Letter, and from Information received
from some Officers bound home, I presume there is nothing to apprehend from the Tunissians; with that Impression and agreeable to his
Orders to M' Gavino I shall proceed from Algiers to Malta. H. B. M.
Frigate Fish Guard sailed Yesterday for that Place, by which Op ortunity I wrote Comr Preble advising him of my Arrival here, a
of which Letter I have the honor of inclosing you. The John Adams behaved as well during the Passage as I had any
reason to expect, tho' from her being so very deep, she steered very
bad when it blew hard, and made from 6 to 8 Inches of Water F
Hour. I met with no Accident during the Passage, nor have I lost
any Men except M' John D. Sears Midshipman who fell overboard
on the 2gtQJune and wns lost, altho' every Exertion was made to save
him. Our Crew continues very healthy, and are generally very good
Men, my Respects to your Brother
Come SAMUEL
BARRON.

dpy

[KDA.

hlC LR, 1804-5.1

To Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Navy, from John Gavino, U. S. Consul, Gibraltar

GIBRALTAR
- July 24th 1804
DEARSIR, Since my last to you pr the Schooner Commodore Barry,
20th Inst, I received Malaga post your duplicate of 22e April last Yesterday arrived t e U. S. Ship John Adams when gave Cap+
Chauncey tho ~ e r u s aof
l your above letter 8: will be the bearer of this.
The Schooner Eleonora," Cap3 Grayson arrived from Alexandria
with a cargo of Stores pr note at foot - the directions from the
Sec? of thc Navy regarding the same was that the Squadron should
take on board the cargo, but if they were not here, to unload her,
which am doing, as the J. Adams is so lumbercld that she cannot take
any thing in - I look every moment for the Reinforcement &
refferring to Capxhauncey, I am with respect
THEEleonora's CARGO
260 Barrells beef
83
DQ Pork
190 Barrels Bread 16.505 lb
46 Boxes S ermaceti Candles 1, 4, 20%Ib
50 Boxes d o u l d
d? 1993 lb
3 Bales Russia duck of 20 p9 each &
200 bolts Russia duck. -

Rr

[LC. EPP, LB, April-Nov. 1804.1

292 NAVAL OPERATIONS. APRIL-SEPTEMBER 6. 1804
Extract from journal kept on board the U. S. Frigate Constilution. by Captain Edward
h e b l e , U. S. Navy, Tuesday, 24 July 1804

Light Airs from the Westward, Squadron in comp? At 10 pm
fresh Breezes from S E which soon chang'd to the S W, AM ordered
all the water casks on board the Gun Boats and Bomb-Vessels to be
filled from this ship, it is a necessary precaution in case of separation
as they carry only six days allowance of that article. at Noon
Tripolp bore S W b S 60 miles. [LC. EPP, Vol. 12, June-August 1804 ]
Extract from journal kept by Purser John Darby, U. S. Bavy, on board U. S. S.
John Admns Master Commandant Isaac Chauncey, U. S. Navy, commanding,
Tuesday, 24 July 1804

I set up late last night. I got up about Nine Oclock. and after attending to the business of the ship. Doctr Griffin and myself went on
shore again to day we landed about 1 Oclock and amused our selves.
by looking at the town again and purchasing some few things. We
waited on M r Gavino. the American. Consol. I had some business
with him to get. some Spanish gold changed for Dollars. which he.
cou'd not conveniantly do - and got it done. by. a Cap1 Leigh. an
American by giving him rather better than one and a half per cent.
We dined on shore, and when the Signal Gun a t sunset fired we repaired to the place appointed for our boat to meet us. but on geting
down to the shore we discovered our boat. going off to the ship and
out of hail. We returned into the town again left our servants to watch
for the boat and let us know if they shoud discover her returning
[manuscript mutilated] on board of an American Brig [manuscript
mutilated] and that they supposed we had gone, [manuscript mutilated] as he was on shore and had dined with [manuscript mutilated]
We were not satisfied with this as we were very much aversed to
staying on shore particularly as we had not obtained permission from
the Capt. We went again down to the shore and remained there
until1 a few minutes before nine, finding our servants there and no
appearance of the boat. we. immediately. returned with our servants
with in the Gates. otherwise we should have been compeled to have
remained on the beach all night. the gates shut a few moments after
we got with in them. We then went to Bonards Tavern and staied
all night.
m D A original.

Miss Camilla S. McConnell.]

To Secretary of the Bavy from Master Commandant Isaac Chauncey, U. S. Navy

U. S. SHIPJohn Adams
Gibralter Bay 2btQJ d y 1804
SIR I had the honor of writing you on the 234 Ins; the Day after
my Arrival, wherein I stated to you my Intention of proceeding to
Algiers and Malta, I am now getting under way with the Wind from
the Eastward for that Purpose.
[NDA.

MC LB, 1804-5.1

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

293

Extract from journal of U.8. Brig Argus, Master Commandant Isaac Hull,U.8, Nsvy,
commanding, Wednesday, 25 July 1804

[Off Tripoli] A, hf, at 4 saw the Commodore with a Squadron of
Gunboats and the rest of the American Squad? made sail for him a t
5 Spoke him Cap; Hull went on board and returned at 11 took 2 of the
Gunboats in tow fresh breezes and Clear Empd as Necessary
[XDA photostat.]
Extract from journal kept on board the U. S. Frigate Constitution, by Captain Edward
Preble, U. S. Bevy, Wednesday, 25 July 1804

Wind E N E, we cornpleated watering the Bombs, & Gun Boats,
a t 2 AM fell in with the Syren a t 4 saw the Argus & Enterprize a t
6 AM wore ship off shore with the mind S E. - a heavy sea heaving
on the coast. Tripoly in sight bearing by compass S W dist 15 Miles.
at 8 the Argus & Enterprize join'd compr, made the following disposition for towing Gun Boats, & Bombs. - Viz. Constitution the 2
Bombs, Argus N? 2 2 3 Gun Boats Syren NQ5. V k n N Q6. NaUtdw
Tu'" Enterprize NQ4. with this orrangment I presume we shall be
able to tow them off shore in case of a Norther. Made signal for all Captains and delivered them the Orders of
Sailing.
Latd Obsd 33' 10' N. [LC.

EPP, Vol. 12, June-August 1804.1

[25 July to 10 September 18041
Naval Operations against Tripoli

8th Congress.
2d. Session.
COMMUNICATED
TO CONGRESS,
FEBRUARY
20, 1805.
To the Senate and House of Representatives of the United States:
I communicate, for the information of Congress, a letter of September 18, from Commodore Preble, giving a detailed account of the
transactions of the vessels under his command, from July the gth,
to the 10th of September, last past.
The energy and judgment displayed by this excellent. officer,
through the whole course of the service lately confided to hun, and
tbe zeal and bravery of his officers and men in the several enterprises
executed by them, cannot fail to give h g h satisfaction to Congress
and their country, of whom they have deserved well.
TH: JEFFERSON.
Feb~uary20, 1805.
To Secretary of the Navy from Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Navy

SIR: I had the honor to write you from Messina under date of the
5th of July. I then expected to have sailed the day following, but
was detained by bad weather until the 9th, when I left i t with two
small Bomb Vessels under Convoy, and arrived at Syracuse; where
we were necessarily detained four days. On the 14th I sailed, the
Schooners Nautilus and Enterprize in company, with six Gun Boats
and two Bomb Vessels, generously loaned us by His Sicilian Majesty.
The Bomb Vessels are about thirty Tons, carry a 13 Inch Brass SeaMortar and 40 men; the Gun Boats 25 Tons carry a long Iron 24

294 NAVAL OPERATIONS. APRIL-SEPTEMBER 6. 180.4
pounder in the bow, with a complement of 35 Men; They are
officered and manned from the squadron, excepting twelve Neapolitans bombadiers, gunners, and sailors, attached to each boat,
who were shipped by permission of their Government. This step I
found necessary, as every vessel in the squadron was considerably
short of complement. The gunboats are constructed for the defence
of harbors; they are flat bottomed and heavy, and do not sail or row
even tolerably well. They were never intended to go to sea, and, I
find, cannot be navigated with safet , unless assisted by tow ropes
from larger and better sailing vesse s, nor even then, in very bad
weather; however, as they were the best I could obtain, I have
thought i t for the good of our service to employ them, particularly
as the weather in July and August is generally pleasant, and, mlthout
them, my force too small to make any impressio~lon Tripoli.
On the 16th of July we arrived at Malta, where we were detained,
by contrary gales, until the 21st, when we left it, and arrived in sight
of Tripoli the 25th) and were joined by the Syren, Argus, Vixen, and
Scourge. Our squadron now consisted of the Constitution, three
brigs, three schooners, two bombs, and six gunboats, our whole
number of men one thousand and sixty. I proceeded to make the
necessary arrangements for an attack on Tripoli, a city well walled,
protected by batteries judiciously constructed, mounting one hundred
and fifteen pieces of heaxy cannon, and defended by twenty-five
thousand Arabs and Turks; the harbor protected by nineteen unboats, two galleys, two schooners of eight guns each, and a %rig
mounting ten guns, ranged in order of battle, forming a strong line of
defence, a t secure moorings, inside a long range of rocks and shoals,
extending more than two miles to the eastward of the town, which
form the harbor, protects them from the northern gales, and renders
i t impossible for a vessel of the Constitution's draught of water to
approach near enough to destroy them, as they are sheltered by the
rocks, and can retire under that shelter to the shore, unless they
choose to expose themselves in the different channels and o enings of
the reefs, for the purpose of annoying their enemies. Eac of their
gunboats mounts a heavy eighteen or twenty-six pounder in the bow,
and two brass howitzers on their quarters, and carry from thirty-six
to fifty men. The galleys have each one hundred men, schooners and
brigs about the same number. The weather was not favorable for
anchoring until the 28th) when, with the wind E.S.E. the squadron
stood in for the coast, and, a t 3 P.M. anchored, per signal, Tripoli
bearing S. two and a half miles distant. At this moment the wind
shifted suddenly from E.S.E. to N.N.W. and from thence to N.N.E.
At 5 o'clock i t blew strong, with a heavy sea, setting directly on shore.
I made the signal to prepare to wei h. At 6, the wind and sea having
considerably increased, the s i p a was made for the squadron to
weigh and gain an offing: the wlnd continued veering to the eastward,
which favored our gaining sea-room, without being obliged to carry
so great a press of sail as to lose any of our gunboats, although they
were in p e a t danger. The gale continued varying from N.E. to
E.S.E. without increasing much, until the 31st, when i t blew away
our reefed foresail, and close reefed main-topsail; fortunately the sea
did not rise in proportion to the stlength of the gale, or we must have
lost all our boats. AVGUBT~ B Tthe
, gale subsided, and we stood

9

f~

k

WRRS WITH BARBARY POWERS

295

towards the coast; every preparation was made for an attack on the
town and harbor.
AUGUST
3 ~pleasant
,
weather, wind East; stood in with the squadron
towards Tripoli. At noon we were between two and three miles from
the batteries, which were all manned, and observing several of their
gun-boats and galleys had advanced, in two divisions, without the
rocks, I determined to take advantage of their temerity. At half past
12, I wore off shore, and made the signal to come within hail, when I
communicated to each of the commanders my intention of attacking
the enemy's shipping and batteries. The gun and mortar boats were
immediately manned, and prepared to cast off, the gunboats in two
divisions of three each; the first division commanded by Ca tain
Somers, in No. 1, Lieutenant [James] Decatur in No. 2, and Leutenant Blake, in KO. 3: the second division commanded by Captain
[Steplen] Decatur [Jr.], in No. 4, Lieutenant [Joseph] Bainbridge, in
No. 5, and Lieutenant Trippe, in KO. 6. The two bombards were
commanded by Lieutenant Commandant Dent, and Mr. Robinson,
First Lieutenant of this ship. At half past 1 o'clock, having made the
necessary arrangements for the attack, wore ship and stood towards
the batteries. At 2, signal made to cast off the boats; a t a quarter
past 2, signal for bombs and gunboats to advance and attack the
enemy. At half past 2, general signal for battle. At three-quarters
past 2, the bombs commenced the action, by throwing shells lnto the
t o m . In an instant the enemy's shipping and batteries opened a
tsemendous fire, which was promptly returned by the whole squadron
within grape-shot distance; a t the same time the second division, of
three gunboats, led by tbe gallant Captain Decatur, was advancing,
with sails and oars, to board the a s t e r n division of the enemy, consisting of nine boats. Our boats gave the enemy showers of grape
and musket balls as they advanced; they, however, soon closed, when
d
were made good use of by our
the pistol, sabre, pike, a ~ tomahawk,
brave tars. Captain Somers being in a dull sailer, made the best use
of his sweeps, but was not able to fetch far enough to mindward to
en age the same division of the enemy's boats which Captain Decatur
fel in with; he, however, gallantly bore down with his single boat on
five of the enemy's western division, and engaged within pistol shot,
defeated, and drove them within the rocks, in a shattered condition,
and with the loss of a great number of men. Lieutenant Decatur, in
No. 2, was closely engaged with one of the enemy's largest boats of the
eastern division, which struck to him, after having lost a large proportion of men, and, a t the instant that brave officer was boarding her to
take possession, he was treacherously shot through the head by the
captain of the boat that had surrendered, which base conduct enabled
the poltroon (with the assistance he received from other boats) to
escape. The third boat of Captain Somers' division, kept to windward, firing a t the boats and shi ping in the harbor; had she gone
down to his assistance, i t is probab e several of the enemy's boats would
have been captured in that quarter. Captain Decatur, in No. 4,
after having, with distinguished bravery, boarded and carried one of
the enemy of superior force, took his prize in tow, and gallantly bore
down to engage a second, which, after a severe and bloody c o a c t , he

f

f

296 NAVAL OPERATIONS. APRILSEPTEMBER 6. 180.4
also took possession of.' These two prizes had thirty-three officers
and men killed, and twenty-seven made prisoners, nineteen of which
were badly wounded. Lieutenant Trippe, of the Vixen, in No. 6,
ran along side of one of the enemy's large boats, which he boarded
with only Midsllipman John Henley and nine men, his boat
falling off before any more could get on board; thus was he left, compelled to conquer or perish, with the odds of thirty-six to eleven.
The Turks could not withstand the ardor of this brave officer and his
assistants; in a few minutes the decks were cleared, and her colors
hauled down. On board of this boat fourteen of the enemy were
killed, and twenty-two made prisoners, seven of which were badly
wounded2 The rest of their boats retreated within the rocks. Lieutenant Trippe received eleven sabre wounds, some of which are very
severe: he speaks in the highest terms of Mr. Henley, and those who
followed him. Lieutenant Bainbridge, in No. 5 , had his latteen yard
shot away early in the action, which prevented his getting alongside
the enemy's boats, but he galled them by a steady and well directed
s
fire, within musket shot; indeed he pursued the enemy until l ~ boat
grounded under the batteries: she was, fortunately, soon got off.
The bomb vessels kept their stations, although covered with the spray
of the sea occasioned by the enemy's shot. They were well conducted
by Lieutenants Dent and Robinson, who kept up a constant f i e from
the mortars, and threw- a great number of shells into the town. Five
of the enemy's gunboats, and two galleys, composing the centre
division, and stationed within the rocks, as a reserve, joined by the
boats that had been driven in, and supplied by fresh men from the
shore to replace those they had lost, twice attempted to row out, to
endeavor to surround our gunboats and their prizes: I as often made
the signal to cover them, which was promptly attended to by the brigs
and schooners, all of which were gallantly conducted, and annoyed
the enemy exceedingly, but the fire from this ship kept their flotilla
completely in check. Our grape shot made great havoc among their
men, not only on board their shipping, but on shore. We were several
times within two cables length of the rocks, and within three of their
batteries, every one of which, in succession, were silenced, so long as
we could bring our broadside to bear upon them; but the moment we
passed a battery, i t was re-animated, and a constant, h e a ~ yfire kept
up from all that we could not point our guns at. We suffered most
when wearing or tacking; it was then I most sensibly felt the want of
another frigate.

* * one of the enemy having a fair chance a t captain Decatur's head,
1 +
made a blow a t him with all his force. His object was discovered by a young
man of the name of Daniel Frazier, who nobly rushed between Decatur and his
foe, and received on his own head the blow destined for Decatur. [Naval Chronicle, Vol. 1.1
2 A more extraordinary action was probably never recorded.
The commander
of the enemy's gun boat, was a remarkably athletic, gallant man, about twentyfour years of age: his height considerably exceeded six feet. Before he engaged
in battle, he swore upon the Koran that he would conquer or die. Trippe waa
under size, though well ~ e tand
, extremely active. IIe and Henley, perceived the
gigantic stature of their foe, yet unappalled, made a t him. The gallant Turk
sustained the conflict, with a firmness worthy of a better fate. - Trip and
Henley admiring his extrsordinary courage, were anxious to spare his l g and
gave him repeated intimations of their wishes; he, however re'ected, indignantly,
every overture of the kind, and fought with increased fury. fte, it was, who gave
lieutenant Trippe eleven wounds. Trippe's life was only saved by his great activ-

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

297

At half past 4, the wind inclining to the northward, I made the
signal for the bombs and gunboats to retire from action, and, immediately after, the signal to tow off the gunboats and prizes, which was
handsomely executed by the brigs, schooners, and boats of the squadron, covered by a heavy fire from the Constitution. At three-quarters
past 4, P. M. the light vessels, gunboats, and prizes, being out of
reach of the enemy's shot, I hauled off to take the bomb vessels in
tow. We were two hours under the fire of the enemy's batteries, and
the only damage received in the ship is, a twenty-four pound shot
nearly through the centre of the mainmast, thirty feet from the deck;
main royal pard and sail shot away; one of our quarter-deck guns
damaged by a thirty-two pound shot, which, at the same time, shattered a marine's arm; two lower shrouds and two backstays were
shot away, and our sails and running rigging considerably cut. We
must impute our getting off thus well to our beeping so near that they
over-shot us, and to the annoyance our grape shot gave them: they
are, however, but wretched gunners. Gunboat No. 5 had her main
yard shot away, and the rigging and sails of the brigs and schooners
were considerably cut.
Lieutenant [James] Decatur was the only officer killed, but in him
the service has lost a valuable officer. He was a young man who
gave strong promise of being an ornament to his profession. His
conduct in the action was highly honorable, and he died nobly.
The enemy must have suffered very much in killed and wounded,
both among their shipping and on shore. Three of their gunboats
were sunk in the harbor, several of them had their decks nearly
cleared of men by our shot, and a number of shells burst in the town
and batteries, which must have done great execution. The officers,
seamen, and marines, of the squadron behaved in the most gallant
manner. The Neapolitans, in emulating the ardor of our seamen,
answered my highest expectations.
I cannot but notice the active exertions and officer-like conduct of
Lieutenant Gordon, and the other Lieutenants of the Cons~dution.
Mr. Harriden, the master, gave me full satisfaction, as did all the
officers and ship's company. I was much gratified with the conduct
of Captain Hall and Lieutenant Greenleaf, and the marines belonging
to his company, in the management of six long twenty-six pounders,
on the spar deck, which I placed under his direction.
Captain Decatur speaks in the highest terms of the conduct of
Lieutenant Thorn, and Midshipman McDonough, of NO. 4, as does
Captain Somers of Midshipmen Ridgely and Miller, attached to
No. 1.
ity, and perfect self-possession: Finding that the Turk would not yield, although
he had received many wounds and bled freely, lieutenant Trippe and midshipman
Henley were at length compelled, in self-defence, though with great reluctance, to
inflict the mortal wound. The Turk reeled and fell: just before he expired midshipman Henley, supposing h i to be dead, stepped over his body. In the agonies
of death, he was sensible of this indignity, seized midshipman Henley by the
ancle, gave it a violent twist, and expired!
Lieutenant Trippe during his whole life, regretted the necessity he was under
of putting this Turk to death. Years after the event had occurred, so great was
his sensibility on the occasion, that he shed tears in reciting to us the circun?stances. Noble, generous spirit - conspicuous alike for hi humanity and h ~ s
chivalry. [Naval Chronicle, Vol. 1.1

298 NAVAL OPERATIONS, APRILSEPTEMBER 6 , 1804
Annexed is a list of killed and wounded; and, enclosed, a copy of
my general orders on this occasion.
Killed.
Gun-boat No. 2 - Lieutenant James Decatur.
M70unded. Constitution - One marine.
Do. Gun-boat No. 4 - Captain Decatur, (slight) one
sergeant of marines, and two seamen.
Do. Gun-boat No. 6 - Lieutenant Trippe, severely, one
boatswain's mate, and two marines.
Do. Gun-boat No. 1 - Two seamen.
Do. Gun-boat No. 2 - Two seamen.
Total - one killed, thirteen wounded.
AUGUST~ T H . We were at anchor with the squadron about two
leagues north from the city of Tripoli; the Argus in chase of a small
vessel to the westward, which she soon came up with, and brought
within hail; she proved to be a French privateer, of four guns, which
put into Tripoli a few d a j s since, for water, and left it this morning.
I prevailed on the Captain, for a consideration, to return to Tripoli, for
the purpose of landing fourteen very badly wounded Tripolitans,
which I put on board his vessel, with a letter to the prime minister,
leaving it a t the option of the Bashaw to reciprocate this generous
mode of conducting the war. The sending these unfortunate men on
shore, to be taken care of by their friends, was an act of humanity, on
our part, which I hope will make a proper impression on the minds of
the Barbarians, but I doubt it.
All hands where busily employed in altering the rig of the three
prizes, from latteen ressels to sloops, and preparing for a second
attack. Observed one of the enemy's schooners and the brig, (two
corsairs in the harbor) to be dismasted. Was informed by the French
captain, that the damage these vessels received in the action of the
t h d had occasioned their masts being taken out.
AUGUST
~ T H . The French privateer came out, and brought me a
letter from the French Consul, in which he observes, that our attack
of the third instant has disposed the Bashaw to accept of reasonable
terms, and invited me to send a boat to the rocks with a flag of truce,
which was declined, as the white flag u-as not hoisted at the Bashaw's
castle. At nine A.M. with a very light breeze from the eastward,
and a strong current which obliged the G'onstitution to remain a t
anchor, I made the signal for the light vessels to weigh, and the gun
and bomb boats to cast off, and stand in shore towards the western
batteries; the prize boats having been complete1 fitted for service,
and the command of them given to Lieutenants rane, of the Vizen,
Thorn, of the Enterprise, and Caldwell, of the Syren, the whole
advanced with sails and oars. The orders were for the bombs to
take a position in a small bay to the westward of the city, where but
few of the enemy's guns could be brought to bear on them, but from
whence they could annoy the town with shells; the gun-boats to
silence a battery of seven heavy guns which guarded the approach to
that position, and the brigs and schooners to support them, in case
the enemy's flotilla should venture out. At half past one P.M. a
breeze from N.N.E. I weighed with the Constitution and stood in for
the town, but the wind being on shore, made it imprudent to engage
the batteries with the ship, as, in case of a mast bemg shot awag, the
lose of the vessel would probably ensue, unless a change of wind s ould
favor our getting off. At half past two P.M. the bomb and gunboats

F

WARS WITH BARBARY PO WEBS
having gained their station, the signal was made for them to attack
the town and batteries. Our bombs immediately commenced throwing shells, and the gunboats opened a sharp and well directed fire on
the town and batteries, within point blank shot, which was warmly
returned by the enemy. The seven gun battery, in less than two
hours, was silenced, except one gun; 1 presume the others were dismounted by our shot, as the walls were almost totally destroyed. At
a quarter past three P.IM. a ship hove in sight to the northward,
standing for the town; made the Argus signal to chase. At half past
three one of our prize gunboats was blown up by a hot shot from the
enemy, which passed through her magazine: she had on board twentyeight officers, seamen, and marines, ten of whom were killed, and six
wounded; among the killed were James R. Caldwell, First Lieutenant
of the Syren, and Midshipman John S. Dorsey, both excellent officers;
Midshipman Spence, and eleven men, were taken up unhurt. Captain
Decatur, whose division this boat belonged to, and who was near her
at the time she blew up, reports to me, that Mr. Spence was superintending the loading of the gun at that moment, and, notwithstanding
the boat was sinkmg, he, and the brave fellows surviving, finished
charging, gave three cheers as the boat went from under them, and
swam to the nearest boats, where they assisted during the remainder
of the action.' The enemy's gun-boats and galleys (fifteen in num1 There is a circumstance with regard to midshipman Spence, not known, i t is
presumed, t o commodore Preble, a t the time he wrote his despatch. - The
commodore states t h a t Mr. Spence was superintending the loading of the gun, a t
the time the boat ~ v a sblown up by a hot shot from the enemy - that "notwithstanding the boat was sinking, he, and the brave fellows surviving, finished
charging, gave three cheers as the boat went from under them, and swant to the
fortunately he
nearest boats." Midshipman Spence did not know hou: to swim
got hold of a n oar, by which he kept himself from sinking.
Another circumstance - the gun was actually jired, and then the three cheers were given. These
facts appear
t o us to increase zssentially the merit of Mr. Spence's conduct on the
-occasion.
Captain Decatur, in his official communication to commodore Preble, n-ritten
on the day of the action stated: " I t is with regret I have to inform you of the loss
of No. 8[9], which was blown up by a hot shot from the enemy. After the smoke
cleared off, I found all abaft the mast was under water; the gun and bow being
the only part out. Mr. Robert T. Spence, midshipman, was the officer superintending the gun, who, a t the time of the explosion, was in the act of loading her:
after which accident, he, and the brave fellows left, completed the loading of the
gun before she sunk, and then swam to the nearest boat, whcre they assisted during the engagement." From this letter it would seem that the fact of the gun
having been actually fired, and that of midshipmen Spence being ignorant of the
art of swimming, was unknown to captain Decatur also, on the day of action.
He soon after, however, became apprized of these circumstances; and so highly
did he think of Mr. Spence's conduct, that he warmly urged his promotion; and
commodore Preble accordingly conferred upon him the appointment of a n acting
lieutenant, which was sanctioned and confirmed by the government.
The father of this young officer, Iieith Spence, esq. a gentleman justly held in
high estimation for his probity, intelligence and nice sense of honor, was then a
prisoner in Tripoli. He was the bosom friend, the mentor, of Decatur. Drawing invaluable lessons of wisdom from the precepts of the father, Decatur, by his
example, produced a spirit of emulation in the son, to which may, in a great
degree, be attributed that utter disregard of self, that heroic devotion t o the honor
of the service, manifested by him on this occasion.
Mr. Edmund P. Kennedy (now a master commandant in the navy,) then
gunner's mate of the brig Siren, was captain of the gun on this occasion. His
gallant conduct attracted the attention of commodore Preble, who made him an
acting midshipman; and Mr. Secretary Smith, upon being informed of the circumstance, sent him a warrant as midshipman. [Naval Chronicle, Vol. 1,
p. 228.1

-

300 NAVAL OPERATIONS, APRIL-SEPTEMBER 6, 1804
ber) were all in motion close under the batteries, and appeared to
meditate an attack on our boats; the Constitution, Nautilus, and
Enterprise, were to windward, ready, at every hazard, to cut them off
from the harbor, if they should venture down; while the Syren and
Vixen were near our boats, to support and cover any of them that
might be disabled. The enemy thought it most prudent, however,
to retire to their snug retreat behind the rocks, after firing a few shot.
Our boats, in two divisions, under Captains Somers and Decatur,
were well conducted, as were our bomb vessels, by Lieutenants Dent
and Robinson. The town must have suffered much from this attack,
and their batteries, particularly the seven gun battery, must have lost
many men. At half past five P.M. the wind began to freshen from
the N.N.E.; I made the signal for the gun and bomb boats to retire
from action, and for the vessels to which they were attached to take
them in tow. The Argus made signal that the strange sail was a
friend.
In this day's action No. 4 had a twenty-four pound shot through
her hull; No. 6, her latteen yard shot away; KO. 8, a tu-enty-four
pound shot through her hull, which killed two men; some of the other
boats had their rigging and sails considerably cut. We threw fortyeight shells, and about five hundred twenty-four pound shot into the
town and batteries. A11 the officers and men engaged in the action
behaved with the utmost intrepidity. At half past six all the boats
were in tow, and the squadron standing to the northwest. At eight
the John Adams, Captain Chauncey, from the United States, joined
company. At nine the squadron anchored, Tripoli bearing southeast,
five miles distant. Gunboat KO. 3 was this day commanded by Mr.
Brooks, master of the Argus, and No. 6 by Lieutenant Wadsworth,
of the Constitution.
Annexed is a return of our loss in this attack.
Gunboat No. 9 - One Lieutenant, one midshipman, one
Killed
boatswain's mate, one quarter gunner, one sergeant
of marines, and five seamen.
Gunboat No. 8 - Two seamen.
Do.
Wounded. Gunboat No. 9 - Six seamen, two of whom mortally.
Total - twelve killed, six wounded.
Captain Chaunccy brought me the first positive information that
any reinforcement was to be expected. By him I was honored with
your letters of the 7th, 22d, and 31st of May, informing me that four
frigates were coming out, under Commodore Barron, who is to supersede me in the command of our naval forces in these seas, a t the same
time approbating my conduct, and conveying to me the thanks of
the President for my services. I beg you, sir, to accept my warmest
thanks for the very obliging language in which you have made these
communications, and to assure the President that to merit the applause of my country is my only aim, and, to receive it, the highest
gratification i t can bestow.
Captain Chauncey informed me that the frigates might be expected
every moment, as they were to sail from Hampton Roads four days
after him. I n consequence of this information, (and as I could not
bring the John Adams into action, she havin left all her gun carriages
for her gun deck, except eight, on board the 8ongress and Constellation,
a day or two previous to her sailing) I determined to wait a few days
for the arrival of Commodore Barron, before another attack, when,

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

301

if he should arrive, the fate of Tripoli must be decided in a few hours,

and the Bashaw completely humbled. Had the John Adams brought
out her gun carriages, I should not have waited a moment, and can
have no doubt but the next attack would make the arrival of more
ships unnecessary for the termination of the Tripoline war. I gave
Captain Chauncey orders to remain on the station, that we might be
benefited by the assistance of his boats and men, as nearly half the
crews of the Constitution, brigs, and schooners, %-eretaken out to man
the bombs, gun boats and ship's boats, when prepared for an attack.
AUGUST
~ T H .We were engaged supplying the bomb and gun-boats
with ammunition and stores, and gettlng every thing in readiness for
an attack, the moment Commodore Barron should arrive and make
the signal. I cannot but regret that our naval establishment is so
limited as to deprive me of the means and glory of completely subduing the haughty tyrant of Tripoli, while in the chief command; i t
will, however, afford me satisfaction to give my successor all the
assistance in my power. At three P. M. I went on board the Argus,
for the purpose of reconnoitering the harbor of Tripoli; we stood in
towards the town, and were near being sunk by the enemy's fire; one
of tbeir heaviest shot, which struck about three feet short of the
water line, raked the copper off her bottom under water, and cut the
lank half through. In the evening the wind blew strong from the
N. E. ; the squadron weighed, and kept under sail all night. The
day following we anchored, Tripoli bearing S. S. W. six miles distant.
At ten A. 31. the French consul hoisted a white flag a t his flag staff,
under the national colors, which was a signal that the Bashaw was
ready to treat. I sent a boat into the harbor, and took this opportunity to forward Captain Bainbridge, and his officers, letters from
their friends. The boat was not allowed to land, but returned in the
afternoon and brought me a letter, advising that the Bashaw was ready
to receive five hundred dollars for the ransom of each of the prisoners,
ond terminate the war, without any consideration for peace or tribute.
This is three hundred and fifty thousand dollars less thnn was demanded previous to the action of the third instant. These terms I
did not hesitate to reject, as I was informed by Captain Cha~mcey
that i t was the expectation of our Government, on the arrival of four
fri ates, to obtain the release of the officers and crew of the Philade!L phia without ransom, and dictate the terms of peace. I enclose
you copies of our correspondence, which will convince you that our
attacks have not been made without effect.
NO. news of the frigates, and but short allowance
AUGUST1 6 ~ ~
of water in the squadron. I sent the Enterprise to Malta, with orders
to the agent there to hire transports, and send off immediately a
supply of fresh water, provision, and other stores which have become
necessary, as some of the squadron have now been upwards of five
months in sight of this dismal const, without once visiting cr friendly
port. Those vessels, as well as the gun-boats, received their supply
of water and provisions from the Constitution.
AUGUST1 8 ~ As
~ .the season is fast approachin when we may
expect bad weather, and no news of the frigates, I ave determined
to make an attaclr as soon as the wind proves favorable. At eight
P. M. I sent Captains Decatur and Chauncey, in two small boats, to
reconnoitre the harbor, and observe the disposition of the enemy's
flotilla a t night. They returned a t midnight, and reported that they

k.

f

302 NAVAL

OPERATIONS,

APRILSEPTEMBER 6, 1804

were anchored in a line abreast, from the mole to the Bashaw's castle,
with their heads to the eastward, for the defence of the rnner harbor.
At daylight the wind shifted suddenly from northeast to north northwest, and brought a heavy sea on shore, which obliged us, for greater
safety, to weigh, and stand to sea.
2 0 ~ ~w .e had gained an o f b p of nine or ten leagues;
[AUGUST]
still blowing bard. We met with the ketch Intrepid, from Syracuse,
with a cargo of fresh water, stock, and vegetables, for the squadron.
[AUGUST]
2 2 ~ . Fell in with a ship from Malta, with water and live
stock for the squadron. These cargoes arrived very opportunely, as
we have for some time past been on short allowance of water. The
wind having moderated, we stood in and anchored with the squadron,
SLY miles northeast by north from Tripoli. All the boats were eng
in dischar~ngthe transports. The Enterprise arrived from
but brought no intelligence of the long expected frigates.
2 4 ~ Wlth
~ . a light breeze from the northeast, we stood in
[AUGUST]
with the squadron, prepared for action, intending to attack the town
and shipping in the night. At eight in the evening, anchored about
two and a half miles from the batteries. At midnight it fell calm;
I sent the bomb vessels, under the protection of the gunboats,. to
bombard the town; the boats of the squadron were employed in towmg
them in. At two, ,4.?rf., the bombardment commenced, and continued until day-light,' but with what effect is uncertain. At six, all
the boats joined us, and were taken in tow by the squadron, which
was under weigh and standing off. At seven, anchored four d e s
north of the t o m . The weather, for several days, proved unfavorable for approaching the shore.
[AUGUST]
2 8 ~ a we
, were favored with a pleasant breeze from the
eastward; a t three, P.M., we weighed, and stood in for Tripoli; a t
five, anchored the Constitution, two miles north by east from Fort
English, and two miles and a half from the Bashaw's castle; the light
vessels ordered to keep under way; we were employed until eight,
P.M., in making arrangements for attacking the town; a number of
the officers, and many of the seamen, of the Constitution being attached
to the bomb, gun, and ship's boats; Captain Chauncey, with several
of his officers, and about seventy seamen and marines, volunteered
their services on board the Constitution. All the boats in the squadron
were officered and manned, and attached to the several gunboats.
The two bomb vessels could not be brought into action, as one was
leaky, and the mortar-bed of the other had given way. The John
Adams, Scourge, transports, and bombs, were anchored sevcn miles
to the northward of the toun. Lieutenant Commandant Dent, of the
Scourge, came on board the Constitution, and took charge on the gundeck. Lieutenant Izard, of the Scourge, also joined me. Lieutenant
Gordon commands gunboat No. 2, and Lieutenant Lawrence, of the
Enterprise, No. 5; these are the only changes. At half past one,
During this attack an accident occurred which waa very near proving fatal
to captain Bainbridge. A thirty-six pound ball, from commodore Preble's s uadron passed through the wall in the apartment of the prison where captain %sinbridge was sleeping, struck against the opposite wall, rebounded, and in its fall,
took part of the bed clothes from him and passed within a few inches of hie body.
In its passage through the first wall, it knocked out a cart load of stones and mortar, under which captain Bainbridge was buried until the officers relieved him.
He was considerably bruised by the rubbish, and received a cut, in the right ancle,
which occasioned a lameness for months. [h'aval Chronicle, Vol. 1.1

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

303

A.M., the gunboats, in two divisions, led by Captains Decatur and
.Somers, were ordered to advance and take trheir stations close to the
rocks a t the entrance of the harbor, within grape-shot distance of the
Bashaw's castle. The Syren, Argus, Vixen, Nautilus, Enterprise,
and boats of the squadron, accompanied them. At three, A.M.,
the boats anchored with springs on, within pistol shot of the rocks,
and commenced a brisk firing on the shipping, town, batteries, and
Basham's castle, which was warmly returned, but not as well directed.
The ship's boats remained with the gunboats, to assist in boarding the
enemy's flotilla, if i t should venture out, while the brigs and schooners
kept under weigh, ready for the same service, or for annoying the
enemy as occasion might present.
At day-light, presuming. that the gunboats had nearly expended
their ammunition, we weighed with the Comtitzltion, and stood in for
the harbor. Fort English, the Bashaw's castle, crown and mole batteries, kept up a heavy fire upon us as we advanced. At half past
five, I made the signal for the gunboats to retire from action, and for
the brigs and schooners to take them in tow. We were then within
two cables' length of the rocks, and commenced a heavy fire of round
and grape on thirteen of the enemy's gunboats and galleys, which
were in pretty close action with our boats. We s u n k one of the
enemy's boats; at the same time two more, disabled, ran on shore to
avoid sinking; the remainder immediately retreated. We continued
running in until we were within musket shot of the crown and mole
batteries, when we brought to and fired upwards of three hundred
round shot, beside g a p e and canister, int,o the town, Bashaw's castle,
and flMole head] batteries. We silenced the castle and two of the
batteries for some time. At a quarter past six, the gunboats being
all out of shot and in tbow,I hauled off, after having been threequarters of an hour in close action. The gunboats fired upwards of
four hundred round shot, besides grape and canister, with good effect.
A large Tunisian galliot as sunk in the mole. A Spanish ship,
which had entered with an ambassador from the Grand Seignior,
received considerable damage. The Tripoline galleys and gunboats
lost manv men, and were much cut. The Bashaw's castle and town
have suffered rerp much; as hare their C r o m and Mole [Head]
batteries.
Captains Decatur and Somers conducted their divisions of gunboats
with their usual firnmess and address, and were well supported by the
officers and men attached to them. The brigs and schooners were
also well conducted during the action, and fired a number of shot a t
t h enemy,
~
but their puns are too light to do much execution. They
suffered considerably in t.heir sails and rigging. The officers m d
crew of the Constitution behaved well. I cannot, in justice to Captain
Chauncey, omit noticing the very able assistance I received from him
on the quarter-deck of the Constitution during the whole of the action.
The damage which we have received is principally above the hull.
Three lower shrouds, two spring stays, two top-mast backs stays,
trusses, cl~ains,and lifts of the main yard, shot away. Our sails had
several cannon shot through them, and were besides considerably cut
by grape; much of our running rigging cut to pieces. One of our
anchor stocks, and our larboard cable, shot away, and a number of
ape shot were sticking in different parts of the hull, but not a man
r u t ! A. boat belonging to the John A h m a , with a master's mate,

304 NAVAL OPERATIOATS,APRILSEPTEMBER 6, 1804
(Mr. Creighton) and eight men, was sunk by a doubfe headed shot
from the batteries, while in tow of the Nautilus, which kilIed three
men, and badly wounded one, who, with Mr. Creighton and the other
four, were picked up by one of our boats. The only damage our
gunboats sustain~dwas in their rigging and sails, which were considerably cut by the enemy's round and grape shot. At eleven, A. M.,
we anchored with the squadron, five miles northeast by north from
Tripoli, and repaired the damage received in the action.
2 9 AND
~ ~~O T R , preparing the bomb vessels for service;
[AUGUST]
supplying the gunboats with ammunition, &c.
[AUGUST]
3 1 s ~a ~ressel arrived from Malta with provisions and
stores; brought no news of Commodore Berron or the frigates. We
discharged this vessel's cargo and ordered her to return.
SEPTEMBER
2. The bomb vessels having been repaired and ready
for service, Lieutenants Dent and Robinson resumed the command
of them. Lieutenant Morris, of the Argus, took command of No. 3,
and Lieutenant Trippe, having nearly recovered from his wounds,
resumed the command of No. 6, which he so gallantly conducted the
third ultimo. Captain Chauncey, with several young gentlemen, and
sixty men, from the John Adams, volunteered on board the Constitution. At four, P. M., made the signal to weigh; kept under sail all
night. At eleven, A. M., a general signal to prepare for battle.
B Spanish polacre in ballast came out of Tripoli, with an ambassador
of the Grand Seignior on board, who had been sent from Constantinople to Tripoli to confirm the Bashaw in his title; this ceremony
takes place in all the Barbary regencies every five years. The captain
of this vessel informed us that our shot and shells had made great
havoc and destruction in the city, and among the shipping, and that
n vast number of people hare been killed: also informs us that three
of the boats which were sunk hv our shot in the actions of the third
and twenty-eighth ultimo, had been got, up, repaired, and fitted for
service [action].
[SEPTEMBER]
3 ~ .At 2, P.?Vf., Tripoii bore south sotrthwest, two
miles and a half distant; uind east by north. At half past two, the
signals were made for the gunboats to cast off, advance, and attack
the enemylsgalleysand gunboats,which were all under weigh in the eastern part of theharbor, whi ther thev ha rl for some time been working up
against thewind. Thiswas certainlp a judiciousmovement of theirs, asit
precluded the possibility of our boats going down to attack the
town, without leaving the enemy's flotilla in their rear, and directly
to windward. I accordinglv ordered the bomb vessels to run down
within proper distance of the town and bombard it, while our gunboats were to engage the enemy's galleys and [gun] boats to windward.
,4t half three, P.M., our bombs having gained the stations to which
they were directed, anchored, and commenced throwing shells into the
city; at the same time, our gunboats opened a brisk fire on the galleys,
&c. vithin point blank shot, which was warmly returned by them and
Fort English, and by a new battery a little to the westward; but, as
soon as our boats arrived within good musket shot of their galleys and
boats, they gave way, and retreated to the shore within the rocks,
and under cover of musketry from Fort English. They were followed
by our boats, and by the Sgren, Argus, Vixen, Nautilus, and Enlerprise, as fnr as the reefs would permit them to go with prudence. The
action was then divided. One division of our boats, with the brigs

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS
and schooners, attacked Fort English, whilst the other was en aged
with the enemy's galleys and boats. The Bashaw's castle, the bole,
Crown, and several other Batteries, kept up a constant fire on our
bomb vessels, which were well conducted, and threw shells briskly
into the town; but, from their situation, they were very much exposed,
and in great danger of being sunk; I accordingly ran within them with
the Constitution, to draw off the encmy's attention, and amuse them
whilst the bombardment was kept up. We brought to within reach
of grape, and fired eleven broadsides into the Bashaw's Castle, Town,
and Batteries, in a situation where more than seventy guns could
bear upon us. One of their Batteries was silenced. The Town,
Castle, and other Batteries, considerably damaged. By this time, i t
was half past four o'clock; the wind was increasing, and inclining
rapidly on the northward. I made the signal for the Boats to retire
from action, and for the brigs and schooners to take them in tow, and
soon after hauled off with the Constitution to repair damages. Our
main-top-sail was totally disabled by a shell from the Batteries, which
cut away the leech rope, and several cloths of the sail; another shell
went through the fore-top-sail, and one through the jib; all our sails
considerably cut; two top-mast baclistays shot away ; main sheets,
fore tacks, lifts, braces, bowlines, and the running rigging, generally,
very much cut, but no shot in our hull, excepting a few grape. Our
Gun Boats were an hour fifteen minutes in action. They disabled
several of the enemy's galleys and boats, and conside~ablydamaged
Fort English. Most of our boats received damage in their ri ging and
sails. The bomb vessel No. 1, commanded by Lieutenant gobinson,
was disabled, every shroud being shot away; the bed of the mortar
rendered useless, and the vessel near sinking; she was, however, towed
off. About fifty shells were thrown into the town, and our boats fired
four hundred round shot, besides grape and canister. They were led
into action by Captains Decatur and Somers, with their usual gallantry. The brigs and schooners were handsomely conducted, and
fired many shot with effect a t Fort English, which they were [some
time] near enough to reach with their carronades; they suffered wnsiderably in their rigging, and the Arqus received a thirty-two pound
shot in the hull forward, which cut, off a bower cable as i t entered.
We kept under weigh until eleven, P.M., when we anchored, Tripoli
bearing south southwest three leagues. I a ain with pleasure, acknowledge the services of an able and active o cer in Captain Chauncey,
serving on the quarterdeck of the Constitution. At sun-rise, I made
the signal for the squadron to prepare for action. The carpenters
were sent on board the bombs to repair damages, and our boats embombs and gunboats with ammunition, to

d

the enemy by all the means in my power, I
directed to be put into execution a long contem Iated Ian of sending a
fire ship, or i n f t d . into the harbor of
in $e night, for the
purpose of endeavoring to destroy the enem s shipping, and shatter
the Bashaw's Clrstle and Town. Captain mers, of the Naudilus,
havin volunteered his services, had, for several days before this
p r i o k been directing the preparation of the ketch intrepid, assisted
by I~ieutenantsWadrsworth and Israel, About one hundred barrels of
powder, and one hundred and fifty fixed shells, were apparently judicioualy disposed of on botrrd her. The fusees leading to the magazine,

Tripe\,

&

306 NAVAL OPERATIONS, APRIL-SEPTEMBER 6, 1804
where all the powder was deposited, were calculated to burn for a
quarter of an hour.
SEPTEMBER
~ T H . The Intrepid being prepared for the intended
service, Captain Somers and heutenant Wadsworth made choice of
two of the fastest rowing boats in the squadron, for bringing them out,
after reaching their destination, and firing the combustible materials
which were to communicate with the fusees. Captain Somers' boat
was manned with four seamen from the Nautilus, and Lieutenant
Wadsworth's with six from the Constdutzon: Lieutenant Israel accompanied them. At eight in the evenin , the Intrepid was under sail,
and standing for the port, with a lea$ng breeze from the eastward.
The Argus, Vixen, and Nautilus, convoyed her as far as the rocks. On
entering the harbor, several shot were fired a t her from the batteries.
I n a few minutes after, when she had a p arently nearly gained the
intended place of destination, she sudden y exploded, without their
having previously fired a room filled with splinters and other combustibles, which were intended to create a blaze, in order to deter the
enemy from boarding while the fire was communicating to the fusees
which led to the magazine. The effect of the explosion awed their
batteries into profound silence with astonishment; not a gun y a s
afterwards fired for the night. The shrieks of the inhabitants mformed us that the town was thrown into the greatest terror and consternation by the explosion of the magazine, and the bursting and falling of shells in all directions. The whole squadron waited, with the
utmost anxiety, to learn the fate of the adventurers, from a signal
previously agreed on, in case of success; but waited in vain.
of their safety were to be observed. The Argus, Vixen, and Naut' US,
hovered round the entrance of the port until sunrise, when they had
a fair view of the whole harbor. Not a vestige of the ketch [Intrepid]
or her boats was to be seen. One of the enemy's largest gunboats was
missing, and three others were seen very much shattered and damaged,
which the enemy were hauling on shore. From these circumstances,
I am led to believe that these boats were detached from the enemy's
flotilla to intercept the ketch, and, without suspecting her to be a fire
ship, the missing boat had suddenly boarded her, when the gallant
Somers and heroes of his party, observing the other three boats surrounding them, and no prospect of escape, determined, a t once, to
prefer death and the destruction of the enemy to captimty and torturing
slavery, put a match to the train leading directly to the magazine,
which at once blew the whole into the air, and terminated their existence. M conjectures respecting this affair are founded on a resolution whic Captain Somers, Lieutenants Wadsworth and Israel had
formed-neither to be taken by the enemy, nor suffer him to get
possession of the powder on board the Intrepid. They expected to
enter the harbor without discovery, but had declared that, should
they be disappointed, and the enemy should board them, before they
reached their point of destination, in such force as to leave them no
hopes of a safe retreat, that they would put a match to the magazine,
and blow themselves and their enemies up together; determined, as
there was no exchange of prisoners, that their country should never pay
ransom for them, nor the enemy receive a supply of powder through
their means.' The disappearance of one of the enemy's boats, and

Y

srs

g

[Attention is invited to a note concerning the bravery and sense of honor of
Lieutenant Somers, which appears on pages 237 and 238 of "The United states'
Navd Chronicle" by Charles W. Goldsborough, Vol. 1.)

WARS U71TH BARBARY POUTERS

307

the shattered condition of three others, confirm me in my opinion
they the were an advanced guard, detached from the main body of
the floti a on discovering the approach of the Intrepid, and that they
attempted to board her before she had reached her point of destination; otherwise, the whole of their shipping must have suffered, and
erhaps would have been totally destroyed. That she was blown up
gefore she had gained her station is certain, by which the service has
lost three very gallant officers. Captain Somers and Lieutenants
Wadsworth and Israel were officers of conspicuous bravery, talents,
and merit, They had uniformly distinguished themselves in the
aeveral actions; were beloved and lamented by the whole squadron.
SEPTEMBER~ T H .We were employed in supplying the gunboats
with ammunition, kc. and repairing the bomb vessels for another
attack, but, the wind shifting to the N. N. E., a heavy swell setting
on shore, and other indications of bad weather, determined me, for
eater safety, to take the guns, mortars, shot, and shells, out of the
oats, into the Constitution and John Adam, which was accordingly
done. The weather continuing to wear a threatening aspect until the
7th, and our ammunition being reduced to a quantity not more than
sufficient for three vessels to keep up the blockade, no intelligence of
the expected reinforcement, and the season so far advanced as to
render it imprudent to hazard the gunboats any longer on the station,
I gave orders for the John Adams, Syren, NautiEus, Enterprise, and
Scourge, to take the bombs and gunboats in tow, and proceed to
Syracuse with them. The Argw, and Vixen to remain with the
Constitution, to keep up the blockade.
SEPTEMBER
1 0 ~ The
~ . United States' ship President, Commodore
Barron, and ConsteUation, Captain Campbell, hove in sight, and soon
joined company, when the command of the squadron was surrendered
to Commodore Barron, with the usual ceremony. I continued in
company with the squadron until the 12th, when three strange ships
came in sight, standing direct for Tripoli. Chase was given, and two
of them boarded and taken possession of by the Constitution, the
President in company, about four leagues from Tripoli, but not more
than five miles from the land, whiIe the Constelktion and Argw were
in chase of the third. The two boarded by the Constitution were
loaded with about sixteen thousand bushels of wheat. Tripoli is in a
state of starvation, and there can be no doubt but these cargoes were
meant as a supply and relief to our enemies.
Considering the season too far advanced, and weather too uncertain,
to hazard any further operations against Tripoli, a t present, Commodore Barron determined that the prizes should be sent to Malta,
under convoy of the Constitdim, i t being necessarv she should go into
port to be re-caulked and refitted. I notified omm mod ore B m n
that it was my wish to return to the United States, in the frigate
John Adam, Captain Chauncey; this, readil , and in the handsomest
manner, met his acquiescence. I shall accor ingly return in that ship.
The service in t h ~ squarter cannot suffer from this arrangement, as
Captain Decatur is a t present without a ship, and my return will
place him immediately in the exercise of the duties attached to that
Commission which he has so galIantly earned, and his Country generously bestowed. I s h d fed a pleasure in leaving the Constitdm
under the command of that officer, whose enterprising and manly
conduct I have often witnessed, and whose merits eminently entitle
him to so hmdsome a command.

9

r

d

308 hTAVAL OPERATIONS, APRIL-SEPTEMBER

6, 1804

The other commanders merit the highest commendations for their
prompt obedience to orders, on all occasions, and for the zeal, spirit,
and judgment, which they displayed in the several attacks on the
enemy's shipping and batteries, as well as for the general good order
and disci line at all times observed on board their respective vessels.
The o cers of the squadron have conducted themselves in the most
gallant and handsome manner; and the conduct of the different ships'
companies has merited my warmest approbation since I have had the
honor to command them.
I t affords me much satisfaction to observe that we have neither had
a duel nor a court martial in the squadron since we left the United
States.
I most sincerely r e ~ e the
t loss of our gallant Country Men, who
have sacrsced their lives to the honor of the Service, and that it has
not been in my poR7er, consistent with the interest and expectation
of our Country, to liberate Captain Bainbridge and the unfortunate
officers and crew of the Philadelphia. Be assured, sir, I have incessantly endeavored to effect this desirable object. I hare no doubt
but my successor will be able to effect their release, and establish
peace, on such terms as will reflect the highest honor on himself and
his Country.
1 7 ~ Arrived
~ .
at Malta, with the two detained Greek
SEPTEMBER
vessels. We experienced very bad weather, but had the satisfaction
to learn that the bombs and gunboat,^ had arrived safe at Syracuse
the 15th instant, without accidat. Each of the Tripoline gunboats
which we have captured has two brass howitzers abaft, and a handsome copper gun in the bow, which carries a twenty-nine pound shot,
is eleven and a half feet long, and weighs six thousand six hundred
pounds.
I send you a plan of the Town and Harbor of Tripoli, with the
disposition of our squadron and the enemy's flotilla, at the time of
the several attacks, with sundry other papers.
EDWARD
PREBLE,
U. S. SHIP Con~tifution,MALTAHARBOR,
18th. September, 1804.
[LC. EPP, LB, 1804-1805.1

8

[Enclosore]

Kames of the Officers, Seamen & Marines, Killed & Wounded on
board the Squadron of the United States under command of Commodore Edward Prehle in several attacks made on the City Br. Harbour
of Tripoli in Barbary in July, August, &- September 1804 with the
names of the Vessels they belonged to.
KILLED.

July 7th. Syren.
August 3rd. Nautilva

August 7tQ Syren

William Williams
James Decatur.
'James R. Caldwell
John S Dorsey.
Wm Davis
James FarreU
John Spear
John Robinson.
,John Holmes

Seaman
Lieu t t
Lieu3
Midship'
Boats? Mate
Q' Gunner
Qr Master
Seaman
Seaman

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS
August 7tF Syren

Vixen- - - - - - - John Jones
homas Macdonough.
August 28. John Adams WmFountain
John Bartlett
Richard Somers
James Sirnms
Nautdus
Th? Tompline
Septr 4.
James Harris
Wp Keith
[Henry
"adsworth.
August 7.

i

Septa 4-

Jos: Israel
WmHarrison
Rob! Clark
Constiiution Elugh MacCormich.
Jacob Williams
Peter Penner
,Isaac W. Downs
Total 30 Killed.

I

309

Seaman
Sergt Marines
Private Do
Seaman
Seaman
Seaman
Seaman
Seaman
Capt.
Seaman
Seaman
Seaman
Seaman
Lieu!
Lieu!
Seaman
Seaman
Seaman
Seaman
Seaman
Seaman

WOUNDED.

Wm Cooper
Riveness
July 7 t U y r e n ,,---- Tho?
Sam! Henry (Mortally,
since dead)
Stephen Decatur.
Captain
August 3'* Enterprize - - - Thomas James
Seaman
Seaman
Dan! Frazer
Solomon Wren
Seaman
Lieut.
John Trippe
C. Allen.
Boatn Mate
August 3rd. 'I,%xen
M: Csrmon. [or Cannon] Prive Marine
J . Ryan.
Ditto.
Ditto
August 3rd. Constitution- - Charles Young.
Sam: Rodner
Ditto
August. 3. Nautilus
A Neapolitan.
Seaman
Two Seamen
Francis Rodgers (h'fortally - Since dead)
Seamm
James Desney
Seaman
Anth? Currin
Seaman
Thomas
Deven
Seaman
August 7. Syren.
WQ Mitchell
Seaman
John Lamott
Seaman
Antonio Morrell
Seaman
Seaman
August 2gth John Adams. Isaac Happs
Total Wounded, 24. - Total Killed & Wounded 54 [LC. EPP, LB, Nov. 18OPMer. 1805.1

i
i

{
i
I

310 NAVAL OPERATIOhTS. APRILSEPTEMBER 6, 1804
- - ~

[Enclosure]

Force of the Tripoline batteries Fort English--- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - .
- - - -.- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 7 Guns
Fort American, so called from its having been built by the American
Prisoners-----------.-- - - - . - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - Palace------,
- - - - - .- - - - - - - - - - -.- - - - - .- - - - - - - - - - -.- - - - - - - - - - - - -----------Between the Palace & Mole Head._ Mole Head & Crown Battery - - _._
-._
._
. --- - - - - - - - - - - - . - - - --- -.
Foot-Way
Two small Batteries between Foot Way & Ma1t.a Battery - - - _ -.
- -.
_
Malta B a t t e r y - - _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ . - - . . - - - - - - - - - . . - - . - - - . - - - . - - - - . . - . - - - Half Moon
--- -.
- -- - - - - West Diamond Battery - - _ _ - _ _ _ - - -._-- - - - - - - - - - Battery with Arched Embrazures- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - Western Battery without the City walls called the VIXEN Battery from
having fired the first shot at that Vessel - - - - - . - - --- --.------- -

-

- -

[LC. EPP, LB, Nov. 18OPMar. 1805.1

115

Extract from log book kept by Sailing Master Nathaniel Heraden, U. 8. Navy, on
board U. 6. Frigate ConsliMion. Wednesday, 25 July 1804

Light airs from E N E. Squadron in company This afternoon
supplied the Gun & bomb vessels with 900 Gall! water - At 2 P. M .
Made the Gun & bomb boats signal to set their lateen sails - This
afternoon for the first time the Marines were exercised at the great
Guns - Towards evening Moderate breezes from S E - We reduced our Sailing to 4 knots u.hich will run us in with the land by
Morning At 2 A. M. brought to. At 2%saw two strange sail to the S S W.
Filled $ spoke the U. S. Brig Syren in company with the Enterprize The Syren informs us that Tripoly bears S S W - 18 Miles - Wore
& brought to off shore. - At day light wore in shore - Saw the
high land or Mountains of Garfan situated inland of Tripoly bearing
by compass S S W.
At Yz past 6 A. M. wore off shore - Tripoly in sight from the mast
head bearing by compass S W The Argus, Syren & Enterprize joined company. The Scourge not
in sight.
Made the signal for all Captains - Lieutt" Stewart Hull & Decatur
waited on the Commodore Continued with the main topsail to the
mast all the forenoon - Ships head N W b N.
Sent to the Argus two brass 12 pdr%th their shot & aU the other
articles belonging to them which were recieved in Malta on Friday
Iast.
Mr Brooks master of the Argus who was recieved from sick quarters
a t Syracuse some time ago rejoined the Argus, & Mr Robertson Purser
of the Enterprize who was recieved at Malta rejoined the Enterprize.
Fresh breezes from N E & cloudy all forenoon. Emplo ed making
the necessary arrangements for a general attack on Tnpo y.
In the course of the forenoon made the Store Ship, Enterprize &
Argus signals to come within hail
At Noon we are 5 leagues N E b N from Tripoly - The Mountains
of Garfan in s' ht from the Mast head bearing by compass S W b S
% S. At 10 A.%. we cast ofif] the three Gun boats which we have
towed from Malta - The Syren, Argus & Enterprize were ordered to
take them in Tow - We continued to tow the two Bombards Surgeons report 3 sick & 3 convalescent.
Latitude Observed 3 3 O 10' N.

7

[LC. EPP, Log Colurtitutwn, 1803-1804

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

31 1

Extract from jonrnal of U. S. Prigate John Adam. Master Commandant Isaac
Chauncey, U. 6. Navy, commanding, Wednesday, 25 July 1804

Commences with light Airs from the Eastward and pleasant
Weather - At 4 P. M. hove sbort - At 9 weigh'd and got the
Boat a head (it still being Calm) and towed out of the Bay At 11 a
light Air sprung up from the Northward - made Sail - At 9
A. M. Malaga bore North - Saw a Number of Sail beating to the
Westward - Ends with fresh Gales $ Pleasant. - Wind W b N
[LC.

EPP, Journal, June to 6 August 1804.1

Extract from journal kept by Purser John Darby, U. S. Navy, on board U. S. 6.
John Adam. Master Commandant Isaac Chauncey, U. S. Navy, commanding,
Wednesday, 25 July 1804

Doctr G r i E and myself having been left on shore last night we got
early this morning and sent our boys. down to the two landing
&ces. to see if our ships boat had come on shore they returned and
lnformd us that. i t had not. we then met with the boat belonging to
the American Brig Capt. Leigh. went off in ber and went on board of
him. apologised for our not coming off the evening before to tea:
stayed to breakfast with him, then went on board of our own ship,
and inquired of Lieu1 Higenbothom why we had been left on shore
last evening. he said he had understood from the Gentlemen who
come of[f] in the boat that we had gone on board of the American Brig.
and that he concluded that the Caps wou'd send us on board We then went into the Cabin and reported ourselves to the Cap!,
and informed him of the circumstance of our having been left on shore
he informed us that as it was a mistake he cou'd not attach any blame
to either us or the officer of the boat - [Manuscript mutilated] under
way that evening. to sail for [Manusc.ript mutilated] from thence to
Malta where we should [manuscript mutilated]
We immediately commenced writing to [manuscript mut,ilated]
informed them of what News we had wbich coud be contained in the
space of a letter and our destination. - We put our letters and
dispatches in the hands of Cap' Grayson of the Schooner Beanor who was bound for Washington City and who. brought out. Stores for
our Mediterranean Squadron Capt. Leigh came on board and d i e d
with us to day and brought onboard the Silver which he had changed.
for gold - At about 4. Oclock. a Very heavy fireing commenced from.
the. Portugueas ship laying at Algesirus & the Spanish fort. there. it
being some saints day. and I am told it is their custom to salute on
at. 9 Oclock a t night we got the ship under way
every saints day -.
and stood out of the Ray with a li ht air of wind. having been very
much fatigued and slep but little t e two nights before this, I went
to bead about 10. Oclock u

Ph

[KDA original. Mias Camilla S. McConnell.]
Extract from journal of Midshipman F. Cornelius deKrafft, U. 8. Navy, in U.S. Brig
Siren of 18 guns, Master Commandant Charles Stewart, U. S. Navy, commanding,
Wednesday, 96 July 1804

Light winds & pleast the Enterprize in sight past 2 118 to the
Nq Lt Carrol went in the bar e a small distance to the Eq of Tripoli
to sound. X past 3 'lC4 to %e S. E handed top gall$ sails. At 5
' K q to the N E & spoke the Enterprize. j4 past 5 back'd the main top

312 NAVAL OPERATIONS. APRIZ-SEPTEMBER 6 , 1804
-

sail & sent the launch along side the Enterprize for water. At 6
Single reefd the topsails the barge return'd, At 9 the launch return'd
with 6 casks of water, hoisted them in & stow'd them. % past 9
6112daway N E. Midnight fresh breezes & clear At 1 saw a sail to leeward bore
away for her M past 1 spoke her prov'd to be the Constitution, with
the Vixen Nautilus,six gun boats &- two bumbards At 2 made sail &
stood to the S. W.
(Lying bye astern of the Commodore.)
Latt 33' 11' N.
[NDA.]
To Lieutenant John B. Cordis, U. S. Navy, Washington, D. C., from Secretary of
the Navy

NAVYD E P ~26
. July 1804
The President has appointed you a Lieutenant in the Navy of the
United States, and a Commission will in due season be forwarded to
you. You will take the enclosed Oath and return it to this office with
a letter accepting this Appointment, and ou will without delay
proceed to Hampton and take command o the Gunboat recently
built by hl' Hope at that place. Her hull is to be completed a t
Hampton and she is to be brought here to be rigged and equipped
for service. You will engage a sufficient number of men, to enable
you to bring her to this place and you will call on Daniel Bedinger
esquire for any other necessary assistance.
Let me hear from you on your arrival at Hampton and state to me
the situation in which you may find the Gun Boat, and when you will
probably be here with her.

3

[ICDA. OSW, Vol. 6, 1802-1805.1

Extract from journal kept on board the U. S. Frigate Constitution, by Captain Edward
Preble, U. 6. Navy, Thursday, 26 July 1804

Wind N N E to N E and a heavy sea setting on shore which makes
it imprudent to approach near the coast. Tripolp bears S S W about
5 Leagues, at 5 p m saw the Scourge in the SW. We stood to the
Eastward by the wind all night at 9 AM wore & bore up to the W S W.
The Syren Joind comp? our Squadron now consists of one Frigate
three Brigs &- three Schooners, Men of War, two Bombs, and Six Gun
Boats, in all 15 Sail, besides the store ship, the whole are now in company. - At noon the Squadron becalm'd 8 miles from the land and
about 5 Leagues to the Eastwg of Tripoly. a heavy Sea setting on
shore.
Latq 0bd 33' 07' N.
[LC. EPP, Vol. 12, June-August 1804.1
Extract from journal of U. 8. Frigate John Adom. Master Commandant Isaac
Chauncey, U. 8. Navy, commanding, Thnreday, 26 Jnly 1804

First Part strong Gales from the Westward and Pleasant

-

At 2

P M. took down the Births of the Officers on the Gun Deck and struck
down the Six 12 Pounders that were mounted in the Waist of the Spar
Deck, and mounted them on the Gun Deck where they can be managed

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

3 13

to much greater Advantage - At Sunset the Extremities of the
Land bore from E. N. E. to N W. )$W. DistP off shore about 10 or 12
Leagues - Wind West
[LC. EPP, Journal, June to 6 August 1804.1
Extract from journal kept by Purser John Darby, U. 6. Navy, on board U. 6. 6.
John Adam, Master Commandant Isaac Chauncey, U. S. Navy, commanding,
Thursday, 26 July 1804

[Manuscri t mutilated] of Gibraltar bore. W. by N. distance about
&ape Mariano. in Spain N. E. about 20 Miles. at. 9.
discovered several. Sail we continued to stand along the Spanish
shore, at about 10 was abrest of Granada a considerable Province
in Spain with a Title of a Kingdom. bounded on the North by Andalusia. on the East. by the Kingdom of Murcia and on the South by
the Mediterranean Sea. it is about 175 hliles in Length and 75 in
Bredth: the City of Granada large handsom & delightful being the
Capital of the Kingdom. in Which. are the Tombs of Ferdinand &
Isabella. who took this place from the Moores in 1492. on the Top
of the Granada mountain we discovered large quantities of Snow.
Thermomerter now stands at 75j4. I am told that the Snow remains
on these mountains all the Year. We this day passed the town of
Malaga about 60 miles from Gibraltar it is a large town in the
Kingdom of. Granada 35 Miles.

[XDA original.

Miss Camilla S. McConnell.]

Extract from journal of Midshipman F. Cornelius deKrafft, U. S. Navy, in U. S. Brig
Siren of 18 guns, Master Commandant Charles Stewart, U. S. Navy, commending,
Thursday, 26 July 1804

At 11 'sent the launch on board the Vixen she return'd with 100
round 18 lb. shot. Latt Obs 33' 19' N.
[NDA.]
To Secretary of the Navy from Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Navy

Constitution off TRIPOLYJULY
27 1804
SIR, I have the honor to transmit to you a copy of a letter [7 Jldy
18041 from Captain Steu-art of the U. S. Brig. Syren.
I have received information by a Spanish Vessel detained by the
Squadron, which left Tripoly a few days after the affair mentioned
by Captain Stewart, that the fire from the Vixen and boats of the
Syren, did the Enemy great damage; and that they lost upwards of one
hundred men killed and wounded.
[LC.

EPP, Vol. 12, June-August 1804.1

314 NAVAL. OPERATIONS. AF'RIL-SEPTEMBER 6 , 1804
127 J d y 18041
Orders of Captain Edward Preble, U. 6. Navy

ORDEROF ANCHORING
BEFORETRIPOLY.

Nautilus - Enterprize Scourge -

Argus to the West
Constitution
t.o theShip
North
Store
'C7ixen
Syren to the East.
The Constitution will s6and in and anchor first: The other Vessels
will then take their Stations conformable to the above arrangement A r m to the Eastward, Syren to the Westward - The line paralel
to the Shore: two cables length distance asunder
Constitution July 27th 1804.
Signed EDWARD
PREBLE
To Cap: STEWART
Syren
N. B. One of the above was sent to each of the Capp of the
Squadron

I

[LC. EPP, Order Book, May 1803-June 1805.1
COMlldON ORDER O F SAILING

Argz~s
Nautilus
Cmtitution
Vixen
Scourge
Syren
The Argus is to keep well ahead but within Signal distance The
Other shi s are to consider two cables length to be sufficiently open,
and One ufficiently close - Unless Signal be made to close more
ORDER O F SAILING ABREABT.

Enterprize

8

e

The Enterprize & Nautilus are to keep within hail in fine weather.
Signed EDWARD
PREBLE
Cmtitution July 27th 1804 - [Copy also dated 25 July 1804, to
Lieutenant John H. Dent, U. S. Navy.]
[LC. EPP, Order Book, May 1803-June 1805.1
To Midshipman John M. Haswell, 3. 6. Navy, from Captain Edward Preble,
U. 8. Navy

SIB You are hereby advised to take command of the Pink St
C;c,isseppeladen with water and Provisions the Property of the United
States, and proceed in corn any with the Constztutzon off Tripoly for
the purpose of Supplying s 'ps of the United States blockad' that
Port - You are not to supply any Ship without my writtenvrders
for so doing. - Attend to the Signals this day delivered you
[LC. EPP, Order Book, May 1803-June 1805.1

g,

WARS WITH

BARBARY POWERS

315

Extract from journal kept on board of the C. 8. Frigate Conrtifufion. by Captain
Edward Preble, U. S. Navy, Friday, 27 July 1804

Wind N E Light Breezes Squadron in compv hoisted out the
large cutter Rigged and Armed her, Beat to uarters, to scrape &
black-lead the axle trees and trucks of the Gun- arriages. continued
to steer for Tripoly, 'till 7 oClock when we shortened sail $ brought to
4 miles from the land. - Tripoly bearing by compass W b S. about 5
Leagues. Sounded 55 faths sandy bottom, Wind E N E to S E
all night lay with Main Topsails aback head off shore. a t % past 4
AM wore & stood to the S W for Tripoly, Land in sight to the Eastward of the Town 7 or 8 Leagues, we have had a strong Easterly current all night, At noon wind E N E Tripoly bearing S W % W 4 Leagues
dist a heavy swell heavin towards the land. Surgeons Report 1
Sick 3 Convalescent, 1 disc arg'd from sick list. Delivered to each
Commander the! orders for Anchoring before Tripoly on our arrival
off the Town. Viz. the fleet to anchor in two Columns, in lines
parallel with the shore which trends about east & west. - the inshore
column to consist of the Argus, Constztution, Vixen & Syren, a t two
cables length asunder the Argus to the East. & Syren to the West of
the line. the outer column, two cables to the South, & to consist of
the Nautilus to the West Enterprize, center, and Scourge to the
EastwQ- store ship 4 cables length to the Southward of the outer
line, the Constitution to lead in and anchor first. -

e

%

[LC. E P P , Vol. 12, June-August 1804.1
Extract from journal kept by Purser John Darby, U. 6. Navy, on board U. S. 6.
JohnAdams, Master Commandant Isaac Chauncey, U. 6. Navy, commanding,
Riday, 27 July 1804

I got up this morning about 8 Oclock. after a good nights rest.
the sea having very smoth and a h e fresh breeze we still continue to
stand up the Mediterranean along the Spanish coast. the Barbary
shore not being in sight. we have seen a number of strange Sails
but have not s oke any. of them we passed Cape De gat. last night
about [space] &lock. - Nothing particular having occured to day We had all our staterooms taken down to day and our guns mounted
on our Gun deck. - at. 6. Oclock all hands were ordered to quarters
and exercised the guns. about 10 Oclock I went to bead. and had a
tollerable nights rest. [ N D A original.

Mim Camille S . McConnell.]

Extract from journal of U.S. Brig Argus, Master Commandant Isaac HuU, U. S. Navy,
commanding, Saturday, 28 July 1804

At j4 past 2 PM came to in 20 fme water the town of Tripoli bore S ji E
the Cornmod?made Sig! NQ1205 weighed anchor and made
sail the Commode still a t Anchor the rest of the Squadron under way
At midnight light winds and a heavy swell from the Northw'J set and
took in Sail Occasy At 10 AM the Cornmod+made a Sigl Kp 605 Cap*
Hull went on board of him -

* * *

[ N D A photostat.)

316 NAVAL OPERATIONS, APRILSEPTEMBER 6, I804
Extraot from journal of U. 8. Frigate Congrur. Captain John Bodgers, U. S. Bavy,
commanding, Saturday, 28 July 1804

At 7 AM. discovered the Island of Madeira * * * distance
10 leagues.
At Meridian the East end of the Island of Madeira bore E b N%
N -Distance 8 leagues
Latitude Observed 32' 20' N Longitude Observed 17' 44' W.
[USNA.]
Extract from Memorandum Book of Captain Edward Preble, U. 8. Navy, on board
U. S. Frigate Consllltdion. E8 July 1804

Anchored the squadron near the batteries when a N. E. gale soon
obliged us to go to sea again.
[LCoriginal.]
Extract from journal kept on board the U. S. Frigate Constilulion,by Captain Edward
Preble, U. 8. Bavy, Saturday, 28 July 1804

Moderate Breezes from the S E & pleasant Standing in for Tripoly
at 1 pm observed the Batteries manned an Encampment of Troops
along the South side of the Bay and 19 Gun Boats in motion all pulling
out of the Harbour towards us 3/: past 1 the wind shifted suddenly
from the S E to North at 3 pm we came to with the small Bower in
20 fath? Water 2 3 miles from the shore the round Rater Battery in
Range with the Bashaws Castle. the Boats all under way but the
wind blowing directly on shore and increasing they returned into port,
the squadron all came in and Anchored in order, with the Gun Boats
made fast to their sterns, a t 5 the wind & sea increasing so much as
to make it dangerous riding. made signal for Captains, they alI came
on board. at 6 the Cap'? all return'd to their respective ships as it was
thought prudent to get under way, made the signal to prepare. - at
7 pm sign! to weigh by % ast 7 they were all under way. a t 8 we
weghd and stood to the N W Wind N E and more moderate but
an increasing sea, at 10 pm several of the fleet in sight Stood off to
the N N W all Night at day light wore & stood for Tripoly Wind
E N E. at 11 hauld off to the Northward $ brought to, to discharge
the Store Ship of Water & provisions, and to supply the Squadron
with Powder shot & other Military, and Naval stores.
Latq Obsd 33' 3' NQ

J'

[LC. EPP, Vol. 12, June-August 1804.1
Extract from log book kept by Sailing Master Nathaniel Haraden, U. S. Navy, on
board U. S. Prigate Comlluliion, Saturday, 28 July 1804

Moderate breezes from S E - We are 4 or 5 leagues N E of Tripoly
running in for it with the S uadron in compan At 1%P. M. the wind s$1ted in a light squaKl from S E to N N W
At 3 P. M. we came to (as did the Squadron) in 21 fathq nearly 2%
Miles North from Tripoly by com ass. We now displayed before
the walls of Tripoly all our Squa on consisting of one Frigate 3
Brigs, 3 Schooners, 6 Gun boats & 2 bombards, exclusive of the Store
ship - The Enemy's batteries appear all manned, & shew 67 cannon
pointing Sea-Ward. We can see at Anchor one Brig, one schooner, 13
Gun boats & 12 Row boats under their Batteries.

d:

WARS WITH BARBARY P O W E R S

317

By 4 P. M. we had strong breezes from N b E which heaves in a
rough sea, direct on shore - The Gun boats & Bombards me all
riding by the Squadron - B 5 the Syren & Viwn let go their second
anchor - We disarmed the arge cutter & hoisted her in - Down
Royal Yards & pointed all the yards to the wind. Towards Evening
it moderated Lent the Syren a 7%Inch Hawser of 108 fath" a wooden stocked
kedge of 638 lb. At sun set the weather became cloudy, and a little
overcast - Made signal for the S uadron to weigh & work off shore-By 7 P. M. the Squadron Was a1 under way At 8 we weighed &
filled to the N W, Tripoly bearing S. 3 or 4 Miles By 9 P. M. the
weather was moderate. Wind N E.
Made & shortened sail as necessary to keep an Offing and have the
Squadron in sight during the Night.
Our soundings round Tripoly 4 Miles from the shore are tolerably
r ular between 20 & 25 fathoms - Five leagues from the shore
(%ipoly bearing S b W, South, S b E or S S E) the soundings are Very
irregular, sometimes 30 & sometimes 65 faths - On the different
parts of the coast, particularly round Tripoly we have found gravelly
or sandy bottom.
At Day light we wore to E S E with fresh breezes from N E. Squadron in Sight. Tripoly bearing South, 4 leagues.
By 8 A. AI. the weather was Moderate & pleasant. Winds from
E N E -. Bore up to the Westd and steered along paralel to the
coast. At 11%brought to with the main topsail to the mast, as did the
Squadron - Out large Cutter 6- sent her with an Officer & a party of
Men to assist in discharging the store ship. - Employed this forenoon sending powder to the Bombards k c Noon - Laying to:
Squadron in company 4 leagues N E b N % N from Tripoly.
Winds moderate from N E b E. Ships head to N N W.
Depth of water 34 fathQard bottom.
Made this forenoon the Enterprize Signal N? 600 & the general
Signal N ? 605.
Latitude Observed 33' 3' N.

3

9

[LC. EPP Log Constitution, 1803-1804.1
Extract from journal of William Eaton, U. S. Navy Agent for the Barbary Begenciee,
28 July 1804

[On board U. S. Frigate President.] 28 - Saturday. Constant
head winds.
At 12 oclock, signal from tbe Congress, discovered Madeira
[H. E. Huntington L&AG, EA 206.1
Extract from journal kept by Purser John Dsrby, U. 6. Navy, on board U. 6. S
John Admnr, Master Commandant Isaac Chauncey, U. S. Navy, commanding,
Saturday, 28 July 1804

[Manuscri t mutilated] this morning about 8 Oclock found the
Ship to be. c ose in with the Barbary shore. off Cape Tennis I?]
in Lat.
36. 35 N Long. 1. 12. E. distance from Algiers [space] Miles a t
Meridian Cape Coxine bore E S E 8 or 9. leagues Cape [word
illegible] S W. Distance about 5 or 6. Leaps. at Six Oclock in the
Evening all hands was ordered to uarters. this is done to give the
men practice & to let them know t eir stations -

f'

1

[NDA original.

Miss Camilla S. McConnell.

318 NAVAL OPERATIONS, APRIL-SEPTEMBER 6, 1804
Bxtract from journal of Midshipman F. Cornelius deKrafft, U. 6. Navy, in U. 8. Brig
Siren of 18 guns, Master Commandant Charles Stewart, U. S. Bavy, commanding,
Saturday, 28 July 1804

L g h t breezes & pleas! in Co: with the fleet At 2 came too with
the larboard bower in 24 fathoms, same time all the squadron came
too Tripoli bore S S E 2 leagues. At 7 the Commodore made signal
to get under way, hove up made sail & stood to the N Wg a t 9 made
sail. Latt: Obs: 33'7' N.
[KDA.]
Extract from journal of U. S. Brig Argus, Master Commandant Isaac Bull, U.6. Navy,
commanding, Sunday, 29 July 1804

the Commodore and Squadron in Comp? hoisted out the Iaunch
and Sent her on board the Store Ship for Provisions At $6 past 4
Tripoli bore South Dist' 4 leagues Received Sundry provisions from
the Store Ship set and took in Sail as Necessary at 5 AM the Comm o d m a d e Sigl N? 1260 Wore to the Southwd and Westward
[NDA photostat.]
-act

from journal kept on board the U. S. Frigate Comfitulion, by Captain Edward
h e b l e , U. 6. Navy, Sunday, 29 July 1804

Wind N E l lying to with the squadron, discharging the Store ship,
Tripoly bearing S S W dist 4 Leagues, the sea too rough to approach
the Town with our Bombs, or Glln Boats, at 7 pm closed the Squadron.
Tripoly in sight bearing SX W 6 Leagues Hoisted our Boats in, lay to
all night wind strong from E b S. and a very rough sea. the Weather
we have experienced for several days past has been uncommonly
tempestuous for the season, a t 5 am made the signal to wear ship
& bring to the wind on the Larbord tack, we wore and 34 Reef'd the
Topsails, Wind S E b E . a t 10 AM land about Tripoly in sight
S b E 5 or 6 Leagues dist at 11 the wind abated took the store ship
in tow to facil[i]tate the discharging her cargo, Brought to with the
Squadron, sent Boats with Officers & men to assist furnishing the
necessary supplies for the men of war. at noon wind E b S strong
breezes Observed in Latd 33' 9' N? suppose Tripoly to bear S? 5
Leagues, but the Atmosphere so close & thick that we cannot see the
land. [LC. EPP, Vol. 12, June-August 1804.1
Extract from log book kept by Sailing Master Nathaniel Haraden, U. 6. Navy, on
board U. 8. Frigate Condllution. Sunday, 29 July 1804

At Sun set bore up & ran a mile to the N W. in Order to close the
Squadron & take up our boat At this time Tripoli was in sight
from the Tops bearing by com ass. S%W. nearly 8 leagues - At 8
p. m. in large cutter which has een employed carrying shot & powder
to the Gun boats & bombards - The two bombards are towed by
the Constitution - Two Gun boats by the Argus, Syren one, Nautilus
one, Vixen one, & Enterprize one Lay to (with strong breezes from E b S. & a rough Sea) during the
night for the ease of the Gun boats - At 5 A. M. Made signal for
the Squadron to wear, & come to the wind on the larboard tack Latitude Observed 33' 9' N.
[LC. EPP, Log Conetittltion, 1803-1804.1

g

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

319

Extract from journal of William Eaton, U. 6. Navy Agent for the Barbary Begencies,
29 July 1804

[On board U. S. Frigate President.] 29. B a t within 3 miles of
Funchal, the capital of the Island [H. E. Huntington LBAG, EA 206.1
Extract from journal of U. S. Frigate John Adam, Master Commandant Isaac
Chauncey, U. 6. Navy, commanding, Sunday, 29 July 1804

First Part of these 24 Hours fresh Breezes and Pleasant - At
4 P. h1. the City of Algiers in Sight Hoisted our Colours with the
Union Jack at the Fore, and fired a Gun as a Signal for the Consul
in 15 Minutes fired a Second Gun - soon after saw the American
Colours hoisted at a House in the Country, therefore fired Signd Guns
every half Hour to signify to the Consul that I wished Dispatch half past 5 saw a Boat leave the Mole with the American Colours
hoisted - At 6 Colt Lear the American Consul General resident a t
Algiers came alongside; but before I permitted him to come on board,
I asked him if he cou'd not do his Business with me without putting
the Ship in uarantine as I thought it a Matter of some Consequence
to keep the hip from Quarantine if Possible as I had Stores for the
Squadron, and the Commodore might want immediate Communication - he however answered me that his Coming on board was
indispensible for he shou'd take Passage with me to Malta - I therefore permitted him to come on board and saluted him with seven
Guns - it was then too late for him to return to the Shore, he therefore sent in his Boat and Drogarman on Shore, and stayed with mr:
all Night - Col Lear then desired me to anchor as he cou'd not get
ready in less than 48 Hours - At % past 10 anchored with Starboard
Bower in 21 Fathom Water the light on the Marine bearing N W.
Dist 3 Miles Cape Metaphor E b S. - furl'd sails and set the
Watch - At sun rise the Castle fired a Salute of 21 Guns which we
answered with the same Number - At. 6 got the Barge out and Col.
Lear and myself went on Shore; on our Landing they saluted me with
5 Guns which was answered from the Ship with the same Number Waited on the Minister of Marine, who received us very graciously
and treated us with Coffee, and offered any Assistance that we stood
in Need of - took our leave and went to the Councellor House
where the Prime Minister soon sent his Com . with permission
e Dey was a t his
to take off any Thing we stood in need of Garden in the Country therefore did not see him - Ends with fresh
Breezes from the N E. and fine Weather. Wind West.
[LC. EPP, Journal, June to 6 August 1804.1

%

K

Extract from journal kept by Purser John Derby, U. S. Navy, on board U. S. S
John Adorns, Master Commandant Isaac Chauncey, U. 6. Ravy, commanding,
Sunday, 29 July 1804

This day commenced with pleasant [manuscri t mutilated] hght
breezes. I got up about 8 Oclock [manuscript mutlated] and dressing.
all hands was mustered found a t Meridian by observation that we
were about 30 miles from the Town of Algiers. sbout half past four
we discovered the town and the breeze increasing we came up with it
very fast. about five we fired a gun and discovered the American

320 NAVAL OPERATIONS, APRIL-SEPTEMBER

6, 1804

Flag flying on. the Top of our Consuls Country house which is
about three Miles from the Town house. and about a mile and a half
from the sea shore Near the top of the Mountain. Capt. Chauncey
being very desirous for the Consul to come off immediately, having a
fine fresh breeze and fare, and wishing to proceed on to Malta as fast
as possible, provided it was not necessary for him to detain us - he.
continued to fire [manuscript mutilated] we got in oposite the Mole
where [manuscript mutilated] and nearly abrest of the Deys pallace
we hove the ship in stays fired a gun and Stood of[q and on. a short
time afterwards we discovered a gally rowing of[Q with 16 oars & the
American flag. flying in the bow of it. which was a signal to 11s that
our Consul was onboard. When the boat had got about half way
off we recognized the Consul with our Glasses. there being several of
us who were pursonally acquainted with him. - He was attended
with three of the Deys Officers. Cap! Chauncey spoke to the Consul
before he came on board and requested that. he would not come on
board unless he thought it absolutely necessary as he wou'd compel
us to perform qurentine. when we arrived at Malta. by having any
communication with the Barbary Shore. hc informed the Captain
that it was absolutely necessary for him to come on board he [manuscript mutilated] came on board and [manuscript mutilated] We
came to [manuscript mutilated] bay a t half [past] 10 Oclock. in 21
fathoms of Water [manuscript mutilated] Algiers bearing N W by

N 3N
[XDA original.

Miss Camilla S . McConnell.]

To Captain Samuel Barron, U. S. Navy, Commodore of U. S. Squadron in the
Mediterranean, from Tobias Lear, U. S. Consul General, Algiers

SIR, In a letter which I had the honor to receive from the Secretary
of State, by Capt Chauncy, of the U. S. Frigate John Adums, I was
informed of Your appointment to command our Squadron in this
sea, and that you would, e,t a proper time, send for me if a negociation
should be opened at Tripoli. I assure you, Sir, it will give me great
satisfaction to co-operate with you in this business so interesting to
our Country, and will be ready to go up whenever you msy send. I
would suggest the good effect it might have to send more than one
Vessel here, if it can be done without injury to the service.
At present we appear to stand well here. As I cannot detain Capt
Chauncy one moment more than is necessary, I ho e you will pardon
the brevity of this letter, and be assured of the hig respect & esteem
with which * * *

1

[Mrs. James S. Barron original; and Stephen Decatur Col., Book A.]

To Becretary of the Navy from Master Commandant Iaaac Chauncey,
U. S. Navy

U. S. SHIPJohn Adam
Algiers Bay 30" July 1804
SIR I have the honor of informing you that I arrived here Yesterday in a passage of 3 Days from Gibralter, on my approaching the
Bay, I made the signal for the Consul which was answered, and Colt
Lear came on board about 6 "Clock in the Evening, but previous to

WARS WITH BARBARY POWEBS

321

my admitting him on board I asked him if his Bussiness was such,
that it was requisite to put me in Quarantine as I thought it might be
of Importance for me to have immediate Communication on my
Arrival a t Malta, he told me that he shou'd proceed to Malta with me,
therefore desired me to anchor, and he wou'd be ready to depart in
48 Hours, I accordingly anchored; but when Colonel Lear perused
his Dispatches from Government, he told me that he found that it
was unnecessary for him to go to Malta at that Time, but wou'd
dispatch me as soon as he cou'd go on Shore and write to Commodore
Preble, and enclose him Copies of some Communications that he
wished to make, I therefore waited until1 5 P. M. when I received his
Dispatches and got under Way for Malta,
[XDA. MC LB, 1804-5.1
To Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Havy, from Tobias Lesr, U. S. Consul General,
Algiers

ALGIERS
J h SOth1804.
DEARSIR I have but barely time, by this opportunity to acknowledge the receipt of your acceptable favor of the 1gt+ of June
with its enclosures, and to assure you its contents shall be attended
to. - As I have nothing special to communicate from this place, and
Capt? Chaun[ce]y can inform you of every thing from hence, I she
not have occasion for a long letter. - I must sincerely pray that you
may have effected your Object at Tripoli before this time. - I h o w
to a mind of sensibility like your's how it must feel, in not having it
in your power to accomplice so glorious an undertaking as you have
commencd, while you may be in the Chief Command; if it shd not be
done before the arrival of Commodore Barron: But I know also, my
dear Sir, that your Patriotism will conquer your personal feelings
when you consider that the force sent out could not have been equip'd
uithout employing the Old Commanders.
I hare r e d orders from home to repair to Tripoli whenever the
Comma[n]der shall inform me that there is a prospect of Negotiation,
and shall hold myself in readinas accordingly
Captc Chauncy Rill inform you of the state of things here, which
so far as relates to us, is still favorable and will therefore only add,
that I hope shortly to have the happiness of a personal interview.
ill"
Lear send her best regards & wishes for your health, happiness
8. prosperity, in which she is most cordially joined by me
P. S. I take the liberty to enclose a Letter for h l r OBrien, w-ou
will be so good as to deliver if he is with you; if not please to direct
it to him wherever he may be. [Stephen Deoatur Col. NDA photostat, Book A.]
To Captain William Bainbridge, U. S. Navy, from Tobias Lear, U.8. Consul General,
Algiers

ALGIERS
July 90" 1804
MY DEARSIR I have but a moment to acknowledge the recl of
your welcome favors of the 36 5* & 30thof April & 20* of May; and
to tell you how glad I was to learn that you were in health. - I hope,
ere this something has been done to releive your situation; or if not
that it will be shortly done

322 NAVAL OPERATIONS. APRIL-SEPTEMBER 6. 1804
I can only add, in the moment of hurry that I pray God to keep &
bless you, and to assure you that you & our unfortunate fellow CLitize[n]s
shall not be f o r g o a n by me
M* Lear sends her best regards & wishes united with those of, my
dear Bainbridge,
Your Sincere friend,
TOBIAS
LEAR.[Stephen Decatur Col. NDA photostat, Book A.]
To Richard O'Brien, from Tobias Lear, U. 8. Consul General, Algiers

ALGIERS,
J u l y 3OtP 1804
DEARSIR I have but one moment to acknowledge the rect of
your acceptable letter of the 19* of June, and the interesting detail
of your audience with the Bashaw of Tripoli. - Things remain here
as when I wrote you last, as relates to our affairs. I t is thought that
the British affaires are in a train of settlement. M' MQDonoughhas
been here twice, and is said to have gone to London. I think it
probable I may have the pleasure to See you before you leave this
part of the World
The French Lady & Children have gone to France. The Dutch
Consul is very sick. Every thing else in the Consular line as when
you left us.
I enclose a duplicate recuor the Articles you left in my hands.
We were very glad to hear of the health of M* OBrien, and your
h e Children, which we pray God to preserve. M* Lear unites with
me in best wishes for you & them, as do all our family.
OBRIENEsqr
RICHARD
I
wrote
you on the 8* of June, via Tunis.
P. S.
[Stephen Decatur Col. XDA photostat, Book A.]
Extract from journal of U,6. Brig Argus, Master Commandant Isaac Hull, U.S. Navy,
commanding, Monday, 30 July 1804

[Off Tripoli] a t 4 Cap! Hull went on board the Commode recd
Water from the Victualler a t % past 6 Caps Hull returned on board
hoisted in the launch a t X past 7 filled Away and wore Ship to the
Northwd & Eastward set & took in Sail Occasionally a t 11 backed the
the main Yard for the Commodore to Come up at % past wore Ship
to the Southward [NDA photostat.]
Extract from journal kept on board the U. 6. Frigate Corulilulion,by Captain Edward
Preble, U. S. Navy, Monday, 30 July 1804

Wind E S E. Moderate but a heavy swell, the Boats of the
Squadron Employd in discharging the store ship, but the sea so
rough as to render our progress rather slow, sent fuses Clay
u[i]ck match for the shells on board the Bombs, and shott on oard
%e different Vessels to which the Gun Boats are attach'd, a t 7 pm
i t blew a fresh gale cast off the store ship & in Boats, Bled away to
the Southward a t 8 pm wore with the squadron & stood to the N N E
wind East, under double reef'd Sails, stood off all night a t 5 AM wore
to the Northward & stood for the land wind from East to S E Variable.
a t Noon obsd in Latq 33' 10' NQ- Tripoly bearing S b E, 6 Leagues
disg
[LC. EPP, Vol. 12, June-August 1804.1

iutw

323

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

Extract from journal of U. 6. Frigate john Adam, Blaster Commandant Isaac
Chauncey, U. 8. Bavy, commanding, Monday, 30 July 1804

Fresh Breezea from the N. E and pleasant Weather At 6 P. M.
embarked from the Marine, Col. Lear having informed me that he
had received such Information from America that superceded the
Necessity of his going to Malta, therefore I was a t Liberty to depart
when I thought proper - he delivered me his Dispatches for Commodore Preble, and I embarked for the Ship - On my stepping into the
Boat I was again saluted with five Guns which was returned by the
Ship; this Practise of Saluting Captains of Men of War appears to be
invariable and they conceive i t as a Marked Insult if it is not instantly
answered At K past 7 weigh'd and made Sail with the W i d a t
E. N. E which is Dead in the Bay - At 11 A. M. a light Breeze from
the Northward $ Westward - Received from Col. Lear Yesterday
a Quantity of Stock and Vegetables -m ' d a Beef for People's Use.
Wind Variable
[LC. EPP, Journal, June t o 6 August 1804.1
Extract from journal kept by Purser John Darby, U. S. Navy, on board U. 6. 8 .
john Admnr. Master Commandant Isaac Chauncey, U. S. Navy, commanding,
Monday, SO July 1804

[Manuscript mutilated] about sunrise this morning. the ship
passed nearly oposite the Deys palace which is a few miles to the
eastward of the Town [,Ugiers]. at sunrise me were saluted with 21
rounds from the Deys Grand battery. We immediately returned the
salute after which. Capt. Chauncey invited Doct: Griffin and myself
to go on shore with him d the Consul. We went on shore and on our
landing we were conducted to the General of Marines place of residence
which is a large Castle situated immediately on the Mole. We
walked up under a la[r]ge covered way with our hats off. when we
arrived at the outer court or large Saloon. we were seated on. benches
covered with rich carpets. immediately afterward the General of
Marine made his appearance and after seating himself on a rich sofia
in the Turkis fashon. with his feet drawn up under him, we were
introduced to him [manuscript mutilated] Captain Chauncey shook
bands [manuscript mutilated] myself only made our bow. fmanuscript mutilated] General of hlarine asked a few questions such as
[manuscript mutilated] any News and what Vessels we had seen on
our passage. and how many da s passage &C. after this Coffee
was served up to us in fine china ups. set in gold baskets and a h e
Napkin spread in our laps. - after Coffee the Napkins were taken
from us and a few minutes afterwards they ha[n]ded each of us a
Goblet of Sherbet & presented us with another fine Na kin. the
Consul being engaged in conversation with the Gener and not
Noticing the Servant hofdiig the Goblet of sherbet to him. we were
a t a loss to know what to do with it. Capt. Chauncey supposed from
their handing a napkin with it, that it was intended for us to wash
our hands in, and diped his fingers in it. but the sex-vant made signs
that we were to drink it. he then drank some of i t [manuscript
mutilated] We drank but very little. whicb the General of Marine
observed and mentioned it. we observed to him that we had drank.
a sufficiency of it We set about 20 hlinutes longer, when we all rose, except the
General of M t h e wbo kept his seat. the Consul bid the General of

6

2

324 h?AT7& OPERATIONS, APRIL-SEPTEMBER 6 ,

1804

M[ar]ine good morning we followed his example by bowing we then
walked out of the covered way with our hats off until1 we had cleared
the enterence we then put our hats on and walked up through the City
to the Consular Town house. which is situated nearly in the Middle
of the Tomm. We were preceeded by the Consuls Drogerman. who
went before us to announce our approach and to make every person
give way to us. We arrived at the Consuls house ahout 9 Oclock
We entered a covered way which lead to the street about 30 feet
[manuscript mutilated] M' Mumford S- llr Hendley [manuscript
mutilated] and a Midshipman in the United States [manuscript
mutilated] a Turkish ofFicer who was the Consuls [manuscript mutilated] we were introduced to them. and after seting a little while we
were invited into the dining room - to breakfast where me had
breakfast served up in the dmerican stile with the addition of Red
wine & fruit, Orrenges, Water mellons Musk mellons & dates After breakfast. the Consul t,ook us through the different parts of
the house to shew us the stile which i t mas built in - after viewing the
house and some of the curiosities of the country whicb he had collected we were invited to go to the Consuls Summer house, that being
about three Miles from the town house we were to ride - and w h
of us was provided with a mule, there being but one horse which
belonged to the Consul which he insisted on Capt. Chaunceys riding,
the Mules mere saddled and caparisoned after the Turkish stile [manuscript mutilated] we proceeded in this manner to the Consuls
Country house in m-hat is called with us, Indian file the streets being
so narrow as not to permit two persons to ride abreast so as to leave
room for one person to pass who was going the reverse way and many
places not wide enough for that. after we left the toun the road by
which we assended the mountain was only a single trace and we wcre
very often on the very Margin of the mountain not more than Twelve
Inches space for the Mules to pass and below us was a preci~iceof a t
least Two hundred feet deep - as we passed along the streets the
walls W&S lined with the natives viewing of us. We no doubt. attraced
as much curiosity in them as they no doubt would have done had they
have been in our Country and indeed had we have been in our own
country and in one of our popnlus cities mounted in the manner which
we were we shou'd have attracted the at tention and curiosity [manuscript mutilated] the officer and our approch announced and they
were compeled to give us the way and if the passage was not broad
enough so as to admit of our passing they wcre cornpeled to turn back
at the risk of their lives to a place sufficiently wide for our passing When we arrived at. the consuls country house two Mooreish
servants. (who had run all the way on foot after us.) attended us one
to hold the Mule and the other to take our feet out of the sturrup,
we were then conducted in to the Consuls house. which was a very
elegant building situated on the side of the Mountain over looking
the whole town and harbour the House has four Wings which strike
of[fj at right angles. from the Main Wall which forms a large spacious
court. in the center. open from top to bottom [manuscript mutilated]
the Doctor & myself were introduced [manuscript mutilated] Capt.
Chauncey being well acquainted with her before she and the Consul
took us by the hand and expressed their Joy at seeing us there desired
us to consider ourselves ns at home. We were then conducted into a
siting room which frunted the sea, and seated our selves on sofa's

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

325

there being one on each side of the room & end, the floors are all laid
with tile or marble. soon after we were seated. spirit and different
kinds of wine was placed on a side Table and we were requested by
Col? Lear to help our selves to what ever we prefered. when ever
we choose and not to wait for a second invitation. We thanked him
and assured him that we shou'd do so. & helped ourselves to some red
is a fine handsome sweet Little woman.
wine & Water - hlr-ear
possessing a h e lively disposition, and an easy ellega~tsoft manners
& person. she was borned near T7CTilliamsburgin Virginia a Daughter
of M: Hendley [manuscript mutilated] beautiful orring grove leading
to [manuscript mutilated] were not fully ripe, the orrenges & Lemons
were half grown. from there we went to his stable where he shewed
us s fine Barb Horse. crossed with the Arabian blood. which was
presented to him by the Dey of Algiers. and said to be the finest
that ever was given to any of the Consuls: he was between three &
four years old and upwards of fifteen hands high, from this we retired
to the house went through every appartment of it and on the Terrace
which over looks the town and into the Sea. - we then returned into
the siting room. and loll'd on the Sofas and entertained ourselves
in conversation. on various subjects. soon after the Sweedish Consul
came in we were introduced to him. he asked some questions and soon
entered into familiar conversation with us as he Spoke the English
Language very well [manuscript mutilated] Dinner was anounced
[manuscript mutilated] conducted into the dining room [manuscript
mutilated] excellent Dinner served up. [manuscript mutilated] Most
choice meats fish and Vegetables which the country affords & the
most choice wine after the cloth was re~llovedwe had all the delicious
fruits of the season. hlellons. Pears apples. Dates grapes. raisins
plums, figs. &C. I had like to have forgot to mention a Portugease officer who we
found at Col? Lears. he was a prisoner and what is caled a christian
slare to the Dey - he was permited to reside in Col? Lears family
and the other officers who was taken with him were distributed
amongst the other Christian Consuls. but. they are all some times
ordered out to VTork. when ever the Dey takes a. freek in his head to
do so. he was a very modist Genteel Man. and u-as treated with the
utmost respect and attention. by Col? Lear & his Lady. We also
saw two Neapolitan Women who was [manuscript mutilated] we rose
from Table. took [manuscript mutilated] C0l9 Lear and the Sweedish
Consul & Portugeas officer. [manuscript mutilated] Col? Lear
accompanyed us into Town. we went through all the same seremony
in returning which we did in goin . we stoped at the Consuls Town
house. where we purchased a few 6uriosities of the country which we
had requested the Drogerman to have collected for us. I t is necessary
to observe here that the. Drogerman. never leaves the Town house
except when he accompanys the Consul on foot and is his chief man in
all officialmatters. after purchasing what curiosities we wanted. and
geting our Bill of the Stock &c sent off for us. we left the Town House
and walked down to the Marine. accompanyed by the Consul & Mr
Mumford, his Secretary. preceded by the Drogerman. when we
arrived on [manuscript mutilated] he returned in a minute & informed
us [manuscript mutilated] embark as soon as we pleased - [manuscript mutilated] the Consul Mr Mumford & the Drogerman farewell
and the moment we steped into the boat. they fired a salute of five

326 NAVAL OPERATIONS, APRIL-SEPTEMBER 6 , 1804
guns from the Battery which was answered gun for gun. from our ship
we got on board the ship about 6 Oclock and immediately go[t] the
ship under way for Malta. I have now to say something of the Town of Algiers. the appearance
of the Sallirs [?I their dress habit customs &C. so fare as I cou'd form
an opinion from small oppertunity which I had - the first part of
which. that is to say the Geographical part I must borrow from Books.
Gazetteer. Algiers is a Kingdom of Affrica. bounded on the E. by
the Kingdom of Tunis on the N. by the Mediterranean Sea on the
South by. Mount Atlas and on the W. by the Kingdom of Morocco
[manuscript mutilated] The Kingdom is divided into three provinces.
Namely Flemsan on the W. Titterie on the S. and Constantia on
the E. of the City of Algiers
The Turks. who have the Government. in their hands are not above
7000 in Number as yet the Moores or natives of Affrica have no
share in it. It is only a kind of Republic under the Protection of the
Grand Signior who keeps a Bashaw or Viceroy there but he can do
nothing of himself without the council of the Imissaries. the Arabs.
who live in tents are a distinct people. governed by their own laws and
Magistrates. though the Turks interpose as often as they please. the
Dey of Algiers is an absolute Monarch but elected by the Turkish
Soldiers and frequently deposed and put to death by them. they have
Murdered four of their Deys. and deposed Two ~ t inhthe space of
Twenty years. the Revenues of [manuscript mutilated] the Dey has
several [manuscript mutilated] Moores in his service both horse and
foot. and the Deys or Viceroys of the provinces have each an army
under his command, their Religion is Mehometanism and their
Language a dialect of the Arabic. they have likewise a Jargon composed of Italian French and Spanish called Lingua Franca that is
complexion of
understood by the common people and mercht"he
the Natives is tawny and they are strong and well made - The Town
of Algiers is the Capital of the Kingdom. large and well built and now
strongly fortified. I t is built on the Declivity of a mountain and is in
the form of an amphitheatre next the harbour, in so much that the
houses appearing one above another make a very fine appearance from
the Sea. the Roofs of the houses are all flat. for which reason they
walk upon them in the evening to take the air. besides they are
covered with earth and serve for a sort of garden [manuscript mutilated] extremely narrow and serve to keep off [manuscript mutilated]
heat of the sun the houses project [manuscript mutilated] forms a
kind of arch. &- there is only [manuscript mutilated] for one Mule to
pass another. The Mole of the harbour is 500 paces in length extending from the continent to a small Island. where there is a castle and a
large Battery of guns. the Island is now united to the main land by an
emence labour having filed the passage up with stone. the Number of
inhabitants are said to consist of 100.000 Mahometans. 1500 Jews.
and 2000 Christian Slaves. chieefly Neapolitans. & Portugeas, their
chief subsistance is derived from their Piracies for they make Prizes of
all Christian ships who are not a t Peace with them - The country
about the Town of Algiers is adorned with gardens and fine Villas
Watered With fountains and rivulets and thither the inhabitants who
can afford it resort in the hot season. On the West of the Town
stands an ellegant country Seat and garden where the late Dey
resided. on the east of The Town stands the Pallace & Gardens

W m S WITH BARBARY POWERS

327

of the Present Dey where he resides in the hot season [manuscript
mutilated] Grand Battery stand to the Eastwd [manuscript mutilated] there was four frigates laying one of them was the Creasent
which was given to them by the United States. another was a Portugees
frigate which they had taken. they had also laying there several
Xebecks. & gall s. they had a very large 44 Gun frigate on the stocks.
which. about. alf finished they compeled the Portugees & other
Christian Slaves to work on her. I t was Capt. Chaunceys opinion
that she would be a very fine ship, - the. Moores 8: Turks all wear
Turburns. linen shirts with open sleaves the arms naked. a kind Petty
coat. Trowsers reaching to the Knee, the legs & feet bare with a slipper
down at the heel and under Jacket buttoned & belted round them.
the Mooreish women which we saw were of the meaner kind. they had
Linen drawers on r e a c h to their ancles. slip shod a piece of white
cotton Cloth thrown over their head & shoulders r e a c h down
nearly to their knees They [manuscript mutilated] like a caul over
their face only shewing their eyes and the up er part of their nose
which to us was a frightful appearance the fews dE Jeweses are all
drest in Black the Jeweses shew their faces & I saw one that was a
handsom woman. The Turkish women are never seen. when they
ride out. they have a kind of a Box built up on a Mule which they sit
in which prevents their being seen - The Mooreish women are considered even by their Husbands nothing more than slaves, and the
Jewish maried women do all the Menial services in their own familys
as they are none of them admited to have servants let their fortune
be what it will and their daughters are brought up in the same way -

E

[ S D A original.

Miss Camilla S. McConnell.]

Extract from journal kept on board the U. S. Frigate Comlitufion, by Captain Edward
Preble, U. 6. Navy, Tuesday, 51 July 1804

Wind E S E to N E very Variable and a rough sea Standing to the
Southurard by the Wind, under double Reef'd Topsails, Squadron all
in sight, at 1 p m saw the City of Tripoly bearing S b E j4 E disr 5
Leagues. - Stood in S? with the Wind E S E until 4 pm. then
wore ship to the Northward, Tripoly S S E 3 Leagues at :i past 6 pm
the Wind shifted to the N E b N & blew a gale, split our Fore Sail &
Main Topsail, send down Top Gall! Yards and made the signal for the
Squadron to do the same Unbent the split Sails, and brought others
to the Yards, by 8 pm we were under a Reef'd Fore Sail & close Reef'd
M V o p Sail the Wind blowing very heav , and a rough sea. from 8
pm to 2 AM the Wind veer'd round gradua y to the S E until it got to
E b S. then shifted suddenly in a squall to the N N E l stood to the
N W until day light then wore to the S E. and made more sail the
Squadron all in sight but much scattered a t noon wind N E b E.
steering S E b E. Latd Obsd 3 3 O 18' Nq T r i ~ o l ybearing by calculation S S E f E
28 Miles, I ordered the Fore Sail & Me Top Sail which were s lit
last night to [be] ripped out of the Bolt-rope, and turnd into the ail
maker as old Canvas, considering them not trustworthy. -

f

I

[LC.

EPP, Vol. 12, June-August 1804.1

328 NAVAL OPERATIONS, APRILSEPTEMBER 6 , 1804
Extract from log book kept by Sailing Master Nathaniel Haraden, U. S. Navy, on
board U. S. Frigate Conrtitution. Tuesday, 31 July 1804

Fresh Breezes from the Eastward with a rough Sea Stand'
in
for Tripoly (Squadron in company) under double reefed T O ~ S ~15S
Courses - The Gun boats and Bombards are invariably continued
in Tow by the Squadron - We condemned by survey 804 pounds of
cheese Eotton, stinking & unfit for men to eat: the same was hove
Overboard - At 1 P. M. we saw Tripoly bearing by compass
S S E. We stood in for it till 4 P. M. when we wore to the Northc The Bashaws Castle S E b S four Leagues - At this time strong
breezes & cloudy weather. At 4 past 5 P. M. Tripoly S E b S S.
5 Leagues At 4 past 6 P. M. the wind shifted in a squall from East
to N E b N - We sp[l]it the foresail from clew to Earing - In a
few minutes after we split the Main Top sail - Unbent both & bent
others - From this time till till 8 P. M. we were under a reef'd mainsail and close reefed fore topsail - At 7 down top gall! Yards; As the
Gale is nearly dead on shore, it became necessary to press the ship
which makes it hazardous in Towing the Gun boats & Bombards At past 9 handed the foretopsail; and set a reefed foresail At 10
Rove preventer tacks & sheets - by this time the gale had shifted
by degrees to E B N At Midnight strong gales from the Eastward.
At past 2 A. M. the wind shifted in a squall from E b S to N N E,
which heaves us direct aback.
The two Bombards in Tow were very much exposed, but fortunately
no damage was done - We immediately wore &- came to the same
tacks as before - From this time till day light strong Gales from
the K E.
At 3 past 5 A. M. wore to the S E. The Squadron all in sight,
many of them hull down - The Gale continued Strong till 8 in the
morning when it became more Moderate
At 7 A. M. set close reefed Main & hfizen Topsails Sixteen hours out of the twenty four we have been necessarily under
low sail with a rough sharp sea - Winds veering between N E $
East. Surgeons report 1 sick 3 convalescent At Noon we are under
low sail. Squadron in Sight. - Standing in for the coast.
Tripoly supposed to bear (Var: Cor:) S E b S 3 30 Miles
Latitude Observed 33' 17' N.

+

[LC. EPP, Log Constitution,1803-1804.1
To Lieutenant John Cassin, U.S. Navy, Navy Yard, Washington, D.C., from Charles
W. Goldsborough for Secretary of the Navy

NAVYD E P M
1~Augt 1804.
Mr Buller Cocke has been appointed Storekeeper to the Yard a t

this place, under the Act supplementary to the Act entitled "An Act
providing for a Naval Peace Establishment and for other purposes".
You will be pleased to deliver to him by Inventory all the Articles of
Stores now under your charge; exce ting the Timber, taking his receipt therefor as your voucher in the ettlement of your Store Account
with this Department. As i t is an object of considerable importance
that the Accounts should be arranged and methodized with all practicable dispatch, you will be pleased to lose no time in carrying the
object of these Instruction into effect.

8

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

329

A System will presently be devised and communicated to you which
i t is hoped will ensure methodicd operations in all the Departments
contemplated by the supplementary Act above alluded to. [NDA. OSW, Vol. 6, 1802-1805.1
To Captain Samuel Barron, U. S. Navy, from James Simpson, U. S. Consul, Tangier,
Morocco
TANGIER
1et August 1804. DEARSIR My last of 21 st July advised the Emperour had directed

one thousand Fanegins Wheat being laden on His Ship Mirboh
destined for the poor of Tripoly, - after Arraez Lubarez had actualy
begun to receive that wheat he represented to His Majesty the not&
cation I had made to him of Tripoly continuing to be blockaded. By order of the Emperour, (I am assurd) the Wheat has been relanded
and the Ship proceeded to Salle to join the two others at their return
from Magadore. Alcayde Hashash has however written me, complaining of the
opposition I had made to Lubarez going to Tripoly and requiring a
Passport for the Ship for that special Voyage; adding that by that
means Peace will continue to subsist between us. I answered his Letter yesterday and told him that as Tripoly continues to be blockaded no such Passport as he asks can be granted we shall see what reply he will make. Under these circumstances I persuade myself you will see it proper
to leave a couple of Frigates in the Straits untill these matters be,
satisfactorily cleared up. At return of an Express I fortunately dispatched on Saturday last
with a Letter for His Majesty and another for the Minister I shall be,
able to speak with precision on the subject. 36 A U G ~Since writing the foregoing I have received another Letter
from Alcayde Hashash copy of which I enclose for your perusal - he
has changed his stile and now requests as a favour what he m a manner
demanded before. I have answcred him that neither myself or any other Consul is
competent to grant Passports to insure Vessels entrance into blockaded
Ports. - I have besides represented to him the imposibility there
is for any of His hlajestys Ships to go to Tripoly now the Neapolitan
Squadron is in those Seas I have told him that I should lodge copy of his Letter for your
perusal at Gibraltar, and that you would give your answer to His
Majestys request. - I am highly sensible of the very great impropriety there 1s in Muley Soliman making such a request, but as Commodore Morris authorised me to grant a Passport for a Cargo of
m e a t to be sent to Tripoly after my return to this Country in the
year 1802, I have thought you may perhaps have latitude to yield
to His Majestys solicitations, especialy as such a favour might conduce to the better treatment of the unfortunate Americans now in
Tripoly, and I an1 persuaded the Em erour would receive it as a mark
Wheat I am assured is to be
of articular attention to him. -eh! '
distributed to the poor gratis. As the Emperours Ship certainly cannot go on the intended Voyage
because of the Neapolitan Squadron I should presume he would now

330 NAVAL OPERATIONS, APRIL-SEF'TEMBER 6. 1804
ropose to send a neutral Merchant Vessel, - which would certainly
ge preferrable with us too, for I should not recommend an Armed
Ship being permitted to enter Tripoly. - This morning it is said
Lubarez is still a t Larach, the certainty I shall know in a day or two
and advise you I repeat what I mentioned in the former art of this Letter, that I
trust you will leave two Frigates at Gibra ter untill this matter be
settled, to which I am instigated by the recollection that it was on a
refusal of a similar request I was sent from this Country in June 1802

i'

[Mrs. James S. Barron Col.

KDA photostat.]

To Secretary of

State from Richard O'Brien

On board The UNITED STATES
FRIGATE Cowtitutwn
The 1 @ o j august 1804 - 14 miles North of tripoli
ESTEEMED
SIR After aiding Co! Lear to make a good Settlemt on
the annuities and cash payment to the regency of Algrq on the same
day of The 26" of March I left that city of Algiers. to render every
service in my power on our &airs with tunis and tripoli The Purport of the audiences I. and M' Davis had with the Pascha
of tunis and his minister on the latter End of April will give you.
with other communications - from Mr Davis a detail from which
you can judge what course. That The united States. should steer
relative to Tunis Permit me to Observe, That it is more the interest of Tunis to Keep
The peace with The U States. Than it is for us to offer anything
extra to induce her to a permanent and pacafic conduct towards us if our conduct. should convince her (whichit has) that we are afiraid
of her, Then 8 fathoms will not Annually content or feed Their
Avarice Comodore Preble & Col Lear, has given you full details, on this
Subject and allso, you can Judge by The Purport of my conferances,
and audiences with The Pascha of tripoli and his Minister on the 13th
of June what is his Views. They are very great - agreeable to The
intreau ing reports. and letters of The french Consul at tripoli which i h h e y were complied with, would bring on us - more extravigant in proportion from tunis and Algiers We sailed from Malta the 21?3 ul! and on the 25tQmade the land to
The East of tripoli on the 275b we anchored with our whole fleet. to
The N@of tripoli 3 miles. and intended to commence Bombarding
The City, but The wind Commenced, to blow. Very fresh from the
N E. and we were again Obliged to put to sea - the weather has
remained, untill This, evening Very Boisterous - but if i t remains
fine to Commence - opperations - against the City of tripoli The Pascha aided by the advice of his Ministry, and The insinuations
of The Christian Consuls - is very confident of his own. strength.
and of Course does not apprehend. we can do him much injury -he
has 19 Gunboats and several. rowboats. A Brig 2 Schooners. a Xebec
and 2 other Small Corsairs -with Sundry very strong and important.
Castles. to oppose This and make a requisite impression - we have
The Constitution Argus Siren Vixen Nautulas Enterprize & Scourge
2 bombards. &o 6 Gunboats. - The Vessels in general. not well
manned - and much deficient, as to Their Compliment of men perhaps this force. appIied and with The - offer of 60 - fathoms. we

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

331

might. thereby - extricate the officers. and crew of The Ex-Philadelphia - this would be doing a great d e d - but I have my fears.
That we must have more force. Then we have at present before we
shall convince tripoli That it is his interist. to be a t peace with The
U States. he is biased. up that. we must finally get tired and give him
the Extint of his demands. if we do we are gone in this Sea it must therefore be evident. to The U States. that it is necessary.
that we should have built. The 6 - 74 Gun Ships a few heavy Corvettas - and 9 or 10 Schooners of 200 - or 250 tons to carry each 4 long 24 pounders & 6 - 24 pounders Caronades - and a 13 inch
mortar to be coppered to have 90 Mariners. and 10 - Bombardiers.
these Vessels. would by throwing Bomb shells into tripoli at all times
render them a Cit of torment. and if they intended to keep up the
war they must d a l o n g The coast abandon their Villiages - this
would Bring them to Their Bearings, and would be a terror of a new
system - of Warfare - and blockade to. deter Algiers and tunis from
irritating us by new - or extra demands. My services I shall not be wanting to contribute to The honor and
interests. of my Country. The same time I recommend to your friendly
aid - and Services My wife and 4 Children a t present a t Malta RICE^ OBRIEN
P S - We shall at last be obliged to Send an adequate force. - a
dribling war ought not to be our System I have my fears the Expected frigates will not arrive in time to aid Us - in the attack on
tripoli Modern troy [NA. SDA.

CL, Algiers, Vol. 7, Part 1, Jan. 1804-Kov. 1805.1

Extract from journal kept on board the U. S. Frigate Constitution. by Captain Edward
Preble, U. S. Bavy, Wednesday, 1 August 1804

Wind N E. steering by the wind on the Larbq Tack. all the Squadron in sight. At % past 3 pm Tripoly in sight bearing S b E l the
weather very unsettled and a rough sea, wore ship to the N N W, a t
5 pm made the signal for the squadron to close to prevent separation.
in the Night the wind moderated, at 5 AM wore to the S E, a t 8 Sent
up Top Gall! Yards, out large Boats and compleated discharging the
store ship, a t noon we obsd in LatQ33' 13' N ? Tripoly bearing S S E 7
Leagues dist - Wind E N E very light.
[LC. EPP, Yol. 12, June-August 1804.1
Extract from log book kept by Sailing Master Bathaniel Haraden, U. S. Bavy, on
board U. 6. Frigate Coditufion. Wednesday, 1 August 1804

Sent to the Syren two 12 pounders belonging to the Constitution
with the carriages &9" belonging to them. Towards Noon brought
to, & took the store ship in tow in Order to complete discharging her.
The Captains of the Squadron waited on the Commodore (per
Signal) Noon, Moderate breezes from N E. Squadron in Company Sent
Carpenters to one of the Bombards to repair some damage done her
Masts, during the Blow Latitude Observed 33' 13' North.
[LC.

EPP, Log Constitution, 1803-1804.1

332 NAVAL OPERATIONS. APRIESEPTEMBER 6. 180.4
Extract from journal of Midshipman F. Cornelius deKrafft, U. S. Navy, in U. 6. Brig
Siren of 18 guns, Master Commandant Charles Stewart, U.6. Navy, commanding,
Wednesday, 1 August 1804

Midnigb t fresh gales & cloudy At 6 wore to the S. E. At 10 made
all sail. At 11 shorten'd sail, the Commodore made signal for all
Commander to repair on board of his ship. % past 11 Lieu; Stewart
went on board the Corn"
Meridian recd 2 long 12 pounders complete from the Commodore. Latt: Obs: 33" 20' N.
[PU'DA.]
To William Higgins, U. 6. Navy Agent, Malta, from Captain Edward Preble, U. S.
Navy

U. S. SHIPConstitution
At Sea. August W d 1804
DEARSIR I arrived off Tripoly with the Squadron in Company
the 27th UltQ and Anchored near the Town in hopes of immediately
commencing an Attack, but a Gale of wind came on from the N E
and obliged us to weigh and get to Sea as fast as possible The Gale
continued three days, and was so severe as to bring us under reefed
courses - The Gun boats stood towing very well - We are now
about 6 Leagues from Tripoly 8: endeavouring with a light breeze
to gain anchorage near tbe Town.
If you can hire a Vessel under English coIours on reasonable terms
by the month to come immediately off here with 10 or 15,000 Gallons
of Fresh Water I wish you to do it: and send me Ten doze Fowls &
twenty or thirty Sheep with pienty of Grass or Hay for them, 200
bushels of Potatoes 8: 200 bushels of Onions, a parcel of Cabbages &
good melons. I wish you to hire or borrow water casks - I think
Cap$ Schomberg will lend you as many as you want for a few days
I have written to Cap-chomberg to lend us casks, which, I have
no doubt he will do on your application I send this by the Store ship - She has a number of Casks which
you can have taken out; but, I believe, some of them will want
coopering Hire a careful man to see the Water filled & the casks well
rinsed. The Vessel you hire must be at the Risk of the People you
hire her of: and must be protected by an English Passport & papers She can clear out for Tripoly .
[LC. EPP, LB, April-Xov. 1804.1
To Captain Schomberg, B. I?., commanding H. B. M. S. Madross, from Captain
Edward Preble, U. 8. Navy

Constitution Off TRIPOLY
August W d 1804
DEARSIR, I have had a fair trial of Our flotilla as Sea boats Our

Squadron anchored before Tripoly the 27th UltQa t Noon, the Wind
light from S El a smooth Sea and pleasant weather: but in less than an
hour the sea began to rise, and by 4 O'clock it blew a gale from N E
which Obliged us to Weigh & gain an Offig as fast as possible: The
Gale continued three da s, most of which time, we have been under
reefed courses - I have ost a foresail & Main topsail in the Gale, and
mention it to give you some Idea of the Weatber - The Gun boats
towed well & made much better Weather than I expected - We are
now about 6 Leagues from Tripoly with a light breeze from the South@
endeavouring to gain our hchorage -

9

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

333

I have desired Mr Hig,hs our Agent at Malta to send me a Vessel
with fresh Water - Can you Oblige me by lending him some Water
Casks for a few days, to be returned in good Order? [LC. EPP, LB, April-Nov. 1804.1
[2 August 18041
To Midshipman Henry Wadsworth, U. 8. Navy, from Captain Edward Preble,
U. 8. Navy

SIR YOUare forthwith to repair on board this Ship, and consider
yourself attached to her as one of her Lieutenants - Until farther
Orders Given &" August 26 1804
Signed EDWARD
PREBLE
Lieutt HEN?WADSWORTH
On board the Scourge
[LC. EPP, Order Book, May 1803-June 1805.1
12 August 18041
To Edshipman Charles Ilborris, U. 6. Navy, from Captain Edward Preble,
U. 8. Navy

SIR YOUare to repair on board this Ship until farther Orders Given &s. August 2 g 1804
Signed EDWARD
PREBLE
Mr CH! MORRIS
Master of the Scourge
[LC. EPP, Order Book, May 1803-June 1805.1
[2 August 18041
To Midshipman John M. Haswell, U. S. Navy, commanding the Transport
St.Cuisseppe, from Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Navy

SIR, Having discharged y o l ~ rCargo into the Squadron here, you
arc to fill up all your Empty water casks with Salt Water for Ballast,
and roceed to Malta, and there deliver up the Polacre St Guisseppe
to
Higgins Ame~icanAgent.
You are not to part company with the Scourge if you can possibly
avoid it.
Given &3. the 26 of August
PREBLE
Signed EDWARD
Mr JOHN
M HASWELL
Midshipman U. S Navy commanding
the Transport St Guisseppe in the Service of U. S
[LC. EPP, Order Book, May 1803-June 1805.1

h8

[2 August 18041
Certificate of Captain Edward Preble, U.6. Navy, regarding the Polacre Sf. Cuisseppe

I hereby Certify that the Polacre St Guisseppe is employed in the
Service of the United States under command of hlr John M Haswell
Midshipman as a Transport to supply the American Squadron under
my comm&nd with provisions from Malta and that she leaves the
Squadron a t sea this day on her way to that Island, she having

334 NAVAL OPERATIONS, APRIL-SEPTEMBER 6, 1804
nothing on board excepting Casks filled with Salt water as ballast The Commanders of Vessels of All nations in peace and friendship
with the U. S. are desired to let her pass free and unmolested Given $E? the 2q day of August 1804
Signed EDWARD
PREBLE
To all Whom i t may Concern.
[LC. EPP, Order Book, May 1803-June 1805.1

[2 August 18041
Statement of Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Navy, regarding the Polacre St. Cuisseppc

I Certify that the Polacre St Guisseppe Transport for Supplying
the American Squadron off Tripoly Leaves the Squadron a t Sea
without any of her crew having had any communication whatever
with the Shore, or with any Vessel of the Squadron, or any other
Vessel Whatever that has had any such communication for forty
days past Given on board the U. S. Ship
Constitution 2 d August 1804
(Signed) EDWARD
PREBLE
[LC. EPP, Order Book, May 1803-June 1805.1

[2 August 18041
To Midshipman (acting as Lieutenant) Ralph Izard, Jr., U. 6. Navy, from
Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Navy

SIR, YOUare hereby Ordered to take under your convoy the Transport St. Guisseppe commanded by Mr John M Hasm-ell Midshipman
in the Service of the United States; and see her safe into some Port
or Harbour in the Island of Malta and return directly to join the
Squadron off this Station - You are not to go into any port in
Malta - You are to defend your Vessel against the Attack of any
of the Barbary cruizcrs and to capture Tripoline Vessels should you
meet with any Given &p the 2? day of August 1804
Signed EDWARD
PREBLE
P. S. Mr Haswell & the two Seamen belonging to this ship you are
to bring back from the Transport as soon as she is in safety.
[LC. EPP, Order Book, May 1803-June 1805.1
Extract from journal kept on board the U. S. Frigate Constitution, by Captain Edward
Preble, U. S. Navy, Thursday, 2 August 1804

Wind E N E supplied the Vessels of the Squadron with a large
quantity of Provisions & stores. in the Evening the Wind came from
the S E stood to the E N E all night, in the morning calm ordered
Lc Dent Commander of the Scourge with 30 of his crew to join the
two Bombs which with the Neapolitans on board of them compleats
their crews, ordered Lt Wadsworth & Mr Morris (Master) of the
Scourge to join this ship, Wadsworth to do duty as a Lt on board and
Morris to serve in the Boats. - sent off the store ship to Malta, under
convoy of the Scourge, in charge of Lt Izard who is to see her safe into
some port in Malta & return to this Station the Scourge has 36 men

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

335

on board including Officers. At noon Latd 33' 11' NQ discharg'd
from the service Lewis Bashaw a seaman & sent him to Malta in the
store ship, on account of Indisposition and his pleading that he was a
frenchman. Tripoly Bears S b E dist 6 Leagues. [LC.

EPP, Vol. 12, June-August 1804.1

Extract from journal of U. 6. Frigate John Adums. Master Commandant Isaac
Chauncey, U. S. Navy, commanding, Thursday, 2 August 1804

First Part of these 24 Hours fresh Gales and Cloudy with frequent
Squalls of Rain At 1 P M. saw a Brig to the Northward standing to
the Southward on a wind; she appeared to be a Brig of War - made
the Private Signal of the Day to her, she did not answer it, hauled it
down, and hoisted our own Colours, which she answered by hoisting
American, judged then it was the United States Brig Scourge, but
that the Commander did not understand the Private Signal made to
him. I then made the Signal for him to shew his distinguishing Hag,
this Signal also he did cot answer, I then judged t.hat she was some
armed Merchantman, or that she shewed false Colours, she was at so
great a Distance to Windward that I thought it wou'd be only losing
much Time and a fair Wind to Chase her - At 6 call'd all Hands to
Quarters and exercised the great Guns and small Arms - At 7
Cape Farino S. E % S. and Cape Bon S. E b. E - At % past 2 A.
M saw the Island of Cimaro bearing S. S. E. - At 4 the Island of
Cimaro bore W b S. distant 2 Leagues, Cape Bon, South Dist. 5
Leagues - At 5 Cape Bon bore S, S W. Dist 3 Leagues - Latter
part frequent and heavy Squalls, attended I think with the heaviest
Rain I ever Saw -At 6 saw a Sail a Head standing the same way that
we were - At 9 saw the Island of Pantalaria bearing S. S. E - At
the same Time spoke the Brigg we saw a t 6 this Morning she proved
to be a Ragasa from Algiers bound to Smyma 7 Days out full of
Algerine P i r i m s on their Wa to Mecca - People scrubbing Hammocks and washing Cloths - k i n d N W b W
[LC. EPP, Journal, June to 6 August 1804.1
Extract from journal kept by Purser John Darby, U. 6. Bavy, on board U. S. S.
John A d m , Master Commandant Isaac Chauncey, U. S. Bavy, commanding,
Thursday, 2 August 1804

At. half past three this morning we made Cape Rosso fine breeze
& pleasant Weather at 8 came on Squally with considerable rain
a t % past 10. we discovered the Island of Galetie bearing S E % E.

a t Meridian the middle Point of the Island bore S E 34 S. distance 4
. Note. in all the boolrs & charts onboard the ship the Island
a atie is in Lattd 37. 50 but by Observation we find the Island in 37.
33. the Island of Galatie is [space]
a t 1 Oclock. we discovered a brig on our [manuscript mutilated]
a t 2 the Brig passed to Windwd made the signal of the Day. it not
being answered hauled it down and hoisted our colours, she likewise
hoisted American soon after made the Signal to shew her distinguishing flag which was not done from which we concluded she was American
Merchantman - At 6 the Islands of Solcanos bore W. S. W a t 7
Cape Ferino bore S. E % S. Calld all hands to quarters to exercise the
great guns & Marines the Small anus.

:yes

[NDA original. Miea Camilla S. McConnell.]

336 NAVAL OPERATIONS, APRIL-SEPTEMBER 6 , 1804
Extract from journal of Midshipman F. Cornelius deKrafft, U. S. Navy, in U. 6.
Brig Siren of 18 guns, Master Commandant Charles Stewart, U. S. Navy,
commanding, Thursday, 2 August 1804

Light winds & pleas: Lying bye with the fleet At 4 flll'd away to
the N W. made sail. At 9 wore to the Eastwd Latt: Obs: 33'16' N.
[NDA.]
Extract from Memorandum Book of Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Navy, on
board U. S. higate Constitution. S August 1804

Attacked the town and harbour and captured 3 gun boats.
[James] Decatur was killed.

Lt.

[LC original.]
Extract from journal kept on board the U. 6. Frigate Constitution, by Captain Edward
Preble, U. S. Navy, Friday, 3 August 1804

Wind E S E to E b N. Exercised the Bomb Vessels & threw some
shells, fresh Breezes 6.pleasant, during the night we had fresh Gales
lay to with the ships head to the N E. in the morning wore & stood
for the Land, Tripoly about 4 Leagues dist Bearing S S W. at 8 A M
wind E b N a t noon we were within two miles of the City of Tripoly
which is defended by Batteries mounted with 67 Heavy cannon pointing sea ward, and 22 Gun Boats each carrying a piece of heavy Brass
Ordnance [*I, besides small cannon, muskets Pistols Pikes &c - and
man'd with 30 to 50 Men each they have als[o] an Armed Brig two
armed schooners in the Port full of men. I made the signal to wear
and haul off and immediately after the signal to come within hale,
clear'd ship for Action & beat to quarters. - made signal to prepare
for Battle intending to attack their Gun Boats R. the City as I observed
their Boats without the Rocks,
[*Commodore Preble's Diary indicates "Batteries mounted with 115 heavy
Cannon pointed sea ward, and Nineteen Gun Boats each carrying a peice of
heavy Brass Ordinance".]
[LC. EPP, Vol. 12, June-August 1804.1

[3 August 18041
Extract from journal kept on board the U. S. Frigate Constitution. by Captain Edward
Preble, U. S. Navy, Saturday, 4 August 1804

Wind E b S. Standing off shore on the Starbord Tack the signal
out to come within hail spoke the different Vessels and acquainted
their Commanders that it was my Intention to attack the shipping
& Batteries, - directed the Gun Boats & Bombs to be prepared for
immediate service. a t 12%pm Tack'd & stood for the Batteries. Back'd the Main
Topsail, at 34 1 pm made the general signal to follow the motions of
the Commodore. Bled the Maintopsail & stood in towards the B a b
teries, a t % past 2 made the signal for the Bombs & Gun Boats to
advance & attack the ships & Batteries. % past 2 general signal for
Battle. the whole squadron advanc'd within point Blank shot of
the Enemies Batteries & shipping, our Gun Boats in two divisions
the 1% consisting of 3 Boats Commanded by Cap' Somers the 2'Jof
, past 2 the Action commenced on
three Boats by Capq Decatur, a t %
our side by throwing a shell into the Town, and in an Instant the
whole Squadron were engaged. - the Enemies Gun Boats were
Anchord with springs on, in three divisions the Eastern or van division

M A P OF

T H E ATTACK ON TRIPOLI.3 AUGUST 1804.

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

337

consisted of 9 Boats the center of 7 Boats, and the Western or Rear
of 5 Boats. As the wind was from the Eastward our Boats were
ordered to lead in to Windward and attack the Enamy. the Rear &
center division of the Enemies Boats are close under their Batteries,
& the Van division consisting of their largest Boats are within Grape
distance of the Bmhaws Castle & fort English a t 3 observed our
Gun Boats engaged in close action with the Enemies Boats, while a
tremendous fire was kept up by this ship and the rest of the Squadron.
Cap9 Decatur with N Q4 Lt Trippe of N? 6 & LT Bainbridge of N Q5
& Lt James Decatur of N? 2 attacked the enemys Boats within Pistol
shot. N Q 1 Cap! Somers fell to Leward but fetched up with the
Enenys Rear of 5 Boats which he gallantly attacked disabled & drove
in altho within pistol shot of the Batteries. N Q3 Lq Blake did not
o into close Action, had he gone down to the assistance of Cap'
&mars it is probable they would have captured the Rear Boats.
Caps Decatur Boarded and after a stout and obstinate resistance took
possession of two of the Enemies Gun Boats, Lt Trip Boarded and
carried a third. Lg James Decatur in the Act of Boarding to take
possession of a fourth Boat was shot through the Head & Mortally
wounded the officer next in command (M" Brown) hauld off. Lt
Bainbridge had his Latten Yard shot away early in the Action which
prevented him from taking a Boat but he Galled the Enemy by a
steady fire within Musket shot, indeed he pursued the Enemy until
his Boat touch'd the ground under the Batteries. the Bombs kept
their stations which were well chosen, by L' Dent & Ll Robinson, who
commanded them, and threw a number of shells into the town altho
the spray of the sea occasioned by the enemies shot almost covered
them, three different times the Enemies Gun Boats rallied and
attempted to surround ours. I as often made the signal to cover them,
which was properly attended to by the Brigs &- Schooners, and the
fire from this ship not only had the desired effect on the enemies
flotilla by keeping them in check and disabling them, but silenced
one of their principal Batteries for some time, a t j$ past 4 pm made
the signal for the Bombs to retire from action out of Gun shot, and a
few minutes after the generd signd to Cease fireing and Tow out the
Prizes & disabled Boats. sent our Barge and Jolly Boat to assist in
that duty. Tack'd ship 8: fired two Broadsides in stays which drove
the Tripolines out of the Castle & brought down the Steeple of a
Mosque, by this time the wind began to freshen from N E a t 4%
PA4 hauld off to take the Bombs in tow, a t 5 pm Brought to, two miles
from their Batteries, Recd Lr James Decatur on board from Gun
Boat N Q 2, he was shot through the Head (in Boarding a Tripoline Boat
which had struck to him) he expired in a few moments after he was
brought into the ship. - We lay to until 10 P h4 to receive the
Prisoners on board captured in the Prizes, then made sail & stood off
to the N E the wind Veering to the E S E. - we have all the surgeons
of the squadron on board dressing the wounded. During the Action we fired 262 Rounds shot besides Grape double
head & Canister from this ship and were several times within 3 cables
lengths of the Rocks & Batteries where our soundings were from 10
to 16 fathr the Officers Seamen & Marines of the Squadron behaved
Gallantly throughout the Action. Cap1 Decatur in Gun Boat NQ4
particularly distinguished himself as dld Lt Trip of NQ 6. Our loss
in Killed & Wounded has been considerable the dam e we r e d in this
ship is a 24 pound shot nearly through the center o the Mainmast

7

338 NAVAL OPERATIONS. APRIL-SEPTEMBER 6 , 1804
20 feet from the Deck, Main Top Gallant R Yard & sail shot awa ,
one of the Fore shrouds and the sails & running rigging considerab y
cut one of the 24 pounders on the Quarter deck was struck by a 24

i

pound shot which damaged the Gun and carriage and shattered the
Arm of a Marine to pieces, Gun Boat N? 2 had her latteen yard shot
away, & the Rigging & sails of the Brigs & Schooners were considerably cut. We captured 3 Gun Boats two of which carried each a long
Brass 24 pounder & two Brass Howitzers and 36 men with a plenty of
muskets pistols pikes sabres &c, the other mounted a long Brass 18
pounded & two Howitzers & 24 men 44 Tripolines were killed on board
of the 3 Boats and 52 made prisoners, 26 of which were wounded, 17 of
them very badly 3 of which died soon after they were brought on board,
the Enemy must have suffered very much in Killed & wounded among
their Shipping and on shore, one of their Boats was sunk in the
Harbour several of them had their decks nearly cleared of men by our
shot, and several shells burst in the Town, which must have done great
execution. We have lost in Killed & Wounded Vizt
Killed
Wounded
Lt James Decatur

Ca t Decatur slight
Lt %ripp(e] severely
10 Seamen & Marines wounded

Total 1 Officer Killed
2 M c e r s Wounded
10 Seamen & Marines Wounded
13
[LC. EPP, Vol. 12, June-August 1804.1

[3 August 18041
Extract from log book kept by Sailing Master Nathaniel Haraden, U. S. Navy,
on board U. S. Frigate Corutitulion, Saturday, 4 August 1804

Fresh breezes from E b N. We are standing off shore 2 or 3 Miles
from Tripoly with a signal out, for the Squadron to come u-ithin hail
- We spoke them, & directed the Gun boats & Bombards to be ready
for immediate service We made a short board off till 12%Noon when we tacked in for the
Batteries, and made signal for the Gun boats & Bombards to cast off
- Our Gun boats are in two divisions - The first is commanded by
Caps Somers of the Nautilus, Lt Decatur & Ls Blake; The 2@division
by Cap! Decatur of the Enterprize, LTripp[e] & Lt Bainbridge The
Bombards are commanded by Cap! Dent of the Scourge [*] & Lt
Robinson of the Cmtitutwn The Enemy's gun boats are the same in number as on Saturday last,
and are stationed in three divisions as s line of defence - The two
Western divisions are close under the Batteries, and the 3Qonsisting
of their largest boats carrying either long 24 or 32 pdr8is to the Eastward, and under cover of Grape from the Batteries - A few minutes
after we tacked in towards the batteries we backed the main topsail to
make some arrangements ifi the Squadron At 1%P. M. made the Nautilw Signal to make more sail, & a few
minutes after made signal for the Bombards to take their stations, and
for the Gun boats to advance Cap'Decaturand Lieutn J. Decatur,
Tripp & Bainbridge led in for the Eastern division of the Enemy's Gun

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

339

boatg - At 2 P. M. made signal to advance - We were now within
un shot of all the Enemys batteries and stood in within s mile of them
fefore 8 shot was exchanged - At 2%Bombard N? 1 hove a s h d The Enemy's batteries & Gun boats immediately immediately commenced firing which we returned with our Larboard Guns Cap%Decatur boarded and after a stout resistance took possession
of two of the Enemy's Gun boats; Lieut Trip boarded & carried a
third - Lt J. Decatur in the Act of boarding a third was mortally
wounded and the Officer next in Command hauled off Ll Bainbridges boat was partly disabled in proceeding to the Attack
- however she was in, and in close action Cap1 Somers was some
way astern when the signal to advance was made - He came up with
every possible expedition, received the fire of four boats, and pursued
them within musket shot of the Bashaws castle The Bombards kept
their stations and continued to throw shells, altho nearly covered with
the spray of the Enemys shot. Gun boat N? 3 was not in close action
Three different times we made the general signal to cover the
Boats At 4 P. M. the Enemy's boats attempted to surround Cap$ Somers
- The Vixen bore down to his support, and we immediately hove
about & gave them our starboard Guns, on which they all retreated
under the Batteries. At 4% P. M. made the Bombards signal to haul
off, and a few minutes after, the general signal to cease firing, m d tow
out the prizes, and disabled boats.
Sent two boats from the Constitution to assist in Towing out the
Prizes Tacked within half a Gun shot of the Bashaws Castle & round
Battery, and gave them a full broadside in stays, which drove them
out of the Castle & brought down a steeple in the direction of the
Castle.
By this time the wind freshened and began to Veer to N E.
At 4% P. M. we hauled off C made Signal to take the Bombards &
gun boats in Tow. At 5 P. M. brought to, two miles from the Batteries Rec'd L?J. Decatur from Gun boat N? 2 - He was Wounded in the
head and Expired in a few Minutes after being brought on board.
Cap! Decatur reports that ten on our side were wounded & S k t y of
the Enemy killed in the three Gun boats which we have captured We recieved on board fifty two Prisoners, twenty of whom are wounded
- Four of the wounded prisoners died soon after they were brpught on
board - All the Surgeons in the Squadron assisted (pr Signal) m
dressing the Wounded Although the Constitution was exposed to the fire of all the Enemys
batteries & Gun boats for upwards of two hours, Nine shot only struck
her - The Commodore had a very narrow escape - He was close to
a Gun disabled by one of the Enemy's shot; - The shot broke &
severely wounded one man - The Commodores cloathes were cut in
several placea by pieces of the shot We had one of the fore shrouds, and the main Royal Yard cut away.
Our main mast is wounded about 28 feet above deck with a 24 Ib baIl
which came from the Bashaws Castle - I t is wooded about 15Inches. During the action we were several times within three cables Iength
of the reefs and the Western rocks. Our soundings were from 21 to 16
fath?, hard bottom - There were u wards of 200 shot that fdwithin
10 fath*of the ship, and a number w ich hove the spray upon our deck.

E

340 A-AVAL OPERATIOA7S, APRIL-SEPTEMBER 6 , 1804
At Sun set Tripoly bore South 3 &files - We were necessarily
employed till 10 P. h.I. when we filled under Easy sail to the N E At 7 A. M. wore in shore - Tripoly in sight bearing by compass
S W b S X S. 5 leagues Light breezes from E b S, till 10 A. M. when
we had fresh when we had fresh breezes from E N E
At 9 A. hi. the Argus was Ordered to chace to the W N W.
At Noon came to 7 or 8 hiiles to the Northward of Tripoly in 32
fath%ard bottom
As our bower is light; we were under the necessity of Veering to
140 fath? before the ship brought up - We had taken the Argus's two
Gun boats in Tow when she u7asOrdered to chase.
Latitude Observed 33" 4' N.

i* See journal of 2 August 1804.1
[LC. EPP, Log Constitution, 1803-1804.1

[3 August 18041
To George Davis, U. 6. Charge d'Affaires, Tunis, from Captsin Edward Preble,
IT. S. Navy

Constitution a t ANCHOR
off Tripoli Vhof Aug? 1804
DEARSIR. I have the pleasure to inform You that on the 3c Instant
we made an attack on the Town and Harbour of Tripoli; the Action
i 2. P. M. and lasted till K past 4, during which
commenced at $past
time a most tremenduous fire was kept up by our Squadron, and the
Enemies Batteries - S
i
x of Our Gun Boats, led by the Gallant Captain Decatur, advanced into the Harbor to engage 19 Gun Boats, a
Brig, two Schooners and a Galley of the Enemies, they were completely beaten, and three of thir best Gun Boats, were taken and
brought out, one was Sunk, and all of them suffered very considerably - Decatur within musket shot of their Batteries, boarded and
brought out two of the Enemies Gun Boats, each of Superior force.
Lt Trippe of the 'I7ken,boarded and brought out another; the boats
captured are all new, and each carried a long brass 24, and two brass 3,
pounders, and were manned with 108, Men, 52, of which were killed,
and 18, wounded - we made 56, prisoners, 14 of which were so badly
wounded that I sent them on Shore at Tripoli to be taken care of, and
soothed by their friends.
The Town of Tripoli, as well as the Shipping in the Harbor has
suffered very considerably - We lost one brave Officer, Lt [James]
Decatur, (brother to the Gallant Captain [Stephen Decatur Jr.]) who
was shot through the head, at the moment he had obli~edan Enemies
Gun Boat to strike to him, on board of which all the Men were killed
in the Conffict excepting three.
We had a few Men wounded, and the Squadron suffered some
t d h g Damage in Masts, Spars, rigging &c. but nothing what we had
reason to expect, from being two hours in action, within 500, Yards of
the Enemies Batteries - Our Bombs threw several Shells into the
T o m , with good effect.
I intend to attack the City again this day - enclosed is a Copy of a
letter from the French Consul,
Please to write Colonel Lear, and enclose him a Copy of this, and
the French Consul's letter.
COPY

[NA. SDA.

CL, Tunis, Vol. 2, Part 2, 1803-1806.1

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

341

13 August 18041
Narrative of Attacks on Tripoli by Richard O'Brien

No. 1
Narrative of The attacks on tripoli. The 34 and
of august 1804.
with remarks and observations Thereon. by OBrien After our hopes. had been exhausted. relative to The expected
frigates. from The United States. arriving to Join our division in order
to attack tripoli. and by that means extricate our brethern from bondage. We. sailed from Malta. destined for tripoli on The 21%of July our force as Viz - Constitution Vixon and Nautdas. 6 gunboats &c
2 bombards. - on the morning of The 25thwe fell in with. The Siren
Argw and Enterprize in the Evening The Scourge Joined us - we
were about This time 22 miles to The N E. of tripoli On the d@"he wind fresh at East. we stood to The N'J and a t midnight tacked to The South$ On the morning of The 27th of July - the whole fleet steering down
for tripoli. at 2 P M The fleet anchored in an East and west line to The
Nd of tripoli 3%miles - we were getting our bombards ready, in order
to Throw Shells into The town when the wind freshened up to The
N N E. that it threw up a great Sea. it was no longer safe to remain
to an anchor - The signal was made to get underway - and at 8 P M
The whole fleet was standing to The ,Rd The weather remained severe
with fresh winds at N N E. and East until1 The night of The 24 qf
August when we tacked for tripoli, and on The morning of The 3 4 at
Midday was as near as 5 miles - to The N N E. of tripoli. Variation
allowed
(It will Observed. That we had not made or agreed on any Plan of
attack. The gunboats was to lead in and commence fireing at The
Gun boats of tripoli. and we were to be guided by The result or Event.)
our gun boats were in 2 divisions. NB. each of The gun boats and
The 1'4 Commanded by
bombards had 15 Neapolitans and
Captain Somers- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 25 Americans. This took away.
Lieu! Blake - - _ _- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - The $*@of The crew of The NauLieu: James Decator - - - - - - - - - - - - tdas and Enterprize and Bd of The
crew of The Vixen and it@
of The
crew of The Argus and $ds of The
24 Division Captain Decator
crew of The Scourge.
Lieu! Tripp.
Lieut B h b r i d g e
Tripoli had its Castles Batteries A
Division of Bombards Brig in The harbour a schooner &Lieu! Comdt Dent.
Galliotta. with 19 Gunboats.
and Lieu$Robinson Mounting 24 pounders & 18
pounders The first Division of
our force was Thus The Constitution------ - - 46 Guns Gunboats of tripoli was 6 sail
without masts. was moored in a
Argus- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 18
line ahead extending from The
Siren - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 18
double battery East +'J of a mile,
Vixen- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 16
to The South. of This division
Naudulus- - - - - - - - - - - - - - 16
was 2 gunboats under sail and to
Enterprize- - - - - - - - - - - - - 14
an anchor a schooner of 8 guns
6 Gun boats-- - - - - - - - --2 bombards - - - - -- -- - - - ,and a Galliotta of 4 Guns.

342 NAVAL OPERATIONS, APRIL-SEPTEMBER 6 , 1804
Under The double battery moored in a half moon line from N, to
South was 11 Gun boats. The wind a t S b N a fresh breese The
Paschas Pallace and castles were filled with men the flags of tripoli
were displayed on the castles - corsairs and Gun boats, i t being
Mahometan Sunday The Constitution was to The N E b N of The double or Pierhead
battery, distance about 4% miles. The Nautulas a stern rather on
The weather Quarter. The Siren Argus Vixon and Enterprize to
The East of The Constitution with our heads to The Southard; when
the Signal was made for The gunboats to cast loose from the Vessels
towing Them. The Signal was next made for The gunboats and
bombards to advance in a line abreast extending from The S E. to
The N w but
~ as The Constitution was with The Nautuhs to The west
of The fleet. The. 2 bombards - towed by The Constitution and
Gunboat towed by The Nautulas did not get sufficient East. to Join.
The rest of The Gunboats. - Which kept leading ixl for the Van
division of The tripoli Gunboats as ours approached The Van The
Enemie. a fireing commenced - from the tripoline Gunboats. a t ours
which kept approaching fireing round shot.
The 2 bombards commanded by Lieu$ Comidant Dent. and IF'
Lieu! Robinson of The Constitution. commenced fireing Their Shells one of which burst. adjacent to The double Battery and another
Pashed said Battery into The town. - The Constitution. Then
had her top Glt Sails handed a reefe in the topsails, fore sail & M? sail
in The Brails - main and mizen top saile aback heading in about
S b W - The Batteries and gun boats of tripoli commenced a very
severe fireing a t The 2 bombards, - and Constitution - it seemed
then as if it was impossible but The shot of tripoli would sink The
two bombards, all round Them and under The starboard, bow of
The Constitution the Water was kept. entirely in a foam from The
Enemies shot. (with Cap$Somers, was Mr Ridgely as 2g officer.) Captain Somers
falling to Lewards he led in to The West of The Bombards, and kept
fireing a t The double battery and a t the 11 Gun boats. he soon drew
a part of their attention one of our Gunboats. kept to The East of.
The Enemie fireing a t a Gun boat and Galliotta. which was under
sail, whilst Capt Cornid! Decator. with Lieu5 Tripp and Lieu! James
Decator stood in Through the 12 feet channel exposed to a heavy fire
from The Paschas Castle &$ when all but along side of The Van
division of tri oli - gunboats fired their large canister shot. of
Muskett balls. Paid The Enemie on board and with the 1 9 ' fire of their
Musketts and pistols. each a boarding pike and cutlash. boarded The
tripoline Gunboats, - Lieu$ Bainbridge in approaching This Van
division. had his lattene yard shot off jP from the upper End, he
nevertheless used his Oars and sail with his usual exertion, and kept
a continual fireing on the tripoline. 6 boats engaged with The 3
Americans - but The wind & sea and loss of his lattene did not
Permit. him to get sufficient to windward to board The Enemies
Gunboats. As our boats fired advanced and boarded. The Van of The Enemie exposed to The fire of The batteries corsairs and Gunboats. We
Perceived a movement. from The 11 Gunboats. under The double
batteq. and a Galliotta & Gunboat to The South of The Enemiea
V m h e of Gunboats. These made an attempt to succour. The

343

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

Van of their boats. Engaged with Capt Decator Lieu$' Tripp &

Decator. but before this time. The Constitution had filled away The
main and mizen topsails and stood within % Cables Length of The
double battery, fired 3. of her starboard. bow Guns - and bow
chaces - a t The boats. under T i e double battery. Wore with our
head to. The WestP and The after division of our larboard Guns was
fired a t The Galliotta & Gun boat. leading to our boats Engaged boarding our Centre division - was fired a t The Paschas. Castle and
The forward division a t The double battery and Gun boats under it.
We again loaded our larboard broadside with 2 round shot and
grape and in. divisions fired a t The round or double Battery and a t
The 11 Gun boats. by this time we perceived we Threw The 11
Gunboats. into confusion. our Grape and 2 Shells burst over them.
They were annoyed in a cross fire by the Gunboat commanded by
Cap? Somers.
We finding we should get to Leward. of our station we hawled off
to The NQmade sail covering our reheat with our two stern chases in % an hour we tacked stood in under a press of sail. and fired our
starboard broadside at The double Battery and Gun boats 3 of
Them was rowing up
[H. E. Huntington L&AG, EA 480.1
Extract from journal of Midshipman F. Cornelius deKrafft, U. S. Navy, in U. 6.
Brig Siren of 18 guns, Master Commandant Charles Stewart, U. 6. Bevy,
commanding, Friday, S August 1804

Light winds & pleas! the Scourge left the fleet with the store ship
to convoy her into port - % past 2 shorten'd sail. At 4 back'd the
main top sail. At 7 wore to the N E reef'd the topsails. Tripoli
bore S 5 W 3 leagues. Midnight fresh breezes & a heavy sea - % past 3 wore the S. W.
day hght made all sail. At 10 took in sail. dismounted the aftermost
carronade on each side & plac'd the long 12 pounders in their births. Meridian handed top galls sails. All hands employ'd, in preparing
for the attack against the Town of Tripoli, gun boats &c. [NDA.]

[3 August 18041
Extract from journal of Midshipman F. Cornelius deKrafft, U. S. Navy, in U. 6.
Brig Siren of 18 guns, Master Commandant Charles Stewart, U. S. Navy,
commanduq, Saturday, 4 August 1804

Fresh breezes & pleasant all the fleet close in with t,he harbour.
At 2 the Commodore made signal to cast off the gun boats & bombards, At 3 commenc'd a heavy fire on the enemy's gun boats which
were moor'd under the enemies batteries, the enemy kee ing up an
incessant fire on Our boats from a11 quarters % past 3 the ommodore
made signal to cover the gun boats when all the squadron stood close
in with the rocks & commenc'd a heavy fire on the Town 7: past 3
the signal was made for the gun boats to join the Squadron as soon
as possible. At 4 the boats return'd from Action with 3 Tripolian
un boats in tow, 2 of which had been boarded & captur'd by Cap*
beeatur & 1 by Lt Trip % past 4 took NQ 5 gun boat in tow. %

8

344 NAVAL OPERATIONS, APRIL-SEPTEMBER 6 , 1804
past 6 took 1 prize gun boat in tow from the Vixen. Tripoli bearing
S % E 3 leagues. Midnight hove too j: past 6 wore to the S W.
j4 past 9 CapWecatur came on board fill'd away & made sail. Meridian handed top gall: sails & over haul'd a range of the larboard
cable Latt: Obs: 33' 4' N.
[NDA.]

[3 August 18041
Extract from journal of U. 8. Brig Arguc, Master Commandant Isaac Hull, U. S.
Navy, commanding, Saturday, 4 August 1804

These 24 hours Commences with fresh Breezes and Clear Wr
standing in for the town of Tripoli a t K past 2 the Commodore made
Sig! 175 with a Preparative flag at 3 PM, he made Sig! N Q341 the
Preparative flag display'd immediately after Cast off the Gun boats
they stood in for the Batteries and an Engagement took place between
the Squadron Batteries and Gun boats at 5 the Commodo made Sig!
NO 1201 stood off and toolr the Gunboats in tow they having as prizes
brought off 3 Tripolitan Gunboats well manned and Armed a t 6
Tripoli bore S b E Cap' Hull went on board the Commodore and
returned at 9 PM, At 6 AM wore to the Xd 6t We at 9 saw a sail
on our lee bow - the Commodore hoisted our Distinguish5 flag and
made Sig! 259 made all Sail in Chace at 12 came up with her she
proved to be a french privateer the Capf of her came on board
[NDA photostat.]

[3 August 18041
To Captain Edward Preble, U. 6. Navy, from Lieutenant Richard Somers, U. 8.
Navy

UNITEDSTATES
SCHOONER
Nautilus
At Anchor 03 Tripoli Aug' dt@1804
SIR, Agreeable to your orders I send you herewith a statement of
the proceedings of the Gun Boats of the l @Division under my Command on the 3'd Ins! At 2 P. M. when the signal was made to cast off the Gun Boats, I
then beeing far to leward, made sail with the Nautilus to Join the rest
of the Division which were to windward and advancing with the 2 4
Division under Capf Decatur; When the Signal for battle was made,
I immediately Cast off and advanced with all sail upon a wind with
my sweeps out, I found it was impossible to Join the division to Windward which had Commenced firing on the weather line of the Enemy,
who lay a t Anchor close under the rocks, by this time there was five
of the Enemy's Gun Boats of the lee line under way advancing and
firing; when within point blank shot I commenced firing on the Enemy
with round & grape, they still advanced until within pistol shot when
they wore round & stood in for the Batteries I pursued them until1
within musket shot of the Batteries which kept up a Continual fire
of round & grape, three of their boats had got in behind the rocks, I
then wore and stood off - The boats has received no dam e and
but two of the men slightly wounded. - Gun Boat NQ2, un er the
Command of Lieut James Decatur & Mr Thomas Brown Midshipman

7

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

345

Second in Command, engaged one of the Enemy's Gun Boats which
after a short confiict haul'd down their Colours to him;the treacherous
enemy in the act of Lieu! Decatur's geting on board to take possession,
discharged a Volley of Muskettry in which that brave and gallant
officer was killed; the enemy then sheered off from a long side and by
superior sailing escaped being Captured; Gun Boat N? 2 received no
damage and except Lieu3 Decatur but one man slightly wounded in
the breast by a muskett ball; Gun Boat N? 3 was to windward. Permit me Sir to say that the Officers on board N Q1. Mr Ridgley
& h4r Miller and the Men behaved with the greatest magnanimity. [LC. EPP, Vol. 12, June-August 1804.1
To Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Navy, from Captain Stephen Decatar, Jr.,
U. S. Navy

GUNBOATN? 4 off TRIPOLI
Augwt 3'6 1804
Commodore EDWARD
PREBLE
SIR In obedience to your directions to state the proceedings of the
2Qg division of boats that you did me the honor to place under my
command, - I beg leave to acquaint you, that after the Signal was
displayed to advance and engage the enemy I led in with my boats;
finding it impossible to bring their weather division to close action,
I bore down on their line of boats consisting of seventeen, which were
moored within two cables length of their Batteries, - I boarded
and carried two of them, and was successfull in bringing them off, I was supported in the handsomest manner by Lieutenants Tripp
and Bainbridge, Lieutenant Jonathan [John] Tripp who commanded
N ?6, Boarded, carried, and got off one of the enemies Boats, I regret
that Lieutenant Bainbridge's boat NP 5 being disabled prevented him
being equally Successful, I now feel it my duty to Assure you that
nothing could surpass the zeal, courage, and readiness of Lieutenant
John [Jonathan] Thorn & Mr Thomas Macdonough and every discription of Officers & Men under my command, and I am sorry that my
words fall short of their merits, - The Prizes taken by 11'9 4 are new
boats and well fitted, the first captured mounted a long Brass peice
carrying a Ball of 27 1b & 2 brass swivels, her crew consisted of 36 men
& Officers, 16 of whom were killed, 15 wounded BE 5 well Prisioners, the
second Boat mounted a long brass 18 Pounder & 2 brass howets her
crew consisted of 24 men &- Officers, 17 of whom were killed, 4 wounded
& 3 well Prisoners, - The Boat captured by N9 6 was of the same
dirnentions, mounted the same metal, and had the same number of
men as the largest Boat captured by N? 4, she had 14 men killed, and
22 made Prisones, 7 of whom were wounded, I am happy to mention the damage sustained on our part was
trifling, NO 4 has 4 wounded Including myself slightly, No 6 Lieutenant Tripp and 2 men wounded, I have the honor to be
Sir
with great Respect
Your Obedr humble Servt
STEPHENDECATUR
Jr
[LC. EPP, Vol. 12, June-August 1804.1

3 4 6 - N ~ v R LOPERATIONS. APRILSEPTEMBER 6 , 1804
[3 August 18041
To Purser Keith Spence, U. S. Navy, from Captain Stephen Decatur, Jr., U. 6. Navy

UNITEDSTATESSHIP Congress
Tunis Bay Jany gth 1804 [I8051
DEARFRIEND I had the satisfaction of receiving yours of 2" of
November, with a letter for Captain Stewart and one for Robert,
which I shall keep until their return, which is expected shortly.
Your son [Midshipman Robert T. Spence] has displayed a Manliness
of Conduct, that will make every American proud of him as a Countryman. After the accidents which befel his boat, he served in the boat
with me, his Conduct with me was such, as you would have wished;
as to his being confirmed there can be no doubt as Comodore P. has
given me his word that he will have it done
I have requested Captain Bainbridge to shew you some papers I
have enclosed to him, You will see in my report to Comodore P. on
7'h August, your son is mentioned in a way, that will not be displeasing to you. I shall be happy to have him with me, and I know he
wishes it, but Cap! [James] Barron wishes him to sail with him in the
Egsex, R has more than my friendship if possible, and by Sailing
with Captain Barron he will insure his, for he is already attached
to him, therefore by sailing with B. [two words illegible] when I see
R, I will speak to him upon the Subject, Pray let me Know your
opinion respecting it. You see he is in great demand You will observe I am in the return of the wounded on the 3q of
August. My wounds were slight and as follows, in the arm by a
sword and in the breast by a pike. I find hand to hand is not childs
play, 'tis kill or be killed
You no doubt recollect a conversation we had when in the City of
Washington, I then informd you 'twas my intention to board, if ever
I had an opportunity and that 'twas my opinion that there could be
no doubt as to the issue. You will not doubt me I hope, when I say,
I am glad the event has proved my ideas to be correct. I dways
thought we could lick them their own way and give them two to one.
The first boat they were 36 to 20 we carryed her without much fuss,
the second was 24 to 10, they also went to the leeward I had eighteen Italians in the boat with me, who claimed the honor
of the day, While we fought they prayed. They are convinced we
could not have been so fortunate, unless their prayers had been
heard. This might have been the case, therefore we could not contradict it Some of the Turks died like men, but much the greater
number like women I leave this tomorrow for Tripoly, if you are suffered to walk out,
you will know my Ship by her having stump top G1 Masts
Believe me to be yours
Sincerely
STEPHENDECATUR
jr
I
need
I
f
I
do
not
write
often
do
not
attribute
it
to
neglect.
P S.
not tell you I dislike writing, you know it, and my reason, for fear you
should have forgotten, I will tell you, I have always thought, that they
who write badly should write little or by the way of ractice a great
deal. Now as I know I can never become an adept, know you will
think me prudent for not writing much.
(COPY)

P

(Note The person spoken of as R
Captain in the Navy)
[NDA, A 4 . 1

- wae

Robert T. Spence afterwards a

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

347

[3 August 18041
Extract from "Life of Stephen Decatur," by Alexander Slidell MmKenzie, U. S.
rJav

" * * * The Tripolitan colors were hauled down, and Decatur,
taking his prize in tow, was proceeding out of the harbor, when the
boat, which had been commanded by his brother, came under his
stern, and informed him that they had engaged and captured one of
the largest of the enemy's boats, but that, after she had struck,
Lieutenant James Decatur, in the act of stepping on board of her to
take possession, had been shot through the head by her treacherous
commander.
Decatur's noble indignation at such base treachery needed not the
stimulant of fraternal agony, a t the sight of an expiring brother, to
impel him to the immediate pursuit of the assassin. Lieutenant
Thorn, with the greater part of his crew, had been left in possession
of the prize. Still heedless of every prudential suggestion, he laid
the head of his boat towards that of his brother's murderer, and,
followin him within the enemy's line, where he had taken refuge,
ran on oard, and leaped upon his deck, followed by the gallant
young Macdonough, and the nine remaining Americans of his crew.
This was a desperate undertaking, suggested by a courage which
stopped to consider no inequality. For twenty minutes, the result of
the contest seemed uncertain. Three of Decatur's followers were
already disabled by wounds.
At length Decatur was able to single out the treacherous commander,
conspicuous no less by gigantic size, than by the ferocity with which
he fought, and to meet him face to face. Decatur was armed with a
cutlass, the Turk with a heavily ironed boarding-pike. As the latter
made a thrust a t Decatur, he struck it violently with his cutlass, in
the hope of severing tbe head; but his cutlass, coming in contact with
the iron, broke a t the hilt, and left him without a weapon. Many a
brave man thus disarmed might have turned to seek another weapon.
But Decatur stood his ground, and, attempting m t h his right arm to
parry the next thrust of his antagonist, received the point of it in
his arm and breast. Tearing the weapon from the wound, he succeeded likewise, by a sudden jerk, in wresting it from the hands of his
adversary, who immediately grappled him; and, after a fierce and
prolonged struggle, botjh fell with violence on the deck, Decatur being
uppermost. During this time, the crews, rushing to the aid of their
respective commanders, joined in furious conflict round their persons.
A Tripolitan officer, who had got behind Decatur, aimed an unseen
blow a t his head, which must have decided his fate, had not a
oung man, by the name of Reuben James, who had lost the use of
goth arms by wounds, rushed in, and intercepted the descending
cimeter with his own head, thus rescuing his beloved commander by
an act of heroic self-sacrificewhich has never been surpassed.*
Just then the Tripolitan, exerting to the uttermost his superior
strength, succeeded in turning Decatur, and, getting upon him, held
him to the deck with an iron clutch of his left hand, whilst, thrusting
his right beside him, he drew from his sash the shorter of two yataghans, which, for the very purpose of such close work, he carried in
the same sheath. The moments of Decatur's existence seemed
numbered; scarce an intervalLr8mained to breathe a prayer for mercy

%

348 NAVAL OPERATIONS, APRIL-SEPTEMBER 6 , 1804
in another world; a second brother was about to perish beneath the
rage of tbe fierce Tripolitan. But the cool courage and fertile resources
of Decatur came to his rescue in this extremity. Disengaging his
left hand, he caught the right of the Tripolitan, stayed tbe yataghan
as i t was about to drink his blood, and, thrusting his own right hand
into his pantaloons' pocket, succeeded in cocking a pistol, which he
had there, and, giving it the proper direction, fired. The Tripolitan
relaxed his hold, and Decatur, disengaging himself from the beap of
wounded and slain, which the struggle had gathered around him,
stood again that day a victor on the enemy's deck.t
*Some have said this noble act of self-devotion was performed by Daniel
Frazer, which left the name of the individual somewhat uncertain. See a notice
of Reuben James, in the Appendix.
?The above version of this celebrated struggle, which has in other places been
narrated somewhat differently, is derived from Messrs. J. K. Hamilton and
Francis Gurney Smith, early companions of Decatur, who, feeling a natural
curiosity to learn the true history of the adventure, drew from Decatur himself
the statement imbodied in the text. On the body of the Tripolitan, or rather
Turk, (for the officers, like the Bashaw, were from Constantinople,) a devotional
work was found, containing Arabic prayers and passages from the Koran. This
work has, since the death of Decatur, been presented by Mrs. Decatur to the
library of the Catholic College in Georgetown, where it may now be seen by the
cunous.
[NR&L. No. 9516, Bnl D 291 M.]

Surgeons Report of wounded on board the Gunboat N Q 4, Lt:
Decatur, junr: Esqr: Commander. Augt 36 1804.
Capt: Decatur, wounded slightly in the arm.
Sj t Sal: Wren burnt & slightly wounded in the hand.
Tho-ames, superficial puncture in the face.
D4' Frashier, two incised wounds on the head, one of them severe;
one bad wound across the wrist & seven slightly about his
hands.
LEWISHEERMANN.
[LC. EPP, Vol. 12, June-August 1804.1
[Gun Boat] N ? 4 expended on Augt 3. 1804
19 - 24 'b Cartreges
11 - Do Round Shott
5 - D QGrape
3 - Bags Musquts Balls
19 - Wadds 19 - Tubes
Priming Powder
25 - Doz. Musquet & Pistol cartriges
8 - Blunder bus cartriges
2 - Men wounded
7

- 108 m Powder
12 Round Shot
24 Wads
12 Tubes -

[LC. EPP, Vol. 12, June-August

Recq a shot in the Hull. 1804.1

349

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS
Expended on board Gun Boat Nq 6 3r4 August 1804
15 - 24 lb Cartredges
15 - 24 l? Round Shot
10-24
Gra e
60 - Musket artredges
3 - Fathom Match Rope
25 -Wads
1K - '?Priming Powder

8

JNQ TRIYPE

[LC. EPP, Vol. 12, June-August 1804.1
[3 August 18041

List of wounded on board gun boat N? 6 - in the attack of the 3'3
Ins't :
Lieut: J. Trippe
C. Allan - B. Mate
M. Connor Marine
J. Ryan
DQ
EPP,
Vol.
12,
June-August
1804.1
[LC.
[3 August 18041
Statement of Jacob Boston concerning his service and movements of U. 6. Ships
in the Mediterranean
I n the year 1803 in March, I entered the United States Service in

Philadelphia and some time in May, I was ordered to Baltimore under
the command of Capt. Hall and Lieut Johnson of the marine corps,
the detachment was divided, and I left with Lieut Johnson at baltimore, Where I was appointed as sargent of the marines and was
Stationed a t the navy yard with a guard of marines. Whilst the brig
Vixen waa fitting for sea, then I was ordered aboard of her with a
detachment of marines under the command of Capt Smith. In Au ust
1803, we sailed for hampton roads, then to Gibraltar where we fe in
with Our american Squadron. Capt Smith replenished the ship with
water and provisions, then sailed for Malta, where we fell in with the
Philadelphm frigate, then sailed for tripoli in order to blockade
harbour, we arrived a t tripoli in october 1803, here we soon received
information that a tripolitan cruiser had escaped from the port, Capt.
Bainbridge dis atched us to cruis off cape bon in quest of her, after
cruisin sever3 days we were forced to put in to harbour on account
of a vio ent storm where we unship'd our ruder and injured the bottom
of our ship, we repaired our damages, then sailed to Malta, where we
got information that the PhiladelphQa frigate were taken by the tripolitans then we immediately [sailed] for tripoli, where we found her
moored in the harbour to our surprise, we continued Cruisin off there
for Several weeks, then returned to Syracuse where we ound our
comadore with the rest of the Squadron, in a oouple of weeks afterwards we sailed for tripoli in comptmy with the Syren where we drove
a tripolitan ship on ahore west of the town which we diatroyed, after
s cruis of six weeks we returned for Syracuse, where we replenished our
ship with water and provisions and than was ordered to take another
cnuse for tripoli, where we took two triplitan ships that were bound

fi

5

t'

350 NAVAL OPERATIONS, APRIL-SEPTEMBER 6,

1804

for Constantinople which were loded with slaves, animals, and four
boxes of gold dust, which we carried into Malta. I n the Spring it
being determined to make an attacht upon tripoli; Comodore Preble
uptained from the king of naples the loan of Six gunboats and two
bombards which he formed into divisions, and give the command of
one of them to Capt. Decatur, the other to Lieut Sommers, the Squadron Saild from Syracuse consisting the frigate Constitution, the brig
Syen, the Schooner, ,Vautilus and the Vixen and gunboats and bombards, having arrived on the coast of barbary, they were for some days
prevented from making the attack'd by adverse winds and weather,
a t length the morning of the Second of August the weather being favorable, the signal was made from the Commanders ship, to prepare for
action Sargent Migs and me wereordered aboard thegunboat with ten
marines under the command of Lieut. Trip, the Vixon towing us to
the windward, a t nine O'clock the Signal was made for bombardin
the town and to engage the onemin vessels, the gunbonk was cast
and advanced in a line ahead, lead on by Capt. Decatur, and covered
by the other Vessels, the enemies gunboats were moored along the
mouth of the harbour under the battery and within musket Shott,
and was ordered to sink rather than abandon their positions they were
aided and covered by a brig and schooner and the batte , as soon as
we came in range of the battery, a heavy fire was opene upon us we
returned their fires and continued advancing until we came in musket
shot of the gunboats, where we fired on them five rounds of musketry
Which were so well directed by the marines, which caused them to
haul down their colours, by this time we came along side, and boarded
her on her Starboard bow, Lieut. Trip gave orders to Mr Henly to run
to the (lewrd) and take another that were there, we not expecting
any further resistance there bein only ten marines that boarded and
Lieut Trip and one Sea men of a1 Which were americans, the enemies
Seeing our boat put off a heavy combat ensued with the turks and us,
in fifteen minutes we cleared the deck of them, Eight Sought refuge
in the holds And the[y] fell and Jumped over board the number
Supposed to be thirty, Lieut Trip and the Turkish Capt. were the two
last in combat Lieut. Trip fell, I sprang to his assistance, where I contended with the turk for several minutes Where I broke my sword and
had but ei hteen inches of blade. I sought shelter round the mast and
was w a J y persued by the turk. I cried out my sword was broke to
Lieut Trip that he could give me his, by this time the Lieut. had come
too, and made a pass at the turk he fended it off, which gave me a
chance to cut him down with my broken sword. Our hands were
engaged in killing them that had Jumped over board, we then prevented them immediately and saved the lives of seven, our boat had
got so far to the lewrd, that She could not come to our assistance.
The comadore made signal for retreat. The boats all retreated and
we were left in a helpless State and became an entire mark for the
. With what few hands we had, we got out our Sweeps, and
rode er out as fast as possible, a t this time there was a cannon ball
passed my shoulders within six inches or less, that blackened the
skin, which ball passed through the mast, the comadore came down,
and we had got nearly out of gun shot b that time, he asked us if we
would wish to be taken into tow, Lieut. $rip, Answered no, we should
make our we. out, the comadore poured several brode sides into the
town which awed their attention on him, and we made safe our r e

08

7

f

&

WARS WITH BARBARY POUTERS

351

treat, the next day the Comadore ordered a day of rest and sent all the
turkish prisoners that were dangerous1 wounded, Likewise buled the
Bashaw that he should prepare himse for the next day, we also engaged the town the next day, where we lost two of our gunboats that
were blowed up by the enemies f i e , we also continued besiegeing the
town for nearly a month untill Col. Lear appeared off the harbour to
negotiate a peace with the Bashaw, a treaty was a t last concluded
between the two nations, and the Americans and Tripolitans prisoners
were Exchanged and the Sum of Sixty thousand dollars were given to
the Bashaw which I always felt sorrow for. From thence we sailed
for tunis and blockaded the harbour there. We got our consul out
and took off the tribute After affairs being settled there, we Sailed to
Algiers and then to gibraltar where the Vixen was Stationed to convoy
merchant ships up and down the straits, as it was a very difaculty
time there then, for England France and Spain being a t war with one
another a t that time, after a long and tedious cruise the Vixen returned to America which was upwards of three years or more. We
arrived a t Charlestown South Carolina Being about a week there then
we sailed for Hampton roads and from thence to the City of Washington where I was discharged in the year 1806. - then I retired to a
private life untill the late war with great Brittian. I volunteerd my
service again in defence of my Country, Where I rendered my utmost
service, till I was discharged.

h

JACOB
BOSTON.

[VA. OW Inv. 146.1

[3 and 7 August 18041
To Mrs. Keith Spence, Portsmouth, Bew Hampshire, from Midshipman Bobert
T. Spence, U. 8. Navy

GIBRALTAR,
November 12, 1804
DEARHONOURED
AND RESPECTED
MOTHER:
I wrote you from Malta,
on the 6th ultimo, mentioning the late change thats taken place in
my situation; and advis'd you of our intention to leave that place for
a few days. On our arrival we found the Essex Frigate which ship I
intend joining. Capt Stephen Decatur is to succeed Capt Barron,
in the Command of her. This Capt Decatur is a friend of my Father's
no doubt you have heard of him by fame; he Commanded the expedition in burning the Philadelphia & for which he was promoted to a
post Captain although greatly out of his turn - He since has done an
action, which by far cxceeds the brilliancy of that; it perhaps for
intrepidity & Courage equalls any thing ever done; In the Action of
the 3 of August he entered with his division of Gun Boats (which was
only 3) the Harbour of Tripoli under the fire of 60 pieces of heavy
Cannon from the Batteries & 20 pieces from their Gun Boats boarded, himself, & brought out 2, Mounting each superior forces &
canying a greater number of men. A Circumstance were ou present
to see it done you could hard1 conceive it credible. I n &s &air he
lost his brother Lieut James ecatur, who Commanded a boat of his
brothers division he was shot through the head with a Dundebuss
in the Act of boarding a boat - One boat more was brought out by a
Lieut Tripp who received 11 dangerous wounds in boarding (he's
recovered of them). The Capt of this boat died in the most Heroic
Manner. Although cut all to pieces by the Assailants swords he

d

352 NAVAL OPERATIONS, APRIL-SEPTEMBER 6, 1804
continued to fight; Lieut Trip , who encounter'd him, was almost
falling with weakness from the oss of Blood; when one of his sailors
run him through with a Boarding Pike. He died brandishing his
Sword & exhorting his men to revenge the death of their Commander.
The Contest was long, 20 Turks lay weltering in their Gore, before
they surrendered to the Americans. Out of 170 men, which man'd
the Boats, 50 only were captured alive. The day following we brought
too a French privateer & sent her in with 25 woonded Turks; they
were past recove . The next Action, the Boat I was in, Commanded
by Lieut ~ a l d w e was
x Blown up. The Lieut, with a midshipman and
14 men, out 24, were kill'd. I, astonishing to relate, & 6 men escaped.
4 of the men in so wounded a condition that their lives, at first, were
despair'd of. I t was my Conduct on this occasion that got me my
Promotion. I , a t the time the shot struck, was forward, taking sight
a t the Gun; though not a minute before I had been aft, assisting in
binding up the woonded. I t being a red hot shot,she instantly exploded;
I went up some distance in the air, & lighted by the Gun again; the
only part remaining was that on which the Gun stood. I found by
my side, one man only. Around me lay arms, legs, & trunks of Bodies,
in the most mutilated state; though a little confused & bewilder'd by
things tumbling on my head, & by the prospect of death before me;
for I cannot swim, I had presence of mind sfficient to know my duty,
& not to quitt while there was a part remaining. I fired the Gun, &
loaded her again. When she went down from under me I gave a cheer
and went down - came up again; when I was taken up by one of the
other Gun Boats - I cannot describe my sensations, on this meloncholy Occasion - I felt as though I wish'd to die, because I should
die Nobly - This accident will distress my Father much, as Mr.
Caldwell he look'd on as a Son, & loved him equally as well as he does
me; in fact I never knew so pure, and so strong a friendship to subsist
between any two men. He certainly was the most honourable little
fellow I ever knew, & the most respected of any young man in the
Navy - My Father in a letter from Washington to me says thus,
Remember me to my oldest of all Modern Friends Mr. Caldwell."
You may judge from this language how fond he was of him. Young
Dorsey was a man of great Merit & highly esteem'd by me. I saw
Mr. C. after he came down, without arms, or legs ;his face so mutilated
that I could not discriminate a feature - by his dress only, I recognized him; he was not dead although he sank instantly - I made
another escape as astonishing as this. I made application, as well as
Capt Stew't for me, to go in to the Harbour of Tripoli, in an Infernal,
containing 150 Barrels of Powder & 300 shells, for the purpose of
blowing the Bashaws Castle up; this expedition was Commanded by
Capt Surners - I received no direct answer, from the Commodore, &
of course, expected to go; but a favorite of the Commodores, persuaded
him, to allow him to go. Capt Decatur then made Application for
me; But the Commodore reply'd he had already selected the officer,
that was to go with Capt Sumers; the Night came - She went in,
all were anxious with expectation when Cannon announced her near
approach to the Castle. Cannon were fired from all parts of the town.
I n a few moments she went up - How awfully Grand! Every thing
wrapp'd in Dead silence, made the explosion loud, and terrible, the
fuses of the shells, burning in the air, shone like so many planets, a
vast stream of fire, which appear'd ascending to heaven portrayed the

P

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

353

Walls to our view - 20 minutes elapsed, without seeing the signal
agreed on, between Capt S & the Commodore. Guns were fir'd from
the Commodores ship ; signals repeated by the different vessels - our
small schooners sent to reconnoiter the Harbour - but no Boat
appear'd. Poor Sumers a Lieut & a midshipman were gone, no more
to return! We conjectured the explosion to have been premature; it
has since been confirm'd by information from Tripoli. He was within
the Rocks, & only X mile distant from the Bashaws Castle, when he
was boarded by two Gun Boats, 50 men each, - He might have
escap'd; but he started with a determination never to let so seasonable
a supply fall into their Hands; & never to return alive unless he had,
satisfactorily, executed his mission. He touched fire himself to
match & she went up, sending 100 Turks and 15 Christians souls to
eternity. What a Noble Death, & truly characteristic of that Noble
Sumers. He certainly was an extraordinary man. He united every
thing that made the man, or the officer - possessing more firmness &
determination than any man I ever saw - sought danger in every
shape - dangerous undertakings were the most pleasing ones to him.
In loosing him we were deprived of one of the Navys most valuable
officers. The Lieut with him was a schoolmate of William'shis name
was Wadsworth, of Portland.
Much will be done the ensuing Summer. Our force will be formidable. I shall expect the command of a Gun Boat. I hope an oportunity may offer that I may do something conspicuous. It's impossible to conceive that spirit of emulation which prevails among officers
& men; danger is sought for, & the most daring intrepidity has been
discover'd, in officers. Commodore P. has been succeeded by Commodore Barron, a senior officer; But in the most delicate manner.
The letters from the President, to him, are of the most flattering kind,
pointing out the necessity of this Act. He returns to America soon,
to receive the grateful applause of his Countrymen. He certainly
deserves all the Honours they can pay him, & more too. His conduct
in Bombarding Tripoli with so pitiful force has astonished all Europe.
Your affec son,
R. T. SPENCE.
[U. S. Xaval Institute Proceedings, April 1923, p 627.1
[3 August 18041
To whom not indicated from Purser Noadiah Morris, U. S. Navy

UNITED
STATESFRIGATE
Constitution,
off Tripoli, 7th September, 1804
DEARSIR, I improve the opportunity of the prize Brig Scourge's
going to the United States, to give you an abstract of the proceedings
of the American squadron before Tripoli, since the 26th of July, a t
which time the Constitution, Vixen and Nautilus arrived from Malta
towing six gun, and two mortar boats, and was joined on this station,
by the Syrcn, Argus, Scourge and Enterprize.
- 27th [July] all the s uadron came to anchor near the town of
Tripoli, and all hands emp oyed in preparing for a general attack, but
was obliged a few hours afterwards to get under wa , the wind having
veered to the N. E. and blowing a heavy gale on s ore, we stood off,
and could not again approach the coast till the Sd qf August, when
being within three miles of the town, wind S. E., the signal was made

1

i

354 NAVAL OPERATIONS, APRIL-SEPTEMBE=R 6 , 1804
for action, and you can hardly conceive with what promptitude the
several preparative signals were answered and executed. At half past
two the action was general, the Constitution within musket shot of the
Batteries, which could bring eighty pieces of heavy cannon to bear
on her, the bombards in a position to send all their shells into the
town,and the six gun boats covered by our brigs and schooners bravely
engaging nineteen gunboats, two gallies, a schooner and a brig within
the harbour, and in pistol shot of the Bashaw's castle; in the heat of
this doubtful conflict, the intrepid Captain Decatur with his division
of three boats, bore down on a division of the enemies boats seven in
number, and fought them hand to hand under the walls of their
castles, and in view of twenty-four thousand Arab and Turkish
soldiers, and hauled down four of their flags, three of which boats
were brought out, the other boat got into the Mole, after treacherously
killing Lt. James Decatur after their flag was struck.
Capt. Somers who commanded the leeward division of three boats
was equally intrepid, but not so successful. One of his boats was disabled early in the action, and another from some almost unaccountable
reason, did not come into close action; but this brave officer alone
attacked five of the enemies' boats, and obliged them to haul off, and
run into the Mole, where all their boats had taken shelter in a shattered condition, and we have since learned, with a great proportion
of men killed or wounded - we must account for this great slaughter
from their boats being full of men, and our boats reserving their fire
'till close along side, and their guns loaded with forty pounds of musket
balls each - the three boats capturedeweremounted with new brass
Spanish pieces 13 feet long, and carrylng a ball of 28 pounds - the
carnage on board them was very great, out of 52 prisoners one half
were covered with sabre and pike wounds. Ca t. Decatur boarded
and carried two of them and received but one s i h t wound, though
his life was twice saved by his gallant tars. Lt. rippe boarded and
carried the others, but received eleven sabre wounds, none of which
however proved mortal; he is again a t his duty.
Never was there a more complete victory - to recount every instance of personal bravery would be to name almost every officer in
the squadron. - The Turks were driven from their batteries in the
greatest terrour and confusion; and I think I may say with propriety,
that since Charles the 5th of Austria never have any of the Barbary
States met with so severe a check.
The Constitution suffered some in her spars, sails and rigging, a shot
in the center of her mainmast I fear has done i t considerable injury;
it has been strongly fished.
Fourth, 6th and 6th in continual preparation for battle, but weather
unfavourable. The wind to the Northward of East, heaves such a
swell on shore as to make i t improper to attack.
7th wind favourable but the Tripoline gun boats kc. not inclined to
give us battle, our gun boats now nine in number and two bombards,
ran in and attacked the town to the Westward, in order to entice the
enemies' boats out, but without effect - they however sustained a
heavy fire for four hours from the town forts, and a severe gun battery
on the beach, which they succeeded in silencing - the two bombards
commanded by Capt. Dent and Lt. Robinson, did eat execution in
the town - one of our prize boats unfortunate y blew up; and
Lieutenant Caldwell who commanded her, Mr. Dorsey, midshipman

i

Y

A T T A C K O N T R I P O L I . 3 AUGlJST 1804

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

355

and seventeen men lost their lives - a Mr. Sprague [Spence] midshipman and ten men who were stationed forward, to load and fire
the gun, were not in'ured, and u M e all the stern of the boat was
blown off, and actuady sinking, they finished loading their gun, and
just in the act of touching the match, the boat sunk under their feet,
while this brave young officer, and his gallant comrades, gave three
cheers, and lunged into the sea, but they were fortunately all saved
by the sma boats. Independent of those which were blown up, we
had but two men killed and several wounded during this action, a t the
close of which the John Adums hove in sight.
On the 8th there were overtures made by the Bashaw through
the French Consul for an accommodation - but before I give
you these proposals, it will be well to take a retrospect of circumstances which precede this event. - Several months past a t the
intercession of our Minister a t Paris, Bonaparte was induced to
interfere for the liberation of our prisoners in Tripoli, and about the
same time, the Court of St. Petersburg, interceded thro' the medium
of the Ottoman Porte for the same purpose; but with the intercession
of these two most powerful Governments in Europe, a ransom could
only be obtained, but by the payment of 500,000 dollars down a t the
liberation of the prisoners. These were the only terms this haughty
Bashaw could accede to, and induced there was a great deal of acrimony, between the French Consul a t Tripoli (who was the mediator)
and Commodore Preble because the latter would not honour these
terms with his immediate coincidence, which he contended would be
thought honourable by the greatest maritime powers in Europe.
But our intrepid Commander determined to op ose to this unwarrantable demand, the emulative bravery of his fficers and Seamen:
and the event proved the fallacy of the idea, that these Barbarians
were invincible, for in the short space of seven days our little squadron
fought off 350,000 dollars of this insolvent demand - Yes Sir, peace
and ransom were offered for 150,000 dollars - by which you will
discover tthe contest ceased to be a point of honour; nothing was
asked for peace or tribute, of course it became a point of humanity the 150,000 dollars ought to have been given, without hesitation, and
so it would, had not the JohnAdams at this moment arrived, and announced the coming of four more Frigates, for the declared purpose
of dictating terms to these barbarians. Our Commander not knowing
the expectations of Government on this head, could not accede to
these terms at the moment such force was expected. The consequences that would have attended such a measure were but too
obvious; the conclusion would be, that if our fiigate could command
these terms, five would certainly force a peace and ransom for little
or nothing - But for my art I cannot but think, that the only
alternative left our Gallant ommander, was an unfortunate one, and
I firmly believe that altogether they will not command much better
terms - under these peculiar and disagreeable circumstances, Commodore Preble could not accede to the terms with honour to himself.
But he offered twenty thousand dollars as a present in addition to
eight thousand which he had previously offered (and was rejected
with disdain both by the Bashaw, and French Consul) but this offer
was not acceeded to, and we have since the 7th of August been constantly prepared for action, and as often as the weather would permit
been under the batteries of Tripoli. You can form no idea of the

lf'

8

8

356 NAVAL OPERATIONS, APRILSEPTEMBER 6, 1804
rigour of this service, officers and men are worn out for want of necessary rest - never was there a greater emulation in any service, no
altercation but what has arisen from who should have the most
chances of meeting danger and death. We have repeatedly driven
the Turks from their batteries, have attacked their boats kc. a t their
moorings, and sunk many of them, and in fact no means by which
they could be distressed have been neglected. We have in all, between 40 and 50 Semen and Marines killed and six officers, es follows
- Capt. Somers of the Nautilus, Lieut. James Decatur of the NazLtilus,
Caldwell of the Siren, Wadsworth of the Constitution, Israel of the
prize Ketch Intrepid, and Midshipman Dorsey of the Siren. This
loss is severe from the uncommon merits of the officers; but it cannot
be considered as a large number when we reflect that we have been
exposed to the fire of 115 pieces of heavy cannon from the difTerent
Castles and Forts of Tripoli; a brig, a schooner, two gallies and nineteen gun-boats - The squadron generally have suffered in their
rigging, and sails and spars; the Constitution has received upwards
of 40 heavy shots, besides a great number of Grape.
I t is peculiarly unfortunate that the John Adams left her gun
carriages on board the squadron a t Hampton Roads, to be brought
out by them; had she brought them out herself there is not a shadow
of doubt but we should have effected a ransom and peace within 48
hours after her arrival, and for the last mentioned sum of 100,000
dollars. One frigate besides the Constitulion at that moment would
have been fully competent to the accomplishment of so desirable an
object, but the J. A. was of no service: the Commodore however
received great support from the Commander Capt. Chauncy, who
volunteered with a number of his officers and men on board the
Constitution and gun-boats -The squadron have been daily and
hourly expected since her arrival but have not yet made their appearance; and the Commodore has found himself under the necessity
this day of returning the gun and bomb vessels to the King of Naples,
as the weather bas become boisterous, and too uncertain for boats of
their small draft of water on a lee shore, that have no other shelter than
the stern of our vessels, which would be found insufFicient to save
tbem in a Northerly gale, which we have great reason to expect on
the seas, approaching the Equinox, independent of which, we have
expended nearly all our ammunition.
I t is impossible to ascertain how many of the enemy have been
killed during these several engagements, but I think I may safely
say thousands - and the Bashaw has only been deterred from
acceding to the last mentioned terms, from a belief that our gun and
bomb boats could not keep the coast much longer - that Tripoli
has been reduced to the last extremity there is no doubt, and I am
sanguine in my opinion that if the Frigates arrive soon, we mey yet
have a peace this fall.
We are informed that government is fully apprized of the merits
of our commander and that they have given frequent and unquestionable proofs of their approbation. Yet the officers of this squadron cannot but regret the necessity of superceding him in a command
which has reflected so much honour on his country by the intrepidity
which has marked all his measures, and for the field which he has
opened for his young officers, to assert and support the innate principles of Americans, and which cannot fail of impressing all Europe

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS
-

--

357

with sentiments of the &hest respect for our growing naval char-

acters.
I have entered so fully into the operations of our Commodore, for
these six weeks past, that I hope to be excused for adverting to

ma[n]y circumstances, previous M) this sanguinary warfare, in my
opinion equally honourable to his country and himself. You have
been fully apprized of the honourable peace he made with Moroccoour government generously approbated his conduct, and I can only
observe, that this event has been brought about by his ready conception of the Turkish characters, which has been but too long mistaken,
however the Commodore's object accomplished he lost no time in
sailing to join the Philadelphia and Vixen in the blockade of Tripoli;
between Algiers and Malta, he met the unwelcome news of the loss
of that frigate, which wrested from him almost a certainty of making
the same honourable peace with Tripoli, that he had a few days before
made with Morocco - This unfortunate event placed our affairs
with that regency in quite a different point of view; and the Commodore shifted his course for Syracuse which was previously fked upon
as a place of rendezvous for the Squadrons and deposit of provisions.
We arrived there the last of November, and after procuring the
necessary stores and arsenals sailed for the coast of Tripoli, where we
encountered heavy gales of wind, and a tremendous swell setting on
shore, but on the 23d of December, we captured a vessel with a
number of Tripolines on board, among which were some officers of
distinction, after this we returned to Syracuse, and the Commodore
embarked on board the Vixen for Malta, for the purpose of getting
some Turkish letters translated and to fix on some plan of supplying
our unfortunate countrymen in Tripoli with money and other necessaries; from which however they were long witheld either thro' the
. . . . or . . . . of the American Consul at that place - It was
during the time the Commodore was a t Malta that indirect proposals
were made him for the ransom of our prisoners for 400 dollars each, and
the restoration of the Philadelphia for a schooner. Of this circumstance I see (by the newspapers) the publick are apprized, and I presume ere this that they are informed of what followed - It was by
mere chance while a t Malta, that the Commodore learned that this
pretended desire for an accommodation, was nothing less than a
deep laid scheme to prevent any plan he might have formed for the
destruction of that Frigate, until they had carried into effect, a contract then existing between the Bashaw of Tripoli, and Bey of Tunis,
the nature of which was, that the Bey of Tunis was to give two Xebecks of 24 guns each for the frigate Philadelphia at her moorings
in the harbour of Tripoli, where he was to send officers and seamen
from his regency and bring her out under Tunisian Colours; of the
truth of this, I believe Doctor Davis (then charge of &airs a t that
regency) will readily subscribe to - The Commodore convinced of
this pernicious design sailed immediately for Syracuse, when he
formed the plan for the destruction of that frigate which was so
nobly executed by the gallant Decatur. - This event is attended
with greater and better consequences than will naturally occur to
those who are not acquainted with the particular relative situation
of the Barbary states - The main force of Tunis (which is but too
large already) would have been augmented by a valuable frigate
while that of Tripoli would have had an addition of two large Xebecks,

358 NAVAL OPERATIONS, APRIL-SEPTEMBER 6, 1804
completely armed and while the squadron were blockading Tripoli
they would have sailed from Tunis unsuspected, and ere we had been
apprised of the circumstance, the commerce of the United States
would have suffered incalculable injury, as they would have been
permitted to carry their prizes into either Algiers or Tunis - The
existence of these States depend in a very great degree on each other that their manners and custons are the same, there is no question,
and that their strength and arrogance has rather proceeded from the
duplicity of the Maritime powers of Europe, than from any superiority
in bravery or enterprize is equally certain.
The truth of this has been fully demonstrated by our small squadron. The Americans have conquered them, hand to hand, one to
five; and they have reduced the insolent demand of the redoubtable
Bashaw to the standard of reason.
Soon after the destruction of the Philadelphia, the movements of
the Tunisians, wore the appearance of hostility towards our commerce.
Commodore Preble in the course of the spring, was three times in
Tunis Bay - to the impression of this vigilance and the efficient
operations against Tripoli, are we at this moment indebted for his
Beyship's forbearance - it is a fact that the Bey of Tunis has it in
his power to injure our commerce more fatally than any other State,
they have sixty four crusiers and ten gun boats, as follows.
1
1
2
1

9
10
10

30

10

Frigate of 36 guns ready for launching.
do. of 36 do. ready for sea.
Xebec's of 36 do. do. do.
do. of 32 do. do. do.
do. from 30 t o 24 guns each ready for sea.
do. from 16 to 12 do. do. do. do.
do. from 10 to 6 do. do. do. do.
gallies from 1 to 2 guns each, carrying from 30 t o 40 men.
gun boats carrying 50 men each.

Independent of which, their position is infinitely more favourable
to success than Algiers or Tripoli - I would refer you to the Mediterranean Chart, where you will discover that its continuity to the
principal maritime ports in the sea, fully justifies the idea.
Commodore Preble's exertions have not been confined simply to
the prosecution of war against these barbarians; for while at Naples,
negotiating for the gun and mortar boats, he found that our Commerce
a t that place, was shackled with the most injurious requisitions American vessels without distinction of place, or time they left the
United States, were obliged to perform a rigorous quarantine of 40
days, after which they are obliged to manifest their cargoes under the
most unprecedented restrictions - the commodore presented a memorial to the Neapolitan Government placing this grievance in its
true light, contrasting it with commercial privileges other nations
had with them, from which we were unjustly excluded - the consequence of this statement was that he had the firmest assurances,
that America should have equal privileges with the most favoured
nations - whether these honourable intentions are carried into effect,
I cannot say, but I am persuaded that from the influence the Commodore has acquired by his correspondence and exertions, will ensure
many important advantages to the commercial interests of his country,
as it respects the Barbary affairs - a ransom of our prisoners once
effected, there is not the most distant idea of their provoking another
contest, for in this the Regency of Tripoli is impoverished to the last

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS
degree and experience has taught them that they are not invulnerable
to American intrepidity.

N. MORRIS

[NHF.]

[3 August 18041
Presumably Neapolitans serving with U. 6. Squadron

1

GUN BOAT NQ 1

Eadrone
- - - - - - - - - - - _ Tommaso Procida
Guaralanoj
34 Capo- _ - - - - - - - - - - - - - Guiseppe San Filippe- - - - - - - - - -- --- - _-__ - - - - - - Casato
Appuntatore- - - - - - - - - - - - Antonio Migliore- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - Casato
21? Classe- - - - . - - -Guiseppe
- - - - Parzieri

_

Catiello Battimiello- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - Casato
Guiseppe Pace
Pasquale Artiuno [?]
Guiseppe Percuece [?I
Vincenso Sposito dlGiov- - - - - - - - - - - - - - -- - - - Casato
Raffaile Sposito
Rartolomeo Favaruolo
Pasquale Sposito Di Giov.
4'h Classe- - - - - . - - - Giovanni
-Isace
Guiseppe Caravello
GUN BOAT NQ 2

Padrone
Guardiano}- - - - - - - - - - - - Ancello Santa lamaechia- .- - - . - ...-.
..- .- - Casato
34 Capo--- - - - - - - - - - - - Givacchino Raja- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - _ - - - - - -Casato
Appuntatore-- - - - - - - - - - - Vincenzo Mirabilo
2% Clo..- - - - - - - - - - ~- - - Giovanni Stajano
3'4 Clo - - - - - - - - - - - - .. .-Francesco Angelene
Mars di 3do- - - - - - - - __ -_ Biaggio Messina- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - Casato
Scipione Morgera
Fedele Donnarurnena [?I- - - - - - - ..- - - - - - - - - - - Cawto
Antonio Apuzza
Nicola Rafione
Domenico Tasulo
Tommaso Torte- _ - - _ - - - .- - - - - - - - - - - - - _ - ..-Casato
Luigi Raspacele
Domenico Ricciardo
Antonio Cutulillo- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -Casato
Antonio Tricoli- - - - - _ - - - - - - - - - - - - - _- - - - - - --Casato
GUN B O A T NP 3

P
Padrone
Guardiano)- - - - - - - - - - - - Salvatore Scuada
Guaratanoj
Appuntatore- - - - - - - - - - - - Givacchino Zaraffa
Pasquale Nobilione- -.
-.
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -. - Casato
24 C ~ P_ -_ _ _ _ _ _ . ___
_ _ .Gaetano Luongo
Francesco Sacco
3 d~ - - - _
mar^ di 3dr- - - - - - - -.-_ .Antonio Fariello
Antonio S osito- - _ _ _ - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -c858t0
Guiseppe eingolla
Domenico De Simone
Tommaso Arrito- - - - _ _ - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -Camto
Domenico Candelo- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - ..- - - - Casato
Salvatore Donnarumena [?I
Guiseppe Aveta
Felice Bongiorno
Guiseppe La Cave
Vincenzo Persico

360 NAVAL OPERATIONS, APRIL-SEPTEMBER 6 , 1804
GUN BOAT N4 4

Captured the Tripoline Boat
Padrone
Guardiano}- - - - - - - - - --- Ottario Talanga. - - - - -.
-.
..-- ....-.
...-.
- .Casato
Appuntatore- - - - - - - - - - - - Giovanni Pizzarello- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - Cssato
2 CIQ-----------..----Antonio Salpietro

Gaetano Terrigno
Girolamo Caatellaccio
Francesco Ant? Migliaccio
Pasquale Mirro- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -Casato
Mariano di Martino
Raffaele di Paola
Guiseppe di Alessandro
Tommaso Sposito
Francesco Sposito
Pasquale Magliano- - - -- - - - - - - - - - - - ..- - - - - - - Casato
G U N BOAT NQ 5

Padrone
Guardiano}296 Cave_-

-------------

Giovanni Romitiello- - ...............- - - - - - Casato
Francesco di Elia- - _ - - - _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ - _ -..- - - - Casato

. - Casato
Mar? di 3d Cle - - - _ _ _ - _ - Gennaro di Palma
Arcangelo Casteliaccio
Pasquale Sobilione- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - Casato
Giovanni Curcio- - - - _ - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -Cssato
Antonio di Lorenzo
Antonio di Fino - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - Casato
Antonio Santoro- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -C-to
Rajine Jacono- - - - - - - - - - ..- - - - - - - - - - - - - ....- -Casato
Geremia Palle
Tommasco Geri

G U N BOAT N? 6

Captured a Tripoline Boat
Padrone
Duardiano}- - - - - - - - - -- Genaro Salemo. - - - .- --.
....- .- ...........Casato
Appuntatore- - - - - - - - - - - - Filippe Cafarello- - - -- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - Casato
3 d Cl+--- - - - - - - - - - - - - Diego Sciarrone
Guiseppe Sinagra
Andrea Burrello
Marp di 3 d Cle- - - - - - - - - - Caleguo Cristino- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -Caaato
Antonio Portelli
Guiseppe Cesario
Giacomo Cesario
Domenico Basile
Francesco di Martino- --- - - - - - - - - -- - - - - - - - - Caeato
Michele Pinelli
Vincenzo Fiorentino
Carmine Apreo- - - - - - -- - - - --- - - - - - - - - - - - - C-to
qt4 Cle - - - - - - - - - - - - - - .Carto
.
Castellano
Michelangelo Cristino
[Maine HS. KDA photostat.]
-.

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

361

Recognition of Gallant Conduct of Personnel in Action of 3 August 1804 by
Commodore Preble

GENERAL
ORDERS
The Gallant behaviour of the Officers Seamen & Marines of the
Squadron in the Action of Yesterday, with the Enemies Batteries,
Gun Boats and Corsairs, claim from the Commodore the warmest
approbation and praise he can bestow Captain Stewart of the Siren, Captain Hull of the Argus, Captain
Smith of the Vizen, will please to accept the Commodores thanks for
the Gallant Manner in which they brought their Vessels into action,
and for their prompt obedience to Signals, particularly that to cover
Gun Boats and prizes Captain Somers will please to accept the Commodores thanks for the
Gallant Conduct, display'd by him, in attacking five of the enemies
Gun Boats, within musket Shot of the Batteries, and obliging them to
retreat after a warm conflict The very distinguished judgment and intrepidity of CaptainDecatur
in leading his Division of Gun boats into Action, in boarding, capturing
& bringing out from under the Enemies Batteries, two of their Gun
Boats each of superior force, is particularly gratifying to the Commodore, and Captain Decatur will be pleased to accept his thanks Lieut. Command! Dent, and Lieutr Robinson, commanding the Two
Bomb Vessels, are entitled to the thanks of the Commodore for the
judgment & Bravery display'd by them, in placing their Vessels, and
for the annoyance they gave the enemy Lieutr Lawrence of the Enterprize and Lieutenant Read of the
Nautilus (commanding those Vessels in the absence of their Captains)
merit the Commodores thanks for their active exertions in towing
out and protecting prizes The Commodore deeply regrets the Death of Lieutt James Decatur,
who nobly fell at the moment he had obliged an enemy of superior
force to strike to him Lieut' Bainbridge's Conduct in pressing into the Harbour, and
engaging the enemy, and his conduct through the action, merits and
receives the Commodores thanks. Lieutr Trippe mi11 be pleased to accept thanks for the Gallant
conduct which distinguished him, in boarding, capturing, and bringing
off, one of the enemies Gun Boats of Superior Force I have now to tender my warmest thanks to the Lieutenants, Sailing
hfaster, Marine Officers &- other Officers of the Constitution, for the
prompt support I received from them The Conduct of the Officers Seamen and Marines of the Squadron,
have not only in the Action of the 3"3 Instant, but on every other
Occasion, merited the highest encomiums Given on board the UNITEDSTATES
Ship Constitution at Anchor off
Tripoli the 4 r h day of Aug! 1804.
Signed E D WPREBLE
~
[LC. EPP, Order Book, May 1803-June 1805.1

362 NAVAL OPERATIONS, APRIL-SEPTEMBER 6 , 1804
Expended of [f] tr'epli august 3 1804
Fired 109 - 24 Pr"-- _ - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - ----Powder 848 lb
D QRound Shot 24 PC"
130
Grape unknown
Canister unknown
Double hd unknown
12 Prs Fired 61 - - _ _ _ _ _ - _ _ - _ - _ - _ _ _ - - - - - - - - - - Powder 240 ib
Round Shot 61
Grape unknown
Canister unknown
Double hedd unknown
25 PC820 - Powder- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 120 lb
Round Shot- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 20 NQ
Grape unknown
[LC. EPP, Vol. 12, June-August 1804.1

[3 August 18041
[NOTE: Concerning Daniel Frazier, seaman, in Gunboat KO. 4 during the
attack of Commodore Preble's squadron, in the U. S. pension records is a certificate
granting a pension of $9.00 per month to begin 7 December, 1805, to be iesued to
Daniel Frazier. Another certificate dated 21 February, 1838, sworn to by
Edward North, indicates that his brother James North on entering the service of
the U. S. Kavy in 1802 changed his name to Daniel Frazier. He died in New York
about April 22, 1833. Although he suffered from his wounds until his death,
there are several affidavits in the pension records indicating that he did not a t
any time claim his pension.]
Extract from journal of U. 8. Frigate John Adam, Master Commandant Isaac
Chauncey, U. S. Navy, commanding, Friday, 3 August 1804

Throughout these 24 Hours moderate Gales and fine Weather At 1 P. M. saw two Sails to the Southward standing to the Northward - At 4 Pantalaria bore W. b. S. at 6 it bore W % N. - At
Day light saw several Sail in Different Directions - At 9 A M saw
the Island of Gozo bearing S. S E distant about 8 or 9 Leagues At Meredian the End of Gozo bore S. b. E. distant about 3 or 4
Leagues. - Ends with fine Weather. - Wind W b N
[LC.

EPP, Journal, June to 6 August 1804.1

Extract from journal kept by Purser John Darby, U. 6. Navy, on board U. 6. 5.
John A d m , Master Commandant Isaac Chauncey, U. 6. Navy, commanding,
Friday, 3 August 1804

At half past 2 this morning discovered the Island of Simeria bearing
S S. E. at. half past 3 Squally with sharp lightning heavy rain a t
4 Island Simaro bore S W. b S. distance 2 Leagues at 5 Cape Bon
bore S S W. distance 3 Leagues. a t 6 saw a sail on our Lard and
another close in with the Land at 9 the Island of Pantalaria bore
S S. E. Dist. 7 or 8 leagues.
At Meridian spoke a Rigusian Bri from Algiers bound to Smyrna
out 7 days. the West End of Panta aria bore S. S W Yi W. distant 5
leagues the E part S % E. distant 4 leagues. at % past 1. discovered
two sails on our Lard bow standing to N? & E? at. 4 the Island of
Pantalaria bore W S W a t 6 the center of Pantalaria bore W % N.
distant 7 Leagues

f

[NDA original.

Miss Camilla S. McConnell.1

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

363

[4 August 18041
To Prime Minister to the Baehaw of Tripoli, from Captain Edward Preble, U. S.
Navy

To His EzeUency Sidi Mahommed D'Chies Prime Minister to his
&celleency the Bashaw of Tripoly.
SIR The Fortune of War has placed a number of your People in
my Power, and while I regret the Effusion of Blood, humanity dictates
that those who are wounded may be soothed by the presence of their
friends, and by them furnished with fresh provisions, and other
necessaries which we have not on board - Under these impressions
I am induced to improve a good opportunity of sending them on shore,
and shall leave it altogether to the known Magnanimity of his highness the Bashaw whether or not these good Offices are to be reciprocal The letters I received from Capaainbridge respecting the cloathing
consigned to our care, have been highly satisfactory, and mark in
the strongest gght to nobleness of your nature & sentiments I enclose an Invoice of the Prices of the cloathing before mentioned
which you will have the goodness to deliver Capt Bainbridge Signed EDWARD
PREBLE
Constitution --Off TRIPOLY
August 4th 1804
[LC. EPP, LB, April-Xov. 1804.1

[4 August 18041
To the French ChargB d'Affaires and Commissary General, Tripoli, from Captain
Edward Preble, U. 6. Bavy

SIR, I am honored with your letters of the 13th June, 6th July, &
The &st & second I have long since replied to. The latter
I am happy in the present opportunity of answering - I do not
consider the terms I have offered as humiliating to the Bashaw: and
as I am determined not to deviate much from the terms already
offered, I think the Bashaw udl act wisely to accept of them However,
if you think he is disposed for peace, you will do us a favor by assuring
him that the offer for ransom with the addition of ten thousand dollars is still open to him untill the arrival of our additional force of four
Frigates momently expected, after which we never shall consent to
give him a cent.
The Cap! of the french Corsair Rust?,Mr P Blaise Mercellise actuated by the Noble and honorable sentiments of humanity has consented
to convey some unfortunate Tripoline prisoners to their friends I
regret that the Effusion of blood has been necessary and humanity
dictates the sending the unfortunate wounded prisoners on shore as
we have no fresh provisions on board proper for their nourishment I shall be glad to hear from you by the return of this Vessel Constitution - O f f Tripoly.
August 4th 1804
[LC. EPP, Vol. 12, June-August 1804.1
3@Ins!

Extract from journal of U. S. Frigate John Adorns, Master Commandant It38Ib~
Chauncey, U. 6. Navy, commanding, Saturday, 4 August 1804

Throughout these 24 Hours moderate Gales from the Westward and
fine clear Weather - At 4 P. M. saw the Town of Valette bearing

364 NAVRZ; OPERATIONS, APRILSEPTEMBER 6,1804
S. 5. E Dist about 6 or 7 Leagues a t Sun down i t bore S. b E.
Dist 2 Leagues - At half Past 8 took in studding Sails and hauled
down the Staysails a t 9 anchored in the Harbour of Malta with the
Starboard Bower in 13 Fathoms Water - At 10 the Proteque Boat
came off, and after informing were I was from &c he desired that I
wou'd hoist the Yellow Flag a t the Fore, and consider myself in
uarantine which was done accordingly - At 7 A. M Mr Higgins
t e Navy Agent came alongside and delivered me a Letter from
Commodore Preble, directing me to proceed off Tripoli without Loss
of Time - At 8 weighed and warped over on the Weather Shore,
got the Topsails and Top Gt Sails on the Ship, the Wind however soon
hauling more in took in top Gt Sails and topsails and run Warps out
to the Mouth of the Harbour and warped down to the Point where the
l g h t house stands - hoisted the Top Sails and top Gallt Yards to the
Mast Heads with the Sails stoped with Yarns, got the Ship in a Position that I wished and a favourable flaw, cast off the Hawzers made
sail and run out of the Harbour - Fresh Gales & fine Weather
[LC. EPP, Journal, June to 6 August 1804.1

1

Extract from journal kept by Purser John Darby, U. S. Navy, on board U. S. S.
John Adams, Master Commandant Isaac Chauncey, U. 6. Navy, commanding,
Saturday, 4 August 1804

At. 8 Oclock this morning discovered several sail in sight. At %
past 9 Discovered the Island of Goza on our Starboard bow & Sicily
on our Starbg Bean n t Meridian the S W. Point of Gozo bore S b E.
a t 4 the West Point of Gozo bore W b S. h/ S. distant 3%leagues. a t
% past 4 Discovered the Island of Malta. We hare a light breeze &
standing in for the town of Velette a t Sunset the town bore S by E
distant 4 miles. a t 9 Oclock we got in to the town of Malta & came
to anchor several boats immediately came of[f] to us. One from the
Pratique master - who informed us that we must perform quarentine
for 18 days. and that we coud have no communication with the shore
[KDA original.

Miss Camilla S. McConnell.]

To Secretary of the Navy from Master Commandant Isaac Chauncey, U. S. Bavy

U. S. SHIPJohn Adams,
MALTA5thAugust 1804
SIR I have the honor of informing you that I arrived here a t 10

QClocklast Night after a pleasant passage of 5 Days from Algiers -

I have this Moment received Commodore Preble's Orders from the
Hands of Mr H' gins directing me to proceed off Tripoli without
Loss of Time in onsequence of which I am now getting under way

8

for that purpose
Commodore Preble left this Place for the Coast of Tripoli about 15
Days ago with 6 Gun and two Mortar Boats in Addition to the other
parts of his Squadron, since which Time There has been no Kews
from him,
[NDA. MC LB, 1804-5.1
Extract from journal kept on board the U. 8. Rigate Corutitution, b y Captain
Edward Preble, U. 8. Bavy, Sunday, 6 August 1804

Fresh Breezes E b N a t Anchor 7 or 8 miles from the City of
Tripoly bearing South. Squadron and prizes in company. Every

365

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

r

one busily Employ'd in pre aring for another attack on Trip01
the Argus in chase of a sma 1 vessel to the Westward. At 1 P
the Argus brought the chase within hail and anchored, she is a french
privateer of 4 guns saild from Tripoly this morning & brou h t me
letters from the french Consul, the Cap: informed me that e put
into Tripoly for water being in distress for that Article. I prevail'd
on him for a consideration in provisions to convey 14 badly wounded
Tripoline prisoners to Tripoly, which I put on board him with a letter
to the French Consul & one to the Prime Minister. a t past 1 P M.
made signal for all Captains a t 2 P M the Body of LC James Decatur
was committed to the Deep with the Usual Military honors His
funeral was attended by the Officers of the Squadron a t 6 A M the
French privateer weigh'd & stood into the Harbour, Ordered our
three spare Top Gall%asts for masts for the Prize Gun Boats, all
hands employ'd in Rigging & fitting them for service, they each carry
a Brass cannon of 27 'P Ball and 2 Brass Howitzers, Caused General
Orders of Thanks to be read on board each Vessel of the Squadron

k

[LC. EPP, Vol. 12, June-August 1804.1
Extract from journal of Midshipman F. Cornelius deKrafft, U. S. Navy, in U. 5.
Brig Siren of 18 guns, Master Commandant Charles Stewart, U. 6. Navy,
commanding, Sunday, 6 August 1804

Light winds & pleasant, )ipast Meridian furld all sail At 1 came too
with the stream anchor in 35 fathoms to the Nd of Tripoli, the Bashaws
castle bore S % E 6 miles, At 2 the Commodore made signal for all
Commanders to repair on board his ship. At 4 moor'd ship uith the
larboard bower. Midnight light airs & warm. At 7 weigh'd the larboard bower.
At 9 sent Carpenter & sail maker on board the Commodore Pr signal.
$4 past 10 the Commodore came on board of us At 11 he return'd
on board his ship. Meridian light airs & pleasf
[NDA.]
Extract from log book kept by Sailing Master Nathaniel Haraden, U. 6. Bevy,
on board U. 8. Frigate Conalifution.Sunday, 6 August 1804

Brought along side two of the captured Gun boats in Order to
rigg & commission them in the U. S. Service - They appear to be
strong boats - Length on deck 51 feet - Beam 14%feet Depth in the
hold 3 feet 8 Inches - They each carry a brass gun 13 feet long which
takes a 28 pound shot We stepped the main top gall? Mast m One,
and the fore top gall$ Mast in the other - They are to be Sloop
rig ed #he Syren riggs and Manns the other boat which is rather smaller
than these two, and carries a long brass 18 pounder - We supplied
her with one mizen top g a l l h a s t The Commodore this forenoon Visited all the Squadron Supplied
the Bombards with 240 Gall? water each The carpenters & sail
makers of the Squadron are employed (pr Signal) in fitting out the
three Gun boats Towards noon made the 1-ixen signal to weigh,
and reconnoitre the Enemy's batteries Surgeons report 3 sick, 4 convalescent. Of the 21 wounded prisoners
taken out of the captured Gun boats 4 only remain, three having died
& 14 sent to Tripoly -

366 NAVAL OPERATIONS. APRIL-SEPTEMBER 6. 1804
We have now on board in all 35 Prisoners.
Noon Moderate breezes from E N E & pleasant Weather
[LC. EPP, Log Constitution, 1803-1804.1
Extract from journal of U. S. Brig Arguc. Master Commandant Isaac Hull, U. 6.
Navy, commanding, Sunday, 5 August 1804

all the Squadron a t Anchor off Tripoli a t 2 PM came to an Anchor
a head of the Commodore a t % past Cap$Hull went on board of him
At Sundown the town of Tripoli bore SbW j4 W a t 7 took NO 2 & 3
Gunboats in tow again a t 8 Cap? Hull returned hoisted in the launch
and Barge At 6 AM, hove in the Slack Cable At 9 the Commode
made Sig! N Q1000 and 1007 Cap! Hull went on board the Commodc
[NDA photostat.]
Extract from journal of U. S. Frigate Congrus. Captain John Rodgers, U. 6. Navy,
commanding, Sunday, 6 Augnst 1804

At f past 3 departed this life John Rodgers Carpenters Mate. a t 3
past 8 Sam! Shrote fell over board rounded Too Lowered down the
boat & pickd Him up. hoist,ed the boat up & made sail a t $ past 10
saw the land bearing S E., Sick list 34.
Latitude Observed 32' 11' N. Longitude Observed 10' 04' W.
[USNA.]
Extract from journal of William Eaton, U. S. Navy Agent for the Barbary Regencies,
5 Augnst 1804

[On board U. S. Frigate President.] August 5. Sunday - [At
111 Made Magadore - on the coast of Africa, bearing S b. E.

3 Past
[H.

E. Huntington L&AG, E A 206.1

Extract from journal of U. S. Frigate John Adam, Master Commandant Isaac
Chauncey, U. S. Navy, commanding, Sunday, 6 Augnst 1804

Commences with strong Gales and fine Weather - a t 1 P M
made sail and stood to the Southward to clear the Island
At 4 the Extremes of Malta bore from N jh E to N E b N. Distant
about 8 Leagues - At 5 A M.set all the Starboard Studding Sails,
Put all Hands on an Allowance of 3 Quarts of Water pr hlan, my
reason for so doing was, that not knowing how long the Commodore
might require my Services on the Coast of Tripoli and that the Service
might Suffer by my being obliged to return to Port to Water, I therefore judged such a Step expedient - Ends with Moderate Breezes
and fine Weather - Wind W. N. W.
[LC. EPP, Journal, June to 6 August 1804.1
Extract from journal kept by Purser John Derby, U. S. Navy, on board U. S. 6.
John Adums. Master Commandant Isaac Chauncey, U. S. Navy, commanding,
Sunday, 6 August 1804

I t being in the night when we came in here [Malta] I was disappointed in having a view of the town when we came in and our not
being admited to go on shore prevents my saying anything more of
this place than mearly the appearance from the ship, when you
into the harbour i t is large and spacious, sufficient for 500 ships to ay

ft

WARS WITH BARBRRY POWERS

367

with saifty. and place if possible is stronger fortifyed than Gibraltar.
the town of Villet has the appearance of an amphitheatre being built
upon the declivity of hill one house riseing above another. As we
came in the harbour last night it appeared to be covered with boats full of boys & girls singing particular tunes. it being as we supposed
some particular Saitg day a number of the boats came around us
singing and playing on musical instruments. some of them wanted
to come on board but were prevented by our not being allowed
Pratique, this morning a boat came of[f] with a band of musick and
played all round the ship which is always their custom when any ship
of War comes in. they played hail Columbia & Yanke dudle. &
several other American Patrioctic tunes - Mr Higens our Agent
came along side of us. & we delivered him our dispatches. & he gave us
others for Commodore Preble of[fj Tripoli. We found none of our
Squadron here they having sailed from this about a fortnight before
this, as we were not admited to have any communication with the
shore and Capt Chauncey being Very desirous to apprise Commodore
Preble. of the sailing of Commodore Barron and his squadron as they
had been expecting our ship so long that they had concluded that we
were lost as they supposed that we had sailed long before we did.
for those reasons Capt. Chauncey determined to sail immediately
and we commenced geting under way and warping the ship out. as
the Wind blew into the harbour and a t one oclock we made sail on the
ship & cleared the harbour. the Wind W. by N. we bore away
S W % W. and went. to the Ed of the Town - at half past 1. the Town
of Velette bore W % S. Dist. 2 Miles. We have now a fresh breeze &
fair Standing our course for Tripoli [XDA original.

Miss Camilla S. McConnell.]

To Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Navy, from George Davis, U. S. Charg6 d'Affaires,

Tunis

TUNISAugr 6'4 1804.
SIR, Agreable to Your request, (by letter bearing date Tunis Bay
June 20% 1804.) I have given a Passport to a Copigi Bashaw of the
Grand Signior to enter Tripoly, subject to Tour final approbation.
His Excellency the Bey, directs me to inform You, that he has
written the Bashaw of Tripoly, not to embark on board said Vessel,
Passengers other than those mentioned in the Passport on any pretext;
and requires me to add, that as it is his indispensable duty, to send
said Copigi Bashaw to Tripoly, he feels satisfied, that no interruption
will be given to his safe arrival TUNIS
August 10tQ
There has been much difficulty, concerning the form of the passport - with which the Spanish Consul is by no means contentedI have informed the Cap! If he takes one passenger on board more than
is mentioned that you will certainly capture him - altho we have not
a friend in either of the French Commissaries - I have made a merit
of permitting the articles mentioned in the passport to be embarked I had the honor to write you fully on the 8 t V n s t via Malta
GEORGEDAVIS

368 NAVAL OPERATIONS, APRIL-SEPTEMBER 6, 1804
Should you not permit the Vessel to enter Tripoli - The packages
Marked C D, you will be pleased to take in your possession - and
forward to Tunis by the h t occasion - they contain letters &c for
Cap1 B
[LC. EPP, Vol. 12, June-August 1804.1
To Captain William Bainbridge, U. 6. Navy, from Cieorge Davis, U. 6. Charge
d'dffaires, Tunis

TUNIS
Azlgt 6tQ1804 SIR,By the Spanish Polacre Marianu, Capt. Andrea Rossello, carrying a Copigi Bashaw from the Grand Segnior to His Excellency the
Bashaw of Tripoli, with my Passport, I do myself the pleasure to offer
you a line, enclosing a Duplicate of my last.
I am favoured with your letter of the l o t h ult? and duplicate of the
17th June, both under cover from the French Consul, by a Courier
lately from Tripoli; and cannot omit expressing my Surprize, a t
your not acknowledging the receipt of mine of the 234 June;
lady as I delivered in person to this same Courier a Package or ticuyou,
and a line for hl: Nissen, whose answer has come to hand - it is
presumable you have received them before this - they however offer
you no news; and are of no farther value, than tokens of my sincere
regard, respect, &- esteem.
No news from the U. States - no letters for you from any uarter. We learn that the Coronation of Bonaparte, is differed unti 1 the 1gt4
No+; and that the Pope has refused to officiate; (as was intended)
in consequence the French Ambassador, has left the papal dominions.The Russian Ambassador, has again left Paris; and the Fleet of
His Imperial Majesty of both the Russias, is daily expected a t Malta
and Syracuse - their intentions will not be immediately put in
execution; but the delay will not vary the object.
Gen! hloreau, has left France for the U. States. - how, and in
what manner, We are not informed. - I have no news papers of any
kind to forward you, which might dissipate a tedious hour. - And
can only repeat my prayers for the full completion of your desires -

par

7

Sympathetic ink [R7rittenin lime juice.]
The Commodore, has doubtless made an attack on Tripoli; before
this - I hope your situation is not rendered more disagreable in
consequence of i t - nor that it will prevent your receiving as heretofore, communications from your friends To avoid any suspicion of your having been apprized of his intentions, I have not written you so frequently for the last two months,
as I should have done. - I learn from Lt Porter, that a consul is
appointed for Tunis - if it hastens your liberation, or my projected
visit to Tripoli, as stated in my last - I shall rejoice most sincerely
a t the event; should my proposed embassy, accord with your ideas,
let the application to Govt be strengthened by yourself and friends.
I shall dispatch you a courier express on Mr Russel's arrival, and
charge myself with the delivery of all your letters for America, as I
shall not make any stay in the Mediterranean; unless it be by the
absolute orders of the Secv of State. Rely on a just and energetic
representation of yr situation, and believe me under all circumstances
F Sincere friend. G. D.
[NYHS. Geo. Davis LB, Vol. 1.1

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS
To Cap&

369

Edward Preble, U. 8. Bavy, from Yonnieur Beausuier, Rench Charg6
d1Affairerand Commissary Qeneral, Tripoli

TRIPOLY.
BARBARY.
AzGgust 6Q 1804
COMMODORE
I received your letter by the French privateer on
board of which you forwarded the wounded prisoners notwithstan
the just representations of the Captain The Commendable an
humane motive in sending them was misunderstood, and we had
difficulty in persuading the Bashaw to retain them I should have been ha py to have received an answer to my letters
of the 13th of June & 6t July I repeat to you again Commodore that notwithstan
the Pacha's
aversion to conclude a treaty of Peace with the United tates, I prevailed upon him to accept reasonable pro sals - The Efficacious
means that you have adopted in order to orce them to accept our
roposals will certainly hasten a cessation of hostilities, as we$ as
Piberate your unfortunate count men who, notwitbstandmg the
tleir wishes for the glory & success
Attachment to their country and T
of it's Arms must shudder at every discharge of your cannon.
The Fanaticism & fury of these Africans would be diflicult to curb
in case of a total destruction - I think that I ought to lay before you
these considerations, not that I wish to Serve this government, but
in Order that you may be ignorant of nothing that would enlighten
your operations and direct your conduct - Since the reception of
your letter which was yesterday, I have been constantly with the
Pacha, who has assembled his divan several times to which Sidi
Mohammed DGhies has not been able to attend, being very much
indisposed - I have caused him to reflect upon what he had experienced in the first Attack, and what he had to fear from what must
follow - He declared to me that he ardently desired to be ;at peace
with the Americans: but that he would not conclude a p a c e with
such dishonorable conditions. That if you desired it as much as he
did you would not certainly hesitate at augmenting the sum a little
which you had already offered: but if your instructions would not
permit you to go farther he would be obhged to make use of Every
method to oppose your attacks, the result of which would be ordained
by providence - These are his own expressions As for my part, I conjure you to propose a ransom more consistent
with the number and quanity of the Prisoners, which would not be
inconsistant with the honor and d' ty of your nation, and to listen
to the fine sentiments which shod actuate you to avoid the Effusion
of blood - If you should wish to communicste to me your last resolution, you can send your boat as a cartel as far as the rocks which form
the Entrance of the Harbour, and I wiU engwe that they shall be in
Perfect Safety - I propose you this expedient as the privateer cannot
be delayed longer & I beg of you to let her proceed a[flter the reception
dz erusal of this letter h e two papers shall be given immediately to Cap9 Bainbridge Sidi Mohammed DGhies regrets that his indsposition should prevent
him from answering your Obletter - Accept the Assurances
of my hgh Esteem and Consideration (Signed) BEAUSSIER
Would
it
be
imprudent
to
beg
of
you
to disphy the French
P. S.
flag at the Mizen when you intend to bombard the Town.

I?'

f

P"

P

[Mrs. Jamea 8. Barron Col.]

9

370 NAVAL OPERATIONS, APRIL-SEPTEMBER 6, 1804
Extract from journal of U. 8. Brig Argus, Master Commandant Isaac Hull, U. 8.
Navy, commanding, londay, 6 August 1804

at) past 3 the Vixen got under way and stood in for Tripoli a number of gunboats came out At 4 past 6 Consul OBrien Capt? Hull
Somers & Decatur came on board At 3 past 11 they returned on
board their respective Vessels At 8 AM the Cornmod9 made Sigl NQ995 Cap+Hull went on board
a t past 11 Cap$ Hull returned -

+

[NDA photostat.]
Extract from journal kept on board the U. 8. Frigate Comtitufion, by Captain Edward
Preble, U. 6. Navy, Monday, 6 August 1804

At Anchor 2 Leagues North of Tripoly with the Squadron, Employ'd
this Ships Company in Fitting the Prize Boats, &. supplying the
Squadron with Provisions Water & Military Stores, all the Sailmakers
in the Squadron are employ'd in making sails for the Prizes, the Vixen
was kept under way all night makmg false signals to darm the Enemy,
At noon wind N N W.
[LC. EPP, Vol. 12, June-August 1804.1
Extract from journal of U. 8. Frigate john Adams, Master Commandant Isaac
Chauncey, U. 8. Navy, commanding, Monday, 6 August 1804

First Part of these 24 Hours moderate Breezes and Pleasant Weather - At 5 P. M. saw the Land bearing from S W b W to S. S. E.
Distance off Shore about 10 Leagues - At Day light made Sail
and stood in for the Land, but i t soon fell Calm or the Wind so very
hght that we made no Progress Sounded with an Hundred Fathoms
of Line No Bottom - Ends with light Airs from the Westward
and Weather extremely Hot. [LC. EPP, Journal, June to 6 August 1804.1
Extract from journal kept by Purser John Darby, U. 8, Navy, on board U. 8. 8.
John Admnr, Master Commandant Isaac Channcey, U. 8. Navy, commanding,
Monday, 6 August 1804

We have light breezes and pleasant weather this morning being
favored with a fair Wind we are in ourly expectation of faling in with
some of our Mediterranean Squadron, a t % past 5 this evening we
discovered land ahead which knew to be coast of Tripoli. a t 6. called
all hands to quarters and exercised the guns. a t Midnight we hope
[hove] to with the main topsail to the mast. and a t 5 past one we
hove a cast of the lead with a hundred fathom of line no bottom
[NDA original. Miss Camilla S. McConnell.]
Extract from journal of Atidshipman F. Cornelius deKrafft, U. 8. Navy, in U. 8.
Brig Siren of 18 guns, Master Commandant Charlea Stewart, U. 8. Aavy,
commanding, londay, 6 August 1804

Light airs & pleasant, hands employ'd rigging the prize gun boat
(NQ9) su plied the gun boat astern with water.
Midnig t light airs & pleas* the launch employ'd in supplying us

t

with water from the Commodore 11 Cap$ Stewart went on board
the Comm; Meridian r e d spars from the Comm: for the prize gun
boat. [NDA.]

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

371

To Daniel Badinger, Navy Agent and Superintendent of Ravy Yard, Borfok, Va.,
from Secretary of the Navy

NAV.D E PAugf
~ 7" 180.4
A Provision Ship has been ordered from Boston to Norfolk to

receive the Residue of a cargo intended for the Mediterranean. We
shall send certain articles from this place to be put on board the
Provision Ship and we wish you to send out in her the powder left
by the Vessels of War - 6 or 7 tons of assorted Cordage if ou should
have as much in Store - the Bowsprit intended for the onstidution
and as many spare spars as the Provision Ship may Conveniently
receive We are advised by Mr Brown agent a t Boston, that the Provisions
will probably leave Boston on the 8t@ins? - the articles from this
place will be sent on immediate1 so that in all probability the Provision Ship from Boston and the essels carrying part of her cargo from
this place, will arrive in the Roads nearly a t the same time - it is
therefore submitted to you to determine whether, in the event of the
Vessels from this place arriving first i t would not be expedient to
detain them with their cargoes on board until the arrival of the
Provision Ship and then have the Cargoes of the Vessels from this
place put immediately on board the Provision Ship - But we rather
Presume that the Vessel from Boston will be first in the Roads -

B

Y'

[NDA. GLB, Vol. 7, 1803-1805.1

To William Higgins, U. S. Navy Agent, Malta, from Secretary of the Navy

NAV.D E PAug.
~ 7.1804
We have chartered the Provision Ship the AZjred to carry Provisio11s
to the Mediterranean for the use of our Squadron in that Sea We have agreed with the Owner that she shall proceed first to
Gibraltar and thence if required by the Consul a t that place to land
her cargo, but if M' Gavino the Consul from his understandin with
the Commodore of the Squadron in relation to Supplies, sho d not
deem i t adviseable to receive the car a t Gibraltar, he will direct the
Commander of the Alfred to procee either to malta or Syracuse. If directed to malta you will on her arrival there, receive her cargo and
should i t be delivered to you in good condition you will pay the
freight, Vizt 9000$.agreeably to Bill of lading and rnvoice which will
be transmitted to you bv Daniel Bedinger Esq. norfolk Virginia and
you will give advice in due season to Commodore Barron
You wdl pay the freight by Bills on Messr@
De en Purviance & Cq
a t Leghorn or on Frederick De en Esqr a t Napes or otherwise as
may be found the most adviseab e. We are to pay the freight a t the
place where the Cargo shall be delivered -

3

r

f

5

[Similar letter sent to George Dyson, Syracuse.]
[NDA. GLB, Vol. 7, 1803-1805.1

To John Gavino, U. S. Consul, Gibraltar, from Secretary of the Bevy

Nav. D E PAug
~ YtQ 1804
Daniel Bedinger Esgr navy agent a t Norfolk will transmit to you
Invoice and Bill of laQng of the Cargo of the ship Alfred freighted
by Government with provisions $9 for the Squadron in the mediterranean -

372 NAVAL OPERATIONS, RPRILSEPTEMBER 6, 180.4
The Captain of the Alfred is directed to Call on you for your directions respectin the cargo. - If ou deem i t Expedient to land the
Cargo a t Gibra tar you will do so, ut if you deem it most adviseable
that i t should proceed to Malta or Syracuse you will direct the Captain
to proceed on accordingly - The understanding you have with the
Commodore upon this subject will enable you to decide in the present
case with propriety Should you direct the Cargo to be landed a t Gibraltar and i t should
be delivered to you in good condition you will pay the amount of
Freight Viz Seven thousand fire hundred dollars to Such person as
may be properly authorized to receive it, by Bills either on Mess:"
MqKenzie & Glennie, London MessrWegen Purviance & C? Leghorn
or otherwise as you may deem most adviseable, letting me know
particularly how it is paid - Should you pa the freight at Gibraltar
you will receive from the Captain of the A!jred all the letters in his
possession from this Department, But in case you direct the Alfred
to proceed on to Malta or to Syracuse, the freight being payable a t the
place where the cargo shall be delivered, the agent a t such place will
pay i t and has my instructions on the Subject -

5

g

[NDA. GLB, Vol. 7, 1803-18051

To Daniel Bedinger, Navy Agent and Superintendent of Navy Yard, Norfolk, Va.,
from Secretary of the Navy

NAVD E P Yth
~ Augt 1804
Samuel Brown Esq' navy agent a t Boston, agreeably to my instructions has chartered the Ship Alfred and ordered her to Proceed with
part of a cargo - (of which he will particularly inform you and Transmit you invoice and bill of lading) to Norfolk where she is to take in the
Residue of her Cargo and thence proceed to Gibraltar and if directed
by Mr Gavino the Consul there, thence to Syracuse or Malta to
Deposit her Cargo for the use of our Squadron of Ships in the mediterm e a n Sea Captain Cassin is ordered to Send to you to be shipped on board
the Alfred
130,000 lba Bread in Barrels or Hogsheads
125 Barrels of Flour
400 Bolts Russia Duck & Canvas
40
Boxes S ermaceti Candles
H h g ~ e L s es a Quantity of Cheese
20
2
Anchors from 4 to 500 I b T Wt
3
Tons assorted Cordage &q
8.32 Pound Carronades with Carriages, Rammers
Captain Cassin will send you invoice and bill of lading agreeably to
whch you will pay the freight - To this Cargo you will add 7 Tons of
assorted Corda e should you have as much in Store All the Powc fer landed from the Squadron while lying in Hampton
Roads, and the Bows rit intended for the Constitution, with as many
Spare Spars as the A fred can conveniently receive The Freight of the Alfred is to be aid either a t Gibraltar, Syracuse
or malta, wherever the cargo may e ultimate1 landed - ypu will
therefore transmit to each of the following Gent emen an invoice and

1P

1

9

373

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

Bill of lading of the Cargo of the A1 red,
John Gavino Esq - Gibr tar

f

Geo. Dyson Esqr
Syracuse
W* Higgins Esq.
Malta
For the freight we are to pay, if the cargo should be landed a t
Gibraltar the Sum of $7,500 -if landed a t Syracuse or malta the Sum
of 9000$ of which the agents a t these places are fully advised and
instructed by me
You will also transmit an Invoice and Bill of lading of the Cargo to
Commodore Sam! Barron You will direct the enclosed letter to the Commander of the Alfred,
left Blank because we do not know his name, and advise me of his
name - and you will deliver, to him the letter to himself and also the
enclosed letters directed to Commodore Samuel Barron - John
Gavino Esq Geo. Dyson Esq and William Higgins Esqr and you will
des atch the Alfred as early as may be practicable - & so soon as she
sh& have sailed you will transmit me an invoice and bill of lading of
her Cargo [NDA. GLB, Vol. 7, 1803-1805.1
To Captain Joseph Patch, of the American Provision Ship A u d , from Secretary
of the Navy

NAP D E PAug
~ 7,1804
So soon as you are Ready for sea you will weigh anchor and proceed
with all practicable despatch for Gibraltar
You will there call on John Gavino Esq the American Consul to
whom you will deliver the letter which you will herewith receive
addressed to him. Should Mr Gavino determine to land the cargo of
the AlfTed a t Gibrdtar you will deliver i t to him (with all the letters in
your possession from this Department) he will pay the freight agreeably to Bill of lading - Should M Gavino determine to send the
l then
Alfred to Malta or Syracuse with the public Property you d
take his directions and roceed on accordingly to either of these
ports where you will de iver to the agent the enclosed letters to
CornT$Barron Geo. Dyson Esq & William Higgins &q

f

[NDA. GLB, Vol. 7, 1803-1805.1
To Secretary of State, from George Davis, U. S. Charga d'Maires, Tunis
Nq 17
TUNISA U ~ LYt4
L S1804.
~

SIR, I n conse uence of the recent visit of the Neapolitan force,
(as stated in the ast I had the honor to write you) His Excellency,
has ordered all his Corsairs m m ' d : - they will sail in two divisions;
and it is said, are to attack the enemy's Squadron, under any, and all
circumstances - there are on board two half Gallies five hundred &
fifty men; and the rest of the Squadron is manned in proportion the first division is now a t Sea.
The new Prophet, has occasioned much disorder in different parts
of Algiers: he made but a short stay a t Constantine; but erfectly
stripped that place; taliing with him, arms, ammunitions, c oathing,
horses, and a vast number of Cattle; retirin again to the mountains. I learn (indirectly from this Gov?) that fua Army a t tbis moment,

1

P

374 NAVAL OPEBATIONS, APRILSEPTEMBER 6, 1804
consists of one hundred & eighty thousand men, and is daily increasing - all communication between t b and Algiers by land 1s stopp'd
in such a manner, that I could not procure a Courier to go ColQLear,
for any consideration - as yet we can form no opinion as to his
probable fate. - much; perhaps d;depends on G. B. should that
Power ultimately resolve to avenge their innumerable outrages and
indignities (which I have never w p e c t e d j b y an attack on Algiew, it
i t is probable that the consequent disorders of the Regency, wdl so
so far aid the Marabout's intentions, as to make him a formidable
pretender to the Throne.
My last advices from Tri oh, are of the 14Q of July, nothing however of any moment coul have transpired at that period - the
OBicers and Crew, en'oy good health; and have Suffered no change
in their Situation - apt. Bainbridge, writes me, that the Bashaw,
has made known to him, that no person u-ill be received to treat for
peace, or ransom, who, does not come with full powers immediately
from the U. States for that purpose: - his pretentions appear to be
more extravagant than ever.
On the 4th & 5%"Inst. I was called to Bardo, relative to a Pass ort
for a Copigi Bashaw to enter Tripoli - I have the honor to enc ose
you a copy of that I have accorded. - His Excellency, took occasion
to mention the affair of the Sandal; (as stated in my Disptltch of June
23@)I endeavoured to convince the Bey, that on no principle of
Justice, (the sacred rule by which we were governed) any restitution
could be expected; he left me in doubt whether he was satisfied, or if
i t should be the subject of a future demand With Profound Respect and Consideration,
GEORGEDAVIS

!

b

5'

[NYHS. Geo. Davis LB, Vol. 1.1

To Captain Edward Preble, U. 8. Iavy, Commodore of U. S. Squadron in the
Yediterranean, from Secretary of the Navy

NAVYDEPM~
7 Augt 1804 Commodore ED?PREBLE
Mediterranean.
Your communication dated Malta Harbour, 11 March 1804 has
been received. Before this reaches you, you will have perceived that we have not
been insttentive to our Affairs in the Mediterranean. We knew that
the force under your Command was not adequate to carry on vigorous
and effectual measures against Tripoli, and watch the Coast of
Morocco and Tunis. With a view to accomplish these important
objects, and to excite among the Barbary Regencies a just idea of
our National character and Resources, we fitted out the Armament of
which ou have been already advised.
We t a v e already & repeatedly assured you, Sir, of our h q h and
unqualified a probation of your measures and your conduct. Your
Succeesor
have con-veyed to you before t h ~ scan reach you our
Sentiments on these Subjects.
You suggest the propriet of sending eight 32 pound Camnades
for the u per Deck of the onatitution, and six 12 pound C m n a d e s
for our oats. We cannot by this opportunity send the 12 pound
Carronades as we have not got them rtt hand, but I have ordered the

d

d

375

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS
32 pounders with Carriages, Worms, Sponges, Rsfnmers, Shot

$9.

These will be delivered to you, unless circumstances should arise which
in the opinion of Commodore Barron will render a different distribution of them more advisable. Continue to let me hear from you I t will afford me pleasure to receive your Communications.
(Per the Alfred Provision Ship, f
hNorfolk V* Augr 1804.)

[NDA. LB, 1799-1807.1

To Captain Samuel Barron, U. S. Navy, from Secretary of the Havy
NAVY
D E P ~7 Augt 1804

-

Commodore SAM!BARRON
Commanding % American Spuad~on
Mediterranean.
This letter will be delivered to you by the Commander of the Ship
Alfred, having on board for the use of the Squadron under your command, Beef, Pork, Flour, Bread, Rum, Butter, Melasses, Cheese
Canvas, Cordage, Candles, Powder, Shot, Anchors, a Bowsprit for
the Constitution, some spare Spars, and 8, 32 pound Carronades for
the upper deck of the Constitution (if they cannot be otherwise &
more advantageously disposed of among the other Vessels of the
Squadron, which is left to your judgment) with Carriages, Worms,
Rammers, Sponges &q agreeably to Invoice which I have directed
Daniel Bedinger Esqr to transmit to you.
The 32 pound Carronades have been requested by the Commander
of the Constitution who has suggested that they will be very useful
in the event of a war with Tunis. I t will be agreeable to me that they
be delivered to the Constitution, but as circumstances may arise to
render a different distribution of them more advisable, I do not deem
it roper to bind you by any particular Instructions on the subject.
ghould the Alfred arrive safe and deliver her Cargo in good order,
ou will have an abundant supply of provisions for eight months.
g e pleased to make me a return of the quantity on hand. (Per the Alfred.)
[NDA. LB, 1794-1807.1
Extract from Memorandum Book of Captain Edward Reble, U. S. Navy, on board
U. S. Frigate Comtitufion,7 August 1804

Attacked the batteries. Lost Lt. [James R.] Caldwell, one Midshipman Mr. [John] Dorsey and several men.
[LC original.]

-

Extract from journal kept on board the U. 6. Frigate Coditufion, by Captain Edward
Preble, U. S. Navy, Tuesday, 7 August 1804

Wind N b W Cloudy, a t Anchor off Tripoly. - Making arrangments for a second attack at K past 1 made signal to prepare to
weigh. - but falling calm, annulled the Signal. - in the Evening the
French Privateer came out, a t 11 the French Caplcame on board
with a letter from the Consul of His Nation in which he says our
attack of the 3@has disposed the Bashaw to accept of reasonable
terms and invites me to send a Boat to the Harbour as a flag,but as
no specific sum is mentioned and no securit for the Boat, can be
depended on I declined the invitation, a t 9 A the Squadron weighd
pr Signal & ~ t o o din shore towards the Western Batteries. - the Gun

K

376 NAVAL OPERATIONS, APRIL-SEPTEMBER 6, 1804
Boats 9 in number with the addition of the Prizes now corn leatly
fitted & manned and Commanded by LP Crane of the Vixen, T orn of
the Enterprize and Caldwell of the Syren, the whole advanc'd with
ssils & oars. With orders to attack the Western Batteries & throw
sheils into the City. at this time we were a t anchor 6 miles from the
city, calm and a current so strong to the Eastward that we remain a t
anchor, our Top Sails & Top Galls Sails are sett read for the first
Breeze The Argus Syren Vixen Nautils & Enterprize ecalm'd three
milea within us. - Gun Boats & Bombs advanceing to the attack
[LC. EPP, Vol. 12, June-August 1804.1

l

g

[7 August 18041
Extract from jonrnal kept on board the U. 8. Frigate Comiihdim, by Captain Edward
Preble, U. 8. Navy, Wednesday, 8 Angust 1804

At Anchor 6 miles N N E from Tripoly becalmed, the Gun Boats
& Bombs advmcin with all their sweeps, a t % past 1 a light Breeze
from the N N E , e Immediately weighd &. stood in for the Town,
but the Tsind being on shore could not with prudence attack or allow
any of the s uadron to attack the Batteries, as in case of a mast being
shot away %e lose of the Vessel would probably ensue. a t X past 2
P M Made the Signal for the Gun Boats & Bombs to attack the Batteries & Town from the West, when they immediately opened a
tremendous fire within half cannon shot of the Town & less than that
distance of a a Batte of 7 heavy 24 pounders this Battery in less
than two hours was s enc'd excepting one Gun I resume the others
were dismounted as the Walls were almost tota y destroyed, the
Bombs were well and effectually employd by Lt Comet Dent & Lt
Robinson of the Constitution, Lt Robinson from a dangerous position
he took, threw 28 shells into the Town, but the well directed fire of
heavy artaery from the Enemy obhged him to shift his station not
however until the cloths of every man in the Boat was wet throu h
with the spray of sea which the Enemies shot threw over them, &I
Dent threw 20 shells from a poaitition not so favorable as Lt Robinsons
but which a strong Westerly current in shore would not allow him to
change, a t past 3 P A$ a Frigate in sight in the OfEng standing for
the Town, made the Argus's Signal to speak, ordered her to chase the
strange sail at 3 past 3 PM the magazine of one of our Gun Boats
NQ9 Blew up & she immediately sunk - She had on board thirt
OEcers seamen L Marines 10 of whichwere killed Bi six b a d wounded:
of the Syen
Dorsey
among the Hiued were Lt R. Caldwell
Midshipman two good Officers. - Mr Spence Midshipman & 13 Men
were picked up unhurt
The Enemies Gun Boats and Galleys 17 in number are all in motion
under their Batteries, m d appear to meditate an attack on our Bombs
& Gun Boats, ordered the Argus Nautilus Vixen & Enterprize to
Windward in reserve to cut them off from the Harbour if they should
attack, & the Syren & Vixen to leward to su port and cover any of
our Boah that might be disabled, kept to win ward with the Constaut h - ready to bear down & support the Whole, a t % past 5 PM
the Wind began to blow fresh from the N N E Made the signal for
Bombs & Gun Boats to retire out of Gun shot of the Enemy and be
taken in tow by their respective Vessels. a t 6 PM AT^ made the

f

'9

fi

+

-

f

377

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

signal that the strange sail was a friend. in the Action of this day
NQ6 Commanded by Lt Wadsworth had her Latteen Yard shot away.
NQ4 Cap5 Decatur a shot in the Hull, N? 8 lost 2 Men killed by a
cannon shot, some of the other Boats received trifXng damage.
the Gun Boats fired about 50 Rounds each. the Enemy must have
lost many men & the buildings in the City must have received considerable damage from our shot & shells. All the Officers & men
engaged in Action behaved gallantly, a t % past 6 all the Boats were
in tow & the Squadron standing off to the N W, a t 8 the John
Adums store ship Ca t Chauncey Joined Company, at 9 being N W.
about 5 miles from ripoly Made signal to Anchor & Came to with
the Squadron in 35 fath? Water hard Bottom. - Cap; Chauncey
came on Board & brought me dispatches from the Navy Office,
announcing that 4 frigates the President Commodore Barron who is
to supercede me in the Command of the Mediterranean, Squadron,
CapWampbell and Essex
the Congress Cap' Rodgers, Cc~~steUation
Cap' [James] Barron, were ready and would sail in a day or two after
the John Adums Cap$ Chauncey brought me a letter from the Navy
Office approving my conduct, and stating that the superceedure has
been necessary to enable them to send the frigates out as only two
junior Captains to myself were in the US. He also brought me the
thanks of the President for my services which have been conveyed to
me by letter from the Sect? of the Navy, how much my feelings are
lacerated by this supercedure a t the moment of Vicotry cannot be
described and can be felt only by an Officer placed in m mortifying
situation Gave Cap' Chauncey orders to remain with t e Squadron
for the present. -

f

z

[LC. EPP, Vol. 12, June-August 1804.1
Extract from log book kept by Sailing Master Nathaniel Baraden, U. 6. Navy,
on board U. S. Frigate Constitution, Tuesday, 7 August 1804

Moderate breezes from N b W, with rising clouds to the Northq
At Single anchor off Tripoly - Squadron in company Every necessary
arrangement has been made for bombarding Tripoly this afternoon,
but the northerly wind, and the appearance of the weather hare prevented i t - At 1% Made, the Signal for the Squadron to pre are to
weigh. We have a stay Peak - Towards evening the Norther y wind
died away by degrees to a dead calm The french Privateer which carried the Wounded Prisoners to
Tripoly came out this Evening, and rowed off for the Constitution The Commodore Ordered Gun boat N? 9 and our cutter to examine
her. At 11 P. M. she anchored in company with the Squadron Her Captain waited on the Commodore Moderate weather through the Night - Light airs from S E or
Calms from day light till noon At 9 A. M. the Squadron weighed, pr Signal, and stood in shore.
We exchanged three cheers a t parting - Our three captured gun
boats are Numbered by the Commodore NO 7, N? 8 & N Q9.
Gun boat N? 6 is now commanded by L1 Wadsworth NQ 2 by
Lieutt Gordon, NQ 3 by Mr Brooks Master, N Q 7 by L! Thorn NQ8 by L +Crane, & N Q9 by LfCaldwell. The other boats are under
the same Officersas on the 4th Inst: When the Gun boats & Bombards
parted company, we were nearly 6 miles N b E from Tripoly -

P

378 NAVAL OPERATIONS, APRIL-SEPTEMBER 6 , 1804
Their Orders were to row in shore, and take a station to the Westward
of the Town in order to bombard & batter the Western batteries On their leaving the ship they had a strong Easterly current As
they proceeded in shore we observed they had a strong current to the
Westward.
At 10 A. M. the French Privateer parted company to the N N W.
At Noon calm - The Gun boats are in shore to the Westward of the
Town rowing to the Eastward - The two Bombards are rowing in for
the Town, and are almost near enough for firing shells - The Syren,
Argus, Enterprize, Nautilus & Vixen are becalmed between the shore,
and the Constitution As i t is Calm, and a Current going to the
Eastward, we are obliged to continue a t Anchor - We have top gall?
Sails set ready for the first breeze [LC. EPP, Log Constztution, 1803-1804.1

[7 August 18041
Extract from log book kept by Sailing Easter Nathaniel Baraden, U. 6. Navy,
on board U. S. Frigate Conslilulion. Monday, 8 August 1804

Calm - At Single Anchor 7 Miles N E from Tripoly with topsails
& top gall! Sails hoisted in readiness for the first breeze - Our Bombards & Gun boats are all pulling in for the town - At 1 P. M.
Bombard N? 1 commenced heaving shells - After throwing two or
three shells, she landed them & let go her Anchor -In the course of the
afternoon she landed in the town 24 shells - Bombard N W was

swept by the current more to the westward - Her situation was not so
favorable - She threw 18 shells, several of which went into the town At 1% P. M. a light breeze sprang up from N N E. We immediately
weighed & stood in for the town - There is a small shallow anchorage
nearly a mile to the Westward of the Town of Tripoly and as their
Batteries cannot bring their Guns to bear on i t the Town is much
exposed from it - On the gun boats leaving the ship it was the
Orders of the Commodore that they should pull in to the Westward of
the Town and proceed to this Anchorage - An Eight & a five gun
e
two or three days past been built near this place
battery h a ~ within
unknown to the Commodore - At 2): P. M. they opened a heavy
fire on our Nine Gun boats which soon silcnced the 5 Gun battery, and
in the wurse of the Afternoon silenced the 8 Gun battery three times The Enemy's Gun boats 17 sail, are all in motion under their
batteries - At 3%P. M. one of our Gun boats N? 9 blew up - She
was then in close action with the 8 Gun battery - She was one of
the prize boats commissioned by the Commodore, and (except Mr
Spence Midshipman from the Constitution) officer'd and Manned from
the S y ~ e n- Lr Caldwel, hlr Dorsey Midshipman and 8 seamen &
[space] Marines were lost in her and six wounded This Unfortunate
circumstance was Occasioned by the fire of one of our Own Gun boats The Grand Battery kept up a constant fire all the afternoon on the
Brigs and Schooners which were wisely stationed to receive the
Enemy's fire on the greatest elevation, but were however sometimes
necessarily exposed to closer shot. Our gun boats fired on an average
50 rounds each, and must have done great execution on the Western
point of the Town.
At 4 P. M. Bombard NQ1 was driven by the Enemy's batteries from
her station she took another more to the Westward.

379

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

At 4% P. M. Made the Argus S' al to chase to N E - At 5% the
wind began to breeze from N N%?- Made signal for the Gun Q
bomb Vessels to cease firing and join company - At 6 P. M.answered the Argus signal that the chase was a friend - At 6%made the
general signal to tow the Gun boats & Bombards.
At 7 made si al for the Squadron to fill off shore - At this time
the wind was N E direct in shore.
I n the action of this day Gun boat N? 6 had her yard shot away, and
N? 8 had two men killed by a shot from the Enemy.
In the close of the Evening Tripoly bore S E, 4 Miles. At 9 P. M.
came to, in 32 f a t h W W from Tripoly 4 or 5 Miles dis! The Squadron
also came to Anchor
At this time we had a strong current setting to S S E, with moderate
breezes from N b E.
Joined company the U. S. Ship John Adams, Caps Chauncey who
wajted on the Commodore This Afternoon the following Signals have been made Vizr - At 2%
for the Argus & Syren to assist the Nautilus & Enterprize - At 2%
Bombards attack the Batteries At 3 come within hail - the ArgusAt 5. Bombards haul out of Gun shot of the batteries At 8% the Night Signal prepare to anchor.
During the night moderate weather with a swell setting in from

%?

N NE.
From day li h t till 9 A. M. cloudy hazy weather.
At Anchor $ forenoon. Winds Moderate from N W Surgeons report 3 sick & 4 convalescent.

[LC. EPP, Log Constitution, 1803-1804.1

[7 August 18041
Extract from journal of U. 6. Brig Argus. Master Commandant Isaac Hull, U. S.
Bavy, commanding, Wednesday, 8 August 1804

[Tripoli] This day begins with light airs and pleasant I"?standing
in for the batteries in CQ~ 4 t hthe Squadron a t 12 r e d orders from the
Commode to keep out of Gunshot of the Batteries if the w i ~ dContinued light but a Breeze Springing up stood in and fired Several Shot
at the batteries at 34 past Merid? the Commod"ade
Sig!
3 to the
Gunboats a t 2 the Gunboats and bombards Commenced firing on the
Batteries a t 3 observed one of the Gunboats to blow up by which
Accident Lieu' Caldwell snd Mr Dorsey Midship? belonging to the
Syren were lost a t 5 past 3 the Commod' hoisted our Distinguishin
flag made Sail for him he ordered us to give Chace to a Strange S
to the Eastw* she proved to be the U. S. frigate John Adams bore
away for the Commod? a t past 4 the Cornmod' made Sig! N? 1201
at 5 took Gunboat h'? 3 in tow stood off the land in C? with the
Squadro~la t 10 the Commode made Night Sig! N Q 10 came to with
the lwb@bower in 35 fathoms water Cap! Hull went on board the
Cornmods a t M past 1 AM be returned -

A

[NDA photostat.]
,tract from journal of 0.8. Brig Argus, Master Commandant Iaaac Hull, U. 6.
Navy, oommanding, Tuesday, 7 August 1804

A t g p a s t 2 theCommodoremadeSig~NQ879*
made Sgl N Q1005

* *

at8

* * *

380 NAVAL OPERATIONS, APRILSEPTEMBER 6, 1804
a t past got under way a t 9 the Cornmod*made Si 1 NQ356 Cast
NQ7 to the
the Gunboats off a t f: past made Sigl NQ30 and a t 10
Gunboats a t % past 10 the Gunboats stood in for Tripoli a t 11 got out
Sweeps & towed the Brig towards the town [NDA photostat.]
To Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Bavy, from Captain Stephen Decatur, Jr., U. 8.
Navy

GUNBOATNO 4 08 Tripoli August Yth 1804
SIR On the signal being made on board the Constitution I cast off
the Boats of the 2" division, formed and Joined the 1" division, and
proceeded to put your orders into execution, we advanced a head of
the Bombards, and commenced the attack on the Western Batteries,
within half point blank shott, where we continued until1 the signal
was made to retire from action, Tis with regret I hare to inform you of the loss of Nq 8[9] which
wtas blown up by a hot shott from the enemy, after the smoke cleared
off, I found all abaft the mast was under water, the gun and bows
being the only part out, M r Robert T Spence Midshipman was the
m c e r superintending the gun. who a t the time of the explosion was
in the act of loading her, after which accident he and the Brave
fellows left, compleated the loading of the gun before she sunk, and
then swam t o the nearest Boat where they assisted during the engagement, KO 8 was the second boat captured on the 3Fd by NQ4. List of Killed & wounded in the 2 division
Names

by a Cannon shot which damaged
jthe Hull of the Boate0nsiderably.STEPHEN
DECATUR
JT
[LC. EPP, Vol. 12, June-August 1804.1
Nr 9

1 ~ {two
1
Seamen

Concerning Gunboat No. 8

List of Men Killed on board GUNBOATNQ8 August 71h 1804
John Brown, 0 Seaman
Alexander Jones Do
WILLIAMCRANE
Expended on board Gun Boat NQ8 August 71h 1804
46 - - - - 24 ib Cartridges
46 ---- 24 lb Shot
92 - - - - Wads
12 - - - - Tubes
2 !b ,- Priming Powder
4 - - - - fathoms Match Rope
2 - - - - Sweeps
2 - - - - Cutlasses
1 - - - - Boarding Pike
P C . EPP, Vol. 12, June-August 1804.1

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

381

[7 August 18041
To Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Navy, from Master Commandant Charles
Stewart, U. S. Navy

Syren off TRIPOLIAugust gtQ1804
SIR, Enclosed I transmit you a return of the Officers and Men
belonging to the United-States Brig Syren under my command, who
were killed and wounded in Gun-Boat NO 9, when she blew up on the
7th of August a t the attack of the Enemy's Batteries.
I have the honor to be
Sir, Your obt Servt
(Signed) CHARLES
STEWART
Commodore PREBLE
Return of the Officers & Men composin the Crew of the Gun Boat
N? 9, blown up a t the attack of the ripolitan Batteries - 7th
August 1804 James R. Caldnrell---- - - - - - - - - - Lieut - - - - - _. _ . _
Iiilled
__
Rob, T. Spence---- _ _.
- - - - - - - - - Midshipman

8

.__
Killed
..
John S Dorsey - - - - - - - - - - - - - - . -Ditto - - - - - Jonathan Meridith - - - - - - - - - - - _ _ Sergr Marines- _ _ - _Ditto
.-.Qr Gunner- - - - _ ___ Ditto
James Farrell-------__-.-.
Edmd P. Kennedy - - - - - - - - - - - _ _ Gunner's Mate
John Brown - - - - - - - - - - QT
-Master
__--.William Davis- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - Boat* Mate- - - - - - Killed
.--___
James Morgan - - - - - - . . - -Seaman
Ditto - - - - - - - - - Saved by the Boats
William Rodgers- - _ - _.
-.
- - _.
..
William Mitchell- - - _
_.
.
- - - - -.
Ditto- -..-.._ - - Slightly Wounded
DQ
Thomas Devers- - - .- _- - - - _ - _ . Ditto- -..- _ - --.Badly Stephen Gallagher
Ditto.
-- - - . Saved
.
by
the
Boata
Dunn
John la Mott-- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - Ditto--. -.- .
... Slightly Wounded
- -._- - - - - - -_.
ditto
_.
.
._ Killed
John Spears- - - - Walter Mitchell.ditto
Francisco Rodgers- - - _ -- - - - - - - ditto--_ -.._ _ _ - - badly wounded
James Wilmer---.
ditto - - . .-.
-- - Saved by the Boats
James Alexander- - - - - - - - - - - - - Killed
-.-Geo. Irving - - _ - _ - - - - - - - - - - - - - - ditto - - - - - - James Derney [or Desneyl--_-__Ordg Searn~
---.
_ - - badly wounded
John Holmes _ - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - ditto - - - . - - .Killed
___Antonio Currin - - - - - - _ - - -ditto
-.-- -- -- - - - - badly wounded
John Smith - - - - - - - --- - -ditto
- .- .
- - - - - - _ - - - saved by the Boats,
Antonio Morrell---- - - - - - - - _- - ditto-__..- _ _ - - - Ditto John Robinson - - . - - - - - - - -ditto
- --.-.-.
-Killed
- - - - - - - - Marine - - -.
.-.- - - dit,to.
Nathan Holmes- - - -

1

]

(Signed) CHARLES
STEWART
[LC. EPP, LB, April-Nov. 1804.1

[7 August 18041
Extract from journal of Midshipman F. Cornelius deKrafft, U. S. Navy, in U. S.
Brig Siren of 18 guns, Idaster Commandant Charles Stewart, U. S. Navy,
commanding, Wednetsday, 8 August 1804

Li h t winds & pleasant. At % past 1 the Cornrn: made signal to
attacgk 'd the enemy's batteries kc. &. which wa.s immediately done
by an incessant fire from our boats &c also a very h e a w cannonading
from every quarter of the enemys batteries & in boats. At j6 past
2 the gun boat commanded by L' Caldwell, rnr%orsey & Spence blew
up, by fire communicated to the magazine by a hot shot from the
enemies batteries Lt Caldwd, Mr Dorsey & 8 men were blown up
with her, the remainder were pick'd up by our boats, 7 of which we[re]

382 NAVAL OPERATIONS, APRILSEPTEMBER 6,1804
desperately wounded, our boats were immediately sent for the
wounded. At % past 3 the Comm: made signal for the gun boats &
bumbards to retire from action. $ past 4 the Argus under a crpud of
sail in chace of a large ship to windwg At 5 took our gun boat m tow.
At 6 saw the above ship bearing down with the American 3agg hoisted.
A t 8 shorten'd s d & came too with the stream. Also the above ship
which prov'd to be the U. S. Frigate John Adzms.
Mendisn light airs & pleast Tripoli bearing S E 8 S 8 lea:

(SECONDENGAGEMENT

ON

TRIPOLI)

-

[NDA.]

-act
from journal of Wdshipman F. Cornelins deKrafft, U. 6. Kavy, in U. 8.
Brig Sitm of 18 guns, Hester Commandant Charles Stewart, U. 6. Navy,
commanding, Tuesday, 7 Angnst 1804

Light airs & pleast At 1 the Cap%return'd Tripoli bore E N E
hands employ'd arming & sending provisions on board the gun boat.
At K past 1 the signal prepare t o weigh. At 3 caU1d all hands & got
a crew for the gun boat - Midnight calm j!i past the signal to
- $ past 8 hove up, made sail in shore. At 9 the Comm:
ma e signal to prepare for battle. $4 past 9 cast off the gun boats p'
. At 11 set royals eri&an light sirs & fine weather -

""f

INDA.]

[2 to 7 August 18041
Expenditure of Ammanition

Expended on board BOMBARD
lLT9 2 August 2OQ1804
2. _ - - - Shells with Cartridges fuzees &c.
August 3'6 - - - - - - - - - 7. - - - - Shells e t h Cartridges fuzees &c.
August 7tb-- - - - - - - - 19 - - - - Shells mth Cartridges f~lzees&c.
Expenditure on board BOMBARD
N Q1. Aug' Sd 1804
7. - - - Shefls, with thier loading
7. - - - Cartidges
7-- - - Fusees
% 'b- - Priming owder
2 . - - - fathoms fatch Rope
1- - - - Shell to try the force of the powder & 2 Swivels on
August 24q 1804.

R

Expenditure of Powder & Ball on Board GUNBOAT
N Q1 Augz~st3'g
1804

204 lb of Powder
200 Musket CtL1.triges
25 Twenty four Ib Shot
14 Stand of Grape
Expend'd on
7t.P Aug*
390 lb of Powder
48 Twenty four pound Shot

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

383

Expended on Board GUNBOATN Q2, AugP 3Q1804
72 'Ps of Powder - 9 twenty four pound Shot
600 Pistol & Musket Cartridges
32 Blunderbuss - - - - - - D ?

THOS:BROWN

Augt 7th 56 'b of Powder & 7 - 24 'p Shot
174'PofDq
&2924'PDQ
Expended on board GUNBOATN? 3 August 3Q1804
8. - - - - - - - - - 24 'Wartrid es -4 of 12'Q
2. - - - - - - - - - - 24 'b Round hot
6. - - - - - - - - _ - 24'9 Grape.
8. - - - - - ,Tubes
---12. - - - - - - - - - - Musquet Cartridges
2. - - - - - - - _ - - fathom Match Rope
8. _ - - - _ - - _ - Wads
_

d

J o s BLAKE
Expended August 3'3 1804 on board GUNBOATN ? 5
17. - - _ - - - - - - - 24 'b Cartridges
11. - - - - - - - - - - 24 'P Round Shot
5. - - - - - - - - - - 24 'P Grape
1. - - - - - - _ - - - 24 'b Cannister.
17. - - - - - - - - - - Wads
17. - - - - - - - - - - Tubes
1lb - - - - - - - - - - Priming Powder.
100. - - - - - - - - - - Musquet Cartridges
2. - - - - - - - - - - fathoms M[atch Rope]
Expended August Yth 1804 on board GUNBOATN ? 5.
33. - - - - - - - - - - 24 'p Cartridges
33. - - - - - - - - - - 24 'b Round Shot
33. - - - - - _ _ - - -Wads
33. - - - - - - - - - - Tubes
2 'Q_ - - _ _ - - - - - Priming Powder
Match Rope
2 - - _ _ - _ _ _ -fathoms

JOSEPH
BAINBRIDGE

Expended on board BOMBARD
N? 1. August YtQ 1804
27- ---------Shells with their loading, fusees &c.
Expended on board GUNBOATN ? 3. Augwt Yth 1804
44. - - - - - - - - - -24 lb Cartrid es
44. - - - - - - - - - -24 ib Round hot
44 - - - - - - - - - -Wads
44. - - - - - - - - - -Tubes
2'p- ---------Priming Powder
3 - - - - - - - - - -fathoms Match Rope.
1 - - - - - - - - - Sweep.

5

3% NAVAL OPERATIONS, APRILSEPTEMBER 6, 1804
Expended on board of GUNBOATNQ7 - Augmt 7'4 1804 58- - - - - - - - - -24 lb Cartridges
58- _ _ _ - _ _ _ _ - '' Shot
100- - - - - _ - - - _Wads
100- - - - - - - - - -Tubes 1'Q- - - _ - - - - -Priming powder

J THORN

[LC. EPP, Vol. 12, June-August 1804.[
Extract from journal kept by Purser John Darby, U. S. Navy, on board U. 8. 8.
John Adam, Master Commandant Ieaac Chauncey, U. S. Navy, commanding,
Tuesday, 7 August 1804

We this morning made the coast of Tripoli, and discovered from the
appearance of the Land. that we were to the Eastward of the Town of
Tripali. We stood off from the land some distance hove about and
Stood to the Southward & Westd and about )rl past 12 Oclock. we
discovered a smoke riseing in several places. Soon after we hewed
the sound of cannon. and about. half past. 1. we discovered a Sale.
which proved to be the Constitution Comrno'~Preble off the Town of
Tripoli, a bout 3. Oclock we saw with our Glasses, the Town of
Tripoli, and several gun boats Schooners & Brigs. and could plainly
discover the the fireing from the gun boats and the Town. which
appeared to be a very warm and incessent fireing which was kept up.
until1 4. Oclock. when i t ceased and we could see the Schooners and
brigs towing the Gun boats out. the Commodore about this time
discovered us and dispatched one of Schooners to see what we were.
She proceeded but a little way when she took us to be the Brig Scourge.
and stood back. I t seems that the Brig Scourge had been sent as
fare as Malta as a convoy to some of our Vessels, and they were in
hourly expectation of her., Soon after this. the Comodore made a
Signal. which we answered he then supposed us to be the John Adam,
We soon after that shewed him our distinguishing flag which he
answered. We stood up for him and about half past 9 Oclock we
gained a part of the Squadron. the wind being very light all day about half past 10 we run up under the Commodores Stern and gave
him three cheers - which W ~ Breturned. - after hailing us his boat
came along side & requested Capt Chauncey to come onboard of him
as soon as possible - the Capt went onb[o]ard, in a little time we
anchored, the ship to the Westg of the Town, in 35 fathom Water,
before we anchorg several boats came along side with a number of the
Wicers belonging to the Squadron out here. we deliv'd them the
letters which we had for them. And the News from America. and the
informed us that they had this day had a very severe engagement witt
Tripolian Gun boats under the Bashaws fort. but was not successfull
enough to take any of them to day as they kept in shoal water nearly
under the fort. But that a few days before this they had taken three
of their Gun boats and a number of prisoners. & a number Kiled and
Wounded. in this first engagement. Lieut. Ja9 Decator was Kiled
after one of the Tripolian Boats had struck to him. in the last engvement. one of our Gun boats was blown up. by the magazine takmg
fire. in which perishc several of our Officers & men. all that were in
the stern of t,he boat & amidships were lost. Lieutenant Jar Caldwell
& Midshipman Tho9 Dawrsey [Dorsey] were a1nong9~the u[n]fortu-

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

385

nate. It is said. the Tripolians fought very desperately in the first
engagement. and never Did the American officers & men act with
more bravery and enterprise than on this occation every one being
anxious to distinguish themselves in the glory of theire Countrys
cause, with one exception only. which is a Lieutenant Blake who it is
said. did not. conduct himself in the manner which he aught to have
done, and is now ublickly caled a cowerd. by the officers of the
Squadron - I sh not pretend here and a t this time to give a
articular description of the engagement as no doubt. Commodore
reble will give to the Public a very particular. & correct statement
which is not in my power to do. - Our squadron under Comre Barron
has not yet. arrived but. is now. hourly expected. This brave and dareing attack will hardly be credited by the
Europeans who know the greate Advantage of a fort and strong
fortifyed Battery with their greate superiority of gun boats, nor do
I beleive any other nation except the Americans woud have attempted
i t with the same force, not even the British nation with all their
boasted skill in Naval Tacticks, but here I may be said to be partid,
and I will only say that no nation cou'd have done more than Commodore Preble with the same force

d

5

[NDA original. Miss Camilla S. McConnell.]

To Captain Edward Preble, U.S. Navy, from Master Commandant Isaac Chaucey,
U. S. Navy

U. S. SHIPJohn Adams
Tripoli Yt@ Augt 1804 SIR I have the Honor of enclosing you a Duplicate of my Letter to
you of the 236 Ult. 379 1 also Copies of my Letters to the Secretary
of the Navy Nq 2. 3. 4 & 5 a Copy of my letter to Commodore Barron
N? 6 and Copy's of 2 Letters from Mr Simpson the one to yourself
and the other to Cornmoq Barron N? 7 & 8 with a List of Stores that
I have on board for the Squadron under your Command; Also a List
of the Officers, Seamen, Ordinary Seamen, Boys and Marines on
board of the John Adams.
I arrived a t Gibralter on the 226 UltQ where I watered the Ship
agreeable to Orders from the Secretary of the Navy - left Gibralter
on the 2Eith and arrived a t Algiers on the 2gth where I waited 24 Hours
for Col. Lear's Dispatches to you; left Algiers on the 30t9 and arrived
a t Malta late in the Evening of the 4tb Ins! at 7 oClock in the Mo
of the
Mr Higgins delivered me your Orders of the 236 of Ap
last and a t 8 I got underway in Order to join you off Tripoli, the
Wind hauling more to the Northward I was obliged to warp out,
therefore did not clear the Harbour before 1 oClock.
The Reason I did not wait for to Water was that I was Quarrantined, I had no Boat of the Shi s that was Sfficient to Water by, and
there wou'd be considerable 8ifficulty and Detention to procure a
Shore Boat, moreover I was only 1300 GallqBshort and I n a t u d y
supposed that the Dispatches that I had on board for you that i t
as Possible, and
in your present
that my not wait'
%
was out will meet w
to reduce the Expenditure of Water

9ff the Coast of

3

386 NA VAL OPERATIONS, APRILSEPTEMBER 6, 1804
I have put the W c e r s and Men upon an Allowance of three Quarts
pr Day, which also I hope you will approve of.

The Crew of the John Adam are generally healthy, and the Ship
could be got ready for Service in 24 Hours, after her Birth Deck was
cleaned of Stores - I have 8 Six Pounders mounted on the Quarter
Deck and 8 twelve Pounders on the Gun Deck - The Remainder of
the Guns are in the Hold, and the Carriages belonging to them me
distributed in different Ships of the S uadron comhg out The Pmvissions indented for this
Previous to our leaving the
United States are, some Articles expended, others nearly so therefore
with your Permission I will Permit the Purser to Use from the Stores
intended for the Squadron such Articles as he is in immediate Want of
ISAAC
CHAUNCEY
NB. I also have the Honor of enclosing to you an Abstract of my
journal to this Day - inclusive [LC. EPP, Vol. 12, June-August 1804.1

Ap

To Captain Edward Preble, U. 6. Navy, from Lieutenant Josbna Blake, U. 6. Navy

Auat 7th 1804

SIR,I have yet had no opportunity of conversing with Cap%Somers,
and am therefore obhged to decline being considered attached to a
Gun Boat, - distressing as this resignation is to my feelings, I have
chosen it, as less so, than to continue under a Suspicious Eye, when

I feel conscious that every thing has been done by me, as my best
judgement dictated. - I am able Sir, to convince every one, that

the Boat N Q3, was placed, & continued, in close Action, as Soon, &
as long, as Signals, & a prospect of being of Service could justify.
With this consciousness of rectitude on my part, I feel it my duty to
give place to Some Officer that may be more congenial to the feelings
of Cap$ Somers. - I am placed Under an Additional obligation to
You Sir, for the continuance in Command, but am convinced you --ill
think I do right to resign it.
Jos BLAKE
EPP,
Vol.
12,
June-August
1
8
0
4
.
1
[LC.
To Captain Edward Preble, U.8. Ravy, from George Davis, U.6. Charge d1Affaires,
Tunis

TUNISA u w t Bt+ 1804
SIR I should have did myself the honor, to aclmowledge, long
~ ~in reply to mine
before this, the receipt of your favour, of the 1 7 ult:
forwarded by the Spanish Courier; but have been daily expecting,
some vessel; as you were pleased to inform me, that one, should touch
a t Tunis for my dispatches; presuming that contrary winds, or some
other object, has prevented her arrival; I close my package, and
forward it, by this conveyance, for Malta; where I trust it will find
you I had the pleasure to offer you a line, on the 6t@Inst, accom anying
P passport, (subject to your final approbation) for a Copigi gashaw,
of the Grande Signior, to enter Tnpoli - our agairs are in Stutu
- and for your full information, on the general position, of this
G e m y , I do myself the honor, to enclose you, a copy of my last
to the Honie the Sect' of State; and an extract from my present not
yet forwarded

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

387

This moment a Mamlouke, is sent by his Excellency the Bey,
accompanying some Jerheens, with a new complaint - I am directed
by His Excellency, to inform you of the circumstance; and learn if
any restitution, can be expected The Complainants state, that they left the Island of Jerba, in a
Sandal, laden,d with Oil Jars; bound to Bougia, on the Comt of
Algiers - that between Sphax and Jerba, they observed a Brig and
Schooner; the former gave them no molestation; but the latter fired,
a quantity of Guns, which made, dreadful havoc, among their Crockery
Ware - leaving only nine whole, out of the Cargo; which consisted of
one hundred and thirty - after being boarded, they were permitted
to pass - but in consequence of the injury, done to their Boat, were
compell,d to desist from the farther prosecution of their voyage; and
put into Sphax, where the Sandal now lies You will be pleased to direct what repIy, shall be given to the
Bey [LC. EPP, Vol. 12, June-August 1804.1
To Master Commandant Isaac Chauncey, U. 6. Navy, commanding U. S. S.
John Adanas, from Captain Edward Preble, U. 6. Navy

Constitution AUGUST
8$@1804
Copy N? 1
SIR The Service requires that the United States Ship John Adams
under your Command, remains with the Squadron for the present:
You uqll therefore immediately put her in the best State for Action
that your Situation will admit of.
[NDA. MC LB, 1804-5.1

[8 August 18041
To Midshipman Charles Morris, U. 6. Navy, from Captain Edward Preble, U. 6.
Navy

SIR, YOU are hereby appointed Lieutenant of the United States
Brig Argus, You will therefore repair on board said Brig, and take
upon yourself the charge, and duty of LieutP, agreeable to the regulations of the Service, for which this shall be your sufficient Authority
Given under my hand on board
the United States Ship Constitution
this 8th day of Augt. 1804
Signed EDW@PREBLE
EPP,
Order
Book,
May
1803-June
1805.1
[LC.
Extract from journal of U. 6. Frigate Congress. Captain John Bodgers, U. 6. Havy,
commanding, Wednesday, 8 August 1804

[A. M.] a t $: ast 4 discoverd A sail on our Larbq Quarter.
A 5 discover a sail on our weather bow.
At past 6 the commodore Made the Signal NQ276 a t 7 tackd ship
made sail and gave chace - at % past 7 the chace shewed Red colours
the commod made the Si nal NQ871 - hoisted English colours the strange sail proved f'o be a Moorish ship of 32 guns
Latitude Observed 33' 16' N Longitude Observed 11' 11' W

f

[USNA.]

388 NAVAL OPERATIONS, APRIL-SEPTEMBER 6, 1804
Extract from Memorandum Book of Captain Edward Preble, U. 6. Navy, on board
U. 6. Frigate C o ~ ~ i f t d i o I8t , August 1804

John Adams Capt. Chauncey arrived from the U. S. A.
[LC original.]
Extract from journal kept by Purser John Darby, U. 8. Navy, on board U. 6. 6.
John A d m , Master Commandant Isaac Chauncey, U. 6. Navy, commanding,
Wednesday, 8 August 1804

We were this morning at Anchor to the West'! of the town and fortification of the Town of Tripoli all of us in suspence not knowing what
will be the next manuvers of the ComQ'e a peace is talked off. as i t
is said Commodore Preble is now very anxious to make one before
the arrival of Commodore Barron. about 12 Oclock Meridian. a sale
was discovered making towards the Town of Tripoli. one of our
Brigs & Schooner gave chace to her. she was supposed s t h t to be
the Brig Schurg. but was afternards found to be a strang sail. and
having got in to the E d of a long reef. which made out and which our
ships coud not cross. she made her escape into Tripoli before. our
Vessels coud weather the Point. about 2. Oclock we discovered another sale. and all the squadron got under way and sailed along past
the town and harbour of the Town. stood some distance to the easted.
and discovered, by signals, the sail to be the Schurg - We manuvered
about. until1 night. when the Squadron came too. except. a brig and
a schooner which kept underway all night [XDA original. Miss Camilla S. McConnell.]
To Lieutenant James W. Murdoch, U. 6. Navy, Philadelphia, Pa., from Secretary
of the Navy

NAV.DEP.gthAug: 1804.
The President has appointed you a Lieutenant in the Navy of the
United States - and a commission will be forwarded to you in due
season You will take the enclosed Oath and return it to this Office with a
letter accepting this appointment, from the date of which your pay &
emoluments uqll commence. - Geo: Harrison Esqr Xary Agent at
Philadelphia has been directed to make the necessary contracts for
building a Gun-boat, agreeably to a draft which has been transmitted
to him. - Your services as a professional Gentleman, may i t is
conceived be usefully directed to this object - you will therefore
attend in person and superintend the execution of the work, and see
that i t is faithfully performed. You will communicate with G*
Harrison Esq-hen
ever it may be necessary -.
He d put you in
possession of the particular directions, which have been transmitted
to him by me on the subject of dimensions and materials - by which
you will be enabled to form a correct judgment of the work as the
Contractor progresses in its execution.
[NDA. Off. Comg. Gunboats, 1803-1808.1

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

389

To Monsieur Beanssier, French Charg6 d'dffairee and Commissary General,
Tzipoli, from Captain Edward Preble, 0.8. Navy

Constitution. Off TRIPOLY
August 9th 1804
SIR I was honored with your letters by the French Corsair, and
note their contents - I did not constrain the Captain to convey
the wounded to Tripoly: I t was his voluntary act for which I made
him a handsome compensation One Frigate in addition to our Squadron has already arrived, and
three others sailed from America in company with her which were
to stop a t Algiers and Tunis. I expect them every moment. Such a
force you must be sensible will enable us to destroy all the Sea Port
Towns in Trip01 - After their arrival i t m i l l not be in my power to
offer a single do lar either as ransom or peace: As yet i t is; and I now
propose my last offer which I most solemn1 assure you I will never
transcend - I will give his highness the Zashaw Eighty thousand
dollars for the ransom of the prisoners and restore him all the Prisoners
in our possession & re-establish a treaty of Peace, and will give ten
thousand dollars as a Consular present on the arrival of a Consul from
the United States.
If these terms are agreeable to the Bashaw, I must be made acquainted with i t by 10 OClock tomorrow morning If they are
accepted, you will please to hoist the white flag under the fiench flag,
and his highness the Bashaw will be pleased to hoist the white flag a t
his Castle to denote that we are a t peace, which I shall answer by the
white flag a t the fore - Mz OBrien will deliver you this & consult
with you if you wish it.

f

[LC. EPP, Vol. 12, June-August 1804.1
Extract from journal of U. S. Brig Argus. Master Commandant Isaac Hull, U. S.
Navy, commanding, Thursday, 9 August 1804
This day Commences with mode breezes At 4j past 1 P, M, got

under way cast of[fj the Gunboat a t 2 Commodore Preble and Consul
OBrien came on board made sail and stood in for Tripoli a t j4 past 2
fired a Gun and hoisted a Sigl for the french Consul a t 3 observed a
Sail off our lee bow bore away for her found her Close in with the
Shore T, Kd and Stood off a t % past 5 Commode Preble & Consul
OBrien Went on board the Constitution saw a Strange sail to the
Eastwd made all sail in Chace a t 6 Exchan e Sig'g with the U. S.
Brig Scourge at % past 4 AM the Commod%a e Sigi N-71 a t 5 wore
Ship to the Southwd at 6 the Commode hoisted our Distinguishing
flag a t 7 Cap1 Hull Went on board the Commodore and returned a t 9
at X past Commode Preble & Consul OBrien Came on board made
sail and Stood in for the tomm a t j4 past 10 fired a Gun and made a
Sigi for the french Consul At 12 hoisted the white flag under the
french Consular Sigl which was answered by him on Shore.

cf

[NDA photostat.]
Extract from journal of Midshipman Charles Morris, Jr., U. S. Navy, on board
U. 6. Brig Argus. Master Commandant Isaac Bull, U. S. Navy, commanding,
Thureday, 9 August 1804

Joined the U. S. Brig Ar s.
1. Mr OBrien went lnto ripoli with a fla of truce
2 Mr OBrien returned made sail and stoo for the Constdudion

F

%

390 NAVAL OPERATIONS. APRIL-SEPTEMBER 6 , 1804
3 Hove to: The Commodore. Mr OBrien Capt. Hull & Cap*
Smith went on board the Constitution
A. M. Moderate. Wore occasionally to keep sight
of the Com-

modores
6%the%ht
ommodore Hoisted our distinguishing flag
went on board
Sent the launch on board the J n U d u m s -

-

Capt Hull

[Mrs. C. E. Fox original. NDA photostat.]
Extract from journal kept on board the U. S. Frigate Consfifufion,by Captain Edward
Preble, U. S. Navy, Thursday, 9 August 1804

Wind N W a t anchor with the Squadron N W from Tripoly 5
or 6 Miles, supplying the Gun Boats & Bomb Vessells with Ammunition & stores. - At 3 PM went on Board the Argus to reconnoitre
the Harbour of Tripoly, stood in for the eastern Batteries, the Enemy
fired several shot one of which was near sinking us as it struck below
the Water line & raked the Copper down the Bottom. a t 3%P M
made the signal for the Squadron to weigh and haul oft' the Wind
blowing fresh from N N E - a t 6 P M Joined the Constitution, a
small Ketch stole into the Harbour under the Eastern shore while we
were reconnoiterkw, the shoals prevented our cutting her off, fresh
Breezes all night in the morning Calm. a t 9 AM AnchG with the
Squadron 36 fath"
miles N N E from the Town a t 10 AM. the
French Consul hoisted a french Flag & White flag under it, a t his
Flag staff on shore, in consequence of which I hoisted similar colours
on Board the Argus & stood in near the Toun & sent a Boat into the
Harbour with a flag of truce, and a letter for the Prime Minister
one for Caps Bainbridge enclosing an Invoice of clothing Provided
by Mr Cathcart, and a letter to the French Consul. - The Scourge
Joind compez' L? Izard reported that he convoyed the Store ship
safe into Malta. [LC. EPP, Vol. 12, June-August 1804.1
Extract from log book kept by Sailing Master Nathaniel Haraden, U. S. Navy,
on board U. S. Frigate Constitution, Thursday, 9 August 1804

Moderate breezes from N W. At Single Anchor 5 or 6 Miles N W
from Tripoly - Squadron in company - We are Employ'd in supplying the Gun boats & Bombards with military stores. The Commodores General Orders were read this Afternoon thro' the Squadron,
in the form of public thanks to the Officers Seamen BE Marines He mentions with regret those brave unfortunate Officers, Seamen &
Marines who fell in the actions against Tripoly on the 5th & 8th [3 & 71
Inst:. His thanks were cheered from Van to rear of the Squadron
At 3 P. M. the Commodore left the Constitution and went on board
the Argus - He left Orders for the Squadron to weigh & stand to
the E N E.
The Argus bore up for Tripoly in Order to reconoitre the Harbour The Batteries fired several shot a t the Argus one of which hull'd her
within two or three feet of the Place where the Commodore was
standing.
At 3%P. M. the Squadron weighed & filled to the E N E. At Sun
set the Commodore rejoined the Constiiutwn Tripoly S W b S # S.

391

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

The Weather a t this time had the appearance of fresh breezes from
N N E - A sail to the E b S which answered our private S i a l At 9 P. M. the weather cleared up and became More Moderate.
Pleasant weather through the night. We stood off & on with the
Squadron in company till day hght when we wore & stood in for
Tripoly then bearing S W 9 or 10 Miles - From day light till 7
A. M. Light breezes from E S E. From this time till 8%A. M. calm
or light airs from S S W. At 8% A. M. made signal to the Squadron
to prepare to anchor.
At 9 came to, with the s m d bower in 36 f"?hard bottom, 5 Miles
N N E of Tripoly - At 10 A. M. a light [breeze] sprang up from
E b N - The Commodore left the Constitution and went on board
the Argus which made sail in for Tripoly - The Vixen followed the
Argus - As they drew in towards the batteries they shewed American colours & the french flag a t the fore Joined company the Scourge which left the Squadron a few days
ago as a convoy to the store ship Employed all forenoon supplying the Squadron with different
articles - Supplied the Bombards with 256 Gd+Water E d Noon light airs from E N E.
Surgeons report 3 Sick, 4 convdo~
Latitude Observed 33' 4' N.
[LC. EPP, Log Comtztution, 1803-1804.1
Extract from journal kept by Purser John Darby, U. 6. Navy, on board U. 6. 6.
John Adam. Master Commandant Isaac Chauncey, U: 6. Navy, commanding,
Thursday, 9 August 1804

We this day continued a t Anchor malung preparation to discharge
part of our cargo on board the different ships laying here. as it seems
we are to be equiped and to engage in the next atact provided there
is not a peace. The Commodore sent in a flag of Truce to know whether the Bashaw
woud treat on the Terms which had been offered by him before our
arrival. and as I have no correct account of the terms offered. I shall
not pretend to mention them here. the schooner and b
returned
after having had some communication through the French onsul who
came off. by permission of the Bashaw. and the white flag was haled
down. which was a signal that no peace had been made. and. preparations are now making for anoth[er] attacck. we continue to have
every day a number of the officers on board of us to dine and a
repatition of the different engagmtg which they have had with the
Tripolians. - they seem to talk of butchering and cuting up a Turk
with as much indifference as one is acustomed to carve a Turkey or
chicken. the officers here are all very anxious that a peace shoud be
made before the arrival of Commodore Barrion. that Commodore
Preble may have the credit of it. most of the officers of our ship are
opposed to it and we are praying for his arrival before a peace

2

[NDA original. Mise Camilla S. McConnell.]

392 NAVAL OPERATIONS, APRILSEPTE2MBER 6 , 1804
Extracts from journal of Midshipman F. Cornelius deKrafft, U. 6. Navy, in U. 6.
Brig Siren of 18 guns, Master Commandant Charles Btewazt, U. 8. Navy,
commanding, Thursday, 9 August 1804

(Standing along the land with the Commodore 3 past 3 hove up)
Light winds & pleasant. At 1 the Argus hove too. At 2 Lt Elbert
from the Constitution, came on board with the Commodore's thanks
to the Officers & men of the squadron for their spirited conduct &
Exertions on the 3@& 7t@Insttants in attacking & vanquishing the
enemy, which was publickly read on the quarter deck. At 3 past 2 the
A r p hove about & stood in for the Town At 3 a signal to get under
way. fi past 3 weigh'd & made sail. # ast 4 back'd the main topsail,
saw a ketch enter the harbour of ~ r i ~ o ; . At 5 calm At 6 discov'd
the Scmrge to windward. At 8 a signal to anchor. At 9 the Argus
stood in & hoisted the french flag & fir'd a gun to l e e r At 3 ast 9
the Vimn stood in with a french flagg a t the fore At 11 the rench
flag was hoisted ashore. Meridian light airs & pleasant, the Argus hoisted the White flag
under the french. -

P

[NDA.]
To Captain Samuel Barron, U. S. Navy, Commodore of U. S. Squadron relieving
Commodore Preble, from James Simpson, U. S. Consul, Tangier, Morocco

TANGIER
lothAugust 1804. DE.~R
SIR In continuation of the advices already lodged at
Gibraltar for our information on the movements of the Vessels of
War of this ountry, I have now to acquaint you that on the 2gt@
Ult? the Frigate of 32 Guns remained a t Anchor in Sall6 Roads, waiting
the return of that of 30 Guns from Mogadore, ordered back there. The Copper & Salt petre laden on this Ship a t that Port, i t is said will
be put on board a Schooner and a Sactia. - The other Ship Mirbohu
commanded by Arraez Lubarez sailed from Larach on Sunday last to
join those two. - The three are to receive a farther supply of
provisions and Ammunition, with an addition of thirty Seamen each
and their ultimate Instructions, then to proceed in Company on a
Cruise to be established, according to the best information, between
Cape Finisterre and Cape St Vincent, but against whom i t is impossible
for me to say.
The two Galleys arrived here from Tetuan on Wednesday, the
Cilallia Commanded by Arraez Mohamet Ben Mishod & the Bercia Arraez Mohamet Ben Ottoman, of four Carriage Guns and sixty five
Men each. - This morning the Captains have called on the Consuls
for the usual Passports and have got them; - they will probably u t
to Sea tomorrow. - Some say they are to Cruise between Gibra tar
and Malaga, but that is not certain, their station being commonly in
the Straits, makeing this Port their Rendezvous. - The discontent I
have been assured the Emperour shewed on finding Arraez Lubarez
could not carry the Wheat he had ordered for Tripoly, and the destination of all the three Ships which certainly was for the Mediterranean
Ports, being a t that time changed for a Cruize in the Ocean, made me
anxious to have some direct communication from His Majeaty
an the Minister, subsequent thereto. - This day I have received a
Letter from one of the Emperours confidential Friends dated a t
Mequinez the 6t@Inst written by His Majestys order, acknowledging

6'

P

'7

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

393

that I lately wrote His Majesty, i t is in very Friendly terms, but I
have not any answer to that written Sidy Muhammed Selawy a t
same time, owing no doubt to the Express having come direct in
place of takeing Sall6 in his way, where that Minister a t present is. The tenor of this Letter however makes me hope reports had gone
abroad unfavourable to our future Peace here, are perfectly unfounded;
still I consider i t a prudent measure to watch the opperations of these
Cruizers both lar e and small, a t least for such time as it shall be seen
they suffer our F ag to pass free; - the conduct of the one will shew
clea~lythe intentions of the other. -

f

[Mrs. James S. Barron Col.]
To Captain Edward Preble, U. 6. Navy, from Monsieur Beaussier, French ChargB
d'Affaires and Commissary General, Tripoli

TRIPOLY
BARBARY
August 10th 1804
COMMODORE
I did not receive your letter before yesterday a t f
past 12. Though in my opinion the offer you make as a ransom is
still inconsiderable, before i t was communicated to the Bashaw, I
wished to have a conference with haohammet DGhies concerning it,
and called on him for this purpose - He assured me that since the
Effusion of blood had already commenced, his country was bent upon
continuing the war - that the Bashaw, electrified more than ever by
the decision of his council, and by the patriotic transport of his
People, is determined to wait the event, unless the sum is considerably augmented - that the government speaks of nothing less than
two or three hundred thousand dollars - He has promised to second
me before the Bashaw, in these new considerations which I am about
to lay before him He told me, (and I am sensible of it) that i t would be prejudicial
to the interests of both parties to propose Eighty thousand dollars,
and desired me to inform you that he flattered himself with the hopes
of being able to succeed in reducing these pretensions to the sum of one
hundred & fifty thousand - This ranson1 Commodore is not exorbitant, and will not fail to meet with the approbation of your Government, if you wish to penetrate the disposition of the Bashaw, who
persists in hazarding every thing rather than expose his di ty in this
point. Besides you will set at liberty your unfortunate g u n t r y m e n
by means of this reasonable sum which \till be so deemed by all
governments.
If you wish to pursue the negotiation, & communicate to me your
Sentiments, you can make use of the same method as before - In
concert with Sidi Mohammed DGhies & Mr OBrien whose debarkation
I shall obtain, I shall exert myself in persuading the B. to content
himself with the already mentioned sum Your f i s t attack had
intimidated him a little, but the second encouraged him against the
Efforts of your forces, the importance of which I have disclosed to him.
Accept the homage of my high consideration
(Signed) B EAUSSIER
EPP,
Vol.
12,
June-August
1804.1
[LC.

394 NAVAL OPERATIONS. APBIL-SEPTEMBER 6. 1804
Extract from journal of U. 6. Brig Argus, Master Commandant Isaac
Navy, commanding, Friday, 10 August 1804

Hull, U. 8.

This day begins with light breezes and Pleasant Weather At

past

1 P1M, Consul OBrien went to Tripoli with a flag of truce at 2 wore

and stood for the town at 4 past 2 Consul OBrien returned wore and
made Sail off the land a t 4 backed the main topsail Commodq Preble
Consul OBrien C a p H u l l and Cap! Smith went on board the Constitution Mr Cha? Morris Came on board as 3rd Lieu! At midnight wore to
the Ng & Eastwg At 3 AM wore to the Southwd and Westwg a t 6 the
Commode hoisted our Distinguishing flag made Sail for him a t 7 he
hoisted the White flag which followed by the Squadron At 4 past 7
Cap1 Hull went on board the Commod-d
retd at 3 past 9 hoisted
out the launch and sent her on board the John Adams At Merid9
Mode & pleasant Wr
[NDA photostat.]
Extract from journal kept on board the U. 8. Frigate Conslilufion.by Captain Edward
Preble, U. S. Navy, Friday, 10 August 1804

Wind N N E to E N E a t Anchor 2 Leagues N N E from Tripoly. all the squadron a t Anchor excepting the Argus & Vixen as Guard

+

ships. - a t past 12 Noon obsem'd the French Flag with a white
flag under i t hoisted at the staff on Top of the French Consuls House
in Tripoly, I ordered the Argus & Vixen to answer the signal by hoisting similar flags, I then sent a Boat into the Harbour with flag of
truce. Mr Obrian went in as Officer of the Boat, a t 3 P M the Boat
return'd and Brought me a letter from the french Consul, advising
me to offer the Bashaw 150 thousand dollars for randsome of the
Prisoners & make Peace, this I did not thinli proper to do presuming
that our Government might not be sattisfied with the terms, altho
it is my opinion that we shall not be able to obtain them for a less sum,
moderate all night, all the squadron Employd in preparing for a third
attack a t 11 AM. the French Consul hoisted the french & white
flags, sent a Boat into the Harbour with a flag of truce, and a letter,
authorising the F. Consul to offer the Bashaw 100,000 Dolls for
Randsome of the Prisoners, 10,000 as a Consular Present, nothing
for Peace and no tribute, these terms were rejected. [LC. EPP, Vol. 12, June-August 1804.1

+

Extract from log book kept by Sailing Master Nathaniel Haraden, U. S. Navy,
on board U. 6. Frigate Comlifution. Friday, 10 August 1804

Moderate breezes from E N E.
At Single Anchor 5 or 6 Miles N N E from Tripoly - The Squadron
excep the Argus & Vixen which are standing off & on in company.
At 12+ Noon we observed on the walls of Tripoly the French
National flag with a white Flag under it.
The Argus & Vken shewed the same flags - Soon after the Argus
sent a boat into Tripoly with Consul OBrien - She went & returned
under flag of truce At 4 P. M. the Commodore rejoined the Comtitution and Visited some of the Squadron Towards evening fresh breezes from E S E - Veered to 90 fathr From 8 P. M. till day light moderate breezes from E S E. A little after
Sunrise we observed several Flags displayed round the walls of
Tripoly, and two on the Bashaw's castle - We have never before

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

395

this morning seen more than one flag on the Bashaws castle, and it
was the General opinion of the Officers of the Constitution that one of
these two was a white flag - The Squadron hoisted immediately a
white flag a t the fore.
The Vixen was ordered to stand in, and examine the flag: At 8 A.M.
she returned & reported the Flag to be yellow & white - The Squadron immediate1 hauled down the white Flag.
Em loyed a forenoon in sending powder & shot to the Gun boats
& sheis to the Bombards The Squadron employed making the necessary arrangements for a
third attack upon Tripoly At 11+ A. M. we observed the French National Flag with a white
one under i t flying on the Walls of Tri oly Made the hgus & V k n
signals to come within hail Noon Mo erate breezes from ESE with
pleasant Weather
[LC. EPP, Log Constitution, 1803-1804.1

19

B

Extract from journal kept by Purser John Darby, U. 6. Navy, on board U. S. S.
John Adam, Master Commandant Isaac Chauncey, U. 8. Navy, commanding,
Friday, 10 August 1804

This morning Commodore Prible. sent the Schooner and brig in
again under the m i t e flag. to know whether the Bashaw woud. acceed
to the terms which he had offered before and it is said that the Commodore has offered a larger sum for peace and the ransom of ourPrisoners, as he is still more ancxious. to conclude the peace before the
the Brig & Schooner has just returned and
arrival of Com-arron.
haled down the White flag again. which is a signal to us that there is
nothing done. and it was expected that another attack would be
made this evening on the Town, but it seems nothing in that way is
to be done to night. We are still discharging our ship and preparing
for to Join in the action. our Captain has frequent communications
with the comr but we know not what is going on or what is to be the
final result. [NDA original. Miss Camilla S. McConneU.1
Extract from journal of Midshipman F. Cornelius deKrafft, U. 6. Navy, in 0. 6.
Brig Siren of 18 guns, Master Commandant Charles Stewart, U. 6. Navy,
commanding, Friday, 10 August 1804

Lying a t Anchor
Light breezes & pleasant, the Argus & Vizen Lying too offl the
harbour, At 1 the Comm: sent a boat from the Argus on shore At
3 the boat return'd, the Argus join'd the fleet with the V k n Tripoli
bore S W by S. 6 miles. Midnight light breezes &- pleasant At 7 the Comm: hoisted the
white flag & made the signal to speak the Argus. the Vizen stood in
for the Town with a flag of truice. At M past 7 she fir'd a gun to
leeward & stood close in under the batteries M past 7 the flag not
being answer'd the V h n wore round & stood for the fleet. At 9 the
flag on board the Comm: was haul'd down. At % past 11 the Scourge
hove up Mendian light breezes & p l e d
1NDA.I

396 NAVAL OPERATIONS. APRIL-SEPTEMBER 6 . 180.4
To Mrs. William Bainbridge, Perth Amboy, N. J., from Secretary of the Navy

NAV.DEPAugt 11. 1804
As a small supply ofmoney may probably be acceptable to you in
the absence of your Husband CapOainbridge, I have directed
George Harrison Esqr to honor your Drafts on him for 150 or 200
Dollars - If you please you may draw on him a t Sight for this Sum
[NDA. GLB, Vol. 7, 1803-1805.1

[ l l August 18041
To CaptainEdward Preble, U.S. Navy,from P. d'Karpow, Russian Charg6 d'Affaires,
The Two Sicifies
[Tramlation]

COMMODORE
A Sickness which has confined me to my bed during
more than two months has prevented me from acknowledging (before
now) the reception of the obliging letter which you have done me the
honor to torite under date of ithJune last, announcing to me your
wise determination to release the Russian Ship [Madona Catapoliana]
which one of your armed Vessels had taken some miles distant from
the Port of Tripoly.
I , assuredly, will not fail to inform my court of your equitable
proceedure, and it will learn, certainly with much pleasure the care
which you have [taken], to avoid all that, which can bring the least
injury upon the good harmony which exists between my august
Sovereign and your Government.
I likewise beg you Sir to accept the assurance of the distinguished
consideration with which I have the honor to be, S
i
r
Naples. 30t@Juillet 1l t b August
[LC. EPP, Vol. 12, June-August

1804.1

To Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Navy, from William Higgins, U. 8. Navy Agent,
Malta

MALTAthe 11 August 1804
DEARSIR. I dispatch this boat to inform you that Count Galligni
has loaded a Speronara with powder, Muskets, Gun flints &"or
the
Bey of Tripoly she is cleared out for Jerba, and the powder I learn,
for better deception, is packed into Rum Puncheons; the patron of the
Boat which carries this is well acquainted with the rout, the Count's
Vessel means to take and will conduct any of your Squadron into a
situation so as to be sure to meet with her, and cut her off; he may
also be otherways useful in bringing you live stock from the Shore The Vessel with the water &c+will sail to morrow morning Comleatly loaded with about two hundred Puncheons of Water, Onions,
gheep, fowls &c+as pr bill of Lading that will go with her; I have
taken her by the Month, and for three Months certain; and she is
to be entirely under your Orders I have not been able to get the quantity of Potatoes you want, all
that I could procure will go in company with this letter with a parcel
of Melons I sincerely hope you will be able to lay hold of the Counts Ammunition, which i t is important should not reach the Bey, as he, it is
reputed, is much in want; a t any rate I thought i t my duty to give

WilRS WITH BRRBARY POWERS

397

you this information without thinking of the additional Expence i t
will occasion - I give the Speronara 240. Dollars certain, and a
present of 100 Dollars more if the powder is met with; endeed I
should tell you that the first information I got of this business was
from the Bearer to whom the freight was offered, but they could not
agree about the price.
I wrote you by the John Adam's fregate which I hope long ere this
has Joined you, and a fregate is now passing the Island at a distance
sterring with a Crowd of sail your way that I hope will prove to be
the Essex [LC. EPP. Vol 12, June-August 1804.1
To Monsieur Beanssier, French Charge d'bffaues and Commissary General,
Tripoli, from Captain Edward Preble, V. 8. Navy

Constitution - Off TRIPOLY
August 11th 1804
SIR I am honored with your letter of yesterday: in answer to which
I have to observe that the expectations of the Bashaw cannot be
complied with. Perhaps after the next attack he may be willing to
acceed to mine. The last attack would have been a very serious
one for Tripoly, had not a frigate appeared in the offig the moment
there was sufficient wind to enable me to approach the town - The
appearance of that Frigate and supposing that the other four were
near her, induced me to make a signal to withdraw from the attack
in order to make a more effectual one, which will take place the
moment they arrive. In the mean time the Bombardment and
cannonading of the t o m will be carried on, and no more time can be
lost in attempting to negotiate My Government expected to ransom our Prisoners for forty thousand dollars: I had however discretionary power to o as far as Eighty
give the Bashaw
thousand, besides a present in cash; this present I
amounting to twenty thousand dollars to make up the sum of one
hundred thousand for the Ransom of the prisoners, which shall be
paid in forty days. I hope the Bashaw will accept of these Generous
terms, beyond which my Government will not approve of my going
as it is my utmost limits. Be assured Sir, when the whole Squadron
arrives, no such offer will ever again be made - It will be a glorious
&air for you Sir to negotiate the liberation of these Prisoners and
prevent the farther effusion of blood - I am convinced by what I
have already seen, that we can reduce Tripoly to a heap of Ruins:
the destruction of Derna & Bengaza will follow, and the blockade be
constantly cont[in]ued, unless the present terms are accepted - For
this sum now offered all the Prisoners are to be immediately released
& the former treaty of Peace renewed 6- ratified: A Consular present of
ten thousand dollars in cash shall be given on the arrival of a Consul,
but no annuities or other presents - All the Tripoline Prisoners
which I have on board shall be landed here on the restoration of our's;
and all those a t Syracuse shall be immediately sent for and brought
to the Bashaw - I presume you will have no hesitation in becoming
the Guarantee for the payment of the money, and be assured if the
terms are accepted, i t shall be brought from Malta as much sooner
than the forty days as possible -

3

398 NAVAL OPERATIONS, APRILSEPTEMBER 6 , 1804
If the terms now offered are accepted of, I wish you to hoist the
white flag under the french flag at your Staff by 5 O'clock this Evening
& come off, and I will send a boat to the Rocks to receive you. &
Mr OBrien will go on shore with you to make the necessary arrangements [LC.

EPP, Vol. 12, June-August 1804.1

To Monsieur Beaussier, French Charge d'bffaires and Commissary General,
Tripoli, from Captain Edward Preble, U.S. Navy

Constitution Off TRIPOLY
August 11th. 1804
SIR As I know i t is customary to distribute presents among the
officers of the Bashaw on the renewal of a treaty of Peace; You are at
Liberty in addition to the one hundred thousand dollars offered this
day to the Bashaw for the Ransom of the Americans in Tripoly, to
distribute ten thousand dollars to the Prime minister and other
officers for their interest in influencing the Bashaw to accept of the
only terms I have it in my power to propose, which sum shall be
delivered to you for that purpose in forty days. The presents are to
be privately given If on the arrival of our whole force, peace is not established, one of
our Frigates is ordered by the president of the United States to proceed
to Alexandria to assist the Bashaw's brother. hlr Eaton our late
Consul a t Tunis comes out in the Frigate for that purpose, and brings
out arms and ammunition, artillery and cash to enable him to regain
the Throne of Tripoly - I can assure you, this is a fact, and I have no
objection to your acquainting the minister [LC. EPP, Vol. 12, June-August 1804.1
Daily Report of Prisoners of War
Constitutions daily report of Prisoners of W a r Auguat l l t 5 1804
Thirty Seven
Well
Five
Wounded
Fodytwo
Total

/

JOHN
BUGHARD
M. A. [JOHNBURCHARD,
Master at Amzs]
[Maine HS.

NDA photostat.]

Cargo of U. 8. Ketch Inbepld
Manifest of the Cargo Shipped on board the American Ketch
Intrepid for the U. S. of America's Squadron Off Tripoly by George
Dyson - Syracuse August 11th 1804

4 Bullocks
62 Sheep
1 Calf
30 butts Water
3 casks old Hock
20 cantr Wood
42 Fowls
4 Baskets Eggs - 900
500 W + Onions & 50 Pumpions
100 Melons
40 Gallr Oil
2 Baskets Peas
3 Cw! Hay, Corn &ce
230 Melincani
13 Pigs
5 Cw+Onions
1 Cask Marine cloathing for U. 8. Brig Syren
[LC. EPP, Order Book, May 1803-June 1805.1

399

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

Course of U. 8. Frigate Gngrus, one of Commodore Samuel Barron's Squadron,
from Cape Henry, 6 July, to Qibraltar, 11 Angnst 1804
Date

1

Latitude
N.

1

1

Longitude Distance per
w.
h g
43 Miles
154 "
144 "
184 "
224 "
137 "
182
227
194 "
175 ' I
142 "

::

is. 02

14.51
13.07

[USNA.

Log of Congress & Constitution, Nov. 1804-Sept. 1805.1

Extract from journal of U. S. Brig Argus, Master Commandant Isaac Hnll, U. S.
Navy, commanding, Saturday, 11 August 1804

This day begins with mode and pleas? Weather a t Meridn the
Commod"hoisted our Distinguishing flag bore away for him a t 3 past
CommodVreble and Consul OBrien came on board made Sail &
stood in for the to'u.?~at 3 past 1 fired a Gun and hoisted the White
flag a t the Fore T.G. mast head and a french Ensign a t the m a b w-hich
was followed by the Squadron Consul OBrien went on Shore with a flag
of Truce in the barge Commode Preble Capt?Hull and Smith went on
board the Vixen at past 2 Consul OBrien returned on board the T,'ixen
made Sail for the Constituiion a t $ past 8 hoisted in the launch a t 9
Cap? Hull returned a t 2 AM wore Ship to the S@& Westwd a t 9 AM
Capt Hull went on board the Commode a t 3 past he retq with Consul

400 NAVAL OPERATIONS, APRIL-SEPTEMBER 6, 1804
OBrien made Sail and Stood for the town a t 10 fired a Gun and hoisted
the french fla a t the M.T.G. mast head and a White a t the fore a t
li past c o n s 3 OBrien went in the barge for Tripoli with a fla of
Truce a t Merid? he returned made Sail & Stood for the Commo ore

i

[NDA photostat.]
Extract from journal of Midshipman Charles Morris, Jr., U. 8. Navy, on board
U. S. Brig Argus, Master Commandant Isaac Hull, U. S. Navy, commanding,
Saturday, 11 August 1804

P. M. Pleasant, the Commodore hoisted our distinguishing flag
bore up for him
1. The Commodore and M' OBrien came on board. made sail for
the Town in Company with the V7yxen
1%fired a Gun and hoisted the White flag forward and the French
Ensign a t the Main. The rest of the Squadron hoisting a White
flag a t the fore. Mr OBrien went on shore with a flag of Truce the
Commodore, Capt Hull, and Capt Smith went on board the Vixen
2%M' OBrien returned to the Esen made sail off shore
6 Took the Gun Boats in tow. 9 Ccbpt Hull returned
A. M. 9%M' OBrien came on board Stood in shore and hoisted the
signal as above. 10%Mr OBrien went on shore with a flag of Truce
Noon M' OBrien returned stood off shore [Mrs. C. E. Fox original.

KDA photostat.]

Extract from Memorandum Book of Captain Edward Preble, U. 6. Navy, on board
U. 6. Frigate Constitution. 11 August 1804

Sent a flag on shore to endeavor to exchange prisoners.
[LC original.]
Extract from journal kept on board the U. 6. Frigate Constitution, by Captain Edward
Preble, U. S. Navy, Saturday, 11 August 1804

Wind E b N light Breezes, held communication with the french
Consul in Tripoly by means of flag of truce, but without any effect,
the Bashaw's demands are too extravagant to be complied with.
Recq on board sundry stores from the John Adams. PC. EPP. Vol. 12. June-August 1804.1

--

Extract from log book kept by Sailing Master Nathaniel Haraden, U. 6. Navy,
on board U. 6. Frigate Constitution, Saturday, 11 August 1804

Moderate breezes from E b N - At 12%the Commodore went on
board the Argus & made sail in for Tripoly Consul OBrien went on
Shore in the Argus' Boat with a White Flag under the French Flag.
We hoisted a white Flag during the time the Boat was on shore We had strong breezes from E S E. the greater part of the Afternoon,
& are employed in sending dserent stores to the Gun boats & Bombards Towards evening the Commodore came on board.
The Argus & Vizen joined the Squadron - They were Ordered pr
Signal to continue under way during the NightAll the Captains of the Squadron waited on the Commodore The E S E wind continued strong till day light, when we had moderate breezes - At 6 A. M.calm

WARS WITH BARBARY P O W E R S

-

401
-

At 8 A. hf. supplied the Enterprize with 16 gang casks of water 1024 Gallons At 9 A M. the White under the French Flag was hoisted in Tripoly The Argus & K x c n p' Signal came within hail - Consul OBrien
went on board tlie Argus with the Commodores dispatches -.
The Argus m n in with the town and sent a boat on on shore.
At 10)i made Signal for all the Squadron except the John A d a m s &Scourge to weigh.
We u-eighed & ran down for Tripoly - At Koon brought to, u-ith
tlie Main topsail to the Mast 4 hliles North of Tripoly in order to join
company with the Argus & Vixen then in with the town waiting the
return of Consul OBricn in the Boat.
Rec'd from tlie John A d a m s the following stores Viz
One Coil 4% Inch rope _ _
Two---- 4
One-_--_ 5 Eleven-_ I > $ - _ _
.. .
.
Ten - - - _ _ 3 - . - _ _ _ . . . _ _
Fourtecn 12 thrcad Ratlincl . .
E i g h t _ - _ 9 thread d~ .
. _ ..

120
440
120
.
1320
_ 1200
- 1680

faths

.-..__--

..
.

__-___

d~
d~
dp
do

do

1200. do

Iiec'd also from the John A d a m s three boxes Marine Cloathing
[I,('.

EPP, Log Constitution, 1803-1804.1

Extract from journal kept by Purser John Darby, U. S. Navy, on board U. 6. 6.
John Adams, Raster Commandant Isaac Chauncey, U. S. Navy, commanding,
Saturday, 11 August 1804

We still continue a t Anchor ofif] the Town of Tripoli distance about
renewed again to day his ovetures
3 or 4 Leagues. The Comm"rib1e
for Peace and u-ent in near the Town and hoisted the White Flag under
the French Flag. had solne communications u i t h the Bashaw. but all
to no effect. as i t seems. that he has encreased his demanc! i[n]stead of
reducing of them. the cause of %-hi& is attributed to various cucumstance: one the arrival of this ship and and offers of pcace belng made
by him the drip after our arrival the Bashaw supposing that we have
come out with Possitive orders for a pesce from our Government. and
that. the otlicr Squadron which has been so long talked of is not
coming. another. the gun boats. having been ordered off in the last
rtttuck \I-itliout destroying or ta1;in.g any of the Bashaws. Boats, we
riow understand that Commodore 1s determined to make no further
offers to thc Bashnw for Peace but to attack the Town to night. the Squadron not under u-ay u j t h on intention to attack the tourn but
the Wind & Weather not being farourable i t was given over after the
Squadron had stood in near the town [XDA original. MI-., Camilla S McCorlnrll 1
Extract from journal of Midshipman F. Cornelius deKrafft, U. S. Navy, in U. S.
Brig Siren of 18 guns, Master Commandant Charles Stewart, U. S. Navy,
commanding, Saturday, 11 August 1804

Lying a t anchor until 10 P. h4.
Gentle breezes & pleast J2/ past meridian the Argus & TTbenstood
in for tlie town. the Argus fir'd a gun to leeward &- hoisted the white
flag a t the fore &- a french jack a t the main, same time the white flag
was hoisted a t the fore by all the Squadron. At 3 the squadron
haul'd down their flags the Argus 8: V i z e n stood off shore -

402 NA1,'A.L OPERATIONS, APRIL-SEPTEMBER 6 . 1804
Midnight light winds & p l e a s u t daylight perceiv'd the galley's
& gun boats k c . hauling out of the 3lole S t 9 hoisted out the barge
& m cutter to repair. ,4t $4 past 9 the ,4rgus & ITixenmade sail &
stood in for the to\$-11. At ?; past tlie Argus fir'd n gun & hoisted a
u-hit? flag a t thr fore & the french jacli a t the main. fipast 10 n
siynnl from tlie C o ~ n ~ ntoc get under w a y . At 11 nlade sail R- stood
for the town. 3feridian light \ ~ - i ~ l&
d splc:ls! ~veather.-

[snil.]
[12 August 18041
Stores and Provisions shipped on board the Ship Conccptron
Sh!pped by t i ~ cGrt1c.c of God in poocl Order 6; acll conditiorlcd

hy
TWliam Higgins S a v d 9gcnt to tllc Vnitcltl S t : ~ t cill
~ ; and upon the.
good ship called t f ~ cPoncrpt;on v-lierclof is &laster. under Gocl for this
present V o y n ~ e- Antonio Grimn, u r l t l no[\r] ridi~ipnt uxicIlor in the.
Harbour of llaltn and by God's Grace bound for the ,1111c~rieur)
Sqnodron Off Tripol.; n n t l r ~the eomniantl of Commodorc Prc.hlr
beinq supplies for the Use thereof, ant1 thc. I'roprrty of tho 17nitrtl
States r:s particulnrizcd on tlle other siclc hcina tnttrlictl & numbtlrctl
as in thc hlarpin, ant1 are to be deliverctl i l l !il-(1 pootl Ordcr & 1 r
conditioned to the Aforesaid Squadron - ittic -2ct of G o ~ l tllc
, lii~~y~
Enemies Fire, $ all & every other ( I a n p ( ~ s& Accidents of tlrr Seas
c~
Rivers & Saripation, of ~vhntererncture & kiritl s o t ~ csccpted)
Unto Commodorc Preble or to his Assigns, 11eor tl:eq- pnyi~lgfreight
for the said Goods, as per. chartcr Party - u-ittl Primrgc* & Averngtl
Accustomed - In ITitncss ~vhereoft l ~ eMaster or I'urst~of the srild
ship hath affirmc~dto three Bills of laciinp, rtll of this tcbr!or & date:
the one of which bills being aceomplishcd thc othclr two to Stnrld
Void - And So God senti the good Ship to lirr rlesircd Port in
Safety - Amen - Dated in Malta the 12th August 1804
Signed ANTOXI
o GRIMA
Endoresed on tlie Back as follo~vs
195 Iron bound Water caslis full of Fresh Tl'atcr
Thirty sheep
10 Doz? Feu-1s
50 Cantars Onions
8 Sacks Rz~rlry
50 Prsati TI-oo(1 or nbout 258 English Cwt
1 cantar Ilrlons
112 Bnntlles Hsy
3.50 cabbnges -(311

[LC. EPP, Ordrr nook, %lap 1803-.Tliti? lRn5 ]
To Secretary of the Piavy from Captain John Rcdgers, U. 6. Navy

U. STATESFRIGATE
("OR~TCSS
Gibrdta Bay Aug! Idt? 1804
SIR, I have the honor to acquaint you that tho Congress has arrived

T\i? 1 - (Duplicate forwarded)

after a tedious passage of 38 days - The Conskllafion is in Sight &

I expect to see the President & Essez every minute, as we only parted
company five days ago.

-

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

403

The last 25 days of our passage the Winds were directly ahead, and
to facilitate our arrival the Commodore thought proper on the 7tQ
Inst to seprratc the Squadron and direct each Ship to make the best
of her wny to this place. The arrival of the Squadron at this moment has again rendered an
unexpected Scrvirc to the U'States, as the Emperor of Morocco has
began to be unreasonable; IIe wishes to send one of his Ships of War t o
Tripoli, writ11 a Cargo of TiRieat, and has Importuned our Consul much
on the Subject Thc Day the Squadron parted company, it boarded (about 70
Leagues to the S. IT. of Larache) the Emperors Frigate Maimona,
from lfogadore bound to Larachc, a t which place he is collecting all
his force and it is thought very probable to cruize against the U'States,
in casc. of C'o11su1Simpsons refusing a passport to the before mentioned
Ship: however the arrival of this Squadron will no doubt change the
Emperors plans Tunis is refractory nnd has made many threats, but I expect
I'rehlcs T'ipilrnce has caused the Bey to be cautious; Indeed from what
I learn l ~ t ~l~othing
.,
dangerous is to be expected from that quarter,
his Cornn~crccis considerable and he will not risque it for an uncertainty - I an1 afraid the business of Tripoli will be finished before
tv(, arrirv, as it appears by Letters from Capf Prehle to Consul Garino,
t1:ttc~tl Sarngosn June 1gtQthat he was then nearly ready to Sail for
Tripoli with Six Gun Boats & two Bombards in addition to the
Sqnndron It is bt-~lievedhere, b>- the most knowing, that Spain intends to
quarrel with us, and I think from a letter I saw from R l r Pinckney to
(lonsul Gnvino, thnt it is not Improble, as that Gorerment has
refnsrd to ratify the Louisiana Treaty [ I Z . JIIP, L ~ t t e r s& Orticrs, Book A, 1804-1805 1
[12 August 18041
Passport issued to the Spanish vessel LaMarianna

To the Commodor~or Commanding ( l e e r of the Ships of liTar of the
7:nited Statcs nf America brfore Tripoly GREETING
JI-IIEREASHis Excellency Hnmoucla Rashaw Bey of Tunis, has
caused app1ic:ttion to be mnde to mp as the Consulnr Agent of the
I'nitcd Statcs of America for this Regency, that a Safe Conduct should
be granted to Sidi hIohrtmed Aleten Sga Amhassador of the Grand
Sialior, and his Suite consisting of tw-elrc. Prrsons, charged m t h
Dispntclrcs from the Ottoman Porte to His Excellency tllc Bashaw of
Tripoly, and now embarked on hoard the Spanish Pinck La A41arianna
Captain Joseph Bianchi, and navigated by nine Seamen the said
Captain included - I hare therefore granted a Passport to said Vessel,
to proceed off Tripoly, and there to receive the approbation of the
Commodore, or Commanding Officer of the Americnn forces, to enter
said Port. - I t is therefore requested of the Commanders of the
Vessels of war of the IJnited States, to pennit said Vessel to p ~ ons
her destined Vo age without hindrance or molestation; - provided
she embarks no ind of Merchandize or takes on board no Passengers,
other than those above mentioned. - It is further required on the

z'

404 NAVAL OPERATIONS, APRILSEPTEMBER 6, 1804
part of His Excellency the Bey, that said Vessel be permitted to leave
the Port of Tripoly, without any molestation; provided she comes out
with the same number of Passengers &c. &c. - There is shipped on
board (with my consent,) one Trunk, containing wearing apparel,
and one small box of Sugar and Coffee the property of hlr Beaussier
Commissary Generd of the French Republic a t Tripoly. - I have
delivered to the Captain four Packages of letters, and one for the
Commodore or Commanding Officer of the American forces off
Tripoly I n witness u~hereof I have hereunto Set my name and
(SEAL) affixed the Public Seal of Office in the Chancery - Office
of the United States of America a t Tunis this twelvth day
of August one thousand eight hundred and four GEORGEDAVIS
A Tunisien Pilot is embarked on board, by order of the Bey - and
DAVIS
will return to Tunis by land GEORGE
[LC.

EPP, Vol. 12, June-August 1804.1

To Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Navy, from William Higgins, U. S. Navy Agent,
Malta

MALTA
the 12 August 1804
MYDEAR
SIR The enclosed is Copy of what I did myself the honor
to address you yesterday and I sincerely hope i t will enable you to
get hold of the Count's Ammunition-boat

She is not yet sailed but

I understand departs to morrow - The Patron of the speronara is
well acquainted u i t h the Coast and if ycu want him is willing to remain
in the Service as long as you choose to keep him I have now the pleasure to hand You bill of lading for sundry
Supplies of K a t e r &ca shipped in conformity with your orders for the
use of the Squadron under your Command - I trust yo11 uill be
satisfied a t thr expedition I have used in fulfilling Your Commands.
indeed I should have got the Vessel au-ay a day sooner, had it not
been for an intervening holiday on which the Maltese could not be
persuaded to work. I feel myself under considerable obligation to
Capt? Schomberg, and h/Ir Filliie in so promptly furnishing me uith
the Casks which had been Just coopered for the use of the fleet, uithont
this assistance i t would have been impossible for me to have found
others I enclose you a letter from Capt"chomberg - I could not
get the quantity of Potatoes you wanted, all to be procured h a r e
gone to you by the speronara with a basket of Apples, some Onions
& Melons The terms of the Charter are as follows - The Vessel is take11
for three Months certain or longer a t your Option a t 750 sendi pr
Month but she is not to be considered as discharged until the expiration of her Quarantine - She is of course to be absolut,rly under your
direction to send wherever you map think proper a t the 'C'essels risk
tho' I have partly promised to the Captain that if he went to Sicily
you would put him under American Colours to avoid the great
danger of Privateers - this is no obligation however
I got the Store Ship Sun Guiseppe Prattic the day after her arrival I am happy to tell you Mr Lenard is quite recovered and to compleat his reestablishment I have insisted on his taking up his Quarters
a t my house to which he will remove to morrow or next day -

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

405

If i t should be your intention for the John Adams to unload here,
I will be obliged your letting me know that 1 may be prepared to

meet her We have no News, a great talk of 9000 Russians being expected a t
Naples. [LC. EPP, Vol. 12, June-August 1804.1
To Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Navy, from Master Commandant Charles Stewart,
U. S. Navy

Siren off TRIPOLI
12* Augf 1804
SIR A Negligence on the part of Lieu: Maxwell this morning, has
made i t necessary I should suspend his functions, until1 your pleasure
is known - He unfortunately forgot himself and his responsibility
in his morning watch and fell asleep he is very sorry for it, and duely
sensible of his error, however i t being an Offence of so high a nature
that I feel the obligation of referring the decision to you; but Sir, as a
public investigation, would very much injure the young man in his
profession, I hope from your Compassionate disposition, you \$-ill be
pleased to adopt some method that will spare h h , and prevent the
like in future
[LC. EPP, Vol. 12, June-August 1804.1
To Master Commandant Charles Stewart, U. S. Navy, commanding U. S. Brig Siren,
from Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Navy

Constitution - Off TRIPOLY
August 1Zth 1804.
SIR I am honored with your letter of this date containing a charge
against Lieutr ?rfax-wellfor neglect of duty in Sleeping on his Katch It is a charge of a serious nature a t any time, or m any situation, but
in our present one, cruizing on an Enemy's Coast, the Xarigation of
which is even with the best lookout attended with danger, such
neglect is almost un ardonable; - I would h a r e l\lr Mas\\-ell reflect
if any accident shou d hnppen in consequence of his neglect he would
involve many besides himself in the consequences attendant on such
neglect, and his character as an Officer might be ruined - Hoxverer,
this being the first complaint of the same nature against hlr hlasu-ell,
I \\-ill, in consequence of your friendly solicitation spare him from 8
public investigation of his conduct, and consent and direct that you
permit him to return to his duty - I hope a second complaint of
the same nature against hlr Maxwell u-ill never be exhibited - You
will have this letter read on the Quarter deck [LC. EPP, LB, April-Nov. 1804.1

P

Extract from journal of U. S. Brig Argus, Master Commandant Isaac Hull, U. S.
Navy, commanding, Sunday, 12 August 1804

This day Commences with mode breezes and pleasent a t j: past 12
Consul OBrien and Cap! Hull u-ent on board the Commode a t j4 past
2 the Cornmod? made Sig! NP 1260 a t 4 he hoisted our Distinguishin
flag made Sail and stood for him baclied the main topsail Cap3 ~ u f i
came on board filled away wore Ship and Stood for Tripoli a t 5 T, KP
to the Nq & Ed a t % past T, KQto the Sq & We a t 6 the CommodQ

406 NAT7AL OPERATIONS. APRIL-SEPTEMBER

6. 1804

hoisted our Distinguisllg flag T, lidand Stood for him a t 31 past 6 he
made Sig! N ? 995 Cap! Hull went on board of hlm a t 8 T, KQ to
Kc & R d a t 10 Cap! Hull came on board took 2 Gunboats in tow wore
Ship to the East\+ and backed the main topsail - EmpG as Kecessary [NDA photostat.]
Extract from journal of Midshipman Charles Morris, Jr., U. S. Navy, on board
U. S. Brig Argus, Master Commandant Isaac Hull, U. S. Navy, commanding.
Sunday 12 August 1804

P. hf. hloderate
1. C a ~ t .Hull and 31r OBrien \vent on board the Commodore
The Commodore made signal 1260
4. Capt. Hull canie on board l l a d e sail tou-ards Tripoli
6. The Colnmodore hoisted the S r g u s flag stood for him
C t ~ p tHull
.
went on board
A. 11. 6l-1he made K"9Y
10. Capt Hull came on board took our gun boats in t o r .
11 \Tore [hlrs. C. E. Fox original.

S D A photostat.]

Extract from journal kept on bosrd the U. S. Frigate Conslit&!ion,by Captain Edward
Preble, U. S. Navy, bunday, 12 August 1804

Moderate Breezes E b r\' Lying to 3 or 4 miles to tilt> S ,h; E of
Tripoly, the John Adams a t Anchor 2 Leaguts out to prevent the
Tripolines from disco\-ering that she has but a few guns, Every
thing is in order throughout the Squadron for a11 attack on Tripoly
this night, The Enemy has two Galleys a scliooner of 10 guns and
16 Gun Boats moored in the Ilart>our in a line ahl.cast fro111 East to
West Heads to the Northward to defend it. a swell 11t.aringon shore
prevents our attempting any thing a t prcscnt. anchor'd in 26 faths
F a t e r Tripoly bearing South 3 miles from day light to 7 A h l Calm,
a t 8 a Breeze from ?i b E the swell increasing, ordcrc1tl all the
Squadron under way to stand off frorn thc land. [LC. EPP, Vol. 12, June-August 1804.)
Extract from fog book kept by Sailing Master Nathaniel Earaden, U. S. PTavy,
on board U. 8. Frigate Constilulion, Sunday, 12 August 1804

hloderrtte breezes from E b S . Lying to, 3 or 4 Miles h' X E from
Tripoly. Squadron in sight.
The John Adams & Scourge continue a t andlor 4 or 5 ;\lilrs to the
Eastward, At 1%P. hl. the Argus's boat u i t h Consril Consul O'Brien
returned We stood off & on Tripoly all the Sftc~noon
Tou~ardsevening the John Adams & Scourge joined company - 111
the close of the evening we tacked to the Nortllu-ard and came to, in
26 fathahard botto~n Tripoly South by compasq 3 Alilrs - The
Squadron in company continues under Way - The captains of the
Squadron pr Signal waited on the Commodore I3rer.v preparation
has been made for attacking Tripoly this night - The Encrny display
16 Sail of Gun boats, One Schooner, and a three nlastcd Galley They
are under cover of Grape from the Batteries &- within the reef of

rocks -

R'ARS l.ttIl'H BARBARY POWERS
407
By 9 P. M. the wind Veered to N E b E, which heaves in a swell &
prevents the execution of the Commodores plans this night - By
12 Midnight we had fresh breezes from N E b N - By 2 A. hl. i t
became more moderate.
From day light till 7 A. M. calm with a current setting to E S E At 7): A. LM.
sent two boats to assist in towing the John Adams
clear of the Cor~stitution- Veered 20 fat,h"n order to keep clear
of her.
At 8 A. ?\I.a light breeze sprang up from N b E which continued
all forenoon \I-it11 a swell setting in shore Last Sunday & this day saw the English, french, Russian, Dutch,
Spanish, Swedish, Danish, arid Imperial Consular flags flying in
Tripoly.
The Squadron all under uyay. We continue a t Anchor with the two
Bornbards a'stern Xoori light breezes from h' b E with a swell from K E. Surgeons
rcport 5 sick & 3 corivalesccnt.
Friday last ? r l r J. Davis AIidshipman rejoined the Constitution from
the Scourge
Noon made Signal for the Squadron to approach no nearer the
land [LC. EPP, Log Constitution, 1803-1805.1
Extract from journal of William Eaten, U. S. Navy Agent for the Barbary Regencies,
12 August 1804
[0:i botlrcl V. S. Frigate I ' ? ~ s l d ~ 7 i 13.
t ] Ilonday. Xlade cape Spartrl - E~iteredGibraltar bay -- The Congress ar,d Constellation had
entered the same morning

[H. E. H~tutirigtonLkAG, E A 206.1
Extract from journal of Wil~iarnEaton, U. S. Navy Agent for the Earbary Regencies,
Sunday, 12 August 1804

[On hoartl C . S. I+.ig,.attPrrsitlrnf] ,it 9, A. hl. hlatic cape Spnrtcl,
t ) c a r i ~ ~S.
g E. six l c a g t ~ r ~ It
~ . is rcmarliablr. that from lrnving cape
Hcnry, July 5th' til! nit~l;ing the TT7estcrn Isln~lds,c \ r i the 21st. the
u-i~~cls
\i-erc. colistnntlj- strong and fair from the south n-est; arid from
this tlatc. till making Capc Spnrtcll ( J I ~ the 12th August, the>- \$-ere as
cor~sta~ltl>strong rind contrary, fro111 thp East, varying n few points
northerly ant1 soutlier1~-. Tllut thc filst 15 dtigs we co~isitlcrcdour
pussage more thsn tn-o thirds n u d e ; but that the other third uns
gninclcl wit11 dificultv ill 22 days. During the whole passage tllc
~ e : ~ t h wus
e r e~trc.rne\~
finr: not a day but a ship's barge I\-ould have
lived n t sea witliout danger.
[XR$L.

Pio. 9217, Bn11 E 14.1

Extract from journal kept by Purser John Darby, U. S. Navy, on board U. S. S.
John Adams. Master Commandant Isaac Chauncey, U. S. Navy, commanding,
Sunday, 12 Angust 1804

\\-e arc riow under way taclii~igon ant1 of[f] the TOM-11
of Tripoli
quite uncertain what t11c Cot~lmodoreintends to do. a t hleridian thc
town bore S. by W., the Commodore made Several Signals in the

408 NAVAL OPERATIONS. APRIL-SEPTEMBER 6 . 1804
course of the day and about 11 Oclock a t night Capt Chauncey went
on board of the Commodore and returned about 13. Midnight. we
came to Snchor the Town bore [space] nothing particular Occured
this day [NDA original.

Miss Camilla S. McConnell.]

Extract from journal of Midshipman F. Cornelius deKrafft, U. S. Navy, i n U. S.
Brig Siren of 18 guns, Master Commandant Charles Stewart, U. S. Navy,
commanding, Sunday, 12 August 1804

Lying a t anchor [Tripoli].
Commences u i t h light airs & pleasant. the squadron haul'd down
the white flag 3 past 2 the Commodore made signnl to wear worc to
the S. E g back'd the main top sail & spolie the T'kcn A t 8 wore to
the 5 . W Q the Argus tack'd & stood for the Town, the Comm: rnnde
signal for all Commander's to repair on board his ship - ): past 8
Lt Stewart n-ent on board the Comm: ?Kd in succession with t l ~ efleet.
f4 past 10 Lt Stewart return'd on board, hoisted out the cutter &
hoisted in the barge. At 11 came too with the Stream &. furl'd all
sail Midnight Calm. At 4 Franciso Rogers (one of the [mcn], that n-as
wounded on the 7t"stant
in the gun boat that blen- up) died. ,4t 9
committed his body to the deep with the usual ceremony. At 11 the
signal was made for that part of the squad]-on which were under way
to approach no nearer the land. Meridian light airs & pleasant
[?;D.4.]
To A. Pail, United States Commercial Agent, L'Orient, from Secretary of the Navy

h'avr D E P19
~ August 1804 I h a r e recd your letter of the 23'Q Feb? 1804.

The owners of the Schooner Citiian linve eshibitec! a clnini agninst
the Department for 55 day's demurrage, gounded upon n Crrtificr~t~
from you stating that she had heen detnlr~cda t L'Orient "firstly by
quarantine and nextly by the sailing of o, Squadron of Ships of JT-ur",
from L'Orient. Mr Thom who went out in the Schooner stated to us
on his return to this place, certain objections to this claim which arc
mentioned in n letter from him to me dated Sth Aug! 1804, n copy of
u-llic11follows,
'Iwe arrived on the ex-ening of the 17th Dcct 1803, a t thc Port of L ' O r t e ~ ~ t
and were visited by the Health Officer who informcd u s t h a t we ~ r l u s perforin
t
a quarantine of 10 days. I wrote immediatel~to hlr Yail and i~lfornmedllirn
of the Dispatches t h a t were on board and el~rlosedhim the Charter Party
t o let hirn see the necessity of immediately dispatching the Schooner t o her
place of destination; and in answer thereto r e c e ~ t e da letter irrforrnine us we
had permission t o depart, and t h a t a n order for t h a t purpose v n s likcnise
lodged on board the Guard Ship la Relnn. I shewed t h i s letter immediately
or1 its reception t o Capt Lawson and pressed him t o em'nmce thc ijpportn~lity
t o depart, a s the Consul had hinted t h a t there was a prob:rt>ility of our
being detained by the French Admiral which was arcortli~~gly
done the ~ l r ~ t
dav. I therefore do declare t h a t Capt Lawson made no a t t e m p t to get under
weigh when he had permission, and c o ~ ~ s e q u e n t lisy ortlv entitled to $40
demurrage, and cannot possiblpclear his conscience and demand any more!' -

With this information before us we havc not felt o~irselvesjustifiable in admitting the claim for demurrage exhibited b the ov-ners of
the Schooner Citizen. We have deemed i t advisab e, ho~vevcr,to

r

409

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

write to you on the subject. I therefore request that you will be
pleased to state to me all the Circumstances in your possession tending
either to corroborate or invalidate this claim.
[NDA. Barbary Powers, LB, 1803-1808.1

To Joseph Yznardj, U. S. Consul, Cadiz, Spain, from William Sarvis, U. 8. Consul,
Lisbon, Portugal
LISBON
13th Augr 1804
SIR I \+-as honG with your favor of the 27fb L'lt? concerning the

forgery for £4000 Sterling in the name of Comnlodore Preble on
ZI1tlssrRGIennie & lllsclicnzie - The Bills in question, were made
payable to, and endorsed by Laurent Roberts, who forwarded them
the 4th of last October from Cadiz to Slessrs 3layne 8: Brolvn of this
place to be negotiated. In tho course of Xorember & December,
Roberts drew for the amount of tllc Bills in favor of Cllarles Borney.

*

[LC'.

*

*

*

*

EPP, LIi, April-Sov. 180i.j

To Secretary of State from James Simpson, U. S. ConsuI. Tangier, Porocco

S ?SO. -

TASGIER
13th Augu.st 1804. -

SIR Original of Kq 79 Ires font-arded by the Schooner Jane
last Nonth for Boston. sailed from this Bay thc
I have now the honour to acknon-ledge receipt of the Letter you
addressed me on thr G t C June, accompanying the Act for not only
(~stablishingthe hiediterrancan Fund but makeing an immediate
appropriation for its purposes of n hiillion of dollars. - Kothing can
Inorc strongly than this measure testify to the Barbary Powers the
determination of the Government of the Vnlted States to compeU
them to a strict obscrrsrlcc of the existing Treaties. - E'esterday
Con~modoreBarron entercd the Straits and passed on the Gibraltar.
Thc rcspcctable rcinforrcrncnt he brings to tllc Squadron already in
these Scas I hope \rill be found to everr purpose i t is intended for. I \\-ill beg lea\-e to atld that I trust after Peace with Tripoly shall
have bccn flappily establislled, part of this force \rill continue to be
stationed in this part of the ITorld. I h a w to eritreat rou --ill pardon m y very p e n t neglect in not having
carlicr noticed in my rcports to you the subject of the change of
Slediterranean Passes. Mr Lenr did deliver to me the Kc%-Pnss with t h i r t ~Cuts
and I ought
- The period when the change was
to have acquainted you tl~c:-~oi.
to take place n-ns Lon-ever too distant to nlalic any representation to
the Ernpcronr on the subject a t that time, without runirlg a great
hazard of its being forgot before the time came round for his Cruizers
puting to Sea. - I t hns not 110~-everheen omitted and in my last
I should have told yo11 the Commanders of the Ernperours three Ships
t11en mrntioned Iiacl hrcn duel? made ncquaintcd 1%-iththe intended
cnhange, and that cach had been furnished I\-it11 all old and n new Cut,
taclccd togt3tller undcr tlie lcsscr Seal of this Office, that thcy might
not be seperatcd. The Captains were directed to allow Americall T'essels to pass freelwith either of tile I'usscs during their present Cruize.

410 NAVAI, OPERAT10A7S, APRIL-SEPTEA4BER 6 , 1804
This I considc~edthe safest nietllod, as their Passports are renewed
every t i n ~ ethe)- are fitted out. - The period fixed for the old Passes
to be no longer of avail t)eing the first of July 1805 it is highly probable
I shall have to issue the new Cuts only to the Emperours Cruizcrs a t
their nest outfit, for they seldonl go to Sea at an earlier day than that. I t is true the Captain and Crew of the Jfeshouda x$-liilstin Gibraltar
made the cleclaratioiis Captain Rodgers states, but when they got their
liberty they toltl a tiifi'tbrent story.
I have never heard an)- thing Inore from this Gorerriment on the
subject - as I sec Captain I?,odyersconirs out 111 the reillforcement, we
shall now liavc a fair o?portunity of investigating the busyness. I have felt irrysL1:l ~.cqt:.ai~~cd
from making tlic rvport I had iritendecl
to Gove~.r~rncnt
on tilts si~bject,not consitirring the allegations of
these people so inme!? sl!:)ported sufficicnt n u tllori ty i or rrie to particulariztl uamcs of Officcrs 011 s:lch an occasion. - 11s no injury has brcn
done to tlie Publlc b r n
1 ) - tlic tlt~luy,I trust 1 x 1 ~cnutiori will not
be disapro~-cdof. - Tlic t11-o Gtlllr>)-sof Tetuan arrived here on
'ST'edncsday lost ant1 for tlic first time 11al-(1made a Cruizc of a few
hours in tlie Straits this uiornir!g. -1 r heir C'omninnders lmve been
proridecl XT-it11
the t~i-oCuts n11d ilistr~lctedon the use of them. FIVhen I issuet1 niy I'rssports for the Enlpcrours tl~recFrigates,
finding by ever)- information that they \\-ore intended for some Service
in the llediterrancac, I put un csccptiol~to tlleir ihntering Ports
blocliad~dby Ships of K a r of tile Urlitccl States. -His llnjestg had orcle~-edone tltous3ritl F : ? i i r ~ ~ i (1600
t ~ s Bushels)
T h e a t Gcing laden or* thc -3Ilrbo/ta as n gift to rile poor of T r i p o l ~ ,
part of xx hicli n-as actual)- shipt but rclantlt~tl~ 1 1 o~ 1 . d a~t~SUiile
~ tirne
issued for all the three to rendezrous at Sulle and from thcnct~proceed
on a Cruize on tlic Coast of Portugal. The Emperour I am ell infor.nlcd expressed ~ i t ' a tco11cer11a t not
being able to sent1 this ITlient to Tripo1~-.- Alcuj-clc Ilashash on the
first Ins! \\-rote nlr a Letter rclciucstirlg in IIis 1Iltjf.stys name a Passport for it, \\-liich I told l ~ i mit 11-as in:ltossil)lc for m t to gi.arit. A corrcspo~idencrhas bthc~imaintained oil the su!~jcct,hut not of such
moment as to merit tro11]1!ing you u i t ! ~copy of. - Somc rrports
of tlt~stiiiatio~i
had reached rne teric!ing to ir:sirincte that the c*lian~e
of the t l ~ e eShips fro111 a Toj-agc to t h e -\\!c~literra~~i~an
to a Cruise irr
the 0cea1111ad nothin? favou!.t~hIcto Ilis 1fajest;i-s lute enpagtnlents
to maintain I'ence w t h tlic t-nitt~c! Stt~tcls.- l'STtrcn t l ~ cC:al!cys
arrived llere I ha\:- tlicy were gt3tir:g t!ic:n r,clatly for irnrnetliate Ser-:ice - lir1owi11;r tl~csevcsscls il-ere ~tridert!~c orclcrs of 3lr.a)-tlc IIusliash I n-rote hini l'ridax last on s~lbjcctof the rq:orts 1 had lic~artl&
desired an explicit aris~ver,this morniiig I have rec.csi\ etl i i , ill tt-liicl~
amongst other arguincnts against tl~osrrumours he saj-s
icaC

7

"if yo11 find any pcrsr,n a h , ) sliall say any thing agai~lfityour S a t i o n rc"garding our Peace, my Lieut Governonr ~ \ i 1 1cut off their head, for we ~ 1 1
"always mairlta111t!ic co~lfirniatiollof thc Peace n i t h your Ilepnbl~c."-

I have besides received o Letter datetf G t h this h'lonth a t Xleqiiinez
from one of His llajcstgs con!itlential Servants written in very
Friendly terms. - From these circurnstancc.~1 pt.rsuadt> myself the
reports were unfoulldetl, on all whic11 I have given ample information
to Colnmodore Barron. -

1

l.t7ARS WITH BARBARY POU7ERS

41 1

By latest adrices the Frigate went to Mogadore had not yet got
back to Snlle. - I have the honour to be with sentiments of high
respect
[NA. SIIA.

CL, Ta~lqier,Val. 2, Jan. 1803-0cr. IXIO.]

To James Simpson, U. S. Consul, Tangier, Ii¶orocco,from Captain Samuel Barron,
U. 6. Navy

U. STATESSHIPPresident
Gibralta Bay Augt 13. 1804
SIR Last evening I read your sevcral letters of the 30tQJune, 19 &
21 Ulto, & 1l"?, Pth &' 10tQIns? togtthcr nit11 Copies of those address'd
to you on the 1 and Z t h by Hatlge Sbderham Hashas. The assurences
that minister gives of the friendly dispositiorls of His Majesty the Emperor of iZlorocco towards the U States are e:<treme!y agreeable, and
it is with great pleasure I reciprocate those assurances on the port
and in behalf of our Gorermcr~t.
I t u-ould indeed add to the pleasure I fccl on t h s occlrsion (were it in
my power consistently wit11 the Iiltercsts of the U' States) and the
riaturc of my command, to gratify tlle wish the Ilinister espress'd to
you of permitting a Ship laden 11-it11 provisions to enter the port of
Tripoli -- But I hare too exalted and I believe too just an opinion
of his Alajcstys correct understanding, not to be persuaded that on
impartially considerir~gthe tendancy of such n concession, he ill see
thc i~ripossibilityof my ug1.ceing to it: for it would in effect be furnishing provisio~isto an Enemy, n-lierein it is incumbent on me to endeavour, b~ all the prohibitior~sof T17ar, to reduce to seasonable terms
of pacificatio~l- If these prohibitions do in any degrec, effect the
lriterest of llis Imperial hlajcsty, or of his subjects, it is a matter of
r p g r ~ tto our Govcrment, but in 14-hich they hal-e no violation (these
proliil)itio~lsbt~ingtllc result of nccessit?-', and not of choice, unavoidable conscquerrccs of a \JTarinto xvhich they ha\-e been x-tlry reluctantly
compcll'd, ailcl n-iiich we hope may be spc.cdily brought to an honorablc
termination; But until such nn t ~ ~ c ru'rir-CIS
nt
the ports of Tripoli .nil1
be closcly blocliaded by thtl Squadron of the Uiiited States, according
to thr strict ant1 impartial usages of \Tar I spoke tlie Emperors Ship of T a r 31aimona on tlir 6'Q Ins? eight
days from l l o ~ t ~ d o rharing
e
S-ollr passport n-hich \vns duly respected - Tlle Frigates I'res~(lent,Co~)gressant1 C1onsftIlotzon arrired
her($pestcrday, tllc Essex is esptbctcd in momentarily - I shall make
such dispositiorls to rnect the aspect of affairs n-it11-Ilorocco as circumstances shall suggest; of which you will bc duly informed 6 shall
procecd aloft in a fcv- days -

"

[LC:.

J K P , Lrttcrs & Orders. 1804-1805.1

Extract from journal of Midshipmen Charles Morris, Jr., U. 6. Navy, on board
U. S. Brig Argus. Master Commandant Isaac Hull, U. S. Navy, commanding,
Monday, 13 August 1804

kloderatc breezcs and pleasfint ?Teather inndc (T: slmrte~~ed
sail
Tacked and Wore occasionally to lieep Company with the Squadron
6 . P h l The Commodore rxladc Signal N ? 304. general.
IMrs. C. 1:. F o x original. K D A pilotustat.]

4 12 NAVAL OPERATIONS, APRILSEPTEMBER 6 , 1804
Extract from journal of U. S. Frigate Congrus, Captain John Rodgers, U. S. Navy,
commanding, Monday, 13 August 1804

P RI light breezes and pleasant weather. Standing into the bay
Gibralter the Constellation I n company
At % past 3 shortened sail & came too With the Starb" bower anchor
in the Bay of Gibralter, in 13 fathoms Water European point bearing
S ): E , the town of S' Rogue N b E )i E, Cabretta point N W b ITT.
Algesires W B h'. a t 7 the commod"nterd
the bay & came to
anchor At Midnight DO Wind & Weather.
At ;1 past 1 1 the Essex enterd the bay & came to anchor
F. I.
Ships draught water aft. 20 8
Forward 19
By the stern

1 8

[USSA.]
Extract from journal kept on board the U. 8. Frigate Conslilulion. Captain Edward
Preble, U. S. Navy, Monday, 13 August 1804

Wind N E a heavy swell setting on shore, hauld of[f] to the N N F
with the squadron, a t 6 PA1 signal to close to prel-ent separation,
a t 1 0 the wind veered to the E S E hauld up to the h' E and stood off
all night under easy sail, a t 4 Ahf, wore ship $ stood for the land a t
day light Tripoly in sight bearing S b W 5 Leagues dis-~e are nouwaiting for a favorable night to attack Tripoly the Wind must be to
the Southward of East & sea perfectly smooth to enable us to attack
with any prospect of success, - a t h'oon Tripolv bears S b
5
1
F i n d E h' E and a considerable su-cll settlng on shore [LC. EPP, Vol. 12, June-August 1804.1
Extract from log book kept by Sailing Master Rathaniel Haraden, U. S. Navy,
on board U. S. Frigate Constitution, Monday, 13 August 1804

Moderate breezes from 1C' b E - At Single Anchor 3 Miles north
from Tripoly, Squadron in company.
At 1 P. M. the Syren & Scourge came to: the rest of the Squadron
continued under way.
At 4 P. M. the mind Veered to h' E. uith a swell setting from that
Quarter. Made the Syren & Scourge Signal to Weigh - At 4 P. M.
R e weighed & made Sail to the K h' W in order to obtain an Offing At Sun Set made Signal for the Squadron to close.
Tripoly a t this time S b E ): E 7 or 8 Miles.
B y 1 0 P. M. the wind had shifted by d t p e e s to E S E. From this
time till day light Moderate & pleasant. Continued standing to the
r\; E under easy sail until 12 Midnight a h e n u-e brought to u i t h the
Main topsail to the Mast, & remained in this situation till 4 A. M.
u-hen we wore to the South'! At day light saw Tripoly bearing S b
W nearly 5 or 6 leagues
Morning, hloderate & pleasant - ships company washing & scrubbing their cloathes.
Stood in for Tripoly all forenoon with moderate breezes from the
Eastward.
At 9 A. M. made the John Adams Signal to come within hail -

414 NAVAL OPERATIOhTS,APRILSEPTEA4BER

6. 1804

To Captain John Rodgers, U. S. Navy, commanding U. S. Frigate Congress, from
Captain Samuel Barron, U. S. Navy

Duplicatcb foruyarded

1:. STATES
SHIPPresident
Gibralta Bay Augt Idt': 1804.

SIR.You will perceive by the several letters mitten by hlr Simpson,
our Consul nt Tangier (& which for your informetion nccompany's
this) that our affairs in ;\Iorrocco, l i a r e nssunled (at least a doubtfull)
I tllink rather a Serious Aspect. The circun:stanccs of his prrpnring
for Set\ Cruiziny his largest Ships not long since, evidently destined
for some port in the 3ltditernnt~an& liis drawine to Tangier liis
Ga!lics from othcr ports. certain!?. indicate ilostilitp against some
commcrci:ll ntztion, ns t h c ~ cseems to ex& but littlv npprrl~onsiont ~ y
other rlations having Consuls a t Tangiers, i t is possible that tlre
Commc~bceof the lT'Stntes is his object - To cherk any such
intention, i t is necessary to lcare in his neighbourliood a force sufficirbni for this purpo.;r. The C n n g r ~ s s & E~vrrare (it is judged)
adequatt. t o t1:is sen-ice, 3-ou u-ill bc plcascd thorefon1 with those two
Ships to ~*c*nlairr
in this ticigl~l)o~~rllootl.
until1 it is nsccrtainrd n-hetllcr
his meaillrc,s arcbl~ostiic,0 1 Friendl- ton-:~r.tlstlie 'C-'Stntrs; I n t h ~
event o f 1Ir:stilit- it is lclft entirely to ,your tliscarction, as to t h r
disposition of the hliilis ~irltltr?-our commnntl c4; your Op~riitions
generally, if after rt~rnni~iiilr
some time on this station, you slloultl
concirvc~that he is amicably disposed & tlicrc no longcr exists n
necessity for a Ship herc, you will proccctl aloft to join t h r Squadron
there either a t Tripoli or 31alta You will be pleased to Keep tlic Serrctar.3- of the S a v y informed
by all oppertlinitys, of the Measures you mean to pursue, u i t h your
opinion on thc affairs of 5lonocco R T C [LC. .JRP, L e t t e r i R Order.;. 1804-1805 1
Extract from jonrnal of U. S. Brig Argus. Master Commandant Isaac Hull, U. S.
Navy, commending, Tuesday, 14 August 1804

[Standing off and on Tripoli]
This day Commmceq with fresh breezes and Clear Wr a t jj past
Meridian the Commodore Made Sig! K? 1260 wore nnrl stood off the
land backed the main topsail a t 1 PM the Cornmod' made Sig! PI;"
905 Cap! Hull went 011 hoard of hirn a t ji pacit 1 \\-ore & stood for ttic
John Adants received Boatsu-ains Storcs from her a t j4 past 6 CommodQnade Sig! ?;? 1134 and a few Minutes ufter 1130 Taclicd in
C'ompY with the Squadron ,4t 6 the Commotl' mad(. Sig! K o69 to
the Gunboats s t 10 the Commod' mndc Sight Sig' 5" 10 to t11c
Gunboats at 11 Camc too in 40 f?"" l17ater At 9 A l l lroistrd in tlie
launch and barge E ~ n p dOccasv
[SDA p!totostat !
Extract from journal of Kidshipman Charles Morris, Jr., U. S. Navy, on board
O. S. B r ~ gArzus. Master Commandant Isaac Hull, U. S. Navy, commanding,
Tuesday, 14 Avgust 1804

P. M Pleasant. The Commotlo1.r made a general signal K? 1260
Wore
1. The Commodore made signal ?;? '395. General. Capt Hull went
on board

TT'ARS WITH BARBARY POT;CTERS

415

5 3 T h e Com"ade
signal 1134 and a few minutes after 1139.
Tacked
6 T h e Conmodore made signal Xu 69 to the Gun Boats. and at
10. made night Signal Xq 10.
Csmc to in 40 fit tlionls 1%-t-ater
A. Xi. 9. IIoistetl iil tllc Eoats
Xoo11 rough scsl
[Mrs. C. F:. Fox oriqilral. XI)-% photostfit ]
Extract from journal of U. S. Fr~gateCongress. Captain John Rodgers, U. S. navy,
commanding, Tuesday, 14 August 1804

[Gibraltar Btlj-] At 3 rccfid 173 Gn11,n casl;? water. 3 1 l r n attempted
T o swirn from t!~c ship onc of thein 11-a= C:iugllt. the other t15-o
]nude their vscape
rr-ss.\.]
Extract from journal kept on bonrd tlle U. 6. Frigate Ccn~/itu:ron,by Captain Edward
Preble, U. E. Navy, Tuesday, 14 August 1804

off and on 4 or 5 11li1rsfrom T r i p l y , a t
\\-111d E i) S. stan(li11~
i ~ ; i t l ~ cstjlladl.on \\-(.~*t. in closc ol.ticr ~.:lcclvto 1)usIi in after
dm.1; thc John d(latils ninrlour-e!.c~J scvernl c!eceptions p: Signal, for
n-c.iglii~~g
r ~ r ~ stnndirir
tl
~ I 11-it!)
I
tbc Squadron but as soon as dzrk she
\\-as ortl(,~.c~l
to i~alrtlsail\ & rc.ri:Lti~ia t anclic>r.C:lp ! Chuunc.c-, with
st~t3r:il o f l ~ i s0fiict~l.sI& S'3 Stbrtrnc.n 6: ?rInrines ciirno on board as
Y o l u ~ ~ t c e rfor
s the attt1c.1;. ;it 9 I' 11 111c \iiricl fl.eshened from
E b 1; ant1 il~c~rc~:~sctl
tllc st8:1 so 1:111(*11:IS t~ 111:tli~' :~n: ~ t f e r ~ iilnprudent.
pt
I acc.orilin::ly stoati off s11ol.c and rulcllor-cd il; :i; fati:' n':ltcr, Cap;
Clinnnc.e;v it-it11 hi5 Oif;,c.crs $ mcll rrt urncJ tn t I:() JoAn i l d n s n s tn-o
of our (iun Boat.; c:lrriccl away t h 4 r lat t ccr~T:u-ti<> suppiit'd tlienl
with IICTV OIICS, JYC 11ad Sti.t311g GY(Y*.<(>S,
till 11iglit and urltil Xoon. L n t d Obsd 33" 2' X. 1;

I' 1 1

[I,('.

EPl', 1.01. 12,

, 1 1 1 1 1 ~ -1 1 i ~ t , \ iIS34

]

Extract from lo^; book kept by Sai!ing Master Nathaniel Earadex, U. S, Navy, on
board U. S. Frigate Conslrfulion,Tuesdsy, 14 August 1804

?rlotlcrato 1,rct~zc.sf1.ori1 E 1) S - St::!~dil~: 03S' on Tripoly - Fqcadron in cbonipnny. -It 1 1'. 11.tlli. Jolt;/ ,4dc1ns cnn::. to 4 or. 5 rl~llcsto
the Xorth of tllcl Town. Ton-artis PI cnirlg t11t. Cnptains of the
Squadroll 15-tiitcc? on ihc' Co:rtnioclorc -- ,'it Sunsot a11 t l i ~Squntiro11
rc'ntl~to 1)us11 in
was tisscnlblctl t!ll.c%i.or- 4 r::il~s fro111 tlie II:!~.I)~IIs
after diirli - 11)tliv c :oc,c' of fl!c IC~-cililiztllr J ~ ) k n
,Idn:i.s rnnrlcclix Llrccl
l ) 12. ~iirillri:. Zi s t : ~ ~ ~ t l iii!i
r ~with
g
the
several tl~crpt!o:is (I" S ~ g ~ l nfor
Squatiron. Aft (1r tln~.li\\-c rc.c.t~i\-etlon 1)~:1r(itllc ( 'onst ittition Cap!
Chaunccy & 50 Srnnicn from t l ~ cuToi~nAdnlns -- Bj- this t i ~ n ei t \$-as
8 P. 31. \I-hen we Iiatl stronr 1)reczes fl.0111 E I) S . \Tc nnslr-ered the
Signal of (!istress from Gun boat X " 6 n-hich hnd carried nwn;v her
lattt>cli y;tl.d - Fro111 7 till 9 1'. 11. (>~-CI.J~ f f o r t\\-as IISPJto collect
the Squut[ron in ortltlr to stand in ck nttock tilt>hnttc.ries; but t h r n-i11d
c.ontinuicg to inc~*cnsr,
i t n-ns utterly impossi1)lc At 9 P. 11. another Gun bont carriccl an-tiy her lateen ynr.t!. We
\Tore off shore and came to in 37 fath? hard bottom. T-eered to 110
fathp before the ship brought u p - The two Bombards Ti-ere very

4 16 NAVAL OPERATIOXS. APRIL-SEPTEMBER
6. 180.4
much exposed by being nearly athwart our hawse. All the Squadron
(P7ixenexcepted) anchored. The Siren parted from her anchor At 11 P. 11.after we came to, Cap! Chauncey with his men & two boats
assisted by our large cutter rejoined the John Adams - The Wind
continued strong during the night veering between E b S Q S E b E.
with a rough sharp sea. At day light the Squadron all in sight and
(except the T7ixenunder way in shore) a t Anchor. Tripoly S b W % W.
4 or 5 hliles - On our leaving Messina we had 4 spare lateen yards
for the Gun boats - Two lateen yards lost in action, and two carried
away last night expend the whole - -4s they are '74 feet long, we
h a r e no spar that d l make one. The East Wind continued strong all
the forenoon ~ l t ah rough sea which has prevented any communication in the Squadron by boats - These 24 hours t l ~ efollowing signals
were macle Viz!
At 12;: Koon. for Scluadron to wear & haul on a wind to the N N E.
B t 123; Xoon. ,411 Captains to repair on board the Commodore.
At 3 P. hf. Squadron to wear 6: haul on a mind, inshore.
,4t 5%Squadron to tack to N N E.
At 6 P. hI. Vixen & Scourge to come within hail
At 6% P. hl. Squadron (John Adams Bi Scourge excepted) to clear
for Action
At 9 P. Xi. the night Signal. Prepare to anchor.
Xoon strong breezes from E b S Surgeons report 6 sick & 3 convalescent,
Latitude Observed 33'2' North
[LC. EPP, Log Constitution, 1803-1804.1
Extract from journal kept by Purser John Darby, E. S. Navy, on board U. S. S.
John Adorns, Master Commandant Isaac Chauncey, U. S. Nary, commanding,
Tuesday, 14 August 1804

Commenced With fresh breezes We are laying a t Anchor off thc
Town engaged in clearing out our hole. that we may make room on
our gun deck. to work what guns wc can, and discharging part of our
cargo. in distributing it on 1)oar.d of the different Vessels of tlic squadron. We took gun boats X ?8. & 6 in tow.
[XDA original.

Miss Camilla S. Mc('onncll.1

Extract from journal of Midshipman F. Cornelius dekrafft, U. S. Navy, in U. S.
Brig Siren of 18 guns, Master Commandant Charles Stewart, U. S. Navy,
commanding, Tuesday, 14 August 1804

(Following thc Commodores motiocs)
Light breezes & pleasant, all the squadron lying too; the Adurns
a t anchor. K past 51er: a signal from the Comm: for all Commanders
to repair on board his ship. At 11 Cap1 Stewart went on board the
past 5 a sipla1 to stand
Comm. At 3 wore to the E N E pr signal. a t :?'
off the land. At 6 Tripoli bore S by W 8 miles, a signal from tlle
Comm: to prepare for battle. $4 past 6 C a p G t e w n r t return'tl,
back'd the main top sail, hoisted out the barge & fill'd away. At 8
tack'd & stood in for the land, srt top gall! sails. % past 8 back'd
the AI"opsai1, took in top gall' sails. At K past 9 came too with thc
stream in 35 fathoms pr signal.
Midnight fresh gales & clear parted the stream Cable, lost the
Anchor with 80 fathoms. X past Mid: let go the larboard bower. -

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

417

Meridian fresh gales & clear supplied gun boat N? 5 with provisions
$water. [NDA.]
To William Higgins, U. S. Navy Agent, Malta, from Captain Edward Preble, U. 6.
navy
Constitition - AUGUST15th 1804

DEAR
SIR I have received your favor of the 1@ Ins! and am gratified, that my recommendation succeeded in obtaining your appointr
ment - All my nominations to the Government have met with the
supersame success - You will have Observed that Commr"arron
seedes me in the Command in the Mediterranean - I hope to finish
the War with Tripoly first, and then the sooner he arrives the better
as I am anxious to return home - My conduct has received the
Approbation of my country, and the President has transmitted me his
thanks through the Secretary of the N a r y The 3c Ins! I made a general Attack on Tripoly - Our six Gun
1)oats opposed to their twenty one, and this ship with the Brigs 6
Schooners to thcir Batteries - The Action lasted two hours: That
with the gun boats urns in the Harbour of Tripolp and within pistol
shot of their Batteries - The Enemy were handsomely beaten Many
shells \\-ere tllrou-n into the town, and we drove them several times from
their Batteries with this ship - A steeple of one of their Mosques
was shot away and much damage done in Town - Our Gun boats
hoarded and brought out three of their largest new Gun boats, each
mounting a brass cannon 11;: feet long carrying a ball of 26 Ib, and
two brass howitzers - they had on board 96 Men, 47 of which were
liilled nnd 41) made prisoners, 26 of which were badly wounded Orie of their boats was sunk in the Action, & many of them lost
nearly all their men, and were much Shattered We had another action with the Batteries the 7th in which the
Enemy has suffered considerably - I h a r e to regret the loss of some
hrare men - We h a r e lost killed - Two Lieutenants
1 Midshipman
1 Quarter Gunner
1 Quarter Master
1 Boatsu-ains Mate
1 Searjeant of Marines
6 Seamen -

Total Iiillec!- - _ - - - - - __._ - - 13 Wounded 1 Lieutenant with 11 Saber 6: Pike Wounds
15 Seamcrl & Marines -

-

16 Total Wounded The Officers killed are
Lr 54 DECATUR
Lt CALDWELL
hlr DOI~SEY
Rlidshipman Lieutenant Tripp[e] Rounded V e y badly.

418 hTAT7ALOPERATIONS. APRIGSEPTEMBER

6. 1804

We have been waiting several days for favorable Weather for
another attack - Our Water is nearly exhausted I conjure you
to charter two or three Vessels for fear of a miscarriage of one, and
load them with water immecliately, & send me 300 puncheons a t
least, as, soon as possible - If one is not here in 8 days we shall be
ruined, as I hare only 14 days water for the Squadron - Let no
price stop you from cllartcring - Send us some fresh stock, Vegetables, Apples, Melons &-F - I am loolring out for a vessel from you
which I espcct eT-erF monlent to h e a ~ cin sight - ,4s I wrote you bv
the Neapolitan Store Ship to send us Watc~rsome time since - If
you cannot hire you must borrou* or purchase casks With Esteem Tours in haste
(Signed) EDX-ARD
PREBLE
P. S. Hire as many boats C ! rnen as can work to load the Vesscls
& for God's Sake disputcli a T'esscl in 24 hours, & let the rest follow
Send me letters if you haye aIly for mc - a case of good cycler will
be acceptable - Our Alain Slast is shot nearly through by n 24 lb
shot. One of our guns on the Quarter deck disabled - Top Gall1
Royal ynrd shot away & our rigging considerably cut - They are
bad Gunners, or they must have cut us up - We engaged within
3 cables length of the Batteries [LC. EPP, I,B, April-Yov. 1804.1
Extract from journal of Midshipman Charles Morris, Jr., U. S. Navy, on board
U. S. Brig Argus, Master Commandant Isaac Hull, U. S. Navy, commanding,
Wednesday, 15 Augast 1804

Fresh breezes. 1 2 3 the Commodore madr signal X Q 1196 \t-ith
prapara tory penclan t.
1. he made signal 1196 - Sent down Royal and Top Gallf Yards
7 A 11. sent up Top Gall! Pards by signal from Commodore
Il'oon a t Anchor the Town of Tripoli S J( IT7. 5 1111~sdistant
[Mrs. C. E. Fo\ o r i g i ~ ~ a l .3-DA photostat.]

Extract from journal of U. S. Frigate Congress Captain John Rodgers, U. S. Navy,
commanding, Wednesday, 15 August 1804

[Gibraltar Bay] At Meridian light breezes fro111 thr Eastu-" IIOT-P
up & made sail the Essex in comp?
[I-$:\A ]
Extract from journal kept on board the U. S. Fngate Comtitufron, by Captain Edward
Preble, U. S. Navy, Wednesday, 15 August 1804

Strong Breezes from E S E , At Anchor 6 miles to the Xorth of
Tripoly ordered the Vixen to cast off her Gun Boats & Look out to
the Eastward & the Jn? Adarns to take her Boats in tow a t 4 PM
down Royal & Top Gall$ Yards, fresh Breezes through the night. a t
10 AM wind E b ,h & a rough sea.
Latg Obsd 33' 2' N.
[LC. EPP, Vol. 12, JuncAugust 1804.1

W A R S WITH BARBARY POWERS

419

Extract from log book kept by Sailing Master Nathaniel Haraden, U. S. Navy,
on board U. S. Frigate Constitution, Wednesday, 15 August 1804

Strong breezes from E S E.
At Single Anchor 5 or 6 miles N b E 36 E from Tripoly. Squadron
in company The t1~-ogun boats towed by the Vixen were this afternoon rode by
the John Adams.
Tllc Vixen was ordcrcd pr Signal to look out in shore - At 4 P. h4.
donn roynl and top gall; Yards Towards evenin the weather became
more moderate Cap? Cliauncey waited on the ommodore.
Strong breezes from E I S during thc Kight.
Morning ,Ifoderate.
From 6 till 10 A. I f . employed supplying the Squadron as follows Yiz - Thc Syren ~ v i t h9 Gang cask of water =576 G d o n s . The two
1)ombards with 256 Gail? each Scourge with 100 Galls rum, 182 lb
Suet, 54 Gall? of Alolasses, 30 GallOVinegar,131 Ib cheese & 182 lb
of Butter - The Gun boats No" 16 with a lateen Yard Each Thesc art1 tlic two 11oats that carried away tllcir yards on Tuesday
Sight S t 8 9.h1. made Signal "Up top gall! Yards.
At 9: The ,Jolln Adams Signal for a boat - also the Scourge Signal
for a purser At 10 A. ?\I. the \T-inclbegan to freshen from E b N 6- by noon we
had strong breezes Xoon the I7isen came within hail Surgeons report 7 sick fi- 2 convalescent.
Lntitudc Observed rtt anchor 33" 2' North

8

1803-1804 ]
[LC. CPP, Log Co7~stit1ittn?i,

Extract from lournal kept by Purser John Darby, U. S. Navy, on board U. 6. S.
John Adorns. Yaster Commandant Isaac Chnuncey, U. S. Navy, commanding,
Wednesday, 15 August 1804

K c are laying a t Anchor ctiscltarging Provisions. nothing particular
occuring quite unccrtnin \\-hat the Commodore intends to do. Some
think that he will malic n prace others that he nil1 not. but attack
the t o m rtgnin the first oppcrtunity or in other words the first Wind
that suits - O i ~ rsquadron l ~ n snot yet arrived arid har[e] not
llcard any thing of them.
[ S D A original.

hliss Camilla S. McConncll ]

Extract from journal of Midshipman F. Cornelius deKrafft, U. S. Navy, in U. S.
Brig Siren of 18 guns, Master Commandant Charles Stewart, U. S. Navy,
commanding, Wednesdrty, 15 August 1804

Lying a t Anchor [Tripoli].
Fresh breezcs cE plcnst
past 1 sent don-n top gall' yards pr
signal At 2 sea & wind increasing, 11-ore an-ay rnore cable. 3 past
3 tlie cutter I{-ent to tirag for tlle stream cable, At 5 return'd mthout
success. At 7 Tripoli bore South 3 leagues. At 10 freshen'd Hawse.
Midnight fresh gales & p1cas-t
4 sent tlie boats to drag for the
stream anchor. At 8 return'd witllout success, sent up top gall!
yards pr signal. At 9 sent on board the Comm: for water. Meridian light winds 1 pleas'. sent provisions on board gun
boat Nq 5 .
Latt: Obs: 33" 3' N.

+

[NDA.]

420 NAVAL OPERATI0,W. APRIL-SEPTEMBER 6. 180L
To Secretary of the Navy from &faster Commandant Charles Stewart, U. S. Navy

Siren off TRIPOLI
16Q August, 1804
SIR I have been honor'd with yours of 2gt? May, and the accompanying Master Commandant's Commission Please return my t,hanks to the President of the United States; for
the manner it has pleased him to evince a continuation of his confidence
[NDA. MC LB, 1804,5.]
Extract from journal of Midshipman Charles Morris, Jr., U. S. Navy, on board
U. S. Brig Argus, Master Commandant Isaac Hull, U. S. Navy, commanding,
Thursday, 16 August 1804

Off Tripoli
P. h4. Fresh breezes.
2. Capt Hull went on board the Commodore
5 The Cap? Returned
5 A M. sent the launch to the Jn? Adams for Stores
[Mrs. C. E. Fox original.

S D A photostat.]

Extract from journal of U. 6. Brig

Argus, Master Commandant Isaac Hull, U. S.
Navy, commanding, Thursday, 16 August 1804

[Standing off and on Tripoli.]
These 24 hours Commence with fresh breezes from the Eastward
at 8 past 2 P, hl, hoisted out the barge Cap{ Hull went on board the
Commodore a t 5 he returned on board hoisted in the Barge Moderate and Clear through the night A l l at 5 hoisted out the
barge and launch sent the Launch on board the John Adams for
Stores
[XDA photostat.]
Extract from journal kept on board the U. S. Frigate Conttitufion, by Captain Edward
Preble, U. S. Navy, Thursday, 16 August 1804

fresh Breezes from E b N at anchor N b E 4 E from Tripoly
all the Squadron at Anchor except the Vixen, on the Lookout to the
Eastward - at 83 P 31 the Enterpm'ze saild for hialta under
command of Lc Lawrence, nith letters for M r Higgins directing him
to send transports with \Triter 8: Vegetables, the Scurvy has made its
appearance among the men on board of some of the Vcssels of the
Squadron, and our fresh Water is getting short. Surgeons report.
6 sick 4 Convalescent [LC. EPP, Vol. 12, June-August 1803.1
Extract from log book kept by Sailing Master Nathaniel Earaden, U. S. Navy,
on board U. 6. Frigate Conslilufion. Thursday. 16 August 1804

Fresh breezes from E b N.
At Single Anchor 5 or 6 hliles N b E K E, from Tripoly The Squadron all a t anchor except the Vixen which looks out to the Westward Supplied the Syren this afternoon ~ i t 9h Gang Caslrs of water=576
Gallons At 2 P. M. made the Vixen signal to come within hail, & supplied
her with five Sweeps R- a number of Musket cartridges At 8%P. M. the Enter m'ze parted company, being ordered to hlalta
under the command of ieutt Lawrence - Cap! Dccatur remains in
the Squadron with his Gun boat.

E

WARS WITH BARBARY POWEBS

421

From Noon till 7 P. M. fresh breezes from E b N. & from 7 P. M.
till Midnight from E S E - Prom 12 Midnight till 10 A. M. moderate
breezes from S E b E with a small swell from E N E.
Supplied the Syren this forenoon with 6 Gang Casks of Water=
384 From 10 A. M. till noon moderate breezes from E b N.
Bombard N? 2 was this day employed in Exercising her Oars & Sails
The 160 shells which were stowed between decks were t h s forenoon
stowed in the Hold These four days past we have had strong breezes which have prevented the Squadron from corning to action The Captains of the
Squadron this forenoon waited on the Commodore.
Noon Moderate breezes from E b N.
Surgeons report 6 sick & four convalescent [LC.

EPP, Log Constitution, 1803-1804.1

Extract from journal of William Eaton, U. S. Navy Agent for the Barbary Regencies,
16 August 1804

August 16. The President & Constellation got under way for
Tripoli - Captains Rodgers St Barron with the Congress and Essex
ordered to the Morocco coast to watch the motions of the emperor
of Morocco [H. E. Hr~ritir~gton
L&AG, E A 206.1
Extract from journal kept by Purser John Darby, U. S. Navy, on board U. S. S.
John Adarns. Master Commandant Isaac Chauncey, U. S. Navy, commanding,
Thursday, 16 August 1804

'STc are laying a t Anchor employed striking out Provisions and sending them on board the different Vessels. clear and pleasent Breezes.
the climate is excessively hot. when there is little or no wind and dews
are very heavy a t night. - and i t is astonishing to me the squadron
are not more onhealthy than they are as I am told there are but a
few sick - Our ship is very healthy - at j2/ past 12 a signal was made
from the Commodore to prepare to weigh a t s/, past 12. all the
squadron got underway except the John Adams S: Scourge. a t 5 a
signal for Battle the Constitutions Launch came along side for all
our Volunteers, Capt Cham~ceywent on board the Constitution a t
midnight light air from the Eastward [KDA original.

Miss Camilla S. PrlcConnell.]

Extract from journal of Midshipman F. Cornelius deKrafft, U. S. Navy, in U. S.
Brig Siren, of 18 guns, Master Commandant Charles Stewart, U. S. Navy,
commanding, Thursday, 16 August 1804

(Lying a t Anchor off Tripoli)
Fresh breezes St pleasant. At 2 supplied with provisions gun boat
N Q4 - At 3 hoisted in the bar e rece a supply of water from the
Comm: Cap! Chancey of the ohn A h m s came on board. At 7
Captt Chancy went on board his ship
Midnight light airs & pleas! Meridian gentle brcrzes & a smooth sea, sent on board gun boat
N ? 4 4 supply of Provisions - recq from the Commodore water & a
quantit'y of arms. Latt: Obs: 33" 5' N.

f

[NDA.]

422 NAVAL OPERATIONS, APRIL-SEPTEMBER 6, 1804
To Samuel Brown, Navy Agent and Superintendent of Navy Yard, Boston, Mass.
from Secretary of the Navy

NAV.DEP. 17th Aug: 1804
I have received your letter of the 8th instant. - Although the
terms demanded of you for building a Gun-boat are not quite so
reasonable as we could wish yet they are not so high as the terms asked
a t either Charleston, Baltimore, Philadelphia or New York. - You
will therefore, if you should not be able to gct the wo1.k done on better
terms, close with the offer m[a]de to you of building at 30$ P' ton. [KDA. Off. Comg. Gu~hoats,1803-1808.1
To Secretary of the Navy from Captain John Borigers, U. S. Navy

Duplicate forwarded X Q .

U. STATESFRIGATE
Congress

Tangier Bay Augt 17. 1804
SIR I n consequence of the accounts, rec'd from Mf Simpson our
Consul, Commodore Barron was Irlduced to send tile Congress dz
Essex on this coast for Purposes such as you wdl discover in his
orders to me which I enclose you-I saild from Gibraltar with the two
above mention'd Ships on the 1.5 Ins! and arrived here yesterday nltlio
too late to have communication with the Shorc, until this morning,
when A i r Simpson came on Board - 31: Sinlpson is not without
suspicions that the Intentions of the Emperor arc unfriendly towards
the U. States, in consequence of the late movements of his Cruizers,
after being denied a passport for one of his Ships of War to proceed
to Tripoli; and the Lnngunge of his Governor a t Tangier, a Statement
of which Commo. Barron has forwarded you; However I must confess
that, to me, the Emperors Conduct tloes not bear such a construction. - His Cruizers are in motion, as is the case every Summer, but
neither (that I can learn) their procedings or his Language Indicates
hostility towards our Commerce; altho 1 an1 now bolu~dto Salle, to
inform myself of the movements of the three Frigates, supposed to
be at that place, whether any danger to our Commerce is to be apprehended from them, and to protect it i11 cttse of any-Eliile
the
Congress is on this Service, I shall leave the Essex a t the Entrance of
the Straights to watch the movements of Two Gallys now in Tangier
Bay & to protect our Trade in case of necessity - A small force is I
conceive always necessary to secure a I'rotection to our Commerce
on this Coast. - I therefore shall leave the Essex for that purpose,
and on my return procced Immediately to Tripoli, provided thcir is
nothing more than present appearances indicate to detain me; I shall loose no time in getting to Snlle, as I consider the sel.vices
of so large a Ship as the Cyongress (in the Intended opperations against
Tripoli) of Im ortance, neither would Conlmcdore Barron (I am
satisfied) have eft so considerable a part of his Force as Two Ships,
had i t not been for the Earnest request of Mr Simpson - A desire
to take an advantage of the present fair Wind, prevents my writing
you more fully, however as Cap1 Barrons Station will afford him
opportunities of Communicating; I have desired him to do so by every
op ortunity. Enclosed I forward you Copy of my orders to Cap' &James]Barron

P

[LC. JRP, Letters & Orders, Book A, 1804-1805.1

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

423

Circular letter to certain U. 6. Consuls

U. STATESF. Congress

(Circular) B

Tangier Bay Augll7.1804
SIR 111 consequence of the late movemerits of the Emperor of
Morrocco's Cruizers, the United States Frigates Congress & Essex
are cruizing on the Moorish Coast; However 1 now begin to concieve
that our suspicions are without that foundation which was k t concieved - I shall be in Gibraltar in a few Days & would be glad to be
inform'd by you, whether my of the American Vessels lately arrived
in your Port, have been Boarded by hloorish Cruizers and what has
been their conduct in order that I may h o w how to direct the proceedings of the UIStates Ships now on this cotzst.
To William Kirkpatrick Consul at A4hga
" W~iUiarnIrwin "
at
" Joseph Yznardi " at [Cadiz]
[A note by Christopher Columbus Baldwin, first Librarian of the American
Antiquarian Society reads, "This and the following were written by Corn. Samuel
Barron, and has never been published."]
[Am. Antiquarian Soc. K D A photostat.]
To James Simpson, U. S. Consul, Tangier, Morocco, from Captain John Rodgers,
U. 6. Navy

U. STATESFRIGATE
Congress
Tangier Bay Augr lYtb 1804
SIR,Enclosed you will recei~eCommodore Barrons Letter in answer
to Several Letters on the subject of (his lniperial blajestys) the
Emperor of ,Ilorocco's Ship of War, carrying a Cargo of Wheat to
Tripoli, which prereuts the necessity of my saying any thing on the
subject - The Two Frigates you now see in this Bay are the Congress
& Esset, which arc ready for service - I wish to see you and will
send a Boat on Shore for that purpose [Am. Antiquarian Soc.

KDA photostat.]

To Captain John Xodgers, U. S. Navy, commanding U. S. Frigate Congress. from
James Simpson, U. 8. Consul, Tangier, Morocco

TANGIER
Augf 17. 1804
DEARSIR 5 x 7 Johnston has delivered me three Letters, which
shall be carefully forwarded. In my communications to Commo. Barron you will have seen I
told him a certain quantity of Copper & salt Petre to be shipt a t
Mogadore on the Emperors ship 12fai9nona,urns destined for Algiers &
purchased for account of that rcgeIlc1. - Since I saw you I have
rec'd a Letter from my Agent at Mopdore dated 6tQInst, in which is
the following Paragraph correcting his former advices. "It was from misinformation that I wrote you, that the Emperors Ship
here was to load the Copper & Salt Petre for the Algerines, as she came here
to load them for his Majestys account, and is to go when the Rind will
permit t o Salle.
The Algerine is pet here, waiting for a Vessel of his Nation, t o load his,
who is to b ~ f n gCash t o pay for it, as I understand he is short of that necessary article.

-

424 NAVAL OPERATIONS, APRIL-SEPTEMBER 6 , 1804
By this it appears there was two parcels of the mentioned articles,
provided a t Mogadore - The one by the Algerine Messenger & the
other by order of the Emperor, to be taken on his Ship; I have not a
doubt the latter had the same destination as the Wheat, but I expect
it will be equally retarded, so that the intended assistance will have
been perfectly defeated. What farther I may be able to l e m on the subject shall be imparted
to you - Whilst we must regret that there should be such apparent
grounds for suspecting that Muley Soliman had intended to give aid
to our Enemy; it is satisfactory to h o w he has been made sensible,
he could not carry it into effect, & 1 trust that this 1vi.U be an additional stimula with him, to avoid cautiously giving cause for a rupture
with the U'States; and it is equally our Duty not to provoke him to it.
The English Brig left Cadiz last night, the Cap$ writes his Consul,
that a Letter from Paris states, that Russia, Denmark 6. Sweeden
had entered into an offensive $ Defensive alliance with England. [Am. Antiquarian Soc. XDA photostat.]
To Captain John Bodgers, U. S. Navy, commanding U. S. Frigate Congress, from
James Simpson, U. S. Consul, Tangier, Morocco

TANGIERAugust 17. 1804

DEARSIR, m e n you made the Signal Yesterday, a Boat could not

be got to send to you - now the Cap1 of one of the Galleys has done
me the favour to allow- his to go. I know no reason why you should not anchor and communicate
with the Shore as before. [Am. Antiquarian Soc. XDA photostat.]
To Captain James Barron, U. 8. Navy, commanding U. S. Frigate Euu, from
Captain John Bodgers, U. 6. Navy

U. STATESFRIGATE
Congress
Tangier Ba.y Aug: 17. 1804
SIR, In consequence of the orders of Commodore Barron joined with
the opinion of Mr Sunpson our Consul, I have thought it advisable &
Intend proceding to Salle, to make myself acquainted with the
movements of three Moorish Ships of E a r , as also to, Endeavour to
inform myself whether their Intentions art: hostile towards the
U'States - You will remain in the Neighbourhood of Tangiers, to
Watch the movements of the two Gall 's now in that Bay, and to
protect our Commerce in case of Host' ity on the part of Morocco,
until I join you again.

9

[Am. Antiquarian Soc.

XDA photostat.]

To Captain Edward Preble, U. 8. Navy, from William Higgins, U. 6. Bavy Agent.
Malta

Duplicate
MALTAthe 1 7 t h August 1804
DEARSIR YOUhave enclosed the Co y of my last respects under
the 124 August and likewise a Second b$ of lading for Sundry Water
and other Stores sent you by the English Pollacca called the Conception Capt? Antonio Gruna which I hope will have reached you ere
now -

-

-

-

WARS WITH BARBARY POE7ERS

-

425

I wrote you on the llto Inst4 by a Speronara dispatched to inform
you that Count Gdigni had loaded a Speronara with Ammunition
for the Basha of Tripoly, and that ou might by this timely intelligence find mems to cut her off - %hother however he got scent of
m having taken this measure, or whether he has, as too hazardous,
rerl'nquished the Expedition, I dont know, but he has landed the
powder, tho' 1 am told the Muskets &c' are still on board; Perhaps
his intention is to blind us and in a week or two hence to expedite it,
if you therefore can spare a Vessel you would still do urell, I think to
be upon the look out; but I must request you will not advance a
sixper~ccto the Patron of the Speronara I dispatched to you, he has
already got from me One hundred Dollars on advance, and has not
behaved in the way he ought to have done, for instead of going direct
to you as I expected, he carried his boat into one of the lower Ports of
the Island, where he loitered away a couple of days, and came over to
V d e t t e upon some business of his own No appezrrtnce of the Fregates, nor have I any news to impart to
you; I send you the American Papers brought by the Commodore
B a ~ which
y
were inadvertentely left out of the Packet of the English
Ones sent you, they will however, I conclude, contain no news, that
you have not already learnt from the John Adams I wait anxiously to hear from you, the Weather latterly has been
fat-orable, and I trust Monsr the Bashaw will by this time have got a
Quarturn w ~ c iof
t shot 8: shell I forward you some letters from Tunis and also others addressed to
the Prisoners at Tripoly you may have an opportunity of putting
them on shore, there is no sort of Probability that I shall have any
other means of expediting them.
[LC. EPP, Vol. 12, June-August 1804.1
Extract from journal of U. S. Brig Argus. Master Commandant Isaac Hull,U.S. Navy,
commanding, Friday, 17 August 1804

This day Commences with moderate Breezes and Clear Weather a t

+ past meridian Cnpt Hull went on board the John Adams a t 1 P M
the Cornmod' made Sigl KQ 879 a t + past Sig! N-1206 a t 2 Sig! N?

1205 a t 4 past 3 pot under way at f, past 4 Cap: Hull returned on board
at 5 the Cominod' mndc Sip1 NQ 179 R-ith the preparative flag a t 3
past 8 the Cornmod+made Sig! Ns 1 a t 9 made Sig! to the Gunboats
1 Rocket & 3 lanterns being near in Shore the Batteries fired Several
Shot at us at f past 12 the Commod"nnde
Sig! N? 10 at 1 Abl came
to with the Squadron * * * Tripoli bearing S IT Dist 4 miles
At meridian thc Commodore made Sig! KQ 995 Capt Hull went on
board of him -

+

[WDA photostat.]
Extract from journal of Midshipman Charles lorria, Jr., U. S, Navy, on board
U. 6. Brig Argw, l a s t e r Commandant Isaac Bull, U. S. Navy, commanding,
f i d a y , 17 August 1804

P. M. Moderate breezes and pleasant 1 Tho Commodore made Signal NQ879.
1 NQ1206 at 2 NQ 1205.

t

3 got under way.

426 NAVAL OPERATIONS, APRIL-SEPTEMBER 6 , 1804
5 The Commodore made signal NQ179 with preparatory pendent
fil 89 N9 1. night signal 9 to the Gun boats 1 rocket and tliree lights
near in to the shore the Batteries fired several shot a t us
123 the Com~nodoremade signal IS? 110
1 Came to in Company with the squadron in 25 fathoms water
Tripoli S 3 IT. 4 miles. dlstant
Koon Commodore rntlde signal IUQ 995. Capt I-Iull went on Lonrd [Mrs. C. E. Fox original S D A p!~otostat.]
Extract from journal of U. S . Frigate Congress. Captain John Rodgers, U. S. Navy,
comman8ing, Friday, 17 August 1804

[Standing off & on in the Eay of Tangier] 1' hI commences light
plcusant
i
weat!ler A t past 5 beating into tile buy Of Tangier
breezes &
hoisted a n american Jack s t The fore & fired a gun ,4t Sunset shortened S t b i l h- cleard ship for action
Light airs & vuriablc. tnckd ship as occasion Itequired during the
night a t 4 tnckd ship Sr stood in for tangier buy. a t 7 a boat came
along Side, a t past 8 sent the gig on shore a t past 9 the gig
returned with tlie Consul A i : Sinipson
hierediau. the town cf Tangicr bore 'VT S IT. Cape spartelT7' B 3 N.

+

+

[VSSA.]
Extract from jonrnal kept on board the U. S. Frigate Constitulion, by Captain Edward
Preble, U. S. Navy, Friday, 17 August 1804

Moderate Breezcs f r a n E K E c$ plcinsant 11-(>-cather
- At Ancllor
5 miles to the IK 'u 17- of Tripoly - At 3 1' 11 out all Boats and urrued
tllem for an attack. a t 5 1' -\I all the Squadron cst-cpting the John
d d a m s and Scourge \\-ere unrlcr. w q starltli~igfor Tripoly, b_v this titnc
the wind had Veered to 3 IL b b aand thc current setting strong to t 1 1 ~
West~vmd. in the Evening Cup! C!launct>x wit11 several Ofiicers &
50 Seamen frorn the Jot~nAda7,l.s came on board Yoluiltecrs for the
intended attack a t 7 Y AI we \<-ere4 milt3s from the To~vn;Tacking
and mancevering the squadron waiting for the Wind to conic f r o ~ nt h ~
E S E from 8 to 9 PA1 we stood in for tlle Batteries with a light
Breeze from E b K. a t 9%ainlost Calm, the Town Leering S 1) W. the
Batteries fired 11 shot a t us which fell short, tile current setting to the
S W pressing us down on the \Testern Datterirs & the Wind very light
I thought prudent to haul off. nt 11 I' ,\I Kore ship and stood in
again for the Town in hopes the wind might increase, t l ~ cE n c ~ n yfircd
14 shot a t us from their Catterics n-ltich fell short, it being by this
time past midnight and almost calm liauld off u11d a t 1 &lade the signal
to anchor & cgme to in 25 fatliq Tripoly S b I\.' 3 Jliles dis!
[LC. EPP, 5'01. 12, Jur~e-August1804.1

Extract from log book kept by Sailing Master Nathaniel Haraden, U. S. Navy, on
board U. S. Frigate Conslilution, Friday, 17 August 1804

Moderate breezes from E b N, with pleasant weather.
At Single anchor 5 or G Miles from Tripoly. Squadron in company.
At 3 P. M. out all boats, and armed them. They are to accompany
the Gun boats & Bombards - Between 4 4 5 5, M. all the Squadron
except the John Adam8 & Scourge were under way standing in for
Tripoly.

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

427

By this time the wind had Veered to N E b E - We had a strong
current setting to S. W. This is the only one we have observed since
the 8th Inst: Towards evening Cap$Chauncey of the John Adurns with
several Officers and iifty Seamen, (all Volunteers) joined the Constitution - Cap$ Chauncey 8: part of his Seamen remain wit11 the Commodore The others were sent to difl'erent Gun boats - At the
close of the Evening we were four Miles N K E from Tripoly, tacking
occasiondy maneuvering &r. exercising the Squadron till the Wind
should veere to E S E - The Job&Adams d t h o armed en $ute
appears a t some distance to be a complete frigate - She m a n ~ u v r e d
(p: Signal) several deceptions in imitation of JI7e&hing B: standug in
with the Squadron From the close of the Evening till 9+ P. hl. we stood in for the
Batteries with light breezes veering between E Y E R- E b S - At
94 nearly calm. The Town was now in sight bearing S b I T $ W - The
Batteries eave us Eleven shot which fell short of us situate$ as the Squadron [is] a. S ?T & W S ?V current presses home
to the Batteries B affords but a hazardous retreat in a calm Between 10 & 11 P. M. we made a short board to N N E: Between
11 and 12 we made a short board in for the batteries which immediately
gave us 14 Guns More - In the close of the Evening the Enemy's
gun boats a Galley & a Schooner, in all serenteun were moored in a
line of defence within the reefs and under cover of Grape shot from
the Batteries - from the Boats we saw no fire - The 25 Guns fired a t
the Squadron were from the Grand Battery & from Fort English Between 12 Midnight B: 1 A M. light Airs from S E b E - ,\ Iad e the
signal for the Squadron to anchor - Came to in 25 fathQard bottom.
From this time tilI morning light airs from S E. or calms Departed this life John Pyles Seaman. A t 1 A. 31. his body w-as
committed to the deep From dn light till noon light bl.cc.zps & Vuriablc betwecn X E b E
$ East. zontinue all clear at Q u a r t ~ r s Supplied the Syren with
9 Gang Casks of Water = 576 Gall.?
Noon light airs from E b N - Tripoly distant nearly 3 3lilrs S bJ'i'
by compass
These 24 hcrurs tfle follorving Signals \\-ere made Viz.
At 1 P. hi. Squatiron to prepare to Weigh with the J. Adams' annulling Sional
l p . %f. Syren to JtTeigh.
3& P. M. Weigh, the Argus 6: Nautilus
43 P, M. Vhm, to take in tots- the Gun bouts w-i~ichhad been
riding by the J. Adarns
6 P. M. Squadron prepare for action
64 P. M. Come ttlthin Hail, the Syren
9+ P. M. Tack, the Squadron.
94 P- M. Come within Hail, the Squadron
103 P. h$. Tack the Squadron
113 P. M. Tacli
dQ
1 A. M. Anchor the Squadron
[LC. EPP, Log Conetitulion, 1803-1804.1

428 NAVAL OPERATIOh7S,APRIGSEPI'EIMBER 6 , 1804
Extract from journal kept by Purser John Darby, U. S. Navy, on board U. S. S.
John Admns. Master Commandant Isaac Chauncey, U. S. Navy, commanding,
Priday, 17 August 1804

At half past Midnight the Commodore made signal for to Anchor
the Whole Fleet Anchored. a t 12 Meridian the Commre made signal
for all Capt to repair on board the Constitution - the Weather excessively warm with light breezes. a t $ past one the Captain returned
onboard in the Gigg & MQ S-ooke
[Midshipman Rroolie] in the
Black Cutter a t past 2 the Capt. went on board the Constitution.
a t 4 past 3 P M Mr Brook left the ship in the Black Cutter with the
Armour. a t 5 the Commodore made the Signal for the fleet to get
under way a t $ past 5 they got under way and the Captain returnd
on board.[XDA original. Miss Camilla S. McConnell.]

+

Extract from journal of Midshipman F. Cornelius deKrafft, U. S. Navy, in U. S. Brig
Siren of 18 guns, l a s t e r Commandant Charles Stewart, U. S. Navy, commanding.
Priday, 17 August 1804

(Follouing the Commodores Motion)
Light winds & pleas: At 1 a signal from the Comrn: to u-ei h. i
past 2 hove up & made sail. At 3 the Comm: Argus & Nauti us got
under u-ay & stood for the land. At 5 back'd the M q o p sail. 3 past
5 wore & stood off shore. At 6 wore in shore. At 7 wore & stood
off. At 4 past 8 stood in shore.Midnight moderate breezes & pleast standing off & on shore. At 1
the signal for the squadron to come too. 4 past 1 came too with the
larbd bower in 25 fathoms furl'd all sail. Meridian light airs & pleas? the Comrn: mode signal for all Commanders to repair on board his ship, r e d a supply of water from the
Comrnm sent provisions & water on board gun boat N Q4. Latt: Obs: 33' 2' N.

f

[KDA.]
To Midshipman James T. Leonard, U. S. Navy, New York, N. Y., from Secretary
of the Navy

KAV.DEP.lSthAug:1804.
Mr Beekrnan Kavy Agent a t Kew York has been directed to make
the necessary Contracts for building 2 Gun-boats agreeably to a draft
Your services as a professional
which has been transmitted to him.Gentleman, may, i t is conceived, be usefully directed to this object.
You will therefore attend in person and superintend the execution of
the work, and see that i t is faithfully performed.
You will communicate with Mr Beekman when ever i t may be
necessary. He will put you in possession of the particular directions
which have been transmitted to him, b me, on the subject of dimensions and materials, by which you wil be enabled to form a correct
judgment of the work, as the contractor progresses in its execution.

i

[NDA. Off. Comg. Gunboats, 1803-1808.1
Extract from journal of U. 6. Brig Argus. Yester Commandant Isaac Hull,U,S. Navy,
commanding, Saturday, 18 August 1804

a t Anchor off Tripoli a t 7 P hf. Cap$Hull returned on board Li h t breezes through the night a t 5 AM the Commodore made
Sigi
1205 weighed with the whole Squadron and stood to the N E

kP

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

429

a t 8 AM Tripoli bore SWbS -At meridiaa fresh breezes and Cloudy
shortened sail and hove to under the Commodores lee Variously EmpQ
[NDA photostat.]
Extract from journal of Hidshipman Charles Morris, Jr., U. S. Navy, on board
U. S. Brig Argus, Master Commandant Isaac Bull, U. S. Navy, commanding,
Saturday, 18 August 1804

Off Tripoli
Moderate
5. A h l . The Commodore made Signal N?1205 Weighed in Company
with the Squadron.
Fresh Breezes.
[Mrs. C. E. Fox original.

NDA photostat.]

Extract from journal of U. S. Frigate Congrus. Captain John Rodgers, U. S. Bavy,
commanding, Saturday, 18 August 1804

[Tangier Bay] At 1 [P M.] the Consul went on Shore at q past 3
spoke the British brig of war Haggard.
,4t 4 Cape Spartel bore W B N 4 N distance 4 miles Tangier S W
distance $ mile At 7 rec* on board stock S: fruits for the Use of the
ships company. a t 4 past 9 The current having drifted the Essex
Close in shore she made the signal ,h;? 24 Sent the boats to assist
in towing her of[f]. a t 4 past 11 a light breeze sprung up from the
Eastwd the boats returnd Hoisted them in ,4t midnight light breezes & clear bore up &- made sail standing
out of the gut.
past 1 Cape Spartel bore East distance 4 miles
A M made and took in sail as occasion reqQ Meredian the town of
Arzella bore E B N $ N. distance 4 leagues [CSSA.]
Extract from journal kept on board the U. S. Frigate Cotuiitution, by Captain Edward
Preble, U. S. Navy, Saturday, 18 August 1804

Wind N E u-e are a t Anchor 3 miles X b E from the T o n of
Tripoly, we hare our guns all clear Boats all out and armed, aod
every thing prepared for an attack the moment the wind Q sea are
favorable. Bt 8 P RI, I sent Capt Decatur & Cap: Cha~mcey,in
two small Boats to reconnoitre the Harbour and examine the situation
of their Gun Boats. a t Midnight they returnd and reported that
they rowed to the Western rock ~vithinmusket shot of the Enemies
centincls and that all the Gun-Boats were in the Mole, nloored in
a line abreast with Heads to the Eastward. by 1 A h i the wind had
shifted to the S E (which blows out of the Harbour) the sea was
smooth but the current strong to the ITestu-ard, which concludes us
to defer an attacli until some better opportunity as the Boats would
not be able to reach their stations bt.fore day light. - S t day light
the Wind sutldenly shifted to the h- N IT which immediately brought
a heavy swell on shore the sky was clouded and appearances of a
gale, made the signal for the fleet to weigh & gain an offing. - a t
7 A M Weigh'd and made sail to work off shore. At 113 AAl double
Reef'd the Topsails fresh Breezes and a roug!~sea, at noon Tripoly
S b E 3 Leagues dist [LC. EPP, Vol. 12, June-August 1804.1

Extract from log book kept by Sailing Master Nathaniel Haraden, U. S. Navy, on
board U. S. Frigste Conslilolion, Saturday, 18 August 1804

Lidit hrer.zcs fronl K E, 15-it11 a S ~ ~ ebeginning
ll
to set in from
E ,1' E. We are 3 Miles X b E 3 E from Tripolg - All the Squadron
in company except the Scourge and John Adams which are a t anchor
two or three miles without us Supplied the Sjyren this Afternoon with 9 caslis of Water or 576
Gall? which added to what the Syren has had within these two days
malies 2668 Gallons.
There arc now remainirig on bonrd the Constitvtion 33 lragurs Q
16 Butts= 14.000 Gallons TTe expend (Jailp (ncltliri. the Water supplied the two Bombards)
600 gall?
All, this afternoon we lmve had moderate breezes Veering between
,1' I3 ck E ?; E. with n st\-ell setting from the Eastward.
At 8 P. 11. the Commodore serit two small boats to reconnoitre the
E n ~ m y ' spun boats - At 12 Alidnizht they returned and reported
that the Gcn boats were tmnsportcd from their Jioorings c l o s ~
under the Bashaws cnstlc - Our boats were so near that they could
see the Cectinels on the Talls of the castle.
By this time the wind hn,d shifted by degrees to E S E. and continued so with light airs till day light when it shifted to X K IT - At
6 A. AT. We had licht airs from S W b h' with a sn-ell setting in shore
with cloudy orcrcast JTratlier - The Squadron weighed pr Signal
$ stood off shore At 7 A. 11. Teiched S- maclc all plain Snil in Order to Work off
Shore - At 9 A. 31. stowed the lizht sails S- tacked to ITSIT. - At
113 A :\I. doublc rrcftd the Topsails and bro~iglltto for the Squadron
to join cornpnny Ttit John Adam.? continnrs at anchor. JThm u-e
got unrlcr way this morning, the wrnt1i.r 11ad thtl appearance of
strong 1)rerzrr; fro111 t l ~ tSorthrr-:irtl All forcnoor~from 6 A. 31 wc
had motlcratr l~rcrzcsfrom I\; IT7 M-itti ovcrcnst n t ~ a t h a .
S o o : ~- Laving by, 3 1,capucs Yorth from Tripoly. Thc Squadron
in company.
[LC.

EPP, Log Constitttf~on,1803-12301.1

Extract fr,om jorrnal kept by Purser John Darby, U. S. Navy, on board U. S. 6'
John AUoms, Master Commandant Islac Chauncey, U. S. Navy, commanding'
Saturday, 18 August 1804

At half past 12 thcl Commodore made a signal for us to get under
way h f l t a numhc~rof our hands being on honrd thc Pon~tiiutionnTe
made the siLgnalof Iiiabiliip to comply a t 2 Oclock hove up arid got
under v a p at R Oclock this cvcning thc toxrn of Tripoli bore S W
by W7.distance '7 Lr:1gnrs. [ K D A orisinal.

Misi Camilla S. il.IrC'onr~oI1]

Extract from journal of Midshipman F. Cornelius deKrafft, U. S. Aavy, in U. S. Brig
S~renof IS gllns, Xeste: Commsndant Charles Stewart, E.S. Navy, commanding.
Saturday, 18 August 1804

(Standing of[f] shore 1vith the scluadron & part of the time a t
anchor.)
Light winds 6i pleast 3: past 4 r e d a supply of Water from the

Comm:

WAVS WITH BARBARY POWERS

431

Midnight gentle breezes & pleast the Commc made signal to get
under way, hove up made sail I% stood to the N. E. At 5 set stay
sails At 7 set royals & flying jib. At 10 tack'd to the S W took in
royals. past 11 tack'd to the NE* with the squadron. Latt: Obs: 33" 9' N.
[NDA.]

[I9 August 18041
To Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Navy, from Surgeon James Wells, U. S. Navy

SIR. Lieut Charles Gordon from an Affection of his breast, suffered
serious inconveniences from the frequent changes of weather to which
an Officer is exposed, in the Mediterranean Sea during the winter
months.
From a particular attention to his health the minter past, I attribute
thc preservation of his life; if attached to a Ship the ensuing season,
arn apprehensive our efforts to save him will be ineffectual.
Would recommend his return to the United States, or some Port,
congenial to his health.
US. SHIP Constitution AUGUSTlgth 1804.
[LC. EPP,Yo:. 13, June-August 180-1.)
To Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Navy, from William Higgins, U. 6. Navy Agent,
Malta

MALTAthe 19 August 180.4
DE.~R
SIR I have the honor to re!)ly to your ralued letter of the
15 Ins! - I sincerely congratulate you up011 the favorable result of
your first attack upon the Barbarians and I trust that your exertions
will be finally C r o m e d rrith ex-erv Success, at the same time I participate in the regret you ~ r l u s tnaturally feel for the loss of so many
valuable lives, tho' we must conf~ssthcg are but fen- in number when
u7e come to consider the uneqnal and clespcrate Contest they were
engaged in - I felicitate yo11 M y Dear Sir on your escape (a very
narrow one 1am toltl) 2nd I ll,ive no doubt when you return to L4merica
but the thanks of the Prcsic'icnt will he f o l l o ~ ~ eby
d the universal and
lieartfel t approba tion of
Countryn~enTour pressing wants for \rater will hsx-e been reliered I hope ere
this by the safe arrival of thr Cargo I sent to you and which left this
on the 12 Ins! another supply went to you by the Store Ship Intripid
on the 17 - The E g t ~ r p r i s ewill sail this morning as full as she can
load, and to morrow I shall dispatch yon the Bornbard Eliza, with
about I20 Punclleons morc - I do not mean to stop here; to avoid
the possibility of disappointment I intcnd taliing up another Vessel
and if I can get Casks from my wood friend hlr JTillcie she s h d l also
go to you in the course of the TS'eek - TTe h a w however n m pretty
hard upon the Public Stores and I cannot nnsrver for the Success of
a fresh application - The Enterpri~ecarries 40 puncl~eonsfrom the
Dock Tart1 I have no letters for you, those that lay uith me went by the
Intrepid I send you some fruit and Vegetables & if I can get you a
case of Cyder you shall have that also
[LC. EPP, Vol. 12, JulleAugust 1804.1

432 NAVAL OPERATIOATS,APRIL-SEPTEAIBER 6, 1804
[I9 August 18041
To Midshipman Charles Goodwin Ridgely, U. S. Navy, from Captain Edward Preble,
U. S. Navy

SIR YOUare hereby appointed Lieutenant of the U. S. Schooner
the Nautilus you will therefore repair on board the Said Schooner,
and take upon yourself the charge and duty of Lieutenant agreeable
to the regulations of the Service for which this shall be your Authority
Given under my hand on board
the U. S. Ship Constitution this
lgth day of august 1804
Signed EDWARD
PREBLE
MI. CHARLESL RIDGELT
Hereby appointed Lieu t Qv?
[LC.

EPP, Order Rook, Rley 1803-June 1805.1

Extract from journal of U. S. Brig Argus. Master Commandant Isaac Hull, U. S. Navy,
commanding, Sunday, 19 August 1804

At Mrridn the Commodore made Sig! N? 1018 a t 1 P M Tacked
ship t o the Pi? & Ed hoisted in the boats a t past 2 the Commodore
made Sig! 1036 a t 5 took in T. G. sails a t half past 5 the Commodore
made Sig! X ?314 took a reef in the top sails a t 4 pest 6 up Courses
down main T. hl. Staysail and backed the main Topsail sent water to
3 3 past hoisted in the boat and filled away -A t rnidniglit
Gunboat
moderate breczes u i t h R heavy Su-ell from thc Piorthw? wore Ship -

+

[NDA photostat.]
Extract from journal of Midshipman Charles Morris, Jr., U. 6. Navy, on board
U. S. Brig Argus, Master Commsndant Isaac Hull, U. 6. Navy, commanding,
Sunday, 19 August 1804

Fresh breezes and pleasant
1 the Commodore made signal Pi9 1018. Tacked.
2 Signal
1036.
53 K9 314
A. M. Moderate $ pleasant.
Lat. Obsd 33" 14' M.
[Mrs. C. E. Fox original.

KDA photostat 1

Extract from journal of U. S. Frigate Congrus. Captain John Rodgers, U. 6.Navy,
commanding, Sunday, 19 August 1804

+

At 1 [P. M.] the town of Larash bore S W.At $.past 1 Discoverd
a strange [sail] on the Starb? beam. Departed t h ~ sLife I ~ a u ~ e n c e
Vsllance 0. S. At 9 past 1 thc town of Larash bore S E B E. Distance 5 miles discoverd in the harbour. The ship Masuda - with
lower Yards & top masts struck - a t 2 sounded in 25 fathonls
water. Committed the body of the disceased to the deep Latitude Observed 34' 23' N.
[USNA.]
Extract from jonrnal kept on board the U. 6. Frigate Conslitufion. by Captain Edward
Preble, U. 5. Navy, Sunday, 19 August 1804

Wind N W. a t 1 P hl wore to the K E & brought to for the
squadron. Cap! Chauncey with his officers & crew rejoined the

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

433

John Adams, Hoisted in all our Boats, and made signs1 for all Boats
to Join their respective ships. a t 5 P M the wind North stood to
the E N E with the fleet - a t Midnight Wore to the W N W, signal
was made for the Squadron to do the same - fresh Breezes & a rough
sea, a t 6 AM sounded 75 fathq Water sandy bottom, we havenow an
Offing of 8 or 10 Leagues from Tripoly. - Moderate Breezes all the
fore noon with an Ugly swell settlng towards the coast, Tripoly a t
Noon bore S b W 3 W 9 Leagues disc - The Clouds are dispersing
and the Weather appears favorable for a change of wind.
LatQObse 33' 19' NQ
[LC. EPP, Vol. 12, June-August 1804.1
Extract from log book kept by Sailing Master Nathaniel Earaden, U. 6. Navy, on
board U. 6. Frigate Gnrtitution. Sunday, 19 August 1804

Moderate breezes from N W. Waiting for the Squadron to close At 1 P. M wore to N E & brought to Cap' Chauncey with his Officers and Seamen rejoined the John
Adums At 13 P. M. In all boats which we have had out two days in
readiness to assist the Bombards & Gun boats At 2 P. M. filled to
the E N E. Squadron in company By this time the wind had Veered
to North - Out second reef from the Topsails At 33 P. h1. Tripoly bore S W b S S. 14 Miles.
Towards evening the N wind began to freshen - double reefed the
Topsails $ down Royal Yards At Sunset the land was not in Sight. Squadron all in sight, but
considerably scattered Continued standin to E N E till 12 Midnight when we wore and
e r n e to the wind to ?V N W, with the night signal for the Squadron
to follow.
Pleasant weather during the night with a rough sea.
At 6 A. M. sounded - 75 fmp Hard bottom The Garfan Mountains bore S W.
We have now an Offing of 9 or 10 leagues from the coast At 1 A. M. out second reef from the Topsails - Moderate breezes
from N. all the forenoon with a swell setting from N N W Noon. S uadron in company. Standing to W N W The Hills
a little inlan! of Tripoly in sight bearing by compass S W b S - The
town of Tripoly (var: cor:) bears S W b W 3 W. 27 Miles The clouds to the N. are in some measure dispersed and have the
ap earance of a change to the Eastward
gurgeons report 7 sick, 4 conPPt & 3 wounded prisoners - Water
& 16 butts = 13,440 Galls
now remaining 36 Le
The foll owlin sign s have been Made the 24 hours past At 1 P.
J OAdam
~ to Weigh - Answered her signal N9 634.
14 P. M. All boats to return to their own ahipe it P. M. General Signal - Make more sail
2 P. M. Answered the Nautilus signal to epeak the Commodore
5 t P. M. Squadron to close
12 Midnight. Squadron to wear Latitude Observed 33' 19' N.

+

h.

3-

[LC. EPP, Log C m i i t u t h , 1803-1804.1

434 NAVAL OPERATIONS, APRILSEPTEMBER 6, 1804
--

Extract from journal of William Eaton, U. 8. Navy Agent for the Barbary Bwencies,
1%August 1804

19. Monday. 8. a. m. within a league and
Alboran

3 of the Island of

[H. E. Huntington L&AG, EA 206.1

Extract from journal kept by Purser John Darby, U. 8. Ravy, on board U. 6. S.
John Adms, Master Commandant Isaac Chauncey, U. 8. Navy, commanding,
Sunday, 19 August 1804

We continued underway all last night & are now cruising ofif] the
coast of Tripoli land not in sight. at Meridian the squadron in
sight. to Leward light breezes. a t half past 12. discovered a sail
on our Weather beam and made a signal signifying the same to the
Commodore he made the signal for the squadron to wear & at 1
Oclock he made the signal for the Argus to chace the strange sail.
We continued under sail all night in company with the Squadron [NDA original.

Miss Camilla S. McConnell.]

Bxtroct from journal of Midshipman F. Cornelius deKrafft, U. 8. Ravy, in U. S. Brig
Siren of 18 guns, Master Commandant Charles Stewart, U. 8. Navy, commanding,
Sunday, 19 August 1804

(Standing off the land with sll the squadron)
Fresh breezes & pleas! weather 3 past Mer: tacli'd to the Wq
took in stay sails & flying jib At 1 back'd the Mg topsail & sent the
launch on board the John Adam for provisions & rum At 2 hoisted
in the barge. At 3 the launch return'd with provisions & rum the
John Adam weigh'd & stood for the fleet. At 5 Tripoli bore S W by
S 5 leagues. - Midnight clear & pleasf inclining to calm, with a
heavy sea. 4 past 12 wore to the N W@PI signal. Latt: Obs: 33' 14' N.
[NDA.]

To Captain Edward Preble, U. 6. Bavy, from B. W. Meade, Cadiz, Spain

CADIZA-

20tQ1804

DEARSIR, Enclosed you wiIi fbd sundry papers relative to the
forgev practised by one Charles Borny in your name on Mackenzie
& Glennie the Navy Agents of the United States a t London.
The papers explain so very fully the whole business, that it is only
necessary for me to refer you to them. I send you also two of the
al letters, one from Charles Borny to Messrc Gonne Harrison
upton of Lisbon, & one from Laurent Robe& to Mayne & Brown
of same place.
No doubt remains in my mind but that Borny & Roberts are one
and the same person, and that he has assumed one or both the names,
and varied the writing merely to accomplish his purposes. No such
erson as Laurent Roberts being to be traced here, whereas Charles
k r n y , or the person by that name is well known here.
It b robable you may be able from the information now sent
you, an$ from seeing the handwriting, to trace who Mr Borng is,
& where he ma now be.
He is c e r d a most perfect adept in the line he haa selected for
the exertion of
talents; & haa through the whole of his operations

?:?f

&

1
1. FRIGATE "CONSTITUTION." COMMODORE PREBLE
2. BRfG "SYREN
CAPTAIN STEW4RT
"

3. B R l G "ARGUS " CAPTAIN HULL
4 . SCHOONER "VIXEN." CAPTAIN SMITH
5. SCHOONER ' ENTERPRISE
CAPTAIN DECATUR
6. SCHOONER "NALITILUS." CAPTAIN SOLIERS
7. TWO BOMBS

'.

8 A TRlPOLiTAN BRlG
Q

1U
11

a.

b.
c.

SCHOONER
ROW-GALLEY
A FRENCH PRIVATFER
THE BASHAW 5 CASTLE
FORT BUCHRMEiNE
CONSULAR FLAGS

d FCST SPANISH
e. FORT r U R K
1. FORT JEWISH
9. FORT SFDONDO OR T H E ADMIRAL'S FORT
h MSSQUES
0 SIX GUN BOATS
V . GLlN BOATS

ATTACK Q N '1-RIPOLI. 3 ALIGUST 1804.

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

435

which were even extended far more than necessary, made use of the
most respectable & cautious housea both here, and a t Lisbon; and
by that means revented the least ossibilit of suspicion in Messre
Mackenzie & G ennie I think it wo$d be we to write Messq [space]
at Milan. you may possibly hear something concerning him from
them which may lead to a discovery of his present lace of abode.
I shall be happy to hear from you, and if I can e of any service
in this, or my other business in this city, I pray you to command
me, believing me to be
(Signed) R. W MEADE

P

f

g

[LC. EPP, LB, April-Kov. 1804.1

To John Oavino, W. 8. Consul, Gibraltar, frum B. W. Meade, Cadir;, Spain
(COPY)
CADIZ
A q w t 20th. 180.4
DEARSIR- I enclose several papers a list of which is annexed,
relative to the forgery committed on Messr? Mackenzie & Glennie
of London, by a young man under the name of Charles Borny. This
business was put under my charge by C Pmckney Eeqr our Minister
a t Madrid with instructions to trace the game If possible, and discover the residence of Mr Borny.
I have not however been able Go discover any thing further than
that, M? Bomy was here about the eriod of the bills being drawn
& paid; and that he introduced hirnse f to Messrq Grippi & Caleagui,
a very respectable house of this city, t h o ' whom he transacted his
o erations, By the information recd from this house, I find that
tfis 0,
man presented himself at their Counting House on the
27% fleeember last, with a re uest that they would undertake the
collection of several bills for
on jabo on ~eville,~ n d r i d ,bc*
Upon being questioned to know by whom he had been recommended,
he informed them, that he had been captured on his passage from
Italy by the English, carried into Gibraltar, m d had been unfortunate enough to lose nearly all his papers & effects. He however

7

%m

436 NAVAL OPERATIONS, APRIL-SEPTEMBER 6. 180L
new that may occur. Charles Borny is a young man of about 26
or 27 years old, of a midliq stature regular features, good address,
and a great deal to say for hunself, He speaks fluently and correctly
the French, English, Spanish and Italian languages. He told the
Maltese that he u7asa Neapolitan Navy Officer, but the Maltese rather
took him for a Spaniard or Portuguese.
I have not been able to trace which rout he has taken I rather
think however, he has gone to Italy, and I would advise your immediately writing to the house in Milan with a statement of facts,
and it may possibly happen that they may discover him.
No doubt whatsoever exists but that Borny &- Roberts are one and
the same person, as no such person as Laurent Roberts ever made
his appearance here; whereas Borny, or the person by that name
is well known.
He must have been some person either in your confidence or that
of Commodore Preble, or he could not have been so well acquainted
with the particulars of the Letter of credit, and the time it was forwarded. You'll observe that the Bills he drew, and which were sent
forward by Mayne & Brown of Lisbon, reached London by the same
post as the letter of Credit. I think it would be well if the letter of
credit was put into the Post Office by you a t Gibraltar, to enquire
whether a person of that description may not have been employed
in the Post Office I send you part only of Borny & Roberts' letters,
and will retain the others in case any thing should turn up here One
of the original Bills on MacKenzie &- Glennie is in my possession, but
as it is the only one in Europe, I shall retain it until required.
I send enclosed a letter for Commodore Preble, whch please forward. It contains a copy of the letters, and two letters of Borny &
Roberts, that he may know the writing.
I shall be glad
to hear from you, and to be informed should anvthing occur.
Having fixed my residence here for some time, I take the liberty of
offerin ou my services & remain D' Sir,
very DT Servr
(Signed) R IT MEADE
N. B Mess'qrippi & Caleagui having mislaid the letter from the
House in Milan, I am unable by this post to send you the firm of the
House, as they do not remember it. I shall send i t however, as soon
as I can obtain it.
22nd August 1804 You will please give notice to the commanding
officer of the American Ships, that there has this day entered this
port two Moorish cruisers of 4 Guns each and 55 Men [LC. EPP, LB, April-Nov. 1804.1

Xu,

-

To Secretery of State from George Davis, U. 8. Charge d'Affairea, Tunis

TUNISAugust the $OtQ 1804 -cop
I have the honor to inform You, that a Courier has this moment
arrived from Sphax, which gives me the leasing intelligence of our
IR,

d'
1

Squadron's having made a Powerful an Successful attack on the
Town and Harbour of Tri oli; and profit of this early occasion for
Malta to forward You a opy of the Dis atch received from Commodore Preble. The affair has not yet een made known to the
Bey; but shall avail myself of the first occasion to apprize Hie Excel-

8

W m S WITH BARBARY POWERS

437

lency of our effective operations against the enemy; and doubt not
but his own deductions will be more favourable to the conservahon
of our Peace, and have more weight in a happy and honourable
arrangement of our Affairs here, than any comments which proudence
would authorize me to make.
Every avenue between this and Algiers, is perfectly blocked up by
the Sherif, before mentioned; and the fears of that Regency seem not
et to have been awakened as much as this Government. - The
barabout's Army daily increases; Ms continued inactivity augurs
rather an unfavourable issue: there is, however, so much reason for
disaffection, in the different Regencies, and such real misery throughout all this, that we are menaced with a scene of Famine, desolation,
and civil comotion - the price of grain increases: but as this is the
Season of fruit, the People still find the means of subsistence: i t is
the winter that we are to dread.
Naples, inspired by our daring acts, continues to annoy this Coast I learn, (and the intelligence may be relied on, tho' we cannot give
the detail) that the Tunisien Squadron, has been separated and
attacked in different Situations by their Enemy - three T. Gallies,
on board of which were nearly Seven hundred Men, made an attack,
on a Neapolitan Frigate - one i t is said was sunk, and the other two
Captured: part of the Action was seen from Mount Ras Jebel, (near
Porto farino) and a number of dead bodies have since floated on
shore - We have also accounts of four other Corsairs being Captured by the Meapolitans: a frigate, is Cruising between Portofarino, and Cape Bona - Everything, however, is kept in profound
Secrecy, and even enquiries are dangerous. His Catholic Majesty's regalia, arrived on the 18t@Instant, (to wit)
two Xebecs, mounting thirty pieces of Cannon each - Seventy
thousand Dollars in Cash, a regalia for the Sapatapa, with the usual
Consular Present. I have recelved no letters from Tripoli, since the
14'h ult.; but daily expect a Courier [LC. EPP, Vol. 12, June-August 1804.1
To Captain Schomberg, B. B., commanding H. B. M. 6. Modrau, from Captain
Edward Reble, U. £4. Navy

Constitution At Anchor Off TRIPOLY
August 20th 1804
DEARSIR I am honored with your letter by the John Adams and
beg ou to accept my thanks for your prompt $ obliging attention to
our ants in the cask wa The John A h s woul have been a pleasing sight, if she had not
have left her Gun Carriages on board the Squadron in Harnpton
Roads - More of this hereafter I am to be su erseded in the command of the American Squadron
in these seas - gelieve me, my dear sir I have too high a re[s]pect for
those gentlemen who have honored me with their attention in Malta,
to conceal from them the Reasons assigned by my Government for
this Measure - I have therefore enclosed to Sir Alexander Ball, a
co y of a letter from the Secretar of the Navy to me on the subject beg leave b refer
OBrien for information respecting
,,
- o u r Gun boats want much nursing,
our Operations in thisg:"r"d
& create a vast deal of uneasiness for their Safety in rough Weather [LC. EPP, LB, April-Nov. 1804.1

k

f

1

I&

438 N A V U OPERATIONS, APRIL-SEPTEMBER 6, 1804
[20 August 18041
To Edahipman Joaeph Israel, IT. 8. Ravy, from Captain Edwwd Preble, U. 8. Haw

SIR You are hereby appointed Lieutenant of the U. S. Ship Con&&ion - You will therefore repair on board Said Ship, and take
upon youpself the charge and duty of Lieutenant agreeable to the
regulations of the Service for which this shall be your authority
Given under my hand on board
the U. S. Ship Constitution this
20t@day of August 1804
Signed EDWARD
PREBLE
[LC. EPP, Order Book, May 1803-June 1805.1

[About 20 August 18041
To the Commanding Ofecer of each U. 6. Ship of War in the Yediterranean
Squadron from Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Navy

SIR,The Good of the Service requires that you put the whole of
your ship's company on allowance of two Quarts & a pint of water
for 24 hours includmg Peas, Rice, & Grog Water. You will therefore
ve Orders to commence the issuing such allowance & continue until1
Signed E: PREBLE
Note - One of the above was sent to each Cap5 of the Squadron
[LC. EPP, Order Book, May 1803-June 1805.1
Extract from jonmd of U. 6. Brig Arfus. X ~ t e Commandant
r
Iaaac Hnll, U. 8. Navy,
commanding,Monday, U) August 1804

a t 4 past Meridian saw a Strange Sail off our Weather bow the
Commodore hoisted our Distinguish5 flag at 1 PAMhe made S' ! N Q
274 and Np 356 Cast off the Gunboats a t past 4 brought the ?!haw
too she proved to be the American Ketch 1 6
8 days from Syracuse
with Water and fresh provisions for the Squa ron took her in tow and
made Sail for the Commodore a t 6 hove too Capf Hull went on board
of him -

+

?

{NDA photostat.]

Extract from journal of U. 6. Frigate Congrur, Captain John Rodgem, U. 8. Bavy,
commanding, Monday, 20 August 1804

At 3 past 6 [Ah11 discovered 2 strange Sail on the Weather bow -chord with the Kedge anchor In 67 fathoms water - At 8 fired a
& Run up our wlours Tryd the current & found It setting S W
1 mile pr hour - a t 10 weighd hd made sail the town of S d e e
bearing S E distance 3 miles. Saw three Moorish ships of war & a
gally laying in the harbour

TW

IUSNA.]

Extract from journal kept on board the U. 8. Frigate C o d ~ i ~by
n ,Captain Edward
Preble, U. 8. LPsvg, Monday, $0 dugart 1804

Moderate Breezes from the N E with a heavy swell setting to the

N N W, standing to the N N W with the fleet. Trip01 bearing
S S E 9 or 10 Leagues a t 1PM a strange sail was discoverMf from the

WARS WITH BARBABY POWERS

439

John A

h in the E N E. Made the Argw's signal to cast off her
Gun Boats & chase. made the John Adam's signal to Tow the
Argw's Boats at 4 PM the Argus brought the chase to. made the

signal to bring her down to me. a t 6 the Argw & chase joined comany she proved to be the U S Ketch Intrepid from Syracuse with
k a t e r & fresh stock for the Squadron, she Brought me letters from
Mr Dyson & Mr Higgins the latter informs me that an English Vessel
left Malta the 12t4 Ins! with 190 Butts of Water, & some live stock
for the Squadron. We are in great want of the Water but I fear some
accident has happened to her to prevent her arrival as the Wind has
been constantly fair for several days past. at 12 Midnight the Wind
E b S. Steered to the S b E a t 23 AM the Wind SSE wore Ship to the
East a t 53 AM Wind S E wore to the S S W a t 8 AM all sail sett for
the Land, a t 9 AM ordered the Argus to the Eastward to look out
for the store ship Expected from Malta, sent the Vizen to the Westward on the same errand Ordered all the fleet on allowance of Water
2 Quarts pr Day cooking & grog Water included. - The prisoners
at 1 Quart pr day which is more than an equal proportion as they are
not exposed to the Sun and have no work to do. At noon we were
about 5 Leagues from the coast. Tripoly bearing S E b S
Latd 339 4' N. [LC. EPP, Vol.

12, June-August 1804.1

Extract from log book kept by Sailing Master Nathaniel Earaden. U. 8. Navy, on
board U. S. Frigate C d f d f o n . Yonday, 90 August 1804

Moderate breezes from N E with a swell setting in to the N Wt
Standing to N W - 9 or 10 Leagues to the N N E of Tripoly Squadron in company. At 1 P. M. answered the J. Adam's Signal
for a strange sail to the E - The Argus was ordered p. Signal in
chasc, leavin the two gun boats towed by her, in charge of the John
Adams - d d e sail as necessary to lead the Squadron & keep the
Argus in sight. At 4 P. M. the A r p brought to the chase - Made
signal to bring the chase to the Commodore At 6 P. M. joined company the U. S. Ketch Intrepzd from Saragosa
with supplies for the Squadron - Her supplies consist of 30 Butts of
Water, some Bullocks, sheep & Vegetables By 8 P. M. the wind had Veered to E b S - We continued with the
main topsail to the mast till 12 midnight when we wore & filled to
the Southward By 23 A. M. the wind had veered to S S E. Wore ship to the
Eastward - At 53 A. M. Wore to S S W - Moderate breezes from
E S E & S E all the forenoon with pleasant weather & a smooth sea.
At 8 A. M. made all plain sail in for the land - At 9 A. M. the A r p
was ordered to look out to the Eastward in order to fall in with a
store ship which had sailed from Malta 5 or 6 days ago with supplies
uadron - The Vixen was ordered to look out for her to the
for the .
Weatwar
Punished Daniel Veddenburgh & Samuel Greaves seamen with 12
lashes each for neglect of duty This forenoon the ships com any was ordered on allowance of
Water, two quarts per day, ex usive of the water for Pess Rice &
Gm . The prisoners are allowed One Quart p' day each - Noon
~ o t f e r ~breezes
te
from S E - We are 4 or 5 leagues from the mast

9

d'

440 NAVAL OPERATIONS, APRIGSEPTEMBER 6, 1804
which which bears from S E to S W b W - Tripoly we suppose to
bear S S E, 14 Miles - The Squadron all in company except the
Argzls & FT&n which are in sight on the look out - Water now
remaining 33 Leagurs & 14 Butts.
The following Signals have been made these 24 hours At 1 P. M. - Squadron to wear - The Argus to cast off boats - &
the John Adams to take them in tow
At 2 - Squadron to wear
At 5 - Argus - bring down the chase
At 12 Midnight - Squadron to wear
At 2 A. M. - Squadron to wear
At 52 A M. John Adam come within hag.
dq
dq
At6A.M-Vizen
At 8) A. M. Squadron make more Sail.
Latitude Observed 3 3 O 4' North
[LC. EPP, Log Cmstitutim, 1803-1804.1
Extract from journal of William Baton, 3.6. Havy Agent for the Barbary Regencies,
Monday, 20 August 1804

Off Cape De Gat, becalmed. Sunk a queen's ware plate over the
strern, suspended to a bog line, which was seen a t the depth of one
hundred and forty eight feet.
[h'R&L. KO.9217, Bm' E 14.1
Extract from journal kept by Purser John Darby, U. 6. Havy, on board U. 8. S.
JdnAdems. Master Commandant Isaac C b a ~ c e y ,U. 8. Havy, commanding,
Monday, 20 Angnst 1804

At half past 5 this morning the Commodore made the signal that
he wanted to speak us. We bore up for him and soon after spoke him
he Ordered us to take 2 Gun boats in tow Capt Chauncey went on board the Commodore a t half past
Meridian discovered land ahead & at 1. the Town of Tripoli bore
S E by E 5 E. a t half past. 5 discovered a sail on our starbq bow.
standing to the East@- which proved to be a bark with water &c
for the fleet [NDA original. Miss Camilla 8. McConne1l.J
Extract from jonmd of Sdshipman P. Cornelins dsKrafft, U.6. Ravg, in U. 6. Brig
Sirrn of 18 guns, Yrster Commandant Charles Stewart, U. 8. Navy, commanding,
Monday, 20 August 1804

Plying to windward with the fleet in sight of the town [Tripoli]
Light breezes & pleasant weather with a heavy sea from the N E
At f past a signal for the fleet to wear, turn'd the reefs out of the top-

sails & wore ship. At 3 past 2 discover'd a strange sail to windward.
signal from the Commodore for the Argus to give cbace. At 3 past 2
wore pr signal of the Commodore, $ made sail. f) ast 4 shortened sail,
the A l p spoke the chase, Proved to be tbe 8 e t c b inhe@ with
Provisions &c. for the fleet. f past 5 back'd the main top sa
3 past
6 reefd the topmils.
Midnight light breezes & pleasant wore to the S W pr
At 3 wore to the E@pr signal, made sail, 4 past 5 wore to the S
signal. f past 7 back'd the main top sail, sent the launch on b o d
J. Adams for Provisions. At 8 frll'd away -

Td$

441

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

Meridian light airs & clear, r e d from the John Adam a quantity of
Provisions. Supplied gun boat Nq 4 with water & provisions. [XDA.]
To Sir Alexander John Ball, @overnor of Malta, from Captain Edward Preble,
U. 8. Navy

Constitution - Off TRIPOLY,
a t Anchor
Auguat !&?IB$
1804
SIR YOUwill e're this probably have heard that I am to be superseded in the command of the American Squadron in these Seas - I
value too highly the Friendly sentiments with which you have honored
me, to neglect making you acquainted with the reasons assigned by
my Government, for this (to me) unexpected measure - I therefore
take the libert to enclose you a copy of a letter from the Secretary of
the Navr on tie Subject I beg eave to refer you to Mr OBrien for information respecting our
Operations in this Quarter [LC. EPP, LB, April-Nov. 1804.1
To Secretary of State from John Gavino, U. S. Consul, Gibraltar
Nq

GIBRALTAR
21 '3 A?&u&1804

158

SIR

*

*

*

*

*

*

*

On the Evening of the 12t@Instant arrived Commodor Barron and
his Squadron, when I gave him all the Occurrencys of the times, they
irnediately Waterd and took in such Provisions &ce as they stood in
the Commodor in Company with
need of & could stow. On the
the ConsteUation proceeded for off Trip01 ; the Congress & &sex went
said day for Tanger and to shew themse ves on the Western Coast of
Barbary as the Em erours Cruisers were at Sea; I herewith inclose
you one from Consu Simpson, who lately wrote me had received from
the Emperour assurances of friendship towards the U. S. I now anex you abstract of a Letter from Madrid from which it
seems our Situation with Spain is Critical, I m o t e Mr Pinchey on the
arrival of the John Adarns advising him of the approach of our Squadron, and also informed him since of its arrival, but have no answer to
either which makes me apprehend the Letters are stopd, yet I last
Post wrote him a new under cover to a friend. - The Congress &
Essex I expect in every moment, when it is most probable will roceed
to join the
uadron above. - After Comodor Barron sail I was
informed hlr andolf had come out in the PrewicEed and proceeded
with her, which surprized me much that neither Commodor Barron,
any of the Captains or Consul Eaton who all Dined with me & freuented the house should have mentiond it, if they had I most unoubtedly would (busy as I was dispatching the Squadron) have found
him out and shewn him that attention & Civilitys he is so justly
intitled to; it was from General Trigg I heard of his having been here,
after he left the Garrison, as he had been with him to deliver some
Letters he brought of Recommendation, indeed the short sta of the
Ships, 61 the hurry they were in might have Occasiond the Eentn of
the Squadron not ment~oningit which mortified me much, & I understood was one day on shore -

P

"k

I

r'

f

442 NAVAL OPERATIONS. APRILSEPTEMBER 6. 1804
At Malaga they have a Msjlgnant fever which has w r i e d off 15
out of 20 that were taken with it, but they say the Number of Deaths
are now reduced to 5 out of 20, a strict Quaranteen of forty days is
laid here in Consequence on all Vessels from thence. I have no late Accounts from Comodor Prible. [NA. SDA. CL,Gibraltar, Vol. 2, 17961804.1
To Captain Edward Reble, U. 8. Navy, from George Davis, U. 6. Charge d'uaires,
Tunis

TUNIS
August the 21 1804.
SIR, The letter You did me the honor to write on the 7t@Inst.
giving the pleasing intelligence of our daring and Successful attack
on the Town and Harbour of Tripoli; was not received until1 esterday.It renovated thoseflattering hopesIonce so fondly cheris ed that i t should ultimately be the honourable task of America to
check the insupportable Insolence of these States, and revenge the
Cruel outrages so long committed on every Christian Power. - You
have laid the foundation for a National Character; and on so solid a
Basis, that Tripoli a t least, will learn to respect, even its ruins; and
in doing which, You have in a great degree removed the degrading
opinion, they had entertained of Our Nation - Your example, will
stimulate all the Secondary Nations; and I trust, finally destroy the
false Policy of Europe - May equd Success crown all Your future
operations; and a Generous Government, appreciate the r e d worth of
Your Gallant Wcers. - Everything is in confusion with this Regency; tho' all is silent as the grave - for Your full information, I have
the honor to enclose you a Copy of my present to the Secretary of
State.
I wish MF Russel, Consul for this Regency, to announce to me
OfEcially, his appointment, and arrival in these Seas, before he sails
for Tunis, in order, that the same may be communicated to the Bey,
and all difficulties removed for his happy reception.
I most sincerely rejoice, a t being relieved from so unpleasant a
Post; it is not, however, a favourable moment for making a remood My Sentiments of honor and discipline, are too refined, ever to
question the propriety of any change on the part of Government; or
permit personal views to damp my Zed for the Service of my Country.
I beg You to accept the assurances of the hlgh Consideration and
distinguished Respect, with which,
P:S: I enclose you a line for Cap+OBrien - if you bave any news
papers will you favour me, with a few, by the first occasion

K

[LC. EPP, Vol. 12, June-August 1804.1
To Captain Bdward Preble, U. 8. Navy, from Master Commandant John Smith,
U. 8. Eavy

U. S. S. Vixen OE TRIPOLIAug) 9lst 1804
SIR, I t having become requisite that thir shortly should be furnished for the U. S. Schooner Vizen under my command; a complete
suite of running Riggin & Sails, together with some alteration methe
possition of her Masts, for the purpose of facilitating he[r] w o r h g ,
those circumstances together, m t h the particular construction of the
Vessel, has induced me to inform you, that was she altered from her

W B S WITH BARBARY POWERS

443

present rigg into that of a B*, the change would materially deminish
the expence under which she is employed, & will considerably add to
her roperties as a Vessel of War.
& spars, she has a t present are sdicient to
~ g standing
e
rig
effect the change, t e quantity of Riggin & Canvass will I conceive
be less than that which is requisite in her present state.
[LC. EPP, Vol. 12,June-August 1804.1

P

To William Higginr, U. S. Navy Agent, Malta, from Captain Edward Preble, U. 8.
navy

Condilutwn - At Anchor Off TRIPOLY
August 21 9' 1804
DEARSIR Your favors by the Conception & Intrepid, I have
received. - The Water, Live Stock & Vegetables arrived very opportunely as the whole Squadron were nearly destitute - The Enterprize
has this moment arrived & brings me yours of the 19th Inst - The
Bim with the 120 puncheons will be sdicient water until some part
of the Squadron returns to Port which will be in ten or twelve days,
as the Weather is so precarious, and our Gun boats require so much
Nursing that it will not be prudent to let them remain out longer We have not been able to make an attack since the 7th on account of
unfavorable Winds & Weather; but are now waiting with great
anxiety for an op ortunity - I enclose you a copy of the letter
which announces t a t I am to be superseded by Commodore B m o n
presuming that i t may afford you satisfaction to be acquainted with
the reasons which are assigned by Government I refer you to Mr OBrien for our present situation here - I wish
you to get clear of the Conception as soon as possible, & on the best
terms in your power -

g

[LC. EPP, LB, April-Nov. 1804.1

[21 August 18041
Statement of Captain Edward Reble, U. S. Navy, regarding Ship Gmepfion

I certify that the Ship Conception, Antonio Grirna Master, came
along side this ship this day, and discharged s cargo of Water &
Provisions & was hsmissed at 6 O'Clock in the Everung, not having
had communication with the Shore, or with any other Vessel: And
that we are all in good health.
Given on board the U. S. Ship
Constitution At Anchor off
Tripoly - August 21st: 1804
PREBLE
Signed EDWARD
To aU whom it may concern [LC. EPP,Order Book, May 1803-June 1805.1
To Richard O'Brien from Captain Edward Preble, U. 6. Navy

Constitdion - At Anchor
Off Tripoly Augzlst 21 1 804
SIR YOUwill proceed to Malta in the Polacca Ship Conception
prize to the U. S. Squadron Off Tripoly - the Conception has been

444 NAVAL OPERATIONS, APRILSEPTEMBER 6, 1804
detained in wnse uence of attempting to enter Tripoly in Violation
of a strict Nava Blockade by the U. S. Squadron under my
command EDWARD
PREBLE
RICHARD
OBRIEN
Esqr
An Oficer of the Li. S. of America

P

[LC. EPP, Order Book, M a y 1803-June 1805.1
Extract from journal of Edshipman Charles Moms, Jr., U. 8. Bevy, on board
U. S. Brig Argus, Paster Commandant Isaac Hull, U. S. Navy, commanding,
Tuesday, 21 August 1804

Standing off and on the Town of Tripoli
[Mrs.C. E. Fox original. NDA photostat.]
Extract from journal kept on board the U. 6. Frigate Constitution, by Captain Edward
Preble, U. 8. Bevy, Tuesday, 21 August 1804

Moderate Breezes from E S E & pleasant weather. - Standing in
for the coast of Tripoly, all the squadron in comp? excepting the
Argus on the look out to the Eastward, a t 1 P M the Town of
Tripoly in sight bearing by com ass S E b S 4 Leagues, an unexpected
Westerly Current has carried t e squadron 4 or 5 Leagues farther to
leward than we expected carrying a press of sail all ni ht to gain our
station off the Town, Wind Variable in the ni h t
7 A M the
Wmd had shifted from E S E to South Tripoly tearing S W b S 5
Leagues. a t 9 Ah4 saw a strange sail in the S E quarter, gave chase
mad[e] signal for the Argus & Vixen to chase - the other Vessels
of the squadron repeating. At 11% A M they bore up to comply with
the signal [LC. EPP, Vol. 12, June-August 1804.1

g

Ey

Extract from log book kept by Sailing Master Nathaniel Baraden, U. S. Navy, on
board U. S. Prigate Comtfiution. Tuesday, 21 August 1804

Moderate breezes from E S E with pleasant Weather - Standing
on for the coast of Tripoly - Squadron all in company except the
Argm & Vixen which are on the look out within communication pr
Signal.
At 1 P. M. saw the Town of Tripoly bearing by com ass S E b S
nearly 4 Leagues - We unexpectedly made the town on t ese bearings
owing to a strong Westerly current. We stood in shore till 3 P. M.
when we tacked to the N E At 4+ P. M. tacked to the Southward At 5 P. M. tacked to the N E & a t 6 P. M. tacked to the S On the close of the Evening Tripoly bore by compass S S E nearly
4 leagues - At 8 P. M. tacked to N E - Continued standing to the
E. during the Night under Easy sail - Winds Veering between
ESE.&SSE.
At day light tacked to the S W -Squadron in sight & within signal
distance, Except the Vixen, in sight to W S W - By 7 A. M. the
wind had veered to S b E - Tacked to the Eastq Tripoly bearing by
w m ass S W b S, nearly 6 Leagues - Light breezes Veering between
S S f V & W S W, with pleasant weather all forenoon - At 8 A. M.
saw a strange sail bearing S E b S - continued nearing her till 11
A. M. when she altered her course - At this time the Argus was

E

445

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

-

about 5 Miles N E of us - The J. Adams between the Argus t
Constitution - Vizen in sight to the S W nearly 6 Miles - At 11%
A. M. hoisted the Signal to chase with the Argus's distinguishing
flag a t the Mizen & the Vixen's a t the Main - On their not answering
the signal, we fired 4 guns - The J.Adams repeated the Argus signal
with three guns, On which she bore up in chase.
At 11%we also bore up in chase m order to prevent the Argus's
chase gettin in shore Noon mo ewte breezes from W S W Trip01 in sight bearing S W b W, 4 leagues. Squadron all in sight.
The foflowing Signals have been Made,
At 5.4 P. M. answered the Argw Signal for a strange sail E S E. &
made her signal to chase.
8 P. M -Night signal for Squadron to tack to N E.
53 A. M -Answered the J. Adams's signal for a stmnge sail to
WSW7 A. M -Shewed the Argus' distinguishing flag to speak her 10%A. M -Answered the J.Adam's signal for a strange sail South113 A. M -Argus1 signal to chase E S E & Vixen, come within
hail, & A r p to cast off her gun boats & the Scourge
tow the Argus' boats
Latitude Observed 33' 5' N.

f

[LC. E P P , Log Constitution, 1803-1804.1
Extract from journal of William Eaton, U. S. Navy Agent for the Barbary Rwencies,
Tuesday, 21 August 1804

Delivered my opinion to Commodore Barran concerning the
apparent advantages of cooperating with Hamet Bashaw against
Tnpoli: and the probable disadvantages of acting without his
cooperation.
If this plan succeeds (which will certainly have the full coincidence of the Commodore) and a treatv should follow. insert some
s ~wed'es;because the consul of the
clause favorable to the ~ a n e and
former nation has befriended our captives in Tripoli; and because
the latter have been disappointed in the reliance they placed in our
alliance with them in this war; and because neither the one nor the
other is our rival in the commerce of the Mediterranean.
[NR&L. No. 9217, Bml E 14.1
Extract from journal kept by Purser John Darby, U. 6. Navy, on board U. 6. 6.
John A d m , Master Commandant Isaac Chauncey, U. 6. Navy, commanding,
Tuesday, 21 Anyst 1804

We still continue under way cruising off the co[a]st of Tripoli a t
11 Oclock A M discover$ a sail two ints on the lee bow made a
signal to the commodore signifying t e same a t half ast 11 the
Commodore made the signal to the A r p & Scourge to hese. We
repeated one to the Argus and fired three guns & a t 12 repeated and
fired a t Meridian pleasant Weather & light breezes a t half past 12
the Commodore made the signal for the Vkon to chase E S E. a t
1 the Town of Tri oli bore S W.distance 6 or 7 miles. a t 3 past 4
the Capt went on oard the Vixon. a t 8 O ~ l o ~we
l i came to anchor
in 31 fathom Water.

%o

\

[NDA original. Miss Cmilla 6. McConneU.]

8

446 ATAV& OPERATIONS, APRIL-SEPTEMBER 6, 1804
Extract from journal of IKidshipmrm F. Cornelius degrafft, U. 6. Bavy, in U. 8. Brig
Siren of 18 guns, raster Commandant Charles Stewart, U. 13. Bavy, commanding,
Tuesday, el August 1804

Standing off & on shore with the Squadron [Tripoli]. Light wmds & pleasant weather 4 past 3 tack'd ship. At 5 the
Argus made signal discovering a strange sail to the E S E, the Commodore made signal for the Argus to g v e chace.
past 5 back'd the
Main to ail. At 6 fdl'd away, ' K g to the S. W. 4 past 7 furl'd top
gall$sa$
past 8 wore to N. E. Midnight fine breezes & clear weather wore ship. At 6 saw a
sail off the lee bow Prov'd to be the Vkn. A t 7 wore ship. At 8
turn'd the reefs out of the topsails & made all sail.
Meridian light winds & pleasant the Commodore made signal for
the Vizen to chase to the S S E. - Supplied gun boat NQ 5 with
provisions. Latt: Obs: 33" 12' N -

+

+

[NDA.]

To Captain Edward h e b l e , U. 8. Bavy, from Bichard O'Brien

AUGUSTThe 22'3 1804 SIR AS I. am informed. That with The expected reinforcement
of frigates, That Co! Lear and MT Eaton is Expected to Join the fleet
at present. before tripoli as negotiators &"
Under this Consideration with others relative to The Present.
Sickly Situation of my family a t Malta. I sollicit your permission to
return to Malta - Particularly as at present. my Services Can be
dispensed with.
I am Sir much obliged to you. for your Kind attention and Confidence. dureing The time I have been in The Comtitution -Under
your Orders [LC. EPP, Vol. 13, August-December 1804.1

[22 August 18041
To Midshipman Joseph Israel, U. 6. Navy, from Captain Edward Reble, U.S. Bavy

SIR You are hereby appointed to command the Ketch Intrepid of
[space] Guns & swivels in the service of the U. S. of America. You
will therefore obey and follow such Instructions as you may from
time to time receive from me, or any other your Superior Officer,
agreeable to the Regulations of the Naval Service, as established by
the President of the U. States Given on board the U. S. Ship
Constitution at Sea the 224 day
of August 1804
Signed E: PREBLE
[A duplicate copy of this letter is dated 24 August 1804.1
[LC. EPP, Order Book, May 1803-June 1805.1
To Captain Edward Reble, U. 8. IAavy, from William Eigginr, U. 13. Navy Agent,
solto

MALTA
the it2 Augllgt 1804
MY DEARSIR Tbe purchase of the Bombard Eliza mentioned in
my public letter is merely n o d - I will tell you why I have

447

WARS WITH BARBARY POWEBS

adopted this messure -Sir A Ball sent for me yesterday and told me
that he would prefer the supplies I sent you from hence should go by
Neutrals or Vessels sailing under American colours, as he was afraid
in the event of your making peace with the Bashaw that he would
take umbrage a t English Vessels being allowed to carry you water and
other Necessaries whereby, he would perhaps alledge, and with some
degree of truth, ou were enabled to maintain your Station before his
Town- I r e d ' y consented to his wishes and therefore think our
Trans orts should be all put under Our Colours, this may be easily
done ?I y a Document from you declaring the Vessel to be American
property and putting a Sailing Master on board each I do not now
intend to affreight any other Vessel as the first I sent you is I resume
by this time on her return with Empty Casks, the Intrepid so must
have reached you uickly and this Joined to the Enterprise and my
resent supply wdl e nearly a Months provision I do not find Schem!ri has embarked his powder again, I have mentioned the business to
the Governor who has promised me to prevent his making m y such
expedition, I would Council you however to be upon the look out for
you know the Count L a cunning hand & a d- - - d rascal I had difficulty in finding a flag for the Bombard and was obliged
to apply to Pulis for an old ragged one I heard he had in his possession,
which I got upon a promise to pay for it, I dare say it came cheap
enough to him out of some of the M of W - this Gentleman has
chosen to take in high dudgeon my appointment to the Agency which
he says is a manifest injustice done him by the Government, brought
about by your representations - I on the other hand hope you will
not stop here, but that your good OfEices d l soon free me from a
Coleague useless to Government and vexatious to me Enclosed a letter from the Governor -

9

d'

B

[LC. EPP, Vol. 13, AugustDecember 1804.1

To Captain Edward Preble, U. 8. Navy, from William Higgine, U. 8. Bevy Agent,
Malta

MALTA
the 22 Augmt 1804

DEAR
SIB I had the pleasure of paying You my respects on the

19 Ins? by the Schooner Enterprise - This will be presented you by
Captain FranQGiglio whom I have engaged to command the Storeship
Elzza a Bombard bou h t by me for the service of the United States
for the sum of 4000 altese sendi - I have done this as the cheapest
mode of furnishing you with supplies and to avoid the inconvenience
of their being subject to detention which they would be perhaps if
shipped on English bottoms At foot you will find a Note of my present Shipment as also in the
bill of lading enclosed You will of course furnish CaptP Giglio with a Declaration; under
your Seal and Signature of the Eliza being American property and
urchased for the service of the Squadron under Your Command and
have the honor to subscribe myself with great respect

IJ

P

*

*

*

*

[LC. EPP. Vol. 13. August-December 1804.1

*

*

*

448 l L T A V 'OPERATIONS. RPRIESEPTEMBER 6. 180.4
-

-

Extract from journal of U. S. Brig A r m Master Commandant k c Hull,U. 8. Navy,
command~ng,Wednesday, 22 Awnat 1804

a t MeridQaw a strange sail to the Nd & EP made sail in chace with
the Commod-d
V h n a t 3 came up with the Chace she proved to
be a Polacre Ship 8 days from Malta with water and fresh stock for
the Squadron a t fh past 3 the Commodore made Sigl NQ1188 took her
in tow hauled our wind and stood oE the land a t 5 Tacked to the NP
& WP set & took in sail as Necessary received water from the Ketch
Intripid and store ship
[NDA photostat.]
Extract from journal of Hidshipman Charles Moms, Jr., U. 6. Havy, on board
U. 6. Brig Arguc. Master Commandant Isroc Ed, U. 6. Bavg, commanding,

Wednesday, 22 August 1804

MTri li
3 P S b o a r d e d a Poleacre ship 8 Days from Malta with fresh
stock and water for the Squadron took her in tow Received from the Vessels. 1700 GaIlons Water
11 Came to in 35 fathoms Water
8 A M Cast oE the Store ship
[Mrs. C. E. Fox original. NDA photostat.]
Extract from journal kept on board the U. 8. Frigate Conrtifufion,by Captain Edward
Preble, U. 6. Navy, Wednesday, 22 August 1804

Wind W N W Light Breezes, in chase to the S E - Made the
Signal for the Jnq Adams to act discretionary a t 3 P M brought to
the chase, a Maltese ship from Malta with a sup ly of Water Live
stock B Ve etnbles, st 5 P M Wind shifted to tRe 5 E, the Argus
was ordere to tow the store ship. - st 7 PM we were 4 Leagues
from Tripoly ; standing for the JnQAdams, Syren, Scourge & I17auldw,
at Anchor
[LC. EPP, Vol. 12, June-August 1804.1

t'

Extract from log book kept by Sailing Master Nathaniel Earaden, V. S. Navy, on
board U. 6. Frigate h U M f o n , Wednesday, 22 August 1804

Moderate breezes from W N W - We are in chase to the E S E Argus & Vixen in company. The rest of the Squadron are to the
Westward - Standing in for Tri oly - At 2 P. M. fired a shot a t
the chase - At 3 P. M. broug t to, & boarded her - She is a
Maltese ship under English wlours from Malta with supplies for the
Squadron consisting of Water, Wood, Sheep & some Vegetables Variable winds from the N & E.ward, from 5 P. M till 8 P. M. a t
which time it shifted to the S E
At Sun Set we were three leagues from the coast & nearly four
lea es to the Eastward of Tripoly S uadron was all in sight ofi Tripoly, bearing from N W b W
to W N$ - We were a t this time under all plain Sail in Order td
join the Squadron s as signals to the
Between 10 & 11 P. M we fired several
Squadron, which were answered to the W N u
$"At 11 P. M. we came to in 33 fatht hard bottom - Tripoly bearin
S b W j4 W, nearly 2 leagues-Squadronin company -From 10 P.
till day light Modexate breezes from S E. At 7 A. M. out large

-

gs

d

WARS WITH BARBARY POB7EBS

449

cutter & Barge & ran out a Warp of 840 fathr by which we warped
the store shi along side, She had been riding with the Argus We have een employed all the forenoon in discharging the etore
ship - The Boats of the Squadron are all employed in watering from
the store ship Pleasant weather with moderate breezes veering between N W &
N N E, all the forenoon At 8 A. M. saw a strange sail to the Eastward - The Scourge was
ordered pr signal to chase - At 11 A. M. observed the strange sail
to be the Enterprize which parted corn any on Thursday Evening last.
Noon Moderate breezes from N N . These 24 Hours the following Signals have been made
P. M. At 1%- John Adams - Act in this cme atyour owndiscretion.
Noon - 12%- Vixen, chase E S E - Not answered
P. M - 3ji - Argus - tow the store ship.
P. M - 9%- Prepare to Anchor
A. M - 6 - General Signal for all boats.
A. M - 9%- Answered the Argus's Signal for a Strange Sail E N E.
A. M - 9%- Answered the J. Adams d ? for dq E S E.
A. M - 11% - Scourge made a signal not distinct Noon - Made Scourge's Signal that her signal is not understood, &
shewed her distinguishing flag to speak her -

g

E

(LC. EPP, Log

Conafitution, 1803- 1804.1

Extract from jonrnd kept by Purser John Derby, U. S. Navy, on board U. S. 6.
Jdn Adomc. Master Commandant Isaac Chauncey, U. 6. Navy, commanding,
Wednesday, 2%August 1804

We were employed this morning in discharging provisions and
distributing them to the dift Ships of the Squadron. at Meridian
light breezes and pleasant weather, at 7 P M. the comrnodote made
the signal for to prepare for 3at.tle the Constitdims launch came for
the Volenteers. sent the barge & Black cutter maned and armed. Kothing w&s done this evening on acct of the Night not proving
favorable. [XDA original. Miss Camilla 6 . McConnell.]
Extract from jollrnal of Xidehipman F. Cornelius deKrafft, U. S. Navy, in U. 6. Brig
Siren of 38 guns, Master Commandant Charles Stewart, U.S. Navy, commanding,
Wednesday, 28 Augu~t1804

Lying a t anchor fTripoIi].
Light breezes 8: fine weather. took in sail S: baek'd the main topsail.
4 past Meridian the Commodore gave chase to leeward. At 1 fill'd
away. At 6 overhaul'd a ra e of the Larboard cable. A t 7 sounded
in 35 fathoms. At 8 furl'd a sail & came too in 30 fathoms with the
larboard bower. 4 past 11 the Commodore came too astern of us with
the Argus, Vkm & strange sail, Which prov'd to be a store ship for
the Squadmn Meridian fresh gales & fine weather 3 past 4 sent the launch on
board the John Adam for Provisions. - At 6 sent the cutter on
board the Comm: (pr signal) Midnight moderate breezes 8: warm, rec'd a quantity of rum I%
provisions from the J . Adam

y

[NDA.]

450 NAVAL OPERATIONSl APRIL-SEPTEMBER 6, 1804
To Bobert R. Livingston, U. S. Minieter t o PPris, Franoe, from Thomm Appleton,
U. 6. Consul, Leghorn
COPY.
LEGHORN
23Qaugust 1804.
SIR,I have duly r e d the letter you did me the honor to write in
date of the 28P of July, but as you have not mentioned the receipt of
my several respects of the 6th of July - 26 May loth of May & 13thof

April, I am apprehensive they may not have reached your hands.
f have been favored this day with an extract of a, letter from Mr
Beaussier Commercial ent for the french Republic near the Bashaw
of Tripoli dated the 16 uly and addressed to M' Lorckner formerly
consul from Denmark during thirty years near that regency, but now
established in this city, you have here inclosed Sir,this extract which
will a t once shew you the little advantwe likely to be drawn from what
was so well cal[c]ulated by you to facilitate our negociations, and to
bring [to] an honorable issue a war so injurious to the commerce and
interests of the United States - In a letter which I rec* from Com"
Prebble dated hlessina June the 29th says - "the mediation of France
thro' their consul a t Tripoli will be of no service but rather a disadvantage to us as he is altogether in the Bashaws interest for my
own part, I am far from tbinkng this to be the case, for from all hands
I am informed he is a person of much discernment and solid understanding, i t ought not to be infered if M r Beaussier has judiciously
concealed his predilection for us, that of course he was unfavorable
to our pretensions for it is impossible to conceive that a man of his
superior Judgment can sincerely prefer the interests of the Bashaw of
Tripoli to those of a country united by every tie of amity with the
Government he represents.
I t may be necessary to mention that Mr Beaussier is the same
person who on a former occasion was given up by the Bey of Tripoli to
a British Admiral, 8. it is for this reason that the Bey now shews him
particular marks of attention, in order to do away the remembrance
of the injuries he has thereby sustained - But it re uires a singular
confusion of ideas to imagine that Mr Beaussier shou d from this circumstance prefer the interests of the Bey to the possitive instructions
of his Sovereign - however the case may be, one thing is evident that
the correspondence which has been carried on between Corn9 Preble
& Mr Beaussier has totally destrop the hopes you and every one had
so Justly entertained of the friendly mediation of the Emperor.
There is a peculiar fatality which seems attendant on all our affaim
with Tripoli, for this very Mr 0.Brien who made the offer of 50,000
dollars is a person for whom the Bey has an uncommon dislike, as
many years since when our Treaty was negociating with that Regency
he led the Bey (I am credibly informed) to believe he would receive
a much larger present than was afterwards realized - I have no direct
intelligence whatsoever from ComQPreble since my last respects to
you and reports which we not official I never write - With regard
to the Squadron under the ComQBarron we have no advice of its
arrival in the Mediterranian, but we learn that it remained in Hampton
roads on the latter end of June We may therefore reasonably presume
- that i t cannot arrive in thwe seas & put together the timber they have
for the gun boats much before the b
of October, a season when
these boats can scarcely be hazarde on the coast of Tripoli, I have
much trespassed on your time, but I hope the importance of the

4

3

F

451

WARS WITH BABBARP POWEl?S
subject will justify the length my letter is drawn out to
Sir, the assurances of the respect and esteem of

- Accept

[NA. SDA. Disp., France, Vol. 9, 1803-1805.1
Extract from journal of U.6. Brig A r m Master Commandant I.oommandmg, Thursday, SS Angnat 1804

E d , U.8. Bow,

This day Commences with mod' breezes and Clear Wr at 3 P hf.
the Commodore made Sigl NQ225 sent the barge on board of him At
4 P M, the town of Tri oli bore SSW a t 4 past 6 the Commodore made
Sig! NW95 Capt? Hu went on board of him at 8 he returned on
board At 9 the Squadron got under way and stood into 18 fstq WaterAt midnight the Commodore came too set and took in Sail as
Necessary
At Meridian light winds and Pleasant Weather the town of Tripoli
bore SW 3 S Empq as Necessary

E

[NDA photostat.]
Extract from journd of Xidshipman Charles Morris, Jr., U. 6. Navy, on board
U + S. Brig Argus. Master Commandant b a e c Eull, U. 6. Navy, commanding,
Thursday, 28 August 1804

Off Tripoli
3 The Corn-made

Signal Ng 225
6%P M.995
9 the Squadron got under way and Stood into 18 f a t h w a t e r
[Mrs. C. E. Fox original. KDA photostat.]
Extract from log book kept by Soiling Master Batbnniel Baraden, U. 8. Navy, on
board U. 6. Frigate Comfitution. Thursday, 23 Angust 1804

Moderate breezes from N N W,with pleasant weather. At Single
Anchor 5 or 6 miles N b E X from T r i p o l ~ . Squadron in company.
Employed clearing the store ship & ballastang her with Salt Water At 8 P. M. the Enterprize joined company - A t Sunset had cleared
the store ship - By this store ship the Squadron was supplied with
168 puncheons of water - nearly equal to 14000 gall! - We also
received 30 sheep, a large Quantlty of Onions & nearly 12 ward of
Wood - We received b the Intrepid 60 sheep, 30 Butts of Water,
equal nearly to 3,600 ga 1% some Onions - Out of both Vesseh we
received on board the Constitution 135 puncheons of water, 2 Bullocks
30 Sheep, 40 Bushels of Onions, & 9 or ten ward of Wood A t 7 in the Evening the store ship parted company for Malta.
Consul O'Brien took passage in her We have now on board the following casks of water Vizt 51 Lesgurs,
45 Butts & Twenty seven gang casks - or 23,198 Gallons.
At 7 in the Evening every necessary arrangement was made p'
S i p a l for an attack upon Tripoly - The Boats of the Squadron were
ho~stedout, armed & sent to the gun boats & Bombards - At 8
P. M. we weighed with the squadron & ran in for the Harbour Between 8 & 9 in the Evenin we had fresh breezes from E S E. with
cloudy Overcast weather. f f e are standing in for the T a w which
bears S S W, 4 or 5 Miles. Between 10 & 11 P. M. Light breezes
Veering between E b S & E b N Continued standin in with the Squadron till ?4 past 11 P. M.
when it fell nearly
- At this time we were within gun shot of

9

dm

452 NAVAL OPERATIONS. APRIL-SEPTEMBER 6. 180.4
Fort English & nearly two miles from the Town - The Squadron
all clear for Action - . We were now in 19 fathg water & entering
on the Western Bank - We had a strong current setting to the
Eastward At % before 12 Midnight we let go the Small bower under
foot - We were in the Act of casting off the Bombards & gun boats,
when a breeze sprung up from the N El which is nearly direct on
shore - The Town now bore S W b S nearly two miles - We continued in this situation with our Topsails a'trip till 2 A. M. waiting
a change of Wind more favorable for weighmg & standing in to
attack the Batteries - From 12 Midnight tlll 2 A. M. the weather
was overcast with an uncommon scud from E N E At % past 2 A. M. we weighed & stood off till ji past 3 A. M. when
we came to, in 30 fathe The Town bearin S W b S, 4 or 5 Miles Part of the Squadron anchored pr Signa & part continued under
way. At 9 in the morning the Bashaw Saluted 44 Guns From the time of Our Anchoring till noon, Variable Winds from
the Eastward with sultry, Overcast Weather Noon 1' h t airs from E N E with a strong current running to E S E.
The Fo lowing Signals have been made these 24 hours
At 3 P. M. - All boats repair to the Constitution
63: P. M - All captains repair on board the Commodore
7 P. M - Gun boats & bombards Prepare for battle [LC. EPP, Log Con~titution,1803-1804.1

F

f

Extract from journal of William Eaton, U. 8. Navy Agent for the Barbary Regencies,
Thursday, 23 Angnet 1804

Half past 3, P. M. latitude N. 36 de ees 30 minutes lon 'tude W.
2 degrees 41 minutes 15 seconds, 17 mies W. off cape De at, f e l t s
violent shock of an earthquake, which lasted about 30 seconds. I t
had the exact resemblance of the shi 's keel grazing hard upon a

gr
l?
in. The shock was general
rock. We were a t dinner in the ca1
through the ship: i t was supposed she was aground - Consternation

seized the board - all ran on deck - the ship kept her way and no
appearance of rocks or shoals could be discovered. The Constelhtwn,
whose Captain dined aboard of us, we being becalmed, soon made
signal to speak the Commodore: and coming up, reported she had
struck a rock. On enquiry, we found she felt the shock a t the same
instant it WBS felt in the President. A Spanish merchantman being
a t that time about one league on the Commodore's landboard bow, a
breeze s rung up: we bore down and spoke her: she had felt the shock,
and sai it was very violent. About 5 o'clock we experienced another
emotion in the ship, less violent, but more tremulous, than the first.

ti'

[NR&L. No. 9217, Bml E 14.1
Extract from journal kept by Pnrrer John Darby, U. 8. Navy, on bomd U. 8. S.
J o h Admns. Master Commandant Iraac Chauncey, U. 8. Xavy, commanding,
Thurnday, 23 Augnrt 1804

At 3 past 4 this morning our men returned on board. a t Meridian
light breezes and pleasant weather. a t 5 P. M. the Commodore made
the signal to pre are for Battle. soon after the Comtitution-s launch
came for the Vo enteers sent them and our Barge & Black Cutter

P

453

WARS WITH BARBARY POWEBS

maned and Armed: at Midnight l g h t breezes from the S E by E.
no attack was made to night on account of the wind not proving
favorable [NDA original. Miss CsmiUa 8.McConnell.]
Extract from j 0 t U d of Midshipman F. Cornelius degrafft, U.S. Navy, in 0 . 8 . Brig
Siren of 18 guns, Tdaater Commandant Charlea Stewart,U. S. Eavy, commanding,
Thursday, 23 Augumt 1804

Lying a t Anchor Standing off & on shore [Tripoli]
k h t breezes & pleasant. 4 past Mer: the Argus got under way
At 2 sent the launch on board the J. Adam for water &c: At 10
hove up made sail & stood in for the land. A.Il the Squadron under way
3 past 11 back'd the main topsail. Midnight spoke the Commodore, cast of[Q the boats, 4, past 2
back'd the main topsail & took our gun boats in tow fill d away
At 4 came too with the larboard bower, furl'd all sad. At 9 sent the
launch on board the Enterprize for water. Meridian light airs & pleasant, r e d from the J.Adams &- E a r
a uantity of Provisions & water. Supplied gun boats NO 4 &
wit Provisions &c,

c:

B

INDA.]

[24 August 18041
To Captain Edward Reble, U. 8. Navy, from John Broadbent, lJ. 6. Navy Agent,
Messha

On the 24th day of August in the Year of our Lord 1804 in the
Lazarette of hlessina, personally appeared before John Broadbent
Naval Agent of the U. S. Of america William Egery, Master of the American Brig Patty of Rochester,
and deposeth that he sailed from the Port of Leghorn on the l l t b day
of this month, his destination being for this Port; and that on the
evening of the same day, he fell in off the Island of Elbe with a Tunisian
Galley rowing 22 or 24 Oars & mounting two brass guns, the commander of which boarded him: Obliged him to quit his vessel and to
go on board the said Galley where he was detained all night &. till
about 10 Oclock in the morning, during which time he menaced $
insulted him &: spit in his face, saying that his passports did not agree
with that produced by the said commander, who declared that for the
same reason he had sent an American ship mounting 4 guns &- laden
with wine, to Tunis - He also de osed that the commander of the
said corsair robbed him of 110 do ars in S ecie, two quadrants & a
spying glass, L forced him to give him an ac&nomledgement in writing
that he had taken nothing from him: Obhging the captain of a
Spanish vessel who happened to be in company to write underneath
the Said acknowledgement something to the same effect: And the
said William Egery is of Opinion that his vessel would also have been
detained had i t not been for the re resentation of the said S anish
captain, who told the commander o the Privateer that it wo d not
be a good Prize. He further deposed that the mid commander
roduced a certificate signed by George Davis, American Consul a t
Funis dated the 2P July last, &. numbered 34. and that the said canmander had lost his right hand taken off near the wrist, and also art
of one or more of his fingers of the left hand, and that the said G ey,

IP

P

3

&

454 NAVAL OPERATIONS. APRIL-SEPTEMBER 6 , 1804
on parting company went into the Island of Tournique where she

makes her rendezvous -

In testimony whereof I have hereunto set my hand & sed the day

& year above written [LC. EPP,LB, ApriI-Kov. 1804.1

124 August 18041
To Xidshipman* Joseph Iarael, U. 6. Navy, from Captain Edward Preble, U. 6.
IJnvg

SIR YOUare to proceed to Malta in case of Separation from the
Squadron, and there wait my farther Orders Given On board the United States
Ship Constitution - A t Sea; the
24th day of August 1804.
Mr JOSEPH IZRAEL
Lieu! in the U S. Navy Commanding the U. S. Ketch Intrepid

EDWARD
PREBLE

[*Appointed Lieutenant by Commadore Preble.]
[LC. EPP, Vol. 13, August-December 1804.1
To Captoin James Bmron, U. 8. Navy, commanding U. S. Frigate Errex, from James
Simpson, U. S. Consul, Tangier, Morocco

N9

3

TANGIERMOUNTWASHINGTON
August

Zdtb

1804

DEARSIR I have not a Syllable of Novelty to communicate, not

having heard any thing from the Emperor, nor any Person in authority
under him, since I saw you Mr Gavino in his Letter of the 2Ot@desires me to communicate to
you the following parsgraph of a Letter from a private Gentleman
dated Madrid August 7 Q "Mr Pinckney is preparing to go to Cadjz, & will leave this in 15 or 20

"Days - I am well convinced from what Mr Pinckney hes told me concernilig
"his Instructions from the U'Stetes, that our Goverment will be highly
"enraged st the refusal of H . C. M. to ratify the Convention, and you nlsg
"rely upon it, that if this Goverment has not sent out the ratification to
"the U'Ststes, Letters of Marque will be Imruediately granted."-

I do not know who this Letter is from, but it appears strange that
M? Pinckney should not know whether the ratification be sent to
America or not.
A mahgnant Fever has again broke out a t Malaga, as far as Fift
three Persons had Died of a Day: Mr Gavino writes me on the 209@
that he had then juet received a Letter from Mr Kirk atrick, saying
it was abating - I hope it may, but it is seldom a ~sorderof that
Nature is of so short a duration. - When you were in the Bay on
Tuesday afternoon I went to Town, but wuld not et a Boat to send

f

off, which induced me to put up the Colours in a
would have sent one on shore. -

biff, in hopes you

[Am. Antiquarian Soc. XDA photostat.]
Extract from journal of U. 6. Brig Argus, Muter Commendant Isaac Hull,U.S. Navy.
commanding, Friday, 84 August 1804

standing on and off the town the Commodore a d Squadron a t
Anohor a t 3 past 4 the Commodore made sigi NQ89 to the Gunboats

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

455

set and took in Sail Occtlsiondly rind T, K* ship when Necess
at
6 the town of Tripoli bore SWbS a t 8 Cast off the ~ u n b o a & ? ? a ~ $
Hull went on board the Commodore a t 9 took the Gunboats in tow
Ca t Hull returned at 4 ast took one of the Bombards in tow made
and stood in for the %own a t t paat 5 AM took the Gunboats in
tow again A t 8 the Town of Tripoli bore SSW -

SJ

[NDA photostat.]

Extract from journal of Hidshipman Charles Morris, Jr., U. 6. Navy, on board
U. 6. Brig Argur. Mester Commandant Isaac Hull, U. 8. B a v , commanding,
Friday, 24 August 1804

Off Tripoli

Moderate Weather

43 the Commodore made signal NQ69 to the Gun boats
5 a Signal was made to prepare for Battle
8 Cast off the Gun boats (9 took them in tow again with one of the
Bombards. iMade sail and stood for the Town

AM.
2 Cast offthe Bombard & Bosh
3 the Bombards commenced throwing
- Shells and 15 or 20 a t the
Tom
5 A M. Took the Gunboats in tow wain
- and stood off shore No
guns fired from shore
[Mrs. C . E. Fox original. K D A photostat.]

%tract from log book kept by Sailing Mollter Nathaniel Haroden, 0. 6. Hovy, on
board U. 6. Rigate Guntitrdion, Friday, 94 August 1804

Moderate breezes from N E. At Single Anchor 5 Miles N E b N,
from Tripoly. Squadron in company - We received this afternoon
a large Quantity of lemons, One cask Sweet Oil & two small casks of
Wine Towards evening we weighed with the Squadron & stood in for
Tripoly - At 8 P. M. came to in 20 fath" &Miles from Fort English
& about 24 Miles from the Batteries At this time we had fresh breezes from E b S - The Squadron (p:
Signal) within hail - At 9 P. M. we put slip buoys on the cable &
had every thing in readiness for Action At 10 P. M. cast off the Bombards which were taken in tow by the
Argus & Syren with directions to work in shore & wait the signal for
Attacking the Batteries Towards Midnight light airs inclining to a calm - Capt? Decatur
& Stewart waited on the Commodore At 1 A. M. a dead calm. The Boats of the Squadron which had
been Anned before n' h t for assisting the Gun boats $ Bombards, were
ordered to assist in ?'owing them in - At 2 A. M. the Bombards
began to heave shells into Tripoly, and continued doing so till day
light, when they were Ordered p' Signal to join company - Our
Gun did not fire - The Batteries did not fire a gun during the night.
From day light till 7 A. M. light airs from S S W which is the bearing
of Tripoly from our Anchorage At 5$ A. M. the Enemys Gun boats hauled out from the Mole, and
took their old stations in a line of defence within the reefs, and under

456 hTAVAL OPERATIOhTS.APRILSEPTEMBER 6 , 1804
cover of Grape from dl the Batteries. At 6 A. M. Weighed and
took an Offing of 3 or 4 Miles N N E. from the Batteries - Came to
in 30 fathq hard bottom cloudy, sultry weather all forenoon with
light & variable winds from Ng & East$ - Cap! Chauncey with part
of his Officers & Seamen came Volunteers to the Constitutzon - His
Officers &: men are principally sent in the Gun boats & boats of the
Squadron Noon light. airs from N E. - We are anchored near 4 Miles N N E
from the Bashaws castle, which has a breach of apparently, nearly 40
feet occasioned by our Bombards. During the Bombardment not a
light was seen in the Town or Batteries.
At 9 A. M. Cap! Chauncey with his Officers & Seamen rejoined the
John Adams The following Signals hare been made these 24 hours
At 4% P. kf - Gun boats & Bombards prepare for Action
4% A. M - Discontinue the Action & retire out of gun Shot, to
be taken in Tow by the Vessel to which you are
attached [LC. EPP, Log Constitution, 1803-1804.1
Extract from journal kept by Purser John Darby, U. S. Navy, on board U, S. 8.
john A d m , Master Commandant Iaaac Chauncey, U S. Navy, commanding,
Friday, 24 August 1804

At 8 Oclock this morning our men returned to the ship. fresh
breezes from the Eastwc at Meridian fresh breezes. a t 6. Oclock
discovc the ship to drag veered away 20 fathum cable finding that not
to bring her up supposing the Anchor to be foul, up anchor and got
under way and stood in shore at 10 tacked ship [NDA original. Miss Camilla S. NcConnell.]
Extract from journal of Hidshipman F. Cornelius dellraftt, U. 6. Navy, in 0.6.Brig
S h of 18 gnnr, Master Commandant Charles Stewart, U. S. Navy, c o m m m ~ ,
Friday, 24 August 1804

Following the Motions of the Commodore. Light breezes t pleasant. At 5 got under way pr signal At 7 set
top gall$ sails At 8 Xd tO the N Ed At 9 stood in shore. ) past.9
mann'd the launch & barge. - At 10 took one of the bombards m

tow.*Midnight hght airs & clear. At 1 cast off the gun boats & stood in

for the town - At 2 the bombards commenced a heary fire on the
town. A t ) past 4 the Cornm: made signal for the gun boats bombards &c. to retire from action. the gun boats &c come off after doing
considerable damage by sinking 2 of the enemies gun boats & 1 of their
. At 6 took our gun boats in tow. At 7 the Comrn: came too.
P"Ot"past 7 back'd the main top sail - Meridian fresh gales & hazy,
wore in shore, su plied the gun boats astern. r e d a quantity of
Vegitables & fruit rom the store Ketch. (Intrepid) -

P

[FiDrZ.]

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

457

To Colonel John BBicker, Bavy Agent, Baltimore, Md.,from Secretary of the Pavy

NAV.DEP.2i5 Aug: 1804.
I yesterday received your letter of the 22 inst.
Gq Harrison Es by letter of the same date, received this morning
has informed me t a t the carpenters work of the Gun-boat to be built
at Philadelphia, is contracted for and will cost 2500s -that the
probable cost of the boat, including the carpenters, blacksmith's,
joiners, plumbers, painters, riggers, blockmakers, mastmakern, sailmakers, tanners, chaundlers, boatbuilders and coopers bills, the
cost of copper nails, bolts & spikes and flannel, will be 58386.
-4rl offer has been made to Sam! Brown Esqr Boston, to do the carpenters work of a boat at 30$ Pr Ton. [NDA. Off. Comg. Gunboats, 1803-1808.1

1

To Henry E. Langdon, Portsmouth, N. H.,from Secretary of the Bavy

NAV.DEP.,25@Aug: 1804
I hare received your letter of the 15t@inst. wherein you inform me
that the very infirm state of your fathers health will not permit him
to attend to the building of the Gun-boat. - We mean therefore,

for the present, to abandon the Idea of building a t Portsmouth.
pleased to communicate this determination to your father.
[KDA.

Be

Off. Comg. Gunboats, 1803-18Q8.1

To Daniel Bedmger, Navy Agent, Norfolk, Pa.,f'rom Secretary of the Navy

XAVYD E P ~
25 Augg 1804.
1 have recd your letter of the 21" instant, wherein you inform me
that you have engaged the Ship R'm & Mary, Cap-rasmus Tipling,
to carry to Algiers the cargo of Timber which by my letter of 20
June last you were directed to procure.
As it will be a convenience to the owners of the UP c@ Mary to
receive a part of the freight prior to the Sailing of the Vessel, i t being
perfectly immaterial to the public, provided they are well secured,
you may engage to pay & of the freight when the vessel shell have
recg her cargo and be in nll respects ready for sea - the remaining 8
you H-ill engage to pay on the receipt of the Consul a t Algiers bemg
produced to you, stating tlle delivery of the Car o to him in good
order. You will transmit the Consul a t Algiers, Co 9 Lear, an Invoice
& Bill of Lading of the Cargo. You will also make the like transmittal to this Department, and to the Auditor of the Treasury.
I have directed you a remittance of $2,000 out of the "Appropriation for Barbary Negocintions" to enable you to p y the advance
herein authorized on account of the freight of the I4 & May. You
will be careful that the public do not suffer by this Stipulation.
Insure this Cargo on the best terms in your power and let me
h o w the rate of Insurance.
The foreign Ministers being absent from the Seat of Government,
the procuring passports for the
& hiiary may probably detain her
for a day or two. However you will not relax in your exertions to
have her prepared for Sea. We shall send the Passports as soon
rts we can procure them.

5

458 NAVAL OPERATIONS, APRIL-SEPTEMBER 6. 180.4
Should the powder ordered from Baltq to be shipped in the A b e d
not arrive till the Alfred shall have sailed, send i t out in the W m&
Mary if she can safely and conveniently receive it, with directions to
Cap$ Tipling to deliver i t to J Gavino Esqr a t Gibraltm to whom
you will write advising of the shipment and that it is intended for the
use of our Squadron.
Deliver the enclosed Letter to Cap; Tipling & let him experience
no unnecessary detention.
[NDA.

Barbary Powers, LB, 1803-1808.1
[Enclosure]

To Captain grasmus Tipling, of the American Ship William and Mmy, from Secretary
of the Navy

Ca t ERASMUS
TIPLINGof the n7"& May
&closed to Dl. BEDINGER
Esqr

NAVYD E P ~
25 Augt U8041

Nogolk. V*

As soon as you are in all respects ready for sea you will weigh
anchor and proceed with all practicable expedition to Algiers. On
your arrival there you will hand to Colo Lear, the Consul Genera1
a t that place, such letters as you may have for him, and take his
directions relatively to the delivery of your Cargo.
If D! Bedinger esqr should put on board of the Wm & May a
quantit of powder, and direct you to stop a t Gibraltar to deliver it,
you wil act according to his directions.
R f SMITH.(Sailed 29 Sepr 1804)

I

[NDA.

Bsrbsry Powers LB, 1803-1808.1

To Robert Montgomery, U. S. Consul, Alicante, from Tobias Lear, U. 6. Consul
General, Algiers

ALGIERS
August 25* 1804
DEARSIR I have this day dramn upon yourHousefor Six thousands
Six hundred Spanish Dollars, a t 30 days Sight, in favor of David
Coen Bacri, to obtain the sum of six Thousand dollars for Mr Foley
a t Oran, agreeable to his letter to me, a Copy of which is enclosed,
I regret that I had not the money to ad[v]ance, which I shq most
readly have done without an premium. Before I obtained the
money I wnsulted with Sidi Kahomet, mentioned in Mr Foley's
letter, to know if his objects were such as W*make i t proper to draw
a bill a t this loss of ten per Cent, which was the only terms on which
the Money could be obtained, and lie a t once decided that Mr F.
must have the money; I therefore did not hesitate to procure it.
I enclose also one of the Rec" of Sidi Mahomet, of which I have
taken three
Your acceptable favor of the 30t9 of July with the Gazetts came
to hand on the lo* Inst
As I am ordered by my Govt to hold myself on readiness to roceed
to Tripoli to negotiate a peace, in case the Bashaw sh-e
osed
to wnclude i t on proper terms, I may be absent on the arriva of a
Vessel from Alicant, so that if you should send money for Mr Foley's

Af'

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

459

use, it w'J be well to provide for this event, that Mr Foley may not
experience any disappointment
[Stephen Deoatur Col.

NDA photostat, Book A.]

To Thoman Foley, Oran, from Tobias Lear, U. 8. Consul General, Algiers

ALGIERSAugust 25: 1805 [I8041.
SIB, I have been honored with your respe[c]tive favour of the 4'5
of July & of the 5'h & 13'h of the present Month I feel much Obliged
for the letters forwarded with your's of the 4'h of July. as well as for
your Cordial Offers of Service. - The Courier by which I intended to
have written to you soon after the r e d of your first letter left Algiers
a day sooner than I had been informed he would go; and since that I
have known of no opportunity 'till the present. As I reside altogether
in the Country, and seldom visit the City, I am not in the way of
knowin all the opportunities which may offer by land, for the Coast.
I enc ose you an extract of my letter to our mutual friend Rob?
Montgomery Esqr, after I had recc your's of the 4th of July, and also
of his answer thereto, which came to my hands on the l o t h inst
You will see by my letter to Mr Montgomery that I had so many
unexpected demands for Cash, that i t wd not be in my power to Supply
you that article, excepting by a draft on him. - I was in hopes that
he wg have sent money from Alicant to be ready for your use before
you should send for it, to save the Very heavy loss on Exchange,
which is ten per Cent between this place & Alicant; and is the only
way by which Cash can be obtained here a t present. I now send you, by Sidi Mahomet, agreeably to your request six
thousand Dollars in Algerine Gold, that is three thousand Zequins,
and have taken triplicate recQherefore, two of which will be forwarded
to Mr Montgomery with the draft upon him, and one I shall reserve
for myself. I would not undertake to procure to money on this draft until1 I
had communicated with Sidi Mahomet on the Subject; and stated
to him the heavy loss which wc be sustained by the usansce of 10 per
Cent. and as you observe that he a man of your Confidence, I presumed he W@know if your Objects were such as w* make this agreeable,
rather than be disappointed of the money. He a t once decided that
you wg expect the money; and I therefore did not hestitate to procure
~ t. and have drawn a bill a t 30 days sight on Mr Montgomeri;, in
favor of David Co&n Bacri, for Six thousand Six hundred do ars,
which covers the ten per Cent. I am very sorry that i t was not in m power to furnish the money
by other means; as I should feel more eslrous of Shewing my regard
for Mr Montgomery's recommendation, than if I had any pecuniary
interest in the business
With respect to English affairs here, I refer you to the extract from
my letter to Mr Montgomery. Since the date of that we have heared
nothing more respechng them. It is generally beleived that a new
Consul will be sent & every thing accomodated; but I think i t d l
much de end on the Continuance of the War between G . B. & France.
Your etter in favor of Mf Domingo Roman came enclosed in one
from him, I can only say to him that it is the General Policy of our
Governmg not to have Agents, but in places where our commerce,
or other circumstances may make it necessary; and thoJ I am not

7

B

l'

460 NAVAL OPERATIONS, APRIL-SEPTEMBER 6 , 1804
restrained from making such appointments yet delicacy we forbid
my doing it unless called upon by some particular motive, and in that
case the recommendation of M Montgomery wQ have weight with
me. I have recQ orders from my Govt to hold myself in readiness to
proceed to Tripoli to negotiate a peace if the Bashaw she be disposed
to make i t in proper terms; and i t is therefore possible I may be
absent when Mr Montgomery sends Cash; if he shg forward any for
your use; but in that case I will leave i t a t your command and advise
you thereof.
I am much obliged by your polite offer of services; and shall not
fail to improve it, if occasion requires. In the mean time, you will
oblige me, if, when a t leisure, you will draw up a short history of the
Country where you are, touch? all the important points & actual
state of affairs, which your knowledge or information may enable you
to do. - The Climate, Soil, face [?] of the Country, productions,
manufactures, if any, towns Number of Inhabitants $9 $ 9 - You
must not consider this as a matter to be done farther than your entire
inclination & leisure may prompt. - And I pray you to command
my Services when they can be useful to you.
[Stephen Decatur Col. XDA photostat, Book A.]
Extract from journal of U. 6. Brig Argur, Master Commandant Isaac Hull,U.S. Navy,
commanding, Saturday, 25 August 1804

These 24 hours Commences with fresh Breezes and Cloudy Weather
Tacked and wore Ship when Necessary made and Shortened Sail
Occasionally a t 6 the town of Tripoli bore SWbS distant 3 leagues
a t 7 hoisted in the boat At midnight moderate Breezes & Clear a t 3 past 7 Captab Hull
went on board the Commodore & returned a t 8 a t 3 past 9 the Commodore made Sig! N? 886 and Sigi N-8
to the Gunboats a t 2
past hoisted out the Launch We were all ready to Commence an
Attack but the wind Increasing and the Sea running high found i t
Impossible [NDA photoatat.]
Extract from log book kept by Sailing Master Nathaniel Haraden, U. 8. Bevy,
on board U. 6. Frigate Corutitution, Saturday, 86 August 1804

Moderate breezes from E b S A t Single Anchor 4 Miles N K E. from the Bashaw's Castle
Squadron in company and all under way except the John Adam &
Ketch Intrepid - At 3 P. M. fresh breezes - We supplied the
Vizen with 2 coards of wood & some fresh stock - The wind continued
to increase till sun set when we had stron breezes from E S E Hoisted in the Barge & Pinnance & Veere awa to a cable - The
John A h m s a t this time was driving - She weig ed pr Signal - the
wind continued fresh throu h the mght; At day light the Squadron
were all in sight to the N E & E N E. Morning, pleasant; with moderate breezes from E b S The Stock & Vegetables received by the store ship & Intrepid are
all e ended - They have been proportionably divided among the
squ3on. -

N"

% E

461

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

At 7 A. M. (pr Signal) all captains were ordered on board the
Commodore At 8 A. M. sup lied the Bombards with shells & provisions - At
10 A. M. weighetf & stood in shore under double reefed topsails &
courses - From this time till noon strong breezes from the Eastward.
Gun boats No" & 6 carried away their lateen Yards - This
forenoon, arrangements were made for a general attack upon Tripoly.
Strong breezes from E & E b N prevent the Squadron from coming
into action.
Ca 1 Chauncey with a part of his Officers & crew, came on board
the onstitution - They are distributed among the Squadron as
before From the time of our weighing till noon, we wore and tacked as
necessary to keep to Windward of Tripoly
Noon, All the Squadron in company, under way except the John
Adams & Intrepid
Surgeons report 7 Sick & 5 convalescent Noon strong breezes from E b N with a rough Sea - Tripoly
S W b S nearly 2 leagues The following Signals were made the 24 hours past A. M. At 7. All captains repair on board the Commodore
8 - Enter rize come within hail
10 - S ua mn, prepare for Action
104 boats (h Bombard, prepare for d'?
112 - Enterprize come within hail [LC. EPP, Log Constitution, 1803-1804.1

8

Bun1

Extract from journal of Midshipman Charles Morris, Jr., U. S. Navy, 25 Augnst to
1 November 1804

From this date on board the Gun boats, and a Greeli. Ship prize to
the U S Brig Argw, until1 the first Day of Kovember. 30 Days of
which was Quarantined in Malta [Mrs. C. E. Fox original.

NDA photostat.]

Extract from journal kept by Purser John Darby, U. S. Navy, on board U. 6. S.
John Adam. Master Commandant Isaac Chauncey, U. S. Navy, commanding,
Saturday, 25 August 1804

At 7 OClock this morning the Commodore made the si a1 for all
Captains to repair on board. the Constitution. We backe our Main
Top sail & the Captain went on board the commodore a t 9 the Captain returned & at past 9 we came to Anchor in 31. Fathum Water.
a t 10 the commodore made the signal to prepare for battle. sent all
the Volenteers on board the Comtitulion: At Meridian fresh breezes
from E S E. a t half pas 12 fresh breezes from S E . b E. a t half past 2
the Constilzltions boat came along side to inform us that we must take
a gun boat in tow but the wind blowing so hard we were not able to
effect it soon after the Capt came on board in the een Cutter &
the Black cutter returned with the men the wind bowing so hard
nothing was done to day

gn

+

T

[NDA original.

Miss Camilla S. McConnell.]

462 NAVAL OPERATIONS. APRILSEPTEMBER 6. 1804
Extract from journal of Wdsbipman F. Cornelius deKrafft, U. 8. Ravy, in U. 8. ?rig
Siren of 18 guns,Master Commandant Charles Stewart, U. 6. Navy, commandmg,
Saturday, 28 August 1804

F'resh breezes & pleast At 2 the Enterprize got under wa pr signal.
Lying off & on shore & taking in & making sail occasional y. 4 past
7 hoisted in the barge Midnight fresh breezes & pleast standing off & on shore. 3 past 7 a
signal from the Comrn: for all Captn@to repair on board hls ship
standing off & on shore. Latt Obs: 33' 8' N.

f

[NDA.]

[26 August 18041
To Master Commandant Isaac Channcey, U. S. Navy, commanding U. 8. Ship
John A d a . from Captain Edward Preble, U. 6. Navy

SIR, A dispute having arisen between Mr John Darby purser, &
h$r J. Ord. Creighton, Masters Mate of the U. S. Sbip John Adams
under your command on the 26t? Ins: respecting the Pursers duty, in
which the most intemperate, reproachful & ungentleman like language
was uttered & made use of towards each other, in direct violation of
the Articles of war, and regulations of the Service, and tending to the
contravention of all discipline, I do in consequence thereof Order you
to arrest them both to take their trail by Court Martial, which shall
be asssembled b me as soon as the service will conveniently admit
of itYou w' 1 furnish Mr Darby & Mr Creighton with a copy of
this Order with the Order of Arrest.

9

[LC. EPP, Order Book, hlay 1803-June 1805.1
To Master Commandant Isaac Channcey, U. S. Bavy, from Purser John Darby,
U. 6. Bavy

FRIGATE
John Adam

~~EDITERRANEAN
SEA

off Tripoli August 66tQ1804
SIR In compliance with your request, I now lay before you a statement of the affair between Mr John Orde Creighton (Masters Mate)
and myself - The ships steward came to me in the Wardroom, and
informed me that the o5cers and men which had been detached from
the ship yesterday had returned and wished to know whether he was
to serve them out their full allowance of grog and provisions, it being
a little after the grog had been served out for the day, I directed him
to give them their full allowance of grog & provisions he said they
wanted beef and that he had none o eng as the Barrel which was
opened last night - and which was de ivered to me by M? Dove the
master for beef proved to be pork - I told him he must give them
pork in lieu of Beef; and in every instance here after, when he had not
one thing, to give them the Value in another, as I would not keep an
account for every triffing part of a ration at the whim & caprice of
every man onboard, as one wanted one thing and another wanted
pay for his &C- as I was informed by several of the Pursers out
here that. that was their mode of doing the business (to Wit, they
gave them one thing in place of another when they had not the article
necessary for the day - Mr Creighton who was siting in his a artment
on the oposite side of the ship replyed (without being ad ressed or

f'

B

WABS WITH BARBARY P O W m S

463

to by me) that they had a right to stop or refuse whst they
p eased and to demand and receive pay for it and that it was nothug
more than what was customary, and that all the rest of the Pursers
did it (this he spoke out in the hearing of nearly the whole of the
Officers who were below, and a number of the men) I re lyed that they
yed,
I that they
did not all do it, he asserted again that they did. I rep'?
did not -he then said it was faulse for they did I told him he had
asserted the faulsity first, for they did not, he then said I was a damned
lier and rascal, I then lost all command of myself m d replyed to him
in the same language, he returned the same to me with some additional abuse, and threatened me with the consiqu[e]nce of the ships
protecting me, and came across to our apartment in the Wardroom
and shook his fist in my face I steped up to him and drew back my
fist and told him that he knew very well that the situation in which
we were then placed was what alone protected him, one of the Officers
(I believe Ms Bennett,) spoke to us, threats was pased from each
other on our meeting on shore, and I supposed for a moment that the
business was to rest there; but M: Creighton on his returning to his
own apartment observed in a some what lower voice that he had long
since discovered what I was, and that I was not an honest man, I was
not possitive what it was he did say having wdked in the Wardroom
and my back towards him, I immediately turned round and asked him
what it was he did say, he replyed that he had long since discovered
what I was, Yes says I and I have long since discovered the same of
you but I thought you had said something else, yes says he I did say
you were not an honest man I then told him he was a damned lier and
a rascal and that I wou'd make him prove it, I understood him to say
he wu'd. I told him that he certainly shou'd for I had lived too
long in this life under a fair character to be charged with any thing
even unGentlemanly by such a puppy as him, which was much less
than that of a dishonest man
At that moment you Sir came doum the after ladder and went into
your Cabin - I immediately followed you and made to you a Verbal
statement, with requ[e]sting you would take such notice of it as to
Creigbton
I!
prove his charges against me or convict himself of
make >
a faulsity you immediately sent for Mr Creighton d- our statements
differing you directed us to represent each of our statements in Writing
to you, and that you would lay it before the Commodore, this I have
done to the best of my recollection, the proof of which must rest upon
the officers who were present Having Sir, finished my statement I have now to solicit you in the
most pressing manner that you will do me the favor to have i t layed
before the Commodore and to use your interest with him to have a
Public investigation of the base and criminal charges exhibited against
me by ilfr Creighton, (as soon as possible) that I may either stand
convicted or acquited, in the opinion of my Country & friends, the
former of which I do not fear for I put him and all his nefarious accusations a t defiance -yet I must confess. that the charge is the most
unpleasant that my fealings have ever experienced - For as that
great man of fealings Shackespear, says, He that s t d s my Purse
Steals trash, it was mine tis his and has been a slave to thousands,
but he that filches from me my good name, takes from me that which
inriches him not, but makes me, powe indeed
s oken

P

464 NAVAL OPERATIONS. APRIL-SEPTEMBER 6. 1804
I am sorry that I have been compeled to be so very prolix in this
statement but the faithful narative required it. I will now conclude with the fulist conviction on my mind that you
will have speedy and ample Justice done me [LC. EPP, Vol. 13, August-December 1804.1
To Captain John Rodgers, U. 6. Bavy, commanding U. S. Frigate C o r y u ~ ,from
James Simpson, U. S. Consul, Tangier, Morocco

N? 5

TANGIER
Augwt 26, 1804
DEARSIR I have now to acquaint you that I have rec'd an
answer to the Letter I told you I had written Sid Muhammed
Selawy, it is dated a t Salle 21°C this month, he comp ains as [does]
Alcayde Hashash, of my having put in the Passports for the Emperors
Frigates an exception to their entering Ports blockaded by the Ships
of War of the U States, and adds, "If our master whom God assist, - should send any Vessel there [to

i

"Tripoli], dont you hinder her, for it is the Country of Moors our Brothers

"by Religion, you should not forbid it, if you do we will make War uppon

"you, but at present our Master desires nothing from those parts. "You are good & without fault, as well as your Nation, continvfng as you
"have been all well, which please God you shall keep & preserve. -

From this it does not appear to me, that there is any Immediate
intention on the art of the Emperor, to Act against us, but I am fully
satisfyed not on y that they are exceedingly displeased, at having
been prevented from sending their ships to Tripoli, but also whilst
War continues with that state, nothing less will do here, than awing
Muley Soliman from giving them assistance in the manner he may
think he can do it most effectually-I have no tidings on the movements of the Frigates, nor have we heard anything of the Gall'ys,
since they left Tangier Bay this Day Week. - Unless you know more
than I have now told you, it may perhaps appear to you no longer
necessary for the Congress to remain on this Station, but if you should
retire & follow the Commo. I would by all means recommend its
being done, in such a manner as it shall not be known, either here or
a t Gibraltar. I think the Essex should remain in & about the Straights, until such
Vessel as Comrno. Barron may have sent down reaches us. MONDAY
MORNING.
Nothing further new, I have come to Town, but am so unwell with
a Violent Cold, I must not venture to go off.

P

[Am. Antiquarian Soc. NDA photostat.]

Extract from journal of U. S. Brig Argua. Master Commandant Laac Hull,U.6. Bavy,
commanding, Sunday, 26 August 1804

This day Commences with a heavy sea from the Eastwg Standing
off and on in Company with the Commodore and Squadron the John
Adam and Scourge a t Anchor off the Town a t 4 the Town of Tripoli
bore SSW got our men from the Gunboats and hoisted in the launch
and a
set and took in sail as Necessa - At midnight mod-reezes
heavy sea a Ketch in Sight to t e Eastw'J under American Colours a t
6 AM the Commodore Nq 1134 in Sight bearing
At Meridian bore Up to WNW the
WSW At 12 the Town of Tripoli bore

'E

[NDA photostat.]

-

WARS WITH BARBARP POWERS

465

Extract from joarnrl of U. 8. R b t e C b e m , Captain John Bodrem, U. 8. Eavy,
comnambg, Srurdnj, 26 August 1804

st M past 2 [P.N.] fired a gun And brought too the etrange sail
At # past 2 a ke a rusian ship from Leghorn bound to Sr Thomeses.
Shortened S?!a & the ca t p came on board st M past 3 he returned on
b o d hie own Ship. fdd & made d.at S w e t Cape S p d bore
E S distance 6 leagues.
A. M. a t 5 past 4 Discovered 5 sail. at j4 past 7 poke the Eg8e2.
[USNA.]
&tract from log book kept by
Master Nathaniel Earden, U. S. Bary,
on board U. S. Frigate Constihdion.Sunday, %6August 1804

Strong breezes from E b S - We are standrng off & on Tripoly with
the Squadron in company. All clear for action $ waiting for moderate
weather in Order to attack the Batteries - At 4 P. M. we brought hot
a cables length to leeward of the J. Adam which was at Anchor Cap9 Chauncey rejoined her - Our large cutter was Ordered to the
J. Adam with her OKicers & seamen & returned in the close of the
Evening without being able to reach At Sunset we parted from the Bombards & it was 9 P. M. before we
ot them in tow again - Between 7 & 9 P. M. we close reefed the
!opsaih & split the Jib & mpiosail - Unbent them C bent others Our Evening bearing of Tripoly w w S b W j4 W, 5 or 6 Miles - The
Squadron to the E S E, 5 or 6 Miles - The cause of our being to
leeward of the Squadron wm, our being employed in securing the
Bombards & taking up our cutter which had attempted to reach the
J. A b At 9% P. M. We filled to E N E,Wind S E, under close reefed to
Bails & foresail, & continued standmg on this course through the nigg
with a rough Sea - A t Merent times during the night made
Signals to the Squdron by Rocketa & firing Guns At day hght the S E Wind became moderate - Squadron all in
sight except the John. Adams - Out all reefs except one in each
topsail - & set Top G d c sails - A Ketch from M d t a with water
& stock for the Squadron joined cornpan At 9 8 . M. tacked to theS S W
not in sight, but supposed to bear
Forenoon, moderate with pleasant breezes from S E At 11 A. M. made the land bearing from S W to S S E - The J.
Adams under way to S W
Noon, Moderate breezes from S E. The uadron in sight but
much scJtered - Tripoly in sight bearing S , nearly 4 leagues.
Surgeons report 8 sick & 4 convalescent.
The following Sign& have been made these 24 hours
P, M. At 4, repair all boatg to their own ships
5, J. Adame & Scourge, get under way.
8, Burn't two rockets.
A. M. A t 12%- One Gun

-

%

1 - dq
1%- d9
2 - d9
6
S y e n & & w g e make more wiL
7 - Spm & Vixen make more d
b t i t u d e Observed 33' 9' North
[LC. EPP,h g CorrrrtiIJion, 1803-1804.1

-

466 NAVAL OPEIATIOMS. APRILSEPTEMBER 6,1804
Extract from journal kept by Parser John Darby, U. 8. Xavy, on board U. 8. S.
3 . Adams, =aster Commandant hm Chauncey, U. S. Bav, CO-ding,
Sunday, $8 August 1804

The Wind blo
hard last evening prevented an attsck
being made on the o w o Tripoli the fleet which had got under
way for the purpose of attsckin the Town wes compeled to stand
to the Westwg and our men not sing on board & the wind blowing
so hard we were not able to weigh our anchor. the Whole of the fleet was out of sight the breeze
mO-%hg t. and discovering the Tripolitan Gun boats geting
being very
under way, we considered it dangerous to remain here my longer
having but a few men m d boys on board we all hands officers and
all turned too and we' hed Bnchor & got under way rtnd stood ofIf]
the land soon after %soovered the fleet standing towards us. at
4. P M. the Commodore spoke us and ordered us to Anchor st
% past 5 the fleet Anchored - in 32 fathum Water the town of
Tripoli bore S S. W. distance 8 miles a t % past 5 the Commodore
made the signals for all Captains to repair on board his ship -

7"'3

%

INDA origin&

Miss Camilla 5. McConnell.1

Extract from journal of Midshipman F. Cornelins deKrafft, U. 8. Wavy, in U. 8.
Brig Sbm of 18 guns, Yoeter Commandant Charlee Stew&, U. 8. Navy,
commanding, Sunday, 26 August 1804

Stsnding off & on shore

li]
cK.

Midnight strong gales dc
At 4 discoo7d a Ketch to the
N N E. 3 past 5 a signal for the squadron to make sail made all
4. 4 past 7 tack'd pr signal. at 10 spoke the Comrn: loos'd light
sailst0dry.Lstt: Obs: 3 3 O 10' N.
[NDA.J
To Xmter Commandant John Smith, U. S. Havy, comm~ndingU. 8. 8chooner
Vlrat, from Captain Edward Preble, U. 8. Bavg

C d a i o n Off T ~ P O L Y
Azlgust 97th 1804
SIE I have received your letter of the 25*Q Inst: requesting permission to alter the rig of the U. S. Schooner Viza under your command to that of a Brig - & stating your reasons for the request
I
conceive that your reawning is correct & that on the principle of
oconomy the alteration ought fo take place - You therefore hsve
my permission to make it as soon as fhs service will allow of your
gong into port - when that arrives it is Expected thst you will
effect this business in the shortest possible time & return to join the
Squadron on this Station P. S. Your requisitions are to be made on the Agents et Syracuse
& Mfblta.
You also have my permission to take from the Scourge John MqFate
88 your Boatewain [LC. EPP, Order Book, May 1803-June 1805.1

-

467

WA&S WITH BARBARY P O W E '

To Riahaha O. Hiarm, Danish G o M ~ ~ Tripoli,
.
from Jameu W d s e h&-,
Leghorn

LEGHORN
A@

1804

D?SIR I have now determined to return to the United Statas and

s h d depart from this place in all October, but before I undertake
t.his voyage I find it incumbent on me to return you my most sincere

thanks for the services you have render'd the United States of Am&=
since the period you were empower'd by me to act in my absence m d
especially for the assistance & very humane treatmenf the OfEcers &
crew of the kigate Phihddphia and brig Franklin experienced from
you during their captivity a t Tri oli, and I request you to continue
the same to those who remain w om in their letters to their friends
(which have been publish'd) I assure you have done justice to your
humanity in a verg handsome manner As long ago m the 26'Q of last December, the S m e
of State
inform'd me that MI Lear a t Algiers had receiv'd the esidenfs
orders to have prepared a Id snuE box ornamented with the arms
of the United States set in rillimts & to present it to you with such
expressions of the Presidente approbation as circumstances renderd
expedient; aa thi8 tOOk place before the loss of the P h M p h k wtis
known a t the seat of government your Bind treatment of the
prisonem since will inevitably increase the Presidents esteem for you,
which on my arrival in the United Statea I will take every means to
perpetuate. The articles which I left in the Cons& house I request
you to dispose of, (the FI
excepted which belongs to the United
States) and remit what x y are sold for either to Mr Bngiolo
D'hdreis of the house of Sallucci & Cq of Leghorn or to me at the
City of Washington. On m arrival in the United States I will write
to you & at all times I shall e happy to hear of your prosperity being
with unfeign'd esteem
[NA. SDA. CL,Tripoli, Vol. 2, June 180l-JJept. 1805.1

g

%

r

g

To James 8impson, 0. 8. Conml, Tangier, Yorocao, from Captab John -em,
0. s. NsYy
U.S. FRIGATE
Congress

Tangier Bay Aug& 87.1804

SIR,I have to acquaint you that agreeable to our dekmhation
at my leaving this place on the 17'Q Inst - 1 proceeded Immediately
to Salle, and on my wa there found the Tri line Ship M m h &
C one Galley (both in a tste of Ordinary) at &e.
- I arrived
before Salle on the 1Qt@ Stretched close in with the Bar & found the
Ships Maimona & ~ u r b o k a(with one Gd' in a Sfate of Ordinary)

B

L

apparently ready for sea having their sails ent: however they were

within the Bar. On stretching in ae near ss the Bar would admit,
our Colours were hoisted & a Signal Indicative of F'riendship & a

wieh to comunic~tewas made,wlthout any apparent disposition to
&at effect on their part. On the 21p after p l p g off & on before the
Town for Two Days; The whole time never farther off than Seven
or E i t & frequently not more than 2% or 3 Milea,. and using every
means that a friendly demeanor could e eatl to bnag about a oommunication, without any effect; r
q p i n f o r t h i s lme,
I *auld not have returned quite so soon, M I not moievJ'tb.t

3 d

468 NAVAL OPERATIONS, APRIL-SEPTEMBER 6, 1804
remaining longer before W e , would occasion an alarm Injurious to a
good understanding. - Whatever may have been the destination of
these Ships, I am satisfyed they now will not attempt anything unfavourable to our Commerce this Season - I shall now proceed to
Gibraltar Immediately, & from thence so soon 8s I can procure a
little Water to Tripoli; provided you are of opinion that the State of
our sffairs are such as to admit of my departure; However the Es8a
will after making some little repairs at Gibraltar be with you again. Before I leave this I wish to be perfectly sensible that your opinion
agrees with my own, as it relates to the security of our Commerce,
with the Essex left in your neighborhood. [Am. Antiquarian Soc. NDA photostat.]
To Captain John Wodgers, U. 8. Navy, commanding U. 6. Frigate h,
from
James Simpson, U. S. Consul, Tangier, Morocco

NQ6. -

TANGIER
UtQ
Augt 1804
DEARSIR MF Johnston has delivered me your favour of this
morning, and I am happy to find circurnstancea have conduced to
enable you to form a proposal for your future operations, so perfectly
consonant with the Ideas held forth to you in my Letter of Yesterday.
The Person I sent with it told me there was no answer, indeed yours
anticipates the answer you would have given - If you should leave
Gibraltar before a letter of mine, for Commo. Barron, reaches you,
I beg you will have the goodness to say to h i with my respects, that
I have not anything to add to my former communications, besidea
what you can acquaint him of. As the Wind is, I do not think well
of aslung Mr Johnston to wait for that Letter - The Lateen sail
Vessels you saw at Larache & Salle, must have been trading Vessells,
for the Emperor has not any Gall'ys at those PorB; Those of Tetuan
were at Anchor in Cadiz Bay on the 24'4 Inst Whilst I have resided at Larache & Salle, I have never seen a Boat
sent off to an Ship of War - They always send one towards the
Bar, & if the eather be such as to enable them to enter with safety,
a Pilot oes out with a Signal of sometimes a Red & sometimes a
White Fag which he waves to the one side or the other as circumstances requires, to ide the Boat to the Best Channel. - I will not
doubt but just at t% time they were not very desirous of a Visit
from you a t SaIle, As the shi have paas'd to the inside the Bar, I
do not think it likely they d e o m e out again this season, unless it
be to go to Lisbon for Vespers -

f

'i

[Am. Antiquarian Soc.

NDA photostat.]

To Yrrrter Commandant lurc Chancey, U. 8. Navy, from Lieutenant* John Orde
Creighton, U. 8. Xbvy

U, S, FBIGATE
John Adams
A'Q7 - 1804

SIR The dis ute between Mf Darbey, and myself having reached
Your ears - ?wm in hopes You would have decided it, Without
Submitting it to the Commodore But a t Your request I give You a
true Statement as it happened Mr Darbey having frequently interfered when in the discharge of my duty, and of Course as frequently
Occasioned my displeasure I was CompellQWhen I heard him mfom

-

469

WARS WITH BARBABY POWERS

his Steward that he would not stop a ration, to say that Other Pursers
in the Squadron did sto rations which he said was not so, I, replyed
that they did, he said told an Untruth, I re 1 what he said was
false, ha ' hesped abusive names upon me n ecoming the Gentlemen & th%caus,
I shook my fist in his face told him that he was a
Dam4 Rascal, that I would ring his Nose, & Concluded that I hsd
formed m opinion, of hie not being an honest Man - this Sir You
will Perwive to be a Candid Confession, Altho in repeating the
Language I hope I have not lost S ht of the respect due You as my
Commander But Sir Considering ?ou as my friend I Submit every
thing to Your decission - it is hard Sir if I, Cannot draw off a
gallon of Rum or Serve a Pound of Beef Without being overlooked by
the Purser which Mr Darbey hss done, and dedared that he would do
as he had lost Considerable upon every Elanell of Beef that had been
Served Out, & that he intended to Correct the error - this error Sir
must be Centered in those who superintend serving the roviasiom feeling myself injured by his conduct I l a v e every
to Your
Consideration, [*Acted as Mester'e Mate.1
[LC. EPP, Vol. 13, August-December 1804.1

f

~g

%ng

Extract from journal of U. 8. Brig Arm, U t e r Commandant leaac Bull, U. S.
navy, commanding, Monday, 87 August 1804

Commences with moderste breezes & Clear Pleasant Wr made and
aat 4 Commodore made Sig! Nq 877
Short4 sail as Necessary At
At 5 Came too in 30 fathoms ater the town of Tri oli bearing SSW
distant about 4 le es % past the Commodg made igi NQ995 Cap!
H d l went on boar of him at past 6 CaptXull returnedModerate and Clear Wr through the night At 8 AM TripoIi bore
SbW a heavy Swell from the Eastwlr People Employed ss Necessary -

P

+Id'

[NDA photostat.]
Extract from journal of U. 8. Frigate h,
Captain John Eodgers, U. 6. Bavy,
commanding, Yonday, 87 August 1804

[Standing off & on the town of Tangier] 3 past 7 [AM] shortened
sail & came in the bay of Ta er in 10 fathoms water. the t o w n
Bearing W 3 K Cape Spsrtd W B W M W

Y

[USNA.]
Eaiact from log book kept by Boiling Master Bathaniel Earaden, U. 8. Bavy,
on board U. 8. Frigate ChdWh, Monday, 87 A-t
1804

Moderate Breezes from S E. We are 7 or 8 leagues to the N E b N
off Tripoly & steering in for it with the Squadron all in s' h t At 4 P. M. m e to in 32 fath* 5 miles N E b N from?hpaly The
Squadron all anchored per Signal except the Enfe rim, Scourge,
Intrepid & Store Ketch - The Enterprize was ordere to look out in
shore dur' the night - We stayed the Topmasts snd set up the
Rigging
X p a t 4 P. M we made the n e c e m q arrangements for
war in the Store Ketch along side & clearing her - The increase of
the
E wind prevented it. The Ca tt.rins & Commanders pr Signal waited on the Commodore Towards evening fresh breezes from S E b E.
We had fnsb

E fi

7

-yt

-

470 NAVAL OPERATIONS, APRIL-SEPTEMBER 6, 1804
breezes through the night with overcast weather, Winds Veering
betweenSE&SSWAt 6 A. M. We warped Bombard NQ 1 along side: She is reported
leaky & unfit for actual Service We took out the Bomb & stood it
in the main Hatchway - It weighs nearly five Tons -We sent the
Vessel in charge of the John Adam.
Cloudy Overcast weather all forenoon - Winds from N N W with
a swell from the same Quarter - The captains of the Squadron
waited on the Commodore - Supplied the Nautilus with 10 bbls
Pork & 6 bbls beef
At 11A. M. TheStoreKetch was ordered along side of the J. A h ,
to deliver her Cargo At 3%P. M. made the Syrm Signal,prepare for Anchor.
4 P. M. Scourge & Enterprize come within hail.
4% " " All Captains [LC. EPP, Log Constitdim, 1803-1804.1

Ibrtroot from journal kept by PPner John Darby, U. 8. Envy, on board U. 8. S.
J d n Mom, Master Commandant I.roc Chauncey, U. 8. Havy, oommandinc,
Monday, 27 Angnat 1804

We are this morning laying a t Anchor of[q the Town of Tripoli
and have recevd orders from the commodore to hoist in the Guns from
some of the Gun boats, from which we suppose that the attack with
the gun boats is given over for this season as the Levant Winds is
expected to set in soon - st Meridian light breezes from the east@
the order for hoisting in the Guns from the Gun boats is countermanded by the commodore from which we suppose another attac is
to be made on the town with the Gun boats. at 3 past 3. the commodore sent his launch along side for the Volenteers. at 4 he made
the signal Gun boats prepare for battle at 3 past 4 the signal was
made for the fleet to get under way, a t the same time the Commodores
Launch left us with the men also our Barge and Black Cutter and the
Ca t went in the Green Cutter on board the Commodore 8 u r fleet stood in near the town of Tripoli and continued standing
ofIf] and on during the Nigh. we mu'd discover a number of faulse
fires both from our ships and the shore and some times mud here
several guns which we understood to be nothing more than Signals.
I set up until1 Midnight in momentary expectation of seeing the engagement. we lay near eno h to discover the movements of our
squ[a]dron by the assistance o the light of the Moon - at Midnight
the breeze sprung up fresh for the East. and concluding that no attac
woud be made I went to bed. [NDA original. M h Camilla S. McConnell.1

'?

Pxtrrrct from journal of HidshipP. Corneliua degrofh, U. 8. Bavy, in U. 8.
Brig Slnn. of 18 g u ~ Master
,
Comm~nduttChulw Stewart, U. 8. Baw,
commandmg, Yonday, 97 A-t
1804

Lying a t Anchor [Tripoli]. Light sirs in

Mer:

uard the yards At 4 came too
url'd
sail At 3 past 4 signal for all Capt* to repair on
-2
board the Comm:
all

Lstt: Oh: 3 3 O 7' N.

[NDA.]

a

471

W U S WITH BARBARY PO?VERS
To J o l h v l ~W i n p t e , A., 8.Ziord,

Make, from Secretary of tbs bIaq
NAVYDEP* 2?8Augud 1804.

Colp Lesr having &ected a negotiation with the Dey of Algiers by
which he hm agreed to receive Cash in lieu of naval Stores and having
accordingly settled our a~countswith that regency up to the 25
March last, we shall not want the Timber which you have been requested to contract for, for a considerable-period of time-probably
not for 2 gears. We wish you therefore to suspend making the contract if you should not have already made it. Aa far sm you bsve
contracted the Contractors may go on unless they should be perfeatly
to rslioquiah the Contracts which is not to be expected if they
shod have msde even prepmato arrangements for their fulfilment.
You will d&e
ohertenng a 9
' -1.
Be pleased to let me hear
from you immediately.
[NDA. Barbary Powere, LB, 1803-1808.1

9

To John Bselunan, Navy Agent, Bew York, B.Y., from Semetary of the Xatp

Nav. DIP. 38 Aug: 1804.
Your letter of the 24tPinst. I received this day. The Gunhats
are to be coppered and copper fastened. [NDA. Off. Comg. Gunboats, 1803-1808.1
To Captain W U u n Bainbridge. U. S. Bavy, from Tobias Leer, U. 8. Colud
General, Algiers

ALGIERS
A+

28t4 1804

MY DEARSIR I wrote to you on the 24 of March b Mr OBrien,

E

and on the 309 of July (the only opportunities which ave oBered)
wknowledging the rect of your acceptable favors of the 34 !jt4 & 3OtQ
of ApriI, and 204 of May. Since the Iast I have had the satisfaction
to receive your letter of the 17tQof June & 109 of July. - I am
pleased to find you have recg a supply of Clothing &* for our unfortunate Citizens; and rejoiced to learn that you &your fellow sufTerers
are in health, which I ray God to preserve to you. I f e d gratefull for t e attentions of Sidi Mohammed Dghies, His
Excellency's prime Minister, and I trust that all those who have
shewn you favors will be rewarded as well here, ss by the God who
rewards benevolent deeds.
I hope before this reaches ou, that your situation w i l l be alleviated; and I trust that His xc&ency, the Bashaw of Tripoli will
be convinced that it will be for his interest to be a t peace with our
Nation on honorable & permanent Grounds. It is not for us to
seek war. Peace is our ob'ect; but we will never have it u n 'ust
terms, and I think that ah the Barbary Powers, if they gew%ir
own interest would cultivate our friendshi ; for we are a Nation
d8erent from all others, we are now pow ull, if we chuse to exert
our strength; and we sre y p i d l y ta a great pitch of importance
while moet other nations, w ch are known here, are st &eir fulf
wth, or on the decline. - The misfortune of y o d & Our
&litiz,en.ena witb you, has ex*
tbe ~omniwmtion
of our ~ouotqmen
and pour fortitude will be a Subject of their admintion, you
wme out l i e gold tried in the fire, and I trust that Providence will

E

8

J

wd

yet smile upon you end place you among the favorite Sons of
America.
fine here hitherto, & we have been very
The season has been v
healthy.- Monsc ~ h a i n s ethe French Conmjsmry, Genl takes a
Deep interest on your welfare. His wife & f d y s d e d for Frame
about six weeks ago. Consul B d e also feeh much for you, and aU
our friends here are constant in their enquiries about ou. MraLear
gegs you to be assured of her beat prayers Q wishes or you & thase
with you, to which are most sincerely joined my dear Bainbridge
those of

-

P

TOBIAS
LEU.

[Stephen Decatur Col. NDA photostst, Book A.1

P.tfPCt from journal of U. g. m a t e Caryrrrr, Captain John Bodgers, D. 6.B o q ,
commanding, %-day,

%S August 1804

3( past 1 IPMf red a sup ly of vegihbla from Tangier. At 3
weighq &t made sail s b d m g ut of the bay of Tangier
In the Gut of Gibraltar

8

wL4NA.I
-act

from Yemarandurn Book of Captain Edward hsble, U. S. Bavy, on board
U. S. Rigate (hdMh. 28 August 1804

Atbmked the tom aad harbour [of Tripoli]with the whoia squadron.
K C originsl.]

fl

Extract from log book kept by sailing Master Bathanid Harodem, U. 8. Balp,
on board U. 8. Frigate GdiWon, Tamday, 88 Augwt 1804

Moderate breezes from N N E with cloudy Overcast, weather.
We are at Single Anchor 5 or 6 Miles N E b N from Tripojy; Squadron in oompany - At 3 P. M. We w hed & stood in for Tripoiy.
The Wind by this time had veered to b N. At %past5 P. M.
we weighed & m e to, in 17 fa&*hard bottom nearly 2 d e s M b E
$E.fromFortEnghb & 2)4MilesN E b N %N,from the B ~ w ' a
Castle - The Sq~larlmnwas Ordered p? Signal ti, continue under
weigh - We were employed till 8 in the Evening m
arrangemerite for the fourth attaek upon Tri oIy - Caps hauncey
with severd ~ c e r &s 64 Seamen from the J! dom ma came on board
as Volunteers on this
edition Ca Chauncey remains on board
as sn assistant to the ommodore; art of his OfEcers & seamen
substitute those whom we have sent away in the Gun & ship's boats
The J. Adam, Scou e & two Ketchea remain at anchor - The
sbips corn any of the owge (a few exce tttd) are distributed among
the Vesse s which are intended for the ttack - Cap$ Dent of the
b r g e (who has dl along commanded Bombard NQ2) in consequence
of the Bombard Nq 1 bemg found merviceable, became a Volunteer
as an miatant to the Commodore - Lieutt Robinson was removed
fromBombardNQltONQ2-Byjl t 8 i n t h e E v e
fresh breezes from E s E - he squ=
wrs m e r e d pg ignd to
keep in sight to windward - We furled ssile - By 12 Midnight
the weather becssle more moderrtte The night station intended for the Bombarda & Gun boata is at
hsnd some point blunt [sic1 shot from the Baahaw's Castle - At
% peat 1 A.. M. the Gun boab m d Bombard were Ordered to their

%
'

9

f

-e
x?!

5

1

-5

Wi4.W WITH BARBARY POWERS

473

Stations - The Bombard was taken in tow by the Enterpriza - At
%pest1 A.M. Our Gunboats &BombardsboreupAt jipast2,
they came to, within pistol shot of the Western Rooks, and commenced
a fire on the Batteries. The Bombard in proceeding to her Station
After Anchoring her without
a leak, Occasioned by To
gun ot from the Batteries, Lieuti obiinson with all the Bmericage
went on board the Enterprize, leaving the Neapolitans to take care
of her - In this Situation she could remain in safety - The Entarprize ran in, in order to protect our boa@ should those of the Enemy
come out. The Siren, Argus & Naulilw were exposed to the Fire
from the Batteries; It was necessery t b t they should keep well
in, in Order to be ready to Tow out disabled boats - At day light
We weighed & ran in within 3 cables length of the Bashaw's Castle;
the wind was E b S, which is favorable in standing either in, or out
of the Harbour - In standing in we received the fire of 72 Guns,
including those of Fort English, Bashaws Castle, the Square. Round,
$ half moon batteries - We did not £ire a gun till % past 6, when
we commenced with round & Grape on 13 of the Enemy's Gun boats
which were then in close action with our boats. We sunk one of the
Enemies boats, while two more disabled ran on shore to avoid sinking - At this time the Grape from all the Batteries fell some wa s
without us - The Enemy's boats immediately retreated - $6
continued running in until we were within complete musket shot,
when we brought to, & gave the Batteries nine Broadsides of round
& Grape Although we were 54 minutes within musket shot of all their
Batteries, only nineteen lsrge shot struck the shi - We silenced
the Bsshaw's Castle & &he half moon battery - n our fving the
third broadside the Round Battery was deserted; On hauling ofF
the Batteries recommenced the fire - Our Gun boats immediately
hauled o8F per Signal when we received the Enem 's £ire; theb]
cheered the Constitution 88 we a s s 4 them - The fo owing Officers
commtrnded the Gun boats. 1 rzt Cap%Decatur N Q 4, Cap$ SOmers
Nq 1 Lieutt Gordon of the Consfitutbn assisted by Lt Nicholson of
the J. Adam8 commanded 11'9 2, LieutUwrence of the Elrfe
N Q5, Lt Crane of the Viznr NQ8,L*Thorn of the Enterprim
Lt Wadsworth of the Constdudion N Q 6 MI Brooks Master of the
Atgz~sNQ3 - The Situation in which we saw our Gun boats in when
we passed them was as follows, No?4, 1, 2 & 6 were entire1 exposed
C receiving showers of Grape from all the Batteries, wMe hq"*
5, 8, 7,
8 3 were without point blunt shot A t the dose of the Evenin the Enemy displayed within the Reef
17 Gunboats, 2 Galleys, a sc ooner & a Bri - A Galliot & a shi
without the Mole shew no cmlours - The nemy's gun boats ha
into the Mole in the night exce ting two, which are kept outside as
Guard Boats - It was 3 A.
when our Gun boats opened their
fire on the Batteries - Several shot were fired by our boats before
they were returned from the Batteries - Our boats were in action
two hours - Esch boat fired more than 40 Rounds & some more
than 50. We have fired this morning into the Enemy's batteriss
more than 600 round 24.1b shot & a proportionable quantity of
every Broadside we gave them,showm of stone & dust
their battmies - The Galliot without colors
& a three masted galley were sunk by our Gun

8prT

-%

8

h

p.

%

2

If

13

474 NAVAZ OPERATIONS, AP&ILSEPTEMBE& 6. 1804
b t a in the first of the action - Our damage ie as follows - A great
deal of the running riggin cut away by the h p e ahot; A numbor of

As;

shot holes through the
The lanyard of the fore sprin sta cut
away; One of the Main shrouds; chains & TNsses of the
$arda
T w o top maat back stays; Two feet of the atock of the small b o n d
cut completely off by a double hesd shot; The Stream cable & Iarboard fore lift cut off. One of the J. Adam8 cutters hsd four man
killed & was afterwards sunk by the Batteries The Man were taken
up by one of the
boats - The ATW & Siren were stationed
mthout our ~ u n ate to cover a retreat - he ~ c w l s t i i t d i m s
barge under the command of Ms Lewis Midshipman was stationed
with the Gunboats as rr dis atch boat - Her rudder w&s shot away,
but she received no other amage - We Officered 8t mamed three
other Boa& which the roughness of the Sea prevented from proce
in with the Gun boats - At 9 minutes after 7 A. M, we hauled o
from the Batteries & till 11 A. M. were em loyed in ttrking in tow the
gun boats & Bombards & working to win ward - At 11% we ~e
to in 34 fath' hard bottom 4 miles N E b N from the Batbmes, as cbd
the Squadron - Cs f Ch~uncey& his Seamen rejoined the J . Adam.
At this time &esh greezes from E b N with a rough Sea. - The
following S i l s were made these 24 hours P. M. At 3% Squadron to weigh. 3% Gun boats & Bombards
prepare for Action 3%.
ea tams repair on board the Constaufirm - 4 Ansd Scowge. Sq~ml&P
634
A. M. A t 1%Night S' 51,
Bombards & Gun boats vmce to attack. At 3%we repeatef?the
signal - A t 5j4 discontinue the Action the Boab & retire out of
Gun shot - At 6 the general signal, Tow the Gun Boats. 6%
Tow a boat to leeward
At 7% Squadron prepare for anchoring,
leaving room for Veering & Weighin - At 31% all boats repair to
their respective ships - At 11 %
captains repair on board the
Commodore PC. EPP, Log Ccmutiltdwn, 1803-1804.1

dain

C

a

9

l

-

-

d

128 August 18041
To Sir S e u n d e r John Bdl, Qovernor of Xplk, from Captain Edward Preble,
U. 8. HoYy
Augwt [33] 1804

DEARSIB I am honoured with your highly esteemed letter of the
ZIP Instant: and sent a boat in with a flag to deliver the letters which
accompanied it - It cannot but be extreme] atefull to my feelings
to have r n exertio118
~
thought favourably o{%y an OfEcer of our
Excellency s talents & experience - I was in hopes ere this to ave
effected a peace in this quarter: but if the reinforcement of frigatea
does not arrive won, I f
a
r we shall not succeed in bringing about so
dmirable an event this year, as my ammunition is nearly expended
and the season for such gun boats as ours to 8ct
soon be over In fact they are only fit for the defence of Barbom where they can
a t all time13 find protection from the weather: The stem of a frigate
affords but a or shelter for them; and they are not to be trusted
done; They 8ve however rendered very essential service in our
Merent attacks, although on their amount we have each time bean
obliged to wsit for a wind from the E S E or S E, to enable them to
enter & retire with d t y - We must have Gun B; Bomb V e d s
that can protect themeelvea

h

%"

-

A T T A C K O N TRIPOLI

3 AUGUST

1804

Yestarda I eent our eight
boats to the rocke which form the
entrance o the harbour two ours before day light, they anchored
within 600 Yards of the Bashaw's castle, of two galliea & sixteen gun
boats. A brisk 6re was kept up until day li@t b our boats, & as
w a r d 7 returned by the Enemy, when obeemmg
their gun boats
& galllea under way apparently with an intention to attack ours by
boarding, I stood in within three cablea length of the Batteries, lea
the Boate without us to retire, (.a their ammuniGon was e x p e n 2
but not without d m t ) ; and commenced a warm sction with the
Boats & Batteries which lasted # of sn hour: We sunk three ofthe
Enemies gun boats and a large ketch, and did great exeoution among
the other Boats dt Ship ing, and in the Town $ Batteritts - One of
the ship's bost was
4 men Wed t a few wounded which is all
our loas in this affair - Our rig * g, sails, cables &9 have been concannon shot struck this ship siderably cut b grape shot. &I9
The heavy s w d almost constantly setting towards the w w t prevents
us from attacking 8s often as we wish to - I beg you to present me
respectfully to Lady Ball

P

?'

t-5

sd,

-

[LC. EPP, Vol. 13, August-Deeember ISM.]

[28 August 18041
To Captain Edward Prebie, U. 8. Huvy, from Master Commrrndsint Isaac Channcey,
U. 8. Bovy

U.S. SHIPJohn Adam
OfI Tripoly - A
*
28'Q1804
S I ~ ,I hsve the Honor of enclosing you a list of the Volunteers
from this shi employed on board the different vessels of the Squadron
in the Attac upon the Enemy's Gun boats & Batteries on the 2Bt@
inst together with a list of the killed & wounded belonging to &is
Ship
Return of IUed & Wounded belonging to the U. S. Ship John
Adam in the attack upon the Enemies Gun boab & Batteries on the
28'Q A ~ g ~1804
st Thop McDonald Ws Fountain - John Bartlett
Do
Asa Culver - - Seaman - Wounded
Total - 3 Seamen Killed - & One Seaman Wounded
Signed Isaac CHAUN~ET
[LC. EPP,Ordm Book, May 1803-June 1805.1

1

-

-

Extnat from journal kept by h u l m John Ihrbr, U. 8. Navy, on boffd U. 8. 8.
Jdk Mare. Yutm Coxmumdent kuc Chauncey, U. 8. Bavy, oommmding,
Tueadry, m Aplnrt 1804
At 4 Oclock this morning our fleet commenced the attack on the
Town of Tripoli and an incessrrnt firein was Keept up from our
boats & brigs & Schooners. BE the d
m ~ u boats
n
and tbe ort

P

untill half pest. 5 when the commodorewent in with the Con&#h
to cover the retreat of our gun bate. the having expended nearly
all their -&on
The commodora,
when atanding in and
during the
sgement was the most ellegant sight that I eves mw.
ahe had her ompions out matches lit m d batteries lighted up all

?f

476 NAVAL OPERATIONS, APRIL-SEPTEMBER 6. 180.4
hands at quarters standing right in under the fort. & receir a heavy

cannonading from their Battery. as soon as he got within pistol shot
. and immediately laid his starhe commenced fireing his bow
board side p a r d 4 with their attery and gave them a broad side
which silenced the Bashaws batterys for a minute or so the commodore gave them several other broadsides which did eate injury to
their battary and the homes on shore. several of a commodores
24* Balls went through the Bashaws. Pallace. & one went through
his bed in about 5 m u t e s after he had got out of it, he dso sunk
aeverd of their gun Boats. he corn leatl covered the retrmt of our
boats. with the loss. only of our B ack utter & three men killed &
one slightly wounded. he receid some trifling dam e in his riging
our gun b a t s did them graat damage in the town an knocked down
a part of the Bmhsw's eastmost Battery and drove rtll the Tripolitan
Gun boats behind the Rocks. & some of them run aahore and was
deserted by their crew. there was only 8 of our Gun boatg & 2 Bumbards & the Tripolitans had f 6 Gun Boats & 2 Gallp. their Galleys
containri]g from 150 to 200 men & our Gun boats & Bumbards
contain[injg not more than 25 to 30 men in any of them. & notwithstandin their great superiority of fource and the advantage of being
under t eir own Battery they were compeled by our boats to retire
within the Rocks. which makes out a little distance beyand the Basham Batte between which there is an inner channel and affords a
compleat sh ter for them. as their Huls are covered b the rockthe Commodore it is said reeeid above five hundred alls between
his fore and main Mast. but he had got so close in under their battery
that they could no[t] deprea their guns enough to hull him Our Fource of[fl this station are as follom
Frigate C d i o n . Commodore Preble- - - - - - -- - - - - - 44. Guns.
Brig Syren Capt Steward---, - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - _ - 18 Ditto.
Brig A.rpta Capt. Hull- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - _- - - _- - - - - - - - - - - - - Brig Scourge Capt Dent- - .. - - - - - - - - _ - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - _ _ - - - - - Schooner Vbon Capt Smith, - - - - - - - _ - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - Schooner Navtatp18 Capt Summers--- - - _ - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - Schooner Entetprize Capt. Decator- - - - _ - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 2 Bumbards
8 Gun boats.
Frigate John Adam Capt Chauncey armed en FluteNeither the John Adams nor the Scou~gewere in the enagmt tho
28*@August /NDA original. M h Camilla S. McConnell.]

fY

f 8

T

%

a

d'

Extract from journd of U. 8. Brig Ayu. Yaster Commandant Isaac Hun, U. 8.
Envy, commanding, Tnenday, 28 Alynrt 1804

[Standing off and on Tripoli and attacking the batteries and gunboats.]
The Commodore made Sigl N9 1205got under way with the Squadron
boats and bombards the Commodore made Sig! Nq 69 to the Gunc
t
s at 4 he made the Sigl for Gunboats to Caet off at paat they
Commmced firing on the town wore Ship and Stood in shore at 4 past
5 the Commodore made SiJfor the Gunboats to retire and ranged
bis Ship alongaide the Batteries and gave them several Broadsidea at
6 took the two Gunboate in tow At Meridian Anchored with dl the
Sguadron in 30 fathom water the Commodore made the Sigj for 811

+

WARS WITH BARBARY POWEIRS

477

Captains, Ca t P Hull went on board of him during the Action through
our ~ a r b o d h a u s hole
e which cut cut off the bower Cable md Injured
the lead [NDA photoetat.1
Wmct from jo&
of Midehipmrn F. Dorndiw deKnflt, U. 8. Navy, in U. 8.
Brig Shm of 18 guns, Xaster Commandant Chrrles Stewart, U. 8. Bavy,
commo8ding. Tuesday, 28 August 1804

(Following the Comm: motions Lying ofIfJ& on shore.)
Light winds & pleasant. At 4 a signal to the gun boats, pre are for
battle hove up p' signal of the Commodore b stood in for J e land.
At 5 mann'd & m ' d the hunch & barge. j4 past 5 the J.A h ' s
barge came along side arm'd & mann'd, j6 past 6 took in sail, stsndmg
off & on Shore.
Midnight fresh breezes & pleasant, tacking occasionally. At 3 cast
off the gun boats. At 4 they came too an anchor close in the harbour
of Tripoli & commenc'd a heavy fire on the Town & shipping 4 which
was return'd by the enemies batteries. 31past 6 the Commodore made
signal for the gun boats to retire from action, the Comm: & squadron
rwn close in & fired several broadsides on the enemies batteries shi
ping dre. At 7 took our gun boa* in ton, the launch retwn'd m&
past 10 overhad'd a
sail & stood off shore. At 9 wore in shore.
r a q e of the larboard cable. At 11 came too with the larboard bower
pr s@.
Meridian hgbt winds & clear. all the Squadron at anchor. a signal
from the Comm: for alI Commanders to repair on board his ship. Latt: Obs: 33' 4' N.
[NDA.]

128 August 18041
Expenditure of Ammunition
Fired Aup* 28 - [1804]

in - cartridges - 1016
- 128 - Roun Shot

24

Do
Do

Do 12 P* Ds I)P
25 Ptm DP Do Do

11, P O W ~ W

73 - Cartridr - 191 4 of Powder
73 - Round hot
3 - Grape DQ
24 - Cartrid ee - 144 'b Powder
24 - Rou~ld8hot
1 - Grape DQ
35
Grape
2 - Canister
3
Double headed

Paper Cartridgea full Charg4
DQ - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - menell
DV DO RedueQ
66 - Pa r Cartridges full ChsrgQ
11 - i;tfp
Dv Reduo*

69
107
90
C

3

12
47

- Fleneil Cartridges full Chug*

16

-

27

-376
225

1

-

D*

Do

24 p$

12 pd*

Reducd

- Perchmsnt
Cartridges 6
Do
D* 5
I)P

C~~~tiitufwna
Return

DP

4

1)

Ehch
DP

Ds

Perchrnant Cartridgea Came onboard
Shellune
DQ
DQ

25 pds

478 NAVAL OPDATIONS, APRILSEPTEMBEB 6,1804
AmmunitionExpended on board GUNBOAT
N Q1 August i!PQ1804
520 Q' of Cannon Powder-,- --- - - - - -------- - - 65 Cartridges
6 'P of Priming DQ-- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 63 Round Shot--- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 24 'P
33 Grape DQ-- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 3 Match Rope . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
63 Tubes for--- - - - - - - - - - -- - - - -- - - --- - - - - - 24 'P
66 Wads for - - - - - - - - - - - --------- - - - - - - - - - - DQRICH*SOMERS
Esqr
E D WPREBLE
~
,-

E enditure of Ammunition in Action Z8*4 Aug; 180.4 on board the

GUN
%OAT N Q2 -

16 - 8'Q C ~ t r s g e ~
24 - 7 'Q Ditto

44 - 24 'b Round Shot
2 - Bunches 24 Q' Grape
RICH*SOMERS
Esqr
Master & Commandant
U. S. Schooner NauCilu8
Expended on board GUNBOATNQ3 Aug; ~4
11 Shot
11

W d

50 fathom Cable 6 inch
50 Dg
D Q 4%
2 Anchors

1804. -

SAM^ B BROOKEI

Expended on Board GUN-BOAT
N9 4 A@ Zgt4 1804 45 - Fathoms 5 Inch Hauser
30 - Fathoms
DQ
25 - Fathoms 4 Inch Dq
1 - Jibb Sheet
1 - Anchor Wt 240 'Q
1 - Anchor Wt 120 'b
60 - 241b C W '~es
65 - D Q Roun Shott
5 - D Q Grape
60 - Wad&
60 - Tubes
% 'b PNlllng Powder
Expenditures on board NQ6 GUNBOATH. Wadsworth Commander
on the Morning Mi%Auguet : 1804
Catridges24 pr . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
Round shot--- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 51
Gra eshot .........................................
15

9

w&

........................................

102

479

WARS WIT3 BABBARP POWERS

60 fath. 5 in. hawser with the Grapnel.
15 fath 3 in. rope -------- spring- - - - - - - - 3 Ib. priming powder
2 lb. match rope
300 Musket catrigea expended since the 7th August. preparing
ing for Battle.

E WADBWO~TH

Capt DEGATUR.
-

Expended on Board of GUNBOATNQ7 Aqmat
33 - 24 lbRound Shot
33 - -

-

60
34 1-'P-

Cartridges
Wads
Tubes
priming powder
Blunderbuss Cartridge
Musket , - - ditto
- - damaged
Pistol - - - - - - ditto

i

325

l?8t8 1804

-

30 1 Sweep 2 Swivel Cwtridges - - - - - - - - - - - - damaged

J TEORN
Expenditures on board GUN BOAT NQ 8 W Crane commander
Avgt 88*41804
32 - 24 a cartridges
29 - "
round shot
3 - " double head shot
64 Wads
priming powder
match mps
sweeps
21anchor, ked e
30 - fathoms 5 % Inch awser
15 - fathmq 2 Inch rope, spring
32 - Tubes.
WILLIAM C?&Am
Cap; S DECATUR
[LC. EPP, Vol. 13, AugustDecember 1804.1

'

%

To Capkin E d r v d Rebls, U. 8. Bavy, from 8ailm8ka Joseph Douglaa~Pnd
Carpenter William Bodby, U. 8. Ravy, formerly in U. S. Fripre PWd&&a

Tar~ozlllA-

SIR I having signed a
Malta Boat being bound
kc I se her taken by one

S9 1804

brought in this herbour the
on board of the aaid Boat to take out the good8 but he was
stoped by the EngIiah CounsiI and has been detained hesr by the
Bashaw untill this p m t date wich I am informed that she is to
mil this evening or Tomorrow morning the Last attack you made

480 NAVAL OPERATIONS, APRILSEPTEMBER 6, 1804
on the Town you have Injured a grate Many houses killed s e v d
Tmks & drove them entirely out of three of there Batrys the
Ca t and all the Offissers are well I heard from them this day the
ah& that was hove the last night all fell in the Water but verry
few of shells that has been hove in Town hss Bursted there is but
a amall Quantity of Powder in this place by the best information
that I can get
JOSEPH DOUGLAS S Maker
WILLIAM
GODBY
P S hopin we will all be soon out of this the usage is verry bad
and the provisions very short
LC. EPP, Vol. 13, August-December 1804.1
To William Higgins,U. 6. Navy Agent, Malta, from Captain Edward Preble, U. 8.
Bevy

Constitubion AUGUST
29q 1804

DEARSIB,I enclose you a. receipt for what has been delivered from
the Sparonan, you sent over some time sinc.e- The Patron dledges
that he was carried into Tripoly by force: He will however tell you his
Own Story - We made an attack yesterday on the Gun boats, town

& Batteries -sunk three of their gun'boats &G a large Ketch, & did them
much damage - We lost one of the ships boats sunk & 4 Men killed
& some wounded our Rigging & sails considerably cut by Grape;
Only 19 Cannon shot struck us - The weather has been unfavorable,
but we have expended nearly all the Gun Boat ammunition - The
Ketch with Water, live Stock &C which you sent over arrived safe
& remains with us a t present - I wish Commr?Barron would arrive
with the long expected reinforcement - Adieu!
ILC. EPP, LB, April-Nov. 1804.1
To IIbsarter Commandant Isaac Ed, U. 8. Bavy, commanding U. S. Brig Argus,
from Captain Edward Reble, 0.6. Navy

~onstitdionAUGUBT
29* 1804 08F TRIPOLY
Stand in for the Town; Hoist the white flag at the Fore, & French
a t the Main, & if answered by the French Consul send a boat with the
letters directed to him & Sidi Mohammed DGhies and as soon as the
Boat returns m e into your Station [LC. EPP, Order Book, May 1803-June 1805.1
To Monsieur Beaarsier, French Charge d'dftairae and Commirrorg Oeneral,
Ripoli, from CaptPin Edward Preble, U. S. Navy

U. S. SHIPComtiAytion.At Anchor
Orr Tripoly - Auguat 39Q 1806.
Sxa, I have now on board this ship forty two Tripline P r h n m ,
thirty five of which were in the three gun bate ca tured by us on the
30 h t . I am desirous of estabbhing a Cartel or the exchange of
Prisoners,& wish you to use your influence in bringing about this

!

im rtaritobject8!knanity dictatea the measure, and I have no doubt but on your
application to his Highneas the Bsshaw, you will, by proper represen*
trow, be able to induce him to accsed to a measure so generally adopted

WARS WITH BARBARY POW%&S

481

r

by all nations - You will oblige me by communicating to me
Success in this business, and I think i t very probable, if I mu1 see
you on board that such arrangements may be made as to. efFect the
ransom of the whole of my countrymen - If you should thmk proper
to oblige me with a visit, and the Bashaw should think proper to
admit of your coming off, I will send a Boat under a flag of Truce
tomorrow morning a t 9 O'clock to the Rocks to receive you or (if
you should not incline to come off) to receive your answer if you
mswer the French & White flag as hoisted before If you come Off, The truce ahall remain sacred until) you return on
shore and the Fla are hauled down - You have i t in your power to
render an essenti Service to the unfortunate, by making use of your
interest in endeavouring to effect the humane object of this letterI have the honor to subscribe myself with
P. S. Mr OBrien is no longer with me, He went to Malta some days
since & returns to America with his B d y -

3

[LC. EPP, LB, April-Nov. 1804.1
To the Prime Minister to the Bashaw of Ripoli, from Captain Edward Prebls,
U. S. Navy

U. S. SHIPCbnsditution
Augu.at 29'h 1804
SIB I have made Overtures through the French Consul to your
regency for an exchange of Prisoners - I hope this much desired
event may take place; I am not induced to this measuremerely because
it is the usage of a eat part of the World, but because I think i t
founded in reason & urnsnity I flatter my self that Monsieur Beaussier will be permitted to come
on board the Gonstiiution, in which case a mode of Ransom may be
fixed upon, honorable to both Parties I enclose to your care dispatches to the English Consul a t Tri oty
which I received a few day8 since from Malta I% which you v d be
kind enough to have delivered His Excellency SIDIMOHAMMED
DGar~s
Prime Minister to the Pasha of Tripoly
[LC. EPP, LB, April-Nov. 1804.1

!f

To Captain Edward Reble, U. 8. Ravy, from Yonaieur Beaussier, French Chrrg6
d'Affaire8 and Commisesry General, Tripoli
Translatfon

TRIPOL~
29 Awgmt 1804 COMMODOREOn the 12 Current after having myself read to the
Bashaw your Letter of the day before and added what was suitable,
I was about to reply in a manner which wou'd perhaps have been
satisfactory to you, and to make a Signal for you to send on shore
when this Prince formally required me to suspend my Answer, untd
he had witnessed the effect of the third attack - This took place in
the Night betwixt the 23 $ 24 instant, and you Sir must be sensible
that i t was perfectly nuIE
Not a single Bomb was thrown be ond the Forts, and a t day light
a Bombsrde was seen towing off by va boats - The attack between
the 27 & 28 w w more serious A 36 pound Sbot struck the Castle and

-

H

482 NAVAL OPERATIONS, APRIL-SEPTEMBER 6. 1804
passed through the apartment of the Prisoners - another thro h
the Sailer's &on, & others struek a number of Houses, especi&
those of the gpnish, Swedish & Dutch Consuls out of the T o w where
a Camel was killed, and some Shot flew even into the Gardens - A
Tunisian prize was sunk and a Spanish Vessel that had brought here a
Messenger from the Grand Semor with.8 pass from Mr Davis your
Consul a t Tunis was hulled and a Corsslr belonging to this Regency
lost four men, killed by the Grape Shot from your Guns - At day
break one of the Bombardes or a Gun-Boat was seen anchored a t some
distance off which gave rise to the conjecture that she was obliged to
leave the action - The Bashaw seems to care little about the Injury
done to the Houses by the Shot, which is easily repaired; the Shells
only, which he fears may burn and destroy his Town, give him some
uneasiness and revive in him the desire for an Accommodation Menaces have no other effect than to inflame the mind of the Prince I have informed Sidi Achmet Dghie's of the plan of your Government with regard to Sidi Achmet the Bey's Brother - I have
reason to believe that he has not made him acquainted with it, lest i t
h t destroy in him every disposition to Peace the actual State of things I think i t best to leave the Bashaw to
his own reflexions - He is naturally dark mysterious and unconfiding - Were I ta manifest any eagerness for a Decision on his part,
he would only become more immoveable; In the mean while I avail
myself of a Sperronar which carries you some refreshments to inform
you of what IS passing - This Spemnar entered the harbor on the
20 ins,, believing that you were Masters of it I had written thus far Commodore, when to my great astonishment
&regret I heard that a Brig of your Squadron was advancing to parley - Whatever may be the motive I cannot but veiw this Step as most
impolitic as well as detrimental to the Interests of our Guntry,
because a t this moment it must be construed ta your &advantage &
tend to raise the pretensions of this Regency - I t had been much
better at the beginning to have threatened, and to have followed
up your attacks with energy & effect, &hod entering into any
negotiations This instant I receive your Letter of this Morning - I cannot see
the Bashaw till Tomorrow as he is a t his Summer Residence in the
<!omtry - I foresee that your proposal for a Cartel of Exchange
will not be relished as it is a thing not usual and never practiced betwixt Mussulrnen & Christians August 30 - I am just come from an Audience with theBashawWhat I apprehended has actually occurred - In spite of all my
representations & observations he absolutely rejected the Cartel of
Exchange, and to shew that he is by no means Intimidated by your
force (of which he pretends to calculate with nicet the extent and
effect) even after the arrival of the four additional s L , he demands
as the price of ransom & peace, 400000 Spanish Dollars besides presents
for himself and Ministers of the Regency, declaring a t the same time
that he confined himself to this Sum a t present merely out of Regard
& Respect for his good friend the French Emperor and that i t must
not be understood that he meant to keep to it in the sequel. He
added that if the liberation of the Prisoners coud not be w e e d u
this year, it might during the next - I told him immedately t at
it was not in your power to subscribe to such term8 & that i t woud

3

!?

WARS WITH B&BARP

POWERS

483

enta I could
be useless for me to communicate them, Whatever ar
brin forward I was unable to prevail upon His Exce ency to reduce
hie bemaod - You have therefore Monsieur the Commodore no
pltemative dut to txttpck the T o w & particularly the Csstle without
mtennission, unless you feel yourself authorized to a proach nearer
to the conditions proposed - If you do not it will e s u p e ~ u o u s
to reply and you must ersevere until the Pacha hammd at all points
shall hunsdf ssh for a arley When I was at the Castle, there were brought before the Bashaw,
Guns, pistols and other a r m s taken on bawd a, Chaloupe or Boat
which went on Shore to the Westward of the Town, and in which 8
Man wss found who had been killed by a Musket ball -

f?

\

B

[Mm.Jarnee 8. B a m n o r i g i i . ]
Extract from journal of U. 8. Brig Argus. X w t e r Commandant lasac
Havy, comm~nding,Wednesday, 20 Aagust 1804

Ed, U. 6.

[At anchor off Tripoli.] This day Commences with fresh breezes
At 1 PM James Jeffers, 0.S. was badly wounded in the left hand by
the midental going ofF of a Pistol at 4 At Anchor Caps Hull went on
board the Commodore Tripoli bore SSW at 5 Cap* Hull returned
hoisted in d boats fresh breezes thro, the night with a bad swell from
the Eastward At 8 AM hoisted out all boats and took on board 1800 Gall#of water
from the Malta Ketch Watered NP 3 & 7 Gunboat8 a t j4 past 6 the
Commodore made Gunboats Sit N9 69 Ends light winds Squadron
at Anchor Hands Variously Employed [NDA photostat.]
Hxtrut from log book kept by Sailing Muter Nathaniel Heraden, U. 8. R a w , on
board U. 8. Frigate Gdftatim, Wednesday, 2Q August 1804

Fresh breezes from E b S. At Single Anchor 4 or 5 Miles N E b N
from Tripoly Squadron in company. Employed repairing damages
& refitting the Gun boats for another attack.
Towards evening the weather became more moderate & continued
so through the Night.
At 9 P. M. fired two guns & burnt two rockets to alarm the

Batteries At 6 A. M. ran a Warp to the Store Ketch & Warped her dong
side - This is the ketch that joined the Squadron on Sunday
morning last. No opportunity of discharging her has offered before
now - She brough[t] 133 Puncheons of water equal to nearly 10,000
Gall*
Emplo ed dl forenoon in clearing the Ketch & supplying the gun
boats wi Powder shot and other stores A heavy swell all forenoon from E N E - This forenoon the
Retch Intrepid was carried alongside the Sgren - She is ordered to
be fitted out as a fire ship or Infernal Noon Iight breezes fmm N E b E with a swell from E N E.

&

[LC. EPP, Log Conalr'tufion,1803-1804.1

484 NAVAL OPERATIOATS.APRIL-SEPTEMBER 6. 180.4
Extract from journal kept by Purser John Derby, U. 6. Navy, on board U. S. 6.
JdnAdmns, Master Commandant Isaac Chauncey. U. 6. Navy, commanding,
Wednesday, 29 Angust 1804

We are now laying a t Anchor of[f] the Town of Tripoli Plemant
Weather and light breezes from the Eastwq - a t 2 Oclock P If. the
Brig Argus and Schooner Vixon Stood in towards the Town. hoist'd
the White flag which was answered by the Bashaw on shore a t 4
they stood out. We understand that they went in to carry some
Dispatches for the consuls on shore and to take the advantage of it,
in reconnoitrcing the Town and harbour and to know what damage
we had done the town - in the last attack. and to hear from the
french consul whether the Bashaw was better disposed to make a
peace the French Consul informed us that we had done great
damage to the tourn & that the Bashaw wished to know whether the
commodores let,ter contained any propositions for peace. but we are
informed they did not
[XDA original. Miss Camilla S. McConne11.1
Extract from journal of Midshipman F. Cornelius deKrafft, U. 6. Bevy, in U. 8.
Brig Siren of 18 guns, Master Commandant Charles Stewart, U. 5. Navy, oommanding, Wednesday, 29 August 1804

Lying a t anchor [Tripoli]. Midnight light winds & pleasant with
a heavy swell. At 3 past 7 a signal from the Commodore for the gun
boats to prepare for battle. Latt: Obs: 3 3 O 00' N.
[RDA.]

To Secretary of State from Jemes Simpson, U. 6. Consul, Tangier, Morocco

No 81. - duplicate TANGIER
30th August 1804. SIR My late corres ondence with Sidy Muhammed Selawy on
subject of His Imperia Majestys wish to send mheat to Tripoly,
having in some particulars become of rather an Interesting nature,
I think well to hand you herewith translations of my Letter to him
of the g t h Ins!, his answer of the 20th and my reply of the 26t@- I
was enduced to send him the Letter from Alcayde Hashash referred
to in that correspondence, because he says in it - "grant this Passport
and Peace will subsist between us and you." - Knowing how apt
Alcayde Hashash is to hold such Language of himself without
authority, I did not mention the circumstance to you, trusting at
same time the Minister would have satisfied me he had taken his
accustomed liberty on this occasion; but I am sorry to find Selawy
speaks much in the same strain as Hashash. - It does not appear
however that it is intended to press the matter for the present. The arrival of Commodore B a m n s Squadron, in my oppinion will
prevent that; and enduce this Government to act more circumspectly
than it perhaps might have done, had the American Commerce continued without protection on this Coast. In Nq 79 I mentioned that some Saltpetre & Copper were to be
shipt a t Mogadore on the Frigate Maimona for A l ~ e r s ,when these
Articles were brought in from the Mines it was so reported, but Mc
Gwyn in his Letter to me of the first this Month corrects, - he says

i'

"It was from misinformation that I wrote you the Emperours Ship here was
"to load the Copper and Salt etre for the Algerine, ss she came here to load
"them for H I M Account a n f i s to go when the Wind will permit to Sa118.
"The Algerine is yet here waiting for a Veasfl of his Nation to load his. -"

-

WARS WITH BARBARY POUTERS

485

The fact is two different parcells of these Articles were brought to
Mogadore - that belonging to the Emperour was laden on the
Maimom and she has arrived a t Sall6 with them; but in place of proceeding to the Mediterranean, as was a t first intended, we learn by
Letters received yesterday from thence they have been tfanshipt to a
Schooner belonging to the Emperour. - On the 14p Ins! a Messenger
arrived a t Tangier from the Minister with a Letter for the Consuls,
desireing Passports for this same Vessel to go from Sall6 to Tunis with
Pilgrims, but no mention was made of any Cargo; whether the resolution to put the Articles out of the Frigate to her was subsequent to
that application f cannot say, but altho' the Vessel is no doubt bound
to Tunis with about forty Pilgmrns, it appears to me extremely
robable, the ultimate destination of the Copper and Saltpetre is
&ripolg.- That of the Emperours three Ships for the Mediterranean
I lllso now perfectly belie~ewas on some W e m e of giving assistance
to Tripoly, for I am satisfied it is Muley Solinlans wish to do so if he
could, and I fear we shall henceforward find that he will only be
restrained from it, by knowing a sufficient force is a t hand to prevent
it; we shall see what Sidy Muhammed Selamy will say in answer to
my remarks on subject of the War with that State. The Meshouda lays a t Larach notwithstanding these appearances,
without ever having had any repair since she entered that River in
October last. Whilst my duty compells me to hold forth to Government these
powerful reasons for looking to the conduct of Muley Soliman with a
Jealous Eye, still so long as no overt act of hostility is wmmited or
the honour of the Flag assailed, I shall consider it incumbent on me
for the benefit of Commerce to cherish Friendship with this Countw;
in fact this last consideration in such a charge as mine I believe should
be the predominant object. The lssue of the late Negotiation with the Bstavian Consul was a
demand of a yearly Tribute of Twenty thousand dollars, with an
extra Present the first year of complete Cloathjng for One thousand
Soldiers and Stores for the equipment of two Cruizers.
These Conditions of Peace have been transmitted to Holland and
if not accorded with the Consul has been told he must retire and his
Nation to be considered as no longer in Peace with Muley Solirnm. You will see Sidy Muhammad Selawy handed the Presidents Let.ter
to the Emperour - no reply has been sent. - Commodore Baron
left the Frigntes Congress and B s a on this Station, and I am satisfied
it was a wise determination. [NA. SDA. CL, Tangier, Vol. 2, Jan. 1803-kt. 1810.1
To C~ptDinSamuel Barron, U.S. Navy, Commodore, U. S. Sqnodron in the Mediterranean, from J e m e ~Simpeon, 0.6. Consul, Tangier, Morocco

TANGIER
30thAuguA 1804. SIR My last to you 14*9this Month I find did not reach you a t
Gibraltar, but M' Gavino will have forwarded it. My Communications to Captain Rodgers of the 26tQ& 2?Q Inst
follow up the detail of what I have since had to impart on Service,
which he will no doubt lay before you. On the 17t@I received your favour of the 1 3 ~ this
@ Month, in which
you state the strong reasons assist your determination respecting the

486 NAVAL OPERATIONS, APBIGSEPTEMBER 6,180.4
request of some Wheat being sent by the Empemur to Tripoly. - I
have had as you will see an answer from Sidy Muhammed Selawy,
who says it is not now desired. I know the Emperour is highly displeased on the o d o n , and I
have not a doubt but for the very opportune arrival of your Squadron
he would have reaented it. I have not failed to say every thing I could suggest to the Minister
to divest their intentions from unfriendly measures, but I know the
are disposed to give what sssistanoe they can to Tri oly - un
Peace be obtained there we shall have no security here, gut what they
are awed into. By advice from Salle we are assured the Schooner mentioned to you
in mine of the 14" takes Saltpetre & Copper aa well as Pilgrvns to
Tunis,whose ultimate destination is Tripoly. On the 2 g t W a y I mte Commodore Preble mlliciting the release
of a Moor of Tangier Mohamet Ben Ally Ben Seid, whom he had
detained among some Triplines. - I have not received an answer,
but I hope the person has been set at Liberty as a subject of Muley
Sohan. -

dl

[Am. Antiquarian Soc. NDA photoetat.]
To Captain James Barron, 0.6.Navy, commanding U.6.Frigate &, from Captain
John Rodgem, U. S. Navy

U. STATE^ FRIGATE
Congress
QibraUar Bay Augi 30.1804
SIR. Concieving there is not the smallest necessity at present for
the services of more than one Frigate on this Station, I have thought
it advisable & have determined to leave you in the command here,
and shall proceed with the Congress direct to Tripoli, in hopes of
arriving in time to unite her services to the Expdtion commanded
by Commo: B m n , against that place. I therefore Enclose you
my instructions from him for your G o v m e n t . As Commo. B a m n s
Instructions are very Explicit, I feel it unnecessary in me to add
any thin further than merely to observe that I think it advisable
you shoufd (in addition to a constant correspondence with Mr Simpson
our Consul a t Tsngier) sail about the 8 or gth of next month, & cruize
a few Days between Cape Spartel and Salle, to inform yourself
whether any or Either of the Ships a t Sage, have put to Sea, and if
they have what is their object.
[Am. Antiquarian Soc.

NDA photostat.j

To Secretary of the Havy from Coptoin John Badgers, U. 8. Bavy
U.S. FRIGATE
Cove88
CJibraltar Bay Augt 30,1804
SIR I have the honor to inform you that I have this Instant
arrived here with the Congress & Essex direct from Tan
place I saiid from on the 27'@Inst - our assage has been
to a severe Lavant Gale which lasted gom the night
until the morning of the 29" and drove us tbrough the Shaights
into the Atlantick. In my last communications dated Tangier Bay 17&QInst, I informed
you of Commo. B m n s having sent the Congress & Eesez on this

NQ3.

487

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

Coast, in consequence of advices rec'd from Mr Simpson our Consul
a t Tangier, of my Intentions to leave the &ex to Watch the Conduct
of Two Galleys a t that place & of my proceeding Immediately with
the Congreee to Salle, to inform myself of the movements (& if possible
the Intentions) of the Emperors three Ships, mention'd in Mr Sim
communications to Commo. Barron, Copys of which the $""
atter
Gentleman has forwarded you. I did so & arrived & anchor'd
before Salle on the 20'Q (taking Arzilla, Mamora & Larache in my
route) where I found the three Ships in question, and to a,ll appearance nearly ready for Sea. - After laymg three Hours a t anchor
within about 5 miles of the Town, with American Colours Flying & a
S i a l Indicative of Friendship & a wish to communicate with the
Shore, without any apparent disposition of the like on their part;
I weighd & stood w i t h the range of a cannon Shot of the Ships,
without any further success of bringing about a communication, altho
every means which a friendly demesnor could suggest was used:
However I have no reason to suppose that hostile intentions on their
parts were the cause of my not succedin but that they either did
not comprehend the meaning of the sign$ or were afraid to Venture
off. On the 21'1 after repeating again in the same way as on the
preceding Day, my wishes to Exchange Civilities, without any
appearance of success; and fearin that a further attempt on the
subject, m' h t lead to suspicions un avorable to a good understanding,
I made
& Pursued my course back to Tangier, where I agam
on the 27'h join'd the Essex - At Larache I found the Ship Meshotlda
(Ci de Vant Tripoline) in a State of Ordinary;but a t Arzilla & Mamora
there was not a Single Vessel of any description - On my return
again to Tangier I made the usual Signal to communicate with our
Consul, and in an Hour after had the pleasure of receiving advices
from him cornberating my own opinion, "That whatever grounds
their might have been for Suspicion, that they were so far removed
as to admit of one of the Ships leaving the Coast". Two days after
I left Tan 'er for Salle, the two Gall'ys which the Essez was left to
watch, sai 'd & one of them Boarded by her in sight of Tangier.
This circumstance serves to prove that the had no orders to Capture
American Vessels or they certain1 wo d not have gone to Sea,
while the &sex was in slght - &ese two Gall'ys wrth the tbree
Ships a t Salle, compose the greater part, if not the whole marine
Force of Morocco - Since the Gallys sailJd I have heard of their
being a t Cadiz. The Ships are inside of Salle Bar & I have reason
to believe there is but little probability of their going to Sea this
Summer, as I am told there never has been an Instance of their large
Cruizers, going to Sea, for the ur ose of Cruizin after the 10'4
Sept'; However it is not impm ab e that one of %em will go to
Lisbon to receive their Annual Donation, "The Marine repository
a t Lisbon bein the Arainal of MoroccoJJ,As it appears that without
ceremony the %mporer sends UincraUy every year a Ship to that
Port with an Inventory of the Stores wanting for his cruizers, and is
furnished with the am$without a murmur; I shall leave this the Instant I get Water on Board, Sufficient for
Six or Seven weeks, which I am in hopes will not take lon er than
tomorrow morning and proc~eddirect to Tripoli; where flatter
myself (if Cap, Prible has not made a previous attack) I shall yet

SZ

f

F

d

g f

f

488 NAVAL OPERATIONS, APRIL-SEPTEMBER 6, 1804
arrive in time to coopperate with Commodore Barron, For I should
be greatly mortified, if the Congress did not share a part of the Credit
to be derived, in the reduction of Tripoli by inscribing a lasting &
Honorable remembrance of her name on its Walls. - I can now
clearly percieve that our future situation with Morocco will greatly
depend on the ]rind of Peace we make with Tripoli; As i t appears
they are more closely allied than an of the other Barbary Powers,
in consequence of a Blood connection etween the Emperor & Bashaw,
and I think it not Improbable that the Emporer hearinp; of the Destination of the late Squadron, put his Cruizers in mobon, & made
the Vague demands, mentioned by our Consul to Commo. Barron,
merely with an Intention to emply a part of it, until the Season
should be so far advanced, as to render an attack against Tri oli
Impracticable, or a t least hazardous; By the opperations of a ~ m & e r
Force than our Goverment had :calculated. The Essex having light
metal, added to her Hull being in a Very Imperfect state, her services
cannot be Important in an attack of[f] Tripoli, I have therefore left
her on the Gibraltar Station, to check any unfriendly design the
Emporer may feel towards our commerce.
The measures I have pursued during my command on this Station,
will I hope, by their Tendancy, merit your approbation, & I certainly
should not have resign'd, the Command of this Station, to place
myself in a more subordinate station, did I concieve there was a
necessity for the services of more than one ship here. - Altho i t
is full likely, that the Business of Tn oli, will be finish'd before I
arrive there, yet I concieve the probabzity of their being a necessity
for my remaining here, over balanced. by the possibility that I may
yet arrive before Tripoli in time to jom the Services of the Congress
m the Attack.
[LC. JRP, Letters & Orders, Book A, 1804-1806.1

i

To Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Bavy, from Sir Alexander John Ball,@overnorof
Malta

MALTA
30 AuglLsl1804
SIR I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your Excell e n c y ~Letter of the 21qt instt inclosing a copy of one from the Secret~ of the Navy of the United States, informing you of the intention
of the President to augment the Naval force m the Mediterranean
which circumstance will put him under the necessity of sending two
Captains Senior to you - The very flattering expressions He makes
use of in observing that "you have a q u M yourself in a manner
howable to yourself, weful to your Country, and in ad respects e~ectly
satisfactory to us," must satisfy your mind, that notlung ut imperious necessity could have caused your government to send an
officer superior in rank to you. I have communicated this to all those I know. They join me in
regretting that an officer whose Talents and professional abilities
bave been justly appretiated, and whose manners and conduct
eminently fit him for so high a command should be removed from i t I have now on1 to request that you will command me without
reserve whenever can be m any way useful to you
[LC. EPP, Vol. 13, AugustDecember 1804.1

E

9

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

489

Extract from journal of U. 6. Brig Argus, Master Commandant Isaac Ed, U. 6.
Navy, commanding, Thursday. SO Angnst 1804

The Commode sent his boat on board got under way and stood in
for the town a t 3 PM fired a gun and hoisted the french Ensign a t the
main and White flag a t the fore which was answered by the french
Consul on Shore a t 3 past 4 Lieu1 Blake went in the barge with a flag
of Truce TKQand Wore Ship OccasY a t 6 Lieu3 Blake returned filled
away and Stood for the Commodore a t 9 hove too Cap+Hull went on
board the Commode and returned a t 11 filled away At 8 AM the
Commodore hoisted our distinguishing flag Ca t Hull went on board
of him and returned a t 9 filled away and stood or the town in CQwith
the Vixen a t 4 past 9 fired a Gun and hoisted the french Ens'
at
the main and White flag a t the fore which was observ'd by the izen
a t 12 the Commode hoisted our distinguish6 flag & made Sig! No 600
Stood for him.

P

v

[NDA photostat.]

Extract from journal of U. S. Frigate Congress. CsptPin John Bodgers, U. 6. Bavy,
commanding, Thursday, SO August 1804

At 2 [AM] took in top gallant Sails. light airs From the North4 &
West@ past came too in the bay of Gibraltar I n 18 fathoms water
with the starbQBower anchor Veerd & Moord ship with 3 capble each
way. European point Bearing S B E E., Ss Rogue N 3 E Algesirm
W $ N.

+

+

Extract from log book kept by Sailing Master Nathaniel Haraden, U. 6. Ravy, on
board U. S. Frigate Gnrfflotkn. Thursday, SO August 1804

hlioderate breezes from E N E with a swell from the same Quarter At Single Anchor 4 Miles N E b N from Tripoly Squadron in
corn any are employed disoharging the Store Ketch B- supplying the Gun
boats - We supplied NQ2 & Nq 6 with a large Grapnel each, also
with a fore Jeer, & a cat fall - These two boats were under the
necessity of cutting in the late action.
By 5 P. &
we
I.
completed discharging the Ketch & filled 20 casks of
salt water in her when she hauled Off & anchored This afternoon we received 18 Men from the U. S. Brig Scourge These are part of the men supplied her by us when she was put in
commission The Argus was su plied out of the Store Ketch with 24 Puncheons
of water, and the courge with 5 - The Constitution took the remaining 95 puncheons, which added to the water this day on b o d
makes 59 Leagurs, 65 Butts & 29 Gang casks,in Gallons 26,524 At 3 P. M. the Argus & Vizen weighed & stood in for Tripoly They hoisted the French Jack & a white bag as a Signal to speak the
French Consul - In the course of half an bour it was answered in
the Town - The A r m ' s boat met one from the shore & delivered the
dis atches &oderate through the n' ht with a swell from E N E - This
forenoon we supplyed the f h n with 720 Gall' wster & the Nautilus
with 640 Gallf -

d

8

490 NAVAL OPERATXONS, APBILSEPTEMBEB 6, 1804
At 9 A. M. the Argus & Vizen (wbich bad joined corn my at 9 last
evening) ran down to the Town. They hoistad the &cb
Jack &
the white flag, which not being answered agreeable to promise they
were r d e d pl Signal; On their standing out to join the Commodore
the signal was answered in the Town - The Argus then made the
&pal that communication with the shore was granted, and bore up
in Order to speak a dispatch boat-stand* out of the Harbour - At
this time the Commodore was out of the ship, examining the Ketch
which is fitting out as an infernal Surgeons report 6 sick 9 convdescent & 4 discharged
Noon Moderate breezes from E N E.
All our carpenters employed on board the Intrepid
[LC. EPP, Log Constitution, 1803-1804.1
from jonrnd kept by Purser John Darby, U. 6. Navy, on board U. S. 6.
jdn AdMaster Commnndant Isaac Chnnncey, U. S. Bow, comman&ing,

-act

Thnnday, SO A-t

1804

A t 7 Oclock this morning the commodore made the signal. for Gun
boats to prepare for battle at 8 the Argus and Vizon stood in again at Meridian light breezes from N.E. at 5 P. M the Brig Argua &
Vbon stood out with a Maltee boat in tow that had been driven in

to Tripoli by Stress of Weather. they brought. us. some Potatoes &
Onions from Malta. 8nd informed us that the Tripolins were very
much distressed on shore - this day ends with pleasant Weather [XDA original. Miss Camilla S. McConnell.]
Extra& from journal of Midshipman F. Cornelius deKrafft, U. 6. Navy, in U. 6.
Brig Sm of 18 g w , Yaster Commandant Charles Stewart, U. 8. IUavy, camm m d i i , Thursday, 30 Auguat 1804

Lying at Anchor [Tripoli] Throughout those 24 hours light
breezea & pleasant. 4! past 2 the A r p & Vizen got under way &
stood for the Town. At j4 past 3 the Argus fired a gun & hoisted the
a t her fore $ french at her main royd mast heads.
White
Midnig
Is%t cloudy the Argus $ Vixen lying bye close in shore. At
j6 past 10 the Comm: came on board. At 11 the Commodore left us
for his own ship. Meridian crew employ'd hoisting in water stoing it &c. &c. r e d from the J. Adurns a quantity of Provisions &c &c.
[NDA.]
To D d e l Beclinger. Xavy Agent ond Superintendent of W w y Yard, Borfolk, Va.,
from Charles W. Qoldrborongh, Chief Clerk, Bary Department

NAVYD E P31
~ Augt 1804.
I now enclose to you a Passport from the President of the U. States
for the W r $ Mary: Also Passports from the British, French, and
Spanish Ministers.
These Passports are forwarded under the Impression that the
W e & Maq is an American Ship. Should not thls be the case, the
Passports are not to be delivered to Capf Tipling but you will return
them to this office. [NDA. Bsrbery Powera, LB, 1803-1808.1

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

491

To Daniel Bedinger, Xavy Agent and Superintendent of Bavy Yard, Boxfolk, Va.,
from Becretuy of the Bovy

NAV.D E PA~Z L
31.1804
~
received your letter of the 26%4inst enclosing MT
Higgins receipt or the Car o of the Woodtop Sims [ex Be&y Walk] a
letter from Captain Reddic to Mr Geo. MFIntosh also a letter from
Mf MqIntosh to you - all which are herewith returned to you Mr Higgins certificate establishes the fact that a considerable part
of the Cargo of the WoodropSims was damaged when delivered at Malta
also that there was a deficiency in quantity in some of the articles As you have not transmitted to me a Satisfactory account of the manner in which this damage was sustained and deficiency Ocwioned,
my Conduct must be Governed by the Charter Party and Mr Higgins
Certificate the only official papers in my possession - I cannot
therefore authorize any further paymanta, to the Owners of the
Woodrop Sim for the freight of her cargo I observe that Mr MoIntosh states to you his conviction of the entire
correctness of the Circumstances stated in Captain Reddicks note
to him and
unds his conviction principally upon the Circumstance
of the artic e . sent out by him on his Own account (c011~istingof
Tierces of Coffee, of loaf and Clayed S u g m Pepper, Tobacco and
Rum) being delivered in good Order - I mention this Circumstance
not with a View to Examine Caps Reddicks evidence or Mr MtIntoshs
conviction, but to enquire how it came to ass that Mr MsIntosh was
Permitted to Send out in his Own Vess Chartered exclusively for
public purposes, any adventure of his Own -my letters to you of
the 22g Decemr 1803 and lot@and 24'h Janumy 1804 are considered
perfectly Explicit
By the letter of the 22'J Decemr you were requested to procure a
Vessel on Public account and the articles to be sent in her to the
mediterranean were designated - By the Subsequent letters ou
were expressly diected to fill the Veapel with Public Stores $he
extreme im ropriety of Suffering any private individual or any p e m n
or ersons b h atever to Send out an adventure in a Vessel Chartered
sxc usively for public purposes must be apparent to you [NDA. GLB,Vol. 7, 1803-1805.1

I this morn'

"P

i

Y"

3

P

To Captain Edward Preble, U. 6. Bevy, horn Joseph Pmordi, U. 6. Conrd, Crdk,
Spain

AMERICAN
CONSULATE

Cadiz Sl't August 1804 DEARSIR: Under date of the 27t@ultimo I had the pleasure of
inclosing you Copy of a Letter received from James Monroe Esqr
res ecting the forgezy Committed on the house of Messr*MqKenzie
& lennie of London in your name; I have now that of remitting ou
Co g of a Letter 'ust received from Mi William Jarvis our COW$ at

&

h i o n , which wd inform you of the whole transaction.
Notwithstan
the many enqu s made here & steps taken to
discover either Ro erte or Borny aU as proved in vain, as no tidings
of such People can be found.
I am happy to acquaint you that by reporb all matters between
thie Court and the United S t a h will be settled to mutual content, as

""b

4

492 h 7 A V ' OPERATIONS, APRIL-SEPTEMBER 6. 1804
this Government it seems has sent orders to the Marquis d'fiuso to
ajust all pending affairs in the most satisfactory manner possible;
therefore I believe Mr Pinckney has postponed his journey [LC. EPP, Vol. 13, AugustDecember 1804.1
[31 August 18041
To Lieutenant John E. Dent, U. S. Navy, commanding U. S. Brig Scourge. from
Captain Edward Preble, U. 6. Navy

SIR, The good of the service requires that you put the whole of your
Ships Company on allowance of two Quarts & a pint of Water for
twenty four hours including peas, rice and grog Water - You will
therefore give orders to commence the issuing such allowance this
day and continue until1 farther Orders
I am Sir
Your most Ob! Servr
Signed, EDWARD
PREBLE
U . S. S H I PConstitutio~.
03 Tripoly, AugzLsd Slat 1804
Cap! DENT
U. S. Brig Scourge
[NHF. Dent's LB.]
To Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Navy, from Purser John Darby, U. 8. Navy

U. S. FRIGATE
John Adams

OflTripoli Augmt 31 1804

I

I have this morning appli'd to Cap$Chauncey, to know when

I might expect a public investigation of the faulse and malitious
charges exhibited against me by il.lr John. Orde. Creighton, Masters
Mate, of this ship, he has informed me that he had layed the matter
before you, and that he could not say when you wou'd see fit to act
on it
I have now to request of you Sir that if the nature of our countrys
service is such as not to admit of your attention to matters of less
importance that you will be pleased, to order Mr Creighton to remain
on board of this ship or some other ship which is not immediately
engaged in any future attack which may be made on the Town of
Tripoli, or to be placed in any situation which might afford a chance
of endangoring his life. for if Mr Creighton should be, b accident,
deprived of life, before the Public investigation of his c arges - I
shall for ever labour under the worst of all human afflictions that of a
suspected and implicated character. - For however innocent a man
may be there are enough in this world to be found to say (for there
are few of us who have not our enemys) there goes the man, pointing
to the accused, who has been charged by an officer who was Killed
a t such a place, of dishonesty, and in that case i t will be for ever
suspended in doubt, whether the accusation be true or faulse as my
friends will believe one thing and my enemys another, That being the
case and particularly as I am amongst strangers & in a strange country
and where you alone Sir have Cognizance of all matters whch relates
to our country & the officers & men who belong to the Squadron
un er your Command
I have to repeat again that you will be pleased to grant my requestFor as Ce-r
says by his wife a man shou'd not only be honest
but unsu[s]pectedly so. -

E

d'

[LC. EPP, Vol. 13, August-December 1804.1

U7ARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

493

Extract from journal of U. S. Brig Argus. Ylaster Commandant Isaac Hull, U. 8.
Haw, commanding, Friday, 81 August 1804

a t 1 PM observed a White flag hoisted on Shore made Sail and
Stood for the town a t 2 PM, a Maltase Sparranara Came off took her
in tow a t % past 2 Lieu$ Morris went in the barge with a flag of Truce
a t 4 Lieus Morris returned made sail & stood for the Commodore a t 6
hove too Cap$ Hull and Smith went on board of him in our barge a t
9 Caps Hull returned
[N DA photostat.]
Extract from log book kept by Sailing Maeter Nathaniel Harsden, U. S. Xavy,
on board U. 6. Frigate ConrlitIcUon, Friday, 31 August 1804
Moderate breezes from N E. At Single Anchor 4 Miles N E b N

from Tripoly. Squadron in company, the Vixen & A r m excepted,
who are in shore waiting for a boat which meets her half way A Maltese Sparanaro which sailed from Malta some days since
from Malta with supplies for our Squadron, had been captured, on
her arrival off here, by one of the Tripoline Gun Boats - She was
permitted to leave Tripoly this afternoon, & joined the Squadron We received by her a small quantity of Potatoes & onions.
In the Everung the Argus & V k n joined company - They brou h t
dispatches from Tripoly for the Commodore - At f past 3 P.
the French & white flags were hauled down on both sides Towards evening we had fresh breezes from N E b E with a swell
from E N E.
By 10 in the Evening it became Moderate & continued so throughout the Night A. M. Supplied the Vixen with 1158 Gall*of water - In the afternoon of this days log we supplied the Syren with 9 Gang casks, which
added to the water had in the forenoon & the xater from the Enterprize completes her to 1900 Gall"
The carpenters of the Squadron all on board the Intrepid fitting
her out as an Infernal.
We sent this forenoon 100 shells & 50 grenades to the Intrepid.
We sent also to the Enter rize, Syren, Argus J. Adums, Nautilus,
I ' k n & Scourge, four ~ r i ~ o % eprisoners each - The others remain
on board the Constitution Surgeons report 3 sick, 12 conv"~'
The Potatoes & Onions received by the Sparonaro were divided
among the Squadron.
Supplyed the Enterprize with 4 bbls Pork
Condemned by survey & threw overboard 1200 pound of cheese,
rotten, stinking & unfit for men to eat.
The Signals made the 24 hours past are as follows
A. M. 84 - Syren send your launch on board the Constibdion
(She was employed watering the 'I.7kn)
Answered the Syrem Signal NQ 1212 - & repeated
83
her signal for a launch 103
V k n . Come within hail.
11 - All boats repair to the Constisubion
114 - Prepare for action, the gun boats

14.

[LC. EPP, Log Comtituticln, 1803-1804.1

494 NAVAL OPERATIONS. APRIL-SEPTEMBER

6. 180.4

Extr.ct from journal of William Eaton, U. 8. Navy Agent for the Barbary Begencieq
Friday, 31 August 1804

E. Wind, veered to the north; and we laid our course for Malta.
It is remarkable that since the 21st July, the day we made Pico, a

s ace of forty one days, the wind has been constantly and directly
&@ad; excepting about 12 hours in enterin and leaving Gibraltar,
during which time we have beat to windwar a distance of four hundred and fifty leagues.
[NR&L. No. 9217, Bml E 14.1

%

Extract from journal kept by Purser John Darby, U. 8. Bavy, on board U. 8. 8.
John Admm, Master Commandant Isaac Channcey. U. 8. Navy, commanding,
Riday, 81 August 1804

At Anchor ofIf]the Town of Tripoli. a t Meridian the Commodore
made the signal to prepare for Battle. We receved on board four
Tripoleen Prisoners. a t past 5 the Commodore made the Signal
for the Schooner Ente rize !a get under way a t half past 9 A M.
the commodore made t e Signal to speak the Enterprize - Nothing
further Particular occured this day
[NDA original. Miss Camilla 8. McConnell.]

+

"l

Extract from journal of Midshipman P. Cornelius degrafft, U. 8. Navy, in U. 8.
Brig Snn of 18 guns, Master Commandant Charles Stewart, U. 8. Navy, commanding, Friday, 31 August 1804

Lying at Anchor [Tripoli] Throughout these 24 hours gentle
breezes & pleas? sent the launch on board the Comm: the Vixen standing off shore with a large boat in tow the Arm lyin too close under
the batteries. At 9 the Commodores cutter came a ong side with 4
Turkish Prisoners & left them on board. At 10 hoisted out the barge,
sent her on board the Intrepid, with articles to fit her out as an Infernal
At 4 past
she to be sent into the harbour of tripoli & blown up -.
11 a s i p 1 to the gun boats to prepare for battle.
Mendian sent the cutter along side the Intrepid - r e d water from
the Commodore

k

[NDA.]

To Qeorge Davis, U. 8. Chars6 d'Affoires, Tunis, from Tobias Lear, U. 8. Consul
General, Algiers

ALGIERB
SepP 1 qt 180.4
SIR, The foregoing under date of Aug; 22g was written with an

expectation that the Vessel destined for Tunis, w'J have sailed the
Da following its date; but she has been detained till this time;
an no other conveyance could be found. We have had no arrivals
here since the John Adams. Every thing of the Eatable kind is very
high. no grain corning to market. Wheat @ 2 10/100$ and Barley
@ 75. Cents p? Measure. Not a word respecting the English since
the departure of Mr McDonough Bryan W. MQDonogh].
I forward a package of Am. News Papers, which may be later
than any you have r e d and have the honor to be with great regard
& Esteem
[8tephen Decetur Col. NDA photostat, Book A.]

1

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

495

To George Davia, U. 8. Chug6 d'bgairer, Tunis, from Nicholas C. Biuen, Drnirh
C o ~ u lTripoli
,

TRIPOLI
in BAEBAEY
September 16 1804.

DEARSIR, I have to acknowledge the receipt of your favor of 6t4
ult., in consequence of which I shall make new applications to Sidi
Mehenny for the payment of the bill drawn by Sidi Eamida, and
endeavour to finish this affair.
The Packet which ou had inclosed for Captain Bainbridge, hm
been delivered to Ris xcellency the Bashaw's Minister, who, I dont
doubt will pennit the letters to come to hand.
You are certainly informed Sir,of the operations of the U. S.
Squadron off this Port, and news h m Europe, we have not; I can
therefore only have the honor to assure you Sir, of the consideration
and respect wherewith I am,
(Signed) N C NISSEN
NB. I have not yet received any letters to forward in answer to
them you sent.
Sympathetic ink - [R7ritten in lime juiee.]
Dr SIR, I have sent to our common friend Mr Holck, a Journal of
the operations of the Am9 Squadron - I dont doubt but he will give
you a translation, or the necessary information. - Poor Capt. B.
was nearly killed at the cannonade, on the morning of the 28. - a
24 pound passed his head within a few inches while in bed, & covered
him with mortar &ct. - In the whole the bombardement & canonade,
have not had an effect sufficient to force the Bashaw, who, dont
care much about his Town or his Subjects' life.
When you write to Col. Lear, please to inform him that Capt. B.
did not receive the letter he sent & which you forwarded the 234
June, I delivered it but i t has been deta"
mentioned i t to you
but than I did not know what letter it was.
The Bashaw intends to fire with red hot Shot, if he can, he certainly
will blow up his gunners.
The S anish Vessel came in without seeing the Squadron, it was
a Gale t e day before.
Commodq P. is to have offered 1201mil. Dollars, for Peace, Consular
Present ect. -The Bashaw has not made any determined demand
yet, but I believe he will. They are now parlamenting; before I
close this letter I shall give you the informations I may be able to
. The parlamenting has not been conducive to Peace, but the
ashaw is to have given his ultimate demands, which when I l m ,
I shall let you how.- they are augmented. - I t ap ears to me,
excuse the liberty, that Commod~P. enters too often in par amenting the Bashaw takes it as a necessity for peace & grows more obstinate. After every attack, there has been next day a flag of truce this is no good Policy towards an Enemy as Tripoli.
[NYHS. Geo. Devk LB, Vol. I.]

%

E

ff

P

To Qeneral W i a m Allan from Midihipman William Henry Allen, U. 8. Barp

U. S. FRIGATE
the Congress
aibralter bay Sept 1st 1804
DEARSIR I seize 8 moment to Inform you of our having arrived
here dl well the 13th of August the Commodore and Cbnstellafion

496 NAVAL OPERATIONS, APRILSEPTEMBER 6, 1804
proceded irnmidiately to join the Squadron aloft we remaining to take a
cruise off the South coast of Morrocco and was off the City of Sallee
the 20th 21st and 22nd. ultimo found lying there three Ships of
war the Momona [Maimom] of 32 the Momom [Maimom]of 39 & the
Afaboukir [Mirboka]of 22 guns the last is the Ship that was captured
by the Philadelphia and given up a t Tangeir the present situation
of our affairs with Barbary is this (the appearance of the last Squadron
has induced the Emperor of Morrocco to relinquish desi s of a hostile
nature, the decisive conduct of Commodore Preble as compelled
the Bey of Tunis to be a t Peace & Tripoli remains in the same State
as formerly the last accounts from Commodore Preble, he had left
Malta in the Co~~stitudion
with the Brigs, Schooners, 2 bombs & 5
Gun boats bound off there we sail in the morning on a cruise I
Imagine as far as Malta - Convey from me every sentiment of
Respect & Esteem to all Freinds & receive for your Self, Mama,
Sarah & Thomas the warmest affections[te] love I dare again request
you to direct your letters to this Place a brig arrivd yesterday 30
days from Boston
(Postscript) we have heard of the death of Hamilton [July 12,

P

1804.1
[Huntington Library Quarterly.]
To Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Navy, from Monsieur Beaussier, French
Charge d'Affaires end Commissary General, Tripoli

TRIPOLY- 1It Septemr 1804.
COMMODORE,
The Captain of the Spanish Vessel will have the
Honor to deliver you this letter along with his own papers. You
will find that agreeable to ME Davis's Passport that he was to ask
your permission to go to Tripoly ; but that on his arrival off this place
no American Man of war was in sight: You will likewise observe
that on his departure from Tripoly, he is to embark but the same
number of persons composing the suite of the Grand Segnior's Tchowish. He has so strictly conformed himself to this, that the Tchowish
has even discharged a person in this place belonging to his suite The Spanish Consul desired me to furnish him with a letter to you
on this subject in order that you might not prevent h i from proceeding on his Voyage.
I forgot to mention to you yesterday that the Pacha, astonished
to find that the Frigate that arrived here the 7th of August, never
came into action, is induced to bclieve that she is armed en$ute or
that there is some misunderstanding between you & her Captain I ave proper answers to these conjectures - The Prince firmly
be 'eves that in the second attack a gun boat was blown up, and in
the other attacks that you have had a great number killed I am not astonished a t your not answering to the demand preremptorily fixed by the Pacha for the ransom of your three hundred country
men. If I could think it would be in your power to approach it in
any manner I would sa that, the Business might terminate for
three hundred thousand c? ollars - Ah Commodore! if in the answer
to my letter of the 10tQof August, you had offered one hundred &
fifty thousand instead of one hundred thousand, the Prisoners might
have been a t liberty - The little effect of the third attack & the
little injury they received from the fourth has entirely changed the

f

WRRS WITH BARBARY POWERS

497

State of things - The Pacha is determined to encounter all your
forces in Order that Europe & Africa may conceive a favorable opinion
of his strength & courage.
Perhaps you are afraid Commodore that in case of a rupture with
Algiers & Tunis, these Regencies might carry their pretensions for a
peace in ratio & proportion progressive with the sum you would have
paid to this - But this is only a ransom, & the unfortunate accident which has assembled so great a number of prisoners will never
Peruse the Imt instructions you have received &
happen again.
perhaps you wiU then find means to cease running the Hazards of
war, to put an end to your Expences & find hopes for the liberation
of the Prisoners The Pacha not only permitted tbe Sparonaro to execute her commission, but permitted her to take in other provisions for you -

-

[LC. EPP, Vol. 13, August-December 1804.1
-act

from journal of U. 8. Brig Argus, Master Commandant Isaac Hull, U. S.
Navy, commanding,Saturday, 1 September 1804

[Off Tripoli] At 1 PI4 Cap! Hull went on board the Cornmod$
at 3 Four tripolitan Prisoners came on board from the Constitution
[NDA photostat.]
Extract from log book kept by Sailing Master Nathaniel Haraden, U. S. Navy, on
board U. S. Frigate Gnslitullon, Saturday, 1 September 1804

Moderate breezes from E N E. We are at Single Anchor 4 Miles
NE b N from Tripoly - Squadron in company.
The carpenters of the Squadron are employed on board t.he Intrepid,
which is nearly ready for receiving her Powder Between 2 [12?] & 1 P. M. signal was made for the Squadron to
weigh & prepare for action.
By 4 P. M, we had frcsh breezes with a sharp rough sea which
prevents any operation against Tripoly this Afternoon The Tripoiine Prisoners distributed among the Squadron are
Ordered to duty. Their Allowance is one pound of bread & a portion
of water each, pr day Towards evening we made several signals in Order to alarm the
Enemy on shore - On the close of the Evening furled Sails After 12 Midnight the weather mas plensnnt with moderate breezes
fromSEkSSW At 9 A. M. we Towed Bombard NQ1 alongside - The Mortar
which we took out of her on the 27th August, way this forenoon put
into her again - Supplied her with water & provisions - Calms
or light breezes from N b W all forenoon. Squadron making arrangements for a fifth attack upon Tripoly The Scourge is not considered as a vessel of war Tho Men are d
drafted (from her) where necessary in the Squadron - a few excepted. Cap$ Dent continues in command of her - The Officers
are all removed except a Masters mate, a Midshipman & the Bostsswain.
Noon light airs from N b E with a swell from N E.
Surgeons report 4 sick, 9 convalescent.
The following Signals have been made these 24 hours

498 NAVAL OPERATIONS, APRIL-SEPTEMBER 6 . 1804
P. M. 5%

Weigh tho SQuadron
EnterprizecomemithinHail
A. M . 5 x , 4 1 p Do
6 - Scourge DQ
9 - Vixen DQ
Noon 12 - Argzls tow the Gun boats
5%

[LC. EPP, Log Constitution, 1803-1804.1
Extract from journsl kept by Purser John Darby, U. S. Navy, on board U. 6. 3.
john A d a . Master Commandant lsaac Chauncey, U. S. Iavy, commanding,
Saturday, 1 September 1804

We are laying a t Anchor of[Q Tripoli and the Commodore is now
prepareing the Ketch Idrepid to send her into the Town of Tripoli
with one hundred barrels of Powder in her & a number of Bum shels
she is to be sent in in the night close under the Walls of the Town and
to be blown up. she is what is caled an Infurnal it is supposed she
will do great injury to the town and gun boats a t Mendian light
breezes from E N. E. a t j: past 12 the Commodore made the Signal
for the fleet to get under way. a t 1 the Commodore hoisted the
Enterprizes distinguishing flag. a t the same time the gun boats cast
of[a from us and were taken in tow by the Brig Argus. a t j: past I
the signal was made for all Captains to repair on board the Commodore
a t 4 the Commodores Launch came along side for all the Volenteers.
nt 3 past sent to the Ketch Intrepid 20 Barrels of Gun powder at 5
sent all the VoIenteers on board the commodore a t 6 the commodore
& fleet got under way a t 3 past 6 the commodore made the signal
to follow his motions with or without Signals soon after the oommodore Anchored in shore and all the fleet. At 8 the Ketch Intrepid
got undcr way and stood down to the commodore
The Wind not proving favorable no attack was made to night [NDA original.

Mias C m i l l s S. McConnell.]

Extract from journal of Midshipman F. Cornelioa defiafft, W. S. Navy, in U. S.
Brig Siren of 18 guns, Master Commandant Charles Stewart, U. 6. Navy, commanding, Saturday, 1 September 1804

(Lying at anchor) Fresh breezes & pleasF At 7 hoisted in the
barge. Midnight light winds & dear. At 5 the Comm: made signal to
speak the Argus Bt Scourge. a t 9 the signal for the Enterprize to come
within hail At j4 past 9 the Commodore came on board. at 10 ho
return'd to his ship sent the launch on board the Idrepid.
Meridian a signal from the Comm: prepare to weigh [NDA.]
To Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Navy, from Assistant Surgeon John
U. S. Navy, on board U. 13. Brig Arw

W.Dorsey,

SEPT~
2°C 1804
SIR, I have been informed by Cnpt"ul1
this day, that you intend
sending me to Syracuse, with the sick of thc Squadron. As I have
not enjoyed good health since a t sea, the situation will be very pleasing
to me:
You wilI be pleased to accept my gratitude for your favor, & remain
with respect & esteem
[LC. EPP, Vol. 13, AugustDecember 1804.1

T n t KETCH "INTREPID."
Fr,,nt a sk~:rclb1x3 6 13,tlcr frq,1!8 111(1~111pi11a11illbiti~ i 1 ~ , 1 1 r.y\ l l c i ~ .10
a
i 1 1 I
, 14 I
I
I ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ r oI,?~ i.our[I
j u ~ ~%: v ~ I
o! r h ~ f. I e n r E:. ftui1:l11p1~111
I.ii,r.ir) ilnd . \ T I 1 riillr~r?

WARS WITH BARBARl' POWERS

499

To Assistant 8urgeon (or Surgeon's Yste) John W. Dorsey, U. S. Xavy, on board
U,6. Brig A r g q from Captain Edward Preble, U. 6. Navy
Off TRIPOLY
- Septem?2g 1804

SIR YOUwiU join the Brig Scourge under command of LWommS
Dent, and sttend to t3heSick & hurt on board said Brig
[LC. EPP, Order Book, May 1803-June 1805.1
To Captain Edward Preble, U. 6. Navy, from Lieutenant James Sempill
Higinbothom, U. 8. Navy

FRIGATE
John Adam8 Off TRIPOLI
September Zd 1804

SIR Having Information of our going shortly home I must request,
you will be good enough to permit me to join your Ship, or order me
on board one of the Squadron tfhat d l be stationed in these Seas, as

i t has been my greatest Ambition from the earliest part of my Life
to continue in the Service; and an O p p o r t ~ i t ynow Offering by wGch
I may make myself acquninted with my Profession I shou'd think
myself unpardonable was I in this Instance to let this Opportunity
escape me. I must therefore beg as a favor you %illp a n t my request,
and you may rest assured I shall endeavour by my assiduity and
Attention to my Duty to merit o u r Approbation - by complying
you will very much oblige your This Letter has been approved by Capt. Chauncey
[LC. EPP, Vol. 13, AugustDecember 1804.1
Extract from journal of 0.6. Rigate Congws, Captain John Bodgers, U. S. Elavy,
commanding, Sunday, 2 September 1804

At 4 [A. M.] unmoord ship
At 9 11-eigh,d & stood out of the bay [of Gibraltar]
[USKA.]
Extract from log book kept by Saiiing Master Bathsniel Earaden, U. 8. Navy, on
board U. S. Frigate Gnrti~trtton.Sunday, 2 September 1804

Moderate breezes from N. E. We are a t single anchor 5 Rliles
from Tripoly. This efternoon tho Infernal received her powder,
which with u-hat she has receired from the different vesscls of the
Squadron, makes nearly 100 barrels or 5 Tons - At 4 P. M. out aU
boats & armed them - Weighed & stood in for Tripoly Squadron in
company - At Sunset me came to in 19 [or 9?] fsth-ji Miles N E
from Tripoly, & 2 miles from Fort English - After dark the Infernal weighed and anchored in company with the Constitution
The Squadron continued under way - On the close of the evening
the Enemys Gun boats & Galleys hauled in under the Bashaw's
Castle - At 10%P. M. Lieut t 'CCn.ds~-orth,
& Xlr Israel midshipman,
six seamen from the Constitution & four from the lCTautiluswent on
board the Intrepid which is now completed as an Infernal - Cap$
Some:-s also went on board to take command of her - Thirteen of
the Enemy's Boats, two Galleys, a Schooner & Brig ride etrery night
between the half moon Battery & the Basha\\-s Castle, close along
side of each other with their heads out; A t 11 P. hI. Slipped &
steered in for thc mole bearing S S W, 2% h u e s - The wind a t this

-

500 NAVAL OPERATIONS. APRILSEPTEMBER 6. 180A
time was E S El which is two points off the land - The infernal is
designed for the destruction of the Boats, Galleys, Bashaw's castle &
mole head Battery - As she drew in shore & within musket shot of
the place intended she was taken dead aback by the wind out of the
Harbour and a t 2 A, M. she rejoined the Squadron - From this
time till 8 A. M. moderate Breezes between S E & E S E - Between
day light 6: Sun rise the Enemy's boats hauled out & took their
stations within the reef and under corer of Grape from the Batteries At 8 A. M. a Spanish Polacre ship came out of Tripoly, & brought to,
under our sten] [or stern]. We sent an OAirer on board her with
Orders to anchor her - This ship had got into Tripoly during the
North wind betveer1 the 1 9 s & 224 August last - She is without
any cargo from Tripolp bound to Malta, and has a passenger on
board u-ho is reported to the Commodore by the French to be an
Officer of high rank & a subject of the Grand Seigrlior - From
day light till 9 A. M. our Squadron was under all plain sail particularly the Vessels to leeward, in order to come within hail: Light
breezes & a lee current prevent them - The Spanish ship from
Tripoly (after a full examination) was allowed to proceed on her
Voyage - Pleasant weather all forenoon u i t h light breezes veering
between E S E & E b N - The Enemy this forenoon, display 12
boats, 1 Schooner, 2 Galleys & a brig -. We are now making the
necessary arrangements for attacking the Boats & Batteries - Noon
moderate breezes from E b 11'. The Vessels intended for the attack
are all under way, One mile to N b E The following Signals were made these 24 Lours - Vizt P. M. 12%Squadron, prepare to weigh - 12%Enterprize tack & haul your
wind to the Southd - 1ji All Captains repair on board the Commodore - 4% - Weigh the Squadron - 6 - Follow the Commodores
motions - A. M. At 9 Tacli, the Squadron & haul your wind to
S. - Same time, Enterprize come within hail - At 8 Nautilus &
Vixen wear; t i t 11 ).: Gun boats & Bombards prepare for Battle At I I Squadron make more sail [LC. EPP, Log Constitution, 1803-1804.1
Extract from journal of U. S. Brig Argus, Master Commandant Isaoc Bull, U. S. Navy,
commanding, Sunday, 2 September 1804

This day begins with mod? and Pleasant Wr standing off and on
the town Set and took in sail when Necessary TkQand wore Occas?
the Commod"ade
Sig! _h? 571 [or 371?] At 7 YM came to an
Anchor in 20 fme water Soft bottom Tripoli bearing SbW disttabout
5 miles At midnight got under way a t 7 AM the Commodore made Sig!
N? 1134 At 8 Tripoli bore SWbS distt 3 miles saw a Spanish barque
Standing out from the town and came too under the C o m m ~ dstern
+~
Gunboats Sig! No 69 and N Q1036
At meridian the Commod"ade
to the Squadron to make more Sail Ends fair Pleasant Weather
[NDA photostat.]

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

501

Extract from journal kept by Purser John Darby, U. 6. Navy, on board U. 6. S.
John Admns. Master Commandant Isaac Chauncey, U. 6. Navy, commanding,
Sunday, 2 September 1804

At day light this morning we discovered the n-hole fleet under way
cxcept the Commodore. a t % past the Commodore made the signal
to Tack. the fleet and haul by the Wind a t 8. we discovered a
Polacca ship coming out of the Harbour of Tripoli under Spanish
colours the Commodore sent his boat on board of her she Anchored
immediately. a t 5 past 11 the commodore made the signal for gun
boats to prepair for Battle a t 2 P M the commodore got under way
and also the Polacca ship. We are informed that the Polacca ship is
a spanish botom from Constantinople bound to Tunis with an Embassador on board from the Grand Senior - & put into Tripoli with
Dispatches. she went in in the night. when our squadron was out
sight of land and having in the last attack u-hich we made on the
Town Rcceivd a Ball through her and seeing our motions she was
afraid to remain there any longer and came out under nutral colours
the commodore after examining of her suffered her to pass. - a t half
past 3 our Squsdron engaged the Tripolitans. their gun boats came
out and stood along shore close in under their Forts. our boats receid
no injury and i t is supposed we did the enemy but little damage as
they as they were a very considerable distance from each other our
squadron being afraid to Ventu[re] too near in on account of the
Hocks. a t 4. Oclock the commodore stood in for the Batterries and
fired several board sides. and receid some damage in her sails and
rigging and thcn stood out. At 5 the whole fleet stood off a t Midnight
the commodore anchored [NDA original.

Miss Camilla S. McConnell.1

Extract from journal of Midshipman F. Cornelius deErafft, U. S. Navy, in U. 6. Brig
Siren of 18 guns, Master Commandant Charles Stewart, U. S, Navy, commanding,
Sunday, 2 September 1804

(Lying of[f] & on the town) Fresh breezes & pleasant A t 5 hove
up pr signal & made sail % past 6 came too with the larboard bower
& furl'd all sail Tripoli bcaring S. W 5 W. 1 league distant At 11
the Ketch Intrepid stood in for the Toum.
Midnight clear & pleasant. 4; past Mid hove up made sail stood
to the N E. % past 6 a signal for the fleet to tack. At 1.: past 7
saw a ship standing out of the harbour of Tripoli wore to the N E.
At 8 the above ship came too, the Comm: sent his boat on board of
her. Mcridian a signal to make sail
L a t t Obs 33' 5' N.
[NDA.]

502 NAVAL OPERATIOhTS, APRIL-SEPTEMBER 6, 1804
[2 and 3 September 18041

Expenditure of Ammunition

Septr 8"d 1804 fired Away a t tripoli
108 - 24 PC8- Powder 864 'P '
28 - 25 " - - - - - - - - - 224 " totle 1324 'Ps of Powder
50 - 12
- - - _ - - - - - 23G
24 P r B - . 111
Round Shot 25 D? - - _ - 28

[

Grape Shot

/

I'

Double hh-hot

WmSWEENY
Expended dud Sept 1804 on board GUNBOATKO 1 53 - Round shot
456 fb Cannon powder
4 !b priming powder
60 - Tubes
2% match rope
remainging on Board K Q1
13 - Cattridges of 24 pounder
20 - round shot. Wanted 50 - 24 p'J Cartrid es 8 !b Each
50 - 24 p'J Round [hot
Expenditure of Amunition on board of GUNBOATX ?2 in Action.
2"d Septr 1804
16 - Eight Pound Cartrages
26 - Seven Pound Cartrages
42 - Twenty-four Pound round Shot
1 - Bunch of Grape
36 - Tubes CHA?GORDON
R1ca'J SOMERS
Esqr
master & Commander
U. S. Schooner Nautilus
Expended on board GUN BOAThT? 3 Septr Zn$1804.
22 - Cartridges of 8 'P Each.
22 - 24 ib Shot.
22 - Wads
22 - Tubes.
One FathomMatch rope.
One Sweep.
One pound of priming pox-dcr.
Remaining on board Nq 3 Sepf 3Q180.4.
19 - Cartridges of 8 lb Each
41DO,
" iIbEach.
65 - Round 24 Ib Shot
20 - Grape Do.

CHARLES
MORRIS
JC

CHARLES
MORRIS,Jr

503

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

Expenditures on board GUNBOATNq 6 on the find of Sepfr 1804
Sixty - 24 pwartridges
S i t y - Wads
Sixty - 24 p@Round Shot
Two - pound priming Powder
One - fathom Match Rope

JN? TRIPPE

Expenditures ou board GUNBOAT
No 8 on the 2nd Septr 1804,
Thirty Two - 24 pa Cartridges
Thirty Two - 24 pg Round Shot
Thirty Two - Wads
Two fathoms Match Rope
Fifteen Tubes
One & 3 pounds priming Powder

W" CRANE
Indent of Articles wanted for the use of the GUN BOATNo 8 Off
Tripoli Septr 2nd 1804.
Thirty - 24 p'? Cartridges
Thirty - 24 pd Shot.
WILLIAM
CRANE
[LC. EPP, Vol. 13, August-December 1804.1

Extract from Hemorandum Book of Csptain Edward Preble, U. S. Navy, on board
U. 6. Frigate Constiidion. S September 1804

A general attack on the ton-n and harbour [of Tripoli].
[LC original.]
Extract from log book kept by Sailing Master Nathaniel Haraden, U. S. Navy, on
board U. S. Frigate Conrfifution, Monday, 3 September 1804

Moderate Breezes from E b hi. At Single Anchor 23 hides N N E
from Tripoly. Squadron in company under way -Emplo ed making
some necessary pre arations for attacking the Enemy's atteries 8:
Gunboats - Fort ngtish is situated nearly two miles to the Emtdraft. cannot approach it on
ward of the Town - Ships of a hea
account of a reef B bank nearly 13 M' e in the Offing - Within this
reef and under cover of grape from this Fort, twelve of the Enemy's
boats and two three masted gallies are a t anchor. - Cap$Chauncey,
Several of his Officers and 54 Seamen are as usual volunteers in this
attack - Cap! Chauncey remains on board the Constitution as
assistant to the Commodore - Bombard N Q 1 has been recommissioned and is again commanded by Lt Robinson who gives up NQ2
to Cap' Dent - At 2 t P. M. S ~ p was
d made for the Bombsrds
& Gun boats to cast off & soon after the signal for them to advance The were a t this time in close order two miles from Fort English
& $e Enemy's boats di Galleys - Fort English is situated very
low - It has 11 bea guns and is flanked by a seven & a three un
Battery - At 31 P.%. our Boats eonunenced firing on the G dfeys
8: Gun boats - By this time the two Bombards had hose two or
three shells each, in order to get their distance from the Town. We
were now under way running down for Tripoly -Our Gun boats
were followed by the S en, Argus, Vixen, En&pnpnze &: Nautilus as
ow them to stand in on the Bmks - In
far as Safety wodd

c

8

7

J

504 NAVAL OPERATIONS, APRIL-SEPTEMBER 6, 1804
Standing in, our boats received the fire of Fort English & the flanking
batteries - As soon as our boats arrived within point blank shot,
the Enemjs boats Gave way &: took a new station close under the
Beach under cover of the Fort - They were under cover of the
Bashaw's castle rE- the mole head Battery At 33 Y. M. the two
Bombards anchored - They were then within short range for Bombarding the T o m - Bombard KQ hove 19 shells, 15 of which fell
into the Town - Bombard N ? 1 hove 22 shells, 18 of w-hich fell into
the Toun The Bombards from their situation were exposed to the
Random shot from Fort English & the flanking Batteries, Bashams
castle, Mole head, half moon, Square & round Batteries; lye continued running in for the Toum. And at 33 P. hi. were exposed to
the fire of more than 80 Guns, the spray of the shot from which wet
our courses nearly to the lower yards; At 3+ P. M. we brought to
within point blank shot of all the Batteries, and gave them 11 Broadsides of round 8; Doublehead from our larboard Guns - JVe were
40 minutes in firing the 11 broadsides after which we hauled off in
order to make a board to windward & repair our damage - Our
main topsail was totalIy disabled, being cut by a shell by the Enemies
Batteries, nearly from Leech to Leech, Two Topmast Backstays,
blain Buntlines, Main Sheet fore Tack, fore top Rou-line, head
Earing of the foresail, blain top bowline &- main reef Pendant were
cut away - ,4 shell went through the Fore topsail & a double head
shot went through the Jibb - K e were not struck in the Hull The
Batteries fire in a good direction, but without judgement in elevating
or depressing the Guns - Our Gun boats were in action nearly an
hour - They received no damage excepting shot through their
sails - They did not engage within range of Grape & fired on an
average 40 Rounds - Several of the Enemy's Gun boats were
hulled. Bombard Ih;P 1, commanded by Lt. Robinson was before
hauling off much disabled; Her larboard rigging to a s l ~ o u dcarried
away The Bed of the Bomb disabled by her on71 firing 6 two feet of
water in the hold - The same Officers command the gun boats as on
Teusday last; excepting No! 5 &1 6 - Lieutt Tripp is appointed to
hT9 6 in the room of Lt JTadsworth, ~vlionow is on board the Infernal
X'Q3 is commanded by hi' Morris of the Argus nl room of hfr Brooks
who is removed to the Argus - From the time we hauled off which
was a t 10 minutes after 4 P. M. we were employed with the Squadron
in taking in tow the Gun Boats 9: Bombards - After repairing the
main topsail. we made sail in order to work to Wind ward - A t
114 P. hl. we came to in 40 fathq hard bottom - Veered to 100
faths Squadron continue under way during the night - At day
light Tripoly bore S S W - 3 leagues. At Sun rise, Signal was
made for the Gun boats to prepare for Action. The carpenters of
the Constitution were ordered a t day light on board Bombard Nq 1
to repair the damages she receircd yesterday. Pleasant weather 8:
light breezes from E. all forenoon - The Squadron Em loyed
repairing damages & supplying the Gun boats with Powder &. s ot Bombard N W was damaged in her sails 6t rigging in several places.
Ca te Decatur & Somers as usual led into the Action & were closely
fo owed by their respective divisions - The Syren - Argus, VGen,
Enterprize & Nautdus are considered as Vessels rather of show than
force - They all Officer & mann Gun boats, and of course are not
to be trusted under the Batteries, except to assist disabled boats -

\

If

505

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

The J. Adam, Scourge &: the Infernal remain in the O E g a t Anchor The Ketch Store Vessell from MaIta is still in the Squadron - Noon
light breezes from N E. Squadron in company under way. The following signals have been made these 24 hours.
P. M. At 2 - Prepare to cast off Gun & Bomb Vessels
22 - Cast off the Boats.
23 - Advance & attack, the 1 division & soon after
the same signal to the 2Vivision
4% - General Signal - Tow the Boats
83 - Night Signal - Tack the Squadron A. M. At 6 - Prepare for action - Gun & Bomb Vessels [LC

EPP, Log Constifution, 1803-1804.)

Bxtract from journal of U. S. Brlg Argw. Master Commandant Isaac Bull,U.S. Bavy,
commanding, Monday, S September 1804

the Commodore a t Anchor off the t o m at 3 past 12 the Commodore made Sjg! 3 ' 9 583 a t 4 past I he made Sig! h--35 with the
Preparative flag TKQOccas? a t 2 the Bashaws Castle bore SW W a t
$ past the Cornmod9 made Sigl No 356 cast off the Gunboats who
Stood in and Engaged the Enemys Gunboats and a General Engagems
took place a t 5 PLM the Gunboats were drawn off at 3 past took
N? 5 5 7 in tow A t G stood off the land the town bore SSW distt 4
Miles - At 6 AM the Commodore made Sig! IS?69 st 7 Cap: Decatur
Came on board and returned Immediately

+

[NDA photostat.]
Extract from journal of Midshipman P.Cornelius deKrafft, U. S. Bavy, in U. 6. Brig
Siren of 18 guns, Hsster Commsndant CharIes Stewart,U.S. Navy, commanding,
Monday, 3 September 1804

(Standing off & on shore undcr easy sail.)
ast hrfer: a signal to gain the
Light breezes & pleasant
r i n d of the enemy. At 1 a sign$ to prepare to east off the boats.
At 4j past 2 cast off the boats. At 3 a signal for the 1 Pt division to
attack the enemies batteries 6- boats. $ past 3 Our boats commenced
a heavy fire on the enemies boats k c . the Siren 8: Schooners standing of[f] 6: on shore firing a t the enemy.
past 5 discontinued the
action took our boats in tow & stood off shore. Midnight light winds & clear. At 3 shorten'd sail. At 6 back'd
the main to sail. At 9 the wind had'd to the N E Meridian ~ g h winds
t
& pleast -

:

p.

[XDA.]

To Captain Edward Preble, U. 8. Navy, from Midshipman Henry Wadsworth,
U. 8. Navy

Mr Wadsworth informs the Commodore that he wishes to Volunteer
his service on board the Infernal destined for the Harbour off Tripoly(Signed) H WADSWORTE
Commrq PREBLE.
PC.

EPP, Order Book, May 1803-June 1805.3

506 NAVAL OPERATIONS, APRIL-SEPTEMBER 6, 1804
Extract from j o w n d kept by Purser John Darby, U. S. Navy, on board U. S. 6.
John Admns. l a s t e r Commandant Isaac Chauncey, U. S. Navy, commanding,
Monday, S September 1804

This mo-g
Capt Chwncey came on board and most of our
Volenteers cam on board - a t Meridian light breezes from N E.
Y commodore got under way and stood in shore a t
a t 4 past 12 the
the same time, the commodore made the signal for all Captains to
repair on board a t 3 past 1 the commodore Anchored again a t 8
the Ketch Intrepid ot under way and was sent into Tripoli as a fire
ship. Commanded y Capt. Summers, -he had. Our Green Cutter
to make their escape from her. a t 3 past 9 she blew up in which
unfortunately perished Capt. Summers. Mr Wadsworth. Mr Israel,
Midshipmen, & 10 Men it is supposed that she took fire in the
Magazine sooner than was intended or that they were attempted to
be boarded by the Tripolitans and blew her up sooner than suffer her
& themselves to fall into the hands of the Tripoleens. as she had 100
bls powder on board and we are informed that they are nearly out
of Powder - the loss of those brave OfEcers and men are much to
be regreted by their country & friends Capt Summers was as brave
& enterpriseing an Officer as ever steped the Deck of a ship possesing
every Virtue that the human hart is susceptable of. Mr Wadsworth
& M: Israel. I am told were very promising young men (midshipmen)
who was hel'd high in the opinion of the commodore 8: bid fare to be
an honor to their country in the line of their profession. the 10 men
it is said was of Capt Decators brave Crew which boarded and burnt
the Frigate Philadelphia - soon after the explosian the commodore
fired several signal guns & threw up several Sky Rockets. no answer
being returned we immediately concluded that they had all perished
in the explosian as they were immediately after it, to have sent up
several Sky Rockets, as signals of their escape -

%

[NDA original. Miss Camilla S. McConnell.]
Extract from log book kept by Sailing Master Nathaniel Haraden, U. S. Navy. on
board U. 6. Rigate Constitulion. Tuesday, 4 September 1804

Moderate Breezes from N E b E - We are a t Single Anchor 3
Leagues N N E from Tripoly At 4 past 12, Noon we weighed & ran
3 Miles in shore when we came to in 32 fathr hard bottom - T r i p o l ~
S S W, nearly 6 Miles. Employed all the afternoon making some
necessary arrangements in the Squadron - Towards Evening we supplyed the Vixen with 12 Barrells Pork, 8 bb1s Beef, One Tierce Rice,
One tierce Peas containing 8 Bushels, 2 barrels flour & 50 GaUf
Vinegar - At 7 in the Evening we sent to the Intre
part of a
e also sent a
condemned fore Jeer & 27 fathp of 6 Inch hawser
large Grapnel to her: At 8 In the Evening she slip ed leaving our
large cutter to wei h her anchor: She has nearly 100 arrells Powder
100 of 13 Inch she Is, & 50 of 9 Inch shells, with the necessary combustibles for an Infernal - At 81 P. M. she passed the Constitution
with a leading breeze from the E b N. The Harbour of Tri oly for
which she was designed bore S S W, nearly six Miles - he was
convoyed in by the Argus, Vixen & Nautilw - The Nautilus followed
her into 5 fath*water - On the Infernal entering the Inner Harbour,
two alarm Guns were fired from the Batterys, & in a few minutes
after she blew up - Lieutt Reid of the Nautilus wwas waiting close

w"'

f

3

#

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

507

in by the outer Rocks for the Return of the Adventurers - Night
signals by Rockets had been agreed upon between the Commodore
and Cap' Somers - They not being made, soon induced the belief of
their capture or destruction - The Infernal had two Boats chosen
from the Squadron for their swiftness - The Nautilus waited SUEcient time for their return, receiving a t the same time several hazardous
shot from the Batteries - At 10 in the Evening, which was 13
minutes after her blowing up we commenced firing Guns & burning
rockets, which we repeated every 10 minutes till 9 A. M. when the
Nautilw came within hail & confirmed the capture or destruction of
the following Officers & Seamen - Viz Cap! Rich$ Somers of the
Nautilus, Lieutt Henry Wadsworth, Joseph Israel, Lieutenant,
William Harrison, Seaman, Rob$Clark d ? Hugh MFCormick d9 Jacob
Williams d-eter
P e ~ e do
r h Isaac W Downs d?, all belonging to
the Constitution - There were also in the Infernal four Seamen from
the Nautilus Vizg - JaWimms Thomas Tompline, Jar Hanis &
WmKeith Moderate breezes 8: clear star light during the night - In the
morning the Vixen & Nautilus stood in with Tripoly as Vessels of
observation - Towards noon they returned and reported to the
Commodore that they could not see that any material damage had
been done, and that they saw a t anchor, the usual number of the
Enemy's Gun boats, excepting 3 Boats hauld up to repair, and one
tot*allymissing, & Gallies. Lieutl Reid, the reco~oitre[i]ngOfficer
in the Nautilus reported, that he saw the infernal two or three minutes
before she blew up & that she then appeared to be in tbe very place
intended, between the mole head 8: the Bashaws Castle - The
Nautilus was a t this time nearly 3 of a mile from the explosion - The
100 Shells were filled with powder with fuses of 15 Seconds - Many
of them were seen to burst in the air nearly 300 feet up At 8 A. M. we brought alongside the two remaining Gun boats
that were captured on the 3'J August last - I n bad weather they
are not equal to our other Gunboats They each carry a long brass
24 pgr These we took out All forenoon cloudy overcast weather with moderate breezes from
N E & a swell from E N E This forenoon the Captains of the
Squadron waited on the Commodore - Noon Squadron in company
under way except the Constitution, J. Adams & Scourge Surgeons
report 4 sick & 7 conVFt The following si d s have been made these 24 hours Vizt
P. M. 123 p ~ d a m Signal
s
for a Captain
A. M. 63 Come within hail, the Xautilus
73 Nautilus Join company soon as possible
9 Repeated
d9
11 Argus & Vizen - come within hail
[LC. EPP, Log Constitution, 1803-1804.1
[4 September 18041
Blowing up of U, 6. Ketch Inlrcpid described by Xidshipman Charles Q. Ridgely

U. S. Navy
In the year 1804, when Preble, as Commodore of the American
squadron in the Mediterranean, was gaining glory, before Tripoli,
alike for himself, his officers and crews, and for his country, Lieut.

508 NAVAL OPERATIONS, A P R I L S E P T E M B E R 6, 1804
Commdt. Richard Somers had command, under him, of the Nautilus,
a schooner of 14 guns.
During the several fights which had previously occurred with the
enemy, this o5cer had shown great bravery as commander of gunboat No. 1; and, now, suggested to the Commodore, that a happy
result might, possibly, be obtained, by converting the ketch, Intrepid,
a captured craft of about 75 tons - the identical vessel with which
the gallant Decatur had boarded, recaptured, and burned the frigate
Philadelphia - into a fire-ship, and sending her into the harbor
under the walls of the Bashaw's castle, in direct contact with the
entire marine force of the Tripolitans.
This daring and highly dangerous enterprise being determined
upon, Somers, with whom it had originated, received the orders - to
which he was thus entitled - to conduct it; and the necessary preparations were promptly made by him. Fifteen thousand pounds of
powder were first placed, loosely, in the hold of the ketch, and upon
this, two hundred and fifty thirteen-inch, fuseed shells, with a train
attached from the cabin andforepeak. Only one officer, the talented
and lamented Lieut. Henry Wadsworth - brother of the present
Com. Wadsmorth - was to accompany him, and four volunteer
seamen were to compose his crew.
All things were now in readiness, except the selection of the men for it came to this, at last, every man on board the Nautilus having
volunteered for the senice. This done, it was determined, without
delay, to attempt the enterprise - to succeed in it, or perish.
Two nights successively did the Intrepid move; but, owing to light
and baffling winds, nothing could be accomplished. These failures,
and an unusual movement in the harbor after dark on the third
night, led Somers to believe that the suspicions of the enemy had
been excited, and that they were on the look out. I t was the general
impression, that their powder was nearly exhausted; and as so lar e
a quantity, as vi-as on board the ketch, if captured, would great y
tend to protract the contest, before setting off, he addressed his
crew upon the silbject, telling them "that no man need accompany
him, who had not come to the resolution to blow himself up, rather
than be captured; and that such was fully his own determination!"
Three cheers was the only reply. The gallant crew rose, as a single
man, with the resolution of yielding up their lives, sooner than surrender to their enemies: while each stepped forth, and begged as a
favor, that he might be permitted to apply the mateh! I t was a
glorious moment, and made an impression on the hearts of all witnessing it, never to be forgotten.
All then took leave of every officer, and of every man, in the most
cheerful manner, with a shake of the hand, ns if they already knew
that their fate was doomed; and one and another, as they passed
over the side to take their post on board the ketch, mi h t bc heard,
in their own peculiar manner, to cry out, "I say, Sam ones, I leave
you my blue jacket and duck trowsers, stowed away in my bag;"
and, "Bill Curtis, you may have the tarpaulin hat, and Geurnsey
frock, and them petticoat trowsers, I got in Malta, - and mind, boys,
when you get home, give a ood account of usl" I n like manner did
each thus make his oral wfl, to which the writer was witness, and
which "last wiU and testament" he caused to be executed to the very
letter.

f

r

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS
I t was about nine o'clock on the night of the 4th of Sept., 1804,
that this third and last attempt was made. The Nautilm had been
ordered to follow the Intrepid closely in, to pick up and bring out her
boat's crew, in case they should succeed in the exploit. Hence,
though it was very dark, we never lost sight of her, as I had been
directed, by the first Lieutenant - the late gallant Washington
Reed - who commanded in the absence of Somers, to keep constant
watch of her for this purposi?, wlth a ni h t glass.
At the end of an hour, about 10 o'cloc , P. M.,while I was engaged
in this duty, the awful explosion took place. For a moment, the
flash illumined the whole heavens around, while the terrific concussion shook esery thing far and near. Then d was hushed again, and
every object veiled in a darkness of double gloom. On board the
~Vazctilus,the silence of death seemed to pervade the entire crew; but,
quickly the din of kettle-drunls, beating to arms, with the noise of
confusion, and alarm, was heard from the inhabitants on shore. To
aid in the the escape of the boat, an order ~ . n now
s
given by Reed,
to ''sholu a light" - upon the appearance of which, hundreds of shot,
from an equd number of guns, of heavy calibre, from the batteries
near, came rattling over and around us. But we heeded them not:
one thought, and one feeling, alone, had possession of our sods - the
preservat.ion of Somers and his crew!
As moment after moment passed by, without bringing with it the
preconcerted signal from the boat, the anxiety on board became intense; and the men, with lighted lanterns, hung themselves over the
sides of the vessel, till their heads almost touched the water - s
position, in which nn object, on its surface, can be seen farthest in a
dnrlr night - with the hope of discovering something which would
give assurance of its safety. Still, no boat came, and no signal war,
given; and the un~elcomeconclusion a t last n7as forced upon us,
that the fearful alternative - of blowing themselves up, rather than
be captured - so bravely determined upon, a t the outset of the
enterprise, had been as bravely put in execution. The fact, that the
Intrepzd, a t the time of the explosion, had not proceeded as f a r into
the harbor, by several hundred yards, as it was the intention of Somers
to carry her, before sett<ingher on fire, confirmed us in this apprehension; still, we lingered on the spot till broad day-Iight - though
we lingered in vain - in the hope that some one, a t least, of the
number, might yet be rescued, by us, from a floating plank or spar,
to tell the tale of his companions' fate.
To our astonisllment, we learned next day, that Lieut. Israel, a
gallant youtb, who had been sent with orders from Commodore
Preble to Somers, after he was under nrny in the ketch, had accompanied him in the expedition, and had shared his destiny.
Such was the end of the noble fellows, who, a few days only before,
on board their own gun-boat,, No. 1, had beaten six of the enemy's
fleet, of equal force with themselves, immediately under the guns,
and within pistol shot of a shore battery: an achievement, accomplished only, in their peculiar position, by backing astern, and keeping
up an incessant fire of canvass bags, filled with 1,000 musket balls
each, till our gallant commodore, in the Constitution,stood in to take
the fire of the battery, and thus enable us, under hrs cover, to obey
the order, "to come out of action" - a signal which had already been

k

5 I O NAVAL OPERATIONS, APRIL-SEPTEMBER 6, 1804
flying more than an hour, and which Somers, atjirst, mzdd
at last, (from the fierceness of the fight,) cozllcl not see.

not, a d

R.

[Xaval Magazine, Voi. 1, pp. 172-175.1

14 September 18041
Abstract of a journal kept by Midshipman Charles Xorris, Jr., U. 6. Navy, on
board the U. S. Frigate ConsHMion and other ships of war
Joined the U S F Constitution --Edward Preble Esqq Commander, June 20:h
1803 a t Boston Soon after joining the ship she mas hove down and coppered complete
Her
equipments were made with all possible dispatch, and every exertion made t o
Drocure a crew. which however were not completed until near the middle of
August On thc 14th of August we sailed from Boston having Mr Lear, Consul General
for the Rarbary powers together with his lady on board.
After a passage of 23 days we made Cape St Vincent having been favored with
remarkably pleasant weather and moderate winds from the Westward
The Ship sailed remarkably well although very deep with stores of every
description proper for a cruise in the meditterranean Sea Off Cape St Vincent's we fell in with a Moarieh cruiser, but as she had all the
requisite passports from our consul and
were ignorant of any difference existing
with the government of h.lorocco she was suffered to paw - From Cape St
Vincent's to Cape Spartel we hrrd a rough passage of 6 days - On our arrival
a t Tangiers and making the customary signal for the Consul we were surprised
to find i t altogether disregarded - Suspecting a difference had taken place we
hore sway for Gihrn!tar where we arrived in the evening and learned t h a t our
Consul a t Tangier hati k e n confined, and orders issued by the Emperor to his
cruisers anthorising the capture of all American Vesseis - We found the Philadelphia Capt. Bainbridge in the Bay of Gibraltar together with her prize a Moorish
ship of 20 Guns, and an American Brig recaptured from the Moors The next day
the Frigate J o h n Adams arrived from the Eastward with a prize of 20 Gulls taken
from the Tripolitsns - The Frigate h'ew York Comd* Morris, and the Schooner's
,Vautilm and Vizen anchored in the Brty during the day Sep! 17th Weighed and stood into Tangier Bay - The Commodore had an
inwrview with our Consul M ? Simpson, h u t nothing waa decided upon
Returned t h e next day to Gibraltar - T h e Ship's draught of Water was 21. Feet. 6 inches forward
23. feet 3 inches Abaft
S p t 25. Stood into Tangier Bay with a flag of Truce flying - had interview
with the Consul, then bore u p a n d cruised between Larache Br Arzillai until the
3014 when we bore up and came to an Anchor in Gibraltar Bay - Oct,r 5&@ came
too in Tangier Bay, lay at Quarters during the night, had intercourse with the
Shore and learnt that the Emperor of Morocco was expected a t Tangier Or.t,r 6 the
r
in ~ i e h of
t the Citv with an escort of 15.000 men .- E r n ~ e r o came
T h e Troops conthued firing ~ a l u & sIr.,rn ~.heir&st appearance until they reached
their encamDment or] ttir Hilk near the Citv - The American flag was hoisted
on the consular house immediately after - and the ship saluted with 18 Gunv The d u t e was returned and the ship dressed - T h e N e w York and J n Q Adams
caxne too soon after and Mr Simpson our Consul came on board
Octr 8'11
The Emperor came upon the beach attended by his court to view t h e ship - We
saluted him with 21 Guns, which was returned, and a present from the Emperor
of 10 Bullocks, 20 Sheep and some fowls soon after sent on board to the
Commodore We remained in the Bay until the 15'b during which time a peace w a concluded
~
on the same terms as specified in the former treaty with t h a t power - We saluted
t h e Town on leaving the bay a n d bore away for Gibraltar where we came to an
Anchor the same dav - Here we remained until the 234 during which time several
instances occurred of desertion from our ships t o those of his Brittannic Mnjesty ~ r h i c hsingular condrict can onlv be accounted for - by their unconquerable
desire of Change, which they will frequently gratify though they mav know, nt
the time t h a t their change must be for the worse - A serious misunderstanding
took place between the Commodore and the English officers in consequence of
t h e desire which they evinced to encourage our men in a continuence of such
wnduct -

-

-

-

-

-

WA&S WITH BARBARY POWEBS
From Gibraltar we sailed for Cadi%where we arrived the next day end were
uarantined for three daye - Employed watering and overhauling the rigging
luring our stay i n this piace
The ship carries
93 Leaguers
- 29760 Gallons.
90 half leaguers - 10800 DQ
84 Gang casks - 4620 DP

-

Making a Total of
45,180 Gallons Novr 66s Sailed from Cadiz in Company with the EnlerpPize going out of the
harbour eased his most Catholic Majesty's Ship Eon Aoenkro. 74 Guns Admiral L c o a s de Payto - passed through the straits to Gibraltar then hauled
our wind to the other aide of the Bay and Anchored off Algesiras in 21 fathoms.
the Town bearing W. S W. 2 Miles Novr 13 Weighed and stood to the Eastward. the Ships draught of water mRaa
21. feet. 6 inches forward
23 feet 4 inches abaft
Stnoding to the Eastward without any material occurrence until k-ovr 20'6
when we came to dnchor in Algeirs Bay The City bearing W 8 TV, Cape Caxine
N 4 W. Cape Malifora E 4 North. - The City saluted with 21 Guns which was
retbrned Col? h a r and family left the Ship - on the 21.t a t night the wind freshened to
a gale from the Northward. We got under way with considerable difficulty and
worked out of the bay - which is very dangerous with, northerly winds. - Stood
in toward the Town on the 2 2 ~ dand received on board a present from the Dey
consisting of Bullocks, Sheep Vegetables and Fruit - Then bore awny to the
Eastward - On the morning of the 24') epoke His B Majesty's Ship Amazon who
ave us the melancholy intelligence of the loss of the Frigate Philadelphia Capt
f 3 sinbridge upon a shoal near Tripoli, and that the Officers and crew had been
made prisoners of War
KOVF27 off the harbor of Malta sent a boat on shore, with an officer who
returned with a confirmation of the above unfortunate accident - Came to an
Anchor on the 28tb in hracuse harbor - and finluted the Town - Kovr 30t4
Our Purser Mr Deblois departed this life - his loss was sincerely regretted by his
brother otficers who paid his rcnlains aU the respect in their power (Deer 9th Ships draught of Water
23. Feet 2 inch aft
21.
1 i n r h forward)
Having concluded to mnke this Harbour a place of general rendezvous for our
small squadron on account of its d e t y and its neutrality, we were employed in
sending on shore to the Araenal all spare spars and stares and making the necessary
arrangements for cruising off Tripoli until Decr 18Q n-hen u-e weighed and stood
over to Malta, where we remained one day off the harbour - communicating
with our Consul. - From thence Re made the best of our way off Tripoli, On the
234 fell in with and captured a Ketch from Tripoli bound to Constantinople with
an ambassador his suite, slaves and presents. - The Schooner Bfctpn'ze Capt
Decatur in company
On the 30tb Decr came too in Siracuse with the prize - The Ship remained in
the harbor overhauling ber rigging painting kc. N'hile the Commodore went to
Malta in the Vizen to make arrangements for the approaching summer - After
an Absence of a fortnight thc Commodore returned on the 25th Jany. 1804.
From Feb? I+* to Feb? 34 the crew were employed in preparing combustibles
m d gettin the rize Ketch ready for sea on boarf the S. rig 1 s ~ e . n ~
On the 34 T went on board the Ketch, now called the Intrepid together with
Mess.* h a r d , Lams, Davis & Rowe other Midv from the Constitdon - W e
soon after aailed under the command of I,$ Stephen Decatur, having 64 men and
officem on board The U S. Brig Siren being in company - We had a moderate
breeze until the 13'b Febr a t night when %-e arrived off t,he harbor of Tripoli
and came to Anchor about one mile to the Westu-ard of the Town - Owing to
a heavy eea from thc westward the pilot. [Salvndore Catdana] mas averse to taking us i n t o the Harbor - To satisfy himself and ourselves of the practibility of
entering he was dispatched in a boat to examine the entrance, I was ordered with
him and was soon notified that all attempts to enter would at that time be imprudent if not imprncticable and made my report accordingly - we immediately got

8.

512 NAVAL OPEBATIONS, APRIL-SEPTEMBER

6. 1804

underway and stood 08 shore with the Siren - A severe gale of wind ensued
which buffeted us for five days. and a s we were in a very weak vessel a n d upon a
Iee shore our situation was by no means enviable - On the 17tb 1161 the wind having again moderated we made the town, a n d set all sail shewing an apparent wish
t o enter, while we placed drags over the stern t h a t prevented our progressi~lg
more than [one] or two Jfnots - This mode of conduct effectually lulled all suspicion, of our Real chrtracter and enabled us to approach the Frigate Philadelphia
in their harbour without exciting alarm
a t 10 minutes before 11. the order was given t o board which was almost instantly
executed, and in 15 minutes she was completely enveloped in flames, the Ketch
clear of her with all hands on board, having one prisoner and without having
experienced the slightest loss ou our p a r t - The batteries commenced a heavy
fire which t I ~ c ycontinued long after we were heyond their reach and which did
us no injury - k\*e remained in sight sufficiently long to ascertain t.hat our enterprise had becn completely successfrll- We then bore an-ay for Siracuse where we
arrived on the 19th arid I returned on board the Constifultm On board the U. S . Frigate CONSTITCTIOH
The nest day the l? S. Schooner ATautilus, sent in a merchant Brig captured
for a n attempt, t o force the blockade of Tripoli March 21.i The U S. Brig Syren sent in a brig of 24 GUM taken from the
Tripotitens -On April 17'B she was purchased from the Captors by the Commodore and commissioned - L t Dent was promoted t o the command of her Mid+ Wadsworth & Issrd were made her Lieut? myself her Master
On board the U . S . Brig SCOURGE
From April 17th to May 5 we were employed in equipping the Brig now called
the Scourge for sea - our crew was composed of about 20 men, the refuse of the
Squadron - our Brig though 27 vears old was perfectly sollnd but slightly built She sailed b u t moderately especially by the wind - We arrived off Tripoli on
the 10th May snd were employed cruising off t h e harbor until the arrival of t,he
Commodore on July 25th accompanied by 6 gun boats & 2 Bombards procured
from the King of Xrtples. As our Brig was not of ~ufficientforce t o act with any
effect against the Batteries, the oficera with the exception of Mr h a r d were
ordered on board the Conafitulion, On the 34 of August having made all the
arrangements thought to be necessary the Squadron Bore up and attacked the
batteries of Tripoli - before which **ere placed 21 Gun boats & three. Galleys.
Our Six Gun boats advanced [word illcgible] of the enemy and a sharp contest
captrired three and drove the rest into the harbor - The Bombards threw a
number of Shells into the city - and the Constitution ranged along the batteries
firing about 600 Shot into t h e cit,y and Town - L1 [James] Decatur who was
killed in the heat of the action was the only loss we sustained
On the 7'b the Gunboats and Bombveseeis advanced again to attack the Town,
but a strong westerly current carried them so far to leeward that they were
obliged t o form a new line, in doing v~hichmuch confusion enfirled owing [to]
the unmanageableness of the boats - The enemy availed himself of this opportunity and kept u p a very heavy fire which blew u p one of the prize boats commanded by L?ICaldweU] who together with mid^ Dorser & eleven men were
lost. A Breeze springing u p soon after enabled our boata t.o extricate themselves
after receiving considerable damage
On board the U. S. Brig ARGUS
On t h e 8th August I was appointed Lieut of the T/' S Brig A r p g and joined
her on the same dav - Boisterous weather and other circumst.ances prevented
another attack untiI the 28th when at 4 in the morning t h e gunboats having
gained a very favorable station near in shore commenced a well directed fire
upon the Town, the vessels were engaged mopportunity offered until 8 clock,
when the Signal wm made ta haul off
This attack was well conducted and effected considerable injury to t h e enemy
on the 2nd Sept another attack was made b u t wss attended with no part,icular
circumstances and productive of no good eEect. - During the intervals of the
different attacks repeated attempts had been msde to negotiate a treaty with the
baahaw, but his demands were always such as the Commodore would not comply
with - Feeling an inclination to view the harbor I obtained permission t o go
in one of the boats t h a t carried the different dispatches under 8 flag of Truce - I
was disappointed however in mv object being ordered to remain quite in the outer
p a r t of the harbor, where J could make but very few observations. I however
remarked the advantages of the Situation which was afterwarda improved by the
Gun boats on the 28'4 August

-

-

-

-

513

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

Late in Sepr the Kctch Intrepid, was loaded with 100 b a m b of powder 80
Loaded she& for the purpose of exploding them in the harbour of Tripoli among
the Gunboats, end near the castle
L* Commandant Somer's wtns selected to
command her and Lt* Wadworth & Israel with 17 men were ordered to her. she
weighed about 8 P M and stood in for the harbor - the Enterprize and Vizen
following her a t a convenient distance About 10
three guns were fired apparently from the Castle and immediately after the Ketch exploded
-4night of painful anxiety was spent by the officers of the Squadron, and the
morning only arrived t.o realize their fears as no vestige of the Ketch was remaining and nothing to be seen of any part of the brave crew who conducted her in
KO doubt existed of their having been destroyed by the explosion, but different
opinions were entertained as to the manner in which the explosion took place. E
was induced to believe that the enemy had discovered her approach, and made
the attempt to board her, and that in the confusion naturally consequent upon
euch an action some sparks of fire were unfortunately communicated to the train
which in a moment launched both the assailers and assailed into eternity - The
logs of these brave officers was severely felt by our small squadron, being universally esteemed for their private virtues, and respected for their Professional
Talents
The Season was now so far advanced, and our Ammunition so nearly
expended that no further offensive operations were attempted
About the 111
of October Corn* Barron arrived in the President, having the Constellateon, Congress and Essez under his command
After a short parade off the harbour for
about 3 weeks during which nothing was attempted the Squadron went t o Malta
and Siracuse into Winter Quarters, - just before leaving the Station three Greek
Ships were detained on suspicion of an attempt to break the blockade of Tripoliin one of them I returned to Malta where I was quarantined for 30 days
[Mrs. C. E. Fox original. K D A photostat.]

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

Extract from journal of U. S. Brig Argus. Master Commandant Isaac Hull,U.S. Navy,
commanding, Tnesdey, 4 September 1804

a t past 1 P hf the Commodore made Sigk N V 9 5 Cap? Hull went
on board the Commodore at 4 cast off the Gunboats - At 7 Cap;
Hull returned on board At 8 the Ketch fireship [Intrepi;dJ, T7i;cen, and
NauiiEus, got under way and Stood in for TripoLi the fireship stood
in under the Batteries the Argus, T'ixen, and Nautilus, standing after
her a t 9 hove too a t 9 heard 2 Guns from the Batteries at 10 Minutes
past observed the Explosion of the fire ship a t 11 filled away and made
Sail off $ on the town At 4 past 9 AM Cap1 Hull went on board the
Commodore At 11 the Commodore hoisted the A~gus'sDistinguishing
Sigl made Sail and Stood for the Commodore at 4 past 11 C a p W H l
returned took Gunboat N Q3 in Tow [PiDA photostat.]
Extract from journal of Midshipmen F. Cornelius deXraEt, U. S. Bavy, in U. 6.Brig
Shm of 18 gum, lltaster Commandant Charles Stewart, U. S. Navy, commanding,
Tuesday, 4 September 1804

(Standing off & on shore under easy sail.) Throughout those 24
hours gentle breezes & clear pleast weathr At past Meridian a
signal for all Commanders to repair on board the Commodores ship.
4 past 6 back'd the main top sail f past 8 fill'd away. At 10 the
Ketch Intre id that was pre ar'd as an Infernd, was taken into the
harbour of ripoli (by Lieu$ omm Richard Summers of the Nautilw,
Lt Wadsurorth & Mr Israel, Midshipman, with 7 men) & was blown
up. 3 past 11 the Commodore making repeated signal for Cap!
Summers, which was not answer'd, back'd the main topsail Midmght fill'd away, the Commodore still makmg si als without
being mswer'd, day light saw the A r m & Vizen,(whic had aeoompanied the Kctch near the harbour) standing off & on shore. At 7

+

8

8

f'

514 NAVAL OPERATIONS, APRIL-SEPTEMBER 6,

1804

back'd the main top sail, & was inform'd by the Argus that nothing
had been heard or seen of Cap$ Summers & the Ketch's crew, after
she had been blown up
Meridian fill'd away. [NDA. ]
To Lieutenant George W. Reed, U. S. Navy, of U. S. Schooner Nauiilus, from Captain
Edward Preble, U. S. Navy

Constitution - Off TRIPOLY
Septernr 4th 1804
SIR, YOUare immediately to cnuse an exact account to be taken of
all the personal property belonging to Richard Somers Esquire (supposed to be deceased) late commander of the U. S. Schooner Nautilm,
and transmit the same to me, Signed by yourself and two other
oEcers, the Purser to be one - You will also send me his Journals
and other papers, in the Order in which they now are with a General
inventory of the Same [LC. EPP, Order Book, May 1803-June 1805.1
To Lieutenant John H. Dent, U. S. Navy, commanding U. S. Brig Scourge, from
Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Navy

Constitution off TRIPOLY
September dth 180.4
SIR, YOUwill proceed to Syracuse with the Brig Scourge, and on
your arrival there settle all your Accounts with the Agent and be
ready to take Comnlnnd of the h'azLtilus
I am Sir
Yr Obt Servt
(Signed) EDWARD
PREBLE
Lieutt Commdt DENT
U. S. 13. Scourge. [IKHF. Dent's LB.]

[4 September 18041
To Lieutenant John H. Dent, U. S. Navy, ordered to command U. 8. Schooner
Ncutilus, from Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Bevy

SIR YOUare hcrcby appointed to the Command of the United
States Schooner Nautilus, you will therefore settle your Accounts for
the Brig Scourge and transfer all the Stores &s to Lieutr [Space] who
is to take charge of her, you will then repair on board the Nautilus
and assume the Command of s g Vessel for which this shall be your
sufficient authority. Mr Reid will be your first L i e u t b n d you are to
join the Squadron off here without loss of time - An exact Inventory
of every Article on Board the Nautilus is to be taken a t the time you
assume the Command in presence of three Officers for which you have
to receipt to me. Given on board the U. S. Ship Constitution off Tripoly the 4th day
of Sept' 1804
(Signed) EDWARD
PEBLE
P. S. You may discharge from the Scourge all the Nea olitans and
Sicilians that are not fit for our service and send all the ripolines to
Prison immediately after your arrival a t Syracuse. -

$

[NHF. Dent's LB.]

WARS WITH BARBABY POWERS
To Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Navy, from Lieutenant John H. Dent, U. 8. navy
4thSEPT.1804
List of the OfBcers and Crew of the United Stater Bsro S c o o e o ~

John H.Dent - - - - - - - - - - - - . - - - - -Comd.
-----------John G r e e n - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - Puraer
John R o w e - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - . - - - - - - - - - - - Mastersmate
Henry Casey - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - Midshipman
- - - - . - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - Boatswein
- - - - - - - - .
John M~Fate
Rokrt King- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -- Gunner
William Wiley-- - _ - - - - -- - - - - - - . - - - - - -Sail
- -maker
-------Ezeheil Darling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Boy
Emanuel Schulenberg- -.- - - - -.- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - Seaman
Philip S Pearce - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -.- - - - - - - - - - d9
John D e l i t i a - - - _ - - - - - - - - . . - - - - - - - - - _ - - - - - - - - - - Or
- - d~
Sam1 G o l d e n - - - - - - - - - - - - - - . - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - d~
John W o o U e y - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - d~
Jamee Barry - - . . - - - - - - - - - - - - _ - _ . . _ - - - - - - - - . . - . . - - - d9
William Kelly . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
d~
Archibald Frarnpton- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - d9
John C a r s o n - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - . - - - - - - _ - - - do
Adam Bastian . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
do
John S m i t h - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - . - - - - - . Cook
Philip Bricoe -,---- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - Ordr Seaman
- -- -- -- -- ---John Haslip ------ - - - - . - - - - --Joseph Ashiedo- - - - - - - - - - - - - _ _ _ - _ _
- -_
.-----...
.- Boy d~
Jack T r i p o l i , - - - - - _ - _ - - - - - - - - - ~ - - - - - - - - - -d~- - Henry Tripoli . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
d~
Frederich Tripoli- - - - - - - - ..- - - - - - - - - - - - - do
Robert B m e y - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - Ordr Seaman
John A
k
e
a -- .
.
d~
Henry Fleck - - - - - - - . . - . - - - . - - - - d~- - - - . o - - -- -- .
.
dq
J a mR
Samuel B1 the
-_-___~.___-ds- - - - - - _ - - ~ n t h metcher
~ -d- -_- -- _- _ _ _ _- -_ _ -- _..- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - Ord? Seaman
- - ._
-- - - - - .OrdY
--Seaman
Brown urance - _ - _-__ _ _ . - _
Francis Weaver-- - - . - - - - . - - - _ - - -.--Boy
-- - - - - - - .
Henry Johnson - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - O r d ~Seaman
J m e s Gurmley - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - dq
Stephen Hurley- - - - - -.- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -.- .
Carpenter
-

Benjamin Cuthbert. . - - ..----..
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - SargS Marines
Patrick L y n c h - - - - - _ - _ . - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - Marine
William Bonny-- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - d~
Michael Dawley - - _ - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - d9
a
t G
w.
.
dq
John Baptist
Guiteano Valera
Doming Sarcha
Guiangeito Cambese
Bartholemew Boscarun

I
Neapolitans from the Ketch

,

Bassman
Tripolitan Prisoners
Mahomet
51
Water Remaining 200 Gallons

SIR The above is a correct statement of the crew of the Scourge
and the quantity of Water remaining -

JNQ H DENT

Septs 4's 1804.
[LC. EPP Vol. 13, AugustDecember

1804.j

516 NAVAL OPERATIONS, APRIESEPTEMBER 6 , 1804
Extract from journal kept by Purser John Darby, U. 8. Navy, on board U. 8. S
John A d a , Master Commandant Isaac Chauncey, U. S. Bavy, commanding,
Tuesday, 4 September 1804

We are this morning laying a t Anchor of[Q the Town of Tripoli a t
half past 11 the commodore hoisted the Brig Argus's distinguishing
flag. (the Argus was commanded by Capt. Summers) at 4 P M we
got under way and in heaving up parted our cable we continued to
stand of[q and on the coast all night - a t 7 the Town of Tripoli
bore S S. W.Dist 5 Miles a t 4 past 7 the Constitution got under
way [ N D A original.

Miss Camilla S. McConnell.]

To James Monroe, U. S. Minister to London, England, from Secretary of the Bavy

NAV.DEP!Septem dth 1804
Congress by Resolution of 3s' February 1802 directed the President
of the United States to present to Lieu! Sterett a Sword Commemorative of his gallant Conduct in the Capture of a Tripolitan Corsair
on the 1" *August 1801 - Desirous that this resolution should be
carried into Effect as early as was practicable I wrote in the year
1802 to Comre Morris then in the mediterranean, directing him to
procure a sword and present it to Lieu! Sterett who was also in the
mediterranean at that time - This order not having been complied
with, the resolution of Congress remains unexecuted - I therefore
take the liberty Sir to request that you will be pleased to purchase
a suitable sword to be presented to Lieu: Sterett and send it to me
by the first opportunity that may offer Col John Stricker of Baltimore
will make you a remittance for thir purpose [KDA.

GLB, Vol. 7, 1803-1805.1

To John Gavino, U. S. Consul, Gibraltar, from Richard O'Brien, Malta

MALTASepr 6t?'1804
(Duplicate Copy)
DEARSIR l s t The American frigate Corsairs Gun Boats & Bombards attacked Tripoly Castles Corsairs 8: Gun Boats on the Evening
of the 3s' of Bugs $ after a severe contest Ca tured 3 Tri olin Gun
Boats whose Crews were 96 Men of the Num er 46 were {ad illd 50
Made Prisoners, amongst the latter Number 18 were severely wounded.
We iost Lieu! JaWeCature & 13 Men killd & wounded 2d the 7th of Augt the American force attacked Tripoly to the
West of the Citty after a Great deal of Gun Boat firing & also of the
2 Bombards they silenced a 7 Gun Battery, & threw several shells
into the Town, in these two attacks Tripoly must Certainly have
lost 500 Men. We lost a small Gun Boat, $ 12 Men amongst this
Number is Lieu! Caldwell & MC Dorsey the Boat blew up by the
fire of wads of another Boat 3g On the PIIorning of the 2gth of Aug! a t 13 A. M. the American
Gun boats & c W Bombards enterd the Harbour of Tripoly & within
600 feet of the Bashaws Castles Commenced the attack, they fird 120
rounds each Sunk 3 of the Enemys Gun Boats & a Merchant Polacra.- At Day light the Constitution laid in within Pistol shott of the
chief of the Baterys fired 9 Broad sides - r e d 12 Shott in the hull
lost 4 Men Killd & 2 wounded in one of the Boats by shott - In
Tripoly they have mounted on the Citty fninting the East North &

517

WAR8 WITH BARBRRY POWEBS

West 115 Guns, has 45 Thg Arabs & the Inht to defend the Citty, had
19 sail of Gun Boats 2 schooners & 2 Galliotts and a Brig. The
Americans had the Cmtitution Argus Siren Vixen & Nautdw,
Enterprize 6 Gun Boats & 2 Bombards, the whole of the American
Crews am$ to 890 Men & the Neapolitans 120 the latter behaved
well. I n the latter Action CapWhancy Officers &- Crew of the
John Adam, Volunteerd their services in the Constitution & G m
Boats. We have been Expecting to be Joind by Corn: Barron &
frigates but he trill be t ~ late
o to end the affair this year as the Summer season is all but over for Gun Boats, &- Tripoly in Winter can
only be Blocaded by Corsairs a t times off B: on. This Extract will
shew that our present forces is only adequate to Irritate Tripoly, but
will not be adequate to reduce it to American terms & obtain our
fellow Citizens. - N B. The Expected frigates joind with the present
force will do it, or Dri'i~ethe Bashaw & Divar: out of Tripoli 1255 S E P1804
~
On the Evening of the 5tb arrived here Com' Barron & CapWampbell, the former saild on the Evening of the
& the latter for
Tripoly on the Morning of the 8" no doubt but they arrived off
Tripoly the 10th & of course all Joind mill give Tripoli a Genl attack.
Since they sailing we have learnd by the return of a Vessel here
which carried Water to the fleet, that on the night of the l a t the
americans sent in a Vessel prepaird wtb 50 Barr!"f
Pow[d]er & a
Number of loaded shells that this Vessel had got close in to the Earbour of Tripoly amongst the Enemys Gun Boats said Vessel was set
fire to, by some accident or another the fire & ship blew up before
that the Officer & Crew could et dear, & in conse uence the Officer
hlidshipman & 12 hien were b o m to attoms. 1 Beleire it is Cap?
Smith of the Vizen, the Constiiution Gun Boats and Bombards led
in & had s long severe action. I have not been able to obtain from
the Mdtees Crew any better acct on this subject as they have not
brought any one letter, they were Convoyd by one of our Brigs of
wan- w* did not enter this Port but went for Syracuse. I hat-e not
been well. I left the eeet the night of the 22c LUt? & when the John
Adams returns here and discharges I shall proceed wh my family in
said ship for the U. S. - +Till you please to forward a Copy of this
letter to the Secretary of State.
MALTA
Sepr Idi@1804
Dr SIR I have to inform you that it is cap^ Sorners wp Lieu!
Wadsworth & Mr Israel h1idshiprnan & 10 Men that blew up by the
Explotion of the fire ship on their entering amongst the Gun Boats
of Tripoly Cap-mith
in the 1'i;cen arrived here this day he left
off Tripoly 3 days past, he says that Comodor Barron & Ca
Campbell arrived there the 9'b That on t h ~ the Gun Boats ombards
wb the Syren Enterprize Scourge & John Adams left the Coast of
Tripoly for Syracuse. The President Constitution Constelation &
Argus remains off Tripoly that i t is Considerd if the weather would
be favble that the 3 frigates would attack the place. I do not think
that without the Gun boats & Bombards they will reduce Tripoly to
American terms, or obtain the liberation of our fellow Citizens, the
Season is too farr advanced for the Gun Boats and Bombards to
remain with safety on the C o a t of Tripoly -

5

8)

JNA. SDA. CL, Gibraltar, Vol. 2, 1796-1804.1

518 NAVAL OPERATIONS, APRILSEPTEMBER 6, 180.4
To W t e r Commandant Iaaac Chauncey, U. 8. Navy, commanding U, 6. S. John
Admnr, from Crptain Edward Preble, U. S. Bavy

Constitution Off TRIPOLI
September 6Q 1804
SIR YOU will proceed to Malta with the U States Ship John
Adurns under your Command, and on your arrival there deliver to
W@Kiggins EsqT U. S. Agent one half of the Provissions and Stores
Copy N Q2

you have on board, with the remainder you will proceed to Syracuse,
and ddiver to Geor e Dyson Esqrv U. S. Agent a t that place - from
thence Sail for the ity of Washington, touching a t Messina Naples,
Leghorn, Marseilles, Barcelona, Alicant, Mdaga and Gibralter, to
take the American Trade a t those laces under your Convoy: You
are however not to touch, a t any $ort declared to be in a State of
Blockade by any of the Belligerent powers: neither are you to remain,
an unreasonable Time a t any Place, considering the adranced Season
of the Year - Four or Five Days is as long a time as i t will be prudent for you to wait at any one place after you leave Syracuse If Mr OBrien a plies to you for a passage for himself and Family,
I presume i t wil be agreeable to Government that you accommodate
him, and equally so that you accommodate Mr Cathcart and Family
from Leghorn - Mg OBrien *dlshew you a Letter from the Department of the Navy or the State Department which promises h m a
passage in some returning Frigate
I shall forward Dispatches to Syracuse for the Navy Department,
which you will please to take particular Care of. I am happy in
this Opportunity of acknowledging the high Opinion I have of your
Talents as an Officer, Of expressing my entire approbation of your
Conduct as a Volunteer on board this Ship in the Actions of the 27th
Ultq and 3Q Ins$ with the Tripoline Gun Boats & Batteries, and to
request you to accept my thanks for the able Assistance I received
from you on the Quarter Deck in the Absence of my Principal and
a large Proportion of other Officers.
You m i l l make requisitions for what may be found necessary for
your Ship, upon the Agents of the United States in the Different
Ports a t which you may touch.
P. S. You will tow to Malta three Gun Boats and from thence to
Syracuse - Order the Officer attached to each Boat, to take an
exact Acct of every Article on board her, and sign a Receipt t o be
accountable for the same
[NDA. M C LB, 1804-5.1

e

P

[jSeptember

18041

To Lieutenant* Thomas Robinson, Jr., U. 8. Xavy, from Captain Edward Preble,
U. 6. Bevy

(L s)

By Edward Preble Es uire

7

Commander in Chief o the
I?.S. S uadron Stationed in
the Me iterranean
To Lieutenant Thomm Robinson hereby appointed Lieutenant
Commandant of the U. S. Schooner Enterprize
By Virtue of the power and Authority to me given, I do hereby
oonstitute and appoint you Lieutenant Commandant of the U. S.

1

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

519

Schooner Enterprize; Willing & requiring you forthwith to go on
board and take upon you the charge and command of Lieutenant
Commandant in her accordin ly: Strictly charging & commanding all
the officers and company be onging to the said Schooner to behave
themselves jointly and severally in their respective employments with
all due respect and obedience unto you their said Lieutenant Commandant: And you likewise t o observe and execute the eneral printed
instructions and such orders and directions as you sha 1 from time to
time receive from me or any other your superior officer for the United
States Service: Hereof, nor you nor any of you may fail as you will
answer the contrary a t your peril. And for so doing this shall be
your warrant.
Given unde[r] my hand & seal the
day
of September 1804 & 2gtQ year of the
Iudependance of the U. S. of America
PREBLE
(Signed) EDWARD
ti. S. Ship Constitution

f

K

[*On 10 September 1804 he tvas commissioned Master Commandant, U. S.
Kavy.1

[LC.

EPP, Order Book, May 1803-June 1805.3

--

[5 September 18041
To Lieutenant Thomas Robinson, Jr., U. S. Bavy, from Capt,trrin Edward heble,
U. S. Bavy

S I ~You are hereby appointed Lieutenant commandant of the
- You k~dltherefore repair on board said
Schooner and proceed to Malta u-ith Cap$ Decatur, u-ho mill deliver
her orer to you, after making the necessary arrangements for the
crew; Her present crew being to be turned orer to the J o h n Adums,
to be replacoct by an Equal number from that ship - You u d l make
your requisitions for provisions &$ on IW Higgins Esq' and join the
Squadron off here as soon as possible, mid witbout loss of time -

U. S. Schooner Enterprize

[LC. EPP, Order Book May 1603- Jrlne 1805.1

----

Extract from journal of U.S. Brig Argw. Master Commandant Isaac Hull, U. S. Navy,
commanding, Wednesday, 5 September 1804

[Off
TI-ipoli] At 6 the Comrnod~hoisted our distinguishing f l a w
stood for hirn hove too to lenard of him Cap-Jent came on boar8
and went on board the Scourge accompanied by Doctr Dorsey
[KDA photostat.]

-

Extract from log book kept by Sailing Master Nathaniel Haraden, U. S. Navy, on
boord U. S. Fngate Consfitu~ian.Wednesday, 5 September 1804

Moderate breezes from N E. ~ v i t l iCloudy overcast weather - 'CTe
are employed supplying the G u n honts & bombards uith ammunition
for the Sixth attticB upon Tnpoly - As the afternoon advanced the
wind increased from the S E tilth a swell from tJheE N E & had the
appearance of Stro~lgbreezes from N E. - The Gun boats were
Ordered pr signal to the vessels to which they were attached & st 4%.
P. M. the Squadron was ail under weigh - A t Sun down we we hed
& 611ed to the N N I T - Winds N E By 9 P. M. light breezes, ronl
wrhiqh time till 2 P. M. we had calms or light airs from N N E, with

f

520 NAVAL OPERATIONS, APRILSEPTEMBER 6, 1804
a swell setting in shore - At 23 A. M. we came to in 30 fath? in
Order to prevent our drifting in with the land We kept our To sails
a tri in readiness for a breeze - At day light we saw Tripoly earing b E nearly 5 miles - Morning cloudy & overcast - The
John Adams anchored pr signal. The other Vessels of the Squadron
continued under way with light airs from the Northd
At 7 a. m. u-e hauled up the two Bombards & took the Mortars out
of them - Bombard 5" 1 has been several times reported to the
Commodore to be unsafe & unserviceable owing to her leaky state
occasioned by the 5 different actions she has been in, & is a t present
useless - Bombard lb'? 2 is not reported leaky, but the Bed of the
Mortar (from the different actions against Tripoly, is so split &
shivered that she is totally unserviceable and is at present considered
useless The Keapolitan Gun boats altho' nearly 30 Tons each, are (owing
to their being flat bottom'd) but ill calculated to meet a gale of wind.
This forenoon the Guns from KOB4, 2 & 6 were taken on board the
John Adams - NOs 3, 4 & 5 are towed by the Swen & Argus - they
are not within communication by Signal By 10 A. M. the weather cleared away, from which time till noon
light breezes from h' E, with a swell setting in shore This forenoon in loosing one of the Staysails which has not been
set since the action on Monday last a large Grape Shot fell down on
deck & wounded a Seamen in the foot - During the three actions
in which the Constitution has been under the ITalls of Tripoly She has
been struck in 41 places by large shot - Our second & third actions
were within range of Grape, a number of which are now- on board Our loss in the different actions is One Capt 4 Lieutenants One Midshipman & 30 Seamen & Marines in the Squadron. This forenoon
the Scourge, Cap4 Dent parted company for Syracuse. She convoys
the Store Ship that arrived here on the 26t? August last, & has been
necessarily detained since Surgeons report 5 Sick & 7 convact
Signals made as follows
P. hl. a t 3 t t7ixen Tow Your gun boat
33 - Nautilus - Come u+hail.
Lieutt Gordon this forenoon rejoined the Constdution - His Gun
boat has been unarmed Lieutt Robinson who has always commanded a Bombard, has not
been attached to them except when in action.

8

i

[LC. EPP, Log Cowtitulion, 1803-1804.1
Extract from journal of Wiham Eaton, U. S. Navy Agent for the Barbary Begencies,
Wednesday, 5 September 1804

Arrived a t Malta. Quarrantined: having spoke a Tunissirtn.
[NR&L. No. 0217, Bml E 14.1
Extract from jonrnal kept by Purser John Derby, U. S. Bevy, on board U. 8. 8 .
Jokn Admnr, l a s t e r Commandant Isaac Chauncey, U. 6. Bevy, commanding,
Wednesday, 5 September 1804

At. half past 5 the commodore came to Anchor a t 6. we anchored
in 30. Fathoms Water the town of Tripoli bore South. took in 3

WARS WITH BmBARY POWERS

521

Guns. 24 pounders. out of Gun boats No 1. 2. 6. - a t Meridian
li ht breezes & Pleasant. at 5 P M got underway and stood to the
W. a t 6 the commodore made the signal for the Syren 8- Enterprize to take the Gun boats in Tow. a t sun set Tacked ship the
Town of Tripoli bearing South distant 4 or 5 Miles a t $ past 6 a
signal was made from the commodore to dose in sight to prevent
seperation in the night - We continued under way all night.

8&

[NDA original.

Mim Camilla S. McConnell.]

To Daniel Bedinger, Navy Agent and Superintendent of

Navy Yard, Eodolk, Va.,

from Secretary of the Navy

NAV.D E P6~SeplemE 1804
I t is very unfortunate that the bowsprit, powder, cannon shot and
Spare Spars, have not been shipped by the Alfred - We had better
have declined sending any other part of the Cargo than not to have
sent these articles - The frigate Constitution is in great want of a
bowsprit and Spare Spars - the Carronades shipped in the Alfred
will he nseIess without the shot and the Squadron w-ill in all probability
soon be in want of powder - my principal object in sending the
Alfred to Norfolk was that she might take on board the bowsprit
and Spare Spars
If the H-iUiam and A f a v can receive the articles left behind by the
Alfred you will put them on board of her with direction to deliver
them to John Gavino Esqr a t Gibraltar to Whom you will write and
enclose a Bill of lading - If I understand your letter of the 219%ultq
you have chartered the ship William & Mary for the Voyage - and
if so the Owners cannot reasonably demand any freight for these
additional articles - They may demand and you may consent to
give them a reasonable compensation for any detention which the
Vessel may experience in consequence of taking them on Board - all
port charges which may be Occasioned by such addition to the Cargo
you may also consent to pay - I entertain a hope that you will be
able to send out in the TlriUiam& Mary the articles which have been
left behind by the Alfred - and if you should you will carefully note
on the back of each of the passes that have been sent to you for the
WiUiam and May each particular article stating that after the passes
were Obtained, the Government of the United States found it Expedient to malie Such addition to the Cargo of the tlviUiam & Mary.
that such additional articles belong to the United States of America
and are intended to be delivered to John Gavino Es American
Consul a t Gibraltar, for the use of the American Squa'iron in the
Mediterranean Sea [KDA. GLB, Vol. 7, 1803-1805.1
To Master Commandant Isaac Chauncey, U. S. Navy, commanding U. S. S. john
Adam, from Captain Edward Reble, U. S. Ravy

Constitution - Off TRIPOLY
Septenz? 6'p 1804
SIR The Service will not permit me to direct a Court Martial to
be assembled at present for trial of hdr John Darby & Mr J: Ord:
Creighton; but on the a r r i ~ dof the John Adurn a t hlalta, you may
inform them it shall take place if consistent with the good of the Service
[LC. EPP, Order Book, May 1803-June 1805.)

522 NAVAL OPERATIONS, APRILSEPTEMBER 6, 1804
To Cap-

Edward Prsble, U. S. Navy, from Lieutenant (acting as Master's Hate)
John Orde Creighton, U. S. Navy

U S FRIGAT~
John Adams
Off Tripoli Sep r, CitQ 1301,
SIR Trusting You T o d d Grant A, release from my Confinement
Provided the Dispute between M r Darby & Myself Could be Accommodated, in Consequence of which every esertion on my Part has
been exercised - but Kot being 4ble to effect M y Object on terrns
honourable to Xfyself. I have to Solicit Your interference, in Calling
EL, Court h/larshalL, Or Your Illdulgence in Granting me A, release
that I may Again return to my duty. Apprehensive Sir that if the
Ship Should Seperate from the Squadron, a, length of time hlay
elapse before we meet during which I may be Confined, the Unplcasantness of which I am Already Sensible Of - Should You be so
indulgent as to release Me, I trust h l y futrrre Conduct Will be Such
As to Merit Your Approbation.[LC. EPP, Vol. 13, August-Decemher 1804.7
To Master Commandant Isaac Chauncey, U. S. Navy, commanding U. S. S. John
Adams, from Capt~inSemueI Barron, U. S. Navy

COPY

UKITEI)
STIIT~S
SHIPPresident
Alalta 6'b SepfrIS04
DEARSIR The Bearer hlrRa11dolph was a Passenger in the President,

from the U . States to this Place (by the Order of the Secretary of
the Navy) who has directed me to cause him to be accommodnted
with n passage back in any Ship of the United States 1v1Lich rnay
return a t the Time he wishes to benefit by such an 0pportunit;y.
In addition to the Secretary's Instructions on this Subject I beg
leave to introduce M' Rantlolph to you (idividualIy) and nssure
you that any Attention you wiIl please to bestow on Mr R- will be
gratefully acknowledged by, Dear Sir
[NDA. MC I.B, 2804-5.1
SAM^ BARROF

--

To Captain Stephen Decatur, Jr., U. S. Navy, from Captain Edward Preble, U. S.
Eiavy

Constitution Off TRIPOLY
Septemr 6" 1804
Slit You will proceed to Syracuse in the U. S. Schooner Enfelprize,
and as your present runli entitles you to a superior command, you
will delircr up t,hzt of the Enterprize to Licut! Thomas Robinson who
is appointed by me to succeed you: previous to which pou will turn
over to the U. S. Ship the John Adams, for t11~purpose of going home,
all that part of the Enterprizes crew, who do not incline to re-enter
for two years, and Cap: Chaunceg will re-place thcm u-ith an equal
number from the John Adams - Lieutl Robinson will receipt to you
for every article on board thc Enterprke which yo11 rnny caust1 to be
delivorcd to his charge - If any of t l ~ eE:nf~r;~rizes
crcw u-ish to reenter, the able seamen may receive 12, the Ordinary Scamcn 8, &
Boy's 6 dollsrs pr month You will then proceed to Messina with the B o ~ n bVesscls and all
the Gun Boats, and formally deliver tho Neapolitan Boats to General

WARS W T H BARBARY POWERS

523

Espluger - You ma also make a requisition on M' Broadbent
for three thousand do1 ars, to be advanced to the OfJicers & crews of
Gun Boats NQe4 & 6 on account of their prize money - The Prize
boat lost in the action of the 7th L7W: shall be paid for by the U. S.
a t the rate the others sell for - 1 have the honor to be

9

ILC. EPP, Order Book, May 1803-Juue 1805.1

To Sir John Acton, Prime Minister of State, The Two Sicdies (Palerrno), from
Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Navy

UNITED
STATES
SHIPConstilZGtion
Off Tripoli 6th Sepr 1804 SIR,I feel peculiar plcasure in announcing to you the success which
has attended several at.tacks I have made on the Batteries and Marine
force of Tripoli.
On the 3rd Ult? our Six Gun Boats under cover of the Squadron,
advanced into the Harbour of Tripoli, and engaged 22 of the Enemy's
Gallies and Gun Boats, and after an obstinate engagement obtained
a complete victory, after having boarded and carried three of their
heavy Boats, sinking another, and drirrng the remainder under the
Bashaw's Castle, in a shattered condition, and a great many men
killed on board them. Since which, they have not dared to hazard
an Actiorl - We hou-~veron the 28th UltQattacked them a t their
hloorings under the Castle, and sunk their largest Galley, a Gun
Boat, and a Merchant Ship - We have thrown a great number of
shells into the Town, and have in several instances d r o ~ ethe Turks
from thcir Batteries. It is impossible to ascertain how many of the
Enemy hn-re bcen killed in these several engagements, but I think
I may safely say that these Barbarians never have suffered more
from any Christian power.
I have to regret the loss of six brave OfEcers killed, and several
wounded, and between 40 & 50 seamen 8: Marines killed and wounded;
this loss is not, so grcat as we had reason to expect, more especially
as we have bcen exposed to the fire of a t least 115 pieces of heavy
Cannon from the different castles and Forts of Tripoli; besides two
Gallies, a Brig of 10 Guns, two armed Schooners, and Nineteen Gun
Boats.
For the very grcat advantages resulting to our Country from these
efficient operations against n powerful Barbary State, we must in a
very large degree be indebted to His X'eapolitan hIajesty for his
generous loan of Gun Boats & Mortar Vessels, Ammumtion &ca
&c' and to you Sir, for the good will with which you seconded his
intentions, and I feel it my duty so assure you, that my Govt d in
due time manifest the ve high sense with which tbey will receive
such *onb@ proofs of ~ i s % f a ~ e s t ~
friendship.
's
I cannot in justice pass over the merits of Antonio Massene 8ssigned me as Bombard~er,and the Gunners attached to the dBf Gun
Boats & Bomb Vessels: - their intrepidity, and good conduct merits
my mumest approbation, and I beg leave to recommend them to
your notice.
The reinforcement of four fri ates from the United-States have
not yet arrived, but they hnve %een anxiously expected from day
to day these six weeks. Had they arrived before the season compelled me to send off the Gun & Mortar Vessels, \\-e should have

524 NAVAL OPERATIONS, APRIL-SEPTEMBER 6,

1804

forced a peace, or destroyed their Town & Cruisers: as i t is, the
Town is much injured, and I have no doubt that in case they arrive
we shall command a Peace, but we cannot so effectually distress
them after the boats have left us. I send them off this day by an
officer who will deliver them up a t Messina, together with an Inventory of every thing on board.
I hope e're long to have the pleasure of communicating personally
the particulars of this Campaign. I n the meantime, I have the
honor to be,
[LC. EPP, LB, April-Nov. 1804.1
To George Dyson, U. 6. Navy Agent, Syracuse, from Captain Edward Preble,
U. S. Navy

Constitution Off TRIPOLY
Septemr 6t@1804
DEARSIR I refer you to Cap' Decatur for information from this
Quarter. Cap! Chauncey of the John Adams is ordered to deliver
to you one half, the cargo of that Ship, with the other he will sail for
Malta.
I congratulate you on the confirmation of your appointment &
hope yet to be able to do more to serve you.
P. S. Attend to Cap-hauncey -He is my friend, & I wish you
to be acquainted [LC. EPP, LB, April-Nov. 1804.1
To John Broadbent, U. 8. Navy Agent, Messina, from Captain Edward Preble,
U. 8. Navy

Constitution Off TRIPOLY
Septeml 6th 1804
DEARSIR In great haste I refer you to Cap$ Decatur for transactions in this Quarter, in which his Gallantry has shone greatly conspicuous The Neapolitans have behaved well: Our ammunition is expended,
but not without effect - I wish the Neapolitans may be discharged
& paid & that you may advance three thousand dollars to Cap"
Decatur on acc' of Prize Money to be distributed [LC. EPP, LB, April-Nov. 1804.1

[6 September 18041
To Xidshipman Thomas Macdonough, U. 8. Navy, from Captain Edward Preble,
U. 6. Navy

SIR YOUare hereby appointed Lieutenant of the U. S. Schooner
Enierprize - You will therefore repair on board Said Schooner,
and take upon yourself tbe charge & duty of Lieutt agreeable to the
regulations of the Service, for which this shall be your Sufficient
Authority Given under my hand on board
the U. S. Ship Constitution
off Tripoly the 6th day of Septr 1804
Signed E D WPREBLE
~
[LC. EPP, Order Book, May 1803-June 1805.1

0"

10"

10"

20"

30"

MAP OF THE
MED1TERFUNEA.N

CSTSABASTAN

STR OF GlBRALTA

S

E

A

C MESURATA

10"

0"

10"

20'

30"

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

525

To Midshipman Jonathan Thorn, U. 8. Bavy, to take charge of U. 8. Brig Scourge,
from Captain Edward Preble, U. 8. Bavy

Constitvtion - Septemr 6 t b 1804.
SIR YOUare to proceed to Syracuse in the Nauiilw and on your
arrival there take charge of the U. S. Brig Scourge until farther
orders: It is expected that you will be very attentive to the Vessel,
and that you do not sleep out of her.
You are to give Lg Comms Dent duplicate receipts for every article
on board & deliver me a Copy of the Same.
[LC. EPP, Order Book, May 1803-June 1805.1
To Yaster Commandant Charles Stewart, U. 6. Navy, commanding U. 6. Brig
Siren, from Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Navy

Constitution. Off TRIPOLY
Septemf 6th 1804
SIR YOUwill proceed to Syracuse with three Gun boats in tow
of the Syren, and on your arrival there, take in Six weeks provisions
& water & return to join the Squadron on this Station without loss
of time - You are permitted to remain four days a t Syracuse, but
no longer
Order some of your Officers to take an exact inventory of every
thing on board the Gun boats and take the receipt of the Officer and
principal gunner for the Same, to prevent Embezzlement
[LC. EPP, Order Book, May 1803-June 1805.1
To Secretary of the Navy from William Eaton, U. S. Navy Agent for the Barbary
Regencies

MALTA6. Sep. 1804
SIR, Hamet Bashaw is a t Alexandria in the friendship and protection of a Bey of Egypt; waiting as Mr Pulis informs me, for answers
to his proposals offered to the Government of the United States.
The advantages calculated to result from a co-operation with him
seem not to have diminished in prospect from any occurrences which
have happened since those proposals were made - The reigning
Bashaw persists in his demand of a ransom for our captives - But
the distress which must be occasioned by the means he is obliged to
use in support of these pretentions cannot but increase the discontentment of his subjects and ripen them for revolt. For, such of them as
subsist, ordinarily, by commerce or cruising being barred those
resources by a harassin blockade, and such as depend on labor for
subsistence being compe ed to serve for his defence without pay, will
be very apt to sieze an opportunit of relieving themselves from that
distress when i t offers on princip es so consistent with their proper
allegiance and religion - Those subjects who were heretofore in the
interest of the friendly Bashaw, are still so - Through these instruments, I firmly believe, the enemy may be taken from his sofa a t the
same instant that our fellow citizens are rescued from chains - The
only obstacles which seem to oppose the success of this measure are
want of supplies to put it into operation - These are not in the
fleet - And the Commodore is not decided whether any construction
of the Presidents instructions extends to a discretion of procuring
and furnish' them: he will probably express himself on this subject
d t e r having%ed on his plan of operations.

%

i

526 NAVAL OPERATIONS, APRIL-SEPTEMBER 6, 1804
I t is, perhaps, unfortunate that the arrival of the squadron had
rlot been more seasonable - I t is the fault of the elements alone After II, flattering passage of fifteen days to the Western Islands we
experienced forty one days successive head winds and calms, excepting
about twelve houxs {H. E. Huntington L&AG, E A 206.1
Extract from journal of William Eaton, U. 6. Navy Bgent for the Barbary Regencies,
Thursday, 6 September 1804

Mr. O'Brien, under the stern, said he had been to Tripoli and Tunis,
by authority. To the Bey of the latter he had offered an annual
tribute of eight thousand dollars to compromise for a frigate by him
demanded of the United States. To the former one hundred and
ten thousand dollars for a peace and ransom of our captives. Terms
rejected by both.
\NR&L, No. 9217, Brn1 E 14.1
Extract from journal of U.6. Brig Argus, Master Commandant Ieaac Hull,U. S. Navy,
commanding, Thursday, 6 September 1804

[Off Tripoli] Light winds tbrough the night the Commodore oE
our lee bow a t 3 past 8 the commodore made Sig! NO 600 Tacked
Ship and Stood for him a t 9 Cap? Hull went on board of him [ K D A photostat.]

--

Extract from log book kept by Sailing Master Nathaniel Haraden, U. S. Navy, on
board U. S. Frigate Constitution, Thursday, 6 September 1804

Moderate Breezes from K N E - We are at single anchor four
miles N b W from Tripoly. The Squadron in sight & under way
except the John Adams which is a t anchor in company. As the
weather was moderate, till 4 A.M. we were empIoyed taking out the
Powder from the gun boats & Bombards, except Gun boats XQ'3,
4 & 5 which although in sight are not within communication by
signal By 5 P. M. we had fresh breezes from N E b N - We weighed
& made sail to the N W b N - The wind continued freshening till
sun set when Tripoly bore S b E t E, 8 miles. The Squadron a t
this time was much scattered. They were Ordered to close p' Signal - By 9 P. M. the Weather became moderate which continued
during the night - We made & shortened sail as necessary to keep
the Squadron in Company, in order to prevent any surprize from
irregular Currents or the swell setting in shore. At 9 P. M. we
sounded in 40 fath*a t 10 in 55 & a t 12 Midnight in 80, Hard bottom At 6 in the morning we saw two sail to the N N W, which we aupposed to be the Scourge & the Store Ketch which parted company
yesterday for Malta and Syracuse At 3 past 6 we wore with the Squadron to the E S E - At this
time we had light breezes which continued d all forenoon veering between E N E & N N E - At 9 A. M. we brought to, with the
signal out for the Squadron to come within hail - Out large cutter &
plnnace We have been employed this forenoon in receiving the Muskets,
The Seamen & Marines
Wads & Shot from all the Gun boats
belonging to the Const.ilulion were ordered out of the Gun boats The Squadron has been employed all the forenoon in getting the

-

527

WARS WITH BARBARY POM7ERS

-

Gun boats & Bombards ready for returning to Port Saragosa
This
forenoon we supplied Bombard N9 1 with a large Grapnel - Shc
was under the necessity of cutting in the last action - We also
supplicd the Nautilus with three gang casks of water.
This forenoon Licutt Robinson of the Constitution was discharged
on promotion to the command of the U. S. Schooner Enterprize Mr Ridgelp Midshipman is also promoted to a Lieutenancy on board
the U. S. Schooner hTautdusNoon light brcczes from E b N. A heavy contracted horizon The land in Sight from the Mast head bearing by compass S E b S
which we suppose to bc Tripoly.
Signals made as follo~vs.
A. hl. a t 6 Syren tow7 turo gun boats.
63 - Squadron to close
9 - Squadron come within hail
9+ - Q
, U Captains
Latitude observed 33' 07' North
[LC.

EPP, Log Constitution, 1803-1804.1

Extract from journal kept by Purser John Darby, U. S. Bavy, on board U. S. S.
John Adam, Master Commandant Isaac Chauncey, U. S. Navy, commanding,
Thursday, 6 September 1804

At half past 8 this morning the commodore made the Signal to kee
within Hail a t $ past. 8 the commodore made the signal for a 1
Captains to repair on board. a t 3 past 10 the Captain went on board
the Constitution a t 3lcridinn Moderate breezes - a t 3 past 12 the
captain returned from on board the commodore a t 4 ast 1 P. M.
one of the Prizc Gun boats came a long side with two grass T n w ~ t y
four Pounders. hoisted them in a t 4 made the Signal to the commodore of being rcady to proceed on service shortly after the commodore made the signal for all Captains to repair on board. a t -$
past 4 P M Capt. Chuuncey went on board the commodore. a t 6.
the Town of Tripoli bore S by E. distance 4 Leagues. a t 3 past 6
the commodore made the signal for us to make the best of our way
to our intended Port. K e hare in com any the iVadalus S?yren
Enterprize with 8 Gun boats $ 2 Bumbar s. bound for Syracuse. -

f

B

[ K D A original.

Bliss Camilla S. McCon11ell.1

Extract from journal of Midshipman F. Cornelius deEreEt, U. 6. Navy, in U. 6. Brig
Siren of 18 guns, Master Commandant Charles Stewart, U. S. Nary, commanding,
Thursday, 6 September 1804

(Standing of[f] & on shore with the Squadron. - )
Light brcezes & pleasant. At 3 past Meridian furl'd flying jib At 4 past 4 backd the main top sail $ s olie the Enterprize. At
pr~st6 a signal from the Commodore, to c ose in the prescnt order, to
prevent seperation a t night. At 7 hoisted in the barge 6. launch.
past 7 fill'd away & made sail off shore htidnight light, airs & cloudy. 3 past 4 made all sail. 3 past 8 a
signal for all Commanders to repair on board the Commodores ship. At 11 bacli'd the main top sail. Meridian light airs & pleasant Latt; Ohs: 33' 17' N

f

[NDA.]

+

