NAVAL OPERATIONS
FROM SEPTEMBER 7, 1804 THROUGH APRIL 1805

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS
To Sir Alexander John Ball, Governor of Malta, from Captain Samuel Barron,
U. 6. Navy

U STATES
SHIP President
Malta 7 . Sep. 1804
SIR,I regret extremely that the circumstance of my having spoken
a Barbary cruiser on my passage from Gibraltar bars the pleasure
of offering you my personal respects previously to leaving this port;
at the same time I feel a pleasure in expressing a grateful sentiment
for the hospitality and tenders of friendly offices you have manifested I cannot, Sir, give you any interesting intelligence from America;
nor any thing European so late as you will have received through
more distinct channels - But a circumstance occurred on the
passage which cannot be altogether uninteresting to a naval Commander; as it may, perhaps, account for some of the innumerable
dangers marked on the charts of the Mediterranean On the 24. ult. at past 3. p.m. the W. point of Almaria bay bearing
N. about six leagues distant, and the small Island of Alboran S.
about eleven leagues - the ships President and Constellation sailing
in Company, with a light westerly wind and uncommonly smoth
sea, having about three knots way, were alarmed by a violent shock
like striking on an uneven, rocky bottom, which at every stroke seemed
to lift & let fall the ship about one foot - We were then at dinner
in the cabbin; and, supposing the ship aground, ran immediately
upon deck; but we discovered no appearance of a shoal, nor had
the ship lost her way - At the same instant the people of the
cutter, which was towing a stern, cried out in great consternation,
that The boat had struck something!
The weather had been so remarkably h e , Captain Campbell of
the Constellation had visited us, and was still on board - His ship,
being about a mile distance, made signal to speak us - On coming
along side - On coming along side, she reported that she had struck
upon rocks - I t appeared from enquiry, however, that she felt the
same shock, at the same instant, and in the same manner as above
described - I soon spoke a Spanish ship, then a league and an
half distant, whose master informed that he had felt the shock at the
same time At past 8. a.m. the next day, at least five leagues distant from
the place where this shock was felt, both ships, being distant from
each other 1% mile, experienced another similar shock, attended with
a rumbling noise resembling a vessel running over a shoal - The

+

+

2

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1804 TO 1806

continuation of the first shock was about 40 seconds - that of the
second a minute The effect which these singular occurrences seemed to have on the
feelings of the ship's people was also remarkable: the alarm, agitation,
and amazement appeared much greater than would have been created,
I believe, had the ship been actually aground.
(Signed) SAM:BARRON
J. BALL,BART:&c. &c. &c.
His Ex?'Sir ALEXANDER
[H. E. Huntirlgton L&AG, EA 206.1

--

To James Lesnder Cathcart, Leghorn, from Captain Samuel Barron, U. 8. Bevy

MALTASeptr Yth 1804.
DEARSIR Having arrived in those seas with an additional force
to the Squadron here before me I cannot deny myself the pleasure
of addressing you ever grateful for the polite and hospitable attention I experienced a t your house while in Leghorn, 1 hope in the
course of the winter to pay you my personal respects. I have been mortified extremely by the contrary winds which has
lengthen'd our passage in an uncommon degree, it being now two
months since we left the United States, this has compel'd me to call
here for a supply of water, I shall this day proceed with the President
& Constellation for Tripoli but fear the season is too far advanced
to bring the Bashaw to terms before the arrival of the Congress and
Essex which I left a t Gibraltar until the views of the Emperor of
Morocco are ascertain'd in equiping for sea his whole marine force:
this circumstance threatens hostiIity somewhere, & if the commerce
of the United States should be his object great indeed would be the
havock if left unprotected, he has again demanded a free passage for
a vessel loaded with wheat for (as he says) the poor of Tripoli, this
has been refused in the most unequivocal terms, & it is thought that
this will be a pretext for war. I have no news being quarantined
here in consequence of having examined a Tunisian Corsair on my
passage up the mediterranean. - I assure you it will give me pleasure to hear from you, & if I can in any way serve you command me
freely; be so good as to present my respects to MrWathcart & your
charming children & believe me to be with much esteem. [NA. SDA. CL, Tunis, Vol. 2, Part 2, 1803-1806.1
To James Leander Cathcart, Leghorn, from William Eaton, U. 6. Navy Agent for
the Barbary Begencies

MALTAYt@ Septr 1804.
Dr SIR, I am on board the Squadron in Character of Navy Agent
of the United States for the several Barbary Regencies. - but for
the special purpose of reviving & giving effect to the plan of operation
formed yourself & me in conjunction with Hamet Bashaw. - I
candidly confess I entertained an individual wish that we should
find affairs a t Tunis in such a situation as to afford me an opportunity
of gratifying a righteous resentment against that Regency. - But
that Bashaw is as wise as wicked; & times his measures by too certain
a calculation to commit himself; there is now no prospect that he
will provoke chastisement while the means of giving it himself are SG
convenient. - I regret that he could not be prevailed on to accredit

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

3

you a t his court, and more particularly since I have taken an agency
in an affair of enterprize which could be materially assisted by your
light .
Morris is dismissed the service. - Murray is supported by a
mighty phalanx of mighty friends; but they have wisdom enough to
keep him out of sight. He ought to have been cashiered for disobedience of orders. - During the storm which has broken around
me, I have suffered a wreck of fortune; but don't know that my
reputation bears any marks of the shafts which were aimed a t it. I
have certainly had the gratification to see all the measures adopted
which you & I had so long recommended concerning the intercourse
of the United States with the Barbaxy Regencies - And I am satisfied
with the expression of the national opinion of my conduct as their
representative at Tunis. - Thus far I have sketched my story. and hope it will induce you to reciprocate yours. With very sincere respects to Mrs Cathcart your lady, believe me
to remain,
[NA. SDA. CL, Tunis, Vol. 2, Part 2, 1803-1806.1
To Lieutenant George W. Reed, U. S. Navy, of U. S. Schooner Nautilw, from Captain
Edward Preble, U. S. Navy

Constitution Off TRIPOLY
Septemr 7th 1804 SIR YOUwill proceed to Syracuse with the U. S. Schooner Nautilw
& two bomb Vessels in tow. On your arrival you will deliver the
letter for Lieutt Comm' Dent which authorizes him to take command
of the Nautilw An exact inventory must be taken of every article on board the
Bomb vessels & the receipts of the Officers & principal gunners in
charge of them taken for the same & lodged with Mr Dyson.
[LC. EPP, Order Book, M a y 1803-June 1805.1
Extract from journal of Surgeon Jonathan Cowdery, U. S. Navy, 7 September 1804

John M'Donah died of a consumption, with which he had long
been ill.
[LC. Rare Books, American Captives i n Tripoli or Dr. Cowdery's Journal,
Boston, 1806.1

Extract from journal of U. S. Brig Argus. Master Commandant I ~ a a Bull,
c
U. 6. Navy.
commanding, Friday, 7 September 1804

Laying too [off Tripoli] at 3 PM took the Officers and men out of
gunboat NP 3 & 7 with their arms &" and cast off Gunboat No 3
At 6 the Commodore made Sig! NQ805 the John Adams, Syren, Nautilus
and Enterprize sailed for Syracuse with the Gun and bomb Vessels in
tow Cap' Hull came on board from the Commodore
[NDA photostat.]
Extract from Memorandum Book of Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Navy, on board
U. 6 . Frigate Constitution. 7 September 1804

Gun boats sailed for Syracuse.
[LC original.]

4

N A V A L O P E R A T I O N S F R O M 1804 T O 1806

Extract from log book kept by Sailing Master Nathaniel Baraden, U. S. Navy, on
board U. 6. Frigate Comlitufion, Friday, 7 September 1804

Moderate breezes from N E - We are laying by with the Squadron in Company 5 leagues N W b N from Tripoly.
The two brass guns which, on Wednesday last, we took out of the
two Tripoline boats were, this afternoon transported to the J. Adams.
Employed with the Squadron till sundown in receiving the remainder
of the Military Stores from the Gun boat & Bombards
At 69 P.M. Tripoly bore by compass S E. 5 leagues.
Parted company for Saragosa, the J.Adams, Cap$Chauncey Syren
Cap1 Stewart, The Enterprize Lieutt Robinson, & the Nautilus Lieutt
Reid - The Nautilus on her arrival at Saragosa, will be commanded
by Cap.; Dent of the Scourge. Our light Gun boats & two Bombards
went m t h the above vessels Rec'd from the Syren 452 Gallmum in 4 puncheons On Wednesday
last we supplied the Enterprize with a kedge marked 4C. - 3Q. 22 lb. - Supplied the Nautilus with a 7 Inch Hawser, half worn,
120 fath"
Offthe Spye Glasses supplied the Gun boats & Bombards two have
been lost overboard, two blown up & One broken. From our Evening
bearings till day light, we continued working to windward under
Easy Sail with moderate breezes from E S E We have now in company the Argus & V i x e n only.
At 6 A. M. made all plain sail for the coast with fresh breezes from
S E. - A t 10 A. M. we saw the Town of Tripoly bearing by compass
South As we drew in with the land the wind veered to the E. Continued
standing in for Tripoly till noon when we tacked to the Northg,
Tripoly bearing S W b S, 4 miles Argus & V i x e n in company. Employed this forenoon re-stationing the Officers & Seamen who
were attached to the Of£icers & Gun boats Water on hand - 53 leagurs & 27 Butts which contain about
17,000 Galle [LC. EPP, Log Constitution, 1803-1804.1
Extract from journal kept by Purser John Darby, U. 6. Navy, on board U. 6. 6.
John Adams, Master Commandant Isaac Chauncey, U. 6. Navy, commanding,
Friday, 7 September 1804

We are now bound for Syracuse & have three Gun boats in tow.
the Brig Syren. Schooner Enterprize and Nautalus has has 6 Gun
boats & 2 Bumbards in tow. We learn that we are to proceed to
Cyracuse deliver up the Gun boats & Bumbards which we borrowed
from the King of Na les and are to proceed from there to Malta and
there wait the arriva of Commodore Barron and in case he shoud not
arrive in some short time. the further orders of Commodore Preble
we have left off Tripoli the Constitution Brig Argus & Schooner Vixon.
it is said they intend to continue the Blockade untill they have some
news of commodore Barron or as lon as the season of the year will
permit them to remain in saifty. - $he Bumbardment & attack by
Gun boats being entirely e v e n over for this season i t being considered
not safe for them to remam ofIf] the station any longer.

P

[NDA original.

Miss Camilla S. McConnell.]

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

5

Extract from journal of Xdshipman F. Corneliur deKrafft, U. S. Bavy, in U. S. Brig
Siren of 18 guns, Master Commandant Charles Stewart, U. 8. Bavy, commanding,
Friday, 7 September 1804

(On a assage from Tripoli to Syracuse with gun boats &c.)
Fresh reezes from N Ed & pleasant lying bye with the squadron.
At 3 took gun boat NQ3 in tow, At 4 took one of the Prize gun boats
in tow. 3 past 6 wore ship & made sail, Sunset Tripoli bore S S E 4
leagues.
Midnight light breezes & pleast At 6 made all drawing sail, the
Nautilus, Enterprize, J n ? Adams & gunboats in company Latt Obs: 33" 56' N.

g

NDA.]
Extract from journal of U. S. Brig Argus. Master Commandant Isaac Hull, U. S. Navy,
commanding, Saturday, 8 September 1804

[Off Tripoli] the Commodore and Vixen to leward
[NDA photostat.]

Extract from log book kept by Sailing Xaster Nathaniel Haraden, U. S. Navy, on
board U. S. Frigate Conslilulion. Saturday, 8 September 1804

Moderate Breezes from EbN - Cruizing off Tripoly - Argus &
Vixen in company At 1 P. M. we brought to, & sent a boat to the Vixen By two fresh
Breezes - double reefed the Topsails and down Royal Yards The wind was fresh all the afternoon Tacked as necessary to hold our own & keep Tripoly in sight Employed this afternoon in quartering the ship's company & clearing away the birth deck, which has been necessarily lumbered during
the operations against Tripoly At sun set Tripoly bore SbW+ W 4 leagues; We stood in till 8 in the
evening when we tacked to the Northward - Sounded in Stays 39
fath? At 8: P.M. in third reef in the To~sailsWe stood off till 6 A. M, 20 miles p& log, heading N N E & at
times N E b E.
At 64 A. M. we tacked to the Southd - Out all reefs except one
in each topsail & set top gall! sails - By 9 A. M. we saw Tripoly bearingS+EStood in for Tripoly till noon when we tacked to the Northw*,
Tripoly bearing S E. 4 leagues, Wind fresh from N E b E - In top
gall$sails & double reefed the Topsails The Gunner with his crew employed surveying his stores - He
reports, Expended in the actions with the Tripoline Batteries, Gun
boats & Gallies 641 Round Shot - 573 Strand of Grape & Cannister
& 30 double head Shot - of powder, 4028 lb - The double head
was Gred when we were within musket shot of the Bashaw's Castle,
mole head, and half moon batteries - The Cannister was fired when
we were within two cables length of 19 of the Enemy's boats & three
gallies -

+

(LC. E P P Log Constitution, 1803-1804.

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1804 TO 1805

6

Extract from journal kept by Purser John Dorby, U. 8. Navy, on board U. S. S.
John A d m . Master Commandant Isaac Chauncey, U. S. Navy, commanding,
Saturday, 8 September 1804

At. 6. Oclock this morning the breeze very light and Variable and so
much ahead as not to be able to lay our course. all the squadron in
sight this morning at Meridian light air and pleasant the Sven
Nautulus & Enterprize in company - Nothing particular Occured
this day. (NDA original. Miss Camilla S. McConnell. J
To Robert Montgomery, U. 15. Consul, Alicante, from Tobias Lear, U. S. Consul
General, Algiers

ALGIERS
Septf gt@1804

*

%

*

*

*

*

*

On the first of Septr arrived here an English Frigate, the Narcistws,
CaptQonnelly, from Lord Nelson, with a letter to the Dey, which,
it is said, was written in a friendly Stile; saying that a New Consul wd
be sent out, as soon as peace shg take place between France & Engg;
but demanding the release of all the Maltiese, taken under British
protections. - This was, however, not complied with; but no altercation took place. The Ship recd a supply of Stock &? and sailed it is
said for London. - I did not see the Commander; being at m
Garden on his arrival, and not expecting him to Sail so soon as he di$
which was the third day after his arrival, when I had gone to town to
see him. - We have various reports of the Marabout, some say he is
powerfull; others that he has retired to the Mountains, with few
followers. - I t is Certain, however, that the land communication
between this &- Tunis, has been stop'd for almost two months, By my last letters from Tunis, the Bey was fitting out all his
Cruizers; but our Charge dlAffaires Expresses no apprehensions of a
rupture with us while we are so strong in this sea as we are at present. - I enclose the copy of a letter from CaptQBainbridge of the
loth of July, which will shew his situation at that time, as well as that
of his unfortunate Companions. I have not heared from our Squadron since I wrote you last. I
presume, ere this, they have commenced their Operations against
Tripoli; and I am in daily expectation of the arrival of a Frigate from
them to take me up.
I trust our differences with Spain will be amicably settled. A
rupture with the U States would be inevitably followed by the loss
of the Floridas, and their Mexican Territories; not more from the
situation and disposition of our Citizens, than from the opportunity
it would give her Subjects to become indipendant
I shalI take the liberty to ask you to forward by the Courier, or
any Other Vessel, 4 or 5,000, good Corks which are an article not to
he purchased here at present? The Bill of them shall be paid at
Sight. Wheat is at the extravagant price of 2$ Dollbnd Barley one Dollar.
Meats & Vegetables are reasonable.
P. S. I take the liberty to enclose a letter for our friend h4r Kirkpatrick, and one for Mons' Talleyrand Ministre des relations exterieures a Paris, from the Consul here, respecting CaptQBainbridge. [Stephen Decatur Col. NDA photostat, Book A.]

W D S WITH BARBARY POWERS

7

Extract from journal of Surgeon Jonathan Cowdery, U. 8. Nary, Q September 1804

The Bashaw took me with him, and his suit to his country seat
where we spent the most of the day. About 5 o'clock P. M. we went
to see the great Marabewt, or Mahometan priest, in whom the Bashaw
had great faith, and thought he could foretel events. It was said by
the Turks, that he foretold the stranding and capture of the Philadelphia; and that he got offended with the Bashaw and caused and
foretold her being burnt. But I had heard nothing of these mysteries
until a little previous to this. He now said that the commodore's
ship, the Constitution, would never return to America; that she would
either be blown up, or run on shore; and that the Bashaw would have
success in his warfare with America.
[LC. Rare Books, American Captives in Tripoli or Dr. Cowdery's Journal,
Boston, 1806.1
Extract from journal of U.S. Brig Argw. Master Commandant Isaac Hull,U. 6. Navy.
commanding, Sunday, 9 September 1804

At

3 past the Commodore made Sig! 792 bore away and

made Sail

[NDA photostat.]
Extract from log book kept by Sailing Master Nathaniel Haraden, U. 6. Mavy, on
board U. 6. Frigate Consfitution.Sunday, 9 September 1804

Fresh breezes from ENE. Cruizing off Tripoly - Argus & Vixen
in company.
Fresh breezes all the afternoon. Tacked as necessary to keep
Tripoly in sight By 5 P. M. we had three reefs in each topsail - Our principal
object is to keep up a Strict Blockade. In the day time we extend
the Argus to the Eastwq & Vixen to the Westward to the very extreme
of signal distance. In the close of the Evening they are called in pr
Signal.
At 63 P. M. tacked off shore for the night - Tripoly bears
S S W, 4 leagues By 1 A. M. we had stood off 22 miles under easy sail heading
NNW & NNE - At 1: A. M. tacked to S E b E winds moderate
from N E b N.
By day light the wind [weather] became overcast & cloudy wind
N N E - Out all reefs except one in Each topsail and set top gall.
Sails.
Continued on a wind to the E S E till 8 A. M. at which time the
Weather had cleared away with pleasant breezes from N b W.
At 84 A. M. bore up to the Southq & set Royals in order to make
the Town of Tripoly which we ran for till noon when we answered
the Argus Signals for strange sails in the N E, Tripoly, a t this time
S W b S 5 leagues.
Hauled on a wind, tacked towards the Argus & gave chase under
all plain Sail.
As the Haze cleared away we saw two of the Strange Sail which are
running for us.
Noon Moderate Breezes from N b E.
Surgeons Report. 10 sick, 7 c o n v " ~ ~

8

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1804 TO 1805

This forenoon the ships company were cleaned & mustered in
divisions Latitude Observed 33' 10' N.
[LC. EPP. Log Constitution, 1803-1804.)
Extract from journal kept by Pureer John Derby, O. S. l a v y , on board U. 6. 8.
John Adanu, Master Commandant Isaac Chauncey, U. S. Navy, commanding,
Sunday, 9 September 1804

We have this morning a perfect calm. not a breath of air sturing
and very warm. a t Meridian a light breeze a t 3. P. M. the Brig
Syren made the signal to speak us. hauled up the courses backed the
Main Topsail. at 4 the Syrens boat came along side at i past 4
Capt Chauncey went on board the Brig Syren in the Gig - a t 7 the
Captain returned a t Midnight clear & pleasant with moderate Breezes.
INDA originsl. Miss Camills S. McConnell.]
Extract from journal of Midshipman F. Cornelius deKrafft, U. S. Navy, in U. S. Brig
Siren of 18 guns, Master Commandant Charles Stewart, U.6. Navy, commanding,
Sunday, 9 September 1804
(On a passage from Tripoli to Syracuse with gun boats &c.)

Light airs & variable, our consort all in sight. At 2 made a signal
for the J. Adums to heave too. At 3 shorten'd sail & back'd the main
top sail. 4 past 3 sent the barge on board the J. Adums. At 5 fill'd
away & made sail. At 8 back'd the main to mil the barge return'd
with bread. ?past
j
8 hoisted in the barge & l'd away At 11 brac'd
about the yards, - Midnight moderate breezes & pleas: At 1 tack'd
ship Meridian fresh breezes & pleasant, the Consort all in sight Latt: Obs: 34' 42' N.

8

[NDA.]

[ l o September 18041
U. 6. Squadron in the Mediterranean
[RBsurnB, presumably prepared in Navy Department about 1806 or 1807, concerning the U. S. Squadron in the Mediterranean.]

THESQUADRON
OF COMMODORE
SAM!BARRON:
On the Capture of the Philadelphia, Congress passed Act of 25th
March 1804. - The President was authorized to employ such of the
armed vessels as he might deem requisite for protecting the Commerce
and Seamen of the United States and for carrying on warlike operations against the Regency of Tripoli, and any other of the Barbary
Powers which might commit hostilities against the United States.
Whereupon the President directed to be put in Commission, to be
under the Command of Commre S. Barron, the following Vessels,
Viz t
President
Congress
Essex
ConsteUation
J . Adums - Store Ship, armed en Flute.
The President further directed that the United States' Vessels of
War in the Mediterranean under Commodore Preble, consisting of,

WARS WITH BARBARY POTtTERS

9

Condibution, Siren Brig, Argus Brig, Vben Schooner, Nautilus
Schooner, Enterprize Schooner, should be under the Command of
Commodore Samuel Barron.
On the 26 June 1804 the John Adam left the Capes and on the
5 July was followed by the Squadron which appeared off Tripoli the
beginning of September. On the lot@Commodore PrebIe resigned to
Comr"mon
the Command of the joint Squadron and returned to
the United States in the John Aakms. The Season being too far advanced for another attack on Tripoli
the Squadron was detached diffe~entways to protect our Commerce.
The Government having received information of the probable advantages of a co-operation with Hamet the ExBashaw of Tripoli
appointed William Eaton Esqr Agent for the Barbary Powers, to be
under the orders of Commodore Barron. M! Eaton took passage for
the Mediterranean on board the P~esident,& in Novr Sailed for Alexandria in Egypt in search of Hamet, who had joined the fortunes of
the Beys. Having proved successful in discovering & extricating the
ExBashaw from Egypt, M' Eaton with Lt OBannon of the Marines,
M i d s w a n n & Peck and some few other Americans, traversed the
Deserts of Lybia and on 15 Ap! [1805] arrived a t Bomba a Town about
120 Miles to the Eastward of the East Cape of the Gulf of Sidra and
there made a stand for the purpose of making arrangements with
the Squadron and collecting the Adherents of Hamet. Having collected 500 Arabs, Mr Eaton with 10 Marines, a Company of Greek
Christians, Lieu! OBannon $ Mids? Mann advanced with Hamet and
on 27 April 1805 attacked and took, in conjunction with the Argus,
LVaut&s, and Horneb, the Town of Derne in the Province of the same
Name. In this action M' Eaton was shot through the wrist, & Lt
OBannon & M: Mann planted the American Colours on the Walls.
Jussuf the Reigning Bashaw of Tripoli having received Information
of Mr Eston's movements dispatched a force against him which
arriving after the surrender of Derne, attacked & drove the Troops
of Hamet posted before the place but were finally repulsed from works
thrown up by the Americans. Several other Skirmishes took place
alike unfortunate to the Tripolitrtns. M' Eaton and his party were
then preparing to advance to Bengazi, but the Bashaw alarmed a t
the ill fortune of his Arms, threatened by the Squadron in front, and
dreading the progress of Mr Eaton, made overtures of peace through
the Spanish Consul a t Tripoli.
On the 226 May 1805 Commodore Barron resigned to Cspt John
Rodgers the Command of the S uadron, his I11 Health having incapacitated him from the duties the Station.
In May, the Government dispatched to the support of the Squadron,
Gun Boats h T P 2?3, 4, 5? 6, 7 , 8 , 9, & 10, which were soon followed by
the Spitfire and Vengeance, Bomb-Ketches.
The overtures of Peace having been received from the Bashaw of
Tripoli, Consul General Lear was sent from Malta to Tripoli, to
adjust the terms of pacScation: After a short time spent in discussion, Mr Lear offered his ultlrnatum which was accepted by the
Bashaw and on the 3 6 June 1805, PEACE
was made and signed. The
following are the preliminary articles,

01

WSL

I. There shall be a firm and issting Peace upon Principles of reciprocal
advantage.
11. The Exchange of Prisoners, man for man, and the payment of Sixty
thousand dollars to Tripoli for the balance in their hands.

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1804 TO 1805

10

111. The evacuation of Derne by the Americans, and their using all means
in their power to persuade Hamet to withdraw from the Territo of the
Bashaw, in this case the Bashaw to give up the wife and Children of f;Psmet.

Signed by TOBIASLEAR.&
J u s s u ~- BASHAW.
These Articles being carried into effect, the Frigate President,
Cap$Ja! Barron, havin Cornr?Barron on board sailed for the United
States and the
of the Squadron in the Be@ of Jul Rendezvoused at Syracuse under the command of Corns?John Ro gem.

erns sin fa

B

[Resuma, r u m a b l y prepared in Navy Department about 1806 or 1807, concernlng the . 8. Frigate President, 2 April 1804 to 22 September 1805.1

THEFRIGATE
President:
Put in Commission - - - - - - - - - - 2: A ril 1804.
"
Sailed from Washington- -- - - . 25'"~~
4;
Capes- - - - - - - - 5tQJuly "
Arrived a t Gibraltar- - - - - - - - - 12th August "
Sailed from Gibraltar - - - - - - - - 15$@ " "
Arrived a t Malta-- - - - - - - - - - - 5 Sept' "
Off Tripoli till 24th -Syracuse 28 Sept' Off Tripoli with the Vken
27 Novr Left the station Dec' her Fore Mast being defective.
Syracuse 31 Jan? 1805. Part of Feb? & March cruised to the Eastward betwixt Breganzi & Tripoli. Returned about 1 April.
CH
Tripoli with the Constitution21 April. Malta 2St@- OfE Tripoli with
the Constitution 6 May. & with the Essex 26th - May 3Ot@ Caps
James Barron from the &sex took Command. In Malta Harbour
June 3rd. Syracuse 7*@to July 7 - Sailed for the United States
July 13. from Malts. Arrived at Gibraltar 27: Sailed August 3e Arrived in Hampton Roads Septr 11 - Sailed 15 - Arrived in the
Eastern Branch Sept: 22'J 1805 and was Dismantled & paid off immediately. OFFICERS
WHO RETURNED AS PASBENGERS
IN THE PresidentCOM'?S. Barron
MARINEOFFICERS.
CAPSWmBainbridge
CAP%
Hall
LIEUT?
LIEUT~
Greenleaf
Jacob Jones
Osborne
Howard. D. T. Patterson
Of the late Phila?
J a nBiddle
Frigate. Jaq Gibbon
Ben: F. Read
SIoss H. Grenell
Tho? 0.Anderson
J. Blakeley
<(

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS
PURSERSpence
B
T.S GQ
~ Hod~e
- GUN^ kd~tefhenson
Sl Mr Joe Douglass
S. MATESCowdery &
N4 Harwood
M~~sQRenshaw
W" Cutbush
W. Wormeley
R "amble
Ss Mr M. Dove
CARPT~
Moore
GUNNER
Prime.

11

I'
Of the late Frigate
Philadelphia.

[RBsumB, presumably prepared in Navy Department about 1806 or 1807, concerning the U. S. Frigate Congress, Captain John Rodgers, U. S. Navy, commanding; 2 April 1804 to 9 November 1804.1

THEFRIGATE
Congress:
Put in Commission- - - - - - - - - - - - 2 : April 1804.
Sailed from Washington- - - - - - - - 21 : May 6"L
Capes-..-- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 5: July
Arrived a t Gibraltar- - - - - - - - - - - 12: Augt "
Ordered by Commodore Barron to watch the conduct of the Ships
of War of the Emperor of Morocco, and if appearances were not
suspicious, to repair off the Coast of Tripoli. The Congress accordingly appeared before Salle and other Moorish Ports on the Ocean
and not finding indications of hostility, returned to Gibraltar Bay.
Sailed from Gibraltar- - - - - - 2: Sepr Arrived at Syracuse abt
Sepr 18 - & repaired off the Coast of Tripoli. Relieved by the
Constellation & repaired to Syracuse & there taken Command of by
Capt Stephen Decatur Novr 9 , 1804. [RBsumB, presumably prepared in Xavy Department about 1806 or 1807,
concerning the U. S. Frigate Essez, Captain James Barron, U. S. Navy, commanding; 2 April 1804 to 22 August 18051

THEFRIGATE
Essex . .
Put in Commission- - - - - - - - - - - - 2: April 1804
Sailed from Washington- - - - - - - - 27: May "
Capes - - - - - - - - - - - - - 5 : July "
Arrived at Gibraltar- - - - - - - - - - - 13 Augt "
Ordered by Commodore Barron to remain and watch the Conduct
of the Vessels of War of the Emperor of Morocco. - C[a]diz Bay 19
Se$ - Tagus River 29" - Sailed abt 18" Octr arrived at Syracuse
30 . Malta 7 Feb? 1805. Sailed from Syracuse for Venice 9 March.
Sailed May 2* Malta 1 2 ~ Sailed
~
25tb - off Tripoli
Trieste 20'"
to 11 June then at Syracuse. Sailed 13th - Tunis Bay lgtQ Sailed 2 2 d Syracuse 26th. July 2 d M . Cmdt Ch? Stewart took
Command. Sailed for Tunis Bay in Company with the Squadron
14th - Malta 16t@- Sailed 24th - Off Tunis Aug". to 22*. During
this interval the Bey of Tunis agreed to send an Ambassador to the
United States. Augt 224 M. C. Stewart exchanged Ships with Cap'
H. G. Campbell of the ConsteUation.
16

11

12

-

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 180.4 TO 1805

[RBsume, presumably prepared in Navy Department about 1806 or 1807,
concerning the U. S. Frigate Constellation, Captain Hugh G. Campbell, U. S.
Navy, commanding; 2 April 1804 to 29 November 18051

THEFRIGATE
Constellation . .
Put in Commission- - - - - - - - - - - - 2 April 1804
Sailed from Washington- - - - - - - - 12 June "
11
1c
Capes- - - - - - - - - - - - - 5 July "
Arrived at Gibraltar- - - - - - - - - - - 12 Augt "
Sailed from Gibraltar- - - - - - - - - - 15 "
"
Arrived at Malta - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 5 Septr "
Off Tripoli 28th. -At Malta abt 20 Octr Sent to Tunis Bay Latter
part of OctQ. Returned about 1 Decr Malta 7 Peb? 1805. I n Comany with the Nautilus in vicinity of Tunis Bay between 7 Feb? &
fatter part of same month. From 28 Feb? to the b e April, off
Tripoli. Returned to Syracuse middle of April to stop a Leak. Sailed
Off Cape Bon 20t9 - Off
MAY10 - M d t a llt+- Sailed
receiving
Tunis 21 - Tunis Bay 2 2 U a i l e d 3 1 - Tripoli 5 JUNE
a Part of the Crew of the late Frigate Philadelphia. - Derne 12th for the purpose of bringing off the ExBashaw Hamet & Mr Eaton
who had taken that place by Assault but who by the Treaty with
Jussuf Bashaw were to abandon it. Sailed from Derne 14~"
Syracuse 22d - During the time the Constelbtion went to Syracuse in
Apt until 22d she made from 6 to 8 & 10 Inches water per hour. Sailed
JULY
14t+- Malta 16tb - Sailed 236 - in company with the S uad224 - During this intervi the
ron. Tunis Bay 30tQ- to AUGUST
Bey of Tunis agreed to send an Ambassador to U States to adjust all
differences being compelled to this measure by the Squadron which
blocked up the Bay. On 22? August Cap! Campbell exchanged Commands with M. Cmdt C h e t e w a r t of the Essex. Sailed from Tunis
Bay 23d Augt Malta 24 - Sailed 26th - 2gt@Ship made 2 feet water
per hour. Off Pantelaria 30t+- In sight of Alicant S E P8~- Malaga
for water 1 4 ~ 9- Sailed 15 - Gibraltar Bay 17tQ- Sailed 21" Batteries at Cabaretta Point fired at the Ship -Cape Henry Novr 9 Off St Mary's lot@ Navy Yard Washington 29 Novr [I8051
Laid up in Ordinary

"

[Rbsumk, presumably prepared in Navy Department about 1806 or 1807,
concerning the U. S. Frigate John Adams, Lieutenant Isaac Chauncey, U. S.
Navy, commanding; 8 March 1804 to 26 February 18051

-

THEFRIGATE
John Adums
8 March 1804 Put in Commission-, , - -- _ - -- "
Sailed from Washington - - - - - - - - 23 May
1c
tt
Capes- - - - - - - - - - - - - 26 June
"
"
Arrived at Gibraltar- - - - - - - - - - - 22 July
14
ti
Malta, - -,
- - - - - - - - - - 4 Augt " and Off Tripoli 7t4Continued off Tripoli until abt 5 Sepr. Then repaired to Syracuse
and anived there 15 Sep'. Left Syracuse Oct' 9. & arrived at Malta
10: - Returned to Syracuse with Preble on Board 4 Nov' Sailed on
the 15, for Messina: Arrived on 18: - Sailed 21gt for Palermo: Arrived
28 - Sailed for Naples l r t Deck Arrived Gt\ Sailed for Gibraltar
23 Dec': Arrived 5 Jan?: [18]05: Sailed 8 January for the United
States: Arrived a t New York 26 Feb? 1805.
[NDA. Ships' Service, 1801-1809.1

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

13

To Captain Samuel Barron, U. S. Navy, from Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Navy

Constitution Off TRIPOLY
Septemr 10fh1804
SIR I am honored with a letter from the Secretary of the Navy
dated the 22d May, notifying me that you have been sent into these
seas to supersede me in the command of the U. S. Squadron - I have
therefore to request your permission to return to the United States
in such ship as you may think proper to allow me for that purpose The State & condition of this ship is such as to make it necessary
that she should go into Port to be thoroughly recaulked & her rigging
refitted - This ought to be done as soon as possible: in her present
situation she ought not to be exposed to the Hazard of a heavy gale
of wind, which we have.good reason soon to expect If not inconsistent wlth your plans of operation I wish your permission to go to Messina, Syracuse & Malta in her, to settle the
accounts of the Squadron & deposit the military stores loaned by the
Neapolitan Government - I t will also be necessary that I visit
Palermo & Naples in the Ship in which I return home to settle the
accounts of the Squadron at those places If you will please to appoint an officer to command this Ship, the
arrangements for delivering her up can be made either a t .Syracuse,
Messina or Malta & in the mean time the necessary repam can be
made about the Hull & rigging - I wish you health, Success &
Honor
& am with sentiments of Esteem & respect
Sir Your Most obedt Hb!" Servt
(Signed) EDWARD
PREBLE
Commodore SAMUEL
BARRON
Commander of & G a
[LC. EPP, LB, April-Nov. 1804.1
To Captain William Bainbridge, U. S. Navy, from George Davis, U. 6. Charge
d'Affaires, Tunis

TUNISSep. lOVh 1804 DEARSIR, I had this pleasure on the 6'h ult. enclosing a Duplicate
of the 16s" Jul , by a Spanish Vessel bearing my Passport, and
presumed that tgey have come safe to hand. - All the Consuls here,
have recq letters from Tripoli but myself; and am still ignorant
whether my communication of the 23q June with enclosures was
received: I t is more than two months, since I have been favored
with a line from Col. Lear.
Letters from America, give no intelligence, which can interest you;
but refer me to others in the Squadron. - The movements of
Europe, are still unknown to us; and can only repeat my best wishes
for your health and tranquillity.

Sympathetic ink [Written in lime juice.]
Write me I pray you without delay; and if you have suffered any
material change in your situation request "Your friend" N. to send
me a Courier express. - I am still ignorant as to the decision of
Govt with respect to yourselves. Letters from two or three Public
Officers,imagine the war will be of some duration; I know not on what
basis, their opinions are founded - if so, the arangement already
spoken of, should be immediately made - I conceived i t as the most

14

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 180.4 TO 1805

-

necessary measure, that can be taken - all is quiet with me here
no news of, or from M' Russel - write me I pray you as speedily as
possible, and still consider me,
Yr Sincere friend
G . D.
Capt. wmBAINBRIDGE,
T?-ipoli [ N Y H S . Geo. Davis LB, Vol. 1.1

Extract from journal of U.S. Brig Argus, l a s t e r Commandant Isaac Hull,U. S. Eavy.
commanding, Monday, 10 September 1804

A t 2 PM the U. S frigates President and Constellation arrived hove
to and spoke Commodore Barron shortened sail to Keep Company
found that we Could Spare the Commodore all Staysails studding
sails and Royals at 3 past 9 filled away Light airs through the night from NE the Squadron in Company
at 7 the Comrnod"ade
Sigl N ? 571 wore and stood before the wind
Cap*Hull went on board the Commodore and returned at 9 [KDA photostat.]
Extract from Memorandum Book of Captain Edward Preble, U. 6. Navy, on board
U. S. Rigate Conrfilution. 10 September 1804

C o r n . Barron arrived with the President and Constellalion and
took command.
[LC original.]
Extract from log book kept by Sailing &tester Nathaniel Heraden, U. S. Bevy, on
board U. S. Frigate CoNFitution. Xonday, 10 leptember 1804

Moderate breezes from NbE.
In chase to the NNE of Tripoly - Tacking as necessary to chase
to windward.
At 2 P, M. the Argus exchanged Signals udth the chase At 4 P. M, joined compan [uith] the U. S. Ship President Commodore S: Barron & the onsteUation Cap WampbellCommodore Preble hauled down his broad Pendant & waited on
Commodore Barron Continued laying to till 7 P. M. when CommrWreble came on
board & filled with the Squadron to NWbW.
Sunset Moderate breezes from NNE Tripoly in Sight bearing
SWbS%S. 5 leagues.
Moderate through the night during which we continued standing
to NW & NWbN under easv sail
A t 7 A. M. wore & broughi to with the Squadron four or five leagues
NWbN from Tripoly.
A[t] 8 A. M. Commr"reb1e
waited on Cornmre Barron
Forenoon Moderate breezes veering between N N E & N N W,
with cloudy overcast weather Continued laying by all forenoon, ships head N E. Tripoly in
sight bearing S b E, 4 lea es.
consists of the President, ConstellaOur Squadron now off
tion; A& Vben
[LC.EPP, Log Constitution, 1803-1804.1

B

-

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

16

Extract from journal kept by Purser John Darby, U. S. Navy, on board U. S. S.
John Adams, Master Commandant Isaac Chauncey, U. 6. Navy, commanding,
Monday, 10 September 1804

At 5 this morning pleasant weather the Syren Nautalm and Enterprize in sight a t Meridian moderate breezes & pleasant. a t Midnight
cloudy with a heavy sea [NDA original. Miss Camilla S. McConnell.]
To Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Navy, from Captain Samuel Barron, U. 6. Navy

U. S. FRIGATE
President

OflTripoly - Septem' 11 tQ 1804
S I ~I, cannot withold my acquiescence to your wishes to return to
America; - I have to lament the want of your aid on this station;
but as there is an officer now here to fill up the vacancy & from some
circumstances with which I have become acquainted since my arrival
in the Mediterranean\, I am persuaded your presence will be very
acceptable to the Secretary of the Navy, there being a t present but
few officers of rank in America The Frigate John Adams Capt Chauncey, as soon as she deposits
her stores &$ &$,and is otherwise ready can accomodate you not only
with your passage to America, but you will also please to use this
ship for the purpose of conveying you to Palermo & Naples to settle
the accounts of the Squadron whilst under your command.
The State & condition of the Constitution make i t necessary that
she should go immediately into port to refit -. I conceive i t Hazardous
to risk a gale of wind with her & as the season is particularly dangerous
you will do well to take the first opportunity of going to Port for this
purpose after having called at Malta, Syracuse & Messina to settle
your accounts, & deposit the stores loaned by the Neapolitan
Government.
You will please to give the command of the ship to Cap$ Stephen
Decatur & direct him as soon as she is in readiness for sea to join the
S uadron off Tripoly %Vishingyou a safe arrival after a pleasant passage to your country
& friends, I remain with sentiments of respect & esteem
Sir Yr Mo Obt Hb!"erv'
(Signed) SAM#
BARRON
Commodore EDWARD
PREBLE
U. S. Ship Constitzltion
[LC. EPP, LB, April-Nov. 1804.1
To Captain James Barron, U. S. Navy, commanding U. S. S. Esru, from Same.
Simpson, U. S. Consul, Tangier, Morocco

TANGIER
11 SeptP 1804 COPY
DEARSIR! YOUwill receive by Lieut Woolsey a letter I had prepared before your boat came - I have now to Acknowledge your
favour of this day, and altho' I cannot say the Services are really
necessary longer on this station, still considering the uncertainty
YOU will See by my letter of yesterday we are yet in, on the destination
of the Empereours frigates, I think you will be of my opinion that it
will be extremely proper to ascertain that before you leave us - I
shall hope it may be speedily accomplished to satisfaction and then

16

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1804 TO 1806

you will be able to join the Commodore with the fullest confidence
of that measure meeting his approbation - I t cannot be long I
should suppose ere we shall see one or more of the smaller vessels of
the Squadron this way - if you get up before that happens it will
be very prudent to take measures for its not being known either here
or at Gibraltar
Since I wrote you this morning I have been.assured a person arrived
on Saturday at Tetuan from the Empereur w ~ t hOne hundred & forty
five Thousand dollars to be employed under the direction of Alcayde
Hashash in the purchase of Naval stores for building & equiping
Galleys and other Vessels of War. if this be true its a strong proof of
a sudden determination to augment his Marine, but the whole of the
plan has not yet been developed [Mrs. James S. Barron original.]
Extract from journal of U. S. Brig Argus, Master Commandant Isaac Hull, U. S.
Navy, commanding, Tuesday, 11 September 1804

This day Commences with light airs and pleasant at 2 P, M, hove
too Commodore Barron with all the Captains of the Squadron came
onboard at 4 past 2 they went on board the President set and took
in sail Occas? Tacked when Necessary
At Midnight moderate and Pleasant At 11 AM sent the two 18
Pounders with their apparatus on board the President
At meridian Pleasant laying too Tripoli bearing SWbS
[NDA photostat.]
Extract from log book kept by Sailing Master Nathaniel Hareden, U. S. Navy
on board U. S. Frigate Comtitution. Tuesday, 11 September 1804

Light airs from NNE. Cruizing off Tripoly; the President, Constellation, Argus & Vixen in company.
Commre Barron with the Captains of the Squadron visited the

Constitution -

Wind light and variable from the Northward, all the afternoon At sun set Tripoly bore S W b S nearly 4 leagues. Night moderate
& cloudy with light airs from N E b E. Sounded as necessary.
At 1 A. M. the Vixen parted company for Malta & Saragosa She has orders for the John Adams the Syren, Enterprize & Nautilus
to rejoin the Commodore.
As the wind was light she was in sight at day light. from which
time till day light we had light airs or calms.
Employed setting up the Bobstays & staying the foremast.
Carpenters repairing the Boats - Sail Makers mending the Main
SailNoon light airs from WNW - Tripoli bears SWbS, 4 leagues,
Squadron in company.
Surgeons report 15 sick & 7 convqt Water now remaining 47 leagurs & 25 butts - 14,750 Galle Ship's supposed draft is
ft. in:
Abaft 22 - 7
forward 21
1 -7

[LC. EPP, Log

Difference

Constitution, 1803-1804.

WARS WITH BARBARY P O W E R S

-

17

Extract from journal kept by Purser John Darby, U. S. Navy, on board U. S. 6.
John Admns, Master Commandant Isaac Chauncey, U. 6. Navy, commanding
Tuesday, 11 September 1804

At 6 this morning saw the Island of Malta bearing N by E. distance
8 or 9 Leagues - at Meridian Malta bore North 6 . Leagues.
the Schooner in sight from the mast head to Windwd & the Brig to
Leward. at sunset the N E. point of Malta bore N Distance 5 or 6
leagues the S E. Point N. by W. W. 4 or 5. leagues. the Island
N W. by N N. distance 4 Leagues. -

+

+

NDA original

Miss Camilla S. McConnell.]

Extract from journal of U. S. Brig Argus, Master Commandant Isaac Hull, U. 8.
Navy, commanding, Wednesday, 12 September 1804

This day Commences with light breezes and Clear Pleasant Weather
at 3 past 3 the Cornmod' made Sig! No 571 made all sail by the wind
3 strange sail in sight two were brought too by the Commod%t 4 he
made Sig! NO 276 at 2 past we made Sig! Nq 330 to the Commodore
he made sig! N V 5 4 made sail in chace a t 8 TKd to the N & E the
Chace in sight bearing NNE at 3 past 8 lost sight of her Tacked
Occasv set and took in sail as Necessary light winds inclinable to
Calm through the Night supposed the chace to bear NE of us at 3
past 5 AM saw the Chace bearing north ends fresh breezes all drawing
Sail set the [chase] bore North by Compass Hull down Fleet in Sight
[NDA photostat.]
Extract from Memorandum Book of Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Navy, on board
Frigate Constitulion, 12 September 1804

Captured 2 Greek ships in sight of Tripoly for breach of blockade.
[LC original.]
Extract from log book kept by Sailing Haster NathanieI Haraden, U. S. Navy,
on board U. S. Frigate Constifulion. Wednesday, 12 September 1804

Moderate breezes from NbE, and pleasant-Cruizing in comp? with
the Squadron 7 or 8 miles NNE from Tripoly - At 2 P. M. we gave
chase to three strange sails in the ESE which were running dong the
Coast, in for Tripoly - Continued chasing them till 54 P. M. when
we shortened sail & boarded two of them - The third escaped by
hauling on a wind to the NW -The Argus was ordered to chase her These two vessels are under imperial colours loaded with wheat t we
suppose them bound for Tripoly as we took them in sight of the town
bearing W 4 S - 4 leagues & about 5 miles distant from the Coast Sent officers & men on board them with directions to proceed to
Malta for adjudication - Rec'd 28 Greeks from one & 26 from the
other - Both Ships are armed - On the close of the Evening t h e
Argus was permitted by signal to part company & go in chase Moderate breezes from NE & NbE till Midnight, from which time
till day light calms or light baffling winds veering between NE &
NNW - At 43 A. M. being taken aback from the wind from NbW,
the President & Constitution fell foul of each other - Lt Cha"
Gordon was at this time officer of the Watch - Before we got foul
of each other or were taken aback we were heading NNE with the
wind from NW - the President was standing to the Westwd - The
Constitution fell stem on the Presidents larboard bow - Our damages

18

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1804 TO 1805

are, The flying & standing Jib booms with the Sprit Sail yard carried
away - Our cutwater within the two principal bobstays broken
entirely off & our figure head broken to pieces - Employed all
forenoon in bridling the Bowsprit into the Hawse holes with a 9 & an
8 Inch: Hawser - cut an additional hole in the cutwater for another
bobstay - The President being full & continuing her head way,
paid the Constitution off while we were aback & unable to brace about,
which brought the two ships alongside each other. Our sheet anchor
& her spare anchor hooked each other - I t was a fortunate circumstance for the P~esidentthat the anchors hung the ships otherwise she must have lost her lower yards - Her sails being full &
ours aback it was impossible to clear the ships & save the lower yards
by any other method than running a Spring Hawser from her lee bow
to our quarter deck capstem which we hove tawt, & a bow fast from
ship to ship - After the Head way became sufficient to give effect
to the rudder we cast off the Bow fast & cleared without farther
damage The Argus & her chase were in sight from the Mast head aU forenoon - The Consfellationwas ordered pr signal to chase and keep
the Argus in sight Forenoon - fresh breezes from NNW.
Noon the land to the E. of Tripoly in sight from the Mast head,
bearing S. nearly 8 Leagues - Tripoly we suppose to bear S W 12
Leagues.
The President & two Greek prizes in company - The Consfellation & Argus in sight from the Top in chase to the Westward.
Latitude observed 33' 19' N.
[LC. EPP, Log Constitution, 1803-1804.1
Extract from log, presumably of IT. 8. Frigate Comlitution. Wednesday,
12 September 1804

Moderate breezes from N b E with pleasant weather - We are
cruising off Tripoli - The President, Constellation and A r . p in
company - 7 or 8 miles N E b N from Tripoli - At 2 P M gave
chase to three strange sail in the E S E which were running along the
Shore in for Tripoli - Continued the chase till 5 P M when we
shortened sail & boarded two of them - The third escaped by haulling
on a wind to the N W - The Argus was ordered to chase her. These
two Ships are under Greek colours - loaded with wheat - and we
suppose them bound for Tripoli as we captured them in sight of
Tripoli bearing W ) S - 4 leagues and at about five miles distance
from the nearest part of the coast. Sent Officers & men on board
them with directions to proceed to Malta for adjudication - Receiv'd
28 Greeks from the one & 26 from the other -Both Ships are armed In the close of the evening the A r m was permitted by signal to part
company and go in chase Moderate breezes from N E & N E b E
till 12 (midnight) from which time till Day light calms or light baffling
winds veering between N E and N N W - The Ar.gus & her chase in
sight from the Mast heed all forenoon the Constelldwn was ordered
pr signal to chase & keep the Argus in sight - Forenoon - fresh
breezes from N I\' W - Noon - the land to the Eastwd of Tripoli in
sight from Mast head bore South nearly eight leagues
[LC. EPP, Vol. 13, August-December 1804.1

--

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

19

Extract from journal kept by Purser John Darby, U. S. Navy, on board U. 6. 8.
John Adams. Master Commandant Isaac Chauncey, U. S. Navy, commanding,
Wednesday, 12 September 1804

At 4. this morning a heavy S uall and Rain from the Westwg &
with a great deal of thunder and ightning a t 5 A. M. the Brig Syren
and Nautalus in sight. this evening a t Sunset discovered Mount Etnea 90 Miles distance -

P

[ND4 original. Miss Camilla S. McConnell.]
To John Russell, Weaver, Reading, Berks County, Pa., from Charles W.
Goldsborough, Chief Clerk of the Navy Department

NAV D E P Sept
~
l S t Q 1804.
Your letter dated the FYh ins* has been Received - This Department has not the settlement of prize acco~mtswith the Captors I n the case of the [Austrian] Polacre Paulina, I believe the Vessel has
never been adjudicated, I understand that no distribution of prize
money has been made - and it is doubtful whether the Captors will
ever receive any - Or will ever be entitled to Receive any [NDA. GLB, Vol. 7, 1803-1805.1
To Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Navy, from Captain Samuel Barron, U. S. Navy

U STATESSHIP President

OFF TRIPOLI.

Sep ISt'? 1804 SIR YOUwill be pleased to take into either the Port of Malta or
Syracuse, the two Greek Vessels said to be loaded with wheat, &
intercepted by the Squadron in the Attempt to enter the Blockaded
Port of Tripoly - From the Confession of the Masters of those
Vessels, they had a previous Knowledge of the Port being in a State
of Blockade & there is little doubt, in my Mind, that they are good
Prizes. The third Vessel, which made off, & in chace which, the
Constellation, & Argus, now are engaged, will if taken, be sent to the
Port into which you may have conducted the other two, You will
please to examinine those Vessels, &- dispose of them as circumstances
may induce you, I shall remain before Tripoly until1 a Sufficient
Number of Vessels arrive, to keep up the Blockade & enable me to
go to Syracuse, in the mean time I Submit entirely to your discretion
the arrangemt9espccting the Prizes [LC. EPP, Vol. 13, August-December 1804.1
To Master Commandant Isaac Hull, U. S. Navy, commanding U. S. Brig Argu,
from Captain Samuel Barron, U. S. Navy

UNITEDSTATESSHIP President
03 Tripoli September 1 3 t h 1804
SIR The state and condition of the ATS?LS,under your Command,
requiring that she shoud go into port for the purpose of refitting &9
I request you to proceed with all practicable expedition to Malta or
Syracuse, and thsre refit your Vessel, which being compleated, you
will take on board two Months provisions & Water & proceed for the
Port of Alexandria and if a t that Port or Smyrna, you find any American Vessels you will give them convoy as far as Malta, and immediately after join the Squadron off this place
You will take under your care the Ship St Michuel intercepted by

20

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1804 TO 1805

the Squadron b the attempt to enter the blockaded port of Tripoli.
You will find Commodore Preble a t Malta, or Syracuse, with two
other Ships captured in making the same attem t, You will receive
his orders with respect to the disposition of the f Michael, cause all
her papers to be delivered bim, and furnish him with aU the information you may be able to gain from her crew & O n your passage you
will inform the Commanders of the Vessels you may find a t Syracuse
that I shall be off Tripoli
Very respectfully I am Sir
Y: 0 b t Servt
(Signd) SAMUEL
BARRON
-

d

[NDA. Csptain's LB, Vol. 3, 1805.1
IEnclosurel

Verbal orders of Commodore Barron to Captain Hull of the U
States brig Argzls, in presence of the undersigned, on board the
President, Sep. 15. 1804.
SIR,the written orders, I here hand you, to proceed to the port of
Alexandria or Smyrna for the purpose of convoying to Malta any
vessels you may find there, are intended to disguise the real object
of your expedition; which is to proceed with Mr Eaton to Alexandria in
search of Homet Bashaw, the rival brother and legitimate sovereign
of the reigning Bashaw of Tripoli; and to convey him and his suitle]
to Derne or such other place on the coast as may be determined the
most proper for co-operating with tlle naval force under my command
against the common enemy: or, if more agreeable to him, to bring
him to me before Tripoli Should Homet Bashaw- not be found a t Alexandria, you have the
discretion to proceed to any other place for him where the safety of
your ship can be, in ?our opinion, relied upon.
The Bashaw may be assured of the support of my squadron a t
Bengazi or Derne; where you are at liberty to put in, if required, and
if i t can be done without too great risque. And you may assure him
also that I will take the most effectual measures with the forces under
my Command for co-operating with him against the usurper, his
brother; and for re-establishing him in the regency of Tripoli. Arrangements to this effect with h i are confided to the discretion with
which Mr Eaton is ~ e s t e dby the Government
[H. E. Huntington LBAG, EA 20.1
Extract from journal of U.S. Bx-igArgus. Master Commandant Isaac Hull,U. S. Navy,
commanding, Thursday, 13 September 1804

still in chace Tacked Occasionally and took in and set sail when
Necessary At 4 PM the Constellationby a favourable Squall gained our
wake a t 6 fired a Gun a t the Chace she bore away for t,he Constellation
at 7 Spoke the Chace a Polacre Ship from Constantinople bound t o
Malaga the Constellation sent Officers and men on board of her a t 9
bore away for the Squadron
[NDA photostat.]

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

21

Extract from log book kept by Sailing Master Nathaniel Hsraden, U. 8. Navy,
on board U. 8. Frigate Comtitution, Thursday, 13 September 1804

Fresh breezes from the North$ Cruizing in company with the
President - The land to the Eastwd of Tripoly in sight from the
Mast head, bearing S. by compass nearly 30 miles Constellation & Argus in sight from the Mast head in pursuit of their
chase to the W S W.
At 1 P. M. tacked to the N E & parted company with the Constellation & Argus, & at 5 P.M. tacked to WNW, in expectation of falling in
with them, but on the close of the Evening they were not in Sight.
Our two Greek prizes were some ways to leeward. We ran down for
them to reach our wake.
Moderate breezes during night veering between N E & NbW.
Made & shortened sail as necessary to follow the Commodore &
keep the prizes in company.
From day light till noon light airs or calms.
At 8 A. M. we were taken aback. Winds from NNW Filled to the
Eastwd
At 9 A. M. CommrVreble waited on Commre Barron
Ships company employed this forenoon washing their cloaths &
cleaning between decks.
Noon light airs from NW - Tripoly Supposed to bear (variation
corrected) S t W distance 45 miles Latitude observed 33' 38' N.
[LC. EPP, Log Constitution, 1803-1804.1
Extract from journal kept by Purser John Darby, U. 6. Navy, on board U. 6. 6.
John Admns. Master Commandant Isaac Chauncey, U. S. Navy, commanding,
Thursday, 13 September 1804

We are this morning out of sight of land not a breath of Air. at 11.
discovered a strainge sail on the Larb* bow. fired a Gun as a signal to
speak her. We are now on an allowance of Water. of one quart a day.
at Meridian Schooner Nautalus in sight. still calm at about 5 P M. sent our barge on board the Strange Sail. to know
whether they could supply us with water she proved to be a Neapolitan
prise to the Tunisans. they were out of both water & provisions
our barge returned with the Captain of her who shewed Capt.
Chauncey his papers. We sent him on board of his own ship again &
gave him a B11 of Bread [NDA original. Miss Camilla S. McConnell.]
TO Master Commandant Isaac Chauncey, U. S. Navy, commanding U. S. S.
John Adams, from Captain Samuel Barron, U. S. Navy

Off TRIPOLI
14th September 1804
(Extract)
DEARSIR I expect to have the pleasure of seeing you before you
sail for America, if not I can only wish you a pleasant Passage and
happy sight of your Friends &c
Commodore Preble will go home in your ship and having Mairs to
arrange before he leaves the Mediterranean of a Publick Nature you
will of Course receive his Orders
D D A . MC LB, 1804-5.1

22

NAKAL OPERATIOiVS FROM 1804 TO 1805
To Tobias Lear, U. S. Consul General, Algiers, from Captain John Rodgers,
U,S. Navy
U. STATES
FRIGATE
Congress

Algiers Bay, Sepf: 14, 1804

DEARSIR I have sent a Boat on shore merely to Enquire howyou are, & to be infoxm'd whether you have any communicstions to
make - I have no news worth communicating, further than Lieu!
Hooper will be able to give you - The three Letters which accompany this, was handed me by M' & M'%aw[?], who were well, as
were the rest of your friends in the neighbourl-lood of Washington. Pray present my best respects to Mrs Lear d believe me
[LC. JRP, Letters & Orders, Book A, 1804-1805.1

To U. S. Consul, Salonica, from Tobias Lear, U. S. Consul General, Algiers

ALGIERS
Septr 14tb1804.
SIR This will be handed to you by Sidi Hagi Hassien, the T'ickel,
or Agent of his Excellency the Dey of Algiers, who is sent to Salonique, on the business of his Master. - Should he need any assistence
you can give him in the prosecution of His business, or in Chartering
a Vessel, if he should have need of one one, I am persuadQou will do
it, when I assure you that I have experiencd such marks of attention
$ friendship from his Excellency the Dry, towards the United States
of America, since m y residence here, as will fully warrant this mark of
Civility and regard from the agent, of Our Nation.
[Stephen Decatur Col.

XDA photostat, Book A.]

To N. Busnah, Algiers, from Tobias Lear, U. S. Consul General, Algiers

ALGIERS
S e p t r 1 4 t h 1804
SIR I have been honored x l t h your letter of this date requesting
that I would a t the request of his Excellency the Dey give a letter to
the American Consul a t Salonique in favor of Sidi Hagi Hassien, who
is to go thither as the Vickel of His Excellency.
I do not know whether there is an American Consul a t that place,
or not. If there should be One there, the enclosed letter will meet
due attention.
Please to present my best respects to His Excellency the Dey, and
assure him of the pleasure I shall always take in proving the friendship of my Nation towards him when it is in my power.
Mr XAFTALE
Busx.4~
TStephen Decatur Col.

XDA photostat, Book A.]

Extract from journal of U. S. Brlg Argus, Master Commandant Isaac HuII, U. S.
Navy, commanding, Friday, 14 September 1804

[Off
Tripoli] At- a t 10 h o w too alongside the Commod"t, 3 past
Capt-ull
went on board of him At 11 made Sig! N Q l 2 3 0to the
Commodore [NDA photostat.]

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

23

To Captain John Rodgers, U. S. Navy, from Richard O'Brien

MALTASept The 1 4 t h 1804 -

Dr SIR - On the 3 d 7tQand 2StQof August and 2 d Inst The Sea
forces of the U States before tripoli - atta.cked The Castles Gunboats
and Corsairs of that City.in these 4 attacks The U States has
lost. Captain Somers. LieutWeca,tor Caldwell and Wadsworth and
Mr Dorsey
-.
and Israel Midshipmen. with about 45 men Killed wounded.
and blown up The 6 Gunboats and 2 bombards - with The Siren Enterprize
Scourge Nautulas - and John Adams - left - the Coast of tripoli The 7 @ Ins4 destined for Syracousa The President and Constellation arrived here the 5tQIns? and on the
7tQCommodore Barron Sailed and next morning - Caps Campbell They arrived off Tripoli on the g t h n d This morning arrived here.
The Pixon Capt Smith, in 3 days from the fleet before tripoli - he
left there. The President Constitution Constellation and Argus - i t
is Considered if the weather will remain fine that the frigates will
attack tripoli
no doubt
The Season IS past for Gunboats to remain on That statmion
but Tripoli must have Suffered Very much. but The force has been
inadequate - to reduce it to American terms. and obtain the freedom
of our fellow Citizens. I left the fleet. the 2 2 d ulr and expect withmy
family to return to The U States in The John Adnms.
[LC. JRP, Vol. 1, Second Series, Feb. 1775-May 1805.1
Extract from log book kept by Sailing Master Nathaniel Haraden, U. S. Navy,
on board U. S. Frigate Constitution, Friday, 14 September 1804

Moderate breezes from the Earthward - Cruizing in company with
the President, 15 leagues hi E from Tripoly with the two Greek
prizes in company This afternoon we were a little alarmed by two water spouts passing
to leeward of us - The[y] broke within two miles from us - At
3 P. M. parted company with the President. She returns to the rendezvous off Tripoly - The Constitution is now bound to Malta - [with
the two Greek prizes] - Cap! Hull took passage in the President in
order to join the Argus - On the afternoon of 1TTednesdaylast when
the Squadron gave chase to E b S, Commr"arron, Caps Campbell &
Cap: Hull were on board the Constitution - Observing the chase to
be three Polacca Ships, Merchantmen, The Argus was ordered p!
signal to haul up for one of them which was considerably to windward,
while the other two were brought to by the Constitution, President
& Constellation - At Sun set the same evening Commre Barron &
Caps Campbell joined their respective ships & in the Urgency of the
Constc.llation following the Argus, time would not permit a boat t o
attend for the following officers belonging to the Constitution, then on
s visit to the Constellation - vizt Lieutt Tarbell, &I: Morris Purser,
Doctr Wells & hlr Greenleaf Lieutt of Marines - Night Moderate The Constellation, .Argus & her chase in sight next morning and until1
towards noon - I mention these particulars as Possibly they may
have relation to future claims After parting company with the President we had cloudy overcast
weather all the afternoon, till towards evening when we had pleasant
weather -

a

24

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 180.4 TO 1805

At 6 P. M. we brought to, & sent two marines on board of each
prize - The 52 Greeks which we have on board have the liberty of
the ship in the day time & are under guard during the night From Sundown till day light, light breezes & variable from the
Northward & from day light till noon the like wind & weather from the
Southg The two Prizes sail well on a Wind & keep company going large
with little difference in sair Doctor Marshall, late of t-heScourge now on board this ship, reports
17 Sick & 9 ConvYtThis forenoon, saw two water spouts at a great distance
Noon light breezes from S S E with cloudy, overcast weather to the
Eastward We are now on our passage from lkipoly to Malta, which we suppose
to bear nearly N E 102 miles - The two Prizes in company.
Latitude observed 3 4 O 14' N.
[LC. EPP, Log Constitution, 1803-1804.1
Extract from journal kept by Purser John Darby, U. S. Navy, on board U. S. 8.
john Adams, Xaster Commandant Isaac Chauncey, U. S. Navy, commanding,
Friday, 14 September 1804

We are this morning in sight of Sicily. a light breeze and fair. we
are this day reduced to one quart of Water per man for 24 hours. a t
half past 5 this morning saw the land ahead at 3 past six saw the
Nautilus on our weather quarter at 10 saw a strange sail two points
on our Weather Bow. squally with rain attended with thunder &
Lightning. at 2 Oclock the Nautilus Boat came along side for water We coud not supply them at 3 P M saw four strange sail in sight
at 6 t,he NorthQart of Cape Passero bore N N W 4 W and North
East. -

:

INDA original.

Miss Camilla S. McConnell.1

To Timothy Mountford, Algiers, from Tobias Lear, U. S. Consul General, Algiers

ALGIERS
Septr 1 5 t h 1804

DE-~R
SIR AS I am about to leave Algiers, for a short time, to
endeavour to negotiate a Peace with the Bashaw of Tripoli, in comliance with the Orders of my Govt I shall leave in your charge all my
groperty, in Algiers. I shall retain s t the Garden, Sidi Alli, and
Francisco. Segnr Juan will remain there also, & one or two Carbiles
to take care of the horses & mules &- work the Garden I have settled
all my acctg to this time, so that you will only have to attend to such
as may occur, till my return, to defray which after the mone you
have mag be exhausted, you will be furnished by Mr D. C. Sacri
Should a Ship arrive from the U. States, with the annuity for thii
Regency, before my return, you will attend to the delivery of the
Cargo & G u t sill make no settlement therefor, by any means untill
my return: The Documents left with you, will point out the usual
mode of receiving the Cargoes sent as annuities, and the Sweedish
Consul, Mr Norderling, will be so good as to give you advice & information, on this subject, as well as on any others, when you may
need it
I leave three Consular & Six Prize Certificates signed in Blank, in
case any shd be wanted for the Cruizers, during my absence

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

25

You will be pleased to write to me, by any conveyance, which may
offer, for Malta; if there should be no direct, it wd be best to write
by the way of Tunis, In case of very urgent necessity you may dispatch a Courier extraordinary, to Tunis with letters for me, writing to our Charge des Affairs, the case, & desiring them to be forwarded, should letters arrive for me, you may open them, & from their
Contents, judge if any thing is to be done immediately, in consequence
of them
[Stephen Decatur Col. NDA photostat, Book A.]
To Secretary of State from James Simpson, U. S. Consul, Tangier, Morocco

TANGIER
15tb Sept: 1804. NO 82. - Duplicate. SIR N? 81 conveyed copy of my correspondence with Sidy Muhammed Selawy last Month. - I have not yet received any answer to
my Letter of the 26*",ut
my Friend at Rhabat advises me he had
read and explained it to him on the 2d Instant. - Captain Rodgers
went off Salk and at his return here on the 27th Ult? acquainted me
the Emperours three Ships had retired within the Bar of that River. As I knew that could not be done at this dry season of the year, until
a great part of their Artillery and Stores had been taken out, I was
induced to believe it had been determined they should be laid up. On this principle I did not see cause to offer any objection to the
strong desire Captain Rodgers expressed of joining Commodore
Barron.
By many subsequent advices it however appears the Ships did not
go within the Bar at any time since they assembled in Sall6 Road, and
that they put to Sea on the 30th August. - Captain Rodgers m i s ~
take must have proceeded from his not being acquainted with the
distance the Barrs lay from the apparent entrance of the River. The destination of these Ships is not certainly known, but generaly
supposed to be for Lisbon, and that the two largest are to be Coppered
and new rig'd there. On Tuesday last the Essex arrived here from Gibraltar. Captain
[James] Barron also expressed a wish to go to the Commodore, under
an Idea that his Services were no longer necessary here.
As we had no certainty of the destination of the Frigates, I gave it
as my oppinion it would be proper to ascertain that before he left us,
and I presume he is gone to the Westward in that view. - I cannot
but express my regret that other services should seem to these Gentlemen so urgent as to enduce this Station being left without any Vessel
of War, since by experience we have so fully seen the advantages
arise from a contrary conduct. I have now to advise that a sum of money in Spanish Gold said to
be about One hundred and forty thousand dollars arrived here this
morning, appropriated by Muley Soliman for encreasing his Marine. I t goes to Lisbon in a Portuguese Brig of War, as is pretended for
purchase of Naval and Ordnance Stores and Building Materials for
Sea Service. This measure so unexpected and unprecedented in this Country to
such an extent, must proceed from some imperious motive. - In my
oppinion the report of this money being destined for the purpose
mentioned, merits no sort of attention; besides many other arguments
might be offered for this being the case, it is notorious Muley Solirnan

26

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1804 TO 1805

has no Arsenals or Magazines for the deposit of such a quantity of
Stores. - I have not a doubt but we shall find the chief object in
view, is the purchase of Armed Vessels, with probably some essential
articles of Naval and Ordnance Stores; particularly Gun Powder; of
which the Emperour has but a very slender stock at this time. - I
have requested Consul Jarvis to be watchful on their opperations a t
Lisbon and to give you and Commodore Barron the earliest intelligence
thereof. The two Galleys of Tetuan have layen in this Mole perfectly
inactive for these last fifteen days. - during that time we have had a
fresh Gale a t East, with very little intermission. [NA. SDA.

CL, Tangier, Vol. 2, Jan. 1803-Oct. 1810.1

To Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Navy, U. S. Frigate Comfitution, from Captain
Samuel Barron, U. S. Navy

U STATESSHIPPresident OFF TRIPOLY
15 Septl1804
SIR Captain Hull has in charge the Russian Ship St AY[i]ehael,
intercepted in the attempt to Enter Tripoly, I have directed him to
take your orders as to the Disposition of the S@Vessel, as her Case
Seems exactly to resemble that of the two others, which you carried
under your Charge to Malta I presume your determination with
respect to the one, will equally Affect the whole three
1 Submit, (as in the Case of the other two) this Vessels Emamination
&c. entirely to your discretion, I presume that if they can not prove,
that they wcre bound to some other Port, The Situation, & course
we found them Steering, will admit of no doubt, that they were bound
directly to Tripoly [LC. EPP, Vol. 13, August-December 1804.1
Extract from journal of U. S. Brig Argus, Master Commandant Isaac Hull, U. S.
Navy, commanding, Saturday, 15 September 1804

took 26 men from the Poleacre Prize and put her in Charge of
Lieu! Morris Mr Mann & 9 men and left 6 of her men on board of her
recieved from the Consfellation 350 Gallons of Water and 8 Sick men
came on board from her and four from the President At $ past 4
Cap! Hull and Mr Eaton came on board
[NDA photostat.]

Extract from journal of William Eaton, U. S. Navy Agent for the Barbary Regencies,
Saturday, 15 September 1804

Went on board the brig Argus for Malta, at 8 o'clock, A. hl.
[NR&L. KO.9217, Bm' E 14.1
Extract from journal of U. St Frigate Congress, Captain John Rodgers, U. S. Navy,
commanding, Saturday, 15 September 1804

P. M commences with fresh breezes and Clear weather Standing
in for the Bay of Algiers
At 3 shortened sail and hove too Of[f] the town of Algiers
4 past 3 Mr Lear the consul Came a long side
At 4 shortened sail and came too with The larbd bower in 25 fathoms
water Algier light house bearing N W B W distance 2%miles Cape
Matifor E B N distance 6 or 7 miles

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

27

At 4 the fort fired a salute of 21 guns which we answered with the
same number at 5 The Consul left the ship
A M a t 7 Captc Rodgers went on shore and was saluted with 5
guns from The battery
at Meredian light Breezes and pleasant weather
[USNA.]
Extract from Commonplace Book by William Eaton, U. S. Navy Agent for the
Barbary Regencies, Saturday, 15 September 1804

Went on board the brig Argus, Captain Isaac Hull, for Alexandria.
[H. E. Huntington L&AG, EA 207, Commonplace Book.]
Extract from log book kept by Sailing Master Nathaniel Haraden, U. S. Navy, on
board U. S. Frigate Consfitution. Saturday, 15 September 1804

Moderate breezes from the Westward with cloudy overcast weather - We are on our passage from Tripoly to Malta.
By two, P. M. the weather to the Eastward had the appearance of
a heavy gale. We double reefed the Top sails & single reefed the
Courses At this time our prizes were some distance astern. We continued
under our Topsails till 5 P. M. a t which time they came up: we then
set the foresail, Jib & spanker.
By 5 P. M. the wind had shifted by degrees from WSW to SE,
with pleasant weather, which continued till 12 Midnight, when the
weather became cloud with Lightning to the NNE.
In third reef in the opsails & stowed the Jib
Towards daylight judging the ship to be within 9 or ten Leagues
of Malta, in order to prevent Surprize by currents, we sounded several
times - No bottom with 80 fath?
Continued under low sail till day light when we saw the Swf p a t
of h4alta bearing NNE, 10 Leagues - Moderate with overcast
weather & frequent thunder and lightning in the N E l all forenoon.
Noon - We are situated 10 miles SW t W, from the SE extreme
of Malta & nearly 7 miles from the land - The west extreme of
Gozo bearing I\'$ W, in sight from deck At This Time, as well as a t several other times, we have found no
material currents in crossing between Tripoly & Malta The prevailing winds off Tripoly during the besieging of that Town,
from the 28" July to the 13tb Septemr were variable between NNE
and SE, with frequent changes to the NNW. We left the President
Constellation & Argus, cruising off Tripoly

6

[LC. EPP, Log Constitution, 1803-1804.1
Extract from journal kept by Purser John Darby, U. S. Navy, on board U. S. S.
John Adams, Master Commandant Isaac Chauncey, U. S. Navy, commanding,
Saturday, 15 September 1804

At day light this morning saw the Syren & Nautilus a t 8 Oclock we
were beating round Cape Mourde Pore a t 12 Cape Moren De Pore
bore N E by N Distance about 3 Leagues at half past three 3. we made the mouth of Harbour of Syracuse.
cast of[f] the gun boats oposite the light house. at 6. Oclock came to
Anchor in the Harbour of Syracuse the light house bore S E distant f

28

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1804 TO 1806

mile - I t may very Justly [be] said what a falling off in this place
from its once anciant Grandure
[NDA original. Miss Camilla S. McConnell.]
Extract from journal of Midshipman F. Cornelius deKrafft, U. S. Navy, in U. 6.
Brig Siren of 18 guns, Master Commandant Charles Stewart, U. S. Bavy, commanding, Saturday, 15 September 1804

(Standing in for the harbour of Syracuse.) Light airs & pleasant
plying to wind ward under easy sail the John Adams & a Schooner in
sight in tacking got gun boat No 3 foul of us & stove our cutter over
the stern. at 3 past 6 cape Passarro bore N by W. cape Roque
N by E set royals stay sails &c. &c. Midnight gentle breezes & pleasant. Meridian moderate & clear supplied the gun boats astern
Latt Obs 36' 54' N.
At 3 past 1 P. M set royals & steering sails a fine breeze from the
Southwd standing for the harbour of Syracuse At 6 came too in 7
fathoms water furl'd all sail. found the Enterprize, Nautilus;
Scourge, Bombards &- gun boats at anchor At 7 hoisted out the
launch & barge Midnight light airs & cloudy Wind E by N
(NB, those remarks include 36 hours)
[NDA.]
To Secretary of the Bavy from Master Commandant Isaac Chauncey, U. S. Bavy

UNITEDSTATESSHIP John Adurns
Syracuse 16th September 1804
SIR I had the honor of writing you on the 5" of last Month from
Malta, at which Time I was preparing to leave that place to join the
Commodore off Tripoli, which I did on the 7 9 and received his Orders
(a Copy of which I enclose you N? 1 [see 8 August 18041) to continue
on that Station untill his further Orders; where I remained variously
employed untill the 6th Ins! when 1 received the Commodore's further
Instructions (a Copy of which I also have the Honor of enclosing you
NO 2 [see 5 September 18041) to proceed to Malta and Syracuse to
deliver my Stores, and from thence to the United States, touching at
the Different Ports on the North Side of the Miditerranean to afford
Convoy.
You will perceive by my Instructions that I was first to go to Malta,
but the Commodore gave me verbal Orders afterwards to proceed
with the Gun Boats that I had in tow to this Place, in Company with
the Syren, Nautilles and Enterprize, where we all arrived Yesterday
Evening with all the Gun Boats and Bombards on a very short
Allowance of Water - I had but 60 Gallons on board, and some of
the other Vessels much less. I am now preparing to discharge one
half of the stores agreeable to Orders, with the other Half I shall
proceed to Malta and deliver to Mr Higgins after which I shall Ballast
the Ship and Use every Exertion to carry into Effect the other Parts
of my Instructions - I shall necessarily be detained here 12 or 15
Days to get the Ship in a Situation to proceed down the Meditterranean; for she is now a mere Wreck, not having been in port long
enough to do any thing to her since I left the Eastern Branch. M'
Dyson informs me that Commodore Barron, with two Ships arrived
at, and sailed from Malta for the Coast of Tripoli on the 7tQInstant

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

29

and that the other Ship was hourly expected from Gibralter to join
them.
I shall be silent as to our proceedings off Tripoli for I presume that
the Commodore has detailed them fully in his Dispatches [NDA. MC LB, 1804-5.1
Extract from journal of U. S. Frigate Congnw. Captain John Rodgera, U. 6. Ravy,
commanding, Sunday, 16 September 1804

[At Single Anchor in Bay of Algiers] At 10 [A M] recd on board 3
Bullocks 13 sheep And a quantity of Vegitables as a present From
the Dey 35 Sick
[USNA.]
Extract from Commonplace Book by William Eaton, U. 6. Navy Agent for the
Barbary Regencies, Sunday, 16 September 1804
Sunday - Made Malta - Arrived next day [H. E. Huntington L&AG, EA 207, Commonplace Book.]
Extract from log book kept by Sailing Master Nathaniel Haraden, U. S. Navy, on
board U. S. Frigate Consfitadion, Sunday, 16 September 1804

Cloudy overcast weather with frequent squalls from the N E.
accompanied with thunder lightning & rain. We are now 9 or 10
miles SW, from the SE extreme of [sic] under double reefed topsails,
with our two prizes in company By 3 P. M. the weather had cleared away, when the Wind Shifted to
E S E - Out all reefs except one in each topsail in order to work
round the SE end & proceed to Malta -From a watch tower standing
on the very extreme of this part of Malta, SE by compass, there runs
out a dangerous shoal, a mile & a half from shore. Between 6 & 9
P. M. we made several short boards in order to pass i t Wind, moderate through the night from ESE & SE with constant
lightning in the NE.
By 5 A. M. we rounded the Island & Steered NW, for the harbour of
Vilette which was then in sight At 6 A. M. we were taken aback by a squall from the NNW, which
shifted immediately to the NE. We close reefed the topsails, single
reefed the courses and sent down top gall! yards. By 8 A. M. the weather cleared up, when we saw the Harbour of
Villette bearing WbN, 5 or 6 miles. Made sail, Bitted a range on the
two Bowers, unstowed them & ran in for the Harbour -At 4 pas 10 A. M, we came to with the best bower in the o u t ~
harbour in Vilette Veered to a third of a cable & furled sails - The two prizes in
company
Wind N E. - Found here the U. S. Schooner Vixen
[LC. EPP, Log Constitution, 1803-1804.1
Extract from journal of B¶idshipman F. Cornelius deKrafft, U. 6. Navy, in U. 6.
Brig Siren of 18 guns, l a s t e r Commandant Charles Stewart, U. S. Navy, commanding, Sunday, 16 September 1804

(Syracuse Harbour) Commences with heavy squalls of wind &
rain, rec? fresh provi~ionsfor the Crew. launch employ'd watering,

30

N A V A L OPERATIONS FROM 1804 TO 1805

Crew employ'd braking out hold &c. At 10 sent 3 six pounders on
board the Nautilus Meridian light airs & cloudy sent the launch on shore with a raft
of empty water casks loos'd all sails to dry Midnight light winds & variable [NDA.]
To Lieutenant Charles Gordon, U.S. Navy, from Captain Edward Preble, U.S. Navy

Constitution - MALTAHARBOUR
Septem: 1it$
1804
SIR The Public business requires my going to Sicily for a few days.
You will during my absence make use of every exertion to equip the
Constitution for Sea: Her decks are all to be recaullied; the standing
rigging overhauled & tarred: Such parts of the rigging as are unfit for
service, you will replace with new; the main mast is to be examined &
fished with two long fishes of 30 or 40 feet each. The Bowsprit
stripped and Examined, and, if not sprung, the fishes replaced & the
Bowsprit secured & rigged again Sails are to be examined &repaired;
Boats repaired; the Hull of the ship outside & inside, Masts, Spars &
boats painted - Make your requisitions on Mr Higgins for what may
be necessary - You will be careful to keep good order and discipline
on board, and to guard against fire as much as possible. You are on no
pretence to suffer a breach of Quarantine by any person belonging to
the ship [LC. EPP, Order Book, May 1803-June 1805.1
To Captain Samuel Barron, U. S. Navy, from Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Navy

Constitution SEPTEM:17th 1804
Harbour of Malta
SIR Presuming that the good of the Service will be promoted by
preparing the Constitutionfor sea without loss of time I have thought it
advisable immediately to commence her repairs in this port, in order
that she may be completed for sea as soon as possible: and have taken
passage to Syracuse in the Argus - I shall settle my accounts at that
place and return to Malta in 10 or 12 days, or as soon after that time
as the John Adams or any other Vessel is ready to come over - I have
left the charge of the ship to Lieu! Gordon who is an active good
Officer, and shall hurry Cap! Decatur over as Soon as possible (Signed) EDWARD
PREBLE
Commre SAM!BARRON
Commander i n chief o f the U. Squadron
i n the Mediterranean
[LC. EPP, LB, April-Kov. 1804.1
To Captain Samuel Barron, U. S. Navy, from Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Navy

Co~zstitutionMALTAHARBOUR
Septemr 17th 1804
SIR I wrote you the 17Q Ins:, the day the Argus arrived with the
Prize, Since which i t has been s t o m y weather - The Nautilus
arrived this morning in 7 hours from Syracuse, and sails tomorrow to
join you with a store ship loaded with water - Cap: Dent informs
me that the Vessels with the Gun boats in tow had a passage of 11

W A R S W I T H BARBARY POWERS

31

days to Syracuse and were much distressed for water: So long a
passage will account for their not having joined you before this -You
will learn from Cap-ent
when to expect the Syren & Enterprize The Argus sails tomorrow for Syracuse I enclose you copy of a certificate of a robbery committed on an
American vessel by a Tunisian Corsair: but the certificate which the
Barbarian required from the American is, I think proof positive that
they are not at war with us. The story of an American vessel having
been captured, I do not believe The Constitution is stripped and every exertion making to have her
ready for service as soon as possible - Thirty one caulkers are constantly a t work on board although we are still in quarantine-. Will
it not be well to visit the Bey of Tunis soon? He requires good looking
after - I enclose you copy of a letter from the Governor of Syracuse;
and am sorry to learn from others as well as him that great irregularities have been committed by some of our officers, for which, I hope,
they may suffer severely - I suspect you will find i t necessary to
make an example, & the sooner tlhe better - If you can make it convenient to visit Syracuse, I hope to have the pleasure of meeting you
there before I return to this place Tomorrow an examination of the Captains & Crews of the three
Greeks commences before the court of Vice Admiralty at Malta - I
hope they may prove good Prizes - I shall not however release them
or dispose of them in any way until I hear from you - I have employed a person to Translate the papers found on board them: when
finished, we shall be able to judge of the property & destination I have heard nothing from Gibraltar or the Frigates since you left
there [LC. EPP, LB, April-Nov. 1804.1
To Sir Alexander John Ball, British Civil Commissioner for the Islands of Malta and
Gozo, from Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Navy

Constitution, MALTA HARBOUR
Septr 17th 1804.
SIR I have the Honour to acknowledge the receipt of your Excellency's very obliging letter of the 30th Ult?, and take this opportunity
to assure you that the very polite and friendly attention I have been
honoured with by the civil & military departments of the Island of
Malta has made an indelible impression on my mind I regret that I am at present deprived of personally paying my
respects on shore; but hope a voyage to Sicily will soon afford me that
pleasure.
Cap: Decatur takes the Constitution & I return to the U. States
with Cap! Chaunccy in the John Adams. It will afford me the highest degree of satisfaction to have it in my power to render your Excellency acceptable services in that Country.
I enclose for your Excellency's perusal an answer to the memorial
of Gaetano Schembri respecting the detention of vessels in which be
was concerned - You will oblige me by directing it to be delivered to
him.
His Excellency Sir ALEXANDER
BALLBart
His Britannick Majesty's Civil
Commissionerfor the Idands of AIalta & Gozo
[LC. EPP, Vol. 13, August-December 1804.1

32

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1804 TO 1805

Extract from journal of William Eaton, U. S, Navy Agent for the Barbary Regencies,
Monday, 17 September 1804

[On board U. S. Brig Argus.] At midnight arrived a t Malta.
Found the Constitution there.
[NR&L. No. 9217, Bml E 14.1
Extract from journal of U. S. Frigate Congress, Captain John Rodgers, U. S. Navy,
commanding, Monday, 17 September 1804

[Bay of Algiers] 3 past 3 [PM] Mr Lear the consul and his Lady
came on board
At 4 weigh$ & made sail 3 past 7 Calm. let go a Kedge anchor and
shortened Sail
A, M. - at 3 light airs from the South4 WeighQthe Kedge and
made sail
At 11 Cape Coxine bore W S W Algiers light House S W $ S
distance 4 leagues Cape Matafor S q E distance 2 leagues - 33 Sick
Latitude Observed 36' 57' N.
[USNA.]
Extract from log book kept by Sailing Master Nathaniel Haraden, U. S. Navy, on
board U. S. Frigate Constitution. Monday, 17 September 1804

Moderate breezes from E N E . We are a t single anchor in the
outer harbour of Malta. At 3 past noon, the health boat from the
Pptique office came alongside - We have a number of Tripoline
prisoners on board - Holsted a yellow flag as a signal of Quarantine.
At 1 P. M. out all boats & made the necessary arrangements for
warping the ship into the inner harbour - Employed in this work
till 9 P. M.
Night moderate with rain A. M. Employed mooring ship. Moored in the inner harbour in
8 fath-ach way - The best bower S S E ; the small bower N N W We are now situated a cable & a half distance from the shore, N & S,
and completely land locked on every point of the compass except

NEbE-

This forenoon the Commodore went on shore a t the quarantine
ground.
At noon loosed sails to dry.
Winds moderate from S E b E. We received fresh beef and vegetables for the ships company.
[LC. EPP, Log Constitution, 1803-1804.1
Extract from journal kept by Purser John Darby, U. S. Navy, on board U. 6. 6.
John Admns, Master Commandant Isaac Chauncey, U. S. Navy, commanding,
Monday, 17 September 1804

[Syracuse Harbor] We this day commenced discharging our Cargo.
We sent on shore the 4 Tripolila Prisoners to the Castle [NDA original. Miss Camilla S. McConnell.]
To secretary of the Navy from William Eaton, U. S. Navy Agent for the Barbary
Regencies

MALTASep. 18. 1804.
SIR, (Go to Egypt for Hamet Bashaw) Exhibit A is an expression
,of my opinion of the probable advantages of co-operating with Hamet

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

33

Bashaw, delivered Commodore Barron a t sea on the 21. Aug. & contrast - B. additional observations on the same subject, after an
interview with Mr OBrien a t Malta, on the 8. Sep. - C [See letter of
13 September 1804, to Master Commandant Hull from Commodore
Barron]. & D [See enclosure of Exhibit C (of 13 September) dated
15 September 1804.1. the result of deliberations after having advised
with and consulted Commodore Preble before Tripoli (Porcile released by the Government. Why?-) Commodore Barron
declares he does not consider any construction of the President's
instructions will justify him in furnishing cash, arms and amrnunition to Hamet Bashaw - I hoped, in some measure to remedy this
inconvenience by applying to that use cash which I expected to realize
on a claim I have against the Chevalier Antonio Porcile of Sardinia
for payments made as his surety, at Tunis, some years ago on account
of cash borrowed by him for the purpose of ransoming his daughter
Anna Maria Porcile - But I am astonished to learn, by the tenor
of his letter to the President, that he considers himself released from
this debt by an act of the Government of the United States - This
conclusion of his is, to me, altogether enigmatical; but I presume it
a misconstruction on his part of some instructions, unknown to me,
communicated to my successor at Tunis touching the release of the
chevalier's daughter from detention on account of his obligations However the fact may be, it has disappointed my last resort for the
means of assisting the operations of the plan in which I am at length
formally engaged - I am therefore compelled to draw on the Navy
de artment, on account of my salary, for the sum of one thousand
doears in order to meet the contingencies of my voyage to Alexandria,
and to aid me in putting that plan in motion (Rejerence to Comm? Preble d Con. OBrien.) I forbear adding
any thing to my former observations to government on the subject
of this cooperation - Commodore Preble and Consul OBrien, who
will be at Washington, will better satisfy enquiry whether my calculations concerning it have been correct and my arrangements judicious:
as they will also be the best commentators on my own statement to
Congress concerning my general agency on the coast of Barbary I cannot forbear, however, expressing, on this occasion, the extreme
mortification I suffer on account of my actual situation; destitute of
commission, rank, or command; and, I may say, consideration or
credit. And even without instructions for the regulation of my
conduct while ostensibly charged with the management of an enterprise on which, perhaps, depends the successful issue of this war. I
am not ignorant that I ought to ascribe this mortifying situation, as a
remote cause, to the indirect, undue influence of Captain Murray's
insinuations - There is not one statement made by Murray, relative
to Barbary affairs, in which my agency has been implicated and calculated to invalidate my truth and throw suspicion on my integrity,
but what has proved incorrect m matters of fact, if not maliciously
false; yet it has required the testimony of an experiment to work
conviction of his misrepresentations, and the force of demonstration
to do away the injurious impressions they stamped on the belief of
his powerful friends. In the issue I have been materially wronged,
both in my reputation and circumstances; so, indeed, has the public
service. - But, while I have a right to feel indignation towards his
hypocricy, and a regret for the influence it had over measures; I owe

34

NAVAL OPERATIOh7S FROM 1804 TO 1805

nevertheless, to the candor with which you have listened to my statements, to the confidence you have placed in them, and to the uniform
inclination you have manifested towards the system of operations I
would have recommended, the sincerest acknon-ledgements.
And I beg you will be assured, Sir, that this confidence shall not be
disappointed; for, besides the concern I feel that my fellow citizens
in slavery as well as the general interest of my country should be
benefitted by the success of the enterprise now in view, there is s
bond upon my honor which I shall take care to discharge - Hamet
Bashaw is the only man in existence to whom I ever plight.ed my faith
without having succeeded in acquitting myself of the engagement However forlorn therefore the prospect before me may present itself
I am determined to place my breast in this unintentional breach of
good faith, and thus convince him and the world that though, as an
American, I may be unfortunate, as such, I cannot be unfaithful.
If my project succeed, the government will take the benefit of a
miracle;for I have, a t present, very little reason to ground its prospect
of success on ordinary agencies - If it fail, government sacrifices
nothing; though my family may feel a sacrifice - But I shaII continue
still to indulge the hope that some provisions, proportionate to the
magnitude of the object, will yet be made to assist my exertions before
the season for decisive operations commence next spring The requisite field artilery and small arms may be procured a t
Malta, and of the king of the two Sicilies: They did not come on
board at Hampton as was expected - A small fund should be established also at Malta on which requisitions may be made to answer
unavoidable necessities - I believe fifty thousand dollars will be
sufficient to the purpose (27vee U7beat prizes -) Three large polacca ships, laden with wheat,
have been captured attempting to enter the blockaded port of Tripoli,
and sent into Maltma,
within a few days - The cargoes amount, in all,
to about thirty six thousand bushels - This providential supply might
serve a ration to an equal number of arabs about seventy or eighty
days; and might be used as a most effectual bribe to detach those
prizes could be
famishing forces of the enemy from his interest, if t,l~e
adjudicated upon in season. I have no doubt of their being IegaIly
condemned, as the masters wnfess they knew of the blockade, and as
they were intercepted standing directly into port within an hours
sail (Fit time to treat with Tunis -1 I regret that I have not powers to
sieze this moment of distress a t Tunis to modify our treaty with the
Bey so as to place our intercource with that regency on the footing of
the most favored nations. I t may not be too late next year. On
the contrary, a successful termination of our controversy with Tripoli
will facilitate the event.
I sail tomorrow for Alexandria. If I can t,hereraise a small number
of mamlukes and embark them a t Egypt I intend to surprise Bengazi
on my return, if the place should be found accessible, bring off the
Governor, and place a garrison there of the troops of Hamet Bashaw Though under no injunctions to make communications officially,
i t is presumed you will not be dissatisfied to be apprized of my prospects, resolutions and advances as often as any thing interesting

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

35

occurs - This is the only appology I can offer for directing unofficial
papers to your address WILLIAMEATON
Hon!' ROB!SMITH
Sec. of the Navy &c. &c. &c.
P. S. Malta 27. Oct. (accompanying triplicate)
Such was arrangement a t the date of the preceding. The Argus
returned into this port on the 236 inst., after having repaired a t
Messina. Found here the President, Constitution, John Adams,
Vben & Enterprize. The Congress, Constellation and Nautilus having
been ordered off Tripoli, and no account of them since a very severe
gale on the 20. 21. @ [&I 23d the Argus is dispatch in search of them;
and, of course, the expedition to Alexandria suspended - The Commodore tells me she will proceed thither immediately on her return
into port Information will be undoubtedly communicated by the ordinary
reports of the very imperfect state of health which has compelled
Commodore Barron to take lodgings on shore - His physician, Doc.
Cutbush, has been under serious apprehensions of alarm for him,
and, it seems, is not yet wholly relieved from them. I t appears
to me very improbable that he will be able to keep the sea this winter - And, I much fear, will not have sufficient health to transact the
business necessarily preparatory to the operations of next spring and
summer - Much is to be done which requires health and assiduity.
I cannot but repeat my earnest wish that something more explicit
may be expressed in the Cornr" instructions, and correspondent provisions made, concerning the aids to be advanced Hamet Bashaw,
in case this chief can be used to our advantage - He is cautious in
using a discretion on the subject - &, 1 believe, determined in any
situation of the Bashaw's affairs not to furnish any supplies without
special instructions.
Previously to leaving America
(Reform the consular character -)
I thought it my duty to suggest to the proper departments some
changes, which seemed indispensible with our national dignity, in the
consular appointments on the Mediterranean coast. I am still more
than ever convinced of the oecessity of the measure - The character
of our Government suffers through those representatives; so would
our interests if agents were not substituted to execute the duties properly attached to thcir offices - Mr Appleton a t Leghorn, though
harmless, wants character;
Barnes, at Sicily, probity; Mr Pulis, a t
Malta, national attachment and fealty; and Mr Matthieu, a t Naples,
wants every thing.
The navy agents a t those places appear to be judiciously selected I believe they would not disappoint the confidence of the President if
the national seal were placed in their hands - And, as they have the
laboring oar, it seems but reasonable they should enjoy the honor
& the profit of this confidence I have suspended the negociation of the bills mentioned on the 18.
ult. until the brig shall proceed aloft.
Allow me to repeat the assurance
of my perfect respect
WILLIAMEATON
[H. E. Huntington LkAG. EA, 206.1

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1804 TO 1806

36
-

[21 August 18041

EXHIBIT
A. to letter of Sep. 18***
(Advantages of co-operation with Hamet Bashaw)
Apparent advantages of co-operating with the deposed Bashaw of
Tripoli against the Usurper
l t By investing Tripoli in the rear, through the co-operations of
Hamet Bashaw, we cut off the enemy's retreat from the country and
effectually prevent him recieving supplies from any quarter whatever2@ Dread of retaliation, when thus invested, will deter the enemy
from treating our captives with cruelty 36 I n case of a close investment, the inhabitants of the city, seeing
their retreat cut off in the rear, will be very apt to open their gates to
the beseigers, to receive their legitimate sovereign, and to surrender
the usurper to punishment. We should thus get possession of the
enemy's person and suit; and our captives would be restored to us
without ranson 4th Preliminaries of peace are already agreed upon with Hamet
Bashaw, on our own terms; &, when definitely concluded, will, most
likely be permanent: for, if gratitude on his part be not a sufficient
guarantee, we hold his brother and chief admiral, Lisle, as hostages;
who may be used to turn the tables upon him whenever he becomes
faithless.
5tP The experiment will cost us very little, even if it fail of success;
nor shall we loose any ground by the failure; we shall then have the
enemy in the same position as at presentThe success of the
measure will save both life and cash: articles well worth economy in
a country where there is no redundancy of either. The general as
well as particular advantages to the United States equal all they coud
possibly realise from the most effectual coercion 6 % But to sum up all considerations in one, which ought to weigh
down all others, the faith of the United States is pledged to the friendly
Bashaw, by letter from M' Madison to me, by engagements of legitimate Agents of the United States and by conventions of several of
our commanders - By adhering to these engagements, we certainly
have the advantage of keeping faith and supporting a dignity of
character which would impress a high sense of our national perseverance and honor on the minds of the other Barbary regencies, as well
as to revive that sentiment among nations whose good opinion is more
to be desired (Disadvantages of acting against Tripoli without Harnet Bashaw)
Probable disadrantages of acting without his co-operation 1 % No doubt the enemy's town may be battered to the ground;
but he has a retreat in the rear.
2@ Our fellow citizens in captivity will most likely be placed on
the ramparts of the enemy's batteries and forced not only to expose
their breasts to our shot, but to fight against us; while we are compelled
to the painful alternative of cutting down the ranks of our own
brethren to get access to the enemy
36 I n case of forcing an evacuation of the tou-, by a bombardment, the enemy having a retreat in the rear, it neither secures to us
the release of our captives, nor our own terms of peace: the captives
will be carried away to the mountains, and pacification will be delayed
or evaded -

-

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

37

4 4 But should the enemy either find himself reduced to the necessity of yielding to terms; or prevailed on by policy to come to an
accommodation, his faith is an insufficient guarantee to the peace:
he will violate it as soon as he can do it with probable advantage and
security: examples are tpo numerous to leave the conjecture doubtful
The experiment is sure to cost us some expense of blood; and,
most probably, some sacrifice of time and money by the damages our
shipping may sustain; which would a t this moment be more sensibly
felt as we are threatned with war by a nation against whom all our
naval resourses would be reqdred, and might be more profitably
employed - But if defeated in the experiment the enemy gains a
decided advantage Whereas even the success of the measure would
fall short of the beneficial effects which might be secured at less hazard;
as it would leave us in perpetual apprehensions from the enemy's
known perfidy; as well as from the possible event of restoration of the
legitimate Bashaw, who would thus become a decided enemy 6 th Totally to abandon our engagements with the friendly Bashaw
because the indecision, inactivity, or bad generalship of certain of our
late commanders may have left him in a dubious situation would
stamp the shade of an equivocal mind on our government, which
would inflict a wound on the national sensibility and a blemish on our
portrait To Com. Barron 21. Aug. 1804.
[H. E. Huntington L&AG,EA, 206.1
To Captain Samuel Barron, U. 6. Wavy, from William Eaton, U. 6. Navy Agent for
the Barbary Regencies

EXHIBITB. to letter of Sep. 18
Is it not more consistent with the dignity and interest of the United
States to expend money in reducing than in pacifyin an open enemy?
With half the sum authorized, according to Co one1 Lear, to be
given for a precarious peace with the reigning Bashaw of Tripoli,
applied to assist the legitimate sovereign, the usurper may be made
prisoner; an honorable and permanent peace secured; and this expence saved to the United States by the re-embursement of Hamet
Bashaw Mr OBrien is decidedly in the opinion that this plan may be easily
effected. He says the rightful Bashaw- has a powerful party in Tripoli:
that the usurper has spread the report of his death with a view of
baffling their hopes; and that, in order to attack their superstition
and their desparation to his cause, he inculcates the idea into his
subjects that the Americans are infidels and savages, canibals and
monsters of cruelty - Whereas, were their lawful sovereign shown to
them in our fleet, with assurances that we are neither at war with their
religion nor their repose; but that we respect both, and seek nothing
more than that justice which would restore them to peace and to
their proper allegiance, the very soldiery called to the defence of the
enemy, would desert him and take an opposite part: the Arabs are
generally in favor of the friendly Bashaw - This opinion is general
where the circumstances are known But if fighting alone can secure our honor, I should nevertheless
object to taking a vicious horse by the heels when we have a bridle
In his mouth and can sieze the reins! Besides, it is the success of a
measure, more than the mode of effecting it, which secures public

f

38

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1804 TO 1806

eclat. Those who should be of a different sentiment may take
consolation from the probability, that the resistance which despair
would induce the enemy to attempt will be sufficient to all the purposes
of glory Sop. 8. 1804.
To Cornre BARRON.
[H. E. Huntington L t A G . EA, 206.1
118 September 18041
Resolution of the Congress of the United States Concerning attacks on Tripoli

RESOLUTIONS
expressive of

the sense of Congress of the gallant conduct of Commodore Edward Preble, the officers, seamen, and
marines of his squadron.
Resolved, d c . , That t.hanks of Congress be, and the same are hereby,
presented to Commodore Edward Preble, and through him to the
officers, seamen, and marines, attached to the squadron under his
command, for their gallantry and good conduct displayed in the
several attacks on the town, batteries, and naval force of Tripoli, in
the year 1804.
Resoleed, That the President of the United States be requested to
cause a gold medal to be struck, emblematical of the attacks on the
town, batteries, and naval force of Tripoli, by the squadron under
Commodore Preble's command, and to present it to Commodore
Preble i11 such manner as, in his opinion, will be most honorable to
him: and that the President be further requested to cause a sword to
be presented to each of the commissioned officers and midshipmen
who have distinguished themselves in the several attacks.
.ljesolved, That one montlls' pay be allowed, exclusive of the common allowance, to all the petty officers, seamen, and marines, of the
squadron, who so gloriously supported the honor of the American
flag, under the orders of their gallant commander, in the several
attacks.
Resolved, That the President of the United States be also requested
to communicate to the parents, or other near relatives, of Captain
Richard Somers, Lieutenants Henry Wadsworth, James Decatur,
James R. CaldwelI, Joseph Isreal, and Midshipman John Sword
Dorsey, the deep regret which Congress feel for the loss of those
gallant men, whose names ought to live in the recollections and
affections of a grateful country, and whose conduct ought to be
regarded as an example to future generations.
APPROVED,
March 3,1805.
[Attention is invited to page 214 of "Our Navy and the Barbary Corsairs" by
Gardner W. Allen, and letter of 18 September 1804 to Secretary of the Xavv
from Ca tain Edward Preble, printed on pages 293 to 308, in Naval Documents.
United gales Wars v d h the Barbwy Powem, volume IV.]
[Navy Register, 1798.1

[I8 September 18041
To Captain Edward Preble, U, S. Havy from Secretary of the Navy

NAVYDEPARTMENT,
May 17,1806.
SIR:In pursuance of the resolution of Congress, of the 3d of March,
1805, requesting the President of the United States to cause a old
medd to be struck, emblernatiral of the ~ t t a r k son the town, %at-

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

39

P

teries, and naval force, of Tripoli, by the squadron under your command, and to present i t to you in such manner as, in his opinion,
would be most honorable to you, the medal which will herewith be
delivered to you by Lieutenant Jones has been struck. You will
receive it, sir, as a testimony of your country's estimation of the
important and honorable services rendered by you; and you will be
pleased to accept an assurance of the great pleasure I have in the
honor of presenting it to you.
R. SMITH
To Commodore EDWARD
PREBLE.
[NDA and Am. State Papers. Nav. Aff., Vol. 1.j

[I8 September 18041
To Secretary of the Navy from Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Navy
PORTLAND
June 1Y'h 1806 -

SIR, By Lieu! Jones of the Navy I had this day the honor to receive
your Official letter of the 17t@Ult? accompanying a gold medal struck
m pursuance of a resolution of Congress of the 34 March 1805 emblematical of the attacks on the town, batteries and naval forces of
Tripoli, by the squadron under my Command. - please to communicate to the President of the United Stat,es,that I accept with gratitude,
this honorable testimony of the approbation of my country - and I
pray you to be assured that I am truly sensible of the very handsome
& obliging manner in which i t has been presented.
EDWARD
PREBLE
[NDA. Captain's LB, 1806, Vol. 2.1

[I8 September 18041
To Secretary of the Navy from Captain William Bainbridge, U. S. Navy

NEW-YORK, 12th February, 1806.
SIR - In compliance with your letter of the 6th instant, which this
day came to hand, I hasten to detail the services rendered to the crew
of the United States' late frigate PhiJadelphia, by Nicholas C. Nissen,
Esq. his Danish l\1ajest,y1sconsul residing there.
In consequence of the mode of imprisonment, it was impossible for
the officers to procure the necessary articles of subsistence. They
were therefore necessitated to receive their daily provision, &c.
through another channel. Mr. Nissen generously offered his services
to obtain our necessary supplies, which he did in the most faithful
manner, for nineteen months and three days, the period of our captivity, and at times when the funds placed a t my command in Tripoli
were expended, he continued our daily supply by his own means,
until ours were renewed by the commodore of the Mediterranean
squadron, or George Davis, Esq. charge des affaires a t Tunis, to whom
we are ~ r e a t l yindebted.
Had it not been for the friendly aid of consul Nissen, we should
not have received our subsistence in so regular a manner as we did,
and should have been exposed at a great expense to the impositions
of the lowest class of our memy. His attentions were not confined
solely to the officers, but were equally extended to the seamen and
soldiers.
- -- - .
Consul Nissen was the first Christian we saw after landing on the
shore of Africa, and he met us the very evening of our misfortune,
-

-

40

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1804 TO 1805

with the philanthropy of a man of feeling, and immediately administered to our wants, by sending provision and bedding from his
house, and ameliorated as much as possible our truly unpleasant
situation.
I carnot, in justice to his attention, omit mentioning a circumstance which shows the lively interest he took in our situation, and
the hazard he ran to serve us. When commodore Preble attacked
Tripoli, Mr. Nissen's house was as much exposed as any in the town,
and himself in danger from the bombardment. I solicited him frequently to leave his dangerous situation, and retire to the gardens,
where the consuls were. He requested me not to importune him more
to leave the town, for he preferred running the risk of the shot and
shells from our squadron, and attending to our wants, to resorting to
the gardens. In thus ursuing the dictates of a feehng mind, he was
very near losing his li e by a shot from the Consitution: Had he not
acted in this friendly manner towards us, it is very probable we should
have been several days without provisions, as the enemy were occupied and exasperated.
I have, sir, detailed to you generally, the services rendered to the
officers and crew of the Philadelphia, at Tripoli, by Nicholas C. Nissen,
Esq. but it is impossible for me to convey a just sense of them. Nothing but a perfect acquaintance with our situation, and the aid we
received, can truly estimate the services rendered.
W. BAINBRIDGE.
To the honorable R. SMITH,
Secretary of the Navy.
Having received this information, Congress passed the following
resolution:
Resolved by the Senate and House o Representatives o f the United
States of America in Congress assemb ed, That the President of the
United States be requested to cause to be made known to Nicholas
C. Nissen, Esq. his Danish Majesty's consul residing at Tripoli, the
high sense entertained by Congress of his disinterested and benevolent
attentions, manifested to captain Bainbridge, his officers, and crew,
during the time of their captivity in Tripoli.
APPROVED
10th April 1806.
[Naval Chronicle, Vol. 1.1

P

t

To Captain Edward Preble, U. 6. Navy, from Marcello de Gregorio, Governor of
Syracuse

COPY
SYRACUSE
19*h September 1804
SIRI avail myself of the present occasion to congratulate you on
the honor you have acquired in your late glorious expedition against
Tripoli. I have not failed to state the relation of it to the Court,
which manifests the highest gratification both on account of your
success, as well as the intrepidity of that conduct in the Neapolitans
which has merited your approbation.
Your presence is very necessary here. I t is with the utmost regret
I am constrained to acquaint you that the discipline which you enforced, is no longer maintained; for which reason, continual applications of the Inhabitants here, are made to Me for redress. I have
waited for your arrival with the utmost anxiety, fully persuaded,
that the event would restore things to their former good order; but

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

41

I learn with the utmost concern that you will return to the UnitedStates without touching here. I thus lose a good friend, for whom I
entertain the most perfect esteem; and whom I shall ever retain on
my memory
Please accept the assurances of my highest respect and perfect
esteem -

(Signed) MARCELLO
DE GREGORIO

(LC. EPP, Vol. 13, AugustDecember 1804.1
Extract from journal of U.6. Brig Argus. laster Commandant Isaac H a ,U. 8. Navy,
commanding, Wednesday, 19 September 1804

[Harbor of Valetta., Malta,] Received 13 Tripolitan Prisoners
from the Constitution At 8 AM sent awa.y all the Greek Prisoners
[NDA photostat.]

Extract from log book of U. 8. Brig Argus. 18 Guns, presumably kept by Sailing
Master Samuel B. Brooke, U. S. Navy, Master Commandant Iaaac fla,U. S.
Wavy, commanding, Wednesday, 19 September 1804

[Malta] This day Commences with fresh breezes and Clear Weather
Employed Watering R e d fresh beef for all hands from the U. S
Ship Constitution At 10 A M . 13 Tripolitan Prisoners came on boaxd
from the Constitution and sent away a l l the Greek Prisoners
At Meridian fine Pleasent Weather people Employed as Necessary
!LC. EPP, Argus, 1804.)
Extract from log book kept by SaiIing Maater Nathaniel Haraden, 8. S. Xavg, an
board U. 6. Frigate Consiitution, Wednesday, 19 September 1804

Moderate breezes from the SE. We continue in Quarantine.
Employed overhading the rigging aloft, reeving the lower Geers,
and Top tackle Pendants in readiness for striking the lower yards &
t opmasts The Greek Polacca which the Argus brought in is in Quarantine
with the other twoThe Men belonging to them remain in them Their Captains are on board the ConstituZion A. M. Strong breezes from the SE.
At day light a Maltese Ketch came alongside Employed this forenoon in putting on board the ketch, for Messina, the Six 24 pounders
which we received in Kaples, the two Bombs taken out of the Bombards off Trip01 , the two brass howitzers received at Messina & all
the remaining stot di shellsWe also put on board of the Argus
this forenoon all our Tripoline Prisoners which are to be sent to
Saragosa At 7 A. M. eleven additional cauIkers came on board, & are employed with the others in caulking the upper deckOne of the small
brass guns received in Messina was sent in the Ketch with the other
Stores- the other is on boaxd the Enterprize We this forenoon returned to the Argus her Anchor which we received some time ago in
Saragosa,
Surgeons report 5 Sick - con^"^^
[LC. EPP,Log ConstUulion, 1803-1804 ]

42

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1804 TO 1805

Extract from journal of Hidshipman F. Cornehus deKrafft, U. S. Navy, in U. 8.
Brig Siren of 18 guns, Master Commandant Charles Stewart, U. 8. Navy, commanding, Wednesday, 19, September, 1804

[Syracuse] Gentle breezes & clear, rec* fresh Provisions for the
crew - M' Anderson & Mr Broun was arrested, they being seconds
in the above affair.
Meridian moderate breezes & pleasant sent thet launch on shore
with a number of ships articles, sails &c. At 2 P M the remains of
Mr Nicholson was taken on shore & buried r e d from the John Adams
a quantity of provisions &c &c.
Midnight light winds & cloudy.

-

INDAI
To Colonel Dwight from Willism Eaton, U. 8. Navy Agent for the Barbary Regencies

MALTA
Sep. 20 ch 1804
SIR,Commodore Barron's squadron arrived here on the 5Fn and fell
in with Commodore Preble off Tripoli on the gtb instant - The
enterprize of this judicious and gallant commander has effected astonishment here. You will undoubtedly have the facts in detail before
the public. With the small force under his command he has stamped
an impression on the Barbary mind which will not be erased this
generation and has restored the charracter of our arms to its proper
consideration among the ne~ghbouringnations - As evidence of this
conclusion I extract the following paragraph from a letter addressed
to the Commodore by a distinguished commander in the british navy
whose abilities and valor have raised him to high rank, great eminence,
and to the government of the most important port in this sea - [*I

*

*

*

*

*

*

*

This encomium has the more weight as it comes from a quarter too
independent to use adulation, and very capable of judging of the
merit of brilliant actions The Pope of Rome expresses himself on the subject - "The American
Commander, with a small force and in a short space of time, has done
more -for the cause of Christianity than the most powerful nations qf
Christendom have done .for ages!" I firmly believe the Holy Father is
correct. If I could obtain as handsome a certificate, and as fairly,
I should be apt to be very indifferent about an absolution for past
sins, and should be in danger of being so about committing fresh
ones - But this is a kind of selfish, sinful sentiment in which you
can take no interest - I %illassure you therefore, as I know you will
share the pride I feel on this occasion, that an American is no longer
ashamed of an American Uniform here - And that a Barbary cruiser
pews an American flag in this sea with as much caution as a scullung
debtor does a deputy sheriff in our country - The Bey of Tunis
twists his mustaches in sullen amazement. Dispair broods frowningly
on the dark brow of the pirate of Tripoli - And the whole coast of
these regencies seem astonished with the forebodings of uncommon
curses; for its is an inauspicious omen, but now known to them, that
the order of things should be so inverted that Christians should be
seen carrying Turks by the board, and Turks flying before Christians,
an hundred to one superior in number and on their own ground Hamet Bashaw is still in a situation to be brought on the enemy's
rear - I am now bound to Alexandria to arrange with him a plan of

WARS WITH BARBARY P0E7ERS

43

co-operations; and in about forty days I hope to. organizing my
Saracen militia on the plains of Lybia in order to brlng them to the
field early next spring. If suitable supplies are furnished for this
enterprise I form sanguine expectations of realizing all my calculations
on this project. If these supplies are with held I shall be compelled
to draw on the enthusiasm of Arabian resentment and bigotry as a
substitute for field artilery, muskets, musket catridges, flints &c.
&c. - for I shall not abandon the object.
You will have an acquaintance with Commodore Preble - He has
too well distinguished himself to need private introductions - And
his talents are too. conspicuous to make i t necessary for me to say
that such an acquamtance is an acquision - Yet I cannot with-hold
from you an expressipn of my serious apprehensions that, however
justly we may appreciate the valor and abilities of his successor, the
service will suffer from his retiring - The unbounded confidence the
officers on the station have in his capacities as a commander, and the
very marked regrets they manifest a t his leaving it, render this apprehension natural without detaching any thing from the merits due to
the manly and amiable disposition of Commodore Barron [*See letter to Commodore Preble from Sir Alexander John Ball, Governor of
Malta, dated 20 September 1804.1

Hon: Col: DWIGHT
[H. E. Huntington L&AG. EA 208.1
To Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Navy, from Sir Alexander John Ball, Governor of
Malta

MALTA20th Septem' 1804
MY DEAR SIR I have but this moment received your letter of the
17th Ins! inclosing one for hl: Schimbri which I immediately forwarded - I am happy to learn that I am to have the pleasure of
seeing you before your return to America I beg to repeat my congratulations on the services you have rendered your country, and the hair breadth escapes you have had in
setting so distinguished an example to your countrymen whose bravery
and enterprize cannot fail to mark the character of a great & rismg
nation in a manner that will be ultimately attended with the best &
most important consequences to your country If I were to offer my humble opinion i t would be, that you have
done well in not purchasing a peace with money - A few brave men
have been sacrificed; but they could not have fallen in a better cause:
and I even conceive i t better to iisk more lives than to submit to
terms which might encourage the Barbary States to add fresh demands & insults
[LC. EPP, LR, April-Xov. 1804.1
To William Higgins, U. S. Navy Agent, Malta, from Captain Edward Preble,
U. S. Navy
Constitution ~ ~ A L THARBOUR
I

Septemr doth 1804

DEARSIR I am honored with your letter of this date informi-

me that the Judge of the British Vice Admiralty court has allowed-the
Register, Interpreter Bc of that Court to assist in taking that deposlt~ons
of the Greeks on board the vessels lately detained by the U. S. Squad-

44

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1804 TO 1805

ron off Tripoly for a Breach of Blockade - You are therefore at
liberty to take such measures as will be most like1 to complete the
business in the shortest possible time - You d a l s o take charge
of the papers of said vessel & haye them translated [LC. EPP, LB, April-Nov. 1804.1
To Captain Samuel Barron, U. S. Navy, from Master Commandant Isaac Channcey,
U. 8. Navy

U. S. SHIPJohn A d a m
Syracuse dot@Septr 1804
SIR I n a Circular Letter from the Navy Department of the 3Ot+

COPY

of May last I am directed to oblige the Purser, in issuing Slops to take
Receipts for the Identical Articles issued and that the Value of each
Article will be fixed on or before my return, but as I have now transferred my Crew to the En.terprize, their Accounts cannot be settled
untill the Prices of their Slops are fixed, and as I have no Instructions
from the Navy Department on that Head, I must request that you
will direct in what Manner the Accounts shall be settled.
If you uiII fix the Prices or Percentage on the Slops and say what
Articles are to be considered Slops and what the Purser's Stores I will
see that, the Accounts are settled and forwarded to the Commander of
the Enterprize from Malta for which place I shall sail in a few Days,
and where I shall be happy to receive any Instructions on the above
together with any Dispatches or Commands for the United States.
The Marines of the Enterprize have been transferred to this Ship
for the Purpose of going Home, but as I have no Instructions respecting
my own I have detained them untill your pleasure is known. Be so
good as to forward my Gun Carriages to me at Malta. if Convenient as
I shall be truly a Man of War udhout Cuns if I am obliged to go Home
without them I sincerely congratulate you on your Arrival and wish you every
Success against the Enemy: I at one Time indulged the Hope of cornposing a Part of the Squadron, but it appears, that the Service requires my returning to the United States with the John Adams
P.S. Since writing the within I have received an Order from Capt.
Decatur 60 transfer to the Enterprize all the Marines whose Time has
not, nor is not about to expire, which Order I have Comply'd
with
T fl
1. b.

[LC. EPP, Vol. 13, AugustDecember 1804.1
Extract from Commonplace Book by William Eaton, U. S. Navy Agent for the
Barbary Regencies, Thursday, 20 September 1804

The Naut,ulus arrived at Malta; brings intelligence of the capture
of two American vessels by Corsaires of Tunis - Boarded two
Tunisian cruisers at Malta which had M' Davis' passports of the 36
Sep. instant [H. E. Huntington M A G , EA 207, Commonplace Book.]
Extract from journal kept by Purser John Darby, U. S. Navy, on board U. S. 8.
John Adams, Master Commandant Isaac Chauncey, U. S. Navy, commending,
Thursday, 20 September 1804

-

[Syracuse Harbor] We are still discharging our cargo. &C.
Lieut. Jas S. Higinbothom: MT Parker. Swarengen and Magruder

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

45

left the ship to join the Schooner Enterprize and 45 Seamen & Boys. &
10 Marines, came from the Schooner Enterprize Geo. Mitchell &
Walter Boyd Midshipmen & 35 men and boys & 11 Marines [NDA original. Miss Camilla S. McConnell.]
To Captain Samuel Barron, U. S. Navy, from Surgeon's Mate Lewis Heermann,
U. S. Navy

U: S: SCH~:
Enterprize. Syracuse Septr 21 1804
SIR, I t is with regret, that domestic circumstances render it necessary for me to adress this to You & to sollicit Your leave for returning
to the United States: during the lapse of near thirty months I was
repeatedly induced to promise myself that satisfaction, & was as
often disappointed. I flatter myself You will take my petition into
consideration & assuming the liberty of assuring You, that I have
allready been sufferer from circumstances, besides making greater
sacrifices inevitable, entertain no doubt, You will grant a request,
which can be of no detriment to the present service.
[Mrs. James S. Barron Col.]
Extract from journal of U.S. Brig Argus, Master Commandant Isaac Hull, U.S. Navy,
commanding, Friday, 21 September 1804

[Harbor of Vdetta] At 6 AM arrived here the U. S. Schooner
iVautilus from Syracuse we was run foul of by a large Transport
Ship r e d no Injury but Sp[r]inging our Starboard Cathead
[NDA photostat.]

Extract from journal of U.S. Brig Argus. l a s t e r Commandant Isaac Hull, U. S. Navy,
commanding, Saturday, 22 September 1804
[Harbor of Valletta Malta.] At 4 AM The wind hauled to the

NW Prepared to Weigh Weighed and warped out of the harbour
at M past 7 made sail stood off & on for the Commodore at 9 he came
on board with M' Eaton Mr Randolph & Mr Morris Made Sail
[NDA photostat.]
Extract from Memorandum Book of Captain Edward Preble, U. 6. Navy, on board
U. S. Brig Argus, 22 September 1804

Sailed for Syracuse in the Argus to settle accounts.
[LC original.]
Extract from journal of William Eaton, U. S. Navy Agent for the Barbary Regencies,
Saturday, 22 September 1804

Sailed for Syracuse. Commodore Preble on board [U. S. Brig
Argus].
[PI'R&L. No. 9217 Bml E 14.1
Extract from journal of Midshipman F. Cornelius deKrafft, U. S. Navy, in U. 6. Bfig
Siren of 18 guns, Master Commandant Charles Stewart, U. S. Navy, commanhg,
Saturday, 22 September 1804

[Syracuse] Commences with light airs from the N E & cloudy.
At 10 r e d fresh Provisions for the crew.

46

NAVAL OPERATIONS FEOM 1804 TO 1805

Meridian light winds from the northwQ & fine weather. RecQ 10
sheep, water & butter from shore 4 past 3 hove short. 4 past 4
weigh'd & stood out, made sail working out of the harbour in Co:
with the Enterpn'z~. past 4 Capt Decatur came on board. At 6
calm. 3 past 6 hoisted out the barge too tow the brig. ,4t 7 came
too & furl'd all sail, the Enterprize came too also. At fr past 7 shipp'd
15 men that formerly belong'd to the Enterprize. Midnight Calm. -

+

[NDAJ
To Captain John Rodgers, U. S. Navy, commanding U. S. Frigate Congress, from
Captain Samuel Barron, U. S. Navy

U. STATESS H ~President
P
off Tripoli 2SrdSept' 1804.
SIR Circumstances make i t necessary that I should go into
Syracuse & Malta to make some arrangements, with respect to the
future operations of the Squadron You will therefore please to remain here with the Congress and
ConsteUation, until you are reinforced with some smaller Vessels turo
of which I expect momentarily from Syracuse, as soon as they arrive,
you will proceed with one of the Frigates, to Syracuse to Water learing one of them here, to cooperate with the smaller Vessels, until
relieved by another Frigate, it is my wish to have all the largo Ships,
ready for a particular Service. some time in the nest month. As it respects TTessels attempting to enter Tripoli with contraband
articles, you will proceed with them as Circumstances may point out
to you. Provisions are by no means to be suffer'd to pass I% if you
suppose that any Vessels which you may intercept with Provisions
&P, really intended to enter the Port, with a Knowledge of the existance
of the Blockade, Send them to Malta, address'd to Mr Hi,g' ins our
agent, to wait for orders. [LC. JRP, Letters & Orders, 1804-1805.1
Extract from journal of U. S. Brig Argus, Master Commandant Isaac Hull, U. S. navy,
commanding, Sunday, 23 September 1804

.4t 4 PM three Strange sail in Sight a t Kept away in chace of 2
Sail to leeward fired 2 Guns at 1 of them and brought her to a t 9
ordered her boat on board of us she proved a Tunisian Cruizer from
Malta
[XDA photostat.]
Extract from log book of U. S. Brig Argus, 18 guns, presumably kept by Sailing
Master Samuel B. Brooke, U. 6. Navy, Master Commandant Isaac Hull, U. S.
Navy, commanding, Sunday, 23 September 1804

This day Commences with mode Breezes and CIear Keather
At 4 AM weighed the stream Anchor at 3 past 5 Weighed the
Bower at [sic] And u-arped out of the harbour a t $ past 7 Cast OfT the
Warps and made Sail in Comp' with the Ketch
From 8 to 9 standing off and on the harbour of Malta waiting for
Cornmod' Preble a t 9 the Commodore &
Eaton
I! Afr Morris and hl?
Randolp[h] came on board to go to Syracuse the harbour of Malta
bore W S W distr 3 miles At Meridian the Ketch astern hove too and
and took her in tow [LC. EPP, Argus, 1804.1

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

47

Extract from journal kept by Purser John Darby, U. S. Navy, on board U. 6. 6.
John Adams, Master Commandant Isaac Chauncey, U. S. Navy, commanding,
Sunday, 23 September 1804

[Syracuse Harbor] At half past 7. this morning the Brig Syren and
Schooner Enterprize got under way and stood out of the Harbour at half past 2. P hil the U States Brig Argus came in and Anchored with
Commodore Preble Mr Eaton & Mr Randolph on board soon after the
Brig Syren & Schooner Enterprize came in - During these 24 hours
came in five Merchantmen two from Malta two from Messina and
one from Mashill [NDA original. Miss Camilla S. hlcConne1l.J
Extract from journal of Midshipman F. Cornelius deKrafft, U. S. Navy, in U. S. Brig
Siren of 18 guns, Master Commandant Charles Stewart, U. S. Navy, commanding,
Sunday, 23 September 1804
Calm & pleasant weather. At 4 a light breeze from the S. Wd At

6 weigh'd & made sail, stood out of the harbour [of Syracusej Enterprize in Co: At 9 back'd the main topsail & spolie the Enterprize several sail in sight r e d fresh beef for the crew. Meridian a fresh breeze fill'd away. the Argus in sight to windward with a Ketch in tow. At 2 spoke the Argus, was requested to
ware & stand in again (by Comm: Preble At 4 came too in 64 fathoms, also the Argus Enterprize & Ketch. Midnight fresh breezes from the Ed [N DA.]
To Joseph Barnes, U. S. Consul, Naples, from Abraham Gibbs, U. S. Consul,
Palermo

PALERMO
24 Sept: 1804
DEARSIR I have before me your obliging favor without Place
or date, but I concluded it was from Leghorn written 3 Ins?, having
received other letters of that date. I am looking out for yours every
hour as a Vessel is expected in from Naples &. another from Leghorn.
the Scene begins to be very interesting & I have the pleasure to say
that all the Gunboats & Bombards were safe returned with two prizes,
at Syracuse on the 15 Ins: with the J o h n Adams loaded with stores &c.
the Constitution is still off Tripoli with Commodore Barron &. three
more frigates. they have compleatly beaten the Turks but unfortunately have lost 6 brave officers & abt 40 men & I regret very much
that Cap: Somers, Lieu' Decatur, Wadworth Dorsey &q are among
the slain. the Neapolitans behaved well &- not one lost, the Bashaw
has offered to make peace almost upon any Terms. & I am in great
expectation of good news from that quarter every day. Many thanks
for your News - under every point of view I consider a continental
War inevitable, & permanent with England as long as Bonaparte continues at the head of affairs, for his ambition has no bounds & Mz Pitt
has declared that England cannot disarm for that reason even in the
Event of Peace We have had no arrivals from the United States for some time 8: I
consider it a fortunate circumstance for every market in the h~fediterranean is overstocked with Colonial produce - nothing has been
done here for some time & any prices that I might quote you would be
at random -

48

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1804 TO 1805

You will find enclosed the only letter I have received for you.
London 564
Leg. 12
Naples 1183
[KA. SDA. CL, Palerrno, 18021838.1
To Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Navy, from George Davis, U. 6. Charge d'dffaires,

Tunis

T U N I SSeptemr 2.4" 1804

DEARSIR Since I had this pleasure every thing has remained in

perfect tranquillity, as relates to ourselves; and indeed infinitely more
so with this Govt than we ought to have expected - another complaint was offered to the Bey on the 1.5" Inst, by the owner of a
Tunisien Corsair, which was handled a little roughly by the President His Exce1'Y dismissed the complainant, without even giving him the
satisfaction of calling me to the Palace I learn by a letter of the 3d Ins: from Wm Eaton Esqr that the
reinforcement has arrived; and is probabl at this time before Tripoli;
as I know there are letters in the fleet or me; (one package to the
care of Lt Ludlow) will you pardon my requesting that they may be
forwarded mc, by the first safe conveyance, Via Malta - I t is announced from various quarters, that the French Fleet has left Brest;
feu in with the English Forces; engaged; and beaten with the loss of
three, some say eight Ships of the Line - the French Admiral, and
m English Ship of the Line blew up -Lord Nelson returns to England
in the course of the ensuing month - The Northern Powers are said
to have formed a Coalition against France; if this should ultimately
prove the case (which may happen) Spain will hare other occupation
than the Lousiana business - I ofer you this Political paragraph,
as I ereg [sic] 13 I have advices from Col, Lear up to the 1" of Septr - nothing
particular as to our affairs - the Govt seems, disposed for T ' gorous
measures, in those Seas - Their labours wi11 be crowned with success,
to the honor of America & disgrace of Europe: If they do not become
fatigued, with the probable length of the war - It tt-ould afford me
particular pleasure to see you at Tunis, for many, great, and weight
reasons -,and when I might again assure you in person; of the higi
consideration
distinguished respect, and sincere regard
with which I have the honor to be &c

r'

[LC. EPP, Vol. 13, August-December 1804.1
To Captain Samuel Barzon, U. S. Navy, from Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Navy

SYRACUSE
24th of September 1804
SIR,I arrived here yesterday in the Argus, and met with the Spen
& Enterprize off the Harbour, the wind blowing so strong from the
Sea that they could gain nothing by keeping out, and as I was desirous of sending to Malta some Rigging &c@for the Constitution, I
desired t.hem to return - they sail tomorrow to join you. The Gun
& Mortar Boats are still here waiting for convoy to Messina; the
expence to Government is so great, that I have desired Captain Hull
to convoy them round; this &-ill be in favor of his fitting the Argus
with expedition, as cadkers are not to be had here at present, and

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

49

there are plenty a t Messina. He sails tomorrow, and I hope will be
detained there, but a very few days in compleating the necessary
repairs I go by land to settle Accounts &c" m d shall return to Mdta
in the Argus or John Adams, as will Captain Decatur. I hope to
have the pleasure of seeing you at Syracuse before I leave it. I have
provided an excellent house for an Hospital where the sick are now
comfortably accomodated.
I refer you to Captain Stewart for further information and have the
honor to remain with esteem & respect Sir
P S, Captain Decatur goes to Messina with me to arrange the
order that you may not be troubled with
business of Prizes &c"
applications respecting them after I leave this. Mr Eaton, & M'
Randolph accompany us. - On our passage from Malta, we boarded
a Tunisine Corsair of 16 Guns, but a few days from Tunis, with Mr
Davis's passport. - E P.
(LC. EPP, LB,April-Nov. 1804.1

-

To Captain Stephen Decatur, Jr., U. 6. Navy, from Captain Bdward Preble, U. S.
Navy

SYRACUSE 24th Septembe~1804.
SIR YOUwill please to repair to Malta in the Argus and on your
arrival there, take command of the U S. Ship Constitution at anchor
in that Harbour - prepare her with a l l possible expedition for a
cruise of three Months and proceed off Tripoli to join the Squadron
blockading that coast under command of Commodore S m ! Barron.
I am happy that my supercedure in the command of the Squadron,
and consequent return to the United-States affords an opportunity of
placing you immediately in the exercise of the duties attached to that
Commission which you have so gallantly earned, and your Country
thus generously bestowed. I feel a pleasure in leaving the Constdudion
under the command of an Officer whose enterprizing and Manly conduct in battle, I have so often witnessed; and who merits so eminently
entitle to so handsome a command
May you ever continue in the pursuits of Glory, and be crowned
with success [LC. EPP, LB, April-Nov. 1804.1
Extract from Memorandum Book of Captasn Edward Preble,
U. 6. Brig Argus. 24 September 1804

U. S. Navy, on board

Arrived at Syracuse and ordered Capt. Decatur to go to Malta
and take command of the Constitution.
[LC original.]
Extract from journal of William Eaton, U. S. Navy Agent for the Barbary Regencies,
Monday, 24 September 1804

Arrived a t Syracuse [in U. S. Brig Argus]. The John Adams here.
[NR&L. No. 9217, Bm' E 14.1
Extract from journal of U. S. Brig Argus. Master Commandant Isaac E d ,U.S. Navy,
commanding, Monday, 24 September 1804

at 1 PM spoke the U. S. Brig Syren and Enterprize At 3 PM came
too in the harbour of Syracuse in 9 P T ~ a t e rSyren and enterprize

50

NAt7AL OPERATIONS FROM 1804 TO 1805

in Company found here the U. S. frigate John Adams 8 Gun boats
and 2 bomb Vessels
[NDA photostat.]
Extract from log book of U. S. Brig Argus. I8 Guns, presumably kept by Sailing
Master Samuel 8. Brooke, U. S. Navy, Master Commandant Isaac Bull, U. 6.
Navy, commanding, Monday, 24 September 1804

This day Commences with Mode Breezes and Pleasent Weather
at 4 P M three strange sail in Sight at 5 bore away in Chace of
2 mil to leward set studding sails & Royds fired 2 Guns at the
chsce a t 9 brought her too she sent her boaf on board She proved
to be a Tunisian Cruizer, from Malta
At midnight light airs and pleasent Ws At 2 AM calm Cast off
the Ket,ch at 5 saw the land bearing from I T N W to W S W Lat"bs'!
36' 51' X.
[LC. EPP, Argus, 1804.1
Extract from journal of IT. S. Frigate Congress, Captain John Rodgers, TI. 8. Navy,
commending, Monday, 24 September 1804

[Off Tripoli] at 1 [Phl] Discoverd two sail a head $ past 3 Spoke
the President and Constellation at Sunset the high Land to the east,w@
of Tripoli bore South At past 6 h/lr Lear the Consul and his lady
went on Board the President. at 5 past 10 the President and Constellation took their departure for Malta
A. M. a t 8 the town of Tripoli Bore S S E
At 10 discoverd a sail on the Larbd Bow
At Meredian Moderate breezes and clear weather the toum of
Tripoli bore S B W disbance 4 miles

+

[USNA.]
To Assistant Snrgeon John W. Dorsey, U. S. Navy, from Captain Edward Preble,
U. S. Navy

SYRACCSE
25th Sepf' 1804
SIR,YOUare hereby directed to take charge of the sick and hurt
officers seamen & marines a t the Hospital in this place until further
orders from Commodore Samuel Barron - commander in chief of the
United States Naval forces in the Mediterranean; and will make your
requisitions for Hospital Stores on George Dyson Esquire Xaval
Agent.
ILC. EPP, Order Book, May 1803-June 1805.1
Extract from log book of U. S. Brig Argus. 18 Guns, presumably kept by Sailing
Master Samuel B. Brooke, U. S. Navy, Master Commandant Isaac Hull, U. S.
Navy, commanding, Tuesday, 25 September 1804

This day Commences with mod' breezes and fine pleasent Weather
At 1 P M spoke the U. S. Brig Syren and Schooner Enterprize at 3
came too in the harbour of Syracuse in 7 fathoms water found here
the U. S frigate John Adams and 8 Gunboats & 2 Bomb Vessels Commodore Preble Mr Eaton Mr Morris & M' Randolph went on Shore At Meridian d m ' Empc as Necessary
[LC. EPP, Argus, 1804.1

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

51

from journal of U. 6. Prigate Congrwj, Captain John Bodgers, U. 6. Bavy,
commanding, Tuesday, 26 September 1804

-act

P. M commences with moderate Breezes and clear weather 3 past
12 discoverd a sail to the Eastward made sail and gave chace At 2
spoke the schooner Nautilus with a store ship under hir convoy
Latitude Observed 33' 03' N.
[USNA.]
Extract from log book kept by Sailing Master Nathaniel Haraden, U. 6. Navy, on
board U. 6. Frigate ConsNlution, Tuesday, 26 September 1804

Fresh breezes from N W, We continue under quarantinecaulka-s
employed on the upper deck, carpenters employed in dubbing between
decks, Received this Afternoon a Caulkers stage from the dock yard,
ships company employed in rattling down the topmast & lower Rigging, condemned and hove over board on Monday last one Barrel of
Pork and 100 pounds Salt Beef, Received in the course of the day from
the Quarantine ground 69 Gang Casks of Water, Night moderate,
A M. at 7 nine Carpenters came on board they are victualed on
board with the others, They have been employed this forenoon in
taking down the Figure head whlch is cut to eices & thrown aside as
useless, Ships company employed m wo ding the Bows rit, I n
L ~
taking the wouldings & fishes off the Mam mast, and in ~ a t t and
taring the Rigging, Caulkers all, (except a few to compleat the upper
deck) employed on the Gun deck, Noon pleasant weather, [LC. EPP, Log Constitution, 1803-1804.1

-

J

TOSecretary of State from George Davis, U. S. Charge d'Affaires, Tunis

NQ 19.

TUNISS e ~ t r 2 6 1804.
~@
SIR, I am this day honored with your letter of the 8t@of June,
apprising me of the decision of His Exc? the President, relative to our
affairs in these Seas. - If a considerable procrastination, of the war,
should not vary the views of Government, our labours will ultimately
be crowned with Success; - but such an important object, cannot be
acquired, in one campaign -.The actlve and Successful operations of
Commodore Preble, with a single frigate, against the whole forces of
Tripoli, could not fail to have impressed on the mind of the Bashaw,
just Sentiments of respect and fear, for that Nation, which has
hitherto, been placed as the most insignificant of Powers - This in
itself is not SufEcient - The Secret adviser, (or Prime Minister) of
every Barbary Prince,.musf, necessarily be the POLITICAL ENEMY of
the Power at war; and invanably one, whose Situation enables him to
make such calculations "on the expences" objects to be acquired possible
result &c. &c. as ought to have the greatest weight, in directing the
decisions of the Chief. - M' BEAUSSIER
(than whom, none can so well
make known, the Bashaw's mtentions) in his letter to Cornmod?
Preble, Slightly touching on this Subject, is most unquestionably
correct My opinions relative to the affairs of Tripoli, have not of late
been Suggested; from a conviction that those whose immediate duty
it was to report on this subject, were Men of years, fill'd with wisdom
and experience; and consequently had made known every circumstance, which could have any hfluence; in h i n g the determination of
His Exc? the President - I beg leave to offer one remark, and the

NAI7AI, OPERATIONS FROM 1804 TO 1805

52

force of which is so apparent, that i t ought. to have some weight,
dt2101 coming from me.
The Commander in Chief of ,our present
formidable forces (formidable for acting against such an mslgnificant
enemyj or whomever else is empower'd to conclude the*peace Should never offer t m s but once; these terms bemg rejected, no
apparent Success of Arms, should induce us renew them, far wben
they are to be accepted, the Bashaw will r e a d y devise means to make
it known.
Every offer that is made him, not only adds to his Insolence; but Increases his pretentions in a double ratio he has heretofore (except within a few months) lau hed a t the war; and even yet
considers the present armament ss a %:bear,
to purchase a cheaper
these opinions should be corrected, by convincing him that
peace
their object is no lees, than the perfect a d a t i o n of his Go+; and
in order to enforce such a belief; and permit the other Regencies to
draw Sdutary.deductions for themselves; our military operations
should not be Interrupted by vain attempts to treat for the peace;
but should be continued viith a Zed, and activity equal to producing
such an event I some time since Suggested to Commodore Preble, that the most
expedient & effective means to release our People, would be to treat
for their ransom, with some power, which has a real interest in such
c ~ nevent. - This Regency offers a field for the negociation. - The
Bashaw of Tripoli, owes about 120,000$ to the Tunisien Govt; Their only hopes of r e c e i ~ git, are founded on the possible result of
OW war - As Tripoli's crown from the position of the Countries
&c. &c - is very dependant on this Prince; and his love of gold so
well known; we might expect that the most decisive measures, would
be taken, to Secure that, which he now considers as nearly lost - The
~h,$&!dhia would have been received in part payment; this by an
unprece lated act of Bra~ery,n-e have fortunately done away - The
B8taia;a & Swedish Regdias are nearly exhausted; and a great proportion of the amount he calwlates receiving from the U. States, d
be necessary for defraying the expences incurred by the War abstracted from these powerful motives, it is the real interest of this
Govi that a Speedy peace should take place; and (a part) of our forces
withdrawn from these Seas, because they are not only view'd as the
Rodjor a peenish child; - but stimulate the adjacent powers to follow
our noble example - by combiniq such a negociation, with a final
adjustment of our affairshere; I thlnk the whole expences would not
exceed the calculations made by Gov? - We can have nothing
binding on the part of Tripoli, as a Securjty for future peace, which
wholly dptitute of Commerce, possesses very little interest in its
preservation; and consequently the poorer that Regency is kept, the
more readily will it be satisfied with t d i n g Sacrifices Our affairs have undergone no change, as His Excr the Bey, is
wholly occupied, with devising every possible means, to ward of[fl
the evils, which might have resulted from the scarcity of Grain T e e n Agents. have bee.n sent to the Levant. and almost. every
part of the Mediterranean; and considerable Supplies have already
arrived; which have been purchased by the Govt - and redisposed of
to the ~eopleat the same price - Wheat is 170 to 180, Piastres the
CaEce, Barley 80 to 90 - extreme misery prevails throughout the
interior of the Country; the people subsisting on roots, a little herbage,
and those who can procure it, Oats - God only knows what
be

-

-

-

&

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

53

the result - effective means (it is said) will be taken to prevent the
Arabs, flying to the City, during the winter The Marabout, is still at the head of his Army near Constantine;
but does not appear to possess SuEcient talents or Courage for so
great an enterprize I t was not a Neapolitan frigate, as stated in my last, which captured the Tunisien Gallies; but a small armament from the Island
of Sardinia No advises have been received from Captain Bainbridge, these two
months; I have the honor to annex N Q 1. a copy of my last from
Tripoli In a letter which I had the honour to address you on the 8t3 of
April, you were informed, that the Bey, had refused in the most
decided manner to receive Col. Lear, as one, authorized to transact
public Affairs; and that he would enter into no negotiation of any
kind with any other person than myself - I am still ignorant of the
motives which induced His Excellency to make this declaration this does not prevent the projected visit of the Consul Gen!, with
whom, I shall ever feel a particular pleasure to confer;
(NQ2. is a Copy of a letter addressed to Col. Lear.) I t was however, to be presumed, that all public arangements, should be made
by me; as long as I remain'd Charged with these affairs; and was
honored with any portion of the confidence of Gov* - I never have
Sollicited from His Excv the President, a confirmation of my appointment; or from the Honbiethe Secr of State, an extention of my powers;
nor could any regrets have been felt, by the immediate arrival of a
new Consul; as implicit obedience to the orders of my Superiors, has,
& I trust ever will characterize my ublic de ortment.
Untill His Excellency the Presi ent, sha have commissioned a
Consul to Succeed me here; I beg you to be assured on the forfeit of
that honor, which is dearer to me than lije; that the Interests of the U.
States, shall never be neglected; or its dignity, in any way lessened that a Scrutinising examination of my deportment here, will prove ax
honourable to myself, as I vainly imagined it was advantageous to
my Country - I have remained nineteem months in this Regency,
at the Sacrifice of my health; and personal feelings, from the puerile
Supposition, that my Services a t Tunis, were particularly necessary How far I am justified in these assertions, every individual, who h a
had any public concerns (for the last year) direct or indirect with this
Regency, can too well testify.
There being no emolument annexed to this Consuk&, it never can
be desireable, excepting on the Score of warmest patriotism.
I feel well Satisfied of receiving the excuses of the Honblethe Sec?
of State for these remarks - while I have ever attached a high value
to all public emplopents; - and an unbounded Zeal in my Country's
Service; I also possess a proportional respect for myself, in the full
exercise of the duties of any Office I may hold; even when obtained
by accident, or casualty With Sentiments of profound Respect and Consideration, I have
the honor to be,
GEORGEDAVIS-

d'

:NYHS.

Geo. Davis LB, Vol. 1.1

Ill

54

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1804 TO 1806

To Captain Samuel Barron, U. 8. Navy, Commodore of U. 6. Squadron in the
Mediterranean, from Captain John Bodgers, U. S. Navy

Congress off TRIPOLISeptemb dGtQ1804
I
have
the
honor
to
inform
you that a Polacre with 100 Sheep,
SIR
8 doz. Fowls, 5 Bags Onions, 12 bags Potatoes 39 Pumpkins, 150
Casks Water & some Hay & Barly, arrived yesterday under convoy
of the Nautilus; - I have taken all the Water for the use of this
Ship & have Shared the other articles with the Constellation
This
large supply of Water, will prevent the necessity of the Congress'4
going into Port. Nothing worth mentioning, has transpired since you left us
Commo. SAMUEL
BARRON
Ship President

-

[Mrs.James S. Barron original.]
Extract from journal of U. S. Frigate Congress, Captain John Bodgere, U. 6. Navy,
commanding, Wednesday, 26 September 1804

At 8 [A. M.] the town of Tripoli bore S 4 W. Made and took in
Sail as occasion required The Nautilus in company
At Meredian the town of Tripoli Bore S B E 4 E distance 7 or 8
miles
Latitude Observed 33' 8' N.
[USNA.]
Extract from log book kept by Sailing Master Nathaniel Haraden, U. 6. Navy, on
board U. 6. Frigate Comlilulion, Wednesday, 26 September 1804

Moderate breezes from S W, We continue under Quarantine There
are now employed on board 37 Caulkers & 20 Carpenters some of the
latter are employed in taking down the figure head and cutting away
the cut water, the rest in dubbing over between decks, The caulking
of the upper deck being finished, the Caulkers are employed on the
Gun deck & Cabbin, Ships company in taring down the Rigging,
Stay'd the main mast and set up the Rigging, towards evening the
wind shifted to E S p hove in the stern cable, the ships sides are as
usual wet round at sun sett, Ni h t moderate,
A M ships company
employed in blacking the yar s rigging the Bowsprit & serving the
Running Rigging, Caulkers a t work on the Gun deck, The figure head
& the carved work about i t are all taken off, The extreme of the cut
water on is entirely broke off, It is necessary to cut it into peices in
order to drift out the Bolts, The Schooner Vixen continues a t the dock
yard under repair, This forenoon Cap1 Smith with the master builder
of the dock yard came along side, received a launch of about 30 tons
which is to be kept along side for the use of the Carpenters, we received
our supplies from the Navy Agent by the conveyance of our own boats
from the quarantine Ground Surgeons Report to Lieu1 Gordon nine
sick & Seven convalescent. - Noon hght airs & cloudy weather.
[LC. EPP, Log Constitution, 1803-1804.1

f

-

WARS W I T H BARBAR P POWERS

55

Extract from journal of William Eaton, U. 6. Nary Agent for the Borbruy Begencia,
Wednesday, 26 September 1804

Took room a t the house of George Dyson, Esq. navy agent of the
United States [Syracuse]; a plain, frank, up and down, hospitable
Y orkshireman.
[NR&L. No. 9217, Bml E 14.1
Extract from j o d kept by Purser John Darby, U. 6. Navy, on boud U. 6. S.
John Adam, Master Commandant Ieaac Chauncey, U. 8. Rrrvy, commanding,
Wednesday, 26 September 1804

[Syracuse Harbor] Imployed to day discharging our Cargo &C The Brig Syren & Schooner Enterprize got under wa and stood out
of the harbour a t half past 12 U. S. Frigat,e Presi nt Commodore
Barron arrived from the Coa.st of Tripoli Soon after the Brig &
Schooner returned & Anchored ColQLear and his Lady came passengers in the President -

L

[NDA original. Mias Camilla S. McConnell.)
Extract from journal of U. 8. Brig Araaa. Master Commandant Iseac Hull,U.S. Bavy,
commanding, Thursday, 27 September 1804

[In Syracuse Harbor] At +,past 1PM arrived here the U. S. Frigate
President Commodore Barron from Tripoli Cap$ Hull went on board
of him and returned a t 10
lNDA vhotostat.1
Extract from log book kept by S d n g fdaater Nathaniel Earaden, U. 6. Navy, on
board U. S. Fngate Consfitution, Thursday, 27 September 1804

Moderate breezes from E S E, We continue in quarantine with the
three Greek ships, we continue to employ 37 Caulkers & 20 Carpenters,
the Caulkers are employed on the gun deck, The Carpenters are in
two divisions, one dubbing the birth deck the other in drifting the
Bolb out of the Cut Water, and working on the head, this afternoon
the mouldings for the Billet head, which is to be made were set up and
secured to the Cut water. I t was the opinion of Captain Smith of the
Vixen Lieutenant Gordon and the master Builder of the dock yard
that the head rails should be lowered. They unite in the outer extreems of the Cut water and lower Knee part of which is cut off in
order to lower the head rails, Towards evening fresh breezes from S E,
The peice of oak timber which we received from shore is nearly m the
form of a Breast Work, I t is 15 feet long and 17 Inches thick and is
now a fitting to go on the Cut water, we also received two pine fishes
for the main mast which was wounded in our first Action with Tripoly ,
as they would not answer we returned them. - Ships company have
been employ'd this forenoon in scraping the upper deck, Recd 75 Gang
Casks of Water, The Carpenters have &shed dubbing over on the
birth deck, we received this forenoon a round spar 66 feet long for
making a sprit sail yard, The one we have out now is a Jury one, The
Caulkers have been employed this forenoon on the Gun deck, Carenters in taking to peices the Cut water and making a sprit sail yard,
F! orenoon moderate with cloudy overcast weather, Surgeons report
six sick, five convalescent & five dischargg. Noon Winds S S E, iT,C.

EPP, Log Constitution, 1803-1804.1

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1804 TO 1805

56

Extract from journal of William Eaton, U. 6. Navy Agent for the Barbary Begencies,
Thursday, 27 September 1804

[Syracuse] The President, Commodore Barron, arrived. Col. Lear
and Lady on board. The Commodore in ill health.
[NR&L. No. 9217, Bm 1 E 14.1
-

Extract from journal kept by Purser John Darby, U. S. Navy, on board U. 6. 6.
John Adams, Master Commandant Isaac Chauncey, U. S. Navy, commanding,
Thursday, 27 September 1804

[Syracuse Harbor] We are imployed overhauling our riggen &C
as it seems we are to go from this to Malta as Soon as we can prepare the ship. Mr Randolph came on board to day to take his
assage with us to the United States - We had several fryers on
goard from the Caposhien Convent which is situated at the Gardens
of Latome [NDA original. Miss Camilla S. McConnell.]

-

Extract from journal of Midshipman F. Cornelius deKrafft, U. S. Navy, in U. S. Brig
Siren of 18 guns, Master Commandant Charles Stewart, U. 8.Navy, commanding,
Thursday, 27 September 1804

(Syracuse Harbour) Light minds & pleasant At 10 got under way
& made sail saw a frigate coming into the harbour prov'd to the the
U. S. Frigate the President Commr"~rron at 11 fresh gales & pleas;
stood into the harbour again & came too. the President came too also.
Meridian pleas; recd fresh provisions for the crew. Midnight light winds & pleas! [NDA.]
To Secretary of State from John Gavino, U. S. Consul, Gibraltar

NQ2

SOUTH
AT GIBRALTAR
28" Septr 1804
SIR I had the honour of addressing you the 20th Instant, advising
the Contagious & Idlamatory fever, that had spread Amongst the
Inhabitants, my retiring to the South and leaving my Office encharged
with M? Humphrys, who I am sorry to say, was taken off in a few
hours by the Fever, I have also been attacked, but thank God, got
rid of it, and am doing well; as to the Inhabitants in Town, are all
Shut up in their Houses, nothing doing in business, every thing in a
State of Confusion & distress, and the disorder Seems to keep up to
was at Cadiz the 20tQintended proceedthe same pitch; Cap-arron
ing the 21" for the Tagus, I hear of nothing new and have the honour to be with Respect. P. S. Herewith a Dispatch from Consul Simpson
[NA. SDA. CL, Gibraltar, Vol. 2, 1796-1804.1
Extract from log book kept by Sailing Master Nathaniel Haraden, U. 6. Navy, on
board U. 6. Fngate Cohciitufion, Friday, 28 September 1804

Moderate breezes from the Southward with cloudy overcast weather,
we continue in quarantine employ'd 37 Caulkers & 20 Carpenters,
the Caulkers have finished the Gun deck this afternoon. - Carpenters
employed in making a sprit sail yard, repairing the Cut water and
taking the head to peices, a rotten place is found in the Main mast
nearly 18 feet above the Guc. deck Partners, - I t is reported by the

W M S WITH BARBARY POWERS

57

Carpenters very injurious to the mast, Ships company employed in
blacking the yards, scrapping the lower masts & upper deck, Night
moderate until1 2 A M when the wind shifted in a light squall to W S W
Veered away on the stern Cable and swung to the two Bowers, morni[n]g cloudy and overcast untill7 A M when we had a heavy Rain with
thunder & Lightning. The Caulkers this mornin commenced the
Gun Room & Birth deck, during the lightning we K,ad all the Hatch
way secured; a t 8 A M the wind shifted in a hea squall from W N W
to N N E We Bitted a range on the sheet Cab e and unstowed the
anchor, by 9 A M the weather had cleared away, Caulkers employed
on the Birth deck & Gun Room, Carpenters in taking to peices the
head & repairing the Cut water & completeing the spritsail yard, ships
company in fitting the Ridge Ropes, strapping blocks & scraping the
Gun deck, Received 52 Gang Casks of water arrived a Maltese
Polacre which is employed as a Store Ship for squadron off Tripoly,
She reporta the arrival of the Congress & Essex off Tripoly a moorish
Ambassador joined the President but from whence he cannot say,
He left cruizing off Tripoly the Essex & Nautilus and was convoyed to
this Island by the Congress when she parted company for Syracuse,
The Navy Agent came alongside this forenoon He reports our quarantine out on the l o t h of October which will be 25 days from its commencement, Weather from 9 A M till noon Showers by intervals
Wind fresh Veering from N N E to E S E

7

[LC.EPP,Log Constitution, 1803-1804.1
Extract from journal of Xidshipman F. Cornelius deKrafft, U. 6. Navy, in U. 6. Brig
Siren of 18 guns, Master Commandant Charles Stewart, U. 6. Navy, commanding,
Friday, 28 September 1804

Light winds & pleasant crew employ'd preparin for sea, MeridC m o l inform'd
ian L5 Stewart went on board the Commq - At 4
me that I was to prepare to go on board the Scourge for America,
by the Order of the Commodore At 8 went on board the Scourge,
she preparing for Sea. - the Siren got under way & stood out of the
harbour [of Syracuse] -

dr

[NDA.]

To Captain Edward Preble, U. 8. Navy, from Lieutenant Charles Gordon, U. 8. Navy

Constitution, MALTAHARBOUR;
2Qt4Septeml1804
SIR As there is not an Oak Fish to be procured in Malta which
will answer our Main Mast, and finding a decayed place in the way of a
knot on the Starboard fore Quarter of the mast, fifteen feet above the
Deck, I have stopped the Carpenters from putting pine fishes until
further orders from You - supposing you would send two from
Messina, or those two which our Carpenter informs me we left a t
Syracuse
I t will require fishes of 46 Feet to reach from the lower part of the
Bibbs to four feet below the decayed place, which will make the mast
perfectly strong As it does not affect the principal Front and Side fishes of the
mast, but is confined to one of the Quarter fishes, I am of opinion it
cannqt weaken the mast materially The Bowsprit I have examined agreeable to your orders, and have

58

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1804 TO 1806

found no defect - The Cut Water and Billet Head will be finish'd in
6 or 7 days The Caulkers have completed the Gun and Spar Decks, also the
Gun-Room & Steerce on the Birth Deck, and in three or four days
will complete the whole
The Carpenters have finish'd dubbing the Birth-Deck, and are now
all employ'd at the Head.
As Mr Higgins informs me that those workmen must continue under
pay during our Quarantine, which will not expire until the lot@of next
month, I intend setting the Caulkers at work on the upper works
outside in a few places which I find a little open
The standing rigging is all complete agreeable to your orders, except
squaring the Dead Eyes of the Fore Rigging, which cannot be done
until the Bobstays are secured, and the Fore Mast stayed
The running rigging which the Ship is in want of I will wait for
until the John Adams comes over, as there is no good rope to be had
in this place
All hands are employ'd in scraping and cleaning ship for painting
which we shall commence at tomorrow
[LC. EPP, Vol. 13, AugustDecember 1804.1
-

-

Extract from journal of William Eaton, U. 6. Navy Agent for the Barbary Regencies,
Saturday, 20 September 1804

Sat out for Messina by land, in company with Commodore Preble,
Capt. Decatur, Mr. Morris, the Commodore's Purser, and Mr. Ryland
Randolph, conducted by Lorenzo Abbate, a very attentive and intelligent Sicilian, lodged at a village called Lentina, near the lake of the
same name.
[NRtL. No. 9217,Bm' E14.1
&tract from journal of Midshipman F. Cornelius deKrafft, U. S. Navy, in U. S. Brig
Scourge, Midshipman (acting as Lieutenant) Jonathan Thorn, U. S. Navy, in
charge, Saturday, 29 September 1804

(Syracuse Harbour) Pleasant weather-the Argus & Gunboats got
under way &- stood out for Masina. [NDA.]
To George Davis, U. 6. Charge d'dffaires, Tunis,:from Nicholas: C. Wssen,
Danish Consul, Tripoli

TRIPOLIIN BARB?
Septr50. 1804.
SIR, The letters which you have sent to my care by your favor of
10tQinst. have been delivered to the Minister of His Excr the Bashaw,
who, I dont doubt will have them remitted according to their adress.Should Mr Biddle demand any Sum of me within the limits you
have fixed, it shall be furnished to him against his receipt in duplo,
& shall draw upon you Sir, for the amount.
We have here no news that can be interesting to you Sir, and whereof
you are not already, and better informed
(Signed) N C NISSEN
NB. Poor Ca t. Bainbridge has been indisposed; but is now better;
Several of the 0 cers are unwell, but of no danger, it has been cornmon here the fever they sick of.

&

59

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

Sympathetic ink [Written in lime juice.]
DEARSIR, The Packet for Capt. B. & letter for Mr Biddle were
delivered to Sidi Dghies; but I know they are still in his possession,
as well as another packet for Capt. B. sent from you the 6th of AugtPray Sir, send your letters, under the cover of Mr Holck - the
couriers always present the letters here with saying, this is from
Veckil American, thereby it is known that there are letters from you;
when unknown I shall sometimes be able to get them to Capt. B. Capt. B. has been sick, but is better, he has often wrote to you &ct.
but his letters have not been forwarded. Inclosed is a small paper for
Commodore P. from Ca t. B. - New rigors have not been used in
consequence of the attaci, I dont think it hardly possible - Many of
the Officers have been sick & are so, but I believe of a fever with pains
in limbs, every body has felt here as contagious; not above 3 or 4,
days neither dangerous; but Lord knows from what.
I candidly must tell you that all the attacks the Squadron except
that of 3q Augt have had very little effect & the damage done is
absolutely of no consequence. I recq a ball in a Belvedere, which had
it come 3, minutes sooner had killed me for my curiosity, not I only
had a star in a looking glass - I have wrote a note to MT Biddle,
informing him that a Gentleman in Tunis had opened a credit for him,
hereby the young Gentleman can at least make use if his friends
endeavours even should he lose their letters.
Let M' Holck, explain to you my letters about your Affairs. Danish
is almost a cypher; I hope you have r e d my letter of 10, Sept. - I
wrote much to Mr Holck, about our affairs, & gave freely my opinion,
it may be wrong in conclusion; ut not in good will.
Advice Your Commodore, likewise to blockade the eastern ports of
Tripoli, many vessels enter there from the Levant with powder &ct.
The 27tWept. went out a Cruiser, a boat with one gun, another
is soon to follow. In several days we only see a frigate & Schooner
off. - Should you Sir, any time hare something interesting to communicate to Capt B. send a whole large sheet of paper written with
lime juice, this I shall be able to send him, but there ought not to be
a line with ink. Books often pass between us, & to preserve the
or binding, we put a paper covering over the calf Skin.
covering
Sat. . .
Should Capt. B. send me any sheet for ou before I close this
you shall either iind it herein or it shall be de ivered to you b Mr H.
as it could create suspicion in seeing such a blank sheet in a etter to
you in case of opening the letters. Pray Sir, destroy my letters after
perusal, this is necessary for all events. N C N.
[NYHS. Geo. Davis LB, Vol. 1.1

T,

9

f

Extract from journal of U. S. Frigate Congmr, Captain John Rodgers, U. S. Navy,
commanding, Sunday, 30 September 1804

P M commences with moderate Breezes and hazey weather
At 5 discovered a sail on the weather bow Made sail and gave chace
the Nautilas in compy At sunset the town of Tripoli Bore S W B S.
distance 8 leagues Shortened sail and gave over chace.
Latitude Observed 32' 58' N.
[USNA.]

60

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1804 TO 1806

Extract from log book kept by Sailing l a s t e r Nathaniel Baraden, U. 6. Navy, on
board U. 6. Frigate Gnslitulion, Sunday, 30 September 1804

Moderate breezes from E N E, we still employ 37 Caulkers & 20
Carpenters, Caulkers employed on the birth deck, Carpenters in
repairing the Cut water & taking the head to peices, Ships company
employd in painting ship. Guns & Carriages and in scraping, at 4
P M anchored here the U S. Brig Siren from Syracuse
A M Moderate & pleasant, as it is Sunday the Maltees Carpenters
& Caulkers do not work, Ship Company employed in repairing the
Boats & a few of the Ships company in painting, The painting of the
Ship prevents the Watering Service Received from the Siren a quantity
of new Running Rigging, The Siren Received it from the John Adams
for the Constitution, Surgeons Report Ten Sick and four convalescent,
This morning we Received fresh provisions & Vegitables for Ships
company
[LC. EPP, Log Constitution, 1803-1804.1
Extract from journal kept by Purser John Darby, U. S. Navy, on board U. S. S.
John Admns, Master Commandant Isaac Chauncey, U. S. Navy, commanding,
Sunday, 30 September 1804

[Syracuse Harbor] At 3. P. M. the Brig Argus 8 Gun boats & 2
Bumbards got under way for Messina. Doctr Griffin left the ship this
day and Join the Argus. & Doctr Weems. came on board and joined this
ship. at 6. Arrived the U States Frigate Constellation 4 days from
the coast of Tripoli a t the same time U States Schooner Enterprize
stood out the Harbour for Messina [NDA original. Miss Camilla S. McConnell.1
Extract from journal of Midshipman F. Cornelius deKrafft, U. 6. Navy, in U. 6. Brig
s u r g e , Midshipman (acting as Lieutenant) Jonathan Thorn, U. S. Navy, in
charge, Sunday, 30 September 1804

(Syracuse Harbour) At 4 P. M the United States Frigate Constilation came too an anchor in the harbour.
[NDA.]

[As of 30 September 18041
Extract from Pay Roll of U. 6. Frigate ConsIifufion. Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Navy, Commodore of U. S. Squadron in the Mediterranean,
1803-1804
Entry

NP
on

D[*l
Names

on Board

Stations

When
-

or P

For what reason

--May
Jye
May
-

............. Edward Preble ................

Ag:r

1
9

-

-

"

9

"

-

July

9
18

-

Augt
July

4
21

-

E-!;:
-

June

-

May
June
July

4

J$y

9
21

'
"
-

20

Augt

17
27
I8
17
17
17
21
16
28
10

June
July

-

June
AUK$
July
May

July

-

28

Augt

6

-

July
Augt

17

3
26
7

I

Captain. ................
Commodore dl41 h f a ~
Nathl Haridan ................. Sails Mr .................
John M Haswell ............... mid^ ....................
William Moshier .............. Boatswain.. ............
Isaac Still.....................- Sall Maker ..............
Dan: 8 Dexter ................. Midv ....................
Charles Morris
Midn ....................
Acting Sailing Master Apl
17') 1804
James S Deblois ............... Purser.. ................
WP C Jencks .................. Licur. ...................
James Wells ................... Surgeon.--. .............
Joseph Tarbell..- .............. Lieut ....................
Thomas Robinson ............. Ditto ....................
John Davis .................... Mldv ....................
Ralph Irard
Master's Mv ............
Act* Llet~!1710 A p r i l 1804
William Burrows.. .........-.Ditto. ..................
Hum r Alden ................. Gunner .-.
-.
.- ..-.
-- -.-.
~ a v i ! ~ e a c o .n................ Master's M Q............
Alexr Laws- ................... mid^ ....................
Hethcote Reid ................. Master's MP
............
Samuel Elbert ................. 1,icut ....................
John Rowe. ................... Midv ....................
Thomas Baldwin .............. mid^ ....................
Noadiah Morris
Chaplalu ................
Purser 1st December 1803
Peter Leonard
Clerk.. .................
Chaplain It' December 1808
Patrick Simm ................ S I I ~ ~Mate
Q * .............
Francis C Hall ................. Midn ....................
John Willson .................. Boatsv ..................
Joseph Nicholson .............. Midv ....................
Leon# Hunnewell .............. Mid9 ....................
John Thompson
Actr Midn ..............
Shlp'r C k r k lqr December 1803
John Bartell ................... Seaman.. ...............
Thomas Hunt ................. Midv ....................

Octr

To the U S Ship John Adamr

July

'Po Brig ScotLrge
Turn'd over to U 9: B Argus

Novr
Aprll

To U S Ship Congress
To U S Brig Scourge

Novr
Sepr
Novr
Septr
Septr
A?"

Putrid Fever
Turn'd over to U 8 frigate Adamr
To I7 S Ship Congreaa
To U S Shin Resident
To Sehoone'r Enterprize as c a p t ~ i n
To U S Brig Scourge
To Ditto

Jan?
Augt
Novr
Novr
Novr
October
ki$r
Nover

Turn'd ovor to U 8: 8 Vizcn
Unflt for Duty
To U S Ship Congrerr
To Ditto
To Ditto
To U S Ship John Adams
To U 8 Brig Scourge
Rrsi ned
To s Ship John Adams

octor

To Ditto

Novr
Nov
Oct.
Novr
Octobr
Octobr

To Ditto
To U 8 Ship Congresr
Intem erance
TO
ship Congress
To U S Ship John Adamr
To U 8 Ship John Adaim

Novr
Novr

Unflt for duty
To U 8 Ship Conprtra

D9

.

- - - - -- - -- .

I

8
iT

1

74
76
76
77
78
79
80
81
82
83
84
86
86
87
88
89

a,

July

-

June
July

-

[July]
June
July

-

-

91 June
92 July
93
94

95

m

-

97 June
98 July
99

100
101
102
103
104
106
108
107
108
109
110
111
112
113
114
116
116
117
118
119
120
121
I22
123
124

-

June
July
July

-

June
July
June

-

July

-

-

June
July

-

-

I

~ o h n~ o v o l.i................... &r Ounr......................................... ......
Sent to U S Brig Scosrge
22
John Lind ....................- Seaman ......................... {**Ii1
29 l y Returned
Augt
.---..
James Mihan .................. Ordr ............................................
Sent to U €3 Brig Scourge
Patrick Mihan. ............... Ord?............................ August
10 1 p Returned
Octr
17 1803 Invalid U 8. frigate New YorkJames Newton ................. Seaman ................. D
-----Acquiling Norris ............... Ord .............................................
Daniel Newell. ................ Ordr ...................-........................ ----..
......
John Ormsby ................. Seaman .........................................
-----William Osborne.. ............ Seaman .........................................
R
17 1803 to British Ship Amphlon Gibraltar Bay
Octr
John Plover. .................. Seaman .................
Fredf Petterson or Patterson.. Ord ............................................. .---..
William Powell................ Ord ...................................................
12 1803 Marine Hospital Fort Independence
Thomas Pierce ................ Ord ..................... nsg AU@
Fever
NOVT
18 ..--..
William Stewart ............... Ordr .................... DI1
Richard Stevens............... Boy ............................................. -----Thomas Sutton................ Seaman.........................................----------John B Smith ................. Boy .............................................
-----John 8 den .................. Ord .............................................
James E r t i s.................. Seaman ......................................... ----..
Ord? ...-..-.............DSQ March
12 1604 Malta
William Smith ................
11 1803 at Boston
Aug)
Robert Stewart ................ Seaman ................. R
John Smith .................... Ord?............................................ ----------.
John C Smith ................. Seaman.........................................
R
11 1604 A t Naples
William Stagg ................. Seaman.................
May
William Scott- ................ Ord ............................................. -----Joseph Smith ...............
... Seaman ......................................... ----------John Thomas .................. Ord .............................................
John Thompson. .............. Seaman-. ....................................... ----------Lemuel Taylor.. .............
. Ord-. ...........................................
R
2 1803 At BoSt0n
July
William Taylor ................ Ordinary ................
Daniel Venderbury. ..........
. 0rd.-. ..........................................--.-..
12 1803 At Boston
July
John Walton .................. Boy ..................... R
John Young. .................. Ord?............................................ -----William Jarvis ................. Qr Master ....................................... -----Malta
Malta of a Fever
12 lfl?l At
March
Noah Morse ................... Ord ..................... DSQ
Octr
21
Samuel Poole ................. Ord ..................... DL)
Jonathan Bates ................ Seaman .........................................
John Cutter .................. Ordr.. .........................................
4
Deer
John Mathews ................. Seaman................. R
...... Ord ............................................
Mathiss C o u m
.....- Seaman.- .......................................
~ a t h a n i e ~ars8iil::::::
l
Thomas Doane ................ Ord ............................................
John C. Miedrez............... Seaman .........................................
John J Thompson ............. Seaman .........................................
Thomas Peck .................. Ordr ...........................................
Richd Franklin ................ Coo er .........................................
Titus Hoy ..................... Qr unner .....................................
John Porter .................... Qr Master ......................................
James Wallace................. Ord ............................................
Thomas Woodford............. Qr Master .......................................
John Glover. .................. Seaman .........................................

8

Bxtract from Pay Roll of U. S. Frigate Constftufion,Captain Edward Preble, 0 . 8 . Navy, Commodore of U. S. Squadron in the Mediterranean,
1803-180PContinued
No
on

I-

Entry

Month

[July]
-

-

July

-

-

1

For what reason

Names

(

Day Yesr
-

m

118031 [July1
-

-

16
18
21 1803 July
13 14 14 16 11 11
11 11
I1 11
11 11

-

-

-

21
22
21
21
21
21
20
20
20
20
20
20
20
20

--

.
...............................
Patt MqMullan. .............. Seaman.. .............
Septr
4 1804 Lost at Tripoli
Isaac W Downs................ Ord ..................... D D
John Davis .................... Ord ........................................-.-........
Thomas Jackson ............... Ord ..........................................-........
Isaac Hunt .................... Bl'c Mate ...................................--........
Mathias Mathews ............. Seams................................-.-...---.-......
Leonard Cozzens .............. Seaman.-. ......................----.-.-..--.-........
William Williams .............. Seaman. ........................----.-.-..--.-.-......
John Bums.................... Ord .............................-..-.-.--.-.----......
Daniel Millen .................. G- Mate..................................--.-.-......
Samuel Clook .................. Seaman.. .............................................
April
22 1804 To U S Brig Scourge
Robert King ................... Qr Gunner .............. D
Richard Penny ................ Seaman. .............................................
John Williamson............... Seaman.. .............................................
Martin W. Hand .............. Ord.. .................................................
William Creedy ................ Ord.. ...........................-....................
April
Sent To U: 8: nrig Scourge
22
Wv b. Willlams
......... Otd ............................. Augt
29 1??4 Returned
w v Willson.................... Or d ...................................................
Septr
4 1804 Lost a t Tri oli
............. Seaman .............
Hugh M~Cormick
DD
Oct.
17 1803 Invalid U #frigate New York
Joshua Hewshurg.............. Seaman ................. D
David King ................... Ord.. .................................................
John Jenkins................... Seaman ...............................................
Nathi Bumford.-. ............. Ord ...................................................
Peter Wallason ................ Seaman. ..............................................
Samuel Lloyd .................. Qr Master.............................................
Ootr
31 1809 At Malta
R
John g Brown .................. Seaman .................
John Ramsay .................. Seaman ..........................-....................
Thomas Bedow ................ Seaman ...............................................
Robert Liddy .................. Seaman.. .............................................
27 1803 A fall from aloft
Augi
Rich4 Beedland ................ Seaman ................. D D
John Russell................... Seaman ...............................................
Nichr Thompson ............... Seaman. ..............................................
16 1804 Of a Fever
Augt
John Pyle ...................... Ord ..................... D D
York.
Octr
17 1803 Invalid U 8. lrigate
Robert hlalcolm .............. Seaman ................. D
George Simmons ............... Seaman.. .............................................
John Hudson .................. Ord ...................................................
Charles Smith ................. Seaman.. .............................................
July
7 1804 A t Messina
James Caton ................... Seaman ................. R
Edward Fitzgerrald ............ Ord.. .................................................
Octor
28 1804 To U 8 Ship John Adam8
John Degray ................... Seaman ................. D
...............................
James Eyre ....................1 Qr Qunr ............... .

{

_
.
.
.

-

188
167
188
1BB
170
171
172
173
174
175
176
177
178 July
178
180
181
182
I83
-

11
11
11
11
I1

185 [Julv]

11

194

188
187

1(1%
189
IMJ
lsl
192
103

11

-

11
11
I1
11
11
11
11
11
I1
11
11
12
11

-

11
11
11
11
11
11
11
11

-

Micbl Ryan .................... Ord .....................
Robert Mead .................. Ord .....................
William Johnson ...............
Thomas Burke ...............
.
James Williams ................

-

July

20
20

I

20
20

1

20

20
20
20

1

-

20

24

24

8

- ~ -

1

~

---I

I
I

Jacob Cook: ...................
Ben P Hutton ..................
P h i l o Brecou .................
Andrew C3etty.................
John Reid .....................
James Lindsay .................
Thomas Sumpter..............
John McFate ..................
John Johnson ..................
Qeor Anderson .................
Joseph Ferguson ...............
John Gsllatt ...................
Willlam Bissett..-. - - - - - - -.
- -- John A u stus

I

July
20
20
20
20
20
24
24
24

Aamn Meachon .............
...
James White ...................
C . I . Metts ....................
William Crilly.................
John Msokay ..................
Joseph West-.. ................
Fmnk 8ize.....................
James Na ler- - - - - - - - - - - - - -.- .Phlneas o r t h r 0.~.............
John Banto... ..I ..............
Emanuel Lewis................
John Kelly--. ..................
Nathl Carpenter...............
Samuel Graves .................
John Beott.....................
James Law .....................
J o s e ~ hDunbesven ..........
Barnuel Blosn..................
John West .....................
James Allen ....................

1

1. -

-

A t Ryracuse

Boston
to Britlsh frigate Medwa Oibr Bay
T o U 8 Ship J o h n Adam8

At Syracuse
Madne Hospital Fort Independence

U 8. frigate New York Invalid
Turn'd over to U S Brig Swurpe

-~

24 ~dward~m..~~~:::::~::::::~
U Wllllam Yard ..................
Wflllam Duffy.................

24
-

Invalld. 8hIp Wllliarn & Mary of Norloik
to British frignte Termwant

To U 8 ahfp John Adam8

Extract from Pay Boll of U. S. Frigate Co~fitulion,Captain Edward Preble, W. 8. Navy, Commodore of U. 9. Squadron in the Mediterranean,
1803-1804--Continued
For what reason

Lost at Tripoli
To B. Frlgate Amphion Ulb:
Fever

Lost at Ttipoll
A t Malta

Oonsumptlon
Sent to U S Brig Scourge
Returned
A t Malta [Ran at Malta1

,
Seaman ................. I ........I. ........
Seaman ................. 1 R I Octobr
May
Ord. ....................
Novr
Seaman. ................
- - - - -- - .
Ord .....................
Robert Davis .................. Ord. ....................
Augt
-------.
Benjamin Hogan ............... Ordr ....................
Augt
John William ................. Ord. ....................
Mark Little ....................I Seaman---. ............-1. ........1. - - - - - - - .
........
George Olfford................. Seaman .............
John W Gibson................ Seaman .................
octor
R
Robert Marshall ............... Seaman. ....................... ........
William Garland ...............Seaman .................
Octr
R
James Carliug.................. Seaman ........................ rAbiil--.
John Burrell ................... Seaman ........................
1Augt
("'I".",".",
...............
David Allen ................... Boatsnr Mate 25 April ....... - - - - - - -.

24 1 Samuel Otway.................I
24 1 James Johnston ................I
Jacob Hendrickson .............
John Brown. ..................
Patrick Campbell..............

I

I

Robert Clark .................. Ord. .................... D D
Moses Brown ............... .
.. Gunq Mate .....................
John Warren ................... Ord ............................
Adam Smith .................. Seaman .................
D
John Conway ................. Seaman .........................
William Beverly ............... Seaman .........................
William Bucket ................ Seaman .........................
John Greer ..................... Qr Gunner .............. 13
David Pentawst ............... Ord ............................
Leonard House. ....-----.-.-..
Boy. ............................
John Kemp .................... Seaman ................. D
John Cross..................... Ord .............................
Samuel Bowman .............. Seaman .................
D
Thomas Moore ................ Camentr ................ I .......
Abijah Shepherd............... Ord-.. ................
. ........
Thomas Pierce ................. Seaman .................
R
Alexr Martin. ...--.-..........
Boy .............................
Jnv Fitzgerald.. ............... Seaman ................ R
Michael Price ................ Seaman.. .......................
Samuel L. Rider ...............
William b Brown .............. Boy .............................
James Dunham ................ Searn~
.................
D
Bryan Leckln .................. Armr.. ..........................
Jnv Burchard .................. Mr a t Arms .....................
Josb Robinson. ................ Seamv-. ........................
Isaac Wilder ................... Ord ..................... D
Ezekial Darling ................ Boy ....................
D
William Jewel1................. r Gunr.........................
8unner ................. D
William Mahy
Or Gunner October 17tb 1805
Elisha Dick ....................
Geop Summers................. Beaman ................. R
Fredk Johnson ................. Seaman .........................
William Harrison .............. Seaman ................. D D

,

,

Gibraltar watering
By a fall from aloft
Fever.
Marine Hospital Fort Independence
Marine Hospital Fort Independents
To British Ship Termwanl
Gibraltar Sent to U 8 Brig Srourac
returned

Septr

Lost at Tripoli

Octr

To U S Shlp John Adama

- - - - - .- .
-- - - -- - .
........

- - - - - .- .
........

Octr

........

........

To U 8 Shlp John Adam8

Octr

To U S Ship John Adam8

Octor

To U S Ship Prealdent

........

........
........

Octr

- -----

July

-.

-------.
-- - - -- - .
........

Octr

- - -- -- - .

To British Frigate Medwa Gib: Bay
At Messina
To U 8 Bhip John A d a m

- - -- -- - .
........

July
April
- - .- - - -.
Octr
Septeml
May
- - .- - - - .
Septr

-

Unflt for duty
turned over to U S Brlg Scowae

At Naples
Lost a t Tripoll

-

Extract from Pay Boll of U. 6. Frigate Qmtilution, Captain Edward Preble, U. 8. Navy, Commodore of U. S. Squadron in the Mediterranean,
1803-1804--Continued
Entry
Appearsnoe
on
a. Be ~ o n t h ~ a yyear on Board

-

NP

----

307 [Aug.l
308
309
310
311
312 July
313
314
315
316
317
318
319
320

-

321

-

322
323 July
324 S e p
a25

328
327
VB

328
330
331
332
333
a34

335
336
33'1
338
838

340
341
3&
348

a~

345
846

"
"

::
"

"

"
"
"

Octob.

---

Octc

--.--

6 [I8031 (Aug.1
8

-

8

-.

8
2

-

26

-

2 3 0 12
12
6
8
6
14
25

5

90
16
16
18
16
16
16
16
16
16

-

18
18
18
18

18
I8
I8
17

18
17
17

-

-

-

-

-

8
6

1

8
6

6
6

--

1
28

l p

Augl

Bettr

13

-

-

Augt

"
"

-

-

-

20
28
6

16
16
16
16
16
16
I5
15
16
%

- October 3
- 18
-- -- 181818
- - 18
- - 18
- 18
- 17
-

-

-

-

--

18 1802 Oetr

ma
U
or P
(9 Q]

When
-Month Day Year
---

Q James Brumade ................ Cook ..................................................
8 Patrick Twle.................. Seamafl.. .............................................
Beaman.. ....................................-.-......
8 George Wood ...........--.....
8 Samuel Wall ................... Ord .........................................--.......

July
-

-

2 5 28

fitations

Names

18
18

17
18

For whet reason

14 1804 By a fall into Main Hold
David Darling................. Boy ..................... D D July
CarpqMnte. .........................................
William Humphreys ........--.
Jobn B Thompson ........-..-. OM ...................-................-..-..--......John Dickina.................. Seaman ...................................-..--.......
Bernard Leonard .............. Qt Mr .................................................
MIch1 Carey ................... Qr Gunnr.- ...........................................
B e n j ~Philips .................. Qr Master .............................................
D
7 1804 To Schooner Entmprlzc
Septr
Ord .....-............
Joseph Dar us ...............Octor
28 1804 To U 8 Ship John Adam*
Thoxnss Bowliue............... Ord..................... D
Wright Smith.................. Beaman ...............................................
.
.
. ..................-...........
Willlam Bartley ............... Ord ................. .
Androw T [or F.] Proudfoot. .. Ord ...................................................
J m s Butler ................... Otd ...................................................
October
29 1804 To U S Ship John Adams
Charles Oordon ................ Lieut .................... D
22 1804 To U S. Brig ScourgL
D
April
Henry Wadsworth
Mid ....................
Actr Licut April 16:L 1804
"
To U 8 Ship Congreat
8
D
Novem
Louis Alexis................... Mids. ..................
D
1803 Ill health [Ordered to U. B.wILh dlapatche~]
Decr
6'b
Chriulr Gadson. ............... Mido. ..................
October
I)
28 1804 To U 8 Bhip John Adam8
William Lewis...............
.
. Mid ...................
h 8 t a t Tripoli
4
DD GP temt
Joseph Israel ................... Mid ...................
11 1'3y
To Nautilus as 14ieut
Jub
Charles Ridgley................ Mid .................... D
To U 8 Ship Conores8
Novr
D
8
Henry P Casey................ Mid ....................
D
Octor
28 1??4 To U 8 Ship J n ? Adnma
William Atwood ............... Ord .....................
April
D
22Pd 1804 To IJ S Brig Scourge
Lieu)....................
John H. Dent
Lt Commandant 8th Febrr 1804
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
Novemr
D
18 1803 At Algien
Robert Eenley................- Mid
Jacob Obey....................Ord ...................................................
R
Octob
.................
31 1804 At Malta
Gregory D'Saint .............
.
. Beaman
Barthy Fuller ................. Ord ................................................-.......................................-...........
Ord
John Decker ...................
Thomas Collins................ Qr Gunr...............................................
William Hilton ................ Qr Qunr ..........................................---.
Octr
23 18W Gibraltar
Charles Gould ...............
.
. r Ounr ................. R
James Head ..........
oy................................................. Consomptioa Syracuse Harbour
21 1804
John Blom..................... Qr Qunnr ............... D D . Jan:
~ o h nh e ...................... Beaman...............................................
John N. Cannon ..............
. Boatswain.........................................................................................
Wlllim Bweeney.............. Gunner..

9

lP

347
348

340
350
351
352
353
354
356
356

357
3%

-

-

--300 361 Novr
362 359

363

asl
366
366

-

367
368 Novr
369
870
a71
372
a73
a74
376
376
377
378 Decem
379
380
1803
381
382 Janr
383
1803
984 Dew
3&5 Jan7
386 387
388 389 Jan?

-

-

a90

391

-

-

Nichc Poterson ................. Seaman. ......................................Antonio Ross.................. Seaman .........................................
Joseph Morees....-............Seaman-. ......................................Peter Morees.. ................ Ord .............................................
Antonio Paul .----......-......
Seaman.. .........................-........-.-.---..
July
10 1BM From 0 Boats at Sgrncuse
o
h C a m ................ O r ..................... R
Novernr
2 1803 Cadlz
Jose h Manuel ................ Seaman-. ............... R
10 1804 At Malts
wil17am curtis ..............
.. ~ v ~ a...t..e.......... R ~ u l y
John Bird-. ................... Seaman ......................................... .-.-.Peter Madelina ................ Besrnan ......................................... - - - - - .
Joseph Ormena ................ Seaman.. ........................................----.
.----John Lyons .................... Seaman .........................................
Petor John ..................... Ord.. .......................................... .----.
Scaman.. ...................................... .-..-.
John Morees..........
Thomas Jackson ...............
Seamen.. ....................................... ----..
Peter Gordon ........... .......
Seaman .........................................
John Morrls. .................. Beaman ......................................... - - - - - R
Octr
23 1804 A t Malta
Thomas Barber ................ Seaman.................
.-.--James Armstrong. ............. Beaman.. ......-.-..
.
.
.------...----.....-.-...
Octobr
28 1804 At Malta
Joseph Rernsrd ................ Seaman................. R
.-.--.
Raymond Martin .............. Seaman .......................-.................
.-..-.
E m m u s Smith..............
Seaman ........................................
Wiliiarn F I O O ~................. 0 r d ............................................. ---..March
21 18M At Syracuse
HendC Johnson ................ Seaman ................. R
John Williams................. Seaman ....................................... -----.
John Marteo................... Ord.....................
.
Nichola Oorea .............. .
.. Ord............................................ - - - - -Bent
to U 8 Brig Scoclrgc
22 l?P4
Adua Lantaog................. Ord ............................. AUgt
{returned
29
.-.--.
John Mitchell. ................
Seaman.. .......................................
.....
Peter Sandall. ................. Seaman-.. ......................................
Frank Lops .................... Seaman ........................................ ..--.John Cheng ................... Ord ............................................ -----.
Charles McKlnley ............. Ord ...........................................
R
October
23 1804 At Malt8
John Bissnrd ................... Ord .....................
.
.
A
&
.

...)-I

I 1 I

Qeo9Marcellin .............. Mid? .................
.
.
.
John Ripley Madison .........
Boy .....................
Carmeno de Beno ........... Old .....................

D

Septcm
October
October

20
28

27

1804 Turned over to U 8 Brig Scourge
1804 To U 8 Sbip John Adama
1804 At Malta

Surg~.Mete .............
D
............... -----Boy ...........................-................ ..-.-.
.-___Ord.. .............. .
.
.........-................
Ord ............................................
Ord ..-..................--....-.................
JohnManolee.. ............... Ord ............................................ ......
John Caryan ................... Ord.. .......................................... .---".
Sent to U 8 Brig Scourqs
26
John aeorge ................... Ord .............................April
{Augt 29 returned
To
,, {Augbditto
22
John Penayoty. ............... Ord. ............................
28 returned
John Moranno ................. Seaman.. ......................................
D
B 1&04 To W B B r t Swn
William Burrows .............
. Mr Mate ................
Pietro F. Crodllo............

I::::::

I

lAliI

-

Extract from Pay Roll of U. 8. Frigate Comfilulion, Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Navy, Commodore of U. 8. Squadron in the Mediterranean,
1808-1804--Contmued
Entry

Stations

Names

For whet reason

8. B.

396 April
3% Febr
397 April

2a [l+l
16
"
28

;15; ::"

;z 41,"""
4al"

15
15
15
16

401

"
402
"
408
"
404
"
406
406 June

l5

407 June
408 Au@
409 Septc
410 S p m
411 t s p a ~ j
4la Octobr
I"[

:::

415
416
417
418
419
420
421
422
423

424

4%

z

28

2

SO

n

"
"
"
"
"
"
"

"
"
"
"

-

-

"

-

"

"
"

,a

'4

"

8,

"

a'

'4

::"

--

14 1804 To Schooner Vizm
June
22 Octaviun A Page ............... MI Mate ................ D
Seaman.................
March
15 1804 A t Malta
R
18 John Heron ....................
29 Willlam Harden ............... Scaman. ..............................................
Ordu.
.................................................
16 Aaron Prior ....................
17 1904 A t Naples a Deserter
15 James Hall ................... Yearnan ................. D
May
15 John Kelly .................... Seaman ...............................................
15 John Bnrry .................... Ordr ..................................................
15 John Bussell................... " ..................................................
17 1804 A t Naples - a deserter
.................... I) May
15 William Bennett ...............
DP
DV
17 1804
.................... D
15 Martin Nearenhnrg ............ "
May
"
.................... R
17 1R04 A t Naples
16 lames Vent ....................
May
Mid8
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
11
1804
D
U
S
Brig
&rm
July
To
3 Robert Spence~
................

April
Feb?
April

Jty"

28 Robert Johnson ................ fieaman.. .............................................
..................
.. DD Septr
4 1804 Lost a t Tripoli
3 Henry Wadsworth ............. Lieu,
AuH
D
8 1804 To U 9 Bhi Jn9 Adamr
Novr
.. " ....................
Octobr 11 Joseph Maxwell. ........... .
Midshipv
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
D
8
"
TO u S. ~ h P oConorcaa
Nppemr
lsO4 Ocfpber 16 Charles Walsh .................
Do ............... D
8 1??4 To ditto
16 Fox Hall Sturman .............
1804
...................................................
oetobt 27 James Seldom ................ Boy
1 3 4 0$01
Novf
8 IBO4
29 [John 0.1 Greighton ............ M I .................... D
30 Asa Culver .................... [space] ................................................
.................................................
30 John Graham ..................
.................................................
30 C h r i s t ~H a n s ~Holm ...........
.................................................
30 John F Johnson ................
.................................................
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
30 h w l s Langer..
30 T h o m a Limrick ............... ,I .................................................
.................................................
John
Mack
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
30
.................................................
30 Robert Nimmy ................
Sail;
Masr.
...........................................
Marmaduke
Dove
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
30
.
D
Novr
8 1804
30 John Blosne.................... Boy .
[Spam].-.
.
.
..........................................
John
R
Maddbon.
.......-..30
................................................
30 James Tlppett .................
"

.

"

-

-

-.

--

SVPEBNUMERARIEB
1

Od.

; Jaqyr

4

"
"

6

"

6

19
24

g
22
22

1809
1804
"

"

....................
Ootor 19 Yfiu1.s Jouvas .................. Pllot
"
January 24 Salvatora Catalan0 ............
F E ~ ~ I12 Francis D'Augmta ......................................
Ord?....................
12 Nlcholas P h i l i p ..............
............... DP....................
"
12 Joseph Rogle
I'
la Simon Chioily................. Dv ....................

1)

D
D
D

D

D

June
Nnvr

9,ctr
"

'I

6

14
14

1804

"

:;

A t Malts

Is

0
I0
11
I2
13
14
18

::"
;:
"

23

1

22

I

"
"

18
17

"
"
''

18
18
20

''

21

I

::
"

Jan?
M?ch
24
2.5 ISp,yel
20
22

z
(

zr

28
29

au

a1
32

33

M

35

ae

g39
40
41
42

4
44

"

"
"
"
"

"

"

"

::

12
12
12
"
12
"
12
"
"
12
"
'
12
"
"
12
"
"
12
"
"
12
"
" 12
‘I
12
sc
I'
12
"
"
12
"
"
12
F
e
b
r
u
~
12
1y4 M a p 415
"
16

::
g
22
22
22

22
22
22

n
n

22
22
22
4
18

,4

:: 2:;' 2
June
6

"
8'

4'

"
6'

"

"

'.
'd

"

',
"

"

"

46
47

*'

I* D-Detached

'8

6

,J

9

"
6'

3
5

6'

16
17
17
17
24

8'

2%

"

"

.A
4'

Sepr

4

9

"

O$

11

"

Beltr

19
12
24
11

"

4s

,'
July

:: As' ;

d,

"
"

"

"

"

8'

"

"
"

"

"

1804 bug)

March
John Parodini. ................
OyJI
Qerol Parodini .................
Francis Nuroni.. ..............
Laurence Faronia ..............
G h n o Speranra ...............
Gerald Dembra ................
Jolin Swtchfiggi ...............
March
op
Fredinando Orlando...........
Francls Serpentinl- ........
6,
Emmuel Fossa ................
Emauuel Mareneo............
.
Laurence S raaea
Joseph ~ h i ~ p i . . . ~ ~ ~ : : : : : : ~ ~ : ~
',
Jose h Sardo ..................
M I C E ~ I Berpentini. ...........
Lewis Basso ...................
Augt
---Angclo Vita ....................
John Vaccilli................... U9 ........................... ------June
Thomas Brown ................ Midv.................... D
Noor
Francisco Fossor............... Actr Mid ............... D
Octr
Qiacomo Mitwurch [or Mil. PllOt .................... D
warchl
. - -".--Robert Corbett ................ Senman.. ......................
Octr
Emonucl Peterson ............. Dv .................. .
. D
- - - - - ..- John Brlant ................... Boy ............................
Octr
Charles Morris.-- ............. Master of Scourge. ......
D
Frederick.. .................... Black boy ............... D
Ay@
Jack.. .........................
D p ....................
n
Adam Bastlon ..............
Eearnan................. D
Nathaniel Lyde ..............
Now
Clerk ................... 1)
Wllllam Burns ................. a r e .................. D
Octr
Ralph Icard ................... Lleut ....................
Beptr
D
Thomas LMar~hall
.............. Burgeon's Mute. ........ D
Novr
Domlnlck Ferrentlnl ........... Ordr ...................
. D
8e.p
Francisco.. .................... pilot .................... n
George Crawford .............. a m ................... L,
John Oakum ................... Bop ..................... D
0::'
Phllin Qreck ...................
D I
Jaquis Sylvestre............... .......................... D I NY"v
Danlel8 Dexter. .--.
.. Lieu).................... D
D
Auguste La Fleur .............. ..........................
%em
John Davis .................... Mldshlpv ............... D

....1

8

-.---

Pr Brig Scourge To Malta Insane

.
A

To U 8 Ship Conflesa
To U 8 Bhip R e 6 W
To Brig Scourge
To U 8 Ship Preafdml
To Brig Scourge

.---..-

1

or dlacharged; DD-Dlscharg'ed Dead; R=-Ran or desserted; P-Promoted or paid ofl; DBQ-Detached to slck quarters.1

[NDA. Pay Roll of Constitution, Vol. 1, 1803-1828.1

72

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1804 TO 1806

Extrsct from journal of U. S. Brig Argus, Master Commandant Isaac Hull, U. 8.
Navy, commanding, Monday, 1 October 1804

a t 3 P, M, weighed and stood out of the harbour of Syracuse with
8 Gunboats 2 bombards 1 Ketch and U. S. Schooner Enterprize a t
3 past 4 Exchanged SigkBwith the U. S. frigate Constitution made the
enterprizes Sig! to speak her At 6 P, M, the NE point of Sicily bore
NbE 4 E made Gunboat Sig! N? 14 set and took in sail as Necessary
At 5 AM backed the main yard for Gunboats to come up at 6 filled
away a t past 6 bore away for the lewardmost Gunboats. and took
two of them in Tow. -

+

[NDA photostat.]
To Captain Samuel Barron, U. 6. Navy, from James Simpson, U. S. Consul, Tangier,
Morocco

TANGIER
Q* October 1804.DEARSIR I am induced to send by way of Leghorn accompanying
Triplicate of my last respects, as I have no advice of the original or
duplicate having reached Gibraltar. - The Captain of an English

Frigate reported he saw three Ships entering the Tagus, which he
supposed to be the Emperours Frigates. I have not seen the Essex since the 1l t h Ult? The Tetuan Galleys have retired within the Bar of that [Ms mutilated] and will no doubt be laid up, as usual during winter. Muley Solimans money was not shipt as intended for Lisbon,
orders were sent to invest it in Bills of Exchange on that City and
London, which has been in part done. We do not yet know the precise Service this money is destined for,
but it is generaly believed to be the purchase of small Armed Vessels
at Lisbon and London. I t is still intended the Agents in this busyness shall go first to
Lisbon. - What they may do there Mr Jarvis will advise you of, but it
may not be so easy a matter to watch their opperations in London. In consiquence of the privailing Sickness in Gibraltar and Cadiz, no
Vessel whatever from those Ports are admitted here, but Humanity
called on us to allow the provision Boats of the former to receive their
Cargoes in quarantine, under certain precautions. [Mrs. James S. Barron Col.]
Extract from journal of U. 6. Brig Argus, Master Commandant Isaac Hull, U. S.
Navy, commanding, Wednesday, S October 1804

At. 1 A, M, Calm came too off the light house in 4+ fathoms water a t
$ past run a Kedge out weighed and got the boats out head Warping
into the harbour of Messina at 8 came came too in 35 fathoms Water
and Moored with the Stream Cable on Shore
V D A photostat.]
Extract from log book kept by Sailing Master Nathaniel Haraden, U. 6. Navy, on
board U. 8. Frigate Gnstiiution. Wednesday, 3 October 1804

[Malta] Moderate breezes from S S E. We continue in Quarantine, at 1 P M landed at the Quarantine ground 29 Caulkers, who are
to remain there Victualed & paid by the Ship during our uarantine, We noon [sic] employ 12 Carpenters 61 8 Caulkers, T h e 8 a k u m

T H E U.

S. B R I G ARGUS.

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

73

& Pitch are supplied by the Master Caulker, The Pitch is boiled in
a boat which is moored some distance from the Ship. Received
this Afternoon the two 12 pounders we lent the Siren oft' Tripoly, A M,

Ships comp[anyJ [emp]Ioyed in Stowing the Boom, Scrapin the
ships outside fleeting the Main Rigging, $ painting the Gun go0111
Cabbin, the 12 Carpenters are empIoyd in putting up the head timbers,
head Rails and Bolting the Cutwater, Caulkers employed in Caulking
the counter & the Store Rooms on the Birth deck, Received fresh
Beef & Vegitables for Ships Company, Surgeons Report, 8 Sick, & 7
Colvdescent, pleasant weather with moderate breezes from S S E,
these 24 hours [LC. EPP, Log Conslitutwn, 1803-1804.1
Extract from journal of IT. 8. Frigate Congrus, Captain John Rodgers, U. 8. Mapy,
commanding, Thursday, 4 October 1804

+

[OffTripoli] past 10 [AM] discoverd several small Sails under the
land made sad and Gave chme Fired Several shot at the boats I n shore Shot away our larb* BOWsprit Shroud and Sprit Sail Yard
At Meredian moderate breezes and Pleasant weather the town of
Tripoli Bore S E B E distance 4 miles
[USNA.]
Extract from journal of U. S. Frigate Congrm, Captain John Rodgors, U. S. Raw,
commanding, Friday, 5 October 1804

[OffTripoli] At past 1 [P M] shortened sail and Let go the larbQ
anchor in 25 fathoms Water - hoisted out the boats armed Them
and Sent them in to take A boat out tha.t had rn on shore At 2 got
aspring on the cable made The Signal for the boats to return $ past
2 the boats returned hoisted Them in weigh'! and made sail At
Midnight fresh breezes and cloudy weather with lightening
A t 3 squally close reeft the top sails
At 11 t u r d 2 reefs out of the top sails And got a new spritsail
athwart
At Meredian moderate breezes and clear The town of Tripoli
bearing S E B E Latitude Observed 33' 4' N
[USNA.]
Extract from log book kept by Sailing Master Nathaniel Haraden, U. S. Navy, on
board U. 8. Frigate Constflution, Friday, 6 October 1804

[Malta] Moderate Breezes with cloudy overcast weather, we continue under quarantine, We continue to employ twelve Carpenters
in puttlng up the head rails and timbers Ships company employ'd m
ainting shlp on the larboard side, at 3 P M squally weather from the
korth, whlch continued till 4 P M with hea rain thunder d: Lightening, The black paint which is above the sxow on the larboard side,
bas entirely Ruined the yellow occasioned by the heavy Rain, Before
the side can be repainted it will be necessary to scrape off all the
yellow, Weather during the night squally -from S S E with intervals
of heavy Showers. Forenoon cloudy overcast weather with light Breezes from the S S E,
Carpenters employ'd on the heads & Cut Water, We this forenoon

74

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1804 TO 1806

completed watering. Served out to Ships com any two days Salt
be no fire in the
provisions as on account of the paint there
Galley to Morrow, Ships company employd this forenoon in scraping
& whitewashing the starboard side of the Ship in the Waist & in
cleaning the Blrth deck this forenoon we hove in on the Stern Cable,
* * * No painting going on to day. [LC. EPP, Log Constitution, 1803-1804.1

&

Extract from journd of WiIIiam Eaton, U.6. Bavy Agent for the Barbary Regencies,
Friday, 5 October 1804

Arrived at Messina, at 9, A. M. Found here the brig Argus and
schooner Enterprise, which had come in the day before.
[NR&L, No. 9217, Bm1 E 14.1
To Secretary of State from James Simpson, U. S. Consul, Tangier, Morocco

Kg 84. - Second Copy. TANGIER
6tQOctober l S O 4 . SIR With this I have the honour to enclose triplicate of N Q83. Advice has this day been received that on the 2gtQ Septc His Imperial
Majestys Frigate Maimona returned to Salle with a Prussian Ship and
Brig bound from Lisbon to Amsterdam and Antwerp, captured off
the Coast of Portugal. The Captain of the Maimona reports that the other Frigate of same
name and the Mirboha entered the Tagus before he took these
Prizes. - We have advice from Gibraltar to the 4Q Inst when the
daily deaths had gone near t o a hundred. -A cordon has been thrown
round Cadiz in consequence of Orders from the SupremeBoard of Health
a t Madrid, who have declared the prevailing Siclrness there to be
what they stile the Epidemic. This Country enjoys good health, but we have scarce had an
hours rain for these five Months past, which is an alarming circumstance. 7t@October. - This morning the two Moors appointed to employ
the sum of money appropriated by Muley Soliman for augmenting
His Navy, arrived here from Tetuan and are to embark on a Ragusem
Polacre in a few days for Lisbon. By a Boat just arrived from Gibraltar advice is recieved the
deaths had gone as far as one hundred and Sixty in a day, - it is
with concern I have heard (but not by Letters to myself) that Mr
Gavino is of the number. In such case I trust Government will find
in the American House of Khun & Green established there, a Successor meriting its confidence [NA. SDA. CL,Tangier, Vol. 2, Jan. 1803-Oct. 1810.1
To Secretary of State from William Jarvis, U. S. Conanl, Lisbon, Portugal

Duplicate
LISBON6th October 1804
SIR The original of the foregoing I had the honor to forward you
by the Schooner Cabinet, Captain Martin, Via Marblehead, since
which I have been twice alongside the Essex. It appears the object
of her Visit, as I presume the inclosed from Captain Barron to the
Secretary of the Navy will inform Government, is to watch the
motions of the two Moors here.

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

75

Before I went below the first day I applied to a Lieutenant in the
Portuguese Navy, with whom I am acquainted, to get what information these people had afforded to this Government relative to the real
object of their Visit; it being generally customary for the Commanders
of the Moorish Vessels to inform the Secretary for Foreign Affairs on
their first arrival the object of their visit & at the same time to hand in
a List of what supplies they wish, which is sent to the Director of the
Arsend to furnish. He did me the favour to go immediately to the
Director with whom he was intimate, who informed him that they
reported direct from Sallee & that they had come here to wait for
another Frigate that had sailed the same time, and parted with them
at sea, and asked for nothing but water and fresh stock, both of which
was sent on board & they had not then asked or received any thing
further. This the Gentleman immediately returned & acquainted me
with not thinking it judicious to go with him. They also told him that
the Officers had not on any occasion mentioned where the other frigate
was gone or what her ob'ect was, but had constantly said that their
intentions were not host' e. A declaration of this lund however was
a thing of course - Through two or three channels I have learnt,
that the other frigate who is the Admiral, ordered these two in here for
repairs & that they have no authority to ask for any thing but must
wait the admirals arrival. This seems to correspond with their conduct altho' all the Crew join in the same report that they shall leave
this directly after the arrival of the other. I t is very extraordinary
where the other is gone or what she is after. I hope that learning one
of our frigates had gone into the Streights they have not sent those
two Ships here as a decoy to take up the attention of our other frigate,
to afford their Ship that is out an unmolested opportunity to depredate on our Commerce. I have promised a Barbary Jew a handsome
reward if he would find out why she did not come in with the other
two, where she has gone, & what her object really is. If he does not
succeed, I shall beleive that it is not known, or that the secret is conGned to the first Officers
The frigate is still under quarantine altho' the Providor Mor (ie
the first Officer of Health) promised me four days ago to admit her;
but the next morning he went to Mafra where the Prince now is, and
did not return till yesterday and when applied to for the fulfillment of
his promise; said that he had been instructed so rigidly to attend to
aJl Vessels from Cadiz and Gibralter, where the Government are
advised that the yellow fever has began to rage that he could not do
it. Upon being advised of this I wrote the original of the enclosed
to Mr de Araujo & should have done it four days ago had not I been
averse to trouble the Ministry when I thought there was a probability
of succeeding through another channel. If my request is not complied
with, as the frigate has only five or six sick people on board & they of
diseases b no means suspicious, I shall think it is with a view to make
a merit o it with the Moors, for their manner of quarantining her is
the greatest farce in the world, they having emitted me to go alonside her twice, without an person from the ealth Office in the boat
when the fri ate lays a f mile from the shore & the last time it was
after dark w en I stopped alongside on my return to Lisbon & yesterday I talked with Captain Barron two hours on shore as near as it is
common for persons to stand to-gether in common conversation -

d

P

f

S

6

76

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1804 TO 1805

A report is now in circulation that General Lannes does not return:
no doubt We shall have a new one every day or two till he comes back
or some other person replaces him Inclosed is a letter from Mr Pinckney, M' Montgomery & Captain
Barron - With the highest Consideration & Respect
[Enclasnre]

15 October 18041

To the Portuguese Secretary of State, Lisbon, from William Jarvis, 0'. 6. Consul,
Lisbon, Portugal

His Excellency DONANTONIO
DE ARXUJO
DE AJETEDE
His Royal Highness the Prince Regent Minister and Secretav of Slate
for the Foreign and War Department &c &c &c SIR I have the honor to inform Your Excellency that the American
Frigate Essex, James Barron Esquire, Commander arrived here the
26Q Ult? in 8 days from Cadiz at which port she arrived in the afternoon of the 16tk, got Prattic the 17th & sailed the following Morning;
the Captain, first and second Lieutenants being the only person's
who were on shore out of her, & they did not remain on shore more
than three hours; Her Crew is in remarkable good health for a Vessel
of her size, not having more than three or four seamen sick & they
with colds & slight complaints incident to seamen. She had no cornmunication with any Vessel on her passage, nor has she been at any
other European Port than Gibralter since she left America about 90
days ago: and she left Gibralter four days before a British Sloop of
War that came direct from thence & got Prattic some days since. I
must therefore beg the favour of your Excellency to expedite an
order to admit her to immediate Prattic, she having now laid under
quarantine 10 days the time I understand that it is Customary for
Vessels of War similarly circumstanced.
LISBON
Jt+ Octo~1804
[NA. SDA.

CL, Lisbon, Vol. 2. Jan. 1803-Dec. 1805.1

Extract from log book kept by Sailing Master Nathaniel Baraden, U. S. Navy, on
Comtiiufion, Saturday, 6 October 1804
board 0.6. -ate

[lMalta] Moderate Breezes from S, S, W with cloudy overchast
weather, The twelve Malt.ees Carpenters are employ'd in putting up
the head rails & securing the head rails $ Bumkins, Ships company
employed in scraping off the yellow paint which was injured by the
black during the Rain yesterday, Night moderate and cloudy, Ships
company employ'd [painting] ship outside and the Starboard side of
the Gun deck, no fire is allowed in the Galley to day, The provisions
for the Officers are Cooked in the Pitch Boat, towards noon the
weather became cloudy and overcast with light winds from E S E,
Our guard Irons on each side of the head are not to be put up again,
they are substituted by wooden peices of about 5 Inches Square, The
space which was formerly open is to be boarded up,
[LC. EPP,Log Constitution, 1803-1804.1

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

77

[7 October 18041
To Mdshipmsn Ralph Izard, Jr., U. S. Ksvy, to command U. S. Brig &w&
from Captain Edward Preble, 0.6. Navy

SIR, Haring appointed you to the command of the United States
Brig Scourge; you are hereby directed to re air on board said Brig now
a t anchor in the Port of Syracuse, and ta e upon yourself the whole
charge and command: subject to the rules and regulations of the
Navy, which you are to observe and enforce. You will prepare her
in every respect for Sea, and take on board three Months provisions
and Stores, and sail direct1 for the city of Washington in the United
States; and apply to the Konb!. Secretary of the Navy for further
instructions. Your requisitions for Provisions &p at Syracuse are
to be made on George Dyson Esquire for which you will be accountable
to the Navy department. It is my positive orders that you do not
stop at any port if it can be avoided, unless a long passage down the
Mediterranean should render it absolutely necessary to f
d up your
water, in that case you may stop at Cadiz or Madeir~,but are not to
stay there more than 48 hours. You will be careful to direct your
Purser to lay in a good stock of Lemons, Ora es, Potatoes, and such
tend to preserve the
vegetables as can best be preserved, and
health of the crew. You are to capture all Vessels belonging to the
Bashaw of Tripoli, or to his subjects but not within the limits aqd
jurisdiction of Neutral Nations. Should ou u t into any port m
the United States previous to your anivar at basbigton, you will
send Mr Haswell or Mr Marcellin off with the dispatches for the Navy
Department, and direct him to deliver them in the shortest possible
time.
Given on board the U. S. Ship Constitution in the Harbour of Malta
this 7th of October 1804. [*]
P. S. You will take care to inform yourself from the Vessels you
fall in with, whether the U S. and Spain are in Peace or War, and
govern yourself accordingly.

R

d

[*It is believed this date should be 27 instead of 7 October.]

\LC. EPP, Order Book, May 1803-June

1805.3

Extract from log book kept by Sailing Master Nathaniel Haraden, U. S. Xaw, on
board U. 8. Frigate Cmiitution, Sunday, 7 October 1804

[Malta] Moderate breezes from E S E, We co~tinueunder quarantine Ships corn m y employ'd in Painting ship. The twelve Carpenters are emp oyed on the head This afternoon we finished painting
the ship, all except the yellow on the Starboard side and the work
about the head, Cleared the upper & Births decks for washing
tommorrow, a t 10 P M cloudy with light Rain which continued
till 12 (Midnight) a t which time clear, A M pleasant weather with
moderate Breezes from the Eastward, Carpenters not at work thm
forenoon, Ships company employe from day light untill 9 A M, m
washing & cleaning the upper & Birth decks, and in painting the yellow
on the starboard side which completes our painting except under
& round the head, We this morzung Received fresh beef for shipa
Company, Surgeons Report, Seven Sick, one Colvalescent and five
discharged, Noon moderate winds E S E $ cloudy weather. [LC. EPP,Log Constitution, 1803-1804.1

P

78

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1804 TO 1806

Extract from journal of W i a m Eaton, U. S.Navy Agent for the Barbary Regencies,
Sunday, 7 October I804

Took l o d e s with Jonathan Bradbert [John Broadbent], Es .
navy agent o f the United States, a rich, intelligent, respectab e
British merchant, of plain manners and hospitable dispositions.
Average dividend of expenoe from Syracuse to Messina, dollars 36,30.
Gratifications - the society only of our own party; and there damped
by a continued series of melancholy proofs how fatal to human happiness is the hypocricy of religious bigotry in the hands of a privileged
priesthood. Every thing is stamped with wretchedness; which
nothing short of an entire revolution or the resurrection can erase.
Brydone is a graceless liar - so 1s general dlscnption.
[NR&L. No. 9217, Bm' E 14.1

?

Extract from journal kept by Purser John Darby, U. S. Navy, on board U. S. S.
John Admnr. raster Commandant Isaac Chauncey, U. S. Navy, commanding,
Sunday, 7 October 1804

[Syracuse] I omited noticeing yesterda the sciling of the U States
Ship President. on a cruise. Commodore amon is in such an ill state
of health that he was not able to go in her but has taken his lodgings on
shore for the benefit of his health -

B

[NDA original. Miss Camilla S. McConnell.]
To John Stricker, Navy Agent, Baltimore, Hd., from Secretary of the Navy

NAV.DEPOct. Stb 1804
I enclose a copy of the Original invoice sent to me by the navy agent

a t Norfolk of the cargo of the Ship AEfred Jas. Patch master which you
will be pleased to have insured on the best terms in your power insure from Norfolk to Gibraltar and from Gibraltar to Syracuse or
Malta, should the Alfred be Ordered from Gibraltar to either of these
places. M' Brown Navy agent at Boston states to me that the Alfred is a
New Ship of about three hundred and thirty tons burthen carpenters
measure
The Alfred sailed from Norfolk about the 1" inst [NDA. GLB,Vol. 7,1803-1805.1
To Secretmy of State from William Jarvis, U. 8. Consul, Lisbon, Portugal

LISBON
8 Octr 1804
SIR The Barbary Jew mentioned in the foregoing called on me
yesterday & all he could learn was, that the three frigates had orders
to cruise a month before they came in here, that their object is to repair
the two large ones, that the two in here came in contrary to the
Admirals consent, that for so doing they made an excuse of being much
out of repair, particularly the small one, that the Emperors letter to
the Prince is on board the Admiral & they cannot ask for any thing
untiU he arrives & it is delivered, that they had secret orders to be
broken open in a certain time, but seem'd to think that it was to be
after the frigates were co pered, that they were at war with the
Nations who had an Eag e with legs - meaning the Imperial &
Prussian flag; but did not h o w where the frigate that is out was gone
to Cruise or what she was after. When asked if they were a t war

I'

-

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

79

with the Americans they replied, that they were the last year & took
a Vessel by the Emperors orders which he afterwards disowned: being
they were not at present & if the Emperor had any secret intentions of
it, they presumed it would not be put in Execution till after he got
his fleet in order. This story taken to-gether is by no means satisfactory, for the truth is, that it is impossible the large frigate should
have quit the Admiral under pretence of repairs & being leaky: for
she is almost a new Vessel & is in extremely good order in every respect
except the want of copper, & that would not have hindered her from
keeping the sea a month or much longer, and to have disobeyed the
Emperors & Admirals orders without sufficient reason would probably
cost the Captain his head. This excuse might hold good as to the
small one, her hull appearing to be very crazy, altho: her rigging &
sails are in good order. The story of the secret orders seems also
absurd enough, if to be opened after they were repaired & had left
the port; as they could not finish coppering before mid-winter & those
people never cruise in the winter: beside their orders might have followed them by the Portugueze Brig of War that goes between this &
Tangier long before that time: nor does the report correspond with
what they have all along said, that they were all immediately to return
after the arrival of the Admiral, but it agrees very well with what M'
Simpson was informed in this respect. I think the probability is if
there were any secret orders, they were to be opened by the Admiral
before they came in here. The most essential part, as to what the
other frigate is after we are still in the dark about, nor do I much
e.xpect to get any information on this point. I hope that the Mystery
will not be unpleasantly unravelled when it is too late to remedy the
evil
I have not r e d an answer from MT de Araujo & as the advices by
the two last posts state that the yellow fever is raging with great
violence in Gibraltar & Cadiz I am afraid that this alone will be a
sufficient reason for his detention if there is no secret motives Inclosed I have the pleasure to hand you a letter from M: Pinckney
& Mr Simpson r e d to day [NA. SDA. CL,Lisbon, Vol. 2, Jan. 1803-Dec. 1805.1
To Captain Samuel Barron, U. S. Navy, from Captain Edward Preble, U. 6. Navy

MESSINAOctober gtQ1804
SIR, Our journey from Syracuse to Catania was over a horrid road,
and through an uncultivated rocky country from thence to this place
we had pleasanter prospects; it is well however that we brought our
allowance with us, or we might have starved. You were fortunate
that you did not accompany us, as nothing we met with, could have
compensated for the fatigue of travelling with such wretched cattle,
and the torments suffered from Bugs & Fleas.
The discharging of the Ketch, Gun Boats and Bombs was completed yesterday, and the returns are now making out. The Enterprize
sails tomorrow to join you, and takes the Officers that were in charge
of the Ketch & Boats to join their respective Vessels - Captain Hull
will be ready to sail on Sunday next unless the continuance of rainy
weather prevents - I hope soon to have the pleasure of seeing you a t
Malta &find on enquiry that you can obtain 20 Gun & 6 Mortar Boats
if you wish them - I have been requested to make a requisition for

80
--

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 180.4 TO 1806

that number, in order that they may be immediately completed, and
kept in readiness - but not feeling myself a t liberty to take such a
step, I shall with pleasure present your requisition at Naples, and
will point out to you the proper channel through which they may be
obtained when I see you - The Neapolitan Governm! are disposed
to render you every assistance in their power.
The Enterprize can be effectually repaired at this place, and at half
the expence than it can be at Malta [LC. EPP, LB, April-Nov. 1804.1
To Master Commandant Thomas Robinson, Jr., U. 6. Navy, U. 6. Schooner Eninprize,
from Captain Edward Preble, U. 6. Navy

MESSINA8 t h October 1804
SIR, YOUwill oblige me by landing Mr Izard, Mr Marcellin, and
Mr Haswell at Syracuse; & taking from thence to Malta, two of the
longest Oak fishes in the Arsenal for the Constitution. The officers
of the John Adams & Constitution you will please to carry to Malta,
and may sail tomorrow morning.
[LC. EPP, Order Book, May 1803-June 1805.1
Extract from log book kept by Sailing Master Nathaniel Haraden, U. 6. Navy, on
board U. 6. Frigate Constilulion, Monday, 8 October 1804

[Malta] Moderate Breezes from E S E we continue under Quarantine, Carpenters not at work this Afternoon towards evening
anchored here the U S S Ship President Commodore Barron, Night
cloudy with fresh breezes from E S E, between 12 at Midnight a t 2
A M light Showers, Wind S S W, Veered away on the Stern cable
A M Received from the President two oak Fishes, a sett of top gallant
masts & two raw[?] Anchor Stock part of our Stores left a t Syracuse,
Carpenters emplop in putting up the wooden Rails which substituted
the guard Irons and in boarding up the space between those Rails &
the head, Forenoon moderate with cloudy overcast weather, Ships
company employd in scraping & Scrubbing the Gun deck, fleeting the
fore & main Rigging, the two Oak fishes received from the President
have been some time wanted they are for fishing the Main mast;
This morning we received fresh Mutton & Vegitables for Ships company, - at 7 A M hove in on the Stern Cable
[LC. EPP, Log Constitution, 1803-1804.1
Extract from journal kept by Purser John Darby, U. S. Navy, on board U. 6. 6.
Jdvl Admnr, Master Commandant Isaac Chauncey, U. S. Navy, commanding,
Tuesday, 9 October 1804

At 7 this morning we got under way and stood out of the Harbour. the Constellation in Company bound for Malta - at Maridian
the town of Syracuse bore West distance 2 Miles - a t 5 P. M. Cape
Mondepore bore N W. 3 Leages distance.

+

[NDA original. Miss Camilla 8. McConnell.]
Rxtract from log book kept by Sailing Master Nathaniel Haraden, U. I.Navy, on
board U. 8. Frigate Constitution, Wednesday, 10 October 1804

[Malta] Moderate Breezes from W S W, We continue under
Quarantine, Ships & Maltees Carpenters employd in fishing the

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS
-

81

-

Main mast, towards evening the billet head was brought off, N' h t
'pks,
Moderate, A M Ships company employd in washing between dec
in reeving new topsail & lower lifts, and in repainting the Quarter
deck Guns, they are now painted a light yellow in order to correspond
with the paint work of the quarter deck, - The Carpentem are
em lo 'din fishing the Main Mast & fitting the Billet head, - The
sail'd aker with an additional number in his Crew employ'd making
new Hammocks, and repairing the main Top sail, Surgeons Report
Eight Sick & five convalescent, Noon Wind fresh W S W
[LC. EPP, Log Constitution, 1803-1804.1
Extract from journal kept by Purser John Darby, U. S. Navy, on board U. 6. S.
John Admnr, l a s t e r Commandant Isaac Chauncey, U. 6. Navy, commanding,
Wednesday, 10 October 1804

At half past 6 this morning discovered the Island of Malta bearing

W. by S. distance about 6 Leagues at Mmdian the south end of
Malta bore N W. at 3 P M. the Constellation went into the harbour

& half past 7. we entered the Harbour of Malta and Anchored in 11.
fathom Water on our arrival here found the U States Vessels of
War - President & Constitution (in quarentine) Brig Siren & Vizon [NDA original. Miss Camilla S. McConnell.]
Extract from log book kept by Sailing Master Nathaniel Haraden, U. 6. Navy, on
board U. S. Frigate Comtituiion, Thursday, 11 October 1804

[Malta] Fresh breezes from W S W we continue in quarantine
altho we were told i t should be out yesterday, Ships Carpenters are
employed with the 12 from shore in fishing the Main Mast, another
Rotton place has been found in the Main mast, i t is about 20 inches
below the other Rotton place, on the other side of the Mast the Carpenters cut in nine Inches & found that it ran only through the side
Fish, this newly discoverd place is nine inches deep, Seventeen long
& four broad, that on the other side is three feet lon , seven inches
deep 6r eight Broad, Night moderate from 9 A M ti% noon cloudy
weather with light Rains Ships Company emplo 'd in cleaning ship,
strapping Block & fitting the Ridge Ropes, The arpenters employed
in fishing the main mast and Bolting on the Billet head, Noon winds
moderate W N W I for ot to mention in the first part of this days
log that the U S S. Conste tion Anchored here, towards noon anchored
here the U S S Jno Adams, [LC. EPP, Log Constitution, 1803-1804.1

e

fi,

Extract from journal kept by Purser John Darby, U. 6. Navy, on board U. 6. 8.
John A d a , Master Commandant Isaac Chauncey, U. S. Navy, commanding,
Thursday, 11 October and Friday, 12 October 1804

I this day landed in Malta. for the first time As we were not
permited to land when we caled here on our way out. this is the
most astonishing place perhaps in the World for its strength. the
into the port is very narrow and is commanded by a stron
on either side, on geting on shore I found myself in a new worl%
indeed. the streets crowded with well dressed people who have all
the appearance of health and affluence. Whereas at Syracuse everything is quite the reverse. my f i s t object was to view the town of
Valette and harbour. the strength both by nature and art is wonderful

82

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1804 TO 1806

indeed. It is certainly the happiest situation that can be imagined.
the City stands upon a peninsula betwixt two of the finest ports in the
world, which are defended by almost im regnable fortifications that
on the south east side of the City is the argest. It runs about Two
Miles into the hart of the Island as is so very deep and surrounded by
such high grounds and fortifications that they assured me the largest
ships of war might ride in the most stormy, Weather almost without s
cable - This beautiful bason is divided mto five distinct harbours.
all equally safe and each ca able containing sn h e n c e number of
ships the mouth of the har our is scarcely a quarter of a mile wide
and is commanded by batteries on each side that would sink the heaviest ship of War before she could enter besides this i t is fronted by a
quadruple battire one above another the largest of which is on a level
with the Water and mounted with about 100 pieces of their heaviest
cannon so that this harbour I think may really be considered as
impregnable and indeed and indeed i t has ever been found so by all
nf~tions
for the French got it by treachery and not by assault and was
afterwards compeled to deliver i t up to the English - being starved
out*[NDA original. Miss Cam& S. %IcConnell.]

f'

g

Extract from log book kept by Sailing Master Nathaniel Haraden, U. S. Navy, on
board U. S. Frigate Coattilulion. Friday, 12 October 1804

Moderate Breezes from W N W, We continue under Quarantine,
The President, Constellation, Jno Adams and Siren at Anchor in
Malta, the 12 Ca enters from Shore continue on board, towards
evening a health 0 cer from the pratick Office came on board - The
OfEcers and ships company were all all ordered down on the Birth deck,
where they were all Smoked, after the Ship was smoked the Hedth
Officer went on shore, and another of higher rank came on board m d
ordered the Yellow flag to be hauled down, The Constitution has been
quarantin'd 25 days, the 37 Caulkers P3 8 Carpenters ~ ~ have
h o been
a t the quarantine grounds since the 3'd of this month were this Afternoon discharged, Night moderate
A M, Ships company employd as necessary, hoisted in the s m d
Cutter for repairs & painting and hauled up the large Cutter on shore
for ditto, Ships & Malteese Carpenters employ'd in finishing the Billet
head fishing the Main Mast and taking off the Rail that goes Athwart
the Stern, Received fresh provisions for ships company, Surgeons
Report nine Sick and five convalescent. The three Greek ship had
prattick Noon Wind W S W, !LC. EPP, Log Constitution, 1803-1804.1

4

Extrnct from log book kept by Sailing Pester Nathaniel Haraden, U. S. Navy, on
board U. S. Frigate Consliiufion,Saturday, 13 October 1804

[Malta] Moderate Breezes from S S W with cloudy weather, President, ConstilZation, John Adams and Siren in company, a t 1 P m
sailed for Tripoly & Gibrslter the Siren, Ships company employd
as necessaq 12 Carpenters from shore who are employg in finishing
the head and filling in the Main Mast for woulding, A M light squalls
from S S W,at 2 A M Veered away on the Stern Cable, Forenoon
fresh Breezes and clear, Carpenters employed filiing in the Main

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

83

mast for woulding & taking off the Stern Rd, S
sick & seven convalescent, ~ o o fieah
n ~reezao
[LC. EPP,Log Constitution, 1803-1804.1

Report nine
sin%eons
sw

To George Davis, U. 6.Charge dYAffaires,Tunis, from Captain William Bainbridge,
U. 6.Xavy
Xympathetic ink [Written in lime juice.]
TRIPOLI
14. Odo: 1804
D' SIR, l'esterday I r e c v o u r letter of the IOt@ ultimo - those of
the 16t"dy & 6 August, I have not received. I cannot understand

your present letter, I presume for the want of them - Pray what
shall I understand from your saying "that the arrangements already
spoken of should be made immediately;" I wish you $0 explain this
in your next - I cannot see any reason for our Govt to continue the
war longer than next Summer for the Squadron will then be able to
bring the Bmhaw to as low terms as our present Navy is able to do,
after the operations of the Squadron in the ensuing year, I conceive
our case will be precisely thus - to comply with the terms that can be
got after battering his Town, send an Army, or abandon us entirely to
the hard fate which serving our Country plunged us into. - I recg
your letter of the 23, June, but no enclosures with it - I frequently
write to you & if you shg not receive them do me the justice to believe
that I am Sensible of your attention to our Situation and shall not be
neglectful to keep you informed of it, on two Acet@ one, that you
may advise Government & the other I always feel pleasure in writing
to a friend - I am & have been from . . . . . . . . . that the most proper
way to negotiate a Peace with this Regency is for an American person
properly authorized by his Government with letters of credence to
this. For believe me that Sidi Muhammed Deghies, Minister of
foreign Affairs to the Bashaw of Tripoli, has a just idea of conducting
negociations in a respectable manner. In making peace with these
peopIe we must not consider them as savages, but treat them as a
nation with whom we wish peace. If peace is not the object then
conduct the war with all possible rigour. -No doubt but an American
would [be] permitted to come and remain several days to negociate,
and he might trust himself with safety for I do not believe that this
Government would break its faith in such instances. This opinion of
mine is hastily written, however, from i t you will be able to get my
meaning & can state the same to Col. Lear, and our Government I am Yours Sincerely
(Signed) W. BAINBRIDGE

OCTOBER
3183 1804.
DEARSIR, Nothing has tralnjspired since the above letter w&s
written - Not a word from America, or the Commodore do we
hear - perfectly in the dark as to all movements, and harassed in
mind with dreadful anxiety. The Bashaw scarcely allows our Crew
the subsistence - I am told that Bonaparte's letter to the Bashaw
treating us with like is in the french papers. If his Imperial Majesty
ever has written on that Subject, his letter has most assuredl been
treated with contempt, which you may avow to ~r L.our J L i s t e r
at Paris, that France may at some future day take notice of it -Pletlse
to inform Col. Lear that [I]write him often, but have not heard from
him these five months past - I n y' letters be as communicative as

84

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1804 TO I806

you can, and in mentionin my Sum for Peace, recollect to name
only the one G t h of the real um-this will deceive in case of detecting
ou; Correspondence God bless you
Yours sincerely

B

[NPHS. Geo. Davis LB, Vol. 1.1
To Secretary of State from Willism Jarvis, U. 6. Consul, Lisbon, Portugal

Duplicate
LISBONl Q t h October 1804
SIR By the Sloop Unity for Alexandria I had the pleasure to
address the foregoing.
I hare now the satisfaction to inform you that the Frigate was
released from quarantine the l l t @
having went the preceding day to
the Providor on the subject, who directly promised her release.
Inclosed is the answer I received from the Minister in answer to
mine of the S t h h o at the same time sent me the Copy of the Law of
the 5tQ October 1715 with the condemnation of the Brig Aurora
Corrected; Copies of which letters are inclosed, as is a letter from
MT fickney.
The farther information the Jew gave me is that the Moors will sail
in a day or two, being tired of waiting for the Admiral, who they still
say they know nothing of, or where he has gone. They have been
both painted here and that is all that is done to them. They have
also taken in about two Ton of Cordage but I cannot learn that they
have taken any Powder; however this I udl get the first moment of
leisure by going to the Powder Magazine about 4 miles up the River.
The Frigate Essex %ill sad to day. William darvis &- C? have
supplied her with provisions &c+amomting to $2161.409 for which
Captain Barron will draw on the Secretary of the Navy in their
favour [NA. SDA. CL, Lisbon, Vol. 2, Jan. 1803-Dec. 1805.1

I14 October 18041
Certificate concerning Don Antonio Yaeai

This is to certify that D%tonio Massi, Bombardier, has in every
instance during the siege of Tripoli, conducted himself in a brave and
Officer like manner. I feel peculiar pleasure in assuring his Government, and all whom it may concern that his good judgment and
intrepidity would do honor to any Service that he might be employed in
Given under my hand at Messina in
Sicily this 14th October 1804
(Signed) EDWARD
PREBLE
!See letter of 17 October 1804.1
[LC. EPP, Order Book, May 1803-June 1805.1
Bxhact from journal of Wdshipman F. Cornelius deKrafft, U. S. Navy, in U. S.
Brig Scwrr#e, Midshipman (acting ee Lieutenant) Ralph Izerd, Jr., U. S.
Navy, commending, 14 October 1804

(Syracuse Harbour) the Schooner Enterprize entered the harbour. 1NDA.I

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

85

-

U. S. Consul, Tangier, Morocco
TANGIER
15" OOober 1804. NQ85. - Second Copy. SIR I beg leave to enclose duplicate of N? 84 [6 October 18041
and to advise that the Emperour has Condemned the two Prussian
Vessels with their Cargoes. - He has directed that the Captains &
Crews shall be employed on the repairs of the Fortifications of Salle
and Rhabat. - This is the first instance we have seen of Muley
Soliman setting Christians under such circumstances to labour; - i t
is feared he may also demand Ransom for them, which is a thing he
has on all former occasions of Captures b his Ships, professed to
Thomas Gavino of Gibabhor. - I have received a Letter from
raltar in which he referrs to a former, not yet come to hand.
From the tenor of this Letter I am led to hope the report of the
Consuls [John Gavino] Death was without foundation, and that he
has only retired from the Garrison for a time. Mr. Gavino tells me Commodore Preble had taken three Tripoline
Gun Boats carrying each a Brass 26 pounder and destro ed some other;
as his intelligence comes from Malta and is of an old ate, I conclude
particulars will have reached you, before this can. To Secretary of State from James Simpson,

d

d

[NA. SDA. CL, Tangier, Vol. 2, Jan. 1803-Oct. 1810.1

[15 October 18041
To Captain Samuel Barron, U. S. Navy, from Richard Farquhar, Malta

MAYIT PLEASEYOUREXCELLENCY
I understand you are going
to Co'operate with Cidi Achrnet Caromili late Bashaw of Tripoli, as
I forwarded his Dispatches to the American Government and also
wrote concerning his expected assistance, Your Excellency may have
an Answer to those Dispatches.
Commodore Preble last March fixed upon a Plan for the taking
of Derna and Bengazi and to Co,operate with the late Bashaw - his
Consul and me was to have gone to assist in this Business, but after
I had a Vessel with a number of People Engaged for Two Months the
Plan was drop'd, but Should your Excellency approve of taking those
Places now as they are in a State of Famine and some Prizes would
be taken, or if you think of Sending a Vessel to Alexandria first, that
the Bashaw may go by land to take Derna and Bengazi.
As I have given Offence by the Information which I have given to
American Officers and for Assisting those who is Prisoners in Tripoli,
also for recommending the Pilot who assisted in Burning the Philadelphia Frigate, and for many other Services which I have done, these
having been made known has got me a many Enemy there is a
Vessel going to Tripoli also one for Gerba but I belive the Cargo is
for Tripoli. I have had some conversation with those who is well
Accquainted with the Afairs of Tripoli, they Say the People is displeased with the Bashaw and as they are distressed for Grain and will
be more so that the taking of Derna and Bengazi would compleat the
Bashaws Ruin, and those Places can be taken very easily now, and if
the late Bashaws Consul & me can be of any Service Please Command us, we hope this favorable oppertunity will not be looked over
I will be Much Obliged to your Excellency for a Passage in the first
of your Vessels that will go for Syracusa, I hope the Information I

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1804 TO I806

86

have 'ven wili not be made known even to Mr Pollies [Pulis] your
Consu
VALETA
Od?15,1804
N Q2 Strada St Paul

1

[Mre. James S. Barron Col.1

To Secretary of State from James Leander Cathcart, Leghorn

LEGHORN
0c.F l&jt@
1804.
SIR, This day I was honor'd with your very acceptable letter of
the lltQof June & am extremely happy that my conduct has been
approved by his Excellency the President, the good of the service was
my sole motive, so far as-I wm concerned I have been successful &
my procuring the Gun & Mortar boats at Naples I presume has at
least facilitated the reduction of the Bashaw of Tripoli to reason
The enclosed are copys of letters received with yours from Messrf
Banon and Eaton, I don't subscribe to the latters opinion as I have
been always disposed to let the Barbarian chiefs alone while they
remain friendly to us but when they infringe emsting treatys to chastise
them for their arrogance $ thereby mspne them with a decided dread
of our anns; the Mercury of Nenyork arrived last night in which I
intend to take passage, provided the good of the service prevents m
return in a public ship for I am persuaded from the friendship whicrt
the Comodores professes for me that nothing less will prevent them
from accomodating me. A continental war it seems is inevitable and I am of opinion is
absolutely necessary to restore the ballance of power in Euro e; the
Pope sets out from Rome to crown h s sacred Imperial &ojesty
Napoleone on the 3'd of November thls is reversing the order of things
& does not well accord with the opinion form'd by his holiness when
this same Napoleone turn'd Mussulman in Egypt; what a flexible
faith the little man has acquired! he is notwithstanding a great
general & profound politician; but I thank.providence that since we
have taken possession of Louisiana there 1s between us and him a
gulph! if their was not, I don't thnli we have any occasion to fear
him, but the Bey of Tunis wisely observes that a fly in a mans throat
d'tho i t may not choak him may make him cough!!!
I have not the least doubt but the Emperor of Morocco intended t,o
act as I had the honor to inform you I suspected he would in mine of
the 30tb of November 1803 & that he acts under the infIuence therein
mentioned is an incontrovertible fact; the arrival of the Squadron will
no doubt prevent him for the present & I think Com-arron
has
acted judiciously in leaving the Congress & B s e x to watch the motions
of his piratical squadron until they are dismantled. I have nothing of importance to communicate & continue with
respectful esteem. Pt: St: I omited to observe that the $4000 for which I placed a
credit in Malta Tripoli Naples & Leghorn subject to the order of
Come Preble & Cap? Bainbridge for the use of the Officers & crew of
the Philadelphia has not been drawn for, you will therefore please to
debit me with that sum until h a 3 settlement. INA. SDA. CL, Tripoli, Val 2, June 1801-Bept. 1806.1

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

87

To Master Commandant bsac C h a ~ c e y U.
, 8. Navy, commanding U. S. Rigate
John Admns, from Captam Samuel Barron, U. S. Navy

(COPY)
MALTA16" October 1804
SIR YOUwiU be pleased to receive on board the Frigate John
Adams under your Command the following Officers and Men Viz t M' Richd K Mead, Midshipman to be attached to the John Ad.ums.
M James Wilson Midshipman, to take passage for the United
States to answer certain Charges exhibited against him by Captain
Cox. Doctor Kneass, Surgeon's Mate to take passage to the United
States to answer certain Charges exhibited against him by Capts
Campbell
M' Whiting, Midshipman, whose State of Health makes it necessary
that he shou'd return to the United States
Nathan Hinds, a private Marine who is insane, and u d t for Service,
You will be pleased to deliver him to any Marine Officer in the United
States
INDA. M C LB, 1804-5.1
To Captain John Bodgers, U. S. Navy, commending U. 8. Frigate Cimgrw, from
Midshipman James Benshaw, U. 8. Navy

TRIPOLI,CASTLEOF THE BASHAW,
in prison Tripoli 16t$October [I8041
DEARSIR, His Highness the Bashaw's Minister of foreign affairs
was so good as to inform us of this opportunity. having obtained
information from a few french papers we had in our possession of your
being called again into actual Service, and destin'd to cruise in these
Seas; induced me once more to resume my pen and communicate to
you the dissagreeable situation in which we are placed at present our
confinement prior to Commodore Preble arrival off this station in the
month of Jul ,was much alleviated by our being permited occasionally
to visit the 6ardens of the Bashaw which is the only satisfaction we
have ever experienced since our captivity. an audience was granted
yesterda forenoon to Capt Bainbridge by the Minister of foreign
affairs w ose conduct to us has been universally that of a Gentlemen
I assure had it not been for this friend our treatment whould have
undoubtedly been more rigourous. at the commencement of our
captivity a parole of honour was promised to be granted us the Minister became our Guarantee, but the Prince not wishing us to have any
communication with our crew put an end to the only pleasure we
could derive from being prisoners in Barbary. Honour so far from
being ingrafted on a [space] mind that they think it impossible for
any of us to remain prisoners when an opportunity offered for an
escape, however there can be no kind of doubt but this is the most
civilized Prince, as well as his Subjects of the Barbary Powers. and as
Such has distinguished himself since our captivity His B. M. Consul. Mr Langford has made application to the Bsshaw
respecting Capt B. remaining a t his house during our captivity, which
I sincerely wish may be granted as he has enjoyed but a very poor
state of health for this four months past.
I fear the liberty I took in addressing you at the commencement of
our imprisonment has not met with your approbation. if so I beg. you
let me know so that I may desist from troubleing you agam, I

1

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1804 TO 1806

88

do not scruple to say my motives for writing were from the unremited
attention shewn me the short time I had the honour of being placed
under your command. in fact I look'd upon you as a friend more than
a Commander, but the wide distance placed between us whould not
Sanction my consulting you in many instances that I wished. however
I trust the day is not far distant before I shall have the pleasure
of being again ordered under your command. My first to you
bearing date (space] was through the hands of my Brother of Phil?
with the request of his writing you, which I have no doubt has been
put in. execution provided they came safe to hand. Should I be so
fortunate as to have any letters I beg you will forward them the first
conveyance, as I feel very uneasy on accoun: of not having receiq a
letter from my distant friends Since our captivity Captain Bainbridge
writes Commodores Barron and Preble by this opportunity and was
it not for that I am confident you whould hear from him I informed
him of my intention of writeing you, he desires his best respects to
you. we have most of us been afflicted with the fall fever which prevails
in this horrid climate [LC. JRP, Ac. 3647.1
To Captain John Bodgere, U. S. Navy, commanding U. S. Frigate Congrus, from
Tobias Leu, U. S. Consul General, Algiers

MALTA,
0cl.T 16tb 1804
we arrived at
Syracuse the 34 day after me left ou, where we remained ten days
owing to a severe indisposition of ommodore Barron. From thence
we had two days to this place, where we find every thing very agreeable. We are fixed in good quarters, and I hope soon to have the
pleasure of see you there.
On the 14tPa onvoy of 16 saiI arived from England, after a passage
of 8 weeks. They bring nothing new. - Commodore Preble went
from S acuse to Messina, soon after we arrived at the former place,
and is ourly expected here in the A~gus.The Constitution will be ready for Sea in a week or ten days. She is
most completely fitted, and is as fine a Ship as swims on the Sea. You
will be tempted to take command of her, not withstanding your partiality for your excellent Ship, the Congress. I feel a strong predeliction for the Cowtitutwn. I think, besides being good, she will be a
most fortunate Ship; and I am sometimes good in my predictions
MrQLear is in good health and sends her regards & best wishes to
you.

DEARSIR, I have the pleasure to inform you, that

6

'2

r

!LC.

JRP, Vol. 1, Series Two, Feb. 1775-May 1805.1

116 October 18041
Estimate of the condition and value of Tripoline Onnboats oaptared by the U. 8.
Squadron in the Mediterranean

In Execution of the Order of the Marshal, Marquis Espluga, Commodore General of this Marine Department in date of the 15*@Inst*
communicated to me by the Inspector of this Royal Arsanal D. Geo
B d t a de Sterlich Captain of a ship of the line, having been on board
the two Gun Boats Prizes to the S uadron of the United States under
the Command of Commodore Preb e for the purpose of Esteeming the

7

WABS WITH BARBARY P O W E R S

89

same as well of their first Construction as also of the actual State of
them, and found as follows: The said two Tripolin Gun Boats now in the power of the American
Arms have been Visited and found to be of a Good Construction and
dementions, being 473 feet in length from head to Stern, in breadth
without the Body 13 feet, in heigth from the Keel 43 were also found
well nailed and in good Order, the Body, Keel, Rudder &c are of
Helem and the remainder alI of Oak excepting the Stern and some
Beams.
By all which it is Judged, that wishing to Construct some equal to
these. here at Messina. the Hull alone of one of them would cost Dt*
Id50 ' These in
may be worth DtQOO, Each not being d t to
serve for the use for which they have been Constructed.
MESSINA16t@
October 1804.
(Sigmd) - V? GIO: DE STERLICH
INSPT~
GIROLAMO
BIANCHI
[LC. EPP, Vol. 13, AugustDecember 1804.1
Extract from journal of Hidshipman F. Cornelius deXrafPt, U. 8. Navy, U. 8.
Brig Scourge, ldidshipmon Ralph Izard, Jr., U. 8. Navy, commanding, 16 October
1804

(SyracuseHarbour)

the Enterprize saiI'd -

[NDA.]

117 October 18041
IT. S. Xavy
SIR, YOUare to consider yourself in the Naval Service of the United
States with pay and emoluments of a Lieutenant; and are to take under
your particular care the two Gun Boats belonging to the United States
now in this Port, together with the Guns and whatever belongs to them;
and attend to such other duty as may be assigned you in future by the
commander of the American Squadron until further orders - for
which, this shall be your s a t Warrant.
Messina October 17th: 1804
(Signed) EDWARD
PREBLE
To Don Antonio Xwsi, Bombardier, from Captain Edward Preble,

[See l e h r of 14 October 1804.1
[LC. EPP, Order Book, May 1803-June 1805.1

To Captain Garnuel Barron, U. 6. Xavy, from Master Commandant Thomas
Robinson, Jr., U. 6. Navy

U STATES
SCH'Enterprize MALTA
HARBOUR
17" October 1804

z

SIR,On Frida 5t@October laying at Anchor in the Port of Messina
at about 10.0' lock, P M, Thomas Davis a Seaman belonging to the
Above schooner under my command deserted from her and was
found next morning on board the British Sloop of War Morgianna,
commanded by [space] Reinsford Esqr I waited on Captain Remsford
Immediately and demanded the man as a diserter from the U S.
Service, he refused; I then Insisted on his going with me before commodore Prebble, the commanding officer then in Messina, that a
Proper explanation and understanding might take place on so serious

90

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1804 TO 1806

an event, a meeting followed, and in consequence an arrangement was
made of which Commodore Prebble no doubt will inform you the man was left on board the Morgiannu for a future demand,
There are several circumstances attending this business too lengthy
for this report, [Mrs.James S. Banon Col.]
Inventory of Gunboat No. 7

[17 October 18041

Inventary of the American Gun Boat NO 7 and roperly one of
those taken from the Tripoleens by Commodore Pre le's Squadron,
with the value or price to it a t the request of said Commodore, and
in Execution of the Order received from Marquis D. Nicola Espluga
chief Commander of the Squadron, and Commodore General of the
Depart!
Copy MARINA
INSPECTION
MESSINA[lYt4Oct 18041

!

-

The Hull is valued a t Eight Hundred Dollars, jusd the eetimation
made by the Conetructor Girolamo Bianchi which are- - - - - DIa 800.NB The Masts, Rigging, Peake of the Traysel, the Giboom, and other
Articles of Cordage belonging to the same were not Priced or esteemed, on accc that they were not to be found on board a t the
time of Capture - - - - - - ----- -- ----- -------- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 17 Oars a 40 grains Each ---------,,---------6.80
a Flag S t a f f - - - - - - - _ - - - - _ _ _ - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - . . - - - - - .10
A small anchor or grampnal Weigh* 52 Rotols a 10 Dtr pr Cwt-- -- 5.20
6 Pieces Tar Pollands weigh* 10 Cantars value -----------------1. 50
A small Cable 66 feet 5 11o length & 1.30 Cantar Weight a 6) 7.
D*rprCwt-----------_----------------------------------A iece of Ditto 9 feet 6 Ins in lenghth, & 22 Rotols Weight a}
.gg
4 pr Cantaro or Cwt . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Another Piece Ditto 13 feet 6 Ins . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1.40

8tt

ARTILLERY ABTICLES

A Braas Cannon 24 Pounder Spanish Construction marked on one

side Quintali Spa nuoli 69.60 equal to Neapolitan Cantare
33.12 a 60 D ~pQ
i &antar.-..-.-.----------------1987.20
A Powder Chest with Iron Wheels &c . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7.0
2 Small Braes Cannons Weighing 1 Cantar 97 Rotr valued a t a l18.20
60 Dtr r a n t a r ---------------------------------------The two &tch Forks for said Cannons valued a t --------------70

I

.

D ~2113.
Q 10
All the other artillery Articles vizt, A Leaden hole Stopper, - 3
tind Tackles & falls, 1 ditto for use of drawing to the Battery,
2 unloading Irons - 1 of 12, & 1 of 24 Pounder, 2 Brooms for
Cleaning Gun, 22 Balls of difft sizes, 72 ditto of 3rd size, 82 of
2, and 22 of 1 - four Rammers of 24;50 Bombs difft sizes, 3
Supermiesioners, 1 Copper memure, and a Powder Chest for
the Powder Magazene, are all valued a t . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
100.0
Am*of the Articles belonging to the Hull kc- - - - - 823. 68
Ditto of Artillery- - - - - - - -- - - __- - - - - - - - - - - -- - -- 2213.10

(Signed) - STERLICHInspector

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS
Ducats

91

- - - - 3036.78

tar qr
Equal to Neap ------------ $2530. 7 . 8
Agio 5 pr Ct -------------126. 6 . 0
Spanish Dollara -----------

2404.1

.

8

[LC. EPP, Vol. 13, August-December 1804.1

[l7th October 18041
Inventory of Gunboat No. 8

Inventary of the American Gun Boat NQ 8 and properly one of
those taken from the Tripoleens by Commodore Preble's Squadron,
with the Value or Price to it, at the request of said Commodore, and
in Execution of the Order received from Marquis D: Nicola Espluga
Chief Commander of the Squadron, and Commodore General of the
Ilepartment. Copy MARINAINSPECTION
- MESSINAl Y t @ Octl 1804
The Hull of the Ship is valued a t Eight hundQ Ducate, just the
estimation made by the Constructor Girolamo Bianchi which
a r e - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - Dtc 800.0NB The Masts, Rigging, Peske of the Traysel, the Giboom together
with other Articles of Cordage belonging thereto cannot be
valued as they were not found on Board a t the time of
Capture------------_---------------------------------19 Oara a 40 grains Each - - - - - . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7. 60
A flag Staff----------------------------_-_-.10
A quarter Deck Tent Canes 15%a 171 grains pr Cane - - - - - - - - - 2.55)
A small Anchor or Grampnel Weighr Cantan 2.15 Rot* a} 21. 50
Dtr 1 0 , - - - - - - - - - - - _ _ _ _ - - - - - - - - _ - _ - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - A small Cable in length 35 feet 6 Ins, in Weight 90 Rot* a 4)
60
Dtrpr C a n t a r - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - . . - - - - - - - - - - - A Piece of Ditto 16 feet 6 Ins weigh^ 32 Rotq a 4 Dtr pr Cantar-1. 28
Twelve
- 0
Weighr Cautara 7 a 4 Dt! pr Cantar - - - - - _ __ _ _ - - - _ _ - - - - - - 28.
Dtr 864. 631
ARTILLERY ARTICLES

A brass Cannon 24 Pounder, Spanish Construction msrked on
one side Quintali Spagnuoli 66.66 equal to Neapolitan Cantam

33.14 a Dtr 60 pr Cantar- _ - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 1988 40
A Powder Chest with Iron Wheels- - - - , - - - - - - -7.0 ----A large Iron hammer for drawing nails- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 1. 20
All the other Artillery articles vizt 160 difft size Balls, 10 Rammera-33 Boxes Nail Shot, 134 Old Shrowd Blocks, 4 Bombs,
cliff* sizes, 5 Brooms for clean* Gun, 2 unloading Irons are all
valued a t - , - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - _ - - - - - - - - - - - - - _ - - - - - - - - - 80.0
Dt* 2076.60
Am%of Hull and Materials &c---- - - - - -- - - - - - - 864.63)
Do of Artillery articles- - - - - - - - - - - - - - -2076.
--60- - - - .

Total - - - - - - - - _ - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - Dtr 2941.231
Ducats 2941-231

,

(Signed) STERLICHInspector

tar qr
Equal to Nea : $2450 - 3 - 31
Agis @ 5 pr
122 - 6 - 1

&

Spanish dollars $2327 - 9 - 2)
[LC. EPP, Vol. 13, August-December 1804.1

92

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 180.4 TO 1806
117 October 18041

To l a s t e r Commandant Isaac Chauncey, U. S. Navy, commanding U. 6. S. John
Admns, from Captain Hugh Campbell, U. 6. Ravy

COPY
SIR I am ordered b Commodore Barron to send Wp Hinds a
khrine, late of the &nsteaation on board the John Adams ha
having leave to return home on Account of a mental Derangement
which he labours under I am respectfully
HUGHG. CAMPBELL
[NDA.

M C LB,

18045.1

Extract from log book kept by Sailing Master Nathaniel Baraden, U. S. Navy, on
board U. S. Frigate ComUtution Wednesday, 17 October 1804

[Malta] Moderate breezes from W S W, President, Constellation
and John Adams in company, The 12 Carpenters from Shore employed
in repairing the Stern where the Rails havebeen taken off, On Monday
last Mr William Sweeney, Gunner was suspended from duty, and
Ordered to his Cabbin, charged with disobedience of the orders of
Lieu: Gordon of the Constitution, Ships company employd in repainting
the ships sides and blacking the bends, A M a t 8 sailed on a Cruize the
U S S Conslellation, - The ships company employd in fleeting the
Top Mast Backstays, staying the topmasts & repairting the inside
work forward on the upper deck Carpenters & a party of Men employd
on shore in repairing the large Cutter & painting the Gratings and
Capstern Bars, a t 10 Sent an Officer & a party of Men to the Cheek
Yolacre Ship brought in here by the A~guson the 1gtQSeptember last
in order to transport here into the mole for discharging her Cargo, which
is wheat, Surgeons Report, Eight Siclc, Moderate & pleasant these 24
hours, Noon Wind E B S
[LC. EPP, Log Constitution, 1803-1804.1
Extract from journal kept by Purser John Darby, U. S. Navy, on board U. 6. 6.
John Adam Blaster Commandant Isaac Chauncey, U. S. Navy, commanding,
Wednesday, 17 October 1804

We are imployed discharging our Cargo. yesterday at 7. P M. the
Schooner Enterprize arrived. from hlessina & a t hallf past 7. the
Consfellation got under way & stood out of the Harbour. George
Mitchell & Walter Boyd rejoined the ship again from the Enterprize
Now for h~laltaagain. As the Cit of Valetta is built on a hill none
of the Streets except the Key are eve1 - they are all paved with
white free stone and are very offencive to the eye from the reflection on
them and the Walls of the House which are built of the same. the
Houses are generally three four & five stories high, and the Streets
are Generally narrow exce t one or two principal ones. The principal
buildings are the palace o the grand master. the infirmary the arsenal
the inns or hotels of the seven tongues & and the great Church of
Saint John. The Palace is s noble though a plain structure It)is now
the residence of Sir Alexander John Ball Governor of the Island

9

f

[NDA original. Miss Camilla S. McConnell.1

WARS W I T R BARBARY POWERS

93

Extract from journal of U. 8. Brig Argus, Master Commandant Isaac Hull, U. 8. Havy,
commanding, Thursday, 18 October 1804

[In harbor of Messina, refitting, watering and taking in provisions
and stores, from 3 October 1804.1
at 5 AM weighed anchor and made sail beating out of the harbour
of Messina a t 8 hove too hoisted in the boats Commodore Preble Consul Eaton and Cap* Decatur came on board took a Ketch in tow
under Convoy for malta made all sail a t 12 the Southermost point
on the Calabria bore SbE E Several Strange sail in Sight
[NDA photostat.]
Extract from journal of U. 8. Frigate Congrw. Captain John Rodgers, 0 . 8 . Navy
commanding, Thursday, 18 October 1804

[Routine cruising off Tripoli since 24 September 1804.1
At 3 past 9 [PM] Captain Rodgers and M: Allen left Left the ship
in the gig to go in and sand [sound?] The harbour of Tripoli.
At Midnight moderate breezes and Cloudy at 3 past 1 a heavy
Squall from the Eastwd
At 7 Captq Rodgers returnd in the Gig - the Nautilus in company.
Latitude Observed 33' 13' N
[USNA.]
Extract from log book kept by Sailing Master Nathaniel Haraden, U. S. Navy, on
board U. S. Frigate Gnslifution, Thursday, 18 October 1804

[Malta] Moderate breezes from E, S, E, President & Jno Adams
in company, The 12 Carpenters from shore employ$ in hishing the
Stern & Cut Water, Ships company employ$ in fleeting & setting up
the top mast back stays, and painting the main mast & Bow sprit
Towards evening heavy Showers, The black paint above the yellow
which has been repainted on the Fore part of the ship has this afternoon entirely Ruined the Yellow, The Constitution is now all complete
for Bending sails, at 7 P M anchored here the U, S, Schooner Enterprize
Lieut Robinson Night Showery by intervals, Winds fresh E S E
employd in cleaning between decks and in scraping down top & top
gallant masts. This forenoon the Cut Water & Billet head were
completed Returned the stage which has been employed for the Carpenters to work on,
[LC.

EPP, Log Constitution, 1803-1804.

Extract from journal of Midshipman F. Cornelius deKrafft, U.S. Navy, in U. S. Brig
Scourge, Midshipman Ealph Izard, Jr., U. 6. Navy, commanding, 18 October 1804

(Syracuse Harbour) Arrive the brig Argus having CommQPreble
on board [NDA.]
Extract from journal of U. S. Brig Argus, Master Commandant Isaac Hnll, U.S. Navy,
commanding, Friday, 19 October 1804

Cast off the Ketch at 4 past 2 AM came to in the harbour of Syracuse with the Larbg bower Ketch in CQat 7 Commodore Preble went
on Shore at 9 Consul Eaton & Cap! Decatur went on Shore - Ends
very heavy rain
[NDA photostat.]

94

NAVilL OPERATIONS FROM 1804 TO 1806

Extract from log book kept by Sailing Master Nathaniel Haraden, U. S. Navy, on
board U. 6. Frigate ChadiMfon, Friday, 19 October 1804

[Malta] Moderate breezes from E S E with cloudy over cast
weather, President and John Adam in company discharged this
Afternoon the 12 Malts, Carpenters They have been employ'd (Sundays Excepted) since 24$hof September last in repairing the Cut
water fitting the Billet head & making other necessary alterations, The
Constitution had before a Hercules head, which with the Cut Water
was destroyed on the 12th of September last as mentioned in that
days log, The large launch which has been employed for the Carenters, was this day returned to the Navy Agent, Evening strong
reezes from E B S, Night Showery & un leasant, A M a t 7 the wind
shifted in in h e a squall
~
from E S E to
S W, with heavy thunder
t rain Veered away our stern Cables, Ships company employ'd in
cleaning ship, as the morning is Rainy no men went on shore on
liberty, - Surgeons Report Nine Sick and three discharged Noon,
Wind fresh N N El with light Rain

B

bb

[LC. EPP,Log Constitution, 1803-1804.1

[21October1

I]

To Captain Samuel Barron, U. S. Navy, from Richard Farquhar, l a l t a

MAYIT PLEASEYOUREXCELLENCY
to give the order for me to go to Syracusa, to the Bearer who was
Pilot to the Vessel that went in to Tripoli to Burn the PhiEadelphia
Frigate, and whom I recommended, & Should your Excellency want
any more Pilots or any other Service I can do for America Please
Command me
VALETTA
Octr 21
IMm. James S. Barron Col. NDA photostat.]
Extract from journal of U.S. Brig Argus, Master Commandant Isaac Hull,U.S. Navy,
commanding, Monday, 22 October 1804

Employed getting ready for sea AM at 5 got under way at 7 Commodore Preble came on board with M' Eaton - and M' Randolph employ'd sweeping and towing out of the harbour of Syracuse.
[NDA photostat.]
Extract from journal of Surgeon Jonathan Cowdery, U. S. Bavy, 22 October 1804

None of our cruisers were to be seen from the top of the castle.
The TripoIitan gun boats were disarmed, and the Bashaw's gunners
were employed in drawing the charges from the cannon on the battery.
Man of the guns now stood in the sand, as they did when commodore
~ r e b &first attacked the town. On being fired two or three times,
the recoiled into the sand so deep that they could not be worked,
an were sbandoned. The Bashaw told me that if he had three
frigates, he would blockade America. He said he could do it as
easily as a frigate and schooner could blocade Tripoli!
[LC. Rare Boob, American Capfives in Tripoli or Dr. Gowdery's JoumaE,

2

Boston, 1806.1

WARS WITH BARBABY POWERS

95

Extract from log book kept by Sailing Master Nathaniel Emden, U. 8. Navy, on
board U. 6. Frigate Gnstituiion, Tuesday, 23 October 1804

[Malta] Light airs and pleasant weather, President, John Adam
& Enterprize in company, discharged from the Constitution to the
President Captain John Hall, Lieutenant Greenleaf, and all their
detachment of Marines 50 in number, Joined the Constitution from
the President, Captain Gale and Lieutenant, OBan[n]on with a detachment of Marines 49 in number, Received from Mr Higgins Navy
Agent 11 Casks of Spirits, some of them pipes & some of them Puncheons, their contents were not marked, The eleven Casks were returned empty to the Agent, - In the evening the Body of Samuel
Pool deceased was put into a Boat and committed to the deep without
the Harbour, Night moderate with intervals of Rain A M the Carpenters with a party of Men employ4 on shore in r e p a w the large
Cutter, - Our sick list daily increases, the Surgeon thinks it is owing
to the quality of the water, which we daily receye from shore, & which
from the late heavy Rains is white & empregnated with a limy substance Sick Report twenty Sick and five convalescent Noon fresh
Breezes from W S. W,
[LC. EPP, Log Constitution, 1803-1804.1

To the Health Officer, Lisbon, Portugal, from William Jarvis, U. S. Consul, Lisbon,
Portugal

COPY
LISBON24th Octor 1804
SIR The American Vice Consuls of Porto & Figueira have written
to me relative to the inconvenience & hazard to which Vessels were
subjected in performing quarantine without those Rivers. In fact,
at this inclement season of the ear it is absolutely impossible, as
Vessels have not the smallest she ter from a tempestuous ocean; and
it is no doubt within Your Lordships recollection, that an American
Vessel, but a short time ago, after laying five days off Porto Bar,
without being permitted to enter the River, was forced to put away
for this Port, with, I beleive, the loss of an anchor & that a Schooner
which was not allowed to enter the Mondego has arrived here within
two or three days, with the loss of a Cable & Anchor. This inconvenience I think can be remedied with the greatest safety to the Health
of His Royal Highness the Prince Regents Subjects, a t the same time
that the most perfect safety is secured to t.he Vessels by permitting
them to perform quarantine at the nearest safe anchorage within the
mouth of the Lower River, under the inspection of the Health Officers.
Upon the opposite side of the Mondigo from Figueira, about two miles
& a half from the mouth & two miles from where Vessels usually lay,
a place where there are no houses near the shore appears to be well
adapted to the purpose; both as to the health of the inhabitants & to
the safety of the Vessels Your Lordship must be too sensible of the inconvenience to which
the inhabitants of those two provinces will be subjected, by being
deprived of the foreign supplies of the first necessary of life, not to
make such arrangements as will secure to Vessels a direct entry into
the Rivers to perform quarantine, if it shall appear that no danger
attends the measure. I have taken the liberty to commit my ideas to paper agreeable to

9

96

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1804 TO 1806

the wishes expressed to Mr Quirk when he addressed Your Lordship
Verbally on the Subject To His Lordship - JOAO
ANASTACIO
FERREIRA
RAPOSO,
PromZor
Mor of Health, of this Kingdom h c &c &c
[NA. SDA. CL, Lisbon, Vol. 2, Jan. 1803-Dec. 1805.1

[24 October 18041
To Captain Samuel Barron, U. 6.Navy, from Captain Hugh G. Campbell. U.6.Navy

SIR - OBedient to yours of the 16*h Inst I proceedeed in the U. S.
Frigate under my command for the coast of Tripoli. Which the
Severity of Weather prevented us from Seing until1 yesterday
Morning -between that time and the Night of our leaving Malta the
weather has been very Severe or in other words a smart Gale accompanied with uncommon heavy Squalls in which the Constellation has
been deprivd of all her head rails and rendered very leaky in all her
upper works particularly about the Bows, in so much that for some
time we had doubts whether the leaks or pumps would preponderate
Captain Ro[d]gers leaves this for Malta this Evening, leaving the
Nautilus to accompany the Constellation, which vessel I understand
is by no means prepared for such weather as we have reason to Expect. - I shall reconiter the town and coast as oppertunity May offer,
a t the same time Keep an Iye to windward for a birth off Shore HUGHG CAMPBELL
Constellation - 24th Octr 1804
[Mrs. James S. Barron Col.]

Extract from journal of U. S. Brig Argus. Master Commandant Isaac Hull,U.S. Navy,
commanding, Wednesday, 24 October 1804

at 3 past 8 [P. bl.] came to in the harbour of Malta and warped
higher up
At Midnight came too in the harbour of Malta u~iththe Starboard
bower found here the President, Constitution, John Adams and TTixenLieuqohnson of Marines went on bd the Constitution

[NDA photostat.]
Extract from journal of U. 6. Pngate Congrur, Captain John Rodgers, U.S. Navy,
commanding, Wednesday, 24 October 1804

I0ff Tripoli] At 1 [PM] discoverd a sail on the starbe Bow Made
sail and gave chace
At 6 past 6 beat to quarters and cleard Ship for action soon after
spoke The US. F. Conste2lation
Latitude Observed 33' 8' N.
[USNA.]
Rxtract from Memorandum Book of Captain Edward Preble, U. 6. Navy, Malta,
24 October 1804

Returned to Malta in the Argus after having travelled by land from
Syracuse to Messina. Found there the Presickent, John Adams Argus

and Enterpnke.
[LCoriginal.]

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

97

Extract from log book kept by Sailing Master Nathaniel Haraden, U. S. Navy. on
board U. S. Frigate W i a t f o n , Wednesday, 24 October 1804

[Malta] Fresh Gales from W S W, President, John Adams and
Enterprize in company, a t 2 P M veered away the Stern Cable, and
let the Ship Swing to the Bower, The Buoy of the small Bower was
this afternoon stove by a Polacre ship proceeding to sea, at 10 in the
evening Anchored here the U S Brig Argus froamSyracuse, Commodore
Preble came in the A~gus,but the Argus dld not get praticque till
10 in the morning when he Rejoined the Constitution after being absent
on the United States Service 31 days, the Cornme was accompanied
on board by several of the Captains of the Squadron, amoung them
was Captains Decatur & Chauncey, at day hght we swang the Ship &
hove in the Stern Cable, since yesterday 22 more is added to the Sick
list, which makes 44, their principal complaint is a Graping with a
flux, An American Store Ship arrived here to day from Norfolk in
America. at Noon fresh Breezes from W B S.
[LC. EPP, Log Constitution, 1803-1804.1
To Captain William Bainbridge, U. S. Navy, from Captain Edward Preble, U. 8.
naw

MALTAOctober 25tQ1804

Dr SIR, I have now an opportunity, and I hope it will not be the
last I shall have of writing you previous to my leaving the Mediterranean, although I return to the United States in the John Adums

Captain Chauncey in a few days, having been superceded by Commodore Barron. I sincerely regret that it has not been in my power to
liberate yourself, Officers & Crew while in command; be assured no
exertion on my part has been wanting which our Government, and
the forces under my command would justify - The forces which we
now have in these S e a , will undoubtedly free you from your present
situation 'ere long. I have r e d a number of letters from America
for yourself and Officers which I have delivered to Commodore
Barron; he will undoubtedly forward them when prudence sanctions
the measure.
I shall leave a copy of accounts relative to supplies &c"orwarded to
Tripoli, with Mr Higgens our Agent at this place; and shall write you
often from America - I presume that most of my letters heretofore
written, have never reached you, as they remain unanswered.
May God bless and preserve yourself and Officers, and soon restore
you to all your friends; is the ardent wish of one who feels sensibly
your misfortunes
P. S. Our Government has approbated my conduct while commanding in these seas; and I have been bond with a letter of thanks The present Squadron could not be fitted out without superceding me
as we had not a sufficient number of Captains in America Junior to
me E P. [LC. EPP, LB, April-Nov. 1804.1

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1804 TO 1806

98

To Captain Hugh 6.Campbell, U. 8. Navy. commanding U, 6. Frigete Gmrbcllolion.
from Captsin JoW Bodgers, 0.S. Bevy
U. STATES
FRIGATE
Congress off TRIPOLI

October 2bt4 180.4
SIR As the situation of our affairs a t present do not make i t
Essentially necessary (I conceive) for more than two Vessels being
on the Coast to continue the Blockade, I shall leave this Immediately
for Malta - & herein Enclose you Commodore Barrons Instructions
to me, for your Goverment. [LC. JRP, Letters & Orders, Book A, 1804-1805-1
To Secretary of 8tate from John Gavino, U. S. Consul, Gibraltar

N? 5
SIR

*

SOUTHGIBRALTAR
25th

*

*

*

*

*

Oct: 1804

*

Here we have nothing new, the &sex & two Morrocco Cruisers
were at Lisbon the 2 8 t W t ? . The 3d Cruiser has returnd to Salle
with a Prusisn ship & Brig ~ $ she
4
Capturd going from Lisbon for
Amsterdam & Antroup, the Captives are made to work. The Disorder continues it5 Ravages much the same, I have further
lost Bror & a Sarvent [NA. SDA. CL, Gibraltar, Vol. 2, 1796-1804.1
Extract from journal of U. S. Frigate Congrws. Captain John Bodgers, U. S. Navy,
commanding, Thursday, 25 October 1804

At sunset the town of Tripoli Bore S B W. distance 4 leagues At 4 [AM] took our departure for Malta Made and t,ook in Sail as
occasion required
Latitude Observed 33' 57' N.
[USNA.]
Extrsct from log book kept by Sailing Master Nathaniel Harsden, U. S. Navy, on
boerd U. S. Frigate Consfltulion,Thursday, 25 October 1804

Moderate Breezes from the W S W, we are in Malta President,
John Adams, Ar.qus & Enterprize in Company, at 3 P M sailed for S acuse the U S S Enterprize, We Received the Kedge & Hawser we ent
in the late Gale, we Received From Syracuse Prison, by conveyance
of the Argus Seven Tripolitans, they are officers taken in the Ketch
and Gun Boats in Commodore Prebles Squadron, A M moderate and

P

Overcast weather we Received from the Agent Eight Puncheons of
Rum they were towed off, no contents were marked on the Casks,
we Received from the Agent one standing & one flying Jib Boom and
a fore top gallant yard, the Surgeon Reports 60 Sick and four on the
Recovery, a t Noon Calm, [LC. EPP, Log Cmstitution, 1803-1804.1
Extract from journal kept by Purser John Darby, U. S. navy, on bow3 U. 6. 6.
J& Adanu. Bfaster Commandant Isaac Chaunceg, U. S. Navy, commanding,
Tbnraday, 25 October 1804

Malta] I omited mentioning the arrival of his British Mttjestys
Ship h o w on the 20th - & 21 rt his majestys ship of War 64 gun
the Amon. We had this day. Sunday [sic] -a most tremendious gale

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

99

which did great damage to some of the ships in the outward Harbour Yesterday the American ship &red arrived 51 days passage with
stores for the Squadron - the U States Brig Argus also arrived from
Syracuse [NDA original. Miss Camilla 8. McConnell.1
To Secretary of State from James Simpson, U, S. Consul, Tangier, Morocco
N-6. -Second
Copy. TANGIER
26tbOctober 1804. SIR I have the honour to enclose with this triplicate of NQ 85
Lisbon is the only Channel left me now to forward m Communications in. - I have satisfaction in saying I have receiv a Letter from
Consul Gavino dated the 14P, to that time he had not been ill, but
he advises "the Fever continued to rage with unremitted fury" The Emperours Agents sailed from this Bay the 1559 Inst for
Lisbon, takeing with them One hundred and forty four thousand
dollars. - A part of this sum is no doubt destined for purchase of
Amunition and Cloathing for Troops, but the chief object in view is
undoubtedly the obtaining small armed Vessels suitable for Cruizing
in the Straits. The Chief Agent in the busyness is an intelligent Moor who has
resided nearly thirty years in different parts of Europe and who had
long resisted every endeavour of the Emperour to enduce him to
return to this Country - he however came back some Months ago
and is generaly believed to be the person who laid the plan of this
Armament and its objects, before Muley Soliman. Alcayde Hashash has intimated to me the Emperours desire to send
the Meshowla to Tripoly. - I have answered him that is impossible
whilst War continues between the United States and that Regency,
reminding him a t same time, that i t was on Muley Solimans engagement this Ship should remain in his Ports until Peace, that she was
restored; to this I have not received any reply. - The Idea is so
repugnant to every sentiment of honour and of Justice, it can scarce
be supposed the Emperour or any of his Officers could expect i t would
meet a favourable reception. - I very much fear it was agitated with
another view, that of seeking a cause of complaint and argument for
resenting the disapointment in that particular and in sending the
Wheat to Tripoly. - I t is beyond a doubt Muley Solimans desire to
give assistance to Tripoly, I have viewed his conduct for some time as
actuated by that principle and I cannot but recommend to Government to meet this new Armament with a Naval force of a nature and
extent equal to the protection of the American Commerce in and about
the Straits at a very early period in the Spring. This Country d l never openly declare War, their system has
always been to Capture first and treat with the full hand, - nothing
will avert such a blow I much fear at the time I have mentioned, but
a force equal to prevent it and to impress a sense of an immediate
severe revenge for such an Act, being the consequence of it. Peace with Tripoly on the basis of the former Treaty most likely would
keep matters quiet here. - I sincerely wish that may happily be
brought about. - I have not heard from Commodore Barron or
his Squadron since he left Gibraltar. The E88ex arrived here from Lisbon on the 17thInstant and put to
Sea again some Evening. - A Tunisien Ambassador is now with

-

J

100

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1804

1806

Mule SoIiman, it is mid he comes to sollicit a supply of Wheat. The gatavian Consul has quieted the Emperour for the present by
making a considerable addition in money to the Present he gave at
Mequinez and promising an Embassy so soon as the Political concerns
of the Republic will admit of it. - The circumstance of their having
no Commerce to interupt, induced Alcayde Hashash to become an
Advocate for this temporary arrangement -.
[NA. SDA. CL,Tangier, Vol. 2, Jan. 1803-Oct. 1810.1
To Captain John Bodgers, U. 6. Mavy, commanding TJ. S. Frigate Congress, from
Captain Samuel Barron, U. S. Navy

U. STATES
SHIPPresident
Mdta Octr 26. 1804
SIR With a View to relieve the Nautilus, I have instructed Cap1
Hull to proceed Immediately, with the Brig Argus, to the Coast of
Tripoli, and in case of your absence, of which I have some expectation,
to place himself under the directions of Cap* Campbell; but should
you still be on the Coast, you wiU please issue Instructions for the
retention of the Ship ConstelEation & the Brig Argus, on the Coast of
Tripoli, & return yourself with the Ship Congress & the Nautilus to
this place, in order to receive under your command the U States Ship
Con.stitution.[LC. JRP, Letters & Orders, 1804-1805.1
To Easter Commandant Isaac Bull, U. 6. Navy, commanding U. 6. Brig Argus.
from Captain Samuel Barron, U. S. Navy

MALTAOctober 26t@1804
SIR The United States Brig Argus beiqg now ready for Sea, you
will proceed with her immediately to the coast of Tripoli and deliver
the enclosed On your Arrival there, shou'd you not find Cspta Rodgers present,
you will place yourself under the instructions of Capt.9 Campble and
there remain for further Orders; but shou'd neither of the Ships destin'd
for the Blockade of Tripoli be found remaining on t,heCoast, you will
then return to this place, bringing all the information you can possibly
collect respecting them
[NDA. Captain's LB, Vol. 3, 1805.1
Extract from joul.nal of Surgeon Jonathan Cowdery, U. S. Navy, 26 October 1804

A great scarcity of grain. Our crew had no bread for three days.
The Bashaw ave orders to d the market people, not to sell grain to
any body b u t L household. There was no bread to be had for money.
A dispute took place between the Bashaw and the renagado Lysle,
about the purchasing of some barley. Lysle was considerably intoxicated, and insisted on his right to purchase grain in the market. The
Bashaw was highly affronted, and flew at him with all his might,
struck him, and ordered his mamelukes to disarm hi and put him
in prison, which they strove to obey, and carried him off. The
Bashaw, however, soon ordered him released, and then ordered his
servant, who was su posed to be the cause of the quarrel, bastinadoed
with five hundred b ows, which was immediately put into execution.

P

!LC.

Rare Books, American Captives in Tripoli or Dr. Courdery's Journal

Boston, 1806.1

-

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

--

--

101
-

Extract from journal of U. 8. Rigate 6ngrrv. CapJohn Badgers, U. 8. Bavy,
commanding, Friday, 26 October 1804

[En route from Tripoli to Malta] At 10 [AM] discoverd a sail on
the lee bow
At 11 Fired a gun and brought the Sail too
At Meredian fresh breezes and clear Weather Spoke the sail she
proved To be a turkish vessel with out papers & could give no account
of her self
Latitude Observed 35' 29' N.
[USNA.]
Extract from log book kept by Sailing Master Nathaniel Haraden, U. 6. Navy, on
board U. 6. Frigate Consfifdion,%day, 26 October 1804

Moderate breezes from the W N W, We are in Malta President,
John Adams, Argus & Vixen in company the Vixen this day hauled
out from the dock yard She has been altered from a Schooner to a Brig
We received the following provisions this afternoon One pipe of a
127 gallons two thirds full & one pipe of 94 gallons Molasses, 15 Barrels
Pork, 30 Barrels Beef, two thirds of a Yuncheon of Vinegar, 18 barrels
flour, 8 Barrels of Beans and seven teirces Rice weight 4546 pound,
This Afternoon Slung the lower yards, - The Sail Maker employed
making a new suit of Sails for the Scourge, Carpenters sheeving the
new spars from Shore, discharged from the Constitution to the Argus
Lieutenant OBannon of Marines, Joined the Constitution from the
Argus, Lieutenant Johnston of Marines deserted from the Constdutwn
Nine days ago John Blisard, Thomas Barbar and Joseph Marlett
Seaman, they made their escape when on liberty on shore, A M
moderate winds W B N, We Received from the Navy Agent 71 Casks
of Bread contents pr marks-26392 pound. The empty Casks was
Received to the Agent, the Sick list continues to increase, The Surgeon
Reports 71 Sick and three discharged, five out of the 71 is Sick with
a fever, - The others with the flux a t Noon Wind N W
[LC. EPP, Log Constitution, 1803-1804.1
Extract from journal kept by Purser John Darby, U. S. Navy, on board U. 6. 6.
John Admm. Master Commandant Isaac Chauncey, 0.S. Navy, commanding,
Friday, 26 October 1804

at 4 A M the U States Brig Argus sailc for Tripoli I went on shore
on business of the ship & in the Evening went to the opera
[NDA original. Miss Camilla S. McConnel1.J
To Sailing Master Nathaniel Haraden, U. S. Navy, from Captain Edward Preble,
U. 8. Navy

UNITEDSTATEB
SHIP~ 0 ~ t ~ ~ i 0 n
Malta Harbour 27IhOctober 1804
SIR YOUare hereby permitted b and with the consent of Commodore Barron to exchange with the aster of the John Adams. You
are therefore to repair on board that ship without loss of time.

L

[Similar letters were sent to Midshipmen John 0.Creighton (to Constitution);
William Lewis (to John A d a m ) ; Leonard J . Hunnewell (to John Adams); George
A. Marcellin (to Scou~.ge);John M. Haswell (to Scourge) and Sailing Master
Marmaduke Dove (to Constitution).]
LC. EPP, Order Book, May 1803-June 1805.

102

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1804 TO 1806
(27 OCTOBER18041

To Captain Samuel Barron, U. S. Bavy, from Captain John Bodgere, U. 8, Navy

U. STATES
FRIGATE
Congress [MALTA]
SIR I have the Honor to acquaint you that I have this moment
arrived direct from the Coast of Tripoli; which place I remained
before, in the Execution of your orders to me of the 234 UltQuntil
the 24th Inst being joind again by the Cmtellatwn, I left it on the
succeding Day & Cap$Campbell in charge of the Execution of your
orders, relative to the Blockade of that place I should not have returned into port quite so soon, had I not
conceived the Force left on the Coast (Constellation & Nautilus) fully
adequate, a t present, to the completion pf your Views, and this as
the most favourable opportunity of repa small defect in the
Rudder of this Ship & filling up her water; not having more than for
three weeks, of that article on board. In compliance with your orders, during the time I remained before
Tripoli the Blockade was kept up as close as the weather (which was
generally good) & other circumstances would admit; and not a Vessel
of m y description during the time, got Either out or in, except on
the 5tQs$, four small coasting Boats loaded with Wheat, which
they effected in consequence of light Winds & hazy Weather: Two
of these Boats I chased on shore - one about three & the other five
Miles to the Westward of the Town, & sent three Boats in to bring
one of them off, Anchoring a t the same time, within the reach of
Grape of the Shore, concieving I should to be able to cover the Boats,
so effectually, as to enable them to execute my orders without much
opposition, but being so near the Town & in sight of an Arrabian
Camp, before they could reach the shore, the Enemy had collected
in such such Numbers, as to make the t h ' i Impracticable without the
greatest probability of making sacrifices, or at least hazarding more
than the Emergency of such an acquisition would Justify. - -4s
the Enemy were coverd by Rocks in a manner to prevent my annoying
them much by the Fire from the Ship. - To the Officers (Lieut"
Wyer, Henly & Blakelp commanded the Boats) and Men engaged in
this semice, it is but Justice in me to observe that they would have
Effected tbe Execution of my Orders, I have not the least doubt, in
spite of all opposition, had I not been induced through motives of
regard of the consequence of hazarding the lives of so many brave
Men, to effect an object of so little Importance to their Country, by
Countermanding my Orders (by Signal) after they had reach'd the
Enemy within Pistol Shot. Conceiving it an object of no small Importance, to know with
certainty to what distance our Ships can approach the Batterys of
Tripoli with safety, I had resolved for some time past on sounding,
the first favourable opportunity, for this purpose; .&r, on Friday night
19" Inst, I made the attempt & succeeded, ('wzthout Interception)
much to my satisfaction, - It being between one & two o'clock in
the morning, when I went in & every thing quiet, I was enabled to
approach so near as to observe the position of the Cruizers & found
that all the Gun Boats were haul'd up with their Sterns Foremast
on the Beach, so as to Enable them to act as a Battery & the Ketch
Schooner, Brig & two Galleys, dismantled & moored to the Wdls The Brig has no masts in - I am now sufficiently acquainted with
the Coast, contiguous to the Batterys, to consider myself a good

-

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

103

Pilot, & this has proved to me (in service like this) the necessity of
Man of War having a Gig; as the sounding an Enemys Coast
can e effected in one of those Boats without Risque, when i t c a ~ o t
be done in any other with safety - I was in 4 feet water inside of
the Rocks, unpercieved, sltho I could hear the People on Shore
distinctly in common conversation The small Zebec which accompany'd the Congress into this Port,
I fell in with yesterday morning, between this & Tripoli, steering for
the latter place, she is armed with two Carriage Guns & one Howitze[r],
with 9 Turks on Board - This Vessel has neither Colours nor a
Skrip of Paper of any kind, to prove what Nation she belongs to. Her Crew says that she is a Prize to a Tunitian Cruizer; however I
should rather suppose that she is a Tripolime, and that her Papers
have been thrown overboard: At any rate be this as it may, the
circumstances under which I found her, are, I concieve, a sdEcient
Justification on my part, for sending her in for Examination. [LC. JRP, Letters & Orders, Book A, 1804-1805.1
Extract from journal of U. S. Brig A r m Master Commandant Iaaac Hull, U. 8. Navy,
commanding, Saturday, 27 October 1804

(Lieu: O'Bannon of Marines Came on board [on 26 October] and
Superceeded Lieu: Johnson - )
AM a t 4 past 5 got under way and stood out of the harbour of
Malta backed the main Topsail and sent the Jolly boat on Shore a t
11 Two boats came from the Commodore to tow us a t ) past 11 the
Jolly boat returned Lieu1 Heathcot Reid Joined us as 3 s Lieu5 A t
12 Sent the Commodores boats back and made all sail [XDA photostat.]
Extract from journal of U. 8. Frigate Congrus, Captain John Bodgem, U. 6. Navy,
commanding, Saturday, 27 October 1804

Beating up for the Island of Malta.
At 4 past 12 [P M] Sen[t] on board the strange Sail To take possesion
of her Mr'r Downs And Sprigg with 9 Sailors
At Sunset saw Mount Etna bearing N Q W The Island of Malta
N W B W 4 W distance 15 leagues
Latitude Observed 35' 39' N
[USNA.]

Extract from journal kept by Purser John Darby, U. 8. Navy, on board U. 6. S.
Jokn Adomt. Master Commandant Isaac Chauncey, U. S. Navy, commonding,
Saturday, 27 October 1804

Still laying a t Malta Commodore Barron is here in a v e v ill state
of health [manuscript mutilated]
[NDA original. Mias Camilla S. McConneU.]
Extract from journal of IKidshipman F. Cornelius deKrafft, 11.6.Navy, in U. S. Brig
b g e . Midrhipmsn Balpb Izard, Jr., U. IZ. Navy, commandmg, 87 Oatobe
1804

(Syracuse Harbour) Sail'd the Schooner Enterprize for Malta. INDAJ

104

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1804 TO 1806

To Captain Edward Preble. U. 6. Navy, from George Davis, U. S. Charge d'Mairscr,
Tunis
TUNIS
October [*I Bth1804

DEARSIR,I am this moment favored FFit.h letters from Mr OBrien,
by which I learn the result of your operations against Tripoli, as
honorable to yourself, as I trust they will prove advantageous to
our Country I t is with pain I learn of your retiring from these
Seas:- to me a most unexpected event. I t would have afforded me
unspeakable pleasure to have seen you once more at Tunis before you
return to the United States The friendly and confidential treatment
I have ever r e d from you, demands my unfeigned acknowledgments
of gratitude - Whatever are your future movements, may they be
crowned with that happiness you so justly merit; and which I trust
no human events can destroy. Accept my best wishes for your health
prosperity and speedy return (since it is so o r d h e d ) to the bosom
of your family: - and accept the assurances of the hi& respect and
sincere regard * * *
[*This letter was included among the December letters in the book from which
copied.]
LC. EPP, LB, Kov. 1804-Mar. 1805.1
Extract from Memorandum Book of Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Navy, Malts,
28 October 1804

Took up my quarters on shore and left Capt. Decatur in command
of the Constitution. Congress arrived.
[LCoriginal.]
Extract from journal of U. S. Frigate Congrm, Captain John Bodgsrs, U. S. Navy,
commanding, Sunday, 28 October 1804

got the anchors off the bow At Sunset light breezes the harbour
Of Malta bearing N W. distance 4 Leagus. At 8 [PM] spoke the
U.S. Brig Argus captq Hull bound on a Cruise off Tripoli. At 9 hove
too Off the harbour of Malta.
At Midnight pleasant weather Standing off and on the harbour
Of Malta - At 7 made sail and Stood in for the harbour
At $ past 8 shortened Sail and Came too with the larbd bower
anchor And moord ship. found laying Their the U S. Frigates
President Constitution John Adams and brig 1~ia:on[USNA.]
Extract from log book kept by Sailing Master Hathaniel Baraden, U. 6. Navy, on
board U. S. Frigate Comtilutlon, Sunday, 28 October 1804

At anchor in Malta, Wind W, S, '8, the President John Adams, S:
Vizen in company, Commodore Preble this day delivered up the
command of the Constitution to Captain Decatur and took up his
quarters on shore. - The Congress arrived from a cruize off Tripoly
& brought in a Vessel detained a s a pirate, she was armed and manned
with Moors and without either papers or colours, Surgeons Re ort 68 Sick, 5 convalescent, 18 discharged, a t Noon
wind fresh w W, [LC. EPP, Log Constitution, 1803-1804.1

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

105

Extract from journal kept by h e r John Darby. U. 8. Bavy, an board U. 8. 8.
John AdaMaster Commandant Isaac Chauncey, U. 8. Bavy, commanding,
Sunday, 28 October 1804

[Malta] The United States Frigate Congress arrived from the Bay
of Tripoli all hands mustered and articles of War read [NDA original.

Miss Camilla 8. McConnell.]

Extract from journal* of Hezekiah Loomis, Steward, U. S. Navy, in U.S. Brig V&en
Yaster Commandant John Smith, U. S. Navy, commanding, Sunday, 28 October
1804

Malta A t 10 o'clock P. M. the U. S. Brig Vixen set sail for Syracuse
at which place we arrived a t 11 o'clock in the morning of the 29th.
All well. quarantined for 7 days. Sugar and chocolate served.
[*Belonging to N. Bolton near Hartford, Conn.]
[L. F. Middlebrook. NDA copy.]

[29 October 18041
To Master Commandant Isaac Chauncey, U. 8. Navy, from Captain Samuel
Barron, U. S. Navy

(COPY)
SIR YOUwill please to permit Serj?Easton now on board the Ship
John Adams, to exchange with Serjeant Spear
O C T 29tQ
~ 1804
[NDA.

MC LB, 1804-5.1

Extract from journal of U. S. Brig Argur, Master Commandant Isaac Hull, U.S. Mavy,
commanding, Monday, 29 October 1804

Ends light winds and Pleasant the Small pox made its appearance
on board found that there were 17 of the Crew who had not had i t
[NDA photostat.]
Extract from journal of U. S. Frigate Congress, Captain John Bodgers, U. S. Navy.
commanding, Monday, 29 October 1804

Harbour of Malta At 9 [PM] the U S. Schooner Enterprize came
In.
A t 3 past 10 [AM] arrived the U. S. Frhgate Essex,from Gibralter
[USNA.]
Extract from lemorandum Book of Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Navy, on board
U. S. Frigate John Admnt. 29 October 1804

Joined the John Adams -

Capt. Chauncey.

[LC original.]
Extract from journal kept by Purser John Darby, U. S. Navy, on board U. S. S.
John A d a . Master Commandant Isaac Chauncey, U. S. Navy, commanding.
Monday, 29 October 1804

[Malta] Came on board from the Schooner Vixon to Join the
Ship Nathl Hunt (Gunners Mate) John Thomas (Seaman) John
Johnson (0S.) and John Miller & Michal Connor (marines) this
day arrived U States Frigate Essex Capt. James B a m n .
NDA original. Mi88 Camilla S. McConnell.1

106

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 180.4 TO 1806

Extract from journal of Midshipman F. Cornelius deKraiTt, U.8. Navy, in U. 8. Brig
Sourge, Midshipman Ralph Isard, Jr., U. 6. Navy, commanding, 29 October
1804

(Syracuse Harbour) Arriv'd his 3. M. Ship Anson, Comq Craycraft, also the U. S. Brig Vhen. [NDA.]
To Captain Samuel Barron, U. S. Navy, from James Simpson, U.S.Consal, Tangier,
Horocco

TANGIER
SOt@October 180.4.
SIR The 3e of this Month I wrote you by way of Leghorn to accom-

pany triplicate of my respects of the 15" SeptrOn the 28th UltQone of the Emperours Frigates returned to Salle
with a Prussian Shi and Brig, captured off the Coast of Portugal.
The Crews have een set to work on the Fortifications of Rhabat
and Vessels and Cargoes adjudged Prizes. - The other two Frigates
went into the Tagus where Captain Barron left them on the 13th
Ins' - The Frigate came to S d e has r e t m e d to Lisbon with two
Captains to supercede the former Commanders of those Ships, whom
the Emperour has determined to punish for having gone into that
f o r t before the expiration of the term they were directed to Cruize. The funds destined by Muley Soliman for augmenting his Navy went
from hence on a Ragusian Polacre the 15th Inst ascertained to be one
hundred forty four thousand dollars. The purchase of Ordnance Stores - Cloathing for the Army and
necessarys for the Emperours Family no doubt constitute part of the
duties of the Agents on this occasion, but the chief object in view is
obtaining Armed Vessels suitable for C r u i z i i in and about the Straits;
this I give you from what I consider good authority. I am also equdy founded in saying Muley Soliman continues highly
disposed to yield every assistance in his power to Tripoly and that his
Shagrin at not having been able to do so before, is no way abated.
Alca de Hashash has intimated to me his Majestys desire of sendin
the &fe;eahardo to Tripoly, I answered that it was impossible unt8
Peace should take place, and reminded him that the Ship was restored
on the E m erours engagement that she should remain in his Ports
I have not received any rep1 to that Letter. - If
during the
Peace be happily concluded with Tripoly on t e footing of the former
Treaty, most probably we s h d not have any Novelty here, but if the
War continues I make no hesitation in saying, that it is now my
decided oppinion this Country will take part in it w l y in the Spring,
and that it is this intention has chiefly instigated the resolution of
encreasing their Navy. I have acquainted the Secretaq of State of tbis and recommended
an adequate Naval force being stationed near this by the time I have
mentioned, either to prevent the dreaded evil, or resent with energy
aueh Act of Hostility as may be committed. The Capture of these Prussian Vessels sailing from Lisbon, will
probably enduce the Minister of that Nation to endeavour at preventing the Moors purchasing Armed Vessels in Portugal, - but in
England they will not meet such impediments. I have not failed to repeat to Mr Jsrvis my request of his keeping
you advised what may be done in these mattars under his observation,
which f trust he will do. -

f)

bar,

i

-

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

107

The Essm arrived here from Lisbon on the 17t@Inst m d put to Sea
again same Evening, since when I have not seen or heard of Captain
Barron. [Mrs.James S. Barron original.]
[30October 18041
To Officers commanding U. S. Ships of War in the Mediterranean, from Captain
Samuel Barron, U. 6. Ravy

Permission is hereby granted to the Ship called Ludy Shaw S h r t ,
George Parry Master, one of his Britanick Majesty's Transports
No 99 to enter the Ports of Tripoly, or Bengaze with balast only and
return from the same loaded with live stock free from Molestation
by the different Ships of War of the United States Squadron under
my Command - Given under my hand and with Authority vested
in me by the United States of America this thirteenth day of October
1804
MALTA,October Soth 1804
A true copy
JNQ
H DENT[NHF. Dent's LB.]
130 October 18041
To Master Commandant John H. Dent, U, 6. Navy, commanding U. 6. Schooner
NmdiIcu, from CaptainGomne1 Barron, U. S. Ravy

SIR You will on your arrival here supply your Vessel with whatr
ever She may want and immediately proceed to Syracuse with all
possible dispatch, for further Orders.
MALTA
October SO* 1804
[NHF. Dent's LB.]
Extract from log book of U. S. 6. JoAn Adam, Master Commandant Isaac Cha~mcey,
U. S. Navy, commanding, Tuesday, SO October 1804

Moderate breezes from W S W We are in Malta in company with the President, Constitution,
Congress, Essex and Schooner Enterprize The Ships company is 130 in number includ* Officers Seamen,
Marines & Invalids from the Squadron A. M. Sailed for Trieste to repair, the U. S. Schooner Enterprize Received from the Constitution 12 gang casks of 64 g a l l b c h , 4
puncheons of 120 gallP each & two pipes 120 gall@each -. the whole
will contain 1488 gall! Joined the John Adams from the Constitution, Jar Dunham Noon Moderate winds N N W.
[LC. EPP,John Adam, 1804-1805.1
&tract from journal of Hezekiah Loo&, Steward, U. 5. Navy, in U. S. Brig vhsq
Maeter Commandant John Smith, U. 6. Navy, commanding, Tuesday, SO October
1804
ypr

Received 107 lbs. Fresh mutton on board. At 3 o'clock P. M. got
underway and went out of the harbour and returned and came to
anchor before sun-set.
[L. F. Middlebrook. NDA copy.]

108

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1804 TO 1806

To Daniel Bedinger, aevy Agent end Superintendent of Navy Yard, Norfolk, Va..
from Secretary of the Navy

Extract of a letter from Corn'"reble
dated 5rh July 1804 -

N.4v. D E P31.
~ Oct? 1804
to the Secretary of the Navy

"The provisions that we sent out in the Woodrop Bins were delivered in
excessive bad Order, many of the casks of Rice, Butter &v were without
heads and some not half fuU The Beef and Pork badly hooped & without
Pickle: The canvas was almost every bolt damaged, and the twine wet and
rotten so much so indeed as to render both useless for sails - The Damage
has been occasioned by careless and bad stowage in a leaky ship"

The above is an extract of a letter which I have this day received
from Come Preble by which I am sorry to find that the Report of Mr
Higgins on the Cargo of the Woodrop Sims is f d y confirmed [NDA. GLB, Vol. 7, 1803-1805.1
Extract from journsl of U. S. Brig Argus, Master Commandant Isaac Hull, U.S. Navy,
commandmg, Wednesday, 31 October 1804

At Midnight fresh gales sounded in 75 fm, water from 6 to 9 AM
standing in for the town of Tripoli a t 9 the round Battery bore SbE
2%miles a t 10 saw 2 sail to leward bore away a t 11 Exchanged Sig4*
with the Comtektion in 0 with the Nautilm hove to Cap! Hull went
on board the Con8teUat.e'onEnds moderate Weather
[NDA photostat.]
--

Extract from journal of U, 8. Rigate C0ngre.u. Captain John Rodger~,U. 8. Bavy,
commanding, Wednesday, 31 October 1804

[Hmbor of Malta] IPM] Sailed the US. Frbgate Essez for
Syracuise
[USNA.]
Extract from log book of U. 6. S. john Adam. Xester CommandsntIsaae Choancsy,
U. 6. navy, commanding, Wednesday, 31 October 1804

Moderate breezes from N N W - At 2 P. M. sailed for Saragosa,
the U. 5. Ship Essa: She arrived here from Tangier & could not get
pratique Joined the John A h from the Constitutbn - Mr W. Lewis
Midshipman M' L. J. Hunnewel midshipman, Capt Gale of the
Marines; John Kemp, seaman & Charles Young Marine, who are
both invalids - Adam Smith Seaman, John DeGray, Thomas Bowline, John R. Maddison, & %heblack boy Mishoude also joined the
John Adams A. M. fresh breezes from N N W Ships Company em loyed white washing between decks & stowing
the fore and after h o d
PC. EPP, John Adoma, 1804-1805.1
Extract from journal of Hezekieh Loomis, Steward, 0.8. Navy, in U. 8. Brig Vtxan,
Master Commendant John Smith, U. 8. Nary, commanding, Wednesday, 31
IC October 1804

Received 111 lbs. beef. At 4 o'clock got underway went out of the
harbour, returned and came to anchor a t 7 o'clock. This day arrived
the Frigate Essm from the Rock.
[L. F. Middlebrook. NDA copy.]

109

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

[l November 18041
Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Navy, delivered U. 6. Frigate Gnstiiufion to Cap&
John Bodgers, U. S. Navy

I certify that the United States ship Comtitzltion together with her
standing and R
compleat has this day been delivered
by order of Commodore Samuel
Barron
S i ' d J N RODGERS
~
United States Sbi Constitution
a t anchor in Va ette Harbour
Island of Malta 1st Novr 1804

P

[Attention is invited to the journal of Captain John Rodgera which indicates
that he continued to command the U. S. Frigate Congress until 9 November, and
that on 10 November he left the Congress to command the U. S. Frigate Constitution. From 2 November, the Congress with some other U. 6. Ships of War
cruised off and on the town of Syracuse awaiting pratique, the quarantine regulations bein particularly rigid because smallpox had broken out in a t least one of
the U. 8. 8hips. Thia is offered aa a possible explanation of the delay in Captain
Rodgers' actually entering on board to take command of the Constitution.
Attention is invited also to the illness which kept Commodore Barron on shore
and plaoed Captain Rodgera under the necessity of frequently acting for the Commodore, until the U. S. Squadron was turned over to Captain Rodgers in May
1805.1

[LC. EPP,U. S. S. Cmtitution, (3lothing & Stores, 1803-4.1
To Captain Boyle, B. I.,commanding HBMS Sea Hme, from Captain John Bodgers,
U. 6. Navy

U. S. SHIPC 4 VALETTE
HARBOUR
lag NOV~
1804
Sir The Man named in the Margin [John Williams], a deserter
from this Ship, which you have been so obhgug as to return, was a t
the time of his entry in New-York a Citizen of e United States: and
had taken the Oath of Allegiance to that Goverment. It does not appear from any proof whatever, that he ever was an
English Subject, of course it is proper that he remains on board the
Constitution. [LC. JRP, Letters & Orders, Book A, 1804-1805.1

To Captain William A. Otway, B. N., British Naval Commkmioner, Malta, from
Captain Edward Preble, U. 8. Navy

MALTA
Novz 1'; 1804
Sir, Captain Chauncey of the U. S. Ship John Adam is in want of
an Anchor from thirty to thirty three hundred pounds we' ht - You
Britannic
will oblige me by directing one to be furnished from
Majesty's Naval Arsenal in this place, and the account to be sent to
WQ Riggens Esql United States Navy Agent -

8

[LC.

EPP, LB, April-Nov. 1804.1

[I November 18041
To Captain Samuel Barron, U. 6. Navy, from Bichard Farquhar, Malta

May it Please Your Excellency
The Consul of Sidi Hamet Caromanli late Bashaw of Tripoli, callJd
on me this Morning to beg of me to write to Your Excellency which I

110

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1804 TO 1805

have hear Inclosed, he hopes to receive an Answer soon as theer is a
V d going to Alexandria by which he will write to the Bashaw, he
further desires me to inform Your Excellency that Should you think
of Sending a Vessel up to Alexandria now, that he is ready to go with
a Number more of Sidi Harnets Friends to Alexandria
MALTA
NOD?
I g t 1804
[Mrs. J m e s S. Barron Col.]
[Enclmm]

[I November 18041
To Captain Samuel Barron, U. 8. Mavy, from the Consul of Hamet Caramanli,
rightful Bashaw of Tripoli

May it Please Your Excellency
I have it in Command from His Excellency Sidi Hamet Caromanli,
The first Born of the Dominion of Tripoli in Barbary, to inform your
Excellency, that he is now in Egypt waiting for the Promised Assistance of the United States of America, and that he has a great number
of Troops Engaged for the Purpose of Cooperating with the U. S. and
that he will repay all money advanced on his Account and give up all
Vessels and their Cargos which may be taken in Tripoli Bengazi and
Derna, as Prizes to the U. S. Shi s of War, and he will always remain
at Peace and Friendship me the
S. of America,
Ten Thousand Dollars will Enable him to take Derna and Bengazi,
and I am convinced the Prizes taken there will amount to more than
that sum, and this is the proper time to assist him as the Arabs is now
much displeased with his Brother the Bashaw of Tripoli, and Provisions is now ve scarce and the Winter season is the best time for the
Troops to
from Egypt, therefore hope your Excellency will not
loose this favourable oppertunity, which will have such an Effect on
all the Barbary Powers as will prevent them from going to War with
the United States of America.
SALVATORE
BUFUTTIL,
Console di S@Eccel? Ahmet Caramanli

6.

MA

[Mrs. James S. Bamn Col. NDA photostat.]
Extract from journal of U. S. Brig Argac, Xegter Commandant Isaac Ed, IT. 6.
Raw, commanding, Thursday, 1 Hovember 1804

[Off Tripoli] a t 6 hove too at 7 Cap! Hull came on board filled away
At 5 A.M the CmsteU&twn and Nautilus in Sight Standing to the
Southward and Westward
[NDA photostat.]
Extract from log book of U. S. S. John Adam, Xaster Commandant Isaac Chauncey,
U. 8. Navy, commanding, Thursday, 1 November 1804

Fresh breezes from N N W. Continue at anchor in Malta - In
company with the Presirtent, CWitution & Congress ships company
employed watering ship and stowin the after hold This afternoon nine men from the s ore entered for the John Ahms.
Mr J. MgFate Boatswain of the Viren & Mr J. Bailey, gunner of
the V k n , who were left here by the Vixen joined the John Adams
Mr J. Thompson, Commodore Prebles Clerk, J. Reed Marine & ThoP
Keridge, Boy joined the John Adams from the C d 2 d i o n - A. M .

%

-

111

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

Moderate breezes from N N W We received the following Wmmnt
officers stores from Mr Higgins, Navy Agent.
[LC. EPP, John Adams, 1804-1805.1
Extract from journal kept by Purser John Darby, U. S. Navy, on board U. 6. 8.
John A d m , Master Commandant Isaac Chauncey, U. 8. Navy, commanding,
Thursday, 1 November 1804

Malta Valette Harbor. Sailed from hence for Syracuse the U
States Frigate President commodore Barron the Congress Capt Rodgers
& the Constitution Capt. Decature. also the Store Ship Alfred which
Anchored here on Tuesday 236 October last. [NDA original. Miss Camilla S. McConnell.]
Abstract of a journal kept by Xidshipman Charles Moms, Jr., U. S. Navy, on
board U. S. m a t e Pruidmf, from 1 November 1804 to 81 May 1805

On board the U. S. Frigate President
On the first of November I joind the U S. F. President Comrc Sam4
Barron as her 5tQ Lieu! got underway from Malta next day and
proceeded to Syracuse where we landed the Comnr on the 4t@and
then proceeded to cruse of[f) the harbor for a few days, On the 8t@
returned into Port and received on board water and Provisions for a
cruise-12 Got under way and stood over for Tripoli off which place
we arrived on the 16@ Employed cruis
off the coast between
Tripoli, and Tripoli Vechio untill Decr 7t@w en discovering our Fore
& Mainmasts and all the lower Caps were very rotten we bore up for
Siracuse.

T

*

*

*

*

*

*

*

From Tripoli we proceeded to Syracuse where we remained repairing
our Masts &q until the 22'6 February [1805]-- On our arrival we
had but 7 men on the sick list. on the first of Jan? the amounted to
40. the greater portion of them having colds with s&ht fever, no
instance of death happened however, and on the 7th our number
of sick was reduced to four men, The number varied from this 10
during the rest of our stay in this place, Having completed our
repairs, we sail'd on the 22 Feb? for Malta, on our pass e we experiand
enced a severe gale of wind and it is with the greatest%culty
exertion that we were able to save our Masts, o w to the Rigging not
having been properly settled over the mast heads before the gale
commenced - We remained in the harbor of Malta until March 2"G
when we weighd and made sail for Tripoli off which place we arrived
the next day. - Spoke the ConsteUation and bore away to the Eastward - Stood up along the Coast as far as the Lo tude of Derna experienced very strong winds, from the northwar & Westward for
several days - On the 13 March looked into the harbor of Bengazi
saw no vessels of any description - Made sail to the westward
again and arrived off Tripoli on the 17t@- Cruised off the harbor
until the 224 then bore away for Siracuse by way of the Islands of
Lampedusa & Pantilaria - Chaced a Tunisian Cruiser into h p e dusa, sent the boats to examine her-a heavy sea and strong breezes
was near swamping the boats before they could reach the Ship on their
return -

=T

*

*

*

*

*

*

*

112

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1804 TO 1806

of
Touched a t M d t a and arrived in Syracuse harbor on the
April returned to Malta on the 14'Q Sailed on the 16t@ and same
sea, carried away the Main Topmast Treasel trees ot the
day
in aTop
rO% yard on the Fore part of the Top and launched the
bopmast - next clay got the Tressel Trees repaired and swayed the
Topmast in its place - 19 t@ arrived off 'I'ripoli employed cruising
to the Eastward of Tripoli - Found that after gettin$ above 10
lea es to the Eastward of the Town that our Soundings m 90 to 75
fa oms was soft YeUm mud - The only distinction between these
soundmg and those to the Westmrd of the Town is the color it being
dark to the WeatwQ - April 27tQ in Co. with the Cmtitution
detained a Tunisian and her two prizes for attempting to enter the
harbor of Tripoli - The President took them in tow and bore sway
for Malta where we arrived safe left the different vessels and returned
off Tripoli on the 7'4' of *May where we were employed cruising until
the 31et whea Cagt James Barron joined the Ship as her Commander
and we bore away for Siracuse [Mra. C. E. Fox original. NDA photostat.]

d!?

To Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Navy, from Captain William A. Otway, R. B.
British Naval Commissioner, X d t a

MALTAYARD
2e November 1804
SIR I have received your Letter of esterday's date, requesting to
be supplied with an Anchor from His ajesty Arsenal for the use of
the United States Ship John Adams.
In answer to which I acquaint you, that I have given the necessary
directions to the Storekeeper to supply her therewith -

H

[LC. EPP, VoI. 13, August-December 1804.1
Extract from Memorandum Book of Captain Edward Preble, U. 6. Navy, on
board U. S. Rigate John Adam, 2 November 1804

Sailed [from Malta] for Syracuse. The President, Constitution and
convoy in company.
[LCoriginal.]
Extract from journal of U. 6. Frigate Congress, Captain John Bodgem, U. 6. Navy,
commanding, Friday, 2 November 1804

At % past 12 [P. M.] weigh$ and made sail Standing out of the
harbour of Malta The Cmtituiwn and President in Compan
At sunset the harbour of Malta bore S S W. distance 2 &s: At
Midmght spoke the p ~ i z eand Hove too.
[En route t k ~Syracuse.1
[USNA.]
Extract from journal of William Eaton, U. S. Navy Agent for the Barbary Regencies,
Friday, 2 November 1804

Sailed from Malta the President, Constit211iom, and Congrees. Took
in convoy a storeship for Syracuse.
[NR&L. No. 9217, Bml E 14.1

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

113

Extract from log book of U. S. 8. John Adm. M ~ t e Commandant
r
Isaac Chauncey,
U. 6. Navy, commanding, Friday, 2 Bovember 1804

Fresh breezes from N W - Sailed for Saragosa the Presideat
Commodore Barron, The Congress Cap! Ro[d]gers & the Cmtitution
Cap5 Decatur - The store ship which anchored here some days ago
from Norfolk went with them Ships company employed setting up the topmast rigging & bending
sails

-

George Corder, a deserter from the Constitution was this afternoon
sent for safe keeping on board the John Adams A. M. Moderate - Employed clearing ship for Sea - Received
from the Constitution as Masters stores, 3 hand Trumpets, 6 pencils
One quire log book paper, 4 quires of writing paper & 50 Quills for
Ships use At 10 A. M. weighed the stream anchor and unbent the cable Noon fresh breezes from Westward
[LC. EPP, John Adam, 1804-1805.1
Extract from journal of Midshipman Charles Moms, Jr., U. S. Navy, on board
U. 6. Frigate President, Flagship of Commodore Samuel Barron, Master Commandant George Cox, U. S. Navy, commanding, Friday, 2 November 1804

P. M. Light breezes and clear.
1. The Congress & Store Ship sailed
2. Hove short 3. Weighed and sailed Sent the boats to assist in
towing the Constitution out of the harbour.
11. Hove to. the Commodore ordered me on board the Store ship
to take her in to Siracuse. Cape Passaro, bearing S. W. 6 miles
distant.
Surgeons Report, 49 Men Sick [Mrs. C. E. Fox original.

NDA photostat.]

Extract from journal of Midshipman F. Cornelius degrafft. 0. S. Navy, in U. 8.
Brig Scourgr, Midshipman Ralph Izard, Jr., U. S. Navy, commanding, 2 November
1804

(Syracuse Harbour) Arrivg the U. S. F. Essez, Cap$J . Barron from
Gibralter, also the Schooner Enterprize
[NDA.]
Extract from journal of Hezekiah Loomis, Steward, U. 6. Navy, in U. 6. Brig
V~rm,Master Commandant John Smith, U. 6. Navy, commanding, Friday,
2 November 1804

Received 105 lbs. mutton from shore. At 3 o'clock got underway.
Spoke the Constitution (Capt. Preble) the President (Commodore
Barron) and a store ship - (the Alfred of Newbury port). They all
went in and came to anchor. We stood out, and spoke the Congress
(Capt. Ro[d]gers) with a prize. We left the Congress to come in next
day and went in and came to anchor.
[L. F. Middlebrook.

NDA copy.]

114

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1804 TO 1805

To Secretary of State from Tobias Leu, U. 6. Conaul General, Algiers
MALTA
November J@1804
NP 9.
SIR,Since m last, under date of July 16t@ (Duplicate of which and
enclosures are erewith transmitted) I have been honored with your
letters of the 6t'3 & 13Q of June, which were handed to me a t Algiers,
by Cap* Chauncy, on the 29'8 of July
The letter from the President to the Dey of Algiers appetwed to
give him much satisfaction, particular4 that part which related to the
Cannon.The Danes and Spaniards ave not yet madea settlement
for the Cannon broF by them; but they expect (at least the former; for
the latter will get nothing) to receive half a dollar per pound Algerine
wt which is about 25 cent more than our's. It d o r d s me the lghest de ee of satisfaction to find that our
Government has taken up our airs in this sea in the manner i t has
done. I trust our national character will be now established on a
respectable footing, and that we shall be no longer subjected to the
ca rices of the Barbary Powers.
$he several points touched upon in your letter of the 6" of June
shall be particularly attended to, and I feel very happy that noth'
has been done by way of settlement with Tunis before the
of Commodore Barron; as I have no doubt we shall now settle everything with that power in o l r own way.
I forwarded to Mr Dams an extract from your letter relating to
Tunis; in order that he might take no steps which could involve the
U. States in an engagement to pay an annuity to that power. - I
have not heard from him since; but Commodore Preble has a letter
from him late in September, in which he says, the Bey seems perfectly
quiet, and has made no demands since he has been assured of our
Force in this Sea.
On the 13th of September, the U. States Frigate Congress Capte
Rodgers, arrived in Algiers Bay from Gibraltar & the coast of
Morocco. - Finding that Commodore Barron has passed up to
Tripoli some days since, without being able to touch there [or here],
on account of the strong N. 333 winds, I determined to take my passage
up in the Congress, that f might be upon the spot in case a negotiation
should take place on the arrivd of our Squadron. - I accordingly
made application to the Dey, (to whom I had before given intormation
that I was ordered to be ready to proceed to Tripoli, whenever the
Bashaw shg be disposed to treat on proper terms) for perrnisssion to
leave his Regency for a short time for that purpose, which he not only
most readily consented to; but added the strongest assurances that
every t h i i sh@be well on our affairs during my absence, as he shg take
all on his own head, and expressed the most pointed disapprobation
of the conduct of the Bashaw of Tripoli in his war with us; giving me
a letter for him in the Turkish language, which he says orders him to
make peace on such terms as f ma propose. - This letter, however,
I do not think I shall deliver; for am full of opinion that we should
not owe a peace, in any shape, to the inte erence of another power.On the 15% I embarked with Mg Lem, after taking leave of the Dey
and principle Officers and rnakmg presents which are customary on
such occasions.
I left a t Algiers Mr Timothy Mountford, a relation of mine, who
went with me to that place, and who will give me due information

g

"h

g;

3

arriz

4

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

115

of everything which transpires du
my absence, and will also
attend to the delivery of the Cargo of t e Annuity Ship, if one should
arrive before I return.
On Sunday the 234 of September we arrived off Tripoli, where we
found the U. S. Frigate President, Commodore B m n , and the Constellation, Cap@ Campbell; and there first learnt the several attacks
which had been made on that place by Commodore Preble, previous
to the arrival of Commodore Barron. - The account of these
actions will be so fully detailed by ComdQPreble's dispatches that
I shall only say, that altho' they were not successful to the extent
we could wish; yet such acts of intrepidity, and heroism were performed b that small force, as must have excited the terror as well
as astonisLent of the Tripolines, and given them an awful impression
of our national character, Much, very much do I regret that we
lose the services of that brave and judicious Commander, and I am
sure it is no less regretted by Commodore Barron. - As Commodore
B m o n was about to proceed to Syracuse & Malta, to water his Ship
&q I embarked on board him, and arrived a t the former place on the
26Q where I remained till the 6tQof October, and then proceeded in
the President for this place, where we arrived on the Q
7tW
-e
found
here the Constitution, and the B ' Syren & Vixen. The Argus &
Enterprise went from S acruse to%essina with the Neapolitan Gun
boats, and the Nazld us went off Tripoli. On the arrival of the
Nautvlus off Tripoli the ConsteUation came to Syracuse to water,
and from thence to this place, from whence she sailed on the 17Q
ultimo for Tripoli, to releive the Congress, which came here to water
on the 2BtQ - On the 29'Q arrived the Essez from the coast of
Morocco, where everything was said to be quiet: As this ship was
put in quarantine here, it became necessary for all the Ships to proceed to Syracuse to make the exchange of ships, Captn Rodgers takes
the Constitution, Cap5 James Barron [Decatur] the Congress, and
Captain Decatur [J. Barron] the Essez. - They left this on the
instant. - After the exchange shall be made, Commodore Barron
off Tripoli with all his force, and leavinu there one or
@,"",?t%$%ips
and smaller Vessels; to proceed himsegf with the rest
to Tunis, and along the coast. - As we appear to have every thing
quiet at Tunis, I shall, agreeably to your instructions, avoid going
to that place at present. has been heard directly from Tripoli since the last attack
made by ommodore Preble, so that we are ignorant of the impression
it made on the mind of the Bashaw with respect to our &airs; but
we know that the first and second attacks lessned his pretention very
much; and I presume that as our reinforcement did not appear so
soon as was expected, the Bashaw did not beleive we shg receive any;
and when they did arrive the season for active operations having
passed, he will not be disposed to come forward to treat on proper
rounds until next spring, knowing that he will be secure this winter
From any formidable attack on his City.
I t seems to be the decided opinion of all those who have had experience in these affairs, that our Force will readily bring the Bashaw to
terms of eace without any pretensions for payment therefor, or any
idea of trigute; but it is also beleived that he will sufferevery extremity
before he will deliver up the Captives without some ransome, as the
example would be unprecedented, and even if he should be disposed

-%

3

Notha

116

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1804 TO 1806

to do it himself, he would not be permitted by his people. This,
however, must be tried.
As I am now here, in the neighbourhood of Tripoli, Commodore
Barron is decidedly of opinion with myself, that I shg remain here
until the operations can take effect in the Spring, as it is presumed
the business will then be very short; and it is possible also that the
Bashaw hearing of the formidable preparations against him may be
induced to come forward this winter with admissable offers of negociation. I feel the less hesitation in remaining, as our affairs with
Algiers stand well, and the Dey can have no pretensions for breaking
with us on the score of deficiencies. - In the spring I shall accompany
Commodore Barron off Tripoli in order to be ready to treat with the
Bashaw, if he shg desire it; before we make an attack. I presume the co-operation of the Brother of the Bashaw of Tripoli
will not be attempted. Our force is thought sufficient to compel him
to terms without this aid, and in any event it is very doubtful whether
he has it in his power, with any reasonable pecuniary assistance we
might give, to render us service. He is now in Egypt, driven by his
brother from Darne, where it is presumed he might have made a stand,
had he been a man of any force or influence; which, from the best
accounts I can collect, he is not. Indeed I sh? place much more
confidence in the contmuancle of a peace with the present Bashaw, if
he is well beaten into it, then I shG have with the other, if he should
be placed on the throne by our means.
I have received from Commodore Barron the Attayan which you
mentioned was deposited with him for me; and I have bro? with me
the Articles I had on hand in Algiers for presents &o if they shq be
wanting. I am very so to inform you that Commodore Barron's hedth
has been very ba for some time past, and I fear that his recovery will
be but slow.
The rendevouze of our Ships will be mostly at Syracuse for altho
Sir Alexander Ball, the Governor, and all the other Officers are ready
to render us any service if it sh* be required; yet the quarantine to
be performed by Vessels from Barbary is very rigid here, and there
being continually some dispute respecting deserters, or men who leave
our Ships and go on board the British declaring themselves to be
British subjects make it a less elegible place for our Ships than Syracuse, where the Americans are in fact commanders of the Town.
I cannot close this letter without expressing the sensibility I feel
for the repeated proofs of confidence which the President has been
pleased to shew me, and assurance that nothing in my power shall
be left undone tfi evince my desire to be useful, and worthy of them.
[NA. SDA. CL,Algiers, Vol. 7,Part I, Jan. 1804-Kov.1805.1

9

To Captain John Bodgers, U. S. Wavy, commanding U. S. Frigate Cow=, from
Captain Samuel Barron, U. S. Navy

SYRACUSE
3 Novs 1804

D' SIR Those People (Sicilians) have given us Prattique & are now

I believe much alarmed at having done so, I have therefore ordered
the Predent to Sea for a few days, to prevent trouble, where you had
better remain, until you hear further from me, this can easil be
eflected by means of the President, who a 4 call every Day ofPthe
Harbour, & as she is not in quarantine, may communicate with the

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

117

Shore- I am so unwell to Day that I can scarce1 write a t all & am
totally unfit for business-God Knows how it will &nd Yours Sincerely
Siq SAM!BARRON
Cap$J n QRodgers
Congress[LC. JRP, Letters & Orders, 1804-1805.1

Extract from journal of U. 6. Frigate Gngrm, Captain John Rodgers, U. 6. Naw,
commanding, Saturday, 3 November 1804

At 4 [PM] light breezes, ordered the prize To stand in to Syracuise
and came To anchor. the town bearing N N W Distance 4 Miles.
Made sail and stood off.
Latitude Observed 36" 23' N.
[USNA.]
Extract from journal of William Eaton, U.6. Navy Agent for the Barbary Regencies,
Saturday, 3 November 1804

Arrived at Syracuse.
[NR&L. No. 9217, Bml E 14.1
Extract from journal kept by Purser John Darby, U. 8. Navy, on board U. 6. 6.
John A d m , Master Commandant Isaac Chauncey, U. 6. Navy, commanding,
Saturday, 3 November 1804

Malta, Valette Harbor We are busily enga ed geting our stores
on board and settleing all Accounts at this p ace - I this day
closed the Ships accounts with M' Higgens the Agent. It is expected
we shall sail tomorrow morning if the wind is fair -

i

[NDA original.

Miss Camilla S. McConnell.]

Extract from journal of Midshipman Charles Morris, Jr., U. 6. Navy, on board
U. 6. Rigate Praidenf, Flagship of Commodore Samuel Barron, Master Commandant George Cox, U. S. Navy, commanding, Saturday, 3 November 1804

[Syracuse] 4 [PM] Shortened Sail. 5. came too in 7 fath? with
the Starboard bower. found the the U. S. Frigates Constitution, and
Essez and Schooner Enterprize in the Bay.
Moored Ship [Mrs. C. E. Fox original.

NDA photostat.]

Extract from journal of Midshipman F. Cornelius deKrafft, U. 8. Navy, in U. 6.
Brig Scourge, Midshipman Ralph Izard, Jr., U. S. Navy, commanding, 3 November
1804

(Syracuse Harbour) Arrive from Malta the U. S. 3'. Constitution,

Cap; S. Decatur & the President Comm? Sam! Barron - the Con-

gress off the harbour [NDA.]

Extract from journal of Hezekiah Loomis, Steward, U. S. Navy, in U. 6. Brig
Vixen, Master Commandant John Smith, U. S. Navy, commanding, Saturday,
3 November 1804

Received 114 lbs. mutton from shore. At 11 o'clock got underway
and steered for Messina (gave the men their old clothing) which was

118

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 180.d TO 1805

stored in the cabin and sail room) took the slops from the spirit room
and put them in cabin.
[L F. Middlebrook. NDA copy.]
[4 November 18041

To Captain Edward Preble, U. 6. Bavy, from Oiceru of U. 8. Sqnadron in the
Mediterranean

To EDWARD
PREBLE
ESQUIRE
late commander in chief of the
American forces in the Mediterranean,
SIR,We the undersigned officers of the Squadron late under your
command cannot in justice suffer you to depart without giving you
some smal testimony of the very high estimation in which we hold
you as an officer and commander. It is under these impressions Sir,
that we beg leave to assure you, that your supersedure in a command
in which you have acquired so much honour to yourself and country
is, by us, deeply regretted, notwithstanding we feel assured that the
measure was dictated by necessity
As you are about to return to your native Country, we all join most
cordially in wishing you a pleasant passage, and sincerely hope that
our Countrymen may generously bestow on you that meed which
your important services so richly deserve, and believe us sincere in
saying that we shall largely participate in any future event thnt may
add to your fame or happiness.
We have the honour to be with the highest respect & Esteem
Your obedt Servta
Syracuse harbour
4th Novr 1804
Step: Deestm Junr-- - Captain U. S. Ship Congress
C ~ StewartQ
- - - - - _ - - Master & Commander-Brig Syren
Isssc Hull - - - _ __ _ -._ - h'laster & Commander-Brig Argus

-

Jnq Smith-- - - - - -- -- .
Master & Commander-Brig Vken
Isaac Chauncey- - _ _ _ _ blaster & Commander-Frigte John Adams
Jn? E. Dent - - - - - - _ _ - Lieuti Commandant-Schooner Nautilus
Tho* Robinson- - - - - - - Lieut t Commandant-Schooner Enterprise
Sybrant Vanschaick - _ _ -_- - Lieutt
Chr Gordon- - - - - _ - - - - - - _ -Lieutt
Joseph Tarbell- - - - - - - - - - - - Lieutg
Jnq 3ohnson- - - - - - - - - - - ___ Lieutt of
Sam1 Elbert - - - - - - - - - _ - - - - Lieutb
Marines
T: Winn- - - - - - - - - - - - _ - _ _ _Purser
Chr Morris - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - Lieutt
N: T: Weems --.- --.
_ - - - _ Surgeon
Nath: Haradin - - - - - - - - - - - - Master
Jnq W Dorsey - - - - - - - - - _ - _ _Surgeon
Hethcote J, Read - _ - - - - - - - Lieutt
Dan! S Dexter_--_..----- - Lieutr
John Trippe--- - - - -._ _.Lieutt
-_
- _.
Lieut,
.__
Jns Hall - - - - _ - - - - - - - - - - - - - C a p of Wm Crane - - - - . _
Marines Richard Butler--- -.
. Master
RoblGreenleaf - - - - _ - - - . . - -Lieutt
of J: Graham - - - - - - - - _ - - - - - _ Surgeon
Marines G: W: Reid -----.
- - -.
-.
- _ Lieutt
Jar Wells- - - - - - - ---.--Surgeon
-.
Chq Ridgely - - - - - - _ - _ _ _ -Lieutt
Cassin - - - - - - _
Master
-_-.
N. Morris - - - - - - - - - Pursuer
. - - - -Stephen
P. Leonard- - -.
.- - - -- Chaplain
--JaQ Tootel - - - - _ _ - . Purser
___--__
Ja! Laurence - - - - - - - - - - - - - - Lieutt
G: Jacques - - - . - - - - -Surgeon
--_--Joseph Bainbridge-. - - - - .- - Lieutt
EdwP Bennett- - - -- _ - _.
_ - _ Lieutt
J. Thorn - - - - - - - ---.
.Lieutt
--Jnv B Nicholson - - - - - _Lieutt
.____
Thos MvDonough- - ..---....- Lieut*
Marmaduke Dove - - - - - - _ - - Master
&$h cartee- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Msster
Jn? Darby - - - - - - - - - _ _ _ - _ -Purser
L: Griffen- - - - - - - - - _ _ - _ - - - Surgeon
Lewis Herman-- - - - - - - - - - - Surgeon
Ra: Izard- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - tieutt
M i c b l C a m 1- - - - - - - - - - - - Lieutt
Josesh J M a r y l l - . .....- - Lieut'
J. M. Haswell -.......- . &t
W a urrom
- - - - - - - - - - Lieut?
G: Marcellin - - - - - - _ - - - - - - - Lt
R ~ b Gpence
t
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Lieutt
J: Green - - - - - - - - Puraer
--,----8aml R Marahail - - - - - - - - - - surgeon
[LC. EPp, Vol. 13, August-December 1804.1

_

_

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

-

119

[4 November 18041
To Secretary of the Navy from Master Commandant Isaac Chauncey, U. 8. Bevy

U. S. Ship John Adams
New York $6" February 1806
SIR, I had the Honor of writ'
ou from Syracuse on the 1 6 q of
"pILave been immediately under the
September last, since which time
Orders of Commodore Preble, who I presume has kept you informed
of our Movements since that Period.
We left Syracuse on the gt+ of October for Malta and arrived the
Day following where we discharged the remainder of the Stores: Ballasted the Shlp and waited untill the 4 t+ of November for Commodore
Preble, on which Da I sailed, with him, and Mr Randolph on board
for Syracuse, where arrived the next Day. - sail'd on the 15th for
Messina, arrived on the 18 t@-sail'd the 2 1" for Palermo. arrived on
the 2gt@- sailed for Naples the 1's of December - arrived on the 6t'?
in the Evening, it then blowing hard from the Southward anchored
with both Bowers in 12 Fathoms Water, and veered 60 Fathoms on the
Larboard and 30 on the Starboard and brought up, struck lower Yards
and top Gt Mast
At 10 P. M. parted the Starboard Bower, let go the Sheet Anchor,
and veered on both Cables untill the Ship's Stem was in the Breakers
and then brought up, struck Top Mast, and got top Gallant Masts on
Deck - from this Time untill Daylight we lay with extreme Anxiety,
expecting every Moment to part and go onshore - At 6 A. M. sent a
Boat on board of H. B. M. Ship Renown which lay near us for Assistance which was handsomely granted, by sending his own Boat with
Cables and an Anchor which they dropped three Cables Length to
Windward of us and gave the End of the Cable on board. We also
very soon got Assistance from the Naval Arsenal, which also sent off a
new 19 In. Cable, bent to a heavy Anchor which they let go three
Cables' Lengths to Windward and gave us the End of a 10 Inch Cable
which was bent to the large One, the Wind moderating, we before
Ni ht hove off into a safe Situation and moored with the Anchors and
Ca les sent us. On heaving up our two Anchors that we were riding
by (the Sheet and Bower) we to our utter Astonishment found them
both broke off in the Shank. The Anchors are American Manufactory
and the worst I ever saw; what prevented the Ship's going on shore
God only knows. We the Next Morning k h e d for, and got the Starboard Bower Anchor which we parted from the evening of the 6 @ .
Commodore Preble tryed every Means to urchase an Anchor for
the Ship, but could only procure one of a out eighteen hundred
Weight, and was obliged to take Cable with it as they would not part
with one without taking both - the Cable is a New one of 14 Inches
but not fit for us. The Commodore procured the Loan of an Anchor
from the Neapolitan Government, which is to be returned to Messina
or Palermo with those two Anchors and the one we got at Malta we
were obliged to sail with; and are all the Anchors that we have got ah
this Time, we were obliged to take the 19 Inch Cable from the Neapolitan Government after riding by it. We sailed from Naples for
Gibraiter on the 23P Decr and arrived on the St+ of January; watered
and provisioned the Ship and sailed on the
for the United States.
On the gth sent our Boat on shore a t Tangier for Mr Simpson's Dispatches and in the Evening took our Departure from Cape Spartell.

P

i

!

120

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1804 TO 1806

On the 13'Q Instant discovered that between two and three Thousand
Gallons of Water had leaked out, owi to the Badness of the Casks.
Put all Hands on s. short Allowance of%ater
On the 22d after ex eriencing very severemweatherand the Wind
constantly prevailing rom the Westward the Ship very Crank and
short of Water, Commodore Preble gave me an Order to proceed to the
Nearest Port, and recommended this; bore up for i t accordingly and
got a pilot on Board on the 24*@and arrived here last Night, where I
shall wait your Orders. shall water the Ship tomorrow and be ready
to proceed for the East.ern Branch in one Hour after I receive your
Orders to do so.
If the Ship should be fitted for Service again, she wants to be corked
throughout, outside and in, two Bower Anchors of 32 Cwt each, three
Boats a Suit of Sails Complete, two Topsail Yards, One Top Gt
Mast, a Number of Water Casks and about three Tons of Cordage
assorted, exclusive of her Stores for the Cruize.
I forward you a Muster Book by which you will preceive the State
of our Crew, and the great Number of Changes that have taken Place.
The Supernumeraries were sent on Board by Order of Commodores
Banon and Preble with the seven Prisoners of War.
The Men whose Time of Service has not expired would be an
Acquisition to any Vessel1 fitting for Service I have been obliged to take up from Commodore Preble ten Thousand nine Hundred Dollars for the Purchase of Anchors, Cables,
advances to Officers, and other Expenses for the Ship and for which
I have receipted to him for - * * *

f

[PTDA. MC LB, 1804-5.1
Extract from journal of U. S. Brig Argus. Master Commandant Isaac Hull, U. S.
Navy, commanding, Sunday, 4 November 1804

At 11 P, M, Came too in the harbour of Valetta in 10 fat,homs
water found here the U, S. frigate John A d a m At 6 A&$ Fresh Breezes got under way and made all sail out of
Valietta at 7 the harbour bore TVbS )/? S made Sig.! Kc 14 to a Brig to
Windward. She did not answer it Ends Plessant
WDA photostat.]
Extract from journal of William Eaton, Sunday, 4 November 1804

[At Syracuse] Commodore Barron shifted his flag on board the
Essex, went himself on shore in an infirm state of health, and the
President Capt. Cox, commander, put to sea on a cruise. Fell in
with the Congress about three leagues from port, cruising along the
coast.
[NRQL. KO. 9217, BmJ E 14.1
Extract from log book of U. 6. S. John A d m . Master Commandant Isaac Chauncey,
U. S. Navy, commanding, Sunday, 4 November 1804

Moderate Breezes from S E - We continue in Malta - Ships
company stowing the after hold & clearing ship for sea A. M. wind S b W - At 9 weighed & warped the ship over the
weather side of the harbour Joined the John Adams Commodore
Edward Preble - M' Randolph came on board as passenger - Mr
Leonard joined the ship
At 11 A. M. we slipped & came to sea in
order to proceed to Saragosa -

-

W A R S WITH BARBARY POWERS

121

Noon, Winds moderate from S b W. Under all plain sail with starboard steer@sails set Our ships company consists of nearly 140, out of which we have
about 60 working men - The remainder are principally invalids
from the U. S. Squadron [LC. EPP, John Adams, 1804-1805.1
Extract from journal kept by Purser John Darby, U. S. Navy, on board U. S. 6.
John Adams. Master Commandant Isaac Chauncey, U. S. Navy, commanding, Sunday, 4 November 1804

Joined the ship as passengers for the U States Commodore E d d
Preble and Mr Ryland Randolph of Virginia at. 11. A M. we got the
Ship under way and stood out of the Harbour and proceeded for
Syracuse a t half past one P. M the Town of Valette bore W b S.X S.
four leagues from which we took our departure
[NDA original. Miss Camilla S. McConnell.1
Extract from journal of Midshipman Charles Morris, Jr., U. S. Navy, on board
U. S. Frigate P r u i d e n ~ Master Commandant George Cox, U. S. Navy, commanding, Sunday, 4 November 1804

[P.M.] Unmoored and hove short upon the starboard cable. 2
Weighed and Sailed out of the harbour.
5 Shortened sail and spoke the Congress
Cruising off the harbour of Syracuse in Company with the Congress.
[Mrs. C. E. Fox original. NDA photostat.]

Extract from journal of Midshipman F. Cornelius deKrafft, U. S. Navy, in U. S.
Brig Scourge, Midshipman Balph Izard, Jr., U. S. Navy, commanding, 4 November
1804

(Syracuse Harbour) Sail'd the President [NDA.]
Extract from journal of Hezekiah Loomis, Steward, U. S. Navy, in 0.6. Brig Vriwt,
Master Commandant John Smith, U. S. Navy, commanding, Sunday, 4 November
1804

The morning calm and foggy on the mountain. At 10 o'clock A.M.,
the vapors rising we had a fine prospect of Mount Etna and likewise
the uneven coast of Sicily. We got out our sweeps and a t 1 o'clock
P. M. were nearly in the wave of Messina. At 2 o'clock a signal was
made to a schooner standing in, which was answered and found to be
the U.S.S. Enterprise. She standing near upon the Eastern shore
had the current in her favor which enabled her to get in and come to
anchor fort minutes before us. We came to anchor before sunset.
an
four gun ship and one Frigate (both dressed
One ~ e a ~ o i t seventy
with colors) were laying in the harbour. We were quarantined.
Immediately after coming to, I went into the wardroom (to the only
conveyance into the spirit room) in order to get some candies for the
captain but by new arrangements the scuttle was altered whlch forced
one half into the Doctor's Lt. P. and M. apartments. I was accosted
by Doctor Graham thus: - "What business have you to take that
scuttle up?" Ans.: - "I wish to go into the spirit room, sir." Doctor: - "Well, that scuttle is not to come up. I have particular orders
against it." Ans.: - "I have orders, sir, to go into the spirit room,

122

NAV&

OPERATIONS FROM 1804 TO 1806

sir." Doctor: - "Very well, take up the other hatch." Am.:- "It
will not come up." Doctor: - "What is the reason, h a not the carpenter fitted it?" Ans.: - "I cannot tell, I did not see him do it."
Doctor: - "Well, this scuttle is not to come up." At this instant,
the purser Mr. Hunt came below, and hearing the debate, aaked what
was the matter. The venerable Doctor replied he had Capt. Smith's
orders not to have his apartment disturbed by the aforesaid scuttles.
Mr. Hunt told him that the spirit room was under his charge, and
that a passage to it was not to be stopped by his orders, and then
having done m errand I went on deck leaving the Doctor Iike a
an$ing that which was his not business.
m-kyh
[L. F. Middlebrook. NDA copy.]
Extrnct from log book of U. S. S. john Adam. Master Commandant Isaac Channcey,
U. S. Navy, commanding, Xonday, 6 November 1804

Moderate breezes from the Southward with hazy weather.
We are running athwart the channel of Malta - At )C past 1 P. M.
the Town of Valette bore W b S j6 S. 4 leagues from which we take
our depature for Saragosa.
We continued under all plain sail till 7 in the Evening when we
stowed all the light sails except the fl ing Jib & main top gallant By
12 Midnight we supposed the ship a reast of Cape Passary when we
sounded 100 fathe no bottom, & steered more in for the land Middle
part, Variable winds & light; Weather hazy - We continued the
lead every half hour from 4 A. M. till day light; some time sounding
70, & other times 80 fath*, no bottom Morning hazy, with light airs
& overcast weather At 9 A. M. punished Duncan Mansfieled Marine with 24 lashes for
Drunkeness and Mutinous language, Noble James, Marine with 18
lmhes for Drunkeness, John Robertson quarter gunner with 12 lashes,
& Thomas James with 6 lashes for Drunkenness - The Weather
continued hazy till 10 A. M. when it cleared away - Saw two strange
Sail in shore, & Cape Morro de Porehi bearing N W % N, nearly 15
mil= Towards Noon a light breeze sprang up from E b S - We Med
in for Saragosa under all plain sail, fore topmast & starboard top gad$
studding sails Ships company triming sails & cleaning ship between decks Noon light breezes from E S E. The Town of Saragosa beaxing
by compass N N W 4 leagues
Latitude observed 36' 49' North

r

[LC. EPP, John Adams, 1804-1805.1
Extract from journal kept by Purser John Darby, U. 6. Navy, on board U. 6. 8.
John Admns, Master Commandant Isaac Chauncey, U. 6. Bevy, commanding,
Monday, 6 November 1804

At 10. A M. saw two Strange Sail in shore - Cape Moore De
Porche bearing N W. % N. about 5 [or 151 miles a t half ast. 11. stood
in for the harbour of Syracuse. at Meridian Wind E. S . the town of
S acuse bearing by compass N N. W. four Leagues distant. Latitude

E

O

G

36.4,

N

At half ast. 5 P M came to in the harbour of Syracuse - found
here the $states Prigate E88ez the Congretts. Constitulion Brig Vizmz

123

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

<

-

& Scourge we obtained Prattique here immediate1 on our arrival
Arrived here & Anchored, from a cruize off Tripoli t e Brig Argwr.
went on shore with several of our Officers & went in the evening to

the Oporea
[NDA original. Miss Camilla S. McConnell.]
Extract from journal of Hezekiah Loomis, Steward, U. S. Navy, in U. 8. Brig
Vixen, Idaster Commandant John Smith, U. S. Navy, commsnding, Monday,
5 November 1804

(A. M.) At 11 o'clock got underway but the wind blowing fresh
we could not beat out of the straits, put back and came to anchor
at 2 o'clock P.M. No objections this day to my admittance. into
the spirit room.
(L.F. Middlebrook. NDA copy.]

[6 November 18041
To the Ofacers of U. S. Squadron in the lediterranean from Captain Edward
Reble, U. S. Navy

To Captains Decatur, Stewart, Hull, Chauncey & Smith Lieutr
CommdP Dent & Robinson, & other OEcers late under my command
GENTLEMEN,
I have this day been honoured with your esteemed
favour of the 4th Instt and as I have been in the highest d
gratsed by the support I have received from you in a diffic t Bt
dangerous service, so am I e ually flattered by your ap robation of
my conduct as an Officer an Commander of the Squa on: and be
assured that I should always consider my reputation as an officer
secure while my views were seconded by that talent & intrepidity for
which you stand so eminently distinguished - .
As it respects my supersedure, I can only say, that, I could not
have been more gratified than by being allowed to command you
till the present war was brought to a conclusion: but rank must be
attended to - and where a measure is impelled b necessity, it
becomes the duty of an Officer to submit with cheerfu ess; this I do,
convinced as I am that you will serve your country under my successor with the same ardor as heretofore There can be no question but your country will be gratefully
impressed by your exertions: and be assured that I reciprocate with
sincerity your kind wishes for my future fame & Happiness I have the honour to be Gentlemen,
With the highest respect Yr most obt Servt
(Signed) EDWARD
PREBLE
Syracuse 6th Novr 1804

a

F

&

L

[LC. EPP, Vol. 13, August-December 1804.1

Receipt for One Negro Slave

SYRACUSE
Noo. 6.1804
Received of Commodore Preble one negro slave, prize to the
United States ship Constitution, captured off Tripoli on the 234
December 1803, in the ketch Mustico, since called the Intripid -

124

hTAVALOPERATIONS FROM 180L TO 1805

Which Slave I hold subject to the orders of the Government of the
United States WILLIAMEATON
[Maine HS.

S D A photost,at.]

To Secretary of the Navy from Captain John Rodgers, U. S. Navy

U. S. Frigate Constiluiion
SYRACUSE
Novemr 6* 1804
DEARSIR I am sensible of the pleasure you have Experienced
in having had it in your power to communicate to Congress, this
session, the reduction of Tripoli, to Terms honorable &: advantageous
to our Country; and I greatly regret that circumstances have so
conduced as to render such an Event impracticable this Season the
squadron not haring arrived so soon as you perhaps contemplated:
However I think I can almost with certainty say to you that next
Summer will complete the Business in a manner highly honorable
to the American Arms; as a General Enthusiam appears to pervade
among all ranks, and nothing that the Bashaw can do, will, I concieve,
prevent his destruction in t.he most complete manner, without he
offers Terms the most humiliating to himself. - If the opposition
we meet with should be Formidable, so much the better, for I feel such
l be made, as to induce nie to
confidence in the Exertions that d
believe, that if we are Formidably opposed, our little Xavy will
Establish a name deserving of a place among'st the most Magnanimous; and such as no Trifle can again ever injure - I have this
day, by order of Commodore Barron, changed my pendant into the
Cmtiihiion, vhich altho a larger ship I do not think so fine a one
(for her rate) as the Congress, which has every good quality to recommend her, and her crew far (now) from belng ordinary - The
Constitution is upwards of 70 men short of her Compliment, which
I will make up in t,he best manner I can before her services are
seriously wanted - 1 have but a few days since return'd from the
Coast of Tripoli, but have no news worth communicating, farther
than that the Bashaw is building [ms mutilated] Battery's, which
I conceive can only serve to make his ruin more Complete & add
to the Laurels we shall achieve, provided we do our duty; the lesson
he will get, will I think ever prevent him or his successor's from again
War upon the U7States & compleatly put a Stop to the
Bey
m&'? o Tunis's Demands - Commodore Barron has been in bad
health for some time; hi complaint - an affection of the Liver. I feel much concern'd for the loss of poor young Israel; whose
intrepidity and other amiable qualifications, had he lived, would
have made him an honor to his friends &- an Ornament to the Service. - The package you sent out by me for him I have sent back
by Captq Chancey. [LC. JRP, Vol 1, Series Two, Feb. 1775-May

1805.1

To Captain John Rodgera, U. 8. Kavy, from Wdsbipman James Benshaw,

U. 6. Navy

CASTLEOF

THE

BASHAW
IN PRISON

TRIPOLINovember 6tQI804
Dr SIR, NO doubt you must be confident we where much elated
when we received the pleasing intelligence of Commodore Barron's

WARS T;ITITErlBARBARY POWERS

125

arrival in the Mediterranean with so formidiable a force which I trust
will My Dr Sir, tend in some measures to restore us to the arms of
liberty, during the ensuing Summer; in a letter I received from a
friend in the Squadron he mentions the arrival of Mr Eton a t Malta,
also his destination to Egypt to cooperate with [space] if this be the
case, I hope his good intentions mill meet with that Success which
generally attends, where the restoration of prisoners from a Barbary
Prince are a t stake.
Our Situation a t present My D' Sir is beyond conception, nearly
Six Months Solitary imprisonment have elapsed since the doors of
our prison have been opened for any other purpose than supplying
us with our daily sustenance, it's true have been treated with more
lenity than we had reason to expect from a Barbary Prince but how
much better whould it have been for us to have been put to hard
labour, as our crew then we could feel the fresh air, which is so essential to human nature I am sorry to find in the establishment of our little Navy our loss
has been so great, in the death of so many brave young Officers, it's
now I hope firm,if we may Judge from the manner i t has been augmented by promotions and appointments. the Emulation amongst
the Officers must have been very great during last Summer, but I
have no doubt Comdr"arron,
will shortly give them all an opportunity of distinguishii themselves.
I fear My Dr Sir, by my communications not being reciprocal on
your part, they do not meet your approbation, you must be confident
from your unremited attention to me, and all O5cers under your
Command, or deem me an ungrateful being, was not my attatchment
to your private and public character ever permament within my
bosom
My Anxsiety to hear from my friends in the U.S.is very greet, as I
ha-ie never received a line from them Since my captivity, and remain
at a loss in what manner to attribute the neglect to, should you
My Dr Sir, find any letters for me, I shall deem i t as a particular
favour of you in having them frowarded on. remember me to Mz
Coxe - Adieu
Yours Respectfully
JAMES
RENSHAW.
CAPTJOHN
RODGER'S
U. S. Frigate Constitution
Mediterrenean. [LC. JRP, Ac. 3647.1
Extract from journal of U. S. Brig Arglu, Master Commandant Isaac Hnll, U. 6.
Navy, commanding, Tuesday, 6 November 1804

At 5 came too with the Larboard bower in 6 fathoms Water in the
harbour of Syracuse found the frigates Constitution, Congress, a s e x
and John A d a m and the Scourge Brig Ends Mod*Breezes & Pleasant
[NDA photostat.]
Extract from journal of U. S. Frigate Congnss. Captain John Rodgers, U. S. Navy,
commanding, Tuesday, 6 November 1804

[PM] Standing In for the town of Syracuise.
At 1 hoisted the boats out to tow The ship
At 2 Shortened sail and came too in the harbour with larbQbower

126

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1804 TO 1806

Veered & Moord Ship Mount E t m bearing North the light house
SSE
[USNA.]
Extract from log book of U. 8. 6. John A d m , Master Commandant Isaac Chauncey,
U. 6. Navy, commanding, Tuesday, 6 November 1804

Light breezes from E S E. We are 5 leagues S S E from Saragosa
rumi in for i t ~t
M. the wind shifted from E S E to S W
At j4 past 3 P. M. we passed the U. S. Ship president At $ past 4 P. M. we m e to in Saragosa in 5 fathy soft bottom,
one & a half Cables length from the town Side - We found here the
U. S. Ship Essex, which had then Commodore Barron's pendant flying,
the Crmgress, Constituion & Scourge The uarantine boat came
alongside and gave us pmtique -Comm'q Preb e and Captain Chauncey went on shore Towards Evening anchored here from a cruize off
Tripoly, the Argus At Sun set hove up & down in order to keep a clear anchor Night Moderate & pleasant The water we Hied at Malta is impregnated with a Lirney substance & is reported by the surgeon to be very injurious to health We started it in readiness to fiu with sweet water [LC. EPP, John Adams, 18011805.]

5.

9

Extract from jonrnal of Midshipman Charles Moma, Jr., U. S. Navy, on board
U. 8. Frig8te P r e s i d d Master Commandant George Cox, U. S. Navy, commanding, Tuesday, 6 November 1804

IOff Syracuse] [AM] 30%Saw a Sail to the southe & East?
Set Studding s d s and Sta sails fired several shots a t the chace Noon Mount Aetna bore
N. E.

k.

[Mrs. C . E. Fox original. NDA photostat.]
Extract from journal of Hidshipman F. Cornelius deKraEt, U. 5. Navy, U. S.
Brig Scourge. Midshipman Balph Izard, Jr., U,S. Navy, commanding, 6 November
1804

r

(Syracuse Harbour) Arrivd the U. S. F. Con ess, Cap? Rotdlgers,
& the J . Adam Cap: Chansey with Cornme Pre le.
INDA.1

-

Extract from journal of Hezekiah Loomis, Steward, U. S. Navy, in U. S. Brig
Vixen. Master Commandant John Smith, U. S. Navy, commanding, Tuesday,
6 Rovember 1804

At 12 O'clock a t noon we weighed anchor and got under way.

U.S. S. Enterprise sailed four hours before us. At 7 o'dock we saw a
(dlhands were called to quarters). We found her to be a Neapolitan Brig which we spoke and passed.
sail

IL. F. Middlebrook. NDA copy.]
To Secretsry of the Bevy from Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Navy

U. S. SHIPJohn Adam
SYBACGBE
HARBOUR NOV~1804
SIR,This will be handed you by M' Izard who has for six months
past been acting as Lieu? in the Squadron and has conducted l i e

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

127

a good Officer. I have placed him in charge of the Brig Scourge
of 16 Gum to Navigate her to the Eastern Branch, and receive your
orders respecting her. The history of this Vessel I have long since
made known to you, and shall be able to produce such proofs against
her as will insure her condemnation, if i t has not already taken place.
If i t is agreeable to you, I wish she may remain in Statupw, until I
arrive
[LC. EPP, LB, April-Nov. 1804.1

To Secretsry of the Navy from Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Navy

U S: SHIPJohn Adams
SYRACUSE
NOD:'7* 1804.

Exchange for $2404 At Sixty days sight of this my first of Excha e (second and third
of same tenor and date not paid) pay the sum o Two thousand four
hundred and four dollars to the order of Gurney & Smith of Philadelhia, Agents for the captors of Gun Boat N Q7 - captured from the
!ripolitans in battle the 3rd of August last, and taken into the
service of the United States by my direction: being the Amount of
the Valuation of said Boat, with her Guns and Appurtenanees -

t

[LC. EPP, Order Book, May 1803-June 1805.1
To Secretary of the Navy from Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Navy

U S. S. John Adams
SYRACUSE
H'7* Nov: 1804

Exchange for $2327 At Sixty days sight of this my first of Exchange (second and third
of same tenor and date not paid) pay the sum of Two thousand three
hundred and twenty seven Dollars to the order of Col: John Stricker
of Baltimore Agent for the captors of Ghn Boat NQ8 captured from
the Tripolitans in battle the 3rd of August last, and taken into the
service of the United States by my direction; being the amount of the
Valuation of said Boat, with her Guns and appurtenances [LC. EPP, Order Book, May 1803-June 1805.1
To Secretary of the Navy from Captain Edward Reble, U. S. Navy

U: S: S: John Adam
SYRACUSE
Hz 7th Nov: 1804

Exchange for $2327 At Sixty days sight of this my first of Excha e (second and third
o thousand three
of same tenor & date not paid) pay the sum of
hundred and twenty seven dollars to the order of Gurney & Smith of
Philadelphia, Agents for the captors of Gun Boat NQ9 captured from
the Tripolitans m battle the 3rd of August last, and taken into the
service of the United States by my direction - being the Valuation of
said Boat, with her Guns & appurtenances [LC. EPP, Order Book, May 1803-June 1805.1

%

128

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1804 TO 1805
To Captain Semnel Barron, U. 6. Navy, from Richsrd Farquhar

SYRACUSE
NOD'Yt5 1804
May i t Please Your Excellency
by Command of Your Excellency I informed the Consul of Sidi
Hamet Carmonili late Bsshaw of Tripoli, that your Excellency will
this month send a Vessel with some Money and Powder and Cooperate
with him in taking Derna Bengaze and Tripoli. he has wrote to the
Bashaw and will be ready when ever the Vessel anive
I have brou ht over a Maltese as an Interpreter who speaks Arab
well he is we Accquainted with the News of Tripoli he says the
People in Tripoli is displeased with the Bashaw for not making Peace
they blame the French Consul for advising the Bashaw to make such
demands their is an English Transport going to Tripoli also a
Maltise Vessel who goes first to Jerba

fI

[Mrs. James S. Barron Col. XDA photostat.]
Extract from journal of U. S. Brig Argm. Master Commandant Isaac
Navy, commanding, Wednesday, 7 Xovernber 1804

Hull, U, S.

[Syracuse Harbor] a t 5 past 2 P, M, Departed this life Lev
White Marine of the Small Pox a t 6 Carried the body without the
harbour and Committed it to the deep with the Usual Ceremony
Arrived the Schooner T7ia:en from a Cruise [KDA photostat .]
Extract from journal of U. S. Frigate Congress, Captain John Rodgers, U. S. Navy,
commanding, Wednesday, 7 November 1804

Syracuise At 9 [PM] arrived the U. S. Brig Vixen
PSNA.]
&tract from log book of U. S. S. John Adam, Master Commandant Isaac Chauncey,
U. S. Navy, commanding, Wednesday, 7 November 1804

Moderate breezes from W N W - We are in Saragosa with the
Essez which has C o m r n r ~ a r r o nbroad
s
pendant, Congress, Conatitution & Argus, in company.
[LC. EPP, John Adam, 1804-1805.1
Extract from journal kept by Purser John Darby, U. 6. Navy, on board U. 8. 8.
John A d m , Xaster Commandant Isasc Chauncey, U. S. Navy, commanding,
Wednesday, 7 November 1804

[Syracuse] At. 2. P M. the U States Ship President arrivd from a
cruize off Tripoli - at. midnight we had very heavy rain with sevear
thunder & Lightning [NDA original.

Miss Camilla 5. McConnell.]

E x t ~ from
t
journal of Xidshipman Charles Morris, Jr.. U. S. Navy, on board
U. 8. Frigate Pruidcnt, Pester Commandant Oeorge Cox, U. 8. Navy, commanding, Wednesday, 7 November 1804

[P MI 2. Brought to the chase shortened sad and sent a boat
along side of her she proved to be a Tunisian cruiser. 2% filled
away
fA M] 6 made sail for harbour of Siracuse
[MIS. C. E. Fox original. NDA photostat.]

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

129

Extract from journal of Hezekiah Loomie, Steward, U. S. Navy, in U. 6. Brig
Vixen, Master Commandant John Smith, U. S. Bavy, commanding, Wednesday,
7 November 1804

At 4 o'clock A. M. we came to anchor in Syracuse. At 8 o'clock
shifted anchoring ground. The Frigate President had gone out and
the Congress, John Adam and Argus had arrived. At 2 o'clock the
John Adams saluted the town with 22 guns.
[L. F. Middlebrook.

NDA copy.]

Extract from journal of U. 6. Brig Argus, Master Commandant Isaac Hull, U. S.
Navy, commanding, Thursday, 8 November 1804

[Syracuse Harbor] at 1 PM arrived the U.S frigate Presidt from a
Cruise sent 6 Seamen & 10 marines on board the Hospital Ketch with
the Small pox
[NDA photostat.]
Extract from journal of U. 6. Frigate Cangrur, Captain John Rodgers, U. 8. Bavy,
commanding, Thursday, 8 November 1804

Syracuise At 1 P. M. the President Frigate arrived
[USNA.]
Extract from journal of William Eaton, U. S. Navy Agent for the Barbary Begencien
Thursday, 8 November 1804

Returned into port. Found the Argus a t anchor; having returned
from the coast on account of the small pox breaking out in her crew.
She had been two days in port.
[NR&L.

No. 9217, Bml E 14.1

Extract from journal of Midshipman Charles Moms, Jr., U. S. Navy, on board
U. S. Frigate Pruidenf. Master Commandant George Cox, U. 8. Navy, commanding, Thursday, 8 November 1804

[Syracuse] [P MI 1. Came to with the Starboard Anchor in 7
fathoms water. 2. hoisted out the boats moored ship with a Cable
each way - from 7. to midnight. Rainy.
Shi s Company employed getting water on board 36 i!len unfit for duty
IMrs. C. E. Fox original. NDA photostat.]
Extract from journal of Midshipman F. Comeline deKrafft, U. 8. Navy, in U. S.
Brig Seowge, Midshipman Ralph Izard, Jr., U. S. Navy, commanidng, 8 November
1804

(Syracuse Harbour) Arriv'J the President. [NDA.]
To Captain Samuel Barron, U. 6. Navy, from Nicholas C. Niseen, Danish Consul,
Tripoli
TRIPOLI IN BARBARY

November 9'Q1804

SIRHowever i have not the honor of being particularly acquainted
to You Sir,i have made no difficulty at the request of Captam Bain-

brid e to adress You thisletter, as soon as i conceived that the information e desires me to give to You and which his unfortunate situation
prevents him from conveying to You himself, could be of service to

%

NAVAL OPERATlONS FROM 1804 TO 1806
130
him. The motive of rendering a service to Captain Bainbridge is

besides too favorable an opportunity of making Your acquaintance
Sir, that i should let it pass unused. M' Higgins will deliver to You Sir a Packet of letters from Captain
Bainbridge written in Ink; inclosed i have the pleasure to forward
m
Bainbridge, but with
three sheets of Paper likewise f ~ Captain
invisible writing, which only by bemg held over the fire, can be made
visible.
The confmernent makes it impossible for Captin Bainbridge to
send away or to receive any letter, that is not previouslyread by persons
appointed by the B d a w for that purpose, he has therefore found
himself in the necessity to write with Lime Juice or with a weak
solution in water of Soda, Cileali Mineralis, the writing of which
only appears when heated over the fire.
It is not necessary to request of You Sir, to keep this a profound
secret, as the consequences of its comming to the Bashaas knowledge
would be very diiagreable for poor Captain Bainbridge and his fellow
Prisonners. M confidence in MT Robertson, by whom i have the
honor to send ou this, and the repeated requests of Captain Bainbridge could alone induce me to risk the secret by sending a letter on
the subject; I shall therefore look upon it as a particular favor to be
informed as soon as possible of the receipt of this, and in preference by
wa of Tunis through Mr Davis as the most surest conveyance.
Xive me leave S
i
r to avail meself of this orcasion to assure You of
the Respect with which i have

9.

[Mrs. James S. Barron Col.]
To Coptoin Samuel Barron, U. 8. Navy, from George Davis, U. S. Charge d'Affaires
Tunis

TUNISNov. Q'$ 1804 SIR,I have the honor to enclose You a blank letter, marked Vol. 1,

NQ1.

received a few days since from Tripoli: the manner of reading it, You
will learn from Col. Lear - Vol. 2 is for Commodore Preble; but presuming that he has left the station, I transmit it to You - this is the
only mode in which Capt. Bainbndge can receive or send any intelligence; as all letters are detained by the Minister - to avoid suspicion
perhaps, it would be well that. Your communications should go through
no other channel than that of Tunis.
Every thing is quiet with us here; m d perhaps may continue so
during the winter; as the Bey expects an answer from the President,
relative to his late demands, It would, however, be well (should not
the disposition of Your Squadron forbided it) to let a Vessel make
o~casionalvisits to this port - and, as our Tunisien friends give
credence to the sense of sight done, it is perhaps of some consequence
to support the opinion, that we keep a watchful eye on their move
rnents [Mrs. James S. Barron Col.

NDA photostat.]
-

Extract from journaI of U. 6. *ate
Gngrur, Captain John Bodgers, U. S. Bovy,
commandmg, Friday, 9 Bovember 1804

Syracuise [AM] Capt Rodgers took command of The Constitution
IUBNA.1

WARS WITH BARBABY POWERS
-

131

--

Extrpct from journal of Surgeon Jonathan Cowdery, U. 8. Navy, 9 November 1804

The Bashaw had an epileptic fit, and his people thought he was
powessed with the devil. They performed many ceremonies to cast
him out, which they said succeeded. The Turks said they saw many
ghosts the night before; and that a Marabewt drove the devil out of
the Bashaw.
ILC. Rare Booh, American Captives i n Tripoli or Dr. Cowdery'e Journal,

Boston, 1806.1

Extract from log book of U. S. S. John A d a m Master Commandant Isaac Cbawcey,
U. S. Navy, commanding, Friday, B November 1804

Light airs from Eastward - continue in Saragosa in company with
the Essex, Congress, Co?atitUtwn, Argus, Vixen, President & Scourge Ships company watenng ship.
At 2 P. M. furled sails pr Signal.
We completed our water this afternoon - The following quantity
is now on board: Total 9,913 Gall?
At 7 A. M. discharged the three watering boats: they received
certificates for two days each Lieutt* Charles Gordon & Sam! Elbert joined the John Adams with
sick ticket.s from the Constitution
A. M. Moderate breezes from '8 S W - Scrubbed hammocks
Employed clearing ship for Sea. Noon wind S W b W [LC. E P P , John Adams, 1804-1805.1
Extract from journal kept by Purser John Darby, U. 6. Navy, on board U. 6. S.
John Admns, Xaster Commandant Isaac Chauncey, U. S. Navy, commending,
Friday, 9 November 1804

[Syracuse] This day Capt Rodgers left the Congress and took
charge of the Constitution and Capt. Decature was appointed to the
Command of the Congress. Commodore Preble having given up
the command of the Constitution and taken his passage with us at
Malta.-Miss Camilla S.McConnell.]

[NDA original.

To John Armstrong, U. 6. Minister to Paris, France, from Secretary of State

DEPARTMENT
OF STATE
November 10 1806
SIR,

*

*

*

*

*

*

*

It appears by communications from Commodore Preble, that the
Government of Naples, has in the most friendly manner, lent him a
number of Gun and bomb boats, with the proper apparatus, for
assisting his operations at Tripoli. As a common enemy to Tripoli,
his Sicilian Majest may be considered as having an interest in the
measures projecte8 against the Bashaw; and so far the facilities
yielded by him ma be the less meritorious. But they have notwithstanding a fair tit e to the acknowledgements of this Government
and the title is the stronger as being h e l f in a state of perpetual
war with the Barbary powers he may be considered as having an
interest in prolonging that of the United States rather than in hastening its termination. In making these acknowledgements the Presi-

9

132

NAVAL OPEIZATIONS FROM 1804 TO 1805

dent has chosen as the most convenient channel, the American and
Neapolitan Legations at Paris. You will therefore take an early
occasion of communicating to the Ambassador from Naples, the sensibility of the President to the kind and valuable aid which has been
supplied, and the satisfaction with which opportunities will be seized
for
. . demonstrating i t by correspondent returns of civility and friendship.
I t has a t different times and from different quarters been suggested
that the regulations of Commerce and Quarantine at Naples were
very unequal and unfavorable to Nations not in Treaty with that
power, and not less so to the United States than an of them. The
papers inclosed which are copied from those received rom Commodore
Preble on this subject will explain the several cases in which the
inconveniences are felt. There are two modes by which provision
may be made for them; one by Treaty; against this there is the general
objection ofmultiplying connections in that form with foreign powers,
where the object is otherwise attainable. The other, by a reciprocit
of voluntary re ations, founded in a friendly understanding whic
has the same e ect, without the embarrassments incident to positive
Stipulations. The President wishes, and authorizes you to enter
into this subject with the Neapolitan Minister'at Paris, and to propose
thro' him such a tacit arrangement between the two Countries, as
will place their citizens and subjects respectively on the footing of
the most favored nations. With us the subjects of Naples are placed
on this footing. The arrangement will have its reciprocal effect
therefore, as soon as the Neapolitan Government shall put the
Citizens of the United States on the like footing on the most favored
Nations. From the dispositions which have been expressed on several occasions on the part of that Government, there is g[r]ound to
expect that this will be done, and that the liberal example set by the
United States will be rather a motive to it, than to a continuance
of an inequality of priveleges, in the calcuIation that i t will not be
countervailed by the United States.
The passage in the President's Message of which a copy is inclosed
relating to the private armaments from our ports, will enable you to
confirm to the French Government, the explanations heretofore
given of the sentiments of the Executive on that subject; and will
probably favor the object of obtaining an arrangement sanctioning
an innocent commerce with St Domingo. This object continues to
be of great importance both as it respects the harmony of the two
nations and the interests and. wishes of the American Merchants,
and consequently claims a contmuance of the effo~tsfor accomplishing
it. The argument with France for concurring m our views, drawn
from the tendency of prohibitions against us, to throw the negroes
into the arms of her enem , derives force from recent information
from a respectable source, t at British overatures hare been actually
made with a view to monopolize the trade-of the Island. An extract
of the letter containing the information is mclosed.
Inclosed also is an extract of a letter lately written to Mr Monroe,
and copies of the correspondence annexed thereto, which has lately
passed between this Department and the Marquis Yrujo. I t is
thought proper that you should be acquainted with the whole, the
better to cultivate in the French Government the impressions and

f

E

P

E

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

133

dispositions so important to the negotiations with Spain committed
to Mr Monroe.
The interest which France has in removing all dangers of a rupture
between the United States and Spain, is too obvious not to be felt by
her; and deserves the most skillful vigilance and management in
turning it to the advantage of the United States.
November 27 The Ambassador of the Emperor of Germany at
Paris havin written to Mr Livingston respecting the capture of the
Imperial Po acre Padina by one of the vessels of our Mediterranean
Squadron, and as the subject may be revived notwithstanding the
satisfactory answer the latter gentleman gave it, I have thought it
might be useful to furnish you with the inclosed copy of my letter to
Mr Pinckney, written in consequence of the complaint having been
before presented at Madrid.
General Turreau arrived here on Monday last.and immediately
announced himself, postponing however, his Official visit until the
arrival of M: Pichon, who was then at Philad* and until his baggage
would be received. It is probable these causes of delay will be removed in a day or two.
The inclosed copy of my answer to M' Pichons letter by which he
communicated the Semtm Consulturn ordaining the new form of the
French Government is a necessary appendage to the instructions
respecting the address of your letters of credence.
[NA. SDA. Dip. Cor., Inst. t o Min., Vol. 6,Oct. 1801-May 1808.1

7

To Surgeon Edward Cutbush, U. S. Navy, on borrrd U. 6. Frigate Prctidd, from
Captains Samuel Barron and John Rodgers, U. S. Havy

SYRACUSE
Novemb 1 0 t V 8 0 / ,
SIR I conceive it necessary & convenient, to establish an Hospital
at this lace for the reception of the Sick and wounded of the SquadI have through M' Dyson our Agent,
ron un er my commandcontracted with the Chevalier Landolina, for a House, which I presume
w i l l be sufficiently large for the purpose & which, he will Keep in good
order. The Secretary of the Nav has directed you should have
i
!
' therefore re air on Shore to act
charge of this establishment; you m
contain 100 Men,
as Hos ital Surgeon. It is supposed the House
you &v however, make the necessary arran enlents for the accomodation of 75, for the present, on as economics a plan, as their comfort
and convenience will permit. M' Dyson will on our requisition, purchase all articles,. you may think necessary for t e Hospitd.
You will exercme your discretion in the appointment of Nurses &
other persons, necessary for this establishment; the internal regulations of which I also leave entlrely to yourself. Any Persons, who
Zty of breaking any of the established rules of the House
or shall
may
be ehave in a disorderly, riotous manner, you will immediately
confine & report them to me, or in my absence, to the Senior Officer
in Port, who will take measures to have them removed to their resqective Ships, if, in your opinion, their situation will permit ;Oficer gullty
of similar conduct, to be re orted as above ordered. Yo Officer belonging to the Squadron, w o is not on the Hospital Books, shall be
permitted to lodge a t the Hospital.

1

7

K

r

%

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1804 TO 1806

134

Mr Dyson will furnish you, as occasion may require, with Money
on account of pay $9Sig@ SAM^ BARRON
Approved
JNQRODGERB
JRP,
Letters
&
Orders,
Book
A,
1804-1805.3
[LC.
To Master Commandant Isaac HnU, U. S. Navy, commanding U. 8. Brig Arm,
from Captain Samuel Barron, U. S. navy

SPRACUBE
10* Novr 1804
SIR,If on your Arrival in Egypt it should be found necessary, to

furnish any Stores, Amunition, Money $9. for the Service of the
United States, in aid of thelintended Coaperation with Hamet Bashaw,
you are hereby Authorized to sup ly Mr Eaton with such as may be
wanted for that purpose, and can I!e spared from the A~gusBrig under
your Command - taking his receipts & Vouchers for the Same
[NDA. Captain's LB, Vol. 3, 1805.1
Extract from journal of U. 8. Rigate Gmfitution. Captain John Rodgers. U. 8.
Navy, commanding, Saturday, 10 November 1804

Syracuise A t 3, P, M, left the Congress & Joined the Constitution
the Leiutenants surgeon purser Sailing Master to act as 5'9 Leutenant
Surgeons Mate & Midshipmen; and the Officers of the Comtitution
Joined the Congress.
[USNA.]
-act

from journal of William Eaton, U. S. Navy Agent for the Barbary Regencies,
Saturday, 10 Hovember 1804

Removed with baggage on board the Ar .~lsto prosecute the expedition to Egypt. About this time Capt.
took command in
the Constitution. Capt. Decatur in the Congress.
[NRCL.No. 9217,Bmi E 14.1

%edgers

Extract from log book of U, S. 6.John Adamr. Master Commandant baac Chmnncey,
U. S. Navy, commanding, Saturday, 10 November 1804
Moderate breezes from E N E - We continue a t Saragosa in
company with the Essex, Congress, Constitution ATW, Vixen, President & Scourge This afternoon Captain Ro[d]gers was shifted from the Congress
to the command of the Constituiwn Cap Decatur of the Constitution
was appointed to the command of the Conpas.

Night, Moderate -From

day light to noon fresh breezes from

W N W.
Ships company scraping between decks.

Discharged from the John Adams to the Congress James Wilson,
Dan! Frazer & Wp Duckitt Seaman Joined the John Adams with a
sick ticket Mr Rich4 Butler, Sailing Master of the Vizen [LC. EPP, John Adams, 1804-1805.)

135

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

Extract from journel kept by Purser John Darby, U. 8. Navy, on board U. S. 8.
John Admns, Master Commandant Isaac Channcey, U. S. Navy, commanding,
Saturday, 10 November 1804

Syracuse Harbour Sailed for a Cruize off Tripoli the U States
Brig Vixon. fresh breezes and pleasant weather - &C &C [NDA original. Miss Camilla S. McConnell.]

To Secretary of State from John Gavino, U. 8. Consul, Ctibralter

GIBRALTER
1I* November 1804

7
SIR

N9

*

*

*

*

*

*

*

On the 8q Inst arrived the U. S Brig Syren Cap9 Stuart from
Malta in 28 days to relive the Essea:who is to join the Squadron as
Comodor B a m n tells me, but gives no news, nor does Coll! Lear who
writes me from Syracuse referring to Cap? Stuart, but as he did not
anchor in our Port, could not see him, as such you will have the
occurrencies from the Hon! Secretary of the Navy Dept to whom
I forward the Dispatches for him pr this Conveyance. Consul
Simpson wrote me to prevent the state ships from anchoring here,
as if did, would not be admitted to come too in the Ports of Barbary
account the Epidemical disordr which we Experience, (the same is
the case in Spain & Portugal)
I had lodged a Letter for the Commanders a t Algeceseras. Cap?
Jaq Barron of the Essea: having wrote me to direct such state Vessels
as came on this station to proceed to Tanger & Consult Consul
Simpson for their future proceedings for the good of the Service.
wherefore I requested of our Prattick Master to endeavour to get
a long side said Vessels before they anchord, giving him a t same time
Paragraphs to peruse
abstract of Consul Simpson & Cap-arrons
to the Capn#so that Captain Stuart delivered him the Despatches
for the Navy Depg with other Letters and bore away for Algecesiras,
& will first Easter1 wind proceed for Tanger
The Average of deaths now among the Troops by the Fever I am
told was last week reduced to LO p' day of the InhQ3 to 2 and there
was one day of none .My Phisicians having recomenda a Change of Air late in the
spring I have to re uest the favour of leave of absence for five
Months (leaving my +ice Consul to Act for me should the service
admit of it) which hope will be able to obtain, when will go for
Barbary, Portugal or Spain
In expectation of your Answer I have the honor to be with respect (NA. SDA. CL, Gibraltar, Vol. 2,1796-1804.1
-

-

--

To Tobias Leer, U. S. Consul General, Algiers, from Captain William Bainbridge,
U. 6. Navy

TRIPOLIBARBARY
11%NOC.1804 (COPY)
Dr SIR. By the last arrival from Malta which brot us a few
letters I learn that you are in that place, I sincerely hope that you
have left Algiers on the business of negotiating with t h s Regency
for our liberation. This presumption has given much pleasure to
myself & fellow officers, for we have the fullest confidence in your

136

KAt7AL OPEEATIONS FROM 1804 T O 1805

conducting the affair with dignity to our Country, and just interest
to our situation in the proper channel of this Government. I sincerely hope, that the instructions from our Government gives sufficient
latitude to effect a peace on the best terms that can be got. By
the American papers, sent to us by Com. Barron, I was very much
astonished to find in them a letter from Corn. Preble dated 7* Jan?
last informing our Govt t,hat he had had indirect communication
from the Bashaw of Tripoli offering to ransom the American Citizens
prisoners to him for 500 dollars each & a second letter of the 20tb of
same month mentions that he had recc further proposals from t,he
Bashaw offerhg to exchange Americans for Tripolitan prisoners to
the Commodore. and the ComGin said letter supposes that for the
remainder American Citizens the Bashaw d l take 400 dollars each
and make peace without an Anual Stipend. Believe me D: Sir,
that the Bashaw never authorized any such offers to be made & I
think the Commodore was premature in communicating it to our
Gov? as indirect information from the Bashaw for I cannot believe
his authority was sufliciently respectible to have sanctioned a belief
that such terms were officially authorised to be made, and I wish
that Com. P. had not been so much in haste in making his communication to Govg especially as he had wrote on the 4gh of the same
month to the Minister of fofl affairs on the subject of exchange and
ransom and the Vessel which Convey'd his letter to Tripoli had not
returned when he wrote the foregoing letters to our Gort
The Bashaw's demand I verily believe at that time would have
been more than 4 times the sum mentioned by the Commodore;
and as for an Exchange, I am Certain, that be never had the most
distant Idea of of making any, I have heard that he declared he
wld not give an orange a Plece for his Subjects, prisoners to the
Americans. The Minister, of Foreign affairs, has told me several
times, that the Bashaw would not give, one of the American Srtilors,
for all the prisoners the Corn. has. I respect Com. P. much, and
believe he has done, what wtts possible to effect with his force, but
can't help regretting the Communications he made to Govt as it
will no doubt, cause them to expect peace, on lower terms than I
believe it possible, to obtain, and may have induced them to restrict
the powers invested in a Negotiation within too narrow limits.
Whenever a Negotiation is attempted, I hope it will be by a person,
coming on Shore to negociate who will be able to have communicacation with Sidi Mahumed Dghies, Minister of Foreign Affairs and
before the person who comes to attempt to Iand; he Should obtain
permission from this Regency, I believe he might come with safety
if he obtained it.
The Bashaw and his Public Officers, like some Ceremony & were
not pleased with the manner that Mg OBrien landed. I learn by let.ters which some of the officers have received that it is the intention
of the Presidt of the U. S. to put the Bashaw of Tripoli's eldest brother
in chief command of this Regency; should this be the case, which I cannot believe, and sincerely hope that such an Impolic 8: extraordinary
measure has not intruded itself on the wisdom, of our Gov! and if our
liberation is to depend on the success of that measure, I am decidedly
of an opinion that our Country had better abandon us to our unfortunate fate & save treasures which will uselessly [be] spent. The
thing is impmeticable except an A m y was sent from the U. S. fio
take the Town, then they might place any person they pleased 11

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

137

Command of the Town; and in that event I should suppose a Christian
would be prefered to a Mahometan. Whoever has advised such a
measure must be entirely ignorant of the power of the present ruler
and of the disposition of his Subjects who always detest the miserable
exile and is it not a natural supposition that should he have any
friends in this Regency that they will abandon the moment that they
find he is joined with Christians against Mussulmen. No people on
Earth I believe are more biggoted in their religion than Mahometans.
- History shews us a most unparallel'd enthusiasm among them
I can't conceive the most distant hope of any utility to be derived to the
U S from pecuniary or other aid given the poor effeminate fugitive
Brother of the Bashaw of Tripoli, who had not spirit enough to
retain his situation when placed in it, or has had interest sufEicient
among his own religious sect. (Mussulmen) to re-establish himself
in what he conceices his right but has wandered an Exile far from
Country, Wife & Children for more than 8 years without distu[r]bing
the Regency of Tripoli. He was placed by his Brother in Command
at Derne the most favorable province for his Attempting a Counter
Revolution. The present Bashaw suspecting that he was not conducting himself properly, drove him from that situation, O d y by an
Order without sending troops against him. What can be expected
from such a pusillanimous being. - If peace can't be effected this
winter I am of an opinion that after our Squadron makes their exertions next spring & summer it will be to the honor & interest of the
U. S. to make peace on the best terms attainable; for a continuation
of the War. would be attended with considerable Expence without
reducing much the demand. I beg, My dear Col! that you will excuse my being so lengthy in
this letter and I trust that you will do me the Justice to believe that
the observations I have made are not in the least infiuenced by my
Unfortunate situation however desirable liberty may be. My
representations will be actuated by my Love of Country. [NA.

SDA. CL, Algiers, Vol. 7, Part 1, Jan. 1804-KO\..1805.1

Extract from journal of U. S. Frigate Conr(itution, Captain John Rodgers, U. S. Navy,
commanding, Snndsy, 11 November 1804

Syracuise [AM] Musterd the ships company [USNA.]
Extract from journal kept by Purser John Darby, U. S. Navy, on board U. 6. S.
John Adam, Master Commandant Isaac Chsuncey, U. S. Navy, commanding,
Sunday, 11 November 1804

[Syracuse] at. 2. P. M sailed for a cruize off Tripoli U States Ship
Presiclent. under command of Capt. Cox Commodore Barron being
so ill as not to be able to go in her, but has taken his lodgings on shore
for the benefitt of his health. [NDA original. Miss Camilla S. McConnell.]
Extract from journal of Midshipman Charles Morris, Jr., U. S. Navy, on board
U. S. Rigate Pruident, Master Commandant George Cox, U. S. Navy, commanding, Sunday, 11 November 1804

People emplo ed getting ready for sea. Doct Cutbush left the
Ship and took c arge of the hospital on shore [Mrs.C. E.Fox, original. NDA photostat.]

E

138

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1804 TO 1806

Extract from journal of Midshipman F. Cornelins d e h f f t , U. S. Navy, U. S. Brig
Scwrgc, Xidshipman Ralph h a r d , Jr., U. 8. Navy commanding, 11 November
1804

(Syracuse Harbour) hove up & stood out of the harbour, the Brig
Vixen. [NDA.]
Extract from journal of Eeaekiah Loomis. Steward, U. 6. Navy,
U. 6. Bdg
Vixen. Master Commandant John Smith, U. 6. Navy, cornmandq, Sunday,
11 November 1804

At 11 o'clock A. M. got underway, and stood for the old castle on
Point Pusina. I t blowing a stiff breeze we stood off and on all night
[L. F. Middlebrook.

NDA copy.]

To Captain Stephen Decatur, Jr., U.8. Xavy, from Captain Samuel Barron,
U. 6, Navy

SYRACUSE
November ldtU804
SIR The Returns respecting the Marines have been made by Cap$
Hail to the United States, supposing there had been no change in
the detachment (except the O5cers) since that they have been shifted
between the Constitution and Congress, - It of course becomes
necessary that they be again changed so as to give credit to Capt
Halls Return, You will therefore be pleased to direct that the detachment be
placed as they were before this last removal (Signed) SAMUEL
BARRON
Captain Stephen Decatur
U S. Ship Constitution
[HS of PA.

NDA photorttat.]

Extract from journal of U. S. Frigate Constitution, Captain John Bodgers, U. S. Navy,
commanding, Monday, 12 November 1804

Syracuise At 3 [Phf] the US Frigate President Sailed On a cruise
Extract from journal of Hidshipman Charles l o r r i s , Jr., U. S. Navy, on board
U. S. Frigate Preaidednl m t e r Commandant George Cox, U. 6. Navy, commanding, l o n d a y , 12 November 1804

P. M. Moderate breezes and clear

1% made the signal for dl officers and boats
2%Unmoored and hove short 3 Weigh'd and sailed.
5 Cape Porche or Pol-case bore N W. 3 leagues distant.
10 furled the fore topsail. Saw the Isle of Malta N W
Leagues.
14 Men Sick From Syracuse to Tripoli.]
[Mrs. C. E. Fox original.

NDA photostat.]

B N.

6

WAR8 WITH BARBARY POWERS

139

Extract from journal of Mibhipman F. Cornelins deKrafft, U. 8. Navy, U. 8.
Brig Scourge. Midshipman Balph bard, Jr., U.8. Navy, commanding, 12 November
1804

(Syracuse Harbour) the President hove up & stood put of the
harbour [NDA.]
Extract from journal of Hezekiah Loomis, Steward, U. S. Navy, in U. S. Brig
VLren, Master Commandant John Smith, U. S. Navy, commanding, Monday,
12 November 1804

Fresh breeze. We kept close under the hind until 1 o'clock P. M.
when we saw 2 sail, one standing for us, the other quartering, the former in speaking her, she ran athwart our bows and carried away our
flying jibb boom, fore top- allant mast, sprit-sail, braces and lifts,
flying 'ibb stay, halyard an down hauls, top-gallant lift and braces
and ot er damage. At 6 o'clock, put away for Malta.

3

b

[L. F. Middlebrook.

NDA copy.]

To Captain John Rodgers, U. 6. Navy, from Captain Samuel Barron, U. 8. Navy

SYRACUSE
19 NOV~
1804
SIR As I shall not be able to attend to the business afloat for some
time, I request you will hoist the Broad pendant on board the Constitution, & give such orders for the safety of the squadron, from time to
time, as may be most proper.It appears that Caps Hull & Chauncey, are much engaged, in preparing for Sea; I would therefore recommend, that the Examination
of the OEcers be suspended, until some other time, when the commanders are more a t Leisure. Sigg S. BARRON
Cap3 John Rodgers
[LC. JRP, Letters & Orders 1804-1805.1
To Tobias Lear, U. S. Consul General, Algiers, from Captain Samnel Barron.
U. 6. Navy

(COPY)

NEARSYRACUSA
lgth NOV~
1804
red i6tP

DEAR
SIR.- This being a time, when a Vessel can be as well spared

as at any other, I have sent the A r p to Alexandria for the purpose of

making enqu relative to the Ex Bashaw & if he is found & wdlmg to
come to t h p ace - Captain Hull is instructed to bring him down,
I conceive that if no other use can be made of him there will be no
difficulty in placing him in possession of Derne & Bengaze. It may
have a ood effect, On his Brother it cannot I think, have an ill one.
Shou d we succeed in getting him here, I shall take no ultimate
measures, without informing you of them. I wish for this purpose &
others that your residence was here. The difticulties which continually seemed to Multiply a t Malta, with regard to our Men & the
English, will prevent any furthur Commumcation with that
during the Winter, their is unavoidable another reason; here 1s pflaw
enty
Since I left you
of Provision & as the Govr says - We are M-rs.
1. have been sometimes better, sometimes worse, but have stillcontlnued to grow weaker, I am now in the Country at a beautiful Seat,

9

f

140

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 180.4 TO 1806

where the pure Air will I hope recover me, The House is taken for s
year by Mr Dyson, is large and commodious, I am sure Mq Lear
would like it & I I should be much pleased, (as would all the officers who
prefer generally this Harbour to ,Malta) if you inhabited a part of it,
it is qmte another thing to Syracuse, if you say you will come oTer we
will accommodate you with a Ship & Endeavour to evade the Quarantine which is now Rigorous. [NA. SDA. CL,Algiers, Vol. 7, Part 1, Jan. 1804-Nov.1805.1
To Sir Alexander John Ball, Qovernor and British Civil Commissioner, Halts and
Qozo, from Captain Edward Prebie, U. S. Navy

SYFL~CUSE
l S t b ATOC
' r 1804
DEARSIR,Commodore Barron being at present sick in the Country
for the recovery of his Health, I take the liberty of introducing to your
Excellency William Eaton Esquire W. S Navd Agent for the Barbary
States. - MT Eaton is going to Eggpt, and wishes to obtain a letter
of introduction from your Excellency to some Character of your
acquaintance. b y attentions you may please to shew 3tz Eaton will be considered
as an additional obligation to the many which your Excellency has
already confered on
[KDA. Isaac Hull LB, 1803-1806.1
To Secretary of the Navy from William Eaton, U. S, Navy Agent for the Barbary

Regencies

SYRACUSE
13. NovT. 1804

SIR,The Argus sails for Egypt tomorrow, with no alteration in her

orders except date, and none in arrangement except that the expedition
against Bengazi is to start from this rendezvous, after the resources of
Hamet Bashaw are better known -*
I t is understood between Commodore Barron and myself that I
am to accompany the Bashaw by land in the expedition against
Tripoli next summer. This I shall cheerfulIy do on condition that he
will give the inspection, field discipline, and disposition of attack and
defense of his army to me On further consideration I am of opinion that the supplies of arms
and amunition to be loaned him should come out from America, that
we may not be subject to the caprice of a foreigner who may influence
the king of the two Sicilies to withhold them. Brass field pieces, well
mounted, and excellent french arms are ready a t Springfield; and as
this place is in the vicinity of Hartford, the best port in the United
States, perhaps, for shipping salt beef, 14 brass 4 pt* and 500 or a
thousand stands of arms may be sent out from thence. Good musket
owder, flints and balls; and suitable amunition for the Artilery will
ge necessary Presuming on the perseverance of Government in the resolution,
you expressed to me last spring of furnishing those supplies I shall
assure the Bashsw accordingly If cash be loaned him, of which he
will stand in need, I desire it may be under regulations which will
impose no responsibility on me WILLIAM
EATON
*P. S. Nov. 14. There is no alteration, neither of date nor arr a n g e m e n t We proceed under the orders of 13. September

-

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

141

copies herewith inclosedCommodore Barron last evening was of
opinion the alterations should be made as stated in the first article of
the foregoing letter; and gave directions to Captain Hull to wait on
him accordingly. He did so - But is ordered to proceed as here
stated - The brig is under way - 6 o clock. a. m. [H. E. Huntington L&AG, EA 206.1
To General William Allen from Xibidshipman William Henry Allen, U. S. Navy

Constitution SYRACUSE
Novr 14th. 1804
DEARSIR, With pleasure I seize this opportunity to assure you of
my remembrance and what pleasure it would give me to hear from
you, not having recd. a line since I left the U. S. as you see I now
date my letters on board the Constitution. - Captn Rodgers having
taken command of her in consequence of the return of Commodore
Preble, & Captn Decatur of the Congress; since my letter from
Gibraltar nothing of consequence has occured here, we have been a t
Algeirs, 6 weeks off Tripoli at Malta, and am now here in company
with the Essex & Congress, John Adums, who sails tomorrow for home,
the Constellation - President, Vixen & ATautiUus are off Tripoli, the
Enterprize has gone to Trieste to repair, the Syren is on the Gibraltar
station & the Argus left here this morning for Alexandria it is supposed to bring down the Beys Brother; Mr. Eaton went in her - the
Commodore is too unwell to attend to the duty or Business of the
squadron & we have the Broad Pendant on board this Ship his
complaint is that of the liver, and it will soon be determined whether
he lives or not. I expect we shall sail from here in a week or so, to
procure men in the different ports on the North side, the Ship being
60 or 80 short of her eomplement, we mount 30-24 pounders on the
Gun Deck 14-12 pounders on the Quarter Deck & Forecastle & 8-32
pound Carronades on the Gunwales in all 52 you have ere this heard
of the different actions off Tripoli and can judge of them. the blowing
up of the ketch was an unfortunate &air*; you can form an Idea what
effect it must have had in the harbour - I will as near as possible
describe her to you I beleive she was a vessel of about 40 Tons
the same that Decatur boarded the Philadelphia in - rigged in this
hlsnnert . . . the Magazine for the Powder was built forward of
the foremast & contained 80 BBls of Gun Powder & 150 loaded Shells
placed in a position on the supposition of going in before the wind, to
be thrown in to the town; through each Bulk head there was a hole
made large enough to receive a Gun Barrel loaded with composition,
calculated and found to burn 11 minutes, from these Gun Barrels
to the scuttle forward & companion way aft there was a trough coptaing a train of Powder; so a Person had only to put his match down m
either place touch the train and jump into his boat, and 11 minutes
would certainly give him sufficient time to get o far enough from her,
but it is the general beleif that poor Sommer lew himself & Officers
up as he told as his intention before he left the Commodore, in case he
was boarded - but I sincerely hope we shall pay them next Summer
we have now on board [this] shi the rascal that pulled the Epaulets from Captn. Bainbridges sho ders. he even had the Impudence to wear on board when he was taken the sword of the Philadel:
phiaa 1st. Leut. Porter;- not a word has been heard from Trip011
dime the ketch Blew up and no one knows the situation of our prisoners

d

d'

142

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1804 TO 1805

I must now bid you adeiu begging you will ive my sincere love to
Mamma tell her how happy I shouid be to ear from her and how

%

much more so to See her, give My best love to Master Thomas,
and aJl our Friends; and believe me to be your Affectionate Son
*A captured Tripolitan ketch. Renamed the I d r e p i d and manned by a volunteer crew under Captain Somers, the ketch was sent into the harbor of Tripoli on
the night of September 4, 1804.
iffere Allen drew a sketch of the bomb vessel, which was rigged with three
square saile on the foremast and a single fore-and-aft sail on the mainmast. [See
Naua.? Documents, Barbary Wars, Vol. IV, p. 499.1
[Huntington Library Quarterly.]

Extract from journal of U. S. Brig Argus. l a s t e r Commandant Isaac Hull, U. S.
Navy, commanding, Wednesday, 14 November 1804

Mr Timothy Winn Purser Joined the Congress and M' Goldsborough
took his place in the Argus a t 6 PM light winds got under way and
stood out of the harbour [of Syracuse] Mr Eston Mr Farquhar and
another Gentleman a passenger Came on board
[NDA photoetat.]
Extract from journal of U. S. Frigate Constiidion. Captain John Bodgere, U. 8.
Navy, commanding, Wednesday, 14 Bovember 1804

[Syracuse]A. M Commences with light breezes and Pleasant weather
At 8 sent up top gallant yards
P M. At 1 hoisted the broad pendant
[Xok. All former entries of Captain Rodgem' journal (on board the Congress to
9 Kovember) indicated the day starting st noon. This is the first entry showing
the day atarting a t Midnight. He resumed his former use of the nautical day
on 29 November 1804.1
[USNA.]
Extract &om lag book of U. S. S. John A d a Master Commandant Isaac Channcey,
U. S. Bavy, commanding, Wednesday, 14 Norember 1804

Moderate breezes from the Westward - We continued a t Saragosa in company with the Essa, Commrq Barron, Comtitzltwn, Congress, Argus & Scourge - Ships company Employed clearing sbip for
sea & stowing the after hold - At 4 P. M. Commr9 Barron shifted
his pendant from the Essex to the ComtituCion - At 5, answered the
Signal for all masters - A. M. Moderate - discharged from the
John Adam to the Congress Mr Edward Bennet, acting Lieutg Joined the John Adam, Mr N. Morris late purser of the Constilzctwn
At 9 A. M. sailed for Ma1ta, the Argus. Two shore boats came alongside, and took away empty casks for watering the John Adam
Koon, light breezes from N B E - We rec'd 10 casks water

-

[LC.

EPP, John Adam, 180+1805.]

Extract from journal of Xibidshipman F. Cornelius deXrafft, U. 6.Navy, U. S. Brig
Scourge, Midshipman Balph Izard, Jr., U. S. Bavy, commanding, 14 November
1804

(Syracuse Harbour) the Argw hove up & stood out [NDA.]

WARS WITH BARBARY POWER8
TO Captain Edward Preble, U. 6. Navy, from Captain Samuel Barron,

143
U. S. Navy

SYRACUSE NOV'1804
SIR, As you will be shortly a t Naples, & m indisposition prevents
my personal application, I have to request o you to ask the loan of
fifteen Gun & Six Mortar vessels from the Govt of Naples in behalf
of the United States, to be delivered to me or my order; these vessels
being intended to act offensively before Tripoli in the ensuing Spring,

P

[LC. EPP, LB, April-Nov. 1804.1
To Captain Stephen Decatnr Jr.! U. S. Navy, commanding U. 8. Prigate G ~ E S S ,
from Captam John Bodgers, U. S. Navy

U. S. SHIPConstitution
Nov: 16, 1804
SIR The services of a Surgeons Mate, bei re uired on board the
Hospital Ship, you will be pleased to order ~ % e a B , (Surgeons Mate)
to Join her; & report to me, the state of the Sick under his csre, every
Morning. [LC. JRP, Letters & Orders, Book A, 1804-1805.1
Extract from journal kept by Purser John Darby, U. 6. Navy, on board U. S. S.
John A d m , Master Commarldant Isaac Channcey, U. 6. Navy, commanding,
Thursday, 16 November 1804

[Syracuse] this day closed all accts with our agent. M: Dyson. At
sunset weighed anchor and hung by the Essez till the close of the
Evening when we cast off and proceeded to sea, in company with the
Brig Scourge, Lieut. Izard. just before we sailed, came on board
from the Castle Seven Tripolitan prisoners. they are part of those
taken in the Ketch Intrepid amongst them are four captains said to
have commanded in the Bashaws Service
[NDA original. Miss Camilla S. McConnell.]
Extract from journal of Hezekiah Loomis, Steward, U. S. Navy, in U. 6. Brig
Vixen, Master Commandant John Smith, U. 6 . Navy, commanding, Thursday,
16 November 1804

At half ast 8 o'clock got underway with a pleasant breeze on a
cruise off ripoly.

4'

[L. F. Middlebrook. NDA copy.]
To Sir Alexander John Ball, British Civil Commissioner and Governor of Malta,
from William Eaton, U. S. Navy Agent for the Barbary Regencies

U S BRIGArgus
MALTA
16 Nov. I804
SIR, uarantain bars the honor I anticipated of delivering in person the etter addressed your Excellency by Commodore Preble The Government of the United States having no representative a t
Alexandria and Grand Cairo, and being bound thither on affairs of a
temporary nature on1 , it would be recelved as a mark of special favor
to obtain lettern to d s Britannic Majesty's Consuls resident there As the brig returns immediately to this port, I shall execute with
peculiar pleasure, and with all possible exactness, any commission

?

144

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 180-4 TO 1805

with which your Excellency msy think proper to honor me a t either
of those places

WILLIAMEATON

His Excellency
SIRALEXANDER
J. BALL,Bart.
[H. E.Huntingdon L&AG, EA 206.1

&g

&o

&$

To William Eaton, U. S. Navy Agent for the Barbary Regencies, from Sir Alexander
John Ball, British Civil Commissioner and Governor of Malta

SIR,I have the honor to acknowledge the recceipt of your letter of
this day's date, acquainting me with your intention of oing to Alexandria, and offering to execute any commands which may have in
that quarter I have to regret that your being in quarantine will deprive me of
the honor of seeing you a t the pdace and thanking you personally
for your obliging offer I inclose herewith letters of introduction for you to Mr Bri gs the
British Pro Consul a t Alexandria, and to Major Misset the Sritisb
Resident a t Cairo, who will have great sstisfaction in any occasion of
being useful to you and in rendering you any service I take the liberty of sending a small parcel for M' Elriggs I haye the honor to be with perfect considerstion Sir,
your most obedient & verg humble servant
(signed) ALEX.Jx9 BALL.
WILLIAMEATONEsq.

P

@. E. Huntington L&AG, EA 206.1

To Samuel Briggs, British Pro Consul at Alexandria, Egypt, from Sir Alexander
John Ball, Brihsh Civil Comrmssioner snd Governor of Mslta

MALTA16. NOD.
1804,
DEARSIR, This w i l l be presented you by 3ilr Eaton, an American

Gentleman who is going to Alexandria and Cairo, to transact some
affairs of a temporary nature for his government - I am to request
that you will assist him and do every thing in your power to accelerate
his business
Every attention paid him will be considered an obligstion conferred
on
-Dear Sir,
your very faithful and obedient servant
(signed) ALEX.Jxo BALL
S.BRIGGSES .
B~.ttishf ,TO Consul Alexandria I send some letters from England for you. A. J. B.
[H. E. Huntington L&AG, EA 206.1
To Major E. Xisset, British Minister Resident at Cairo, Egypt, from Sir Alexander
John Ball, British Civil Commissioner and Governor of Malta

MALTA
16*QNm. 1804
DEARSIR,This will be presented you by Mr Eaton an American

COPY.

Gentleman who is going to Alexandria & Grand Cairo, to transact

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

145

affairs of a temporary nature for his Government, I am to request
that you will give him every assistance to accelerate his business
Every attention paid him will be considered an abligation conferred
on
Dear Sir,
your faithful & obedient servant
(signed) ALEX.JNQ BALL.
MAJORMISSET
British Resident Grand CairoI send some letters by MT Eaton for you from EnglandA. J. B.
[H. E. Huntington L&AG, EA 206.1
Extract from journal of U. S. Brig Argus. Master Commandant Isaac Bull, U, 8.
Navy, commanding, Friday, 16 November 1804

At midnight light winds directly out of the harbour [of Valetta]
called all hands and worked up at 74 past 12 came to in 10 fs" Water
At 7 AM the health officer came off and informed us that we could
not obtain Pratique at % past 7 Weighed the Anchor at 8 let it go
and moored ship in the Quarantine Ground Ends fine Weather
[NDA photostat.]
Extract from journal of U. S. Frigate Comtiiufion. Captain John Bodgers, U. S. Navy,
commanding, Friday, 16 November 1804

Syracuise At 5 [AM] the U, S, Frigate John Adums and Brig
Sc[o]urgeleft the harbour bound to America
[USNA.]
Extract from log book of U. S. S. John Admns, kept by Master Commandant Isaac
Chauncey, U. S. Navy, commanding, Friday, 16 November 1804

Moderate breezes from S S W. We continue at Saragosa in company with the Constitution Congress Essex and Scourge; Employed
clearing ship for sea - At Sun set we weighed & hung by the &sex
till the close of the evening, when we came to sea in order to proceed
to Messina - The Brig Scourge, Lieutt Izaxd came to sea with
us - Commodore Preble continues on board the John Adams The night was pleasant, with a leadin breeze from the S W, till
4 A. M. when we were abreast Mount tna - After this till 10
A. M. either Calms or light airs Ships company employed clearing
between decks and working up Junk - Two hours before we sailed,
we received from the Castle at Syracuse, 7 Tripolitan prisoners They are part of those taken in the Intrepid Among them are 4
captains, said to have commanded in the Bashaw's service Noon light airs from N b E. We are 5 or 6 miles from the land,
Mount Etna bearing N W b W - The mouth of the straits of Messina N E. 5 leagues Lat: obsd 3 7 O 32' PI;.
[LC. EPP, John Adams, 1804-1805.1

%

Extract from journal kept by Purser John Derby, U. S. Navy, on board U. S. S.
J$n Admns. Xaster Commandant Isaac Chauncey, U. S. Navy, commandmg,
F'nday, 16 November 1804

At Maridian. Mount Etnea. bearing N. W. b W. distant about. 2
Leagues. and the mouth of the Streights of Messinia N. E. distant.

146

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 180.4 TO 1806

5. Lesgues. Latitude Ob@37. 32 N. light breezes - Brig Scourge
in Sight. Stood over for Cape De Larme. At sunset we tacked ship
and stood towards the coast of. Sicily [NDA original. Miss Camilla S. McConnell.]

Extract from journal of Midshipman F. Cornelius deKrafft, U. 8. Navy, U. 8.
Brig Scourge, Hidshipman Balph hard, Jr., U. 6. Navy, commanding, Friday
16 Rovember 1804

Fresh breezes & pleas$- bound for Messina # past 4 the J.
Adam8 made signal for us to get under way, hove up in company with
the J. Adams. beat to tbe mouth of the harbour & hove too % paat
6 fill'd away. 7 the J. Adams spoke us, the light house of Syracuse
boreW by S5milesdistt setT. G&TopmaststeeringsailsMeridian light airs inclining to calm Mount Etna bore W N W
# W came on board M' E Blane Midsn suspendg
Latt: Obs: 37' 52' N.
[NDA.]

Beceipt for one Aegro Nave

SYRACUSE
November l r t @1804
Recg of Commodore Edward Preble one ne o slave prize to the
United States Ship Constitution captured o r Tripoli on the 23*
December 1803 in the Ketch Mastico since called the Intrepid which slave I hold subject to the orders of the Government of the
United States.
ISAAC
CHAUNCEY
[Maine HS. NDA photostat.]
To Captain Samuel Barron, U. S. Navy, from William Eaton, U. 8. Navy Agent
for the Barbary Begencies

MALTA17. NOD.1804
SIR, The Argus arrived here yesterday - and will o to sea this
eveningWe are in quarantine six days; as are
vessels from
Sicily - I have obtained letters of recommendation from His Excellency, Sir,
Alexander Ball to His B. M. agents a t Alexandria and Grand
Cairo, which will be undoubtedly serviceable - It was my intention
to have taken along with us Hamet Bashaw's Consul; but, on a close
ins ection, I don't like him: there is too much wood about his head
a n 8 beef about his ancles either to advance or retreat handsomely M: Farquhar goes forward with us If, on falling in with the friendly Bashaw, it is found that he can
raise a sufficient force, where he is, to march to the rear of Bengazi,
I shall accompany him: provided there should a pear a rational possisibility of cutting off the retreat of the Bey o that province which
he would be apt to secure by our attacking him in front by regular
advances - He would be an acquisition.to us, because one of his
wives is sisterand, it is said a favorite sister, of the ruling Bashaw
of Tripoli - Should we succeed in this qxpedition, or by a coup
de mazn, to et possession of that post, i t 1s hoped succour will be
sent forwar seasonably to secure its advantages Be assured, Sir, it was not owing to want of consideration nor
attention that I did not visit you a t your country situation and take

a8

P

d

WARS WITH BARBAh!P POWERS

147

leave - I essayed on the evening of two ?uccessive days to find
our house; but m one instance fell on your n ht, the other on your
y8ft - Should have been out the morning fo owing with a uide;
but the brig was under way so early that my wishes were bafflafSo often as any thing occurs, which ma appear interesting to our
plan of operations, or amusing to your eisure moments, I shag be
careful to communicate it Witchsincere wisbes for the speedy re-establishment of your health ;
with a cordial solicitude for the honor which must crown the success
of your ensuing enterprises; and with the assurance of my utmost exertions to facilitate objects in which the interest of our country is bo
deeply concerned

I

i

Copied from originals, and enteredoff Candia. Nov. 226 1804
[H. E. Huntington L&AG.

At sea, in a conhued gale,

EA 206.1

Extract from log book of U. 8. 6. John Admns, Xrrater Commandant Isam Channcey,
U. 8. Navy, commanding, Saturday, 17 November 1804

Light breezes from S S E - We are 7 or 8 miles from the land
Mount Aetna bearing N W - Scourge in company - By 2 P. M.
the wind had shifted by degrees to N N E, which continued light all
the afternoon - We stood over for Cape de Larme, which is situated
on the Calabria shore, till sumet, when we tacked towards Sicily From sunset till 11 P. M. we had moderate breezes from the N E,
after this till 3 A. M. Light airs or calms - At 3%A. M. a breeze
sprang up from N N W - We made all plain sail for the straights
of Messina, which then bore N E, 4 lea es.
At a A. M. fresh breezes from the f?E - Stowed all the light
sails - At 9 A. M. we tacked to the North@5 Miles from the Cdabria
shore. - From $4 past 9 till 11 A. M. we lay becalmed under Cape
de larme - At K past 11 a fresh breeze sprang up from the N E.
Stowed the light sails & double reefed the Topsails - We are
situated between the Calabria & Sicily shore Latitude observed 3 7 O 40' N.
[LC. EPP. John Adams, 1804-1805.1
Extract from journal kept by Purser John Derby, U. 6. Navy, on board U. 6. S.
John A d m , Master Commandant Isaac Chauncey, U. S, Navy, commending,
Saturday, 17 November 1801)

At half past 11. becalmed close under Cape De Larme. We here
had a full view of Mount. Etnea. it. was smokeing and covered with
Snow to the very mouth of the craiter in this passage we had a view
of Catanea. and the mouth of the River Simetus and a number of
beautiful1 little towns & Villages d along the cost. From this to the
mouth of the Straits [NDA original. Miss Camilla S. 3IcConnell.J

I5 July to 17 November 18041
Journal of the U. S. Frigate Presidd
[Note: There is in the Msnriscri ts Division of the Library of Congrew one
of bound manuscript entitle1 "Journal of a Cruize on board the Uoilad
tates Ship President of 44 guns eta" Unlike the usual journal, this contains

148

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 180.4 TO 1806

only a record of the course, distance run, Latitude, Longitude and similar navigational details. It does not contain remarks or record of historical occurrenew.
The dates covered are as follows:
6 July 1804 to 10 December 1804;
23 February 1805 to 15 September 1805;
15,16, 18 May, 2 April, and 6 August 1810
24 February to 3 March, 12,16 to 23 March 1811
There is also contained in this book a list of the dimensions of the Masts and
Spars of the United States Frigate Macedonian, 20 December, 1812.1
Extract from journal of Midshipman Charles Morris, Jr., U. S. Navy, on board
U. s. Frigate Pruident. Master Commandant George Cox, U. S. Navy, commanding, Saturday, 17 November 1804

[PM] 3. Saw a Sail to the Westward, Tacked Ship
11%Spoke the U. S. Frigate Constellation and Schooner Nautilus.
1A. M . Capt. Cox went on board.

2. Capt Cox returned.
11%the Town of Tripoli bore S B E. 7 Leagues.

Seven Men unfit for duty
[Mrs. C. E. Fox original.

-

NDA photostat.]

Extract from journal of Hezekiah Loomis, Steward, U. S. Navy, in U. 6. Brig
Vixen. Master Commandant John Smith, U. S. Navy, commanding, Saturday,
17 November 1804

This morning commences with pleasant weather, the wind fair. At

3 o'clock saw a sail, which by her signals we found to be the Xautilus
commanded by Captain Dent. She immediately put about after see-

ing our signals and stood q f f for port. We stood on to the southward
until 5 o'clock, then took m sail and stood off shore all night.
[L. F. Middlebrook.

NDA copy.]

118 November 18041
statement of John Broadbent, U. 6. Navy Agent, Messina, regarding Gunboats

I certify that Comr-d:
PrebIe has delivered into my charge for
act? of the United States two Gun Boats N V , and Number 9 [8?].
each mounting a copper cannon carrying a twenty seven pound ball;
and two Brass Howitzers & P &F as pr Inventory taken at the Naval
Arsenal at this place by order of General Espluger at the request of
said Preble, which Boats, Guns, and Appurtenances I am to deliver
to the order of the Commanding Officerof the U. S. Squadron in these
Seas
MESSINAlat@hTov7 1804
N.B. Two of the Brass Howitzers are on board the Vixen
[LC. EPP, Order Book, May 1803-June 1805.1
Extract from Memorandum Book of Captain Edward Preble, U. 6. Navy, on
board U. S. Frigate John Admns, 18 November 1804

Arrived a t Messina.
[LC originsl.1
journal of U. S. Brig Arzuc. Master Commandant Isaac Hull, U. 6.
~ r t r a c from
t
Navy, commanding, Sunday, IS Movember 1804
[Quarantine Ground, Malta] a t 114 past 5 PM weighed and made

sail out of the harbour a t 1/2 past the East end of Malta bore SbW
112 W distant 5 miles
[NDA photostat.]

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

149

Extract from journal of U. 6. Frigate Consfifufion. Captain John Bodgers, U. S. Navy,
commanding, Sunday, 18 November 1804

Syracuise At 112 past Miredian the guard Boat reported t.hat a
turkish cruiser was off the harbour and had taken Two f i s h boats
[USNA.]
Extract from log book of U. S. S. John Adam, Master Commandant Isaac Channcey,
U. S. Navy, commanding, Sunday, 18 November 1804

Fresh breezes from N N E. We are under double reefed topsails
and Top Gall! sails working into the straits of Messina between Cape
de L a m e $ the Sicilian shore - This part of the streights is 7 or 8
Miles broad; Bold on each side - By 3, we had strong breezes when
we handed the Top gallant sails & in third reef in the Topsails - At
4 P. M. we split the Jib - Unbent i t and bent anotherClose reefed
the Topsails - We stood from shore to shore from noon to 12 Midnight, by which time we had not gained more than 5 Miles to windwardAfter this till day light, we continued under easy sail & made
short boards under the Calabria shore - in this situation we found rt
counter current going to Windward - At 6 in the Morning we made
all plain sail &- continued working along the Calabria shore till 11 A.
M. when we stood athwart the straits in order to gain anchorage in
Messina - The part of the straits abreast Messina is between 3 & 4
miles wide - In passing fort Salvadore which forms the East side of
the Harbour of Messina, baffling winds, & a lee current brought us
very near the shore - At 3/4 past 11 we came to in Messina with the
best bower in 32 fath5, soft bottom - between fort Salvador & the
Quay. Veered to 70 fat& & ran the stream cable to the Quay - Furled
sails & got pratique - Commre Preble & Cap; Chauncey went on
shore - We parted company with the Scourge at 2 A. M. Noon
moderate breezes from N E.
[LC. EPP, John Adams, 1804-1805.1
Extract from journal kept by Purser John Darby, U. 6. Navy, on board U. 8. 6.
john Adam, Master Commandant Isaac Chauncey, U. 6. Navy, commanding,
Sunday, 18 November 1804

Fresh breezes. from the northwd 8: Estc ship under close reefe
Topsails beating up for the Streights of Messinia, the view of of this
country from Catania to the mouth of the Streights is beautiful and
picturesque. Cape Spartivento the most southern part of Italy
bearing E. at 11 A M stood athwart the streights in order to come too
an anchor in Messina - a t 314 past 11 came.to in 32 fathom water on the Calabrian shore nearly oposite to Messina is Regium a beautiful
town in entering the mole of Messina we passed the mlghty whirl-pool
of Char~bdies,but it is by no means as dangerious and terrable as i t
was. formerly supposed to be by the ancients the Bason is certainly
one of the safeest in the world after ships have got in as no wind can
touch them the promentary or neck of land which sepperates it from
the rest of the Streights forms it compleatly in the form of a Sickle [NDA original. Miss Camille 8. McConndl.]

150

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1804 TO 1806

Extracts from journal of Midshipman Charles Yorris, Jr., U. 8. Navy, on board
U. S. Frigate Prwidmt, Master Commandant George Cox, U. S. Bavy, commanding, Bunday, 18 November 1804

P. M. Fresh breezes and Squally. 1% the ConsdeUation made
signal No. 995. Capt Cox went on board.
5% Capt Cox Returned. Made and Shortened sail Sail occasionally to keep company with the Constelktion during the night.
8. A M. the Town of Tripoli bore S. W. B S. 5 Leagues discovered
a Sail to the N. E. made sail in chace
10. Spoke the U. S. Brig Vixen
103: the ConsdeUation made signal for all captains 7 Men unfit for
dut .
TGpoli S. W B W. 7 Leagues.
[Mrs.C. E. Fox original. NDA photostat.1
Extract from journal of Bezekinh Loomis, Steward, 0 . S. Navy, in U. 6. Brig Vixen,
Master Commandsnt John Smith, 0.6. Bavy, commanding, Sunday, IS Wovember 1804

At half past 5 A. M. we made sail and stood in shore. At 8 o'clock
saw 2 large sail standing for us and a t half past 9 o'clock spoke them.
They were the Constellation, Captain Camel, and President Captain
J. Barron. (Commodore Barron's ill health obliged him to remain in
Syracuse) the land in sight within 20 miles of the town to the high
mountain eastward. A t 2 o'clock P. M. all hands were called to
muster their clothing. I served the remaining part of the sugar that
we took in a t Malta, to the cabin, ward room, and ships company,
after which I requested the boatswains mate to get a tackle up. I then
called upon the cooper to go into the fore hold and strike it out, he
being captain of the mast he immediatley went and struck out 2 bbls.
flour, 1 bbl. beef, and one that was marked and branded pork. As
it was pork that I wanted I opened it and found it was beef (branded
in America). I told the cooper that he must get up a bbl. of pork.
He said he could not get at any and that it was my d-d
carelessness not marking them right. I told him that I must have the business done at once as it was late. He complied after great disputing
[L. F. Middlebrook. NDA copy.]
To Tobiss Lear, U. 8. Consul General, Algiers, from (taorge Davis. U. 5. Charge
d'bffairsa, Tunis

TUNISNOD!19tQ 1804.

r e d Deer 6tQ1804
SIR. I am without your favours, since the 22"g August; altho
various direct occasions from Malta, and Sicily have occurred since
I attribute it to more important
your arrival in a Christian Land.
occupations and have only to regret that I remain in perfect ignorance;
of the probable result of yo? vlsit - the proposed manner of prosecuting the war; or of concludmng the peace in a word all that relates
to the N ociation with Trip011 is unknown to me.
You
l e m from the Commodore that tho Algerine Squadmn is
a t this place; and the reason we have for eupposing their viat a forced
one. - AJl is quiet with me. - The Clamours, of the people keep
pace with the price of grain which daily incremes - If I only con-

Nq 16.

-

3

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

151

sulted my fee-,
a Prisoo a t Malta would be more agreeable than
full liberty here, parlons pas de cas c'est fans pir pour m&. Be pleased to ~nformme when I may expect the pleaaure of seeing
you; send or bring me money. (COPY)
The Honorable TOBIAS
LEAREsqr
At Mdta. [NA. SDA, CL, Algiers, Vol. 7, Part 1, Jan. 1804-Nou. 1805.1
To Captain James Bsrron, U. S. Navy, commanding U. 6, 6. Eua, from John
Oavino, U. 6. Consul, Oibraltar

GIBRALTAR
1gth Novem! 1804
DEARSIR I have to inform you that the Ship WiUiam & Mary

from Norfolk arrived two Days ago with Stipulations for Algiem, and
has brought the articles at foot for the use of the uadmn, which I
would Ship for Malta but no opportunity, and a communication
between the Town & the Port being cut off has harassed me much,
besides we have no place to lodge Powder & Sparrs on shore, or can
any one go afloat, so that with difFiculty I have hired part of a ship in
the Bay to deposit said stores, until can ship them which is attended
with expences but no remedy; all which let serve for your Govermt
The Syren still at Algaziras, has been under Quarantine, but believe
is now admitted to Prattick -

"s

P. S. - I think you had best call here for the Stores - I have
got the Topsail which is partly sowed together.
Note of Stores pr V'illam & Mary for the Squadron. - 100 Bbls.
Powder, 600 Shot 32 PTe, 1 Bowsprit & Cap, 1 Topmast 2 Ton
gallant Masts & 2 Topsail yards. [LC. JRP, Letterrs & Orders, Book A, 1804-1805.1
Extract from journal kept by Purser John Darby, U. S. Navy, on board U. S. S.
John Adam. Paster Commandant Isaac Chauncey, U. 6. Navy, commanding,
Monday, 19 November 1804

[Messina] I omited mentioning esterday the arrival of the Brig
Scourge and a Neapolitan Ship of o the line and three Frigates the
marine houses of the town here were shaken down about 20 years ago
and still remain in this ruinous state. it certainly was once the most
beautiful1 marine in the World the walk and carriage way is still
beautiful. being nearly 3. miles @ length. the fine fountain of White
marble which Brydon mentions 1s still preserved it is on the key
representing Neptune Holding ScyUa and C h q b d i e s ~[hjainedunder
the emblematical figures of two sea monsters as represented by the
poets, on this neck of land which forms the harbour & bason ~sthe
Lazaret and a light. house to warn ships of their approach to Chrarybdies
the country about Messina is beautifdl and pictueres ue
indeed. and the ancients have given it a ve applicable name or
the Whole country has the appearance*of a arvest the Hills and
sldes of the mountains are covered wlth white clover and various
shrubs and flowers. the V d i e s are full of Vinyards orchards. orange
groves &C &C.
INDA original. Miss C d a S. McConnell.]

9

-

z

1

152

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1804 TO 1806

Extract from journal of Midshipman F. Cornelius deKrafft, U. S. Bary, U. S
Brig Scourge. Midshipman Ralph Izard, Jr., U. S. Navy, commanding, Monday,
19 November 1804

Commences fresh breezes & cloudy 4 inclining to calm At 6 a
boat came along side with a Pilot. 8 came too in the Harbour of
Messina in 30 fathoms, astern of the Jn? Adams
Midnight light airs & cloudy, day light rainy weather a large
fleet of Merchantmen of[f] the harbour Meridian light airs & cloudy, anchor'd - 4 Frigates & 1 seventy four,
Neapolitan, also a large fleet of Merchantmen
[NDA.]

Extract from journal of Hezekiah Loomis, Steward, U. S. Navy, in U. S. Brig Vixen.
l a s t e r Commandant John Smith, U. S. Navy,commanding, Monday, 19 November 1804

Off Tripoli. The morning calm and pleasant, the land in sight and
one frigate (the President). The Constellation stood for Malta all
night and was out of sight this morning. Standing along shore to the
westward, wind off the land. At 5 o'clock P. M. the wind began to
freshen and at 9 o'clock reefed topsails and lay under easy sail all night.
[L. F. Middlebrook. NDA copy.]
To Captain Samuel Barron, U. S. Navy, from Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Navy
MESSINA&vT 20th 1804

DEARSIR, We had a tedious passage to this place, I enclose you
M'Broadbent7sreceipt [18 November 18041 for the two Gun Boats &e"
and have left a case of old Madeira Wine with him for you, which I
beg you to accept of - We sail for Palermo this moment-Should any
letters arrive for me, you will oblige me by forwarding them to Naples
under cover to Frederick Degen & C?to be sent to the United States if
I should be gone -The Neapolitan 74 -three Frigates and a Corvette
arrived yesterday with a Large convoy The 74 has had a brush with
the Algerine Squadron some damage on both sides - I shall write you
from Palermo - I hope you will send the Nautilvs round here, to settle
the accounts of that Vessel as soon as convenient [LC. EPP, LB, April-Nov. 1804.1
To Captain Samuel Barron, U. 8. Navy, from Tobias Lear, U. S. Consul General,
Algiers

MALTA
November doth 1805 [I8041
DEARSIR I had the honor of receiving your acceptable favor of
the lath Inst by.Capt? Hull, and am exceedingly sorry to find that
your health is still so bad. - I have been waiting some days for an
Opportunity of writing to you; but findr none I have determined to
send a Sparonara over for the purpose of carring this letter, to say

that I will join you at any moment you may find it convenient to send
a Ship here. The place of my residence, as it relates to myself, is no
object; and I shall feel myself very happy in being where I can be
most useful, and shall feel peculiarly gratitified if the company of Mn
Lear & myself can tend to enliven your situation. A uarantine of
seven days on all Vessels coming from Sicily is unavoida le; but that
will be no objection to our going on board, and departing at any time.
I bope the mission of the Argus will be attended with good effects.

B

WARS WITH BARBAkY POWERS

153

I t cannot, I think, be productive of any inconvenience; but I am not
at all sanguine in the expectation of Ultimate good from that Object.
I last evening received letter from Tunis of the gtQins; MI Davis
informs me that all is well in that Quarter. At the same time I r e d
letters of the 24@ ultimo from Algiers, where every thing remains
quiet with respect to us. On the 14 of October the Dey sent out 3
Frigates, a brig & 6 Xebecks to Cruise for the Neapolitans who had
been on the Coast of Tunis, and with Orders to send in all Vessels
loaded with grain, as they were in great want of that article, and would
pay a Good price for it.On the 20tQof October he recd acc" from
Constantine that the Marabout, or Holy Man, who has lately made
an insurrection in that quarter, had assembled his forces to the m o u n t
of nearly 100,000 men, well furnished with everything; and that the
City w@fall into his hands, unless immediate Succour was sent. He
dispatched the only Vessels (4) left in his port, with what troops they
could carry, and a new Bey for Constantine as he suspected the Old
one of being in concert with the Marabout. Shd this acc8 be true,
the District of Constantine will before this, be lop'd off from Algiers,
and I have no doubt become another nest of Pyrates. Mr Eaton informed me, on Saturday Even=about half an our before
the Argus sailed, when I was alongside of her, that He had discovered
a Barque, loaded with Ammunition, bound to Tripoli, but declared
for Jerba; I have made enquiries respecting her, and it appears she is
bound to Tunis, with a Cargo of Grain. She is about 80 tons, deeply
ladened, & her gunwale painted yellow. As she is bound for Tunis
we can have no right to question her here; but I presume Mr E. has
written to you on the Subject, as he was verg sanguine.
We have heared nothing from the U States since you left us. The
account of the Sickness at Gibraltar are more favorable than heretofore. I t is reported, with Confidence, that the Governor, Sir Thomas
Trigge, is dead. - This day the report of a War between G. B. and
Spain is more strong than ever; a circumstantial detail of an engagement between 4 English Frigates & 2 Sp Galeons, and the Capture of
the latter, has been rec*
The Patrone of the Sparanara who carries this is directed to wait
24 hours, if you sh? have any commands for this place; or longer, if
you so direct. M* Lear Unites with me in respects & best wishes for the restoration
of your health which she hopes to have a hand in promoting.Our
Compliments to the Officers of the Squadron, to Mr & M" Dyson &
all our acquaintances a t Syracuse Hoping to have the pleasure of Seeing you soon

P. S. I take the libeq to enclose a letter from Sir Alex: Ball of
Health in Syracuse, also one from Gen! Ramsay to MF Leckie. Sir
Alex Ball sends his best wishes & respects to you
[Stephen Decatur Col.
Barron COI.]

NDA photostat, Book A, copy also in Mrs. James 5.

TOGeorge Davis, U. 8. Charge d'Affaires, Tunis, from Tobias Lear, U. S. Consul
General, Algiers

MALTA
November 20th 180-=$DEARSIR A Vessel now on the point of Sailing for Tunis affords

(COPY)

me an opportunity of little more than merely acknowledging the

NAVAL OPERATlONS FROM 180.4 TO 1806

154

-

receipt of your acceptable favor of the 9'h inst with its enclosures
which came to my hands last Evening, for which I beg you fo accept
my best thanks. I have requested Wiam Higgins Esq? the U. S. N & vAgent a t
this place to remit you Two thousand Spanish dollars, in any way in
which he can do it with the greatest security & expedition. This he
has romised to do & writes to you by this Opportunity. I yeft Algiers on the lBtQ of Se tr in the U S Frigate Congress to
join Commodore Barron off ~ r i ~ oto$be ready to enter into a Negociation with the Bashaw if he should desire it on proper terms. - We
had then heard nothing of Commodore Prebles brave attacks, and
expected to have our whole force off that place, and make a formidable
im ression; but on our Arrival off there the 23'a of Sept we found
on y the PresicEent Bt Constellation. The other vessels having gone to
Malta & Syrwuse; and the Season being so far advanced as to make
it unsafe to have Gun boats on the Coast, the idea of a further immediate attack wm given up, and I came to this place with Commodore
Barron where I shall remain (or at Syracuse) untill the season for
active 0 eration may commence, or the Bashaw comes forward with
admissib e terms. - HePoillhaye no more advances under fhe sanction of a F1a.g of Truce. - I am sorry to inform you that Commodore
Barrons hedth is such as I fear must deprive the U. S of his Active &
Valuable services for some time to come, even if he should ever recover.
His Complaint is an Affection of the Lirer. He is now at S racuse
where he requests me to join him which I shall do in a few ays. One or more of our Ships wiU be sent shortly to pay a Visit to Tunis;
when I shdl write to you fully. - In the meantime I can only say
that we feel very easy as to the Bey of Tunis' threats or Conduct
towards us if it should be unfriendly. As the offer of a biennid payment in Cash was not accepted by him & finished, I do not conceive
that we are bound now to go even to that point
The Language to him will be decisive and a termination of our
affairs with Tripoli, will determine the Conduct to be pursued towards
Tunis, But FFhie we take our own ground we shall do nothing to provoke a War; a Peace upon proper & permanent grounds is our object,
every t b g to promote that, consistently must be done. - It is
not probable that I shall have the satisfaction of seeing you untill
our affairs with Tripoli are settled as our settlement with that power
may be made a ground of Arrangement with Tunis. - As I have
not time to write to AIgiers by this Opportunity; I will thank you, if
an Opportunity shodd offer from Tunis, to inform h@Timothy Mountford whom I left a t that place that I have r e d his Letter of the 24@
of Octr which you was so good aa to forward to me; and also that I
may be detained here all winter; for I cannot leave now this part of the
Meditterranean untill the Tripoli business is Over. - As it is Probable
there will be considerable intercourse between this place & Tunis,
for a Supply of Bullocks which cannot now be brought from Sicily
on account of the long Quarantine to be performed, I hope to have the
leasure of hearing often from you this Winter Shg I be a t S racuse.
Higgins will forward Letters to me. Mp Lear is wit me b
desires her Compliments to you. With very great respect & regard.
[NA. 8DA. CL,Algiers, Vol. 7, Part 1, Jan. 1804-Nov. 1806.1

P

f'

B

hr

h

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

155

Extract from journal of U. S. Frigate Comtifufion,Captain John Rodgers, U. 6. Navy,
commandmg, Tuesday, 20 November 1804

Syracuise [AM] Hawled the prize a longside and put Our powder
on board of hir, to make some Alterations in the Magazine.
[USNA-I
Extract from journal kept by Purser John Darby, U. S. Navy, on board U. 6. 6,
John Adams, Master Commandant Isaac Chauncey, U. 6. Navy, commanding.
Tuesday, 20 November 1804

[Messina] Here is a very large Opera house and the Actors perform
Very well the musick is excellent as is the case in all this country - Mr Broadbent an English man is our Agent here. I had
very little business with him as we got nothing for the ship except
Sixty Boxes of Orenges & Lemons. at Meridian fired a gun for a
Pilot and weighed our best bower. at half past Meridian fired a
un for all Officers and men to repair on board. this sudden departure
from Messina prevented my geting a number of small artides of
curiosities for myself and friends which I had intended geting this
day and we were all obliged to hurry on board and left several articles
which we had bespoke - a t 2 P. M. Two Pilots came on board.
at 314 past 2 got under way and stood through the Streights. a t
half past 5 we cleared the mouth of the Faro.
[NDA original. Miss Camilla S. McConiwll.]
Extract from journal of Midshipman F. Cornelius delirafft, U. S. Navy, U. S.
Brig Scourge Midshipman Ralph Iaard, Jr., U. S. Navy, commanding, Wednesday, 21 November 1804

Rainy disagreeable weather Midnight light airs & cloudy. At 10 unmoor'd, rece on board
a large anchor
ht winds & hazy, hove up made sail & stood out of the
Meridian
harbour
[of essina] Pr order of Cornme Preble.

3

To George Davis, U. S. Charge d'Affaires, Tunis, from Captain William Bainbridge,
U. S. Navy

Sympathetic ink [Written in lime juice.]

TRIPOLI220 NOV~
1804.

Dr SIR, I have not heard from you since the lo* Sept. I hope

nothing but the want of opportunity has occasioned my not having
that pleasure.
On the 30q a Vessel arrived here from Malta, and brought me a
letter from Corn. B m o n , and a few others for the Officers from their
friends in America - Some of their letters mention, that it is the
intention of the President of the U. S. to reinstate the Bashaw's
elder brother in chief command of this Regency - I hope sincerely
that such an impolitic & extraordinary measure has not intruded
Itself on our Govf - The right of the present Baahaw is acknowledged by the Grand Signior, and all the Governments of Europe,
and I can't conceive that the least benefit could derive to the U. S.
from pecuniary or any other aid iven to the poor effeminate fugitive
brother of the Baahaw of ~ r i ~ owho
f , has wandered an exile from
Country, wife & children, I believe near ten yeam without giving

156

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1804 TO I806

the present ruler of Tripoli the least inquietude, and who had not
courage enou h to maintain his command when placed in it, and
who has not ad influence enough among his own religious sect to
reinstate him. He was placed in command of the Province of Derne
by the present Bashaw, who suspected him of some intrigue & ordered
him to quit that Province, which order he obeyed, altho' situated in
that part of the Regency most favorable to a Counter revolution
without a Soldier being sent against him. What can be expected
from such a pusillanimous being & He never was popular in this
Regency - If he should have any friends is it not natural to presume that they would immediately turn against h i on seeing him
leagued in with Christians, in a war against X.Iusselmen. To you
who are acquainted with the Mahometan character it is unnecessary
for me to say that no people on earth are greater enthusiasts in their
Religion, and would regard a Coalition as a religious war. Where is he to be found in Egypt, Mecca, Medini, Ispahan, Constantinople, may he not have by this time paid a visit ta the great
Prophet Mahomet.
By the W pa ers sent to us by Com. Bmron, I was sorry to see
Commodore Preb e's communication to Govt in Jan? last: in two
letters mentioned he had had indirect overtures from the Bashaw
of Tripoli to give up the Am@ Citizens prisoners to him for 500,
dollars, each in one letter - in the other for 400, dollars: I am
certain that the Bashaw of Tripoli never authorized such communication to be made to him, for a t that time I verely believe his demand
would have been five or Six times that Sum. I regret much that
Com. Preble, was so premature in communicating to our Govt
terms not coming [direct from the Bashaw?] - the low Sum I
should have supposed would have induced him to have suspected
the autenticity of his authority, and as he had writt,en a few days
previously to this Government puttin the question of ransom and
the Vessel had not returned to Ma ta which conveyed his letter
to Tripoli, I wish that he had postponed giving such informations
as I'm afraid it has induced our Govt to expect eace, or our liberation for a much less [sum] than I believe it will e possible for them
to obtain and may have [space] in the powers given the present Com.
to the protraction of the war I do not know his power, altho' I respect
Corn. Preble much, I can't help regreting his communication to our
Govc respecting an exchange of prisoners & ransom, for the remainder
I do not h o w the measures our Gov5 means to pursue to liberate
their unfortunate Citizens from bondage, but am of an opinion that
after their efforts next Summer it will be to its honor & interest to
conclude a peace on the best terms then attainable, for I believe
that it will not be in their power after that to reduce much, except
by sending an Army, but not Mussdmen.
Let me hear from you as soon as possible - I have not heard
from Commodore Barron - in the invisible please to communicate
the secret to him
Yours Sincerely
(Signed) W. B.
P. S. Mr Biddle has wrote you in answer to your letter to him
(NYHS. Geo. Davis LB, VoI. 1.1

5

P

!?

E

-

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS
To His Excellency Sir Alexander John Ball, Oovernor of Malta,from Tobias Lear,
U. 6. Consul General, Algiers

VALE^ Nmr 221'1804
SIR,I n compliance with your request I have the honor to enclose
you with such extracts from my letters from Algiers, under date of
the 24'h of October. - As relates to the insurrection in Constantine;
and of adding thereto some reports on the same subject, which were
circulated in Algiers, on the first information of the Insurrection above
alluded to
Extraets from Letters
OCTOBER THE 1 7 ~ 3 A Courier arrived this day from Constantine
bringing accounts that the Marabout had mustered his forces before
that place, in three divisions of 30,000 men each and had cannon in
abundance. - The Be demands troops from the Dey for its defence. I t is also said that t e Bey of Constantine is taken by, or is in
favor, indirectly of the Marabout.
OCT? l a t h The Dey has this day appointed a new Bey for Constantine - A Turk of this City (Algiers). oc+ 2otQ This mornin the Aga went out with the new Bey for
Constantine, accompanie with 4 or 500 Soldiers.O C T ~234 Couriers arrived from Constantine saying the place wg be
lost forever to Algiers, if a strong force was not sent for its protection.The Dey has Ordered the Only three Polacres (or Sea Vessels) he has
now in Port to be got ready to take troops to that place (all his other
Cruizers having sailed on the :'1 of October). On the 21't OF MAY the Bey of Constantine arrived at Algiers to
pay his Customary Tribute to the Dey. He remained here till the
2gt3 OF MAY. The Tribute estimable at 600,000 Doll?
I n the LATTER PART OF JUNE the first accounts we r e d at Algiers of
an Insurrection in the district of Constantine, said to be conducted by
a Moor, who stiles himself a Marabout or holy Man; and that he had
collected upwards of 30,000 Arabs and made an Attack on Constantine
but had been repulsed; and a t the same time it was reported that he
had taken some French boats fishing for Coral on the Coast, and carried
54 Frenchmen into Captivity. - This caused a strong remonstrance
from the French Consul in Algiers to the Dey, who sent immediately
some armed Vessels to guard the Coast, and a considerable sum of
money to the Bey of Constantine to provide for the defence of the
place.
About the MIDDLE OF JULY reports from Constantine say that the
Marabout had compelled the French men whom he had taken to
become Mahometans. Other Reports, that the persons said to be
taken were French Officers & Engineers sent to assist the Marabout,
who, is in the Interest of France. But so various & Contradictory are
the accounts in Algiers respecting this business, that very little reliance
can be placed upon them. All regular Communication is cut off, and
tho the business appears formidable and threatening, no measures
seem to be taking to repel its effect

I

~f

[Stephen Decatur Col. NDA photostat, Book A.]

158

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1804 TO 1805

Extract from log book of U. S.8. John Adam, l a s t e r Commandant Isaac Chauncey,
U. S. Navy, commending, Thursday, 22 November 1804

Moderate breezes from S W. - Overcmt weather At 2 P. M.
three Pilots came on board - At 2% we slipped & made sail
through the straits - We had a strong current aga.instus till towards
Evening when it changed favourably - By ?i past 5 P. M. we were
clear of the Faro - At % before 6 we brought to & discharged two of
the Pilots - One remains on board as coasting pilot toPalermo - A
little before 6 we filled & made all plain sail N W b W, in order to pass
between the Islands of Strombolo & Panaric - The former bears
from here N N W by compass 46 mites Overcast Weather al the
first & middle watches winds veering between West & N W. At
11%Tacked to the S S W Noon, we are situated 7 or 8 hides S S E from Strombolo - Standing to W b S. under the courses & close reefed for & main topsails
Wind N W b N.
Note - Yesterday Morning Ships draft
It

tn

Abaft - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 16 6
forward------,---------------_-------15
- 10
8 Inches dif
[LC. EPP, John ddams, 18041805.]
Ertract from journal kept by Purser John Darby, U. S. Navy, on board U. S. 8.
John Adamr. Master Commandant Isaac Chauncey, U. S. Navy, commanding,
Friday, 29 November 1804

this morning we had a light Breeze from the N. b W. wor
to
M
windward between the Island of Pamarie and Lepari at half 7two or three cables length from the N E point of Lepari at noon
becalmed close under Strombolo having changed our position. we
now hav[e] a full view of the mouth of the craiter of Strombolo. and can
see the. Lava streaming. out of the very mouth of it and the red hot
stones flying up in the air. the crater of this mountain is on one side
and said not [to] be within 200 yards of the summit from the crater to
the sea the Island is entirely composed of ashes and burnt matter and
the quantity of this matter is continually increasing from the uninterrup[t]ed discharge from the mountain for oi all the Volcanos we read
of Strombolo seems to bee the only one that burns without ceasing Etna and Vesuvius often lie quiet for many months even years without
the least appearance of fire. but Strombolo is ever a t Work and for
ages past has been looked upon aa the great light house of these Seas.
[NDA original. Miss Camilla S. McConnell.]
[24 November 18041
Court Bdarthl of William Johnron, V. 6. Parine

Proceedmgs of a Court Martial, held by order of Commodore Samuel Barron, on board of the United States Frigate C o n s t W h , in
Syracuse harbour, Novr 24'h 1804, for the trial of Wq Johnson, (a
private Marine in the service of the United States), "charged with
sleeping on post, on board a V w l l in this harbour, which contained

159

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

the powder of the Frigate CWitution, on the night of the 22"a of this
month"
Captain John Rodgers- - - _ _ - - - - - - - - - - - - President
Cap1 James Barron--- - - - - - - - - -- - - - - - - Cap$Stephen Decatur Junior- - - - - - - - - - Lieut. IVm Amory - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - Members.
Lieut John Johnson ----- - - - - - --.- - - -- - Thomas W. Hooper, Judge Advocate
The Prisoner being brought into Court, the President, Members,
and Judge Advocate, were duty sworn, the President then read the
charges to the Prisoner, William Johnson to which he pleads Guilty.
and says in his defence that his duty was uncommonly hard, being
two hours on & two off post during the twenty four hours.
The Court being cleared, proceeded to consider the case of the
having committed a breach
Prisoner, are of opinion that he is $ty,
of the 1gtQArticle of the first section of an Act for the better Goverment of the Navy of the United States, and do sentence him to receive
Fifty Lashes on board his own Ship, having considered his Youth,
former good character, and apparent penitence, Approved
S i n ' d Jn? Rodgers
SAM.BARRON
JAMES
BARRON
JI
STEPHEN
DECATUR
WmAMORY
J. JOHNSON
Lt M
[LC. JRP, Vol. 1, Series Two,Feb. 1775-Lay 1805.1
To Dr. IYIitchell from Surgeon Jonathan Cowdery, U. S. Navy, while prisoner in
Ripoli

Dated 24 November, 1804.
"DEARSIR, "I hope you will excuse me for the liberty I take in
suggestin to you a few remarks which have occurred since my captivity. #he Bashaw has taken me from the prison where my fellow
officers are confined and ordered me to attend his sick slaves who are
principally Neapolitans, negroes, and our unfortunate crew. Some of
the latter I this morning saw chained to a cart loaded with stones
which they were dra ging through the town to repair the fortifications.
They complain muc of hunger, cold, hard labor, and the lash of the
whip. I confess I never saw any thing that wounded my feelings
equal to the sight of those poor fellows. I have libert to walk m
the town, but am attended by a Turk who is loaded wit weapons of
war. I am not allowed to visit any of the fortifications nor any of
the foreign consuls. Capt. Bainbridge's endeavors to relieve the wants
of his crew are often countermanded by our new masters. Five of our
countrymen hare turned Turks, and five have paid their last debt to
nature. Diarrhoea and Dysentery have often appeared amoo
Our
crew, but on a free use of Carbonate of Soda (Natron,) which is ound
m abundance in this country, and often whitewashing the walls of the
prison with lime where they sleep, it soon disappears. Our crew are
now very healthy.
During the several attacks upon this town by our squadron under
the command of commodore Preble, many Turks were killed and
wounded, and several men much burnt by the explosion of their own

%

i

f

160

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1804 TO 1806

powder. I had an opportunity of seeing their method of curing burns
in particular, many of which extended over the whole body. The
Bashaw has all of his wounded brought to an apartment in the Castle
where he visits them and makes them a present of ten dollars each.
He then orders his surgeons and Mamelukes to dress their wounds;
he often assists with his own hands. The mamelukes are his body
guards; the Marabouts are employed to expel evil spirits, and make
intercession with Mahornet their prophet, for their recovery. Those
that were burnt, were first anointed with honey, carefully preserving
the skin as much as possible and keeping the parts exposed to the air.
They then sprinkled the ulcerated parts, if any, with a fine powder of
white lead, (Cemse;) this is repeated at short intervals until a scab is
formed, that is carefully preserved until a cure is accomplished, which
is remarkably soon.
"I hope and expect that in due time my country will honorably and
to the astonishment of Barbarians and Tyrants liberate us from the
chains of sIaver;v, and restore us to our native land, that happy land
the thoughts of which is a healing balm to our souls in their miserable
bondage.
[LC.

National IntelIigencer, 5 A u g u ~ t1805.1

Wrect from log book of U. S. S. john A d a , Blaster Commandant Isaac Chsuncey,
U. S, l a v y , commanding, Saturday, 24 November 1804

Strombolo burnt this Evening more than usual - Rivulets of
Lava were seen running down during the night - I n the morning
we were becalmed 5 or 6 miles from it - The fall of the lava into
the sea hove up a spray similar to the fall of s water spout Ships company employed cleansing slup, & working up Junk Xoon, becalmed 9 miles N N W from Strombolo, with t.he Island of
Alicuna in sight bearing W N W Latitude Observed 95' 54' N.
[LC. EPP, John Adnms, 1804-180.i.J
Extract from journal of Hezekiah Loomis, Steward, U. S. Navy, in U. S. Brig
Vixen, Master Commandant John Smith, U. S. Navy, commanding, Baturday,
24 November 1804

This morning clear and pleasant, light wind from the N. W. Sent
up our top gallant masts, set our fore sail and main stay sail and stood
in shore. Saw a sail to the southward and eastward - made sail
and stood for her. At 4 o'clock P. M. it being calm nearly, we found
the sail to be the U. S. Frigate President. Captain Coxe [of the
President] came on board a t half past 4 o'clock. I the^ had liberty to
give the men their grog. Fine weather at bed time.
[L. F. Middlebrook. NDA copy.]
To Tobiae Lear, U. S. Coneul General, Algiers, (at Malta), from George Davis,
U. 8. Charge d'Affaires, Tunis

TUNISNovember $JCQ1804
red Deer 6tQ1804

Nq 17.

SIR.- The Spanish Vessel by which my dispatches for Malta was to
have been forwarded, had orders to sail on the 20 t@ She was freighted
by the Commercial Agent Had e Unis Ben Unis; who oes to Malts
for the purpose of purchasing
eat, snd reclaiming unisien prop-

h

!f

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

161

erty, captured by the E lish. - an arrival from Marseilles, brings
the intelligence of Spains eing on the brink of a War; and that hostillities had actually commenced. - an engagement has taken place;
in which three Spanish Frigates were captured, and one blown up;
they were from South America with Specie &"* &c?PParispapers up to
the 6 th inst. inform us, that the English Vessels in the different ports of
Spain are arrested and that the British have issued orders to Capture
all Spanish Vessels. On the 20th I was at Bardo, relative to a Tunisian Prize, said to
have been Captured by an American Frigate; the .circumstance is
stated fully to the Commodore. - On the 21" I received letters from
Leghorn, of which I have the honor to enclose you Copies. - I
have only to remark, that if Capt! Egery, had have sought immediate
redress a t Tunis, and not at Leghorn, it is more than probable that
complete satisfaction would have been rendered before this period.
I t is the first complaint, that has ever been made to me of a similar
nature; and I shall urge the point in such a way as I trust will not
only Insure satisfaction to the party injured; but will prevent a repitition of pirac . I have been three days at Bardo, on this affair.
the Rais is a t fphax. - The Bey has sent an Amba to bring him to
Tunis when the affair will be finally settled, of which you shall be
apprized by the First Conveyance. (COPY)

5

[NA.

SDA. CL, Algiers, Vol. 7, Part 1, Jan. 180PNov. 1805.1

Extract from journal of William Eaton, U. S. Navy Agent for the Barbary
Regencies, Sunday, 25 November 1804

Arrived at Alexandria: lay off for a pilot.
[NRdrI,. No. 9217, Bm' E 14.1
Extract from journal of Hezekiah Loo@s, Steward, U. S. Navy, in U. S. Brig
Vixen, Master Commandant John Smth, U. S. Navy, commending, Sunday,
25 Novembeu 1804

At 7 o'clock stood in shore with the President. Pleasant weather,
wind to the northward and west. Mustered and marked the mens
clothes. At 6 o'clock stood off shore. Nothing new. Two turkish
prisoners went on board the President.
[L. F. Middlebrook. NDA copy .I
To Master Commandant Isaac Hull, U. S. Navy, command.ing U. S. Brig. Argus,
from Samuel Briggs, British Consul, Alexandria, Egypt

ALEXANDRIA
26thNOV~
1804
SIII, The Turkish Admiral and the Governor will be a t home to
receive your Visits between 9 & 10 0.Clock in the Morn5 the Governor will return your salute Gun for Gun whatever number you may
give him - My interpreter will have the honour to deliver you the
present, and will if you please attend you to the Admirals Wharf,
where I shall be in readiness to accompany you a t about .%past 9
which hour I hope will be convement. - I beg my compliments to
Mr Eaton, and renew my assurances to both, that it .wdl give me
much pleasure in my public, as well as private capaclty to render
you any service in my power. [NDA. Isaac Hull LB, 1803-1806.1

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1804 TO 1805

162

U. 6. Brig Argus. Xaster Commandant Isaac Ed, U. 6.
Navy, commending~Monday, 26 Rovember 190.4

Extract from journal of

E n route from Malta since 18 November.] at past 1 PM saw
the land bearing from SE to SSE 4 E at 4 the City of Alexandria
Pygpt] in sight fired a Gun and made the Signal for a pilot he did
not come off a t 5 the Entrance of the Port of Alexandria bore SbE
distant 3 or 4 miles a t f past 5 took a reef in the topsails and at 7
TKd Ship to the Westward At 8 taked to the 541 & Ed At midnight moderate and pleasant Tkg occasionally hauled the
mainsail up sound$ with 90 f m t no bottom a t 6 bore away for the
City a t 9 fired a Gun and hoisted the Sig! for a pilot a Cap5 of an
English ship came off a t the request of the Consul he did not know
the western port continued off and on At meridian fine Weather
[NDA photostat.)
Extract from journal of William Eaton, U. S. Navy Agent for the Barbary Regencies,
Monday, 26 Rovember 1804

[Alexandria, Egypt] Entered the old port. I n port a Turkish
Admiral with one ship of the line and six frigates. The Argus saluted
the Admiral's fla with 17 guns; sdute returned with 13. Samuel
Briggs, Esq. his rittanic ~Majesty'sConsul on board.

d

[NRtL. No. 9217,Bml E 14.1
Extract from journal kept by Purser John Derby, U. 8. navy, on board U. S. 5.
John Admnc, Master Cornmendant Isaac Chauncey, U. S. Bevy, commanding,
Monday, 26 November 1804

Fresh breezes from the southwest. at 5 A M Strong breezes&
rough sea. caried away the main topsail sheets - at Meridian
Palermo bore S b W j4 S. distance 9 Leagues. Lat ob'J 38' 14' N.
[NDA original. Miss Camilla S. McConnell.]
Extract from journal of Midshipman F. Cornelius deKrafft, U. S. Navy, in U. 6.
Brig Scourge, Mdshipman Balph Iaard, Jr., U. 8. Navy, commanding, Monday,
26 November 1804

Light breezes & pleasant sunset Palermo W by S 9 miles Cape
Mogerbino S by E 5 miles. 4 set steering sails. 5 a boat came dong
side from shore, the wind shifted to the WQ took in steering sails,
tack'd several times in the harbour 34 past 11 found it impossible to
make the town, came too with the larboard anchor Midni ht clear & pleas! at 7 hove up, made sail & stood in for the
Town o Palermo 8. calm. 9 a light breeze. 10 strong breezes &
pleas? Meridian light gales came too in the Harbour of Palermo in 7
fathoms with the starboard anchor, found she was driving let go the
larboard anchor, furl'd all sail. -

f

[NDA.]
Bxtrrrct from journal of Hezekiah Loomjs, Steward, D. 8. Navy, in U. S. Brig
Viren. Master Commandant John Smith, U. 6. Navy, commanding, Monday, 26
November 1804

The morning commences with a fresh breeze and pleasant weather.
We made sail and stood in for the lsnd. At 3 o'clock P. M. discovered
the land. The Prexicdent stood in and found that we were to the west-

PORT OF A L E X A N D R I A .

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

-

163

ward of New Tri oli, and Old Tripoli in s' ht, bearing about S. W.
Captain Coxe &rmed Captain Smith of%s cbcovery, they then
concluded that it was advisable to heave-to and head to northward
and eastward which was agreed upon and put in execution.
[L. F. Middlebrook. NDA copy.]
To Secretary of the Navy from Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Navy

UNITED
STATES
SHIPJohn Adams.

PALERMO
27 th Nov: 1804
SIE From various causes the John Adam has been detained in
these seas much longer than was expected when I last wrote you.
She arrived here this day from Syracuse & Messina whither I have
been settlin the acctP of the Squadron. I came here to arran e
with Genera Acton for the ammunition &c* expended in the Bom s
& Gun Boats at the seige of Tripoli, and shall go from this to Naples
the day after tomorrow, to make arrangements with the Neapolitan
Government for Bomb Vessels & Mortars, Gun-Boats, Cannon, shot
shells &c^ for the next season; this I do by request of Commodore
Barron, I shall delay no more time than I can possibly help at Naples,
and shall proceed with Captain Chauncey to the United States
touching at Leghorn and Marseilles 24 hours at each place for convoy
if the wind will allow us to do it, without the loss of much time I have only one plan of the Harbour of Tripoli, and disposition of
the Squadron a t the time of the several attacks left, whch I shall
brin with me.
I %ave sent MJ Haswell and MT Marcellin home in the Scourae as
acting Lieutenants - If that Brig is fitted out on semice, I beg reave
to recommend t.hem to be continued as such
P. S. I have dispatches on board from Commodore Barron which
I shall keep with me until I arrive, which I hope will be nearly as
soon as the Scourge - I however refer you to Lieu! Izard for information of the Squadron [LC. EPP, LB, April-Nov. 1804.1

7

t

To Midshipman Ralph Izard, Jr., U. 6. Navy, commanding U. S. Brig Scourge, from
Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Navy

U S. SHIPJohn Adam
PALERMO
fl 27tQNOV:1804
SIR,On your arrival within the Capes of Virginia, you are to proceed
to Norfolk, and from thence go yourself to Washington by land with
the dispatches, and receive orders from the Navy Department relative
to the Scourge - I think it probable the Secretary will order her
coppered and equipped from thence [LC. EPP, Order Book, May 1803-June 1805.1
TO Captain John Rodgers, U. 6. Navy, commanding U. S. Frigate Comfifufion,from
t
Captain Samuel Barron, U. S. Bavy

SYRACUSE
2rtQNowmber 1804
The
circumstance
of
the
Constitution,
under
your command
SIR
bang short of Men, as well as several other Vessels in the Squadron,
and this being the Season of the Year when your services can be most

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1804 TO 1805

164

easily dispensed with, I have to request that you will proceed to Lisbon
and there Ship as many good Men as you can procure, on the same
terms that the rest of your Crew, are enlisted, but if you find the
Period of two Years is Objectionable to them, you are at Liberty to
Limit that Period, as ou may think most proper Keeping in mind
that their Services
not be indispensably necessary, longer than
the next Fall, after having effected as far as in your Power this object
a t Lisbon; you will return to this Station, calling in your way at such
ports as you may suppose, most proper to procure Men: and in your
Passage both up & down the Strieghts, you will endeavour to have an
If in the
interview with Mr Simpson, American Consul a t TangierSimpson, you should Coincide, that it is no longer
Opinion of
necessary for the Syren to remain there, you will be pleased to direct
Cap$ Stewart to repair to this place, with all practicable Dispatch.I enclose SOU a requisition, from Doctr Cutbush (for Surgical
Instruments) for the use of the Hospitd at this Place, if to be had in
Lisbon I wish you to procure them there & if not, request our Consul
a t Lisbon to m i t e to London for them, to be forwarded as soon as
possible to M' Higgins our agent a t Malta.-You will Draw on M e s s r ~ l e n i &
e hlxenzie of London for what
Money you will want for making advances to Seamen or other purposes,taking care to express in the Bill the Purposes for which
they are drawn. Wishing you a plessant Cruize, I am

ad

P. S. The two enclosures to the Secretary of the Navy, you will
be pleased to send by two different Conveyances. S. B.
[LC. JRP, Letters & Orders, 1804-1805.1
Extract from journal of U. IS. Brig Argus, laster Commandant Isaac Hull, U. 6
Navy, commanding, Tuesday, 27 November 1804

[Alexandria, Egypt*] a t % past 1 took a pilot and stood into the
old harbour fired a Salute of 17 Guns which was returned by the turkish admiral with an equal number of Guns at 3 PAT, came to with the
best bower in 6%Pawater the English Consul and a number of Turks
came on board and returned at 5 light airs through the night at 7
Weighed at 7 Weighed and hauled nearer the town fired a Salute of
15 Guns whic.h was returned by the Castle Gun for Gun moored Ship
with the best bower to the NNE small bower SSW Pompeys Pillar
bearing SEbS the Southermost fort bore East - At Meridian Heasant Weather Empq OccasY
[NDA photostat.]
from journal of U. S. %gate Corutitutulion, Captain John Rodgers, U. S
Navy, commsndmg, Tuesday, 27 November 1804

[Syracuse] A. M. clear and pleasant weather
At 34 past 1 struck the cannonades from The spar deck into the hold
Hawled the prize alongside and took Our powder on board P. M. Do weather,
People employd getting the ship Ready for Sea [USNA.]

WARS
WITH BARBARY POWERS
--

165

Extract from journal of William Eaton, U. S. Navy Agent for the Barbary Regencies,
Tuesday, 27 November 1804

[Alexandria, Egypt] Argus saluted the castle with 15 guns. Salute
returned, gun for gun.
Waited on the Admiral, Governor, and supervisor of the revenue.
Most hospitably entertained.
[KR&L. No. 9217, Bml E 14.1
Extract from journal kept by Pureer John Darby, U. S. Navy, on board U. 6. s.
John Adam. Master Commandant Isaac Chauncey, U. S. Navy, commanding,
Tuesday, 27 November 1804

This morning about sun rise we entered the the Harbour of Palermo.
the prospect in entering is beautiful & Picturesque indeed, about
10 Oclock we came to anchor about 2 cables length from the light
house the Prattique master came off and we obtained Prattige
immediately [XDA original.

Miss Camilla S. McConnell.]
--

Extract from journal of Hezekiah Loomis, Steward, U. S. Navy, in U. S. Brig
Vixen. Master Commandant John Smith, U. S. Navy, commanding, Tuesday, 27
November 1804

Stood in for the land all sail set. At 10 o'clock made New Tripoli.
\tTe stood to the westward of the westward of the town and fired one
of our bow guns which sent a shot on shore, but they did [not] think
proper to return the compliment. We then wore and stood off land
the remaining part of the day.
[L. F. Middlebrook. NDA copy.]
TO John Beekman, Navy Agent and Superintendent of Navy Yard, New York,
N. Y., from Secretary of the Navy

NAV.DEP.
t g t h Nov: 1804

The interior of one of the Gun-boats may be finished agreeably to

M' Leonards plan, only with different arrangements as to the occupation of the rooms. Let NP 1, 2 & 3 with the whole of the midship be
for stowage of water and heavy provisions - NO 4 & 6 for storerooms for light materials.the commander and officers to have a
sufficient space (in N? 11) in one room adjoining either end of 1.2. &
3- the rooms 6, 7 , S, 9 &. 10 to he births for the people - and all the
residue of Nq 11 to be occupied for the cables and other heavy stores
and provisions. The Magazine may be Lxed amidships adjoining and
opening by double doors into the officers apartment.
Tho other Gun-boat to be finished in the interior agreeably to the
plan transmitted from this Department. The Guns of both of the
boats to be 32 pounders, the carriages to slide in the bed agreeably to
the deck plan furnished you. The circular sweeps (for allowing
different directions of the Guns pointing in action) should be as near
the midships as tlie other regulations will admit.
The carriages to have 3 friction rollers under each side -the forward
rollers to be fitted with Iron catch-pawls, to prevent their turn* on
the recoil of the piece. The Guns are not intended to be housed or
hwered into the hold
It is not necessary to have filling rooms, as the vessels will c a r q in

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1804 TO 1806

166

their Magazines a su£6cient quantity of Cartridges - But the magazines should be of sdficient size to hold 100 cartridges packed in
pouch-barrels.
[XDA. O f f .Comg. Gunboats, 1803-1808.1

To Captain Edward heble, U. S. Bavy, from Secretary of the Navy

NAVY
DEP~
28 2C70v7 1804
Commodore ED$PREBLE.of the U. S. Squadron Off Tripoli.
I enclose the President's Message relative to the destruction of the
Frigate Philadelphia. Congress hare passed a resolution directing
that a Sword be presented in their name to Captain Decatur, and
they have provided a pecuniarg compensation for each of the other
Officers and for each of the Men engaged in the destruction of that
Frigate. I am happy to announce to you that the Senate have unanimously
confirmed the appointment of Captain Decatur.
Information has reached me through a channel which induces me
to give it full faith, that you have made two Attacks u on Tripoli
and that you were preparing for a third Attack - that f e two first
Attacks eventuated in the destruction of 3 Gun Boats and 1 Polacre,
and in the capture of 3 other Gun Boats, and considerable Injury to
the Fortifications of the Enemy. This information furnishes additional testimony of your energy and judgment - we sensibly feel
the value of our Services, and take pleasure in acknowledging them.
Be assured t at your Country Rill never prore ungrateful. I most ardently hope that ou will have accomplished the reduction
of Tri oli before the arriva of Commodore Barron's Squadron, so
that t e whole Glory of it's Reduction may be attributed to you.
Nothing however can deprive you of the reputation which You hare
justly acquired by the preparatory arrangements made by You for
this object, and by your Conduct in carrying those arrangements
into effect - and although your Successor may give the find Blow to
the Enemy, the Credit will I trust justly attach to You. -

g

g

E

T

[NDA. LB, 179+1807.]
To Secretary of the Navy from R'ilhm Eoton, U. 6. Bevy Agent for the Barbary
Regencies

ALEXANDRIA
68t9 Noer 1804
SIR, The Argus came to an Anchor in this place, the day before
esterday - I proceed this Evening with Lieutenant 0. Bannon,
&idshipman Danielson, Richard Farquhar Esqi four Senants and 8
Turkish guide, d l in a good state of defence, to Grand Cairo in prosecution of the object of our Voyage hither. - The interior of this
Countqy being in a state of generd revolt, renders travelling somewhat
dangerous. If no accident Occur t o prevent, I s h d in due season
report in detail, otherwise I beg leaye t o refer you to Cap1 Hull
I beg you will confjrm Messru Briggs Brothers, one of whom is
British Consul here, in the appointment of K a ~ Agents
y
of the United
States, which Cap1 Hull and myself have requested them to accept,
and to which they have consented - Circumstances may render

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

167

this Agency important to us, the attention the American flag has
received here from this firm merits the distinction. [WDA.

Isaac Hull LB, 1803-1806.1

Extract from journal of U. 8. Frigate Comlilution. Captain John Rodgers, U. S. Navy,
commanding, Wednesday, 28 November 1804

[Syracuse]A, M, Light airs and pleasant weather
At 8 unmoord ship and hove short
At j4 past 8 weighed and made Sail the boats of the Squadron
ahead towing the ship out of the Harbour
At Meredian pleasant weather
[USXA.]
Extract from journal of William Eaton, U. S. Navy Agent for the Barbary Regencies,
Wednesday, 28 November 1804

Embarked for Grand Cairo by Rosetta. Lieut. Blake of the navy,
Lieut. 07Bannonof the Marines, Midshipmen Mann and Danielson*
Mr. Farquhar and Seid Selim, Alli, a drogomnn, and six servants
[KR&L. No. 9217, Bm' E 14.1
Extract from Memorandum Book of Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Navy, on b a u d
U. 6. Frigate John Adam 28 November 1804

Arrived at Palermo found the Scourge arrived.
[LC original.]
Extract from log book of U. S. S. John Adorns, Master Commandant Isaac Chauncey,
U. S. Navy, commhding, Wednesday, 28 November 1804

Moderate breezes from S S W,We are under all plain Sail, Working

up for Palermo which bears W S W,9 or 10 leagues. We Tacked as
the wind favored us. At 4 P. M. dead calm. At 5 a breeze from
E S E - Made all sail in for the Port. By 9 P . M . we entered the
Bay - After this till day light Variable winds out of the Bay. At
3 A. M. a light breeze sprang up from N N W We ran within 2 Miles
of the light house when it fell calm - A little after day light a breeze

sprang up from the S W which blows out of the Bay - After this
till 10 A. M. light breezes - At % past 10 came to, with the best
bower in Palermo, 2 cables length within the light house We anchored in 4 fath", ran out a warp & hove within 60 fathQf
the Mole - At )i past 8 A. M. before anchoring the pratique boat
came along side & gave us pratique Palermo is situated between two mountains at the bottom of a
Circular bay - The Town extends between 4 & 5 Miles nearly
North & South; well fortified alon the shore - The Water within
the mole is shallow - The genera soundings are between 3 & 4 fathe
The outer anchorage near the light house is between 20 & 35 fathg
muddy bottom. The two extremes which form the Bay of Palemo
are situated 5 Miles apart - You are secure in the outer roads from
the winds, excepting the eight points between the N b E dz S E b E In running into this bay you may steer for the light house - The
Anrhorage is good all without it - Noon - The Pilot was
discharged
[LC. EPP, John Adams. 1804-1805.1

f

168

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1804 TO 1806

Extract from journal of Midshipman F. Cornelius deeafft, U. 6. Navy, U. S. Brig
.%urge Belph I~ard,Jr., U. S. Navy, commanding, Wednesday, 28 November
1804

[Palerrno] Midnight an English sloop of War anchor'd in the Harbour, the J . Adams off the Harbour. 8 the J. Adams Anchor'd in
the harbour [NDA.]
Extract from journal of U. S. Brig Argus, Master Commandant Isasc Hull, D. 8
Navy, commanding, Thursday, 20 November 1804
[&exandria., Egypt] at 5 P,M, Consul Eaton went on shore with

Mc Farquhar Lt. Blake Lieu? OBannon of Marines MessrWann and
Danielson Mids'! Emanuel Zeid Seaman Philip Bricou Ordinary Seam9
and David Thomas Marine on United States Duty
[NDA photo~itat.]

Extract from journal of U. S. Frigate Conslitufion, Captain John Bodgere, U. 8.
Navy, commanding, Thursday, 29 November 1804

P M commences with light airs And pleasant weather,
At 5 past meredian cast off the boats And theb] returnd to thire
respective Ships ,4t 2 finding the ship drifted In shore made the
signal for the boats Of the squadron, at 34 past 2 the Boats came to
our assistance. a t 3 a Light breeze from the h'orthg and E a s t d
The boats rebxned to thire respectire ships At midnight light airs and pleasant weather, made and took In
sail as occasion required At hleredian cape passer0 bore N K E :lE Distance 5 leagues
[USXA.]
Extract from log book of U. S. 6. john Adorns, Easter Commandant Isaac Chauncey,
U. S. Eavy, commanding, Thursday, 29 November 1804

Moderate breezes from E N E - We are laying within the hlole
at Palermo - Scourge in company - Ships company employed as
necessary At 1 P. M. CommrVreble 6 Cap! Chauncey went on
shore
A. hl. Light breezes from N Ii E - Supplyed the Scourge with
18 fathc of 5 inch new rope - Discharged from the John Adams to
the Scourge hjr Patrick Simms Surgeons Mate & Ms George Hackley
Midshipman Koon - Winds light from N b E
[LC. EPP, John Adams, 1804-1805.1
Extract from journal of Midshipman F. Cornelius deKrafft, U. S. Navy, U. 6.
Brig Scourge. Midshipman Balph Izard, Ir., U. S. Navy, commanding, Thursday,
$39 November 1804

[Palerrno] Light winds BE pleasant sent up T. G. Yards pr order
of ComrnW. Preble. 7 hove short & hoisted in boats Midnight calm &: pleasant daylight hoisted out boats, Geo.
Hackley Mids? join'd us Meridian calm & pleat shipp'd 2 men from shore
[NDA.]

-

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS
-

169

Extract from journal of U. 6. m a t e Conslilulicn. CapJohn Bodgers, IT. 6.
Navy, commanding, Friday, 30 November 1804

[Syracuse] P. M. commences with light breezes And pleasant
weather At 4 saw the Island of Malta Bearing S W W - M d e
and Took in sail as occasion required
At Midnight D Weather
A t daylight the town of Malta Bore S S W. distance 5 leagues Made and took in sail as occasion Required - At Meredian fresh
breezes and clear the town of Malta bearing S W B S distance 6
miles [USNA.]
Extract from journal of William Eaton, U. S. Navy Agent for the Barbary Regencies,
Friday, 30 November 1804

Sailed for Rosetta. At 4, P. M. anchored in Abukir Bay, by
reason of the day being far spent and the danger of passing the Boghase
by night. Took the occasion of visiting the battle grounds of 8th
and 21st of March 1801, yet covered with human skeletons.
[NR&L. No. 9217,Bml E 14.1
Extract from log book of U. Sa S. John Adam. Master Commandant Isaac Chauncey,
0.S. Navy, commandiig, Friday, 30 November 1804

Moderate breezes from E N E - We continue at Palermo At 4 P. M. sailed for America- the Scourge - Employed fitting new
slings & slinging the Main yard This afternoon some smooth faced villain from a bum boat gave
our sheep a quantity of Poison - four of t,hem immediately died The Villain had done this in expectation that the sheep would be
thrown overboard when they would take it up & dress it for Market Towards evening it fell calm - The Scourge anchored some distance outside of tho Mole till the land breeze sprang up when she
proceeded on her way for America - The Morning was pleasant Scrubbed hammocks & cloathes Noon-light breezes from S E.
[LC. EPP, John Adams, 1804-1805.1
Extract from Memorandum Book of Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Navy, on board
U. S. Frigate john A d m , 30 November 1804

Scourge sailed for the U. S. with dispatches.
[LC originel.)
Extract from journal of Midshipman F. Cornelius deKrafft, U. S. Navy, U. 6.
Brlg Scourge, Ididshipman Balpb Inard, Jr., U. S. Navy, commanding, Friday, 30
November 1804

Light winds $ pleas! 1 hove up made sail & stood out of the
harbour. At 6 calm came too with the stream at the Mouth of the
harbour. 8 a light breeze from the Sq hove up &- made sad %.
8 set T. G. steering sails. ,4t 9 Palermo light house bore S W by
8 5 miles. 10 rounded in the Weather braces. 11 the F i n d shifted
to the W@in steering sails $ brac'd up the yards Midnicht light airs & clear haul'd up square MQsail wind shifted

170

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1804 T O 1805

rounded in the Weather braces & set steering sails fore & aft. at 8
wind shifted to the Wg braed up the yards Meridian cape Sr Victo bore W by S 6 leagues Latt: Obs: 38' 23' N.
[NDA.]
Extract from journal of Hezekiah Loomis, Steward, U. I. Navy, in U. S. Brig
Vixen, Master Commandant John Smith, U. S. Navy, commanding, Friday, 30
November 1804

,4t 6 o'clock sent up our main sliding gunter Royal mast. At 11
o'clock we were &larmed by the upsetting of a kettle of tar in the
galley but by spirited exertions with wet swabs it was extinguished
without damage. All hands emplo ed as follows - Coating the
anchors, worming the cables, overhau lng old rigging etc. until sunset
at which time I saw the grog served.

9

[L.F. Middlebrook. N D B cops-.I
To William Jarvis, U. S. Consul, Lisbon, Portugal, from Tobias Lear, U. S. Consul
General, Algiers

MALTA,
December 1%1804 DEARSIR, I embrace the opportunity offered by my friend Captg
Rodgers, Commander of the C. S. Frigate Constitution, bound to
your Port, to inform you that I left Algiers on the 16 of Septr in compliance with the Orders of my Government, to negociate a peace with
Tripoli; if the Bashaw should be disposed to do it on proper terms.
At that time we had not heard of the Attacks which had been made
on that place by Commodore Preble, and expected to have had our
whole force ready to operate against it; but the season having arrived
when the Gun boats could not remain with safety on the coast,
we found there only two of our Ships, and I came to this place, where
I shall remain 'till the season for active operations commences, when
I think we shall have such a formidable force, as will bring the Bashaw
to reason.
RIy letterls] from Tunis, & from Algiers, since I left that place,
report et-erything quiet with respect to the United States. We have nothing new in this quarter excepting the War between
G . B. & Spain, and a number of Spanish Prizes sent in here daily.
Cap$ Rodgers will give you full details of our affairs in this quarter.
[Mass. HS. Jarvis Cor. NDA. photostat.]
Extract from journal of U. S. Frigate Contiihrflon, Captain John Bodgera, U, S'
Navy, commanding, Saturday, 1 December 1804

At 3 [P. M.] sent the boat into Malta At 4 the town of Malts
bore W. 3.S. distance 5 miles at sunset the town of Malta bore
W $ N distance 3 miles At 9 the Jolly boat returnd from Malta
At midnight fresh breezes and clear weather Made and took in
sail as occasion Required - at 8 Colonel Lear came along Lowerd
down the Jolly boat Malta Bearing S W B S distance 1 mile At
9 the Jolly boat left the ship for Malta
[USNA.]

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

171

Extract from journal of William Eaton, U. 8. Navy Agent for the Barbary Regencies,
Saturday, 1 December 1804

Weighed anchor at 2, A. M. a t 1, P. M. entered the mouth of the
Nile. At half past 2, was met by the English barge with the drogoman of the Consulate a t Rosetta about three miles from the city. I n
the barge was Doctor Mendrici. At 3, arrived a t the landing where
we were met by Major Misset, the British Resident at Grand Cairo,
who had taken refuge here from the dangers which threatened Europeans in consequence of the war between the Turks and Mamelukes,
which raged in that vicinity; and were by him conducted to Mr.
Patruci's, the Consular house. Fast of Ramadam begins.
[NR&L. No. 9217, Bml E 14.1
To Master Commandant Isaac Hull, U. S. Navy, from William Eaton, U. S. Navy
Agent for the Barbary Regencies

ROSETTA
2QDeer 1804
DEARSIR, The day being too far spent to make the mouth of the
Nile in Season on Friday we came to an Anchor in Abukir Bay, and
lay 'till two 0.Clock the next morning, this gave us an oppertunity of
viewing the Battle grounds there, which we found covered with human
Skeletons ghastly monuments of the Savage influence of avarice and
ambition on the human mind - Yesterday Morning we displayed
the fl of the United States upon our Gume [Germe or Jerm], and
about2ne 0.Clock P. M. entered the Nile several miles below Rosetta,
we were Recq by the Drogoman of the British Consulate in an elegant
Barge with Awnings bearing the National flag in which M' Blake and
myself proceeded to the landing, where we were met by Major Missett
his B. M. Resident a t Cairo, who accompanied us to his lodgings on
board the Barge - I met with my worthy friend Doctor Mendrici
of whom you [have] heard me speak so often and so warmly, who now
makes one of our party. I find it impossible to leave this for Cairo day after tomorrow, but
calculate to be beack in about ten days, when I ho e you will find it
convenient to be here. - You will find in Major issett a11 that can
be comprized in the term a Gentlemen, with the frankness of an old
Soldier, we certainly are very happy in our introductions from Governor Ball - I hew'd the Major regret last Evening that he had no
Porter, and that it was almost impossible to procure ~lriadeiraWine. I find my party encreasing, and am very desirous of seeing you here,
that I may have the benefit of your advice in some measures I am
meditating, you will find the tour agreeable and I have no doubt useful. - The Bay of Abukir abounds with fine Mullett, which may
afford both food and amusement to your people during your stay. At Alexandria the Water of the Nile exceeds discription in excellence
of quality, should you think proper to start the bad Water out of the
Argus and fill with this I believe it would contribute to the preservation of health, it certainly would to pleasure - the Brig may be
watered cheap by employing Gums, and using your own Seamen At a11 events I hope you will take a provision of it for the Ward Room
and Cabin, and for an occasional treat to our friends. As you have Mr Blake6 intell' ence for our information and entertainment concerning our tour t us far, shall add nothing on the

d

'"h

!F

172

ATAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1804 TO 1805

Subject. - Please make my very respectful CompIiments to Mess3
Briggs - And believe me to be with
[NDA. Isaac Hull LB, 1803-1806.1
Extract from Xemorandum Book of Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Navy, on
board U. 6. Frigate John Admns, 2 December 1804

Sailed for Naples
[LC original.]
Extrsct from journal of U. S. Frigate Cohtlilution. Captain John Bodgers, U. 5. Navy,
commanding, Sunday, 2 December 1804

P.M. commences with fresh breezes and Hazey weather, at 2 the
Jolly boat Returnd from Malta run hir up Made sail and stood to
the Westward At 4 the center of the Island of Malta Bore S B E
Latitude Observed 36' 27' S .
ICGNA.1
Extract from journal of W i a m Eaton, U. S. Navy Agent for the Barbary Regencies
Sunday, 2 December 1804

[At Rosetta] Impeded from proceeding for Cairo on account of a

Ski&, religious chief, having seized all the boats.
[NR&L. No. 9217, Bml E 14.1

Extract from log book of U. S. S. john A d a . Master Commandant Isaac Chauncey,
TJ. S. Navy, commanding, Sunday, 2 December 1804
Fresh breezes from S W - Cloudy overcast weather -

Employed clearing ship for sea - At ji past 2 P. M. roused in
the stern hawser & hove short - At 4 ran out a kedge in order to
warp the ship to windward - At $6 past 4 the Commodore came
on board - At 5 the wind shifted to K R - Weighed & ran without the light house - Brought to, in order to wait the return of
the barge which was left, to weigh the kedge - At 3: past 6 the
barge returned - Made sail out of the bay - Winds Variable
from the North all the first part with cloudy unsettled weather By 12 we were 20 Miles N N E from Palermo Latitude observed 3B0 53' K.
[LC. EPP, John Adams, 1804-lS05.1
- -

To Hamet Caramanli, rightful Bashaw of Tripoli, from William Eaton. U. S. Navy
Agent for the Barbary Regencies

ROSETTE
December 4. 1804

EXCELLENCE,
I am the American Consul who made an agreement
with your ExceIlency previously to your leaving Tunis for Malta;
and am sent fom-ard by the United States to carw that agreement
into effect. I desire to be informed of the channel of communication
with your Excellency in such a manner as not to embroil my government with any of the Chiefs of this country ,America is a t peace with all the world, except your brother Jussuf.
With him we wdl never be at peace ;for he is unjust towards dl men

-

173

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

But when God shall have restablished the rightful sovereign upon
the throne of Tripoli we will seek peace with that kmgdom
I am your Excellency's sincere friend
WILLIAM
EATON
N a y Agent, General, of the United States of America
for the several Barbary regencies.
His Excellency HAMETBASHAW
of Tripoli -

-

[LC. Perso~~al
P., Misc, Eaton, Ac. No. 213.1
Extract from journal of U. S. Frigate Cortslilulion, Captain John Rodgers, U. S. Navy,
commanding, Tuesday, 4 December 1804

(Beating down the Mediterranean.) at % past 3 [P. M.] spoke the
ship Alfred from Syracuise ,4t Sunset the Island of Linosa bore
IT $4 N distance 7 leagues, Made and took in Sail as occasion required
IVSWA.]

Extract from journal of William Eaton, U. S. Navy Agent for the Barbary Regencies,
Tuesday, 4 December 1804

Embarked for Cairo. Capt. Vincengo, Major Misset's Secretary,
and Doctor Mendrici, joined our party. Mr. Blake returned to Alexandria. Four servants with those gentlemen, now increased our
strength to eighteen able bodied men well armed and provided.
Wind coming ahead, came too near the village Deeby's west bank.
[NR&L. No. 9217, Bml E 14.1
Extract from log book of U. S. 6. John Adam. Master Commandant Isaac Chauncey,
U. 6. Navy, commanding, Tuesday, 4 December 1804
Strorg Easterly winds & overcast weather - We are on our pass-

age from Palermo to Naples.
Punished John Queen, Marine with 24 lashes for drunkeness &
sleeping on his post, Paul Frazer Seaman with 9, & Samuel Bay
Seaman with 6 lashes for drunkeness - Thomas Ayscough Seaman
with 64 lashes for poisoning four sheep, desertion, & drunkeness The suspected villainy mentioned on the 30th Xovr, respecting the
sheep, is aclinowledged by Ayscough.
All forenoon Strong Easterly Winds - T e continued standing
to the Northward till $4 past 11 A. M. when we tacked to the S b E At this time we were nearly 2 Miles from the South side of Palmerora
which is situated 45 Miles nearly W 54 N from Ischia - Between
10 A. M & Noon we let out two reefs of the Topsails.
Noon, fresh Winds from E b S. Ischia m sight bearing by cornpass E S E, Distant 45 Miles Latitude Observed 40' 51' h'.
[LC. EPP, John Adams, 1804-1805.1
To Lieutenant Nathaniel Fanning, U. S. Navy, New Pork, N. Y., from Secretary
of the Navy

NAVDEP
6th Dec. 1804
Your Application for an Appointment in the N a v of the 'CT$ted
States having been received and considered, it has been detelrputed
to appoint you to the station of a Lieutenant - A commlsslon

174

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1804 TO 1806

will be forwarded to you in due season, in the mean time you will

consider this letter as investing you with the rank and authorit
of a Lieutenant in the Navy of the United States - and you WI$
without delay communicate your acceptance to me, from the date
of which communication, your pay and emoluments will commence. Your services are immediately required a t Charleston S. C. to superintend the equipment & outfit of a Gun-boat building a t that place,
under the Agency of TP Smith senr Esqr - You will therefore
immediately repair to Charleston, and on your arrival there, .you
will wait upon Mr Smith, receive and execute such instructions,
relatively to the equipment $ outfit of the boat, as he may give to
you You 'will be continued in the command of the Gun-boat, when
she shdI be put into service, and during such command you will receive an addition to the pay and rations of a Lieutenant in the
Navy (viz: 40$ pr month &- 3, rations p' day) 10$ pr month &- 1
ration pr day, which w 4 l make your pay 50$ p' month and 4 ratlons
p? day. You will take the enclosed oath & return it to this Office. I inclose
a copy of the uniform & rules $ regulations in the Navy.
[NDA. Off. Comg. Gunboats, 1803-1808.1
Extract from journal of William Eston, U. 6.Navy Agent for the Barbary Regencies,
Wednesday, 5 December 1804

Wind contrary, went ashore: inhabitants oppressed and miserable.
At 11, A. h.I. made sail. The British flag displayed on Capt. Vincent's vessel; that of the United States on ours. Dined in a garden
near the village Fuor. Astonished the inhabitants by the accuracy
of the rifle shot, having twice split an orange, in three shot, at tbe
distance of 32 yards.
[NR&L. No. 9217, Bml E 14.1
To James Monroe, U.6. ILlinister to London, Endand, from Secretary of the Navy

KAY.DEPI

Decemr Gth 1804
Congress having directed the President of the United States to
Present a Sword to Captain Stephen Decatur Junt in consideration
of his Gallant conduct in t k destruction of a Tripolitan frigate of 44
Guns [Philadelphia] I request that you will be pleased to purchase e,
Sword for this purpose and send it to me by the first opportunity
that may offer - ColQ Stricker will make you a Remittance for
this purpose [KDA. GLB, Vol. 7, 1803-1805.1
Extract from journal of Surgeon Jonathan Cowdery, U. 6. Navy, 6 December 1804

Our men suffer for the want of pro.;isions. The Bashaw does not
allow them either victuals or cash. - They get but a small allowance
of bread, and that on the credit of their own country. They are
beat unmercifully and compelled to work hard every day.
[LC. Rare Books, American Captivea in Tripoli or Dr Cowdery'a Journal,
Boston, 1806.]

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

175

Extract from journal of William Eaton, U. 6. Navy Agent for the Barbary Regencies,
Thursday, 6 December 1804

Went on shore at the village Sabour: five hundred Albaniandeserters,
Arnout Turks, left this wretched village on the 4th, after having
destroyed every thing valuable or growing within and about it. The
inhabitants apprised us of a camp of wild Arabs about four miles
above, of which they manifested great fear. They prayed for the
return of the English. It is the universal prayer of Egypt.
[KR&L.No. 9217 Bml E 14.1
Extract from journal kept by Purser John Darby, U. S. Navy, on board U. 6. 6.
John Adam, Xaster Commandant Isaac Chauncey, U. 8. Navy, commanding,
Thursday, 6 December 1804

Commenced with strong gales from the Southwo with frequent
showers of rain and heavy sea. - at 3. P. M. finding it impossible to
weather Ischia bore up to run through the passage between Procuta
and the cape forming the South end of the Bay of Naples, here we were
in very great danger of going on shore. and with dificulty weathered
the cape Clawed off with a heavy press. of Sail a man in the
main chains heaving the lead. I never shall forgit when he sung out.
quarter less. four. we all loolred at one another in anxious expectation to hear the next Sound. Commodore Preble ordering him in
an instant to heave the lead again, when he releived us by Singii
out. by the mark five. I will here remark that the ship drew upwards
of three fathom and when in the troft of the heavy sea she must have
near the bottom, We passed the Island of Capua. the
famous
a ode of IAugP Caeasar a t 5 P. M cleared the passage and
been
entered the Bay of Naples. at 7. furled all sail and runing in under
bare poles. a t half past 7. anchored with the Starboard and Larboard Bowers in 12 fathom Water, the Light house on Naples mole
bearing N. W. b W. distant. 2 miles at half past 9 parted
the Starboard cable let go the sheet Anchor and veered to a
hundred fathom on the Larboard cable and about 30. or 40. on the
sheet which brought our stern in the Breakers in 4 fathoms water
the gale increasing soon afterwards we lost our Larboard Anchor.
We waited with anxiety for daylight. however at daylight the gale
had considerably abated. * * *
at 8 A. M. got the barge out and sent an officer on board the Renom
(a British 74 which lay here) - with compliments for assistance,
which was handsomly and immediately complyed with. the Renowns
boat droped an Anchor. 3 Cables length to the Windwaxd of us and
gave an end of 10 Inch Hauzer onboard which we hove tort. at 11
A M. commodore Preble went on shore in order to procure a Cable
and Anchor from the Arsenal at this place. the Gale at the time had
considerably abated, brought to on the sheet cable and hove up the
Anchor. but to our utter astonishment found the Anchor broke off
in tbheshank. and on examination found that in Wulding the shank
t,hat only the outside surface of about )$ of an inch had been wulded At 1 P M. the Neapolitan Boats brought off from the h e n a l an
Anchor of 36. Cwt. and droped it three Cables length to the Windward
of US with a nineteen Inch cable bent to it and two shots of 10. Inch.
Howzer a t the end of that. with these Cables and Aqchors we hove
the ship off in 15. fathom water &never untill now dld we consider

reT

176

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1804 TO 1806

the ship as intirely safe, During this night we had heavy gales &
severe thunder and lightning [NDA original. Miss Camilla S. McConnell.]
Extract from journal of Hezekiah Loomis, Steward, U. S. Navy, in U. S. Brig
Vixen. Xaster Commandant John Smith, U. 6. Bovy, commanding, Thursday,
6 December 1804

Thii morning a t daylight we discovered the island of Malta. We
had tt head wind which was very fresh. At 8 oJcIock A. h3. squalls
began to come on. We beat towards the Harbour and a t 6 o'clock
P. M. anchored nearly opposite the Madrms Prison Ship. Here we
were for the 5th time quarantined since leaving Malta, in October.
I t appears by some of the arbitrary power which stimulates the English as much as virtue does the Americans, that they inflicted this
imposition more for their own fancy than the Laws of their port or
their Country.
[L.F. hliddlebrook. NDA copy.]
To President Thomas Jefferson from Secretary of the Navy

KAVYD E P ~
7 Decr 1804
There are eight Gun Boats now building for the maintenance of
which no Appropriation has as yet been required. If they should be
put in Commission with the number of Officers and hiennecessary
in time of war, we shall require for their maintenance during theyear
1805 the following appropriations,
of the Officers and pay of
For pay & ~ubsist~ence
the Seamen--_- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - . - - - - - - - - - - 51528.For Provisions - we shall require no appropriation
for the year 1805 - Our General Estimate for
provisions for the year 1805 will be sufEcient to
cover this Expence.
For Medicine & hospital Stores - - - - - -- ---.- - - - - - 2000.For Contin ent.Account includg repairs--- - - - - - - - - 6000.For pay of I a m e s - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - . - - - -- - - - - - 8544.For Clothing for Marines - - - - .- - - - - - - - - - - - .- - - - 2880. For Contingent Account M C.------- - - - - - --- - - - 576. $71,528.If these eight Gun Boats should act in one division we shall only
require for pay and Subsistence the sum of 45324,$ because in that
case there would be no occasion for a Surgeon and a Purser to each
Gun Boat. One Surgeon with 2 Surgeon's Mates, and one Purser
with a Steward for each Gun Boat, would be suflicient for the whole.
The saving by this arrangement would be $6204 annually, which
would reduce the whole sum required for the maintenance of these
8 Gun Boats from $71,528 to $65,324. -

%

[NDA. Nom.Appts., 1798-1820.1
Extract from journal of Surgeon Jonathan Cowdery, U. 6. Navy, 7 December 1804

I was informed, that, through the influence of many Turks, the
Bashaw had given orders to Sarcy, our master, to treat the American

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

177

prisoners with the utmost cruelty, in order to induce the United States
the sooner to make peace. He was impatient for his money.
[LC. Rare Books, American Captives in Tripoli or Dr. Cowdery's Journal,
Boston, 1806.1

Extract from journal of William Eaton, U. S. Navy Agent for the Barbary Begenoiea,
Friday, 7 December 1804

At eleven, A. ?\I. landed near a village on the east side of the Xile.
Villagers fled a t o w approach. On giving tokens of friendship some
of them advanced towards us: when told we were English they flocked
around with demonstrations of joy; offered us their services, and
raised loud ejacdations for our establishment in the country. At
6, P. 31. arrived a t the town of Bulac in front of Grand Cairo, By
the imprudent behavior of my young dragoman, Mi, and of m
llaltee servant, Lewis, firing a musket, we narrowly escaped an assa t
from the Turks, who boarded us sword in hand; but who were appeased
by explanations.
[NR&L. KO. 9217, Bml E 14.1

9

Extract from Memorandum Book of Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Navy, on board
U. S. Fngate John Adam, 7 December 1804

Arrived in Kaples Bay in a gale from the westward. Lost two
anchors and parted 2 cables.

--

[LC original.]

Extract from log book of U. S. 6. John A d m , Haster Commandant Isaac Chaucey,
U. 6. Navy, commanding, Friday, 7 December 1804

Strong South Winds, with a heavy Sea - We are under close
reefed topsails & courses, standing to E S E. in order to weather the
Island of Ischia which forms the North extreme of the Gulph of
Naples. By 3 P. 3%.we found it impracticable to weather Ischia We bore up for the N W art of the Island & turned the close reefs
out of the Topsails By 4 M. we passed within two cables length of
the N IT part of the Island - This part of it is well fortified & has
two handsome towers - We saw no shoals or rocks Two bays on
this side appeared to have good anchorage with S S W & S E winds From the N R part of Ischia we steered by compass E b S ji S. for a
passage which leads to Naples - of which Cape de la Mesa forms the
East side and the Island of Procitn forms the West - This passage
is nearly two miles wide - As the wind was scant we kept close to
the Island side - Our soundings through was from 9 to 4% fathe By the close of the evening we passed a point 2 Miles to the S E of
Cape de la Mesa, & bore up for the Anchorage in Naples bay which
n7as 5 or 6 miles under our lee - The Evening was very dark &
Squally & of course we were unable to find the best Anchorage - At
6 Y . M. we brought to, 2 miles South of the light house - Clewed
up & furled over all. We let the ship drift in till 7, when we came to
with the best bower in 12 fathq Soft bottom Veered to 48 fath? & let
go the small bower & Veered 28 f"lf on it, when we brought up with 65
fath?on the best & 28 on the small bower At this time we had onIy
4ji fathr under the stern with a heavy sea breaking close under the
ships stern - Bent the sheet cable & bitted a range on it & unstowed
the anchor -

9.

178

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 180.4 TO 1805

-

the night dead on shore - At % past 9 P. M.
parted from the Sm bower - Let go the sheet & veered to 90
fathe on the Best bower - We now had a Quarter less five, owing to
the wind Veering two points to the Westward - All hands employed
during the night sending on deck the Top gall? masts, striking the
lower yards & topmasts & attending to the Cables - Towards day
light the gale in some measure abated, which made our situation
equally, if not more, alarming than in the night as we were not More
than a cables length from the shore & the breakers often times under
the main chains - The return of the sea from the beach Made the
ship ride very unsafe - I n this situation the light house bore W b N
N near1 2 Miles Fort Elmo bore N W b W ji W - A point
nearly 7 d a e s to the Westward of the light house bore W S W The North extreme of Capria S W b S nearly 8 leagues. At 7 9.M.
out barge & sent an Officer on board his B M Ships Renown & Anow
for assistance - The Renown immediately sent out a launch with
hawsers & a kedge & two boats to tow her out - The launch let go
the Anchor nearly 300 fath? to windward & veered to us. In a few
minutes after we had hove taut on those hawsers we brought home
the sheet Anchor. We were much surprized to f k d the sheet coming
home as it had held well all the gale By 9 the weather became more moderate - We hove off the ship
The ship was now riding by her only bower & an eight
into 9 fathqinch hawser to the Renown's Anchor - An Officer was sent to the
dock ard for assistance - Towards Noon as the gale abated we hove
the sKip more off, b- weighed the sheet when we found the Anchor
parted in the shank nearly 4 feet from the stork - It was an American made Anchor of 3600 Wt. At 9 A. M. sent an officer to the health
office & got pratique. At 10 C o r n r $ Preble went on shore Noon.
Strong S S RTwinds with a hea1-y swell.

It blew heavy dur'

3

[LC. EPP, John Adams, 1804-1805.1
Extract from journal of William Eaton, U.6. Navy Agent for the Barbary Regencies,
Saturday, 8 December 1804

Entered Grand Cairo on horseback, accompanied by some Turkish
officers of distinction; and followed by an innumerable horde of peopIe
of all ages and sexes,curious to see Americans! Capt. Vincents assigned
us apartments in the British ministerial house, and announced us to
the Vice Roy by letter. Doctor Mendrici waited on his highness in
person, and informed him that an -4merican General accompanied by
several young gentlemen of the navy, who visited Cairo during the
winter suspence of operations, to gratify curiosity, had arrived and
would pay him the visit of respect a t such time as would be a reeable.
The Vice Roy had already been apprised of the arrival, and gad lent
horses and attendants to receive us on shore, and accompany us to
Cairo. Visit him tomorrow.
Five o'clock, visit from the Vice Roy's interpreter, welcoming our
arrival; offering his civilities; and informing that tomorrow eveningat
nine o'clock he would receive our visit. He appointed the evening
because, i t being the fast of Ramadam, he could offerno refreshment
by day.
[NR&L, No. 9217, Bml E 14.1

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

179

Extract from log book of U. 6. 6. John Ad-, Master Commandant Isaac Chamcep,
U. 6, Navy. commanding, Satnrday, 8 December 1804

Strong S S W Winds - Riding in Naples bay with the best bower
and a kedge belonging to the Renown. At $ past 1 P. M. a Neapolitan
launch was towed of[f]by 5 boats - She brought off an anchor of 50
Cwt with an 18 Inch new Cable. She let it go two cables length to
Windward & Veered to the ship - We hove taut on it & hove short
on the Best Bower, which we were unable to weigh, owing to the heavy
swell - JT'e then Veered on it & hove in on the new cable from
shore - At ji past 2 P. M. the wind Veered to S R b S & began to
increase till 4, at which time it blew heavy ~ 4 t ha rough Sea 9 Y. Xf we completed Mooring. We are now in a safe situation wit
220 fathq on the best bower & 110 fm? on the anchor from shore.
At 10 P. M mustered a Quarter JTTatch- It blew heavy during
t,he night - We had rec'd from the shore an anchor of 1700 wt which
ure bent on the sheet cable as a spare Anchor-- We moored the launch
which brought off the Anchor astern in readiness for weighing the
Small bower which we parted from - The Barge was moored
astern - Some time in the night she m e d & all her bars were lost.
At 10 A. M. the wind shifted in a light squall from S W to K W Ships company employed clearing up decks & lowering the larboard
cable ties
Noon cloudy weather Winds N N IT -

B!L

[LC. EPP, John Adams, 1804-1805.1
Extracts from journal of blidshipman Charles Morris, Jr., U. S. Navy, on board
U. S. Frigate Pruident. Master Commandant George Cox, U. 6. Navy, commanding, Baturday, 8 December 1804

[From 18 November to 7 December 1804 cruising off Tripoli.] A
Survey was held upon the fore mast head by the Sea Lieuts. Master
Boatswain and Carpenter, who reported the Fore mast head a little
rotten and the Cap unfit for Service bore up for Siracuse [Alrs. C . E. FOXoriginal.

NDA photOstst.1

To Tobias Lear, U. S. Consul General, Algiers, fat Malta), from George Davis,
U. 8. Char@ d1Affaires,Tunis

18

TUNIS
Decr gt*1804.

recQDec' 21fc1804
SIR. I embrace the Opportunity of the U. S. Frigate Constellation,
to offer you a line. She was dispatched here by the Commodore,
whose instructions, directed CaptWampbell, to demand of the Bey
of Tunis, full satisfaction for the Robbery committed on Captc Egary,
as stat,ed in my letter of the 25th ultimo; and also, to satisfy himself,
with respect $0 the Tunisian prize recaptured by the Congress, as
stated to Commodore Barron in my letter of the 24%@
ult.
I cannot avoid expressing my surprise, a! a Fr~gatesbeing d.kpatched
on such a mission, or on any public affairs without recelvlng a line
from the Commodore or yourself. The Bey, insists on our convoying
the prize to Tunis, I have paid to one of the Moors, whom Capt. C.
brought with him seven dollars, for a blanket lost on board.he
also complained to me in Capt? Campbells presence of having lost all
his Cloathing, when captured, I have promised that they shall be re-

180

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 180.L TO 1806

turned him or their value. - The Rais, who plundered CaptQ'Egery,
will be bastinadoed, and kept in prison, until1 the property is restored.You have been constantly informed, that I have no public funds,
and no Credit. - the rent of the Consular House becomes due, and
payment will be expected on the l G t January unless money is received
from you, before that period, I shall be reduced to the degrading necessity of borrowing from the Jews on the interest of the place. -

(COPY)
[KA. SDA. CL,Algiers, VoI. 7, Part 1, Jan. 1804-Kov. 1805.1
To Master Commandant Isaac Hull, U. 6. Navy, commanding the U. 6. Brig Argus.
from William Eaton, U. S. Navy Agent for the Barb- Regencies

GRAND
CAIROlochDecr1804
SIR, r e arrived here at O.Clock in the morning of the 8 s Inst
Hamet Bashaw is with the Mamlukes, we shall have him, I shall take
up a Thousand dollars on Account of Messr? Briggs Brothers, which
I wish you will reimburse them, Particular advice & Vouchers hereI wait here ten days longer for advice from Hamet Bashaw,
after.and t,hen descend the Nile to Rosetta. - VTe shall never have the
means I fear, suitably to reciprocate the Cirilities and Kind Officesof
the British Resident & the Consuls in this Country - Cap? Vincents has equal claims on our gratitude. - Detail on a future occasion.IKDA. Isaac Hull LB, 1803-1806.1
To Hamet Caramanli, rightful Bashaw of Tripoli, from William Eaton, U. S. Navy
Agent for the Barbary Regencies
[Translation]

CAIRO,10 February [December ?] 1804.
EXCELLENCY,
From Alexandria and Rosetta I sent your Excellency

some letters w-hich will be delivered to you accompanied by a letter
from one of your subjects who might be very useful to us. I pray
your Excellency to retire to Rosetta without delay and piace yourself
under the protection of the British Minister, who is there at present,
and that you will have the kindness to send me certain information
as to when I shall be able to meet your Excellency in that town. I
shall wait here ten days for your reply.
If your Excellency has troops attached to you, I venture to suggest
that you send them to AJexandria in order to await your orders there.
I am very respectfully your Excellency's most faithful friend
WILLIAMEATON
Agent Genera..? of the United +States
To His Excellency HAMET
BABBA
of Tripoli
[H. E. Huntington LtAG.]
Extract from journ~lof Surgeon Jonathan Cowdery, U. S. Navy, 10 December 1804

Our men all agreed not to work unless they were fed, and accordingly
when the wardens went to the prison and ordered them out, they all
refused. The wardens whipped them until they were tired, and then

WARS R71TH BARBARY POWERS

181

went to inform the Bashaw, who immediately ordered them bread and
oil, and they went to work.
[LC. Rare Books, American Captives in Tripoli
Boston. 1806.1

OT

Dr. Cowdery's Journal,

Extrsct from log book of U. 6. 6. John Adam, Master Commandant Isaac Chauncey,
U. S. l a w , commanding, Monday, 10 December 1804

Moderate breezes from N E. Ships company employed setting up
the Topmast rigging - At 2 P. M. furled sails. We weighed the
Anchor belonging to the Renown & returned it to her A. M. Light airs from N N E - Employed all forenoon mooring
Ship - In heaving a common strain on the best bower it broke off
in the shank two feet from the Crown. Our small bower which parted
in the shank in the late gale was an Bmerican made Anchor as well
as the best bower - They both broke without bending & appear
to be made of the Worst of Iron - On our anchoring in the gale we
had two bowers & a sheet - Two gave way in the shank at different
times 6. the cable parted from the other - The Anchor from which
the cable parted was an English anchor which we had received in
Malta - The timely assistance we received from the Renown wm
very essential for the Safety of thc ship -.
[LC. EPP, John Adams, 1804-1805.1
%tract from journal of Hezekioh Loomis, Steward, 0.S. Navy, in U. S. Brig
Vixen, Master Commandant John Smith, U. 5. Navy, commanding, Monday, 10
December 1804

[Malta] This commences very cold, the wind directly into the
harbour, which blew a gale. This rendered it impossible for us to go
out of the harbour. At half past 10 o'clock A. 13. we weighed anchor
and went around into the mole astern of the Madras and came to anchor
again. The master of an English store ship (or Transport No. 24)
came on board and took a boy, Micheal Maginnis, from us. The
boy had run away from the store ship and entered on board the U. S.
Brig Siren from which place we received him.
[L. F. Middlebrook. XDA copy.]
Extract from journal of U. S. Frigate Conslilulion. Captain John Bodgers, U. S. Navy.
commanding, Tuesday, 11 December 1804

At 11 [P. M.] Algiers light house bore S W B S distance 3 leagues
Latitude Observed 3 7 O 11' N.
[USXA.]
Extract from journsl of Eezekiah Loomis, Steward, U. S. Navy, in U. 6. Brig
Vixen, Maater Commandant John Smith, U. S. Navy, commanding, Tuesday,
11 December 1604

[Malta] This morning commences very pleasant. At 8 o'clock
A. M. weighed mchor and got underway.
[L. F. Middiebrook. NDA copy.]

182

NAVAL OPEEIATIO.ATSFROM 1804 TO 1806

--

To Captain Samuel Barron, U. S. Navy, from Tobias Lear, U. S. Consul General,
Algiers

MALTA,
December 1 . 9 180.4 -DEARSIR,I had the honor of writing to you on the 6t5 instant, by
a Sparanaro [Speronare], which could not get out till the night before
last.
I forwarded, at that time, a letter for Commodore Preble,
from Constantinople, and an Extract of a letter from the British
Minister, a t that place, to Sir Alexander Ball, respecting the Wheat
Vessels sent in here by our Squadron.
On the l o t h instant arrived here the Ketch, to which you bad
given a passport to go to Tripoli. - M! Robertson brought the two
enclosed letters for you, which I took the liberty to open, in order to
send them by a special conveyance, if they should contain anything
to make it necessary. I found nothing in them which would uTarrant
the expence: But I hare this day seen Mr Robertson, who is in quarantine, and received from him such information as 1conceive makes
it proper to send it to you immediately.
He says that five Cruizers have sailed from Tripoli, vizt - two on
the 8t5, and three on the 10tQof November. - That one of them
had sent in a small Genoise Vessel, which had been converted into a
Gun Boat. - That two of the said Cruizers were destined for the
Coast of Spain and the Straits, and three to the Adriatic. They are
small Latteen Vessels carrying two Cannon each and about 60 men. That he (Robertson) was detained in Tripoli ten days after he was
ready to sail, waiting the arrival of two Vessels loaded with wheat
(u-hichhowever did not arrive), and of which they were afraid he would
give information to our Squadron. - He says they are in great
want of grain and other necessaries; and that their stock of powder
was very smail indeed. - They httd sent to Smyrna for that article
and other military stores. - He says the injury sustained by the
Attacks on the Town was reported to be very inconsiderable, and that
the Bashaw upasvery high in his language respecting the demands he
should make for peace tk ransome; but, he added, that he knew he
was greatly distressed for money and everything else necessary for
carrying on the war.
I received a letter from Captain Bainbridge by this opportunity,
wlictl, I presume, is to the same amount as those now enclosed from
him to you. - I also forward two letters for Commodore Preble; one
from the French Consul, and the other from Captain Bainbridge. Mr Robertson left Tripoli on the 5Q inst- He saw none of our Vessels
off when he came out, nor on his passage over here. - The other
Vessel which had a passport to go over for Bullocks &"s still there,
and is expected to wait until a convoy can be sent from hence to bring
her over.
On the 6th inst. Lieu; Cornd: Smith came in here in the 'b k e n , to get
a supply of bread, of which he says he had but three days allowance on
board. - He was detained here, by bad weather, until the night
before last. - He informed me that he left the President between this
and Tripoli, and that the weather had been so bad for some time past
on that Coast, that it was impossible, without. the greatest hazard,
to keep near the coast.
\Ye are vew anxious to hear of your health, and have been flattering
ourse1t.e~with the pleasure of seeing you over here for some days past.
This pleasing expectation we have not yet given up, and I hope this

-

183

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

may meet you on your way over. - The quarantine from Sicily
is reduced to five days, and in a few days more is expected to be taken
off entirely. I have thought the preceding information from Tripoli of sufficient
im~ortanceto dis~atcha S~aranaroto carrv this letter. - The Patrdn of the ~ ~ a r a g nwill
r o Gait your Orders for his return, if you should
have any letters to send over.
Mr*Lear unites with me in best wishes for your health, and in
respects and compliments to your brother, and our Officers with you,
and also to Mr Dyson.

P. S. Kothing from America.,Algiers or Tunis since my last
13'ednesday Ecening 12 Deer
I have this moment received a letter from Algiers dated 4 Deer -

All was then well there as respected our affairs. - Their Cruizers
had not returned, nor sent in any prizes. There had been no late
accounts respecting the Marabout, which led them to be very easy
respecting him in Algiers. - The Portuguise Slave had lately made
their excape from thence, viz the Captain of a Brig of War taken about
6 years past, and one of the Lieutenants &- the Purser of the Frigate. [Mrs. James S. Barron Col. A copy also in Stephen Decatur Col, Book A.]
To Secretary of State from Charles Pinckney, U. S. Minister to Madrid, Spain

December 12: 1804.
DEARSIR,The farce between Spain & England is at length over as

Duplicate

Spain this Morning declared TTar

-

before this opportunity goes,

I shall be able to send you the declaration, & thus has her conduct to

us involved her in a T a r which she otherwise might easily have
avoided. - England was a t first by no means inclined to this war - the
thing that produced it, as I always told you, was the armament at*
Ferrol, which armament, as I well knew, through a Gentleman I sent.
down privately there to examine & see into it. -2s intended sole1
against us to increase their maritime force in the American Seas WI t i
five sail of the line & some Frigates, & to throw as lar e a body of
Troops as they could into Florida - Yrujo's threat of quadrons at
the Mississipi, Chesespeck & Sandy Hook, now prove this clearly to
have been the intention - The British Minister supposing i t a ainst
them, remonstrated firmly, & it was upon his demanding expkcitls
and strongly the reason of the Armament & their fear of telling the
tmth, that brought them into the war -- The consequences of w b ~ h
will be, I think, the obtaining all we want of Spain, &- the making the
Flag of the United States in a short time the only neutral one in the
World, for Denmark cannot avoid joining Russia & Sweden when they
begin seriously to act. I have some very curious & interesting details
to tell you of this business at another time, for having been prrvy to
the whole of the latter part of the secret negotiations here between
England & this Country, J know that England very unwillingly went
lnto this war - the demands of England on Spain, were so reasonable
that I was always sure Spai~lwould come into them, but she equivocuted so much, & really treated the Questions with such marked evasion,
that England was convinced all her charges were well founded, 6:
that she could not do less than treat her as a principal i,n the war This being the case, however we may as Philant'hropists msh the gencr-

d

184

NAVAL OPERATIOOYSFBOM 1804 TO 1805

al peace of all h'ations, yet if some of them, & particularly those now
engaged, will, in spite of all our wishes, go to war, we must console
ourselves by reflecting that our true security & interest are more promoted by war among the great maritime powers of Europe, than
peace - be assured there is not one of the iron despotisms of Europe
(& they are all such except, England) that has much affection for us R e are such an Eyesore, that I am convinced there is not one which
does not wish us sunk in the Sea, & even England has but a splenetic
cordiality for us - the increase of our Commercial Marine, now
treading fast on her own - the probability of our being, if not the
only, certainly dways tbe most respected neutral flag in the world the numbers & wealth this circumstance, connected with our freedom,
will draw to us, & the consequent increase of our Commerce, Bt when
we please, of our Naval force, will make England view us with jealousy - If you are supplied with their late -4uthors on political subjects, you must perceive many traces of this in their writings, & i t is to
be expected that this jealousy will keep peace with our rise. I am just
informed that this Government arc now deliberating on the propriety
of throwing open aU their Ports in the M'est Indies and South America
on certain conditions - this --ill be a great affair for our Merchants indeed with the circumstance of a general war & the astonishing price
of Prohions, had we not lost our wheat by bad Seasons, as you wrote
me, & the violent hurricane destroyed our rice in the Southern States,
the influx of riches this year would have perlisps exceeded any other The Spaniards are losing immense sums eveq day in the Ships d
cargoes taken by the British, & i t seems from the secret expeditions
preparing in England, unless France & Spain & Holland can make
some great effort by invasion they will have to bid adieu to all t,heir
Colonies & Commerce, as it is said to be one of Pitt's plans to root
France & Holland entirely out of the American Seas, & never to make
peace on the condition of restoring any thing to them in that Quarter
of the FCTorld, or suffering them ever to have any more agency or
interference in the West India Trade - I mentioned to you in my former letters that I had submitted to this Government all the statements
& explanations your instructions contained, & that they are now
waiting for advices by the Express Brigantine they sent to Yrujo,
with whose conduct & energy, as I wrote you before, they are so
pleased, that they are said to be determined on his return, to reward
him highly - their tone however to the United States must in future
be greatly moderated, for they cannot now venture to quarrel with
us, & if our Government is but a little resolute & decisive, they must
give way in every thing.
With my affectionate respects & wishes to the President 8; Yourself
& our friends a t Washington & particularly Major Butler & Colonel
Hampton I remain dear sir
December 12: 1804 IN ADRID RID
inclosed is the declaration of War by Spain.
[NA. SD.4. Disp., Spain, Vol. 6*, Chas. Pinckney (at Madrid), May 1803-

S~D.1805.1

To Joshua Wingate, Jr., Washington, D, C., from the Secretary of the N a y

NAVY
DEP~

12 Decr 1804.For the transportation from this Country to Algiers of the timber1
plank &p comprehended in the list which accompanied my letter to you

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

185

of the 28;" June last, I will agree to give you the sum you have
asked namely, 7000 dollars, one half to be paid when the Bills of
Lading shall be signed - the other half to be paid as soon as we
shall receive authentic imformation of its being safely landed a t its
port of destination and delivered to the Consignee - or if more ageeable to you, it may be paid at Algiers by the Consul's Bills either
on Leghorn or London, provided that the Public shall not loose by
the Exchange. Your Vessel must be navigated by a competent
number of Seamen, and she must be in all other respects completely
fitted and equipped for such a Voyage. No private Adventure
whatever can be admitted on board the Vessel carrying the Timber
she will be provided with governmental passes setting forth
that the whole of the Car o is the property of the United States:
Responsible Security w& be exacted for the return of the money
advanced, if the Voyage should not be performed.
We shall require 20 working days for the discharge of the Cargo
at AIgiers to be computed from the day on which the Vessel shall pass
the forms necessary to legalize the Beginning to discharge. The Vessel
must proceed straight to Algiers- she must not touch at any other port
unless unavoidably constrained by stress of weather. - On her arrival
at Algiers, the Consul must without delay be informed of her arrival,
and the Dispatches to be sent out in hermust be immediately delivered.
For every days' detention a t Algiers beyond 20 working days to
be computed as above stated, I will allow you 40 Dollars - provided
such detention shall not proceed from any deviation from this Agreement, or from any Instructions to be hereafter given on the part of
the owners or from any inattention, neglect or inactivity on the
part of the Commander or Mariners.
If in the period intervening this and the sailing of the Vessel any
political Circumstances should arise to enhance the present rates of
ensurance, you may safely rely on the liberality of the Government
for a just remuneration.
[In this letter book, pages I to 25, are long lists of articles for the Dey of Algiers,
and Emperor of hlorocco; shipped in the Betsy T a l k , Sally, Old Tom, WzUiam
(e- hfufy and Raleigh.]
[NDtl. Barbary Powers, LB, 1803-1808.1

[13 December 18041
To Doctor Francisco Mendrici from Williem Eaton, U. S. Navy Agent for the
Barbary Regencies

To Doctor FRANCIS
MANDRICI
The interests of the United States of America require that a person
of abilities probity and National attachments should be appointed
My long acquaintto the agenc of their affairs in Grand Cairo
ance With ou the uniform attachment and friendly Fees you
exhibited towards me in my capscity of Consul of the Unlted States
when at Tunis and the distinguished proofs of Your Friendskip and
h
of your interested zeal for the Welfare of my CountrJ. ~ h c YOU
have had the goodness to manifest towards us since my arr~valupon
the Nile are good reasons why I should desire you may be vested
with that trust I request therefore You will accept the appoinfment of Agent of the United States in Grand Cauo and 1ts dependencies untill pleasure of the President shall be expressed on the
subject

+!

-

-

186

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 180L TO 1806

I am not authorised to engage that any salary will be annexed to
this appointment but am nevertheless free to assure you that in
case, of any events which shall render our establishment permanent
here, you may rely on my influence with my Government to obtain
for you the Consulate of the United States in Egypt
Done a t Grand Cairo Dec. 13th 1804
WILLIAMEATON
[H. E. Huntington L&AG, EA126 and EA206.1
To Secretary of the Navy from William Eaton,

U. 6. Navy Agent for the Barbary

Begencies

GRAND
CAIRODec: lSth 1804
SIR! Letters of recommendation from Sir Alexander Ball, to His
Britanic Majesty's Consul at Alexandria and resident a t Cairo have
had the effect to give security and perhaps may add success to this
expedition.
On the 30thTnt. we sailed from Alexandria for Rosetto, and arrived
the day following - Found there Major Misset, the British resident
who had left Cairo in consequence of the War which rages between the
Mamelukes and Turks; and which renders a residence here, a t this
moment both dangerous and disagreeable; for nothing can be more
fluctuating and capricious than the government in this Country,
except the disposition of the slaves over whom it dominates
The attention of Major Miset, the resident, though it cannot exceed
my gratitude, far exceeds any means I have of expressing it. Finding him a frank, open hearted, generous soldier - I unreservedly
unveild to him the object of my voyage. He took eve step, which
the nature of his situation would justify, to facilitate t at object and, to render our passage on the Nile and stay at Cairo safe and
agreeable, he directed his Secretary Captain Vincents to accompany
us, and to lodge us in the English house. I also fell in at Rosetto with Doctor hlendrici, of whom frequent
and honorable mention is made in my communucations to government from Tunis as the Bey's cheif physician - The Doctor was
sent out of that regency about a pear before me; and for reasons
if not analogous, equally cogent: myself for Wanting dispositions
congeneal to the in interest of the Bey. he for posessing dispositions
congenial to the interest of the Beys wife - He is here chief phgsician to the Vice Roy, Kourshek Ahmrt Pacha - and also to the
British commission
Having chartered a marche, specie of latin schooner peculiar to
the river, of about forty tons burthen, on the fourth instant we embarked for this ploce; our strength consistin of Lt OBannon of the
Marine Corps Midshipmen Geo Mann and 5 3li E. Danielson - Mr
Faryuhar. Selirn a janisary Alli a drogaman with six servants; all
well armed - Captain Vincents and Doctor Mendrici in another
Boat mounting two Swivels, besides Muskets, Pistols and Sabres, and
about an equal number of people: Precautions necessary to resist the
predatory attacks of the wild Arabs, who infest the rivers banlis and
during this general suspense of justice prey upon the defenseless; as
well as the outrage of the Abbauian turkish soldiery, who restrained
by no discipline ravage and murder indiscriminately every where The English and American flags were displayed on their respective
vessels. -

'K

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

187

At 3 in the afternoon of the same da , without having obtained any
certain intelligence concerning the o ject in pursuit, we departed
from Rosetto; sailed tranquilly along the beautiful banks of the Nile;
and, on the evening of the seventh, arrived a t Bulac, in front of
Cairo, without accident. though we were at one time under some
apprehensions from a troop of wild Arabs which we saw fall furiously
upon a herd of Camels, buffaloes and cattle near the Village Sabour
and drive several of them off unannoyed. The shrieks of the Villagers
demonstrated their consternation and anxiety, while they offered no
resistance Co these mounted marauders of the desert: and these on
t,he other hand, appeared to aim no mischief towards the persons of
their inactive brethren of the plain - We had just returned on board
from visiting the Village - The Arab Camp were within half a
league; but the fire we raised from our fowling pieces upon the vast
numbers of pigeons m d other small fowl in its environs must have
deterred them from attempting to examine our baggage. They howeyer assailed and robbed several boats just after we had passed This same village was but the day before lundered by five hundred Albanians, who had desereted from t e Vice my's Army &
taken their r o u t to Damiette - Fortunate for us perhaps that they
had not stayed a day longer; for it is doubtful whether our appearance
would have been formidable to their avarice; or our resistance to
t,heir force - I make this digression to show the deplorable situation
of the inhabitants of Eygpt - Their prayer for the return of the
English is universal-and humanity prays m t h them.
On the morning of the eighth horses and attendants were sent from
the palace to convey us to Cairo; and at nine oclock we entered the
city, followed by a vast concourse of people of all ages and sexes
whom curiosity or want had collected about us; but a t that respectful
distance peculiar to the people of the East towards strangers of &istinction We passed as American Officers of the Army and Navy
u-hom curiosity had brought fromMalta, to Eygpt during the suspence
of Winter operations. This and the following day were chidy consumed in receiving md
returning visits: Among others a visit from the palace by the Viceroy's
interpreter, welcoming our arrival, and signifying that it would be
agreeable to his highness to wait on us a t the hall of audience in the
citidnl a t the third hour of the ninght of the next day This unusual
hour wrts fixed on b reason of the fast of Ramadam, during which
no refreshments can e given by day.
Mean time I employed all prudent means to put in motion the real
objects of my visit here - I found the Secretary of State and two
ex-Governors of Hamet Bashaw on the spot; destitute of every thhg
but resentment; for every hope had abandoned them - h o r n them
I learned that their Sovereign after a senes of vicisitude and disasters,
had been reduced to the alternative of joining the mamelukes; and that
he was actually with them in command of a few Tripolitans and the
Arab auxiliaries beseiged with Elfi; and the other mamelukes Beys in
the Village of Miniet in upper Egypt. Though glad to hear that the
Bashaw was still active and that the arabs were still attached to his
jnterest, the embarrassments which have hitherto accumulated to
impede the execution of our plan with him were now heightened by
the impossibility of personal access to him; the difficulty of communp
cation; and the uncertainty of obtaining the vice my's firman for h ~ s
departure, in case of succeedillg to detach him from the rebel army,

g

g

g

188

NAVAL OPERA TIONS FROM 1804 TO 1805

as the mamelukes are here stiled - These obstacles overcome, every
thing else seemed feasible - I resolved therefore to throw myself
on the honor and hospitality of the Turkish Sovereign of the Country
At eight in the evening of the ninth, six arabian horses richly
caparisoned, and a numerous escort of attendant waited in the court
yard of the British house to conduct us to the palace. Captain
%'incents
and Doctor M endrici accompanied in their nationd uniforms - The procession was preceeded by an illumination of flambeax and tourchesthe streets for the distance of a mile and a half
were margined with Spectators, curious to see the men who had come
from the new uiorld. Guards, grooms, and servants were stationed to
receive us a t the Gate of the Citadel - The Courbose[?]was parded
with troops regularly drawn up. The flights of stairs which lead to
the grand saloon were flanked with young men superbly armed, and
in rich turkish uniform - The hall was large and splendid and the
court which attended the Vice roy surpassed in magnificence every
thing I have ever seen of the kind - His Highness with a degnified
air of affability, rose from a sofa of embroidered purple and damask
cushions; and, taking my hand seated me next himself and the gentleCoffee- pipea & Sherbet
men in company on the ri ht and leftwere served in oriental sti e - The customary salutstions passed
and repeated questions on indefferent subjects asked and answeredNews of the day concerning the European WarEnquiries relative
to our nation situation and extent of our territory: Date of our independence? Nations with whom we were a t peace or war? Productions and commerce of the country &c. &c. At lenght by a signal
from his hand the court retired leaving the lice roy & his interprter
alone with us. He now observed that it seemed to him our visit to
this country a t so critical a moment must have something more for
its object than mere gratification of curiosity - This opened the
occasion, which I had deterrmned to seek, of making to him a candid
explanation of my business - I stated in french, which he seemed
well to understand but which was formally translated into Turkish,
a detail of our intercourse and relation with Tripoli - Negociations
of Peace with Jussuf Bashaw. Violation of his faith - Commencement of the Wsr and such events in its progress as honor did not dictate to conceal: then drew a Battering though just contrast between
habits of the Barbary princes and those of other provinces of the
Ottoman Empire - He listened with attention and evident gratification - Varying a little the subject, I touched upon the affinity
of principle between the Islam and American religion; both taught
the existence and supremacy of one God: (Let not triune christans
startle at the emphasis placed on this numeral adjective it is not
meant to employ that unity may not be composed of congregated
members to suit any faith!) both enjoined the universal exercise of
humanity: and both forbade unnecessary bloodshedHe acknowledged these to be maxims of his religion - I declared that we sought
in his province, a legitimate sovereign of Tripoli, who had been
treacherously driven from his Government and country, in whose
good faith we might place reliance, and whom we intended to restore
to his throne; and, so doing stamp conviction on the world that we
did not unsheath the sword for conquest nor for spoil, but to vindlcate our rights; and, that we were ready to seize any honorable mean
to prevent the further effusions of blood; and more especially as we
found that, in prosecuting tho war against the faithless Jussuf, the

f

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

189

severity of our resentment fell rather upon the innocent deluded victims of his avarice and hypocricy than upon the aggressor himself
He approved our resolutions said he knew Hamet Bashaw - Had
furnished him supplies for temporary purposes of subsistenoe - but
knew not where he was a t this moment. He assured us, however
that if within his influence, he would by all means aid the accomplishment of a measure so manifestly humane; observing that his predecssor had promised auxiliaries to Hamet Bashaw for this very
purpose as soon as the tranquility of this Country, would admit
After a moments reflection he added, that in case the Bashaw
should have joined the rnamelukes, which was possible i t might change
the dispositions he would otherwise make concerning him, I replied
thnt an object of disstres could not be an object of resentment to an
exalted mind; and that i t was more like God to pardon than to punish
a repenting enemy. By an inclination of his head he signified assent
and promised to send couriers in search of Hamet Rashaw; which he
has done so have IAnd, through the intervention of my friend
Doctor hlendrici who has great influence a t court, and of the Vice
roy's chief interpreter, whom we have gained, there is no doubt of
obtaining his permission for the embarkation of the Bashaw & his
suit. The only embarrassment now is, how he will be able to ~ 4 t h draw himself from the cause of the mamelukes without exciting
suspicion of treason, which might prove fatal to him. If he can do
this, we may think the most d i E c d t part of our plan accomplished;
for I have the fullest assurance and as full confidence that th[r]ough
his influence, we may bring any number of men on the back of Tripoli
which may be deemed requisite to its entire success- and this done,
with our naval force in front all supplies wiU be effectually cut off
from the enemy.I shall remain here yet twelve days for the return of a special courier
dispatched this morning to the Bashaw then return to Rosetto - and
Alexandria except circumstances should engage me to proceed through
the desert from this to Bengazi; in which case the gentlemen in comany will make no delay in descending the Nile, and repairing on
goard tho Argw with further communications
Beleiving a sentinel at this out post to be a precaution necessary to
the successful issue of our measures, and that an agent here may hare
some good effect on our commercial interests; and influenced no less
by a just sense of obligations, T have requested Doctor A!fandrici to
accept this trust. A Copy of m letter of appointment is here with
inclosed - I hope this step r d m e s t the approbation of the President. A list of the articles which enter into the commerce of this
country with the prices current will be forwarded on a future occasion;
either to y o u . Department or to some cornmercjal house which may
take a direct interest in it Decern lVh
Last evening, at an audience with the Vice roy after reproaching
Hamet Bashaw for taking part with the Mamelukes he was prevailed
on to grant him a letter of anmesty and permission to him to pass the
turkish army and leave Egypt unmolested It now remains to detach
h h from the rebel Beys [Attention is invited to letter to Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Navy, from William Eaton in Egypt, dated 25 January 1805. In this letter are included data
from 26 November to 8 December 1804.1
IH. E. Huntington LBAG. EA 206.1

190

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 180.4 TO 1806

To Sir Alexander John Ball, British Civil Commissioner and Governor of Malta,
from William Eaton, U. S. Navy Agent for the Barbary Regencies

GRANDCAIRO
Dec: I S . 1804
SIR, If intrusion in this instance demands an apology I hope it mag
be found in the principle of humanity, which prevails to overcome the
reluctance I should otherw-ise feel at being thought intrusive.
The same reasons which induced me to request of Your excellency
letters of introduction to his Britanic Majesty's agents in this Country,
suggested the propriety of showing an English Jack at the Main Top
gallant mast head on entering the old port of Alexandria the 26th ult.
The signal was recognized and Mr Briggs was immediately on board.We found in port a Turkish Vice admiral, with a ship of the line
and six frigates - a part of which squadron is stationary there to preserve the tranquility of the country; with just as much iduence as
the same number of Pilicans would have on the same station
On entering and passing the streets Of Alexandria I could not but
notice the very marked satisfaction which every expression and every
countenance of all denomitiations of people, Yurks and Frenchmen
only excepted manifested under an impression the we were the avant
coureur of an English Army They had conceived this idea from observing the english Jack at our main, taking our flag, perhaps, for that
of a saint; and because as is natural enough they were ready to beleive
what they ardently wished I t would been cruel to have undeceived:
consequently without assuming, we passed in character of Englishmen
among the Middle & lower orders of people; and as allies among those
of better information Wherever we entered or wherever halted we
were surrounded by the wretched inhabitants; and stunned With their
benedictions and prayers for blessing on us"'STill the english
come? Are they coming? God Grand the English may come! We
have no commerce - we have no money - We have no bread!
When will the english arrive?
My answer was uniformly Patience: on arriving at Rossetto 1''
instant, the attentions we received from Major Miset, who had retired
hither to evade inridents to be apprehended from the distracted
state of the capital were such as the 1et.ters we brought him were
were Calculated to secure civility and goodness, however are the natural
effusions of his heart The same tone which marked the dispositions
of the Alexandrians was heard at Rosetto; but not so loud, because
the inhabitants are less miserable without any traits of happiness.
On the 4'h we left that Village for Cairo, - And to give security
as we11 as accommodations to our voyage and to our stays here the
Resident directed his Secretary, Captq Vincents to accompany us
and to give us lodgings at his house. We ascended the Nile leisurely and calling at several villages, it was plainly perceiveable that the
national partiality which so openly & strongly expressed the feelings
of the Egyptians of the Sea Coast was general through the country;
and the prayers for the return of the English as earniest as universal
On the morning of the 6" we went on shore at the Village Sabour
The villagers expressed an enthusiasm of gladness at seeing red and
blue uniforms and round hats (The french I believe wore triangular)
Two days previously five hundred Albanian deserters from the Yicemy's m y had pillaged and left this villa e in which they had lived
at free quarters about four weeks. - !'he famishing inhabitants
were now distressed with Apprehensions from an other quarter - A

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS
company of wild arabs were camped in sight. They dreaded their
ravages; and apprized us of danger from them. we were eighteen in
the party, well armed; and a pretty brisk fire which we raised among
the numerous flocks of pigeons and other small fowl in the invirons,
must have deterred them from any mischief which they might otherwise have meditated against us. Scarcely however were we an board
and under way when we saw these mounted marauders of the desert
fell furiously upon the herds of camels, buffaloes and cattle of the
village, and drive many of them off without annoyance They afterwards attacked and robbed several unarmed boats which were a few
hours astern of us - Imensibility itself would have been moved a t the
deplorable situation of the peasants of that village - While listening
to their complaining they kissed our hands; and, with prostrations
to the ground and eyes inflamed with anguish implored Eqlish
succor. - Shrieks of dispair a t the assault of the wild Arabs testfied
the additional cause they had to weep and implore - I confess I
felt an all most insurmountable impulse to bring our little party to
their releif and should perhaps have done a rash act had not been for
the cool observations of Captqincents that There were common occurences and that any reley we could eject would be indeed but temporary!
On the morning of the 7 s we landed on the east bank of the river
near a village. At our approach the villagers fled signals of friendship brought some of them to us; when told we were Englishmen
they flocked around us with demonstrations of joy; offered us their
services; and raised loud ejaculations for our establishment in the
country. - Here we could not procure a pint of Milk for our Coffee
The inhabitants had been plundered and chased from their habitations by the Albanians and desert arabs; - and it was but the preceeding da they had returned to their naked cottages.
Grand
iro differs from the places already passed only as the
presence of the tyrant stamps silence on the lips of misery with the
seal of terror. Pale Wretchedness and dumb melancholly stalk here!
But where a whisper is uttered it is in concert with those less restrain'd
voices Why this misery, and spirit of revolution? from a despotic or
rather a total want of Government! Egypt has no master: thou h
the most frightful despotism. The Turkish soldiery, restrained y
no discipline sieze with the hand of rapine, every thing for which
passion creates a desire The mamalukes, who dispute with these the right of domination,
subsist them selves by means not much less oppressive, if more supportable, and the wild arabs, availing themselves of the occasion
plunder the defenceless wherever they find plunder - To finish this
this scene of quadruple outrage the talons of the Vice roy fix on
every thing which can be changed into currency in order to find the
means of supporting an ungoverned disorganized banditti of foreign
Troops, who receive the bruits of his oppression; desert, and betray
him - of all this rapine robbery and extortion the wretched cultivaters of the soil are the perpetual victims A spirit of revolution
1s the natural conse uence Egypt must have a new master - and
the, first comer will e welcome. One of the belligrent parties will
standard - The peasantry will embrace
be apt to join the fore
Protection - The wil arabs retire from the stern front of order;
for their object is not trophies but prey and the refactory party will

&

g

1

I

NAVAL OPEtZATIONS FROM 1804 TO 1805

192

gradually annihilate itself -.
A very small foreign force therefore
may take the possesion and the government of Egypt; but when
once established here, it would require exertions to effect another
change The reason the inhabitants of this Country give for preferring the
English to the French-whether true or false is as natural as it is
Simple, and as influential s s natural" The English "say they" pay
for every thing: the French pay nothing and take every thing They dont like this kind of deliverers If any thing expressed in this sheet should, in any degree have
iduence to procure the establishment of a rational government in
this delightsome country of m~serabletenants, the object of this
hasty sketch is accomplished - It is submitted to discretion presumlng it will be considered that my mane can be of no use but to
testify the sencerity with which I have to honor to be
December 16.
The forces of the Mamalukes Beys at Miniet, upper Egypt; said
to be about 3000
exclusive of arabs, - The Turkish army in
the same vicinity; said to consist of 8000 Albanian and Levant
Turks. - There has lately been a battle between them Each
party claim the Victory; because the MamaIukes gaFe no ground,
and the Turks were not defeated though by the best information
i t appears they run away The friends of the mamelukes have
brought them the Albanians, in retrograde as far as Benisuef.
The Government as the Turks stile themselves. have set them down
around the walls of Miniet Wherever they are, I prophecy their
distruction; for the principle is innate and inextricable - a total
Want of Discipline and t,otal insubordination neither impelled by
patriotism nor influenced by honor
But they have men encounter.
Occupied by the mamelukes the Government seems wholly to have
neglected the defence of the coast; except such as can be
by the
naval detachment Alexandria. Even at. that place the ortifieations
are falling to ruins, and are almost entirely without troopsAs to the Banks of the Kile - if itis [its] defence depends on the
ganisons there stationed, three regular bnttallions would be sufficient
to meet all resistance which they could oppose to a march to Cairo
If I had not been heretofore acquainted with the carless and indolent
habits of the Turkish military I certainly should suspect that treachery had exposed this coast to an invader It is possible however the
Vice Roy is ignorant of the, true situation. I t is certain that his commanding general bears on hs Muster & pay rolls eighty thousand men;
when he has not nine thousand in the field the Vice roy has not authority to cause a muster and review- as an unsuccessful experiment
has demonstrated.-

-

-

Pn

-

[H. E. Huntington L&AG, EA 126.1
Extracts from journal of Midshiphan Charles Morris, Jr., U. 6. Navy, on board
0 . 5 . Irrigate Prwidenl, l a s t e r Commandant George Cox, U. 6. Navy, commanding,
Thursday, IS December 1804

[Syracuse] 1. hoisted out the Barge and black Cutter.
2. Came to in 7 fathom Water.
7 Moored with 90 fathoms each way. the light house bearing

SE

th E.

A. M. Calm.

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

193

10 Sent down Top Gallant Yards.
The Essex.ConsteUation. Congress and Nautilis in the Harbour.
The Surgeon Reports 9 Men unfit for duty[Mrs. C. E. Fox original.

NDA photostat.]

[14 December 18041
To John Gavino, IT.6. Consul, Gibraltar, from William Jarvia, U. S. Consul, Lisbon,
Portugal

Cop of Consul Jarvis's letter dated 14th Dr [December] 1804 to
John avino-('Yesterday the Moorish frigate that put into St Uloes,
droped down, and will proceed to Sea the first fair wind; I presume
direct for Sallee, as she underwent but a very slight repair. The large
frigate with the Admiral, has not only stripped, but taken out dl her
Masts, and Bowsprit, and has lain rt week in this state, Till she gets
new ones in, she cannot be coppered, as she must be hore out for the
purpose They are putting Wooden Bulwarks on the Dutch Brig" -

6

[LC. EPP, LB, Xov. 1804-Mar. 1805.1
Extract from journal of Helrekiah Loomis, Steward, U. S. Navy, in U. S. Brig
Vhen. Master Commandant John Smith, U. 6. Navy, commanding, Friday, 14
December 1804

This day commences with pleasant weather with a st* breeze. At
10 o'clock A. M. we discovered the land from our mast and a t 12
o'clock were near in with it. We found ourselves near 40 miles to the

eastward of the t o m of Tripoli. We then stood off and on beating
to the westward, sometimes almost within gun shot of the land. Saw
no sail this day although we expected to have seen the Frigate President together with another frigate and brig. to relieve us as our
cruise was out.
[L. F. Rliddlebrook. ND-4 copy.]
To Robert B. Livingston, U. 6. IlbiniSter to Paris, f i ~ c e from
,
Captain Edward
Preble, U. S. Navy

NAPLES15t@December 1804
SIR,I am honored with your letter by M' Swan he isin consequence
thereof appointed 2nd Lieu5 of Marines on board the fisex Frigate.
I enclose you a detall of our operations against Tripoli, with s u n d q
other papers for the Navy Department, whch after you have perused
(and copied if you choose) be pleased to seal & forward to the United
States. I t is my opinion that we should long since have been a t
Peace with Tripoli if the French Consd there, had not interfered. It
is for the Interest of his Nation to keep us a t War with that Re ency,
and involve us in one with Tunis,in order that we may out off
supplies from thence to Malta by a Blockade. I have however no doubt,
but that Comm"arron
with the force he now has, will be able to
bring the Bashaw to any terms he may think proper.
I sail tomorrow in the frigate John Adams for the United States.
[LC. EPP, LB,Nov. 1804-kfw. 1805.1

194

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM I804 2'0 1805

To General Forteguerra, The Two Sicilies, from Captain Edward Preble, 0.6. Navy

NAPLES
D
l CthDecT 1804
May it please TOUR
EXCELLENCY
The six Gun Boats, and two Bomb Vessels, which his Majesty,
the Ring of the Sicilies, generously loaned the United States of America
the last Summer, were of very essential service t,o thesquadron under
my command in several a t t a c h which we made on the City and
Shipping of our common Enemy - the Tripolines
I with great pleasure acknowledge the gallant conduct of the Neapolitan Gunners, and other of his Majesty's subjects attach'd to them,
and am certain that the earliest opportunity will be inproved by my
government to tender suitable acknowledgements to his Majesty.
In consequence of the situation of the City and harbour of Tripoli,
it is necessary, in order to carry on our operations against that Regency
with the greater effect, that we should have Bomb Vessels and Gun
Boats; and as they cannot with sttfety be navigated across the Atlantic,
Commodore Barron, my successor in command of the American Squadron employ'd against Tripoli, has therefore requested me, in the name
of the Unit>edStates, to solicit his hlajesty, the King of the Sicilies,
for the further assistance of that description of Vessels - Should
his Majesty be pleased to grant our request, Commodore Barron
will want twelve Gun Boats and six Bomb Vessels, to be ready for
service by the first of may next. The Bomb Vessels to be furnish'd
with Mortars and Shells, and the Gun Boats with their proper Cannon,
small arms, and shot suitable for the Calibre of the Cannon, as we
have none of that Calibre
Spars,
Commodore Barron will furnish all the Boats with
Rigging, and Sails, t o be fitted out as cutters, and wiI1, if agreeable to
his Majesty, take into our service, fifteen Neapolitans for each Boat,
who shall receive double pay
The United States will compensate for the expenditure of Ammunition, and for the use of the Boats in any way that his Majesty may
think proper
The Neapolitans employ'd in the G u n Boats and Bombs the last
Summer h a ~ been
e
paid and satisfied a t Messina, and I request to
be made acquainted how, or in what manner, we are to compensate
for the expenditure of Ammmunition on board the Boats, duringour
lest operations against Tripoli
Your Excellency will greatly oblige me by endeavouring to procure
me an answer as early as possible that I may be able to leave this
Bay, as (for the want of Anchors) the situation of our Frigate would
be rather unsafe in case of a heavy gale of Wind
I have the honor to be with the highest respect Your Excellency's
most obedient And most humble Servant
PREBLE
(signed) EDWARD
a Sua Exc'll'nza I1 CaPe Generale De ltbrtinguerre
Segretario della R1'SeigGa-di Stato & Guerra
e del Dipartirnento della Marina R'le
[Italisn Naval AtCtachB, Washington, D. C., and Comdr. Charles Moran,

U. 8.N. R.]

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

195

115 December 1804
To General Fortegnerra, The Two Sicilies, from Captain Edward Preble, U. 15. Navy

May it please YOUREXCELLENCY
The United States Frigate now in this Bay is in distress for want of
kn Anchor, and cannot proceed to Sea on that account;.
You will oblige me by lending us a suitable one which shall be
replaced either from Syracuse or Cadiz as soon as possible.
(Signed) EDWARD
PREBLE
NAPLES
15Q Decr 1804
[LC. EPP, LB, Nov. 1804-Mar. 1805.1
Co., U. 6. Bavy Agents, Leghorn, from Captain Edward
Preble, U. 6. Bavy
NAPLES
15th Decem: 1804
GENTLEMEN
I sail from this Bay for America in a few days in the
John Adams Capt: Chauncey the situation of your City with respect
to the health of its Inhabitants alone, deprives me of personally paying
my respects to you, of which, I have long been desirous. I have enclosed to At! Appleton our Consul a copy of my official letter to the
Secretary of the Navy, detailing an account of our operations against
Tripoli, together with copies of sundry other papers and letters from
the Na: Depf which I have desired him to give you the perusal of.
1 beg you to accept my best wishes for your prosperity and happiness; and am with much esteem and respect

TO

Degen, Purviance &

1804-Mar. 1805.1
(LC. EPP, LB, SOY.

Leghorn, from Captoin Edward Preble, U. 6. Envy
NAPLES
16'QDeer 1804
DEARSIR,I am honored with your letters 27'QAugust and 1 7 t h September; the first of which, I have long since replied to, and should
have answered tlie latter, had I not intended to visit Leghorn; I shall
however be deprived of that pleasure, in consequence of the prevailing
epedemical disorder at that place. I am now on m return to the
U. S. in the Ship John Adams Captain Chauncey.
e sail from this
Bay in a few days direct for Washington. I should have been glad
to have received yourself and family as passengers if we could have
visited Leghorn; but in the present situation of affairs, that is not
prudent. You would however, have been but indifferently accomodated, as we hare on board all the invalid
of the Squadron, as
ell a s all the Seamen of that description
I have enclosed a copy of my official letter to the Secretary of the
Xavy, detailing our operations against Tripoli, with copies of sundry
other papers to Mr Appleton our Consul a t Leghorn, which I have
directed him to give you the perusal of, and if you wish to copy them
you are a t libert to do it. I t is unfortunate that Come Barron arrived
so late: he w i f however the next summer undoubtedly bring the
Barbarians to terms, such as he may please to dictate.
[LC. EPP, LB, Nov. 180GMar. 1805.1
To James Leander Cathcart,

d

196

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1804 TO 1806

To Wiiam Eaton, U. S. Navy Agent for the Barbary Regencies, from Master
Commandant Isaac Ha,U. S. Havy

ROSETTA
16th Decernr 1804

COPY

SIR, I have been honored with your letter of 10th Inst and am

ha py to learn everything continues still favourable to our e-npidition.
shall take care to m8ke arrangements for paying the thousand
dollars which you inform me you shall draw for on Mr. Briggs -*
For the pmticulars of our passage here, and what has since transpired,
1 beg leave to refer you to Mr. John Henry Sieaac(?), a Gentleman
who I am happy in making you acquainted with, and am sure any
services you can render him will give you equal pleasure, he comes to
Cairo on business and if possible will return with you.
I shall leave this for Alexandria the first fair wind, & hope soon to
be joined by you and all the part . I pra you to make my best
respects to them all - tell Mr. 0 annon a his shipmates are well
and very anxious to hear his Discription of the Nile &c.
I am with respect, Dear Sir your Obedt Servt.
(Signed) ISAACHULL
WILLIAMEATON
Esq:
* (Nothing deleted)

f

B

f

[Am.Antiquarian Society.]
To Robert Xontgomery, U. 6. Consul, Alicante, Spain, from Tobias lear, U. S.
Conaul General, Algiers, in (Xalta)

ALGIERS
December 1 6tQ1804
Copy CireuTar
SIR!YOUhave undoubtedly before this heard that three American
Vessels bad been detained by a Frigate of this place, in consequence
of the annuities for two Years past not having been sent from the
United States in naval & military Stores, as stipulated by treaty;
notwithstanding the amount thereof had been repeatedly offered in
Cash.
These Vessels are the Eagle of New York. Nathaniel Shaler Master,
from Bristol to Palerrno, Cargo Glass Bottles, Brig T7iolet of Boston,
James Merrett Master, from Oporto to Leghorn, Cargo Sugar hides
Indigo &c. - and Schooner Mary Ann of Sew York Icabod [?] Sheffield Master from the Streights of Belle Isle to Leghorn Cargo Fish.
The two former have been in this port upwards of 40 days. The
Schooner has not arrived & is supposed to have made some other
port. The people on board these Vessels have been treated very well
& no pillage of any Kind has been committed.
I have now the honor to inform you that I have adjusted this business with the Dey, who has received the ammount of two years
annuities due in Cash &- the Vessels are liberated & that our Commerce
will receive no further molestation from the Cruizers of this Regency.
I pray you will have the oodness to give this as much publicity as
possible, for the benefit of afl concerned therein.
[XA. SDA.

CL. Lisbon, Vol. 2, Jan. 1803-Dec. 1805.1

To the Secretary of the Navy presumably from William Eaton, U. 6. Navy Agent
for the Barbary Regenoies

Decem 1YtQ [18O/t]
Last evening, at an audience with the Vice roy after reproachin*
Harnet Bashaw for taking part with the Mamelukes he was preveile8

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

197

on to grant him a letter of amnesty and permission to him to pass
the Turkish Army and leave Egypt unmolested I t now remains to
detach him from the rebel Beys -

m. E. Huntington L&AG, E A 206.1

[17 December 18041
To Hamet Caramanli, rightful Bashaw of Tripoli, from William Eaton, U.8. Navy
Agent for the Barbary Regencies

To His Excellency SYDIHAMET
CAROMLY,
BEY.
Bashaw of Tripoli
EXCELLENCE,
God ordained that you should see trouble. We
believe he hath ordained also that your troubles shall now have an
end -

Your Excellency will rejoice when I tell you that His Highness,
Ahamet Hourshet[?] Bashaw, with a greatness of mind worthy of a
Prince, and a goodness of heart resembling Heaven, forgetting actual
situations, and rembering only what you were, orders that your
Excellency may pass, unmolested, through any part of his country,
and embark with me at any port you please If the generals with whom you are, moved by equal goodness, will
consent that your Excellency may profit of this occasion once more
to see your subjects and embrace your family, certainly you will loose
no time in repairing, with your suit, to Rosetta, and meeting me a t
the English Consul's, where the Minister, Major Misset now resides I pray the Almighty may grant Your Excellency his protection and
favorGRAND
CAIRO Dec 1'7. 1804. Sent off the 20th.
[H. E. Huntington L&AG, EA258.1
To Master Commandant Isaac Hull, U. S. Navy, commanding U. S. Brig Argus, from
William Eaton, U. S. Navy Agent for the Barbary Regencies

GRAND
CAIROl Y t QDeer 1804
SIR,I have obtained the permission [of the Vice Roy] that Hamet
Bashaw and suite may pass unmolested through any part of Egypt
and embark a t any Port he pleases in prosecution of the object of our
expedition, expect therefore an addition to your crew of about three
Hundred, rather passengers, all Bashaws & Bashees I have taken up $1000 dollars of Mc Macharl to be reimbursed to
MessrWBriggs Brothers in Twenty days, I hope you will save my
honour, if I am not with you in season to give you further explanIt will be yet ten days before I meet you a t Rosetta. ations.[Pr'DA. Isaac Hull LB, 1803-1806.1
To Le Shah Bender, representing Constantinople, Turkey, from Captain Edward
Preble, U. S. Navy

NAPLES18th December 1804
SIR, I have the honor to enclose you copies of two letters addressed
to the Captain Pacha, through the French Ambassador at Constantinople; they relate to the capture and detention of a Vessel which
changed her colours from Ottoman to Tripoline; and assisted at the
capture of the United States of America's frigate Philadelphia off the

198

NAT%L OPEBATIONS FROM 1804 TO 180.5

Harbour of Tripoli in October 1803. I likewise enclose copies of two
letters addressed to the French Ambassador on the same occasion
I beg leave to request that you will forward these letters to the
proper department at Constantinople, or to make such use of them
as you may deem most proper.
(Signed) ED: PREBLE
LE SHAHBENDER
de la Sublime Porte, Ange de Cazzaiti
[LC. EPP, LB, Nov. 1804-Mar. 1805.1
To John Gavino, U. S. Consul, Gibraltar, from Captain John Rodgers, U. 8. Navy

U. S. SHIPConstitution

GIBRALTAR
Dee: 18,1804
DEARSIR I have the pleasure to acquaint you that I left Syracuse
on the 28*QUltm & Malta on the 2* Ins!, a t the former I left Cornmo.
B m n & at the latter Coil? Lear, both of whom desired to be remembered to you. - I am now on my way to Lisbon & shall call at
Tangiers to learn how our old Friend the Empe~orsPulse beats, and
expect to have the pleasure of seeing you in the course of a Month at
farthest. I should have given you a call as I pass'd, but for fear of
subjecting myself to a Quarantine at Lisbon. - I have no news
worth communicating further than what you have no doubt, recieved
before this by Cap$ Preble, m-ho goes to the U. States in the John
Adums, which sailed from Syracuse on the 16t@Ultm, taking Messina
& Naples in her way.
Cornmo. Barron rec'd a letter from Poor Bainbridge, of a late date,
a few Days previous to my leaving Syracuse, but it contained nothing
Particular I should be glad to hear from you a t Lisbon and if you
have any private letters for me, be pleased to forward them to that
place. OFF

[LC. JRP, Letters & Orders, Book A, 1804-1805.)
Extract from journal of U. 8. Frigate Constitufion,Captain John Bodgers, U. 8. Navy,
commanding, Tuesday, I8 December 1804

at j4 past 3 [PM] sent our Boat on board the brig Mary of Philadelphia From Merceilles bound to St Thomases out 20 days - at 3
past. 4 sent the Boat on board the brig Hetty of N. York From Merceilles bound to St Thomases Out 15 days. - She inform,d us she
Was boarded by the English frigate Arnbwcude off Alicant who had
taken 17 prizes, And was also boarded by the U S Brig Scourge 10 days
since off Alicant,
Latitude Observed 36' 03' N.
[USNA.]
Extract from journal of Midshipman F. Cornelius deKrafft, U, 8. Navy, U. 8.
Brig &urge, Midrhipmsn Balph Izard, Jr., U. 8. Navy, commanding, Tuesda~,
18 December 1804

Calm & Cloudy. at 3 sent the boat on board an American Brig,
the Spanish M y of Philadelphia from Cadiz bound to Malaga. Sunset Malags Point bore N N E )iE 4 leagues, daylight eleven sail

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

199

in Sight. 7 set T. G. Steering sails jk past 7 set F. T. mast steering
sail, saw the Rock of Gibralter ahead Meridian clear & pleast Europa Point bore West 8 miles.
[Lat.] 36" 12' N.
[NDA.]
To James Simpson, U. 6. Consul, Tangier, Morocco, from Captain John Bodgers,
U. 6. Navy

U. S. Ship Constitution
TANGIER
BAYDecem: 19. 1804
SIR I have the pleasure to acquaint you that I left Syracuse on the
2gtb Ultm;a t which place I left Commo. Barron $ the Frigates Congress & Essex and Schooner Nautilus:the rest of the Squadron were on
the coast of Tripoli - I have no news worth communicating - I
am on my way to Lisbon & have call'd here merely to enquire how the
affairs of our Country stand in this quarter. - I shall be this wa
again in the course of three weeks, or a month at farthest, which w&
afford me an opportunity of communicating with you more to my
satisfaction, which I am prevented of at present by a fear of being
quarantined at Lisbon. The bearer Mr Johnston I have directed to recieve any communications you may have to make. The Enclosed you will be pleased to hand Capt Stewart of the
Siren, provided you can dispense with the services of that vessel. [LC. JRP, Letters & Orders, Book A, 1804-1805.1
[Eneloflurel

To Master Commandant Charles Stewart, U. 6. Navy, commanding U. S. Brig
Siren, from Captain John Bodgers, U. 6. Navy

U. S. SHIPConstitufion
Duplicate left
with J. SIMPSON
Esqr
off GIBRALTAR
Decem719 1804
SIR I am directed by Commo. Barron to inform you that it is-his
desire you should proceed to Syracuse to Join the Squadron; I n case
Mr Sirnpson (our Consul a t Tangiers) does not think the services of the
Siren essentially wanting in this quarter P. S. I am bound to Lisbon & expect to pass this way on my return
aloft, in the course of three Weeks. J R
[LC. JRP, Letters 8 Orders, Book A, 1604-1805.1
TO George Davis, U. 8. Charg6 dPABaires,Tunis, from Captain William Bainbridge,
U. 8. Navy

Sympathetic ink [TYritten in lime juice.]

TRIPOU19. Decr 1804.
DEARSIR, POW
3 pieces have come to hand, I am sorry You
could not make out the whole of my invisible - the thick paper
answers best for writing on both sides - but the extraction's best
made by the blaze of a candle following the lines - on the thin
paper coals are preferable - try my last with a candle. - I wrote
you so fully the last month that I have scarcely any thing to add.I gave you what I had heard of Eaton's mission, and my opinion
thereon. Respecting a negociation in Tunis for our ransom I am
induced to believe from my knowledge of the Bashaw of Tripoli,

200

hTAT7AL OPERA TIOATSFROM 1804 TO 180.5

that it cannot be effected to advantage for us there - This Bashaw
has pride and courage sufficient to have himself treated as an independant ruler - I am unacquainted with the Gov$ of Tunis, and
before my captivity I supposed this Regency subordinate in a great
degree to that power & Algiers, but a t present I am of a very different
opinion and firm$ believe that it will be to the interest of our Country
to treat direct w ~ t hthis power - and any expected assistance thro'
the Bashaw's exiled brother or either of the other States of Barba ,
will prove fallacious - And if our Country expects to get us li erated for the Sum which Corn. Preble stated in his official communication of Jan? last, I am convinced they will be deceived, altho'
they should extend the war t,o a considerable length - After t'he
efforts of our Squadron next Spring & Summer I am clearly of opinion
that it will be to t,he interest of the U. S. to make peace on the best
terms they can get, for I c a ~ oconceive
t
any advantage to be derived
from a continuance of the war - a great expence will occur, and
the reduction of the Bashaw's demand will not be much if any except that the U. S. u~ouldsend an army t,hen she might prescribe
terms, otherwise she will hare to pay for the freedom of her Citizens The attack which I presume is contemplated on the town nest
summer no doubt will do some in'ury to it, and it is natural to conclude that i t will make the Bas aw more desirous for peace; but
I do not suspect that it will be so formidable as to release us from
here for a small sum - Believe me that Tripoli can never be starved
by the most rigid blockade, except that the Heavens should deny
rain in the seasons - this year they have been most bountiful the blockade affects the town considerably, and I hope it will be
continued thro' the winter - every distress will assist towards a
desire for peace, but we must not calculate too largely on the distresses of the inhabitants in bring[ing] the Bashaw to terms - He
is absolute and feel but little regard for the interest of his Subjects but do not suppose that such Sovereignity is likely to make his
subjects revolt no, it is not oppressed ignorant that we expect to
see rise in demand of just rights. - If I have differed from
my friend, in opinion respecting the adjustment of our Tripoli's
affairs in Tunis, it is owing to my knowledge of this Gov+,and ignorance of that of Tunis - but I join heartely with you on t,he plan
of your coming & residing here - it most unquestionabIy would
be attended with great advantages You could communicate to
Gov! freely & justly on t'he situation of their affairs with this Regency?
and your opinion would be received as unbiaced by a chained situation - and this Govt, if once they give their sanction to your residing
here, would no doubt consider you free and hare communication
with you on national matters which they will never have with me
whilst a prisoner - How far it would be practicable to get the
permission of the Government thereon I can't say. - I trust you
wiU do me the justice th&t my . . . . . . . & opinion are not in
the least influenced by my unhappy situation - No, I declare
where my Country is effected I shall be among the number of the
last to wish it to accede to deshonorable terms - but I trust that
I shall not be accused of feeling a want of proper respect for its dignity when I say that I do not conceive its honor can be effected
paying a ransom for the liberty of its Citizens in bondage plunged
thereinto by Serving their Country - no person is less disposed

y

h

.

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

201

than myself to beg the friendship of any of the Barbary Regencies,
or to yield to their improper demands - but paying then to keep
a peace or to make one is, I consider, very different from buying the
liberty of our Citizens which can't be obtained by other means
Yours sincerely
(Signed) W.B.

P. S. Lt Porter desires me to inform you that he will write ou
under the name of Dr Ben. Smith, and wishes you to address Lrn
under that appellation - The chief Guard of the prisoners bears
him malice and will not let his letters pass - he also begs you
to take off the covers of all letters which you may receive for him, and
direct them to Smith, and also to change the name of Porter to Smith
in any part of the letters - Give this information to Captain
Smith of the Schooner Vizen, and to Capt. Porter of Baltimore (Sigd) W. B.
[NYHS. Geo. Davis LB, Vol. 1.1
To Tobias Lear, U. S. Consul General, Algiers, (in Idalta), from Captain William
Bainbridge, U. S. Navy

TRIPOLI
BARBARY
19*?December 1804
( T ~ FebY
c ~ ddt$ 1805)
MY DEAR SIR, Your much esteemed favor of the 2 8 s Augt last,
came to hand on the 15Q instant. I wrote to you on the 14 Ulto,
since which nothing has transpired.
I am daily expecting to hear from Commodore Barron, and to receive the letters from our friends in America, which he detained until
he heard from me. I t is now nine months since I have received any
letters from my friends in that quarter of the Globe, and not one word
from Government since my unfortunate captivity. However, I feel
sensible of the sympathy of our countrymen, and have the fullest
confidence that every exertion will be made by the Government to
release us as soon as possible on just terms.
I trust that His Excellency, the Bashaw of Tripoli, will concieve it
his interest fo be a t peace with our nation: - your remarks on the
strength of our country are just, and that we are daily rising to a pitch
of importance, is no less true. The entire ignorance of the Barbary
powers to our present national respectability, and to our rapid progression, may make such language appear to them strange and unfounded; but time, that never failing monitor, will reveal the fact,
and withdraw the veil which covers them against their interest. You
must naturally sup ose that I am very desirous for peace, and sincerely
hope that a reconcgation will soon take place between His Excellency,
the Bashaw of Tripoli, and our country ; but I cannot expect it on
terms incompatible to our national character.
Your kind sympathy and generous wishes, my friend, are sincerely
felt by me. I also feel much indebted to mp friends in Algiers for
their remembrance, particularly to Monsr Thainville and Consul
Bille; - these are gentlemen in whose society I have spent some
pleasant hours, and shall ever remember i t with pleasure, - pray
p
t them my sincere regard. I hope that Madame Thainvllle
&9 had a pleasant passage to France, and will have an agreeable stay
at Paris.
Duplicate

202

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1804 TO 1805

Please to present to M'mear the respects and best wishes of myself
and O5cers - we truly estimate her kind rayers, and justly feel,
you ever be happy,
my Dr Colt, your lmremitted attention. is the sincere wish of yr affectionate friend
TITmBAINBRIDGE
[Thefollowing is written in invisible ink.]
TRIPOLI
5 January 1805
DT SIR,This letter is a duplicate of one I wrote you on the 13Q Ulto,
which was well covered with juice; - but it was destroyed by our
chief pard; I have however sent you the contents of the invisible
[ink]Blank. Nothing has occurred to us since my last. I wish you
the compliments of the season

bay

[Stephen Decatur Col. original.]
To Tobias Lear, U. S. Consul General, Algiers, (in Malta), from Captain William
Beinbridge, U. S. Navy

(Duplicate)
TRIPOLIl g t ADecr 1804.
Dr SIR. - I wrote to you so fully last month in the invisi[ble?
that I have scarcely any thing to add, and as my Communications
went by so good a conveyance as Mr R. I greatly rely on their safely
reaching you. - When I received your last letter I was in ho es to
have found it to contain private communication in the invisib e but
I presume you was not then advised of it altho' my letters to you since
the 6tQof April have contain'd it- not knowing what measures Govern!
means to pursue to effect our liberation, I cannot give you my opinion
on the probable event. I have frequently made lengthy communications to Corn. Preble & have also wrote to Corn. Barron my opinion on
the War.

I'

[See letter to George Davis, 19 December 1804 which contains Captain
Bainbrjdge's opinions.]
[NA. SDA. CL, Algiers, Vol. 7, Part 1, Jan. 1804-h'ov. 1805.1

To Master Commandant Ieaec Hull, U. S. Navy, commanding U. S. Brig Argus,
from William Eaton, U.S. Ravy Agent for the Barbpry Begencier

GRAND
CAIRO
19Q Decr 1804
SIR, The Letters herewith enclosed for the Navy departm? and S
i
r
Alexander Ball, will explain every thing I have done or noticed
since I saw you, which either you or the have any right to be concerned about. - The Interest Major h8kset.t has taken in the success of our Expedition, entitle him to every confidence - I have no
objection, on the contrary a wish that you should shew him those cornmunications - He is too conscious of the 'ustice of the grateful
things I have said of him to suspect me of adulation, if it were not so,
acquaintance would satisfy him that I dont deal in that article.
1 have this afternoon discovered two important characters in the
Suite of Hamet Bashaw - I have no doubt that we may take, three
to five hundred men from Egypt, Provision must be made for an
hundred - I have taken up a Thousand Dollars of Mr Machar1 to
be reimbursed to Messm Briggs Brothers, and advised you we shall
have need of four or five Thousand more - If Government should
reprove our arrangements, we will reimburse them from the spoils of

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

203

Bengaize, which I already calculate upon as ours, nothing will hinder
but unforeseen disaster. If occasion offers to form4 tbe letters to Malta & the U. S. before
you sail, beg you will put them under proper Seals & additional
Covers. [NDA. Isaac Hull LB., 1803-1806.1
To Major E. l i s s e t , British Minister to Cairo, Egypt, from William Eeton, U. 6.
Navy Agent for the Barbary Regencies

GRAND
CAIRO1gt@Decr 1804
SIR,I have the honour to acknowledge you Letter of 15t%eg leave
to refer you to Cap; Hull for occurrences, if with you, otherwise to
the communications covered to his address, which please to open,
use a t discretion, and forward a t leisure. Reasons which will suggest themselves under the tenor of one of
these Letters render me very easy to remain here 'till the return of
this special Courier, there may be reasons why this delay may not
interfere with your affairs. - Nothing from upper Egypt on which
any reliance can be placed - We are more perplexed uith contradictory reports, than were there free presses for the parties. {NDA. Isaac Hull LB., 1803-1806.1
Extract from journal of U. 8. Frigate Coru~ihiionCaptain John Bodgers, U. S. Bavy,
commanding, Wedneeday, 19 December 1804

At 6 [PM] European Point bore N E distance 1 mile at past 6
shortened sail and hove too in the Bay of Gibralter the Swift Sure
sent Hir boat on board of us, a t J/r past 6 The boat left us f2ld
away & made Sail a t $4 past 7 spoke the E. ship Tempe at 10
strong gales took 3 reefs in The top sails & hove too in the bay of
Tangier At midnight strong breezes and cloudy
Made and took in sail as occasion Required at 10 fired s, gun &
Boisted an American Jack at the fore a t 11 sent the boat on shore a t
Tangier
Latitude Observed 35' 34' X.
IUSN.4.1
Extract from journal of William Eeton, U. S. Navy Agent for the Barbary Regencies,
Wednesday, 19 December 1804

Visited the island Rhoda, the Silometer, and the .rillage Gizek; all
a pile of ruins. Palace of Murad Bey in complete ruins.
[NR&L.No. 9217, Bml E 14.1
Extract from journal of Midshipman F. Cornelius deKrefft, U..6. Navy, U. S.
Brig Scwrge. Midshipman Ralph Isard, Jr., V. 6. Navy, commandmg, Wednesday,
19 December 1804

Fresh breezes & clear, as we pass'd Gibralter obser+ Several English Ships of War a t anchor in the bag. Yi past 1 a gun was fired at us
from the rock, took in sad & back'd the Main topsall. % past 3 fill'd
m7ay& made sail, strong breezes, At 8 took our Departure from Cape
Spartel it bearing E. S. E. 10 miles distant 11 braced up
[Lat.] 35' 39' N.
INDA.]

204

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1804 TO 1805

To President Thomas Jefferson from Captain Alexander Hurray, U. 6 . Navy

Dec' 20 t @ 1804
SIR I t has been intimated that the failure of Cap! &/Iorrisin accomplishing the objects for which he was sent to the Me$ was in a degree
owing to my unauthorised return to the U. S., it has been even suggested that Government did not view my conduct in this particular
without dissatisfaction, & I have too much reason from v b o u s occurrences to beleive that the suggestion is not without foundation
I feel the utmost anxiety that my whole conduct shoud be fairly
understood, if I have erred, i t has been the error of the head, only,
but if I have erred, no matter from what motive I ought not to desire,
nor do I desire, to escape the just consequences of that error, in the
present instance, I hope it is only necessary for my vindication, that
the precise truth shoud be known - At Malaga an open Letter
dated Octr 23@ 1802 was put into my hands, by Cap; Rodgers a Letter
not open by the seal being broken, but which had never been sealed,
the object of this was to direct that the Frigate Constellation under
my Command, & the Chesapeake shoud be immediately sent to the
U. S., it being as the Letter expressed, the Presidents deslre, that those
Fri ates shoud not Winter in the MedQs C a p a o r r i s was then 1200
hf' es to the Eastward of me, & in the Month of h'ovr, I considered
the circumstance of the Letter being unsealed, intended for no other
purpose, but that the Commanders, shoud, they then chance to see
the Letter before Cap! Morris, ought to obey the order, the more especially as the period for which my Crews were engaged, woud expire
before I coud arrive in the U. S. & without waiting for his Commands,
so Cap: Rodger8 ce? Cap! Campbd thought & so indeed I coud not bud
think again in like circumstances, I considered that I was doing my
Duty in compIying with the order in the sense it was intended, by
returning home without delay, no conditions being thereto annexed,
& Cap! Morris did not then think I acted improperly, for he immediately sent the Chesapeake after me, & subsequent events shews that
he had still as strong a force as was then deemed necessary for the
execution of his plans I pray Sir that you will not deem this intrusion impertinent, nor
even unnecessary if as I fear doubts of the impropriety of my conduct
hath reached your Ear, I have the most ardent desire to deserve the
confidence of the Executive, & to obtain it, which has prompted the
liberty of this address, for to my great mortification, I have conceived
that all confidence, or trust hath been withheld from me since my
return from the Med? I have revolved in my mind all the occurrencas
during my respective stations, and f 5 d nothing unfavorable to my
as an officer, who after long & arduous services during the
feerinps
Revo
utionary War, as well as since the organization of our present
Naval establishment, thought myself entitled to a command, & I am
bold to say that upon a fair investigation of my eneral conduct,
t l ~It am not undeserving of Executive Patronage; a air & Honorable
career thIr]o7life hsth been rn pursuit, & study, & to deserve well of
my Country, my ultimate
to fail in that object, in default of an
explanation, nothing eke I trmt being necessary is a consideration of
no small moment
[NDA. A. Murray's LB, 1799-1805.1

d

wise

-

f

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

205

Extract from journal of U. S. Frigate Constitution. Captain John Rodgers, U. 8. Navy,
commanding, Thursday, 20 December 1804

[PM] at % past 12 The boat returned from Tangier Bore up and
made sail, a t 4 cape Spartel bore S E % S distance 10 leagues Cape
Trafalgar N E % N,
Latitude Observed 36' 26' K.
[USNA.]
Extract from journal of William Eaton, U.S. Navy Agent for the Barbary Regencies,
Thursday, 20 December 1804

Visited ancient Cairo; the retreat and assylum of the Virgin Mary
and her son Jesus.
Passing the corn market, the people there assembled, shouted at
our approach, and as we passed, raised loud acclamations and prayers
for the establishment of a government of round hats in the country, that
the price of bread might fall; supposing us to be Englishmen.
Proceeded to the village Daerteen, and were admitted into the
mosque Atarenabee; and to a view of all the ladies of the village.
Omnia vineit argent.
Returned.
[NR&L. No. 9217, Bm' E 14.1

[21 December 18041
To Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Navy, from General Forteguens, The Two Sicilies

SIR I have laid before the King your Application dated the 15t4
Inst, by which you evince the desire that the Squadron of the United
States may again present itself next Spring before Tripoli, & request
that this Royal Marine Department will furnish in may next, Twelve
Gun Boats and Six Bombs Vessels with their requisite Ammunition
& a part of their Crews, in Conformity to what has taken place this
Year. - His Majesty is infinitely happy in having been able to
contribute in the past Campaign towards furnishing the means of
attack against the Common Enemy, & would earnestly wish to be
enabled to concur a second time in the same object, but the Coasts of
the Two Kingdoms being continually molested by all the Squadrons
of the Barbary Regencies to the immediate Detriment of his Coasting
Trade, He finds himself under the necessity of employing his Gun
Boats, & Bomb Vessels in the needful Defence of his extensive Coast,
& in protecting his numerous Commerce by preventing the continual
Landings which the Barbarians effect daily, whereby they unfortunately make Slaves of many of his Subjects who claim assistance
for the safety of the Coasts, which can not be more effectually protected than by the Boats in question
I have on this occasion in the name of His Majesty to return
infinite thanks to Your Goodness for the attention & favors which
you have granted to his Crews, & in particular to the officer Anthony
Mapi, whom you have distinguished with those marks of generosit
which are analogous to the Sentiments of your Government, & wit
the assurance of my particular esteem, & regard I have the honor
to be

i

.NAPLES
21afDecemb. 1804
[Italian Naval Attach& Washington, D. C., and Comdr. Charlea Moran,

u. 8. N. R.]

206

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1804 TO 1805

Extract from journal of Surgeon Jonathan Cowdery, U. 8. Xavy, 91 December 1804

At evening, the Bey, the eldest son of the Bashaw, was married to
his first cousin, eldest daughter of the Bashaw who was driven out of
Tripoli by the present Bashaw. The bride was said to be very handsome, and but twelve years old.
Our boatswain, carpenter, sail-maker, and first mrtster's mate, who
had the liberty of the town for a few months, were put in close confinement with our other officers, on suspicion of attempting to raise
the crew to take the town.
[LC. Rere Books, American Captives in Tripoli or Dr. Cowdety's Journal,
Boston, 1806.1
Extract from journal of Wiliiam Eaton, U. 15. Bevy Agent for the Barbary Regencies
Friday, 21 December 1804

Engaged in the service a German engineer, late a Colonel in the
Tgrol battaiions, by name Eugine [Jean Eugene], (alias Leitensdorfer.)
Advanced him fifty dollars.
At evening an exhibition a t the English house of the almee, dancing
women: Haggard prostitutes, disgustful, obscene monsters, who
exhibit savage nature in jestures of studied and practised depravity:
something resembling the Spanish balario, from which the latter probably originated.
[NR&L, No. 9217, Bml E 14.1
Extract from log book of IT. 6. S. John Adam. Master Commandant Isaac Chauncey,
U. S. Navy, commanding, Friday, 21 December 1804

Moderate Breezes from E 1\: E. & light rain. We rec'd from the
Navy Agent a t Naples two bower Anchors - The largest is marked
1748 Rottolo which is 3146 pounds. The other is [space] pounds
We also received a new 13 Inch cables supposed to be 80 fatha
A. M. light airs from E S E - We weighed the Anchor which
we received from the dock yard, the 8th Inst: T e returned it dong
with the small one which we received at the same time - We have
now belonging to the John Adams two Bower Anchors, One Sheet,
One Stream and two small kedges. Of cables we have two on the
small bower, one of them new- & two on the Best bower, one of them
new - The Sheet Cable is a new 21 Inch. I t is the same which
was brought off on the 8th.
memoored 22 December]
[LC. EPP, John Adams, 1804-1805.1
To Captain Samuel Barron, U. 6. Navy, from Captain Edward Preble, U. 6. Navy

NAPLES
2 2 d December 1804
Triplicate

DEARSIR,We arrived gere the 8th instant after a very long m d
boisterous passage. Whilst a t Palermo, General Acton assured me,
that we should have no dficulty in procuring the Gun Boats &em
and give me a letter of Introduction to Prince Lutzi, the Prime
Minister; and one to their Majestys, to whom I was introduced; but
it was several days after I arrived, before the Introduction took place.
I was flattered with expectation from the Heads of the different
Departments that I should succeed, and immediately presented a
requisition on this Government, copy of which is enclosed; and have

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

207

waited with the utmost impatience and anxiety for an answer, which
I did not receive until this day; a copy of which, I also enclose you;
and have left one with M: Degen. I regret that it is not more favourable. We shall sail this evening direct for the United States in
consequence of this disappointment without touching a t Leghorn or
any other port, in order that Government may have the earliest
intelligence of it.
I should advise ou in addition to the prize Gun Boats, to procure
Sparonaras at Ma ta, and fit them as Gun Boats, and I believe you
may also procure Mortars and shells a t that place, but I am not certain.
I shall do everything in my power that the most prompt and active
steps may be taken in the United-States to provide you with the
necessary assistance as soon as possible.
I suspect that French influence here, has deprived us of the Gun
Boats.
I hope ere this, your health is restored, and beg you to accept my
ardent wishes for your prosperity, and that of the Squadron under
your command.
We have broke two of our Anchors in this Bay, and have been
obliged to borrow one from this Arsenal of 33 Cwt. which if you can
replace a t S racuse or Messina, I have assured you will do it, if not,
that one wil be sent out to replace it.
P. S. I would advise you to send a copy of my requisition and the
answer theieto, to General Acton a t Palermo, and write to him yourself, as you may yet succeed through his influence.
Beware of the French Consul in Tripoli, for I beliere him to be our
Enemy.

9

i

[Stephen Decatur Col.]
To James Yackenzie & A. Glennie, London, England, from Captain Edward
Preble, U. S. navy

NAPLESDecember 22°C 1804
GENTLEMENIn the months of October and November (say 27th
October, ending st!' Kovc) I drew ten setts of Exchange on you amounting to six thousand pounds sterling, in favor of K* Higgens Esqr
Agent at Malta for t,he United States Scluadron in the Mediterranean;
and as I am to return to the U S. immediately, I beg leave to inform
you, that I shall have no occasion to draw for any further sum on
your House.
I shall stop at Gibraltar, and probably at Cadiz for the purpose of
tliscovering the author of the forgery committed on your House in my
name, and shall advise you from thence, in case I succeed.
[LC. EPP, LB, Nov. 1804-Mar. 1805.1

TO Tobias Lear, U. 6. Consul General, Algiers, (in Malta) from Captain Edward
Preble, U. S. Navy

U S SHIPJohn Adams
NAPLESBAY 2F'JDecr 1804
MY DEARSIR, When I left you in Malta, I expected e're this,
to have been half way to America. mTewere longer at Syracuse than
I expected to b ~ Our
:
passage from thence to Messina, Yalenno, &
Naples was long and boisterous. I never experienced much worse
weather. We were only three days at Messina and three a t Palermo;
but was detained fifteen a t Naples. While at Palermo, General

208

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 180L TO 1805

Actan assured me, that we should have no difficulty in procuring what
Bomb Vessels and Gun Boats we might want for the next Summer's
siege; and a supply of Ammunition, if we should not receive a sufficient
quantity from the United States in Season. He gave me a letter to
the Prime Minister, and one to their Majesties. They were in the
Country when I arrived, a d i t was not until eight days after, that
they came to the City; when my letters were delivered by the Prime
Minister: Soon after, I was introduced a t Court, and had an audience the Queen (the King having left the City the same day he arrived)
received me graciously, and professed a very friendly disposition
towards the U S
The Heads of Department assured me, that whatever I asked in
behalf of my Government would be granted; and the Minister of
Marine desired me to present to him in writing our requisition, which
he would make known to the King; this was accordingly done. I
waited with the utmost anxiety and impatience for an ansu7er until
yesterday, when I wrote a note to the Minister of Marine urging the
necessity of one, as our Frigate lay much exposed in the Bay, where
we had already parted one cable, and broke our tm70 largest Anchors.
This day I r e d the answer, and to my utter astonishment and disappointment i t was directly the reverse of what I was led to believe it
would have been. Some Interest more powerful than ours, has been
working against us. I presume it is not for the Interest of the French,
that we should have Peace with Tripoli, while they are at war with
England, and that Nation in possession of Malta: as our blockade
cuts off their supplies of fresh provisions from that Quarter. I also
presume that the English are not willing that we should take the
Gun and Mortar Boats from Sicily, as they want them to protect
#e Straits of Messina t o prevent the landing of the French in case
they should be SO disposed. In fact Mr E - the B - Minister at
Naples told me in confidence, that the King of Kaples had long since
stipulated with the 3:Govt that he would keep constantly e uipped
and Mann'd ready for Action 35 Gun and Mortar Boats at Ib essina,
but notwit,hstanding this stipulation, they have not yet one third
part of that Number prepared. He told me, that he was astonished
when he heard of our obtaining those that we did the last summer
without his knowledge; I therefore presume that he has protested
against our hax-iriflg them. I enclose you a copy of my requisition,
and the Answer m Atalian, whlch Mr Higgens will translate for you
readily & correctly. The King expressed much satisfaction at the
use that had been made of his Boats; and has refused to receive any
compensation for the Armnunition which was expended, and amounts
to more than twenty thousand Dollars. I can assure you that I
have endeavored all in my power to procure the Boats: and so anxious
have I been while at Kaples, that I never once have been out of the
City; nor have I visited any of the curiosities in it. The moment I
r e d the Answer, we prepared to sail, and shall go to Sea this evening,
and proceed. directly for the U: S. without stopping a t any other
lace excepting Gibraltar for provisions. I have written to Commo?
Earnon, and have advised him to purchase Sparonarm to be fitted as
Gun Boats, and to Endeavour to procure Mortars and Shells at
Gibraltar.

1

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

209

I have some reason to believe that their Neapolitan Majesties are
not perfectly satisfied in not having any notice taken of their friendly
disposition towards us, by our Govt this, however, is merely conjecture.
I beg you to let me have the pleasure of hearing from you, when
you have a leisure hour to throw away; and be assured I shall not be
wanting in gratitude for your favours.
Make my best respects to Mre Lear, and accept my best and most
ardent wishes for your health, happiness and prosperity.
(Signed) E: PREBLE
[LC. EPP, LB, Nov. 1804-Mar. 1805.1
To Captain James Barron, U. S. Navy, commanding the U. 6. S. Eswr, from Captain
Edward Preble, U. 6. Navy

NAPLES
&3rd December 1804
DEARSIR, Our passage from Messina to Palermo, and from thence
to this place was long and boisterous; and our detention here far
beyond my expectations General Acton assured me a t Palermo,
that we should have all the Boats & ammunition we might want
on my application to the &g through the proper Dept On my
arrival here, I was flattered by the Ministers of State that we should
succeed. The King was absent at the time we arrived, and did not
come to Town until the 15th, when my requisition was presented,
favorably received, and every enaouragement given. 1 waited with
the utmost anxiety and impatience until this day before I received
an official answer; when to my utter astonishment and regret it
was precisely the reverse of what I was induced to believe it would
have been. - Some influence more powerful than ours, has occasioned this change. The French Influence here, as well as a t Tripoli,
is certainly against us. I t is for the Intereat of that Nation to keep
us at War with Tripoli, SO long as they are a t War with England,
and that Kation in possession of Malta; of course they will use their
influence to endeavour to deprive us of the means of reducing that
Regency to Peace.
I am sensible this disappointment will considerably affect Commodore Barron whose prosperity and success with the Squadron
under his Command, I most ardently pra for. I think it possible
notwithstanding the determination of the overnment that the Boats
may yet be obtained through General Acton's influence with the
King: if commodore Barron could go to Palermo and see him. He
must not however depend too much on success even from that
quarter I t is my opinion that the large Sparonaras would make good
G: Boats, and be more managable than those we had last Summer;
and I have no doubt but that Mortars &c"ay
be procured a t Malta,
and mounted to advantage on board of good stout Feluccas, which
can be hired or purchased there.
In consequence of our long detention here, I shall sail direct for
the United States, without stopping a t any other port, in order
that our Government may be informed of the disappointment as
early as possible - We get under weigh this evening.
I beg you to accept my best wishes for your health and happiness -

d

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1804 TO 1805

210

Enclosed is a letter from an Officer to the Secretary of the Navy,
which perhaps you may not have seen.
P. S. Presuming this may find you at Syracuse, and Cap: Decatur
absent, I have written him a short letter; you may therefore show
him this, if you please - Pray write me often - E. P.
[LC.

EPP, LB, Nov. 1804-Mar. 1805.]

To Captain Stephen Decatnr, Jr., U. 8. Navy, commanding U. S. Frigate Congrur,
from Captain Edward Preble, U. 8. Navy

NAPLES
2 g ~ dDecember 1804
DEARSIR After having been distressed by long & boisterous
Passages until we reached this Bay, and being detained here beyond
all expectation, w-e are a t lash disappointed The King has this day
just discovered that he wants his Boats for the protection of his
Coasts and Commerce, and after my having r e d every encouragement both from General Acton a t Palerrno, and the Officers of State
here, that we should have them, they have been refused. Some
more powerful Interest than ours, has been the cause. I believe the
French have had a hand in the business - Presuming that you are
a t Sea, I have written Cap: Barron more fully: he will shorn- you my
letter. I have sent the Commodore copies of my requisition on this
Government, and the Answer, which I presume he will show you.
I n consequence of this disappointment I sail this evening direct for
America without t o u c h at any port, in order that our Governs
m y be informed of our disappointment - pray write me often, and
be assured I shall lose no apportunity of informing you how the
world goes on in the West.
I beg you to accept my ardent wishes for your health, happiness &
prosperity in pursuit of Glory:
And believe me with sincere esteem & regard
[LC. EPP, LB, Nov. 1804-Mar. 1805.1
To Captain Samuel Banon, U. S. Navy from Paclter Commandant Isaac Huli,

U. S. Navy

(COPY)

United States Brig Argus
ALEXANDRIA
Decer [23] 1804
SIR I have the honor to inform you that we arrived off this
port on the 26* [November] in the evening, but the weather being
bad and a heavy sea setting on shore, we could only come near enough
the coast to shew our colours, with the E n lish Jack a t the main,
which was answered by the English consufs hojeting his fiag,
On the morning of the 27'b, the weather being good, stood in for the
tomrn of Alexandria, fired a gun and hoisted our colours as before
with the English Jack at ,the main, which was immediately answered
by the English consul's hoisting his colours and sending off a boat
to pilot us in, - On entering the harbour I saluted the Turkish
Admirals Flag then flying on board of a Frigate, the Salute was
returned and a boat sent from the Admiral to oger his services,
on the 2fYUhe Admiral sent the Captain of one of the Frigstes to
shew us a safe place to moore the Brig, and boats to h s i s t us in
doing it, - I likewise received a letter from M' Briggs informing me
that the Commandant of the Town would answer a Salute Gun for
Gun if I thought proper to fire one, a Salute was fired and answered

-

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

211

gun for gun, soon after I waited on the Admiral, with Mi Eaton
the English Consul, and several Otficers from the Brig, we were treated
very politely, he gave us Coffee Sweetmeats &c, after staying about
half an hour with him we paid a visit to the Commandant of the
town, where we received the same treatment, in fact every body
appears happy to see us, the people of the country, the Consuls of
different Nations, French and Spanish excepted, they did not hoist
their flags on our entering the Harbor, nor have I received their
Visits, though all the other Consuls have called, I suppose they must
have received their lesson from the French consul a t Tripoly, On the 2gt@Mr Eaton, Mr Farguhar, Lieu! 0,Bannan of Marines
Midshipman M a m & Danielson, left this for Rosetta, and from
thence to Cairo, where they arrived on the StQAfter stopping two
days at Rosetta, - I have received a letter from Mr Eaton informing me of the very flattering manner in which they were received by
the Vice Roy, every attention was paid them and he offered to render
them every service in his power, I have been informed since that
Mr Eaton had obtained a pass from him for the Bashaw to pass the
Turkish army, Although he has been with the Mamilukes fighting
against the Turks for some months, We had been informed previous to Mr Eatons leaving this, that
the Bashaw was with the Mamelukes about two days Journey from
Grand Cairo in upper Egypt, and Mr Eaton left a letter to him with
me, which I got translated and forwarded, two days after he left
this, and he forwarded a second from Rosetta and it appears that
Major Messett had heard that uTewere Coming here, and wrote to
Hamet Bashaw to that effect, so that with the Assistance of our
friends here and a number of men of Respectability in Grand Cairo,
which Mr Eaton has met with who are attached to the Bashaw I
have no doubt but we shall be able to get him on board, or make use
of him from this, I have a letter from Mr Eaton of the lgth ins! he informs me that
he waits the return of a special Courier, which He sent off, to the
Bashaw on the 13th, and expects it will return about the 26t@at which
time he will leave Cairo for Rosetta and this place. should the Courier
arrive at the time He expects, and lieleav's Cairo on the 26t@,or even
on the first of January, we should be ready to sail from here by the
lot@or 15t@,but I think it very uncertain whether he leav's Cairo
for some time yet should the man be found and determined to come
with us, it will take some time for him to prepare to leave this Country,
so that should we be detained longer than the time I have stated, I beg you will not be uneasy about us, we have a h e safe harbor and
a friendly Country, - I shall be in no want of provisions we have
plenty of Buffaloes, which I give the Crew every day in order to save
the salt provisions for our voyage down
I know of no opportunity for Malta after the Vessel sails that
brings this, so that you must not expect to hear from us until1 we
arrive, which perhaps will be much longer than I calculate, I shall
however do every thing in My power to expedite our departure from
this, - I n closing this letter I cannot but repeate to you the civilities we have received from the British Consul here, and Major Missett
British resident, and Mi. Patrucha British Consul a t Rosetta, they

212

ATAVRL OPERATIONS FROrM 1804 TO 1805

have done every thing in their power to forward the expedition, and to
make our stay in this country pleasant.
P, S, enclosed is a letter left by Mr Eaton with me which he desired should be forwarded to the Secretarg of the Navy through your
hands
[NDA.

MC LB, 1804-5, Copy also in NDA. Hull's LB.]

Extract from Hemorandurn Book of Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Navy, on board

U. 6. Frigate John

Adam, 23 December 1804

Sailed from Naples Bay for the United States.
[LC original.]
Extract from log book of U.S. S. John Admns, Yaster Commandant Isaac Chauncey,
U. S. Navy, commanding, Sunday, 23 December 1804

Light airs from E S E. Emplo 'd as necessary & watering ship
A. M - Moderate breezes from
S W. At Daylight unmoored
Ship 8: hove a Stay Peak - From 7 till 9 A. M. Cloudy with rain During our stay in Naples we have entered 17 Men for this Ship.
At 11 A. M, Commodore Preble came on board. In boats and made
the necessary arrangements for sailing - Koon - light airs from
W S W, with a swell setting into the Bay

6

[LC. EPP, John Adams, 1804-1805.1
To Captain John Bodgers, U. S. Navy, commanding U. S. Frigate Comti~utiorr,from
James Simpson, U. S. Consul, Tangier, lorocco

TANGIER

Copy.-

6dt@December 1804.-

I
SIR M' Johnstone delivered me your favour of the l g t @Insttold him for your information, that we had not any novelty worthy
of being then imparted to you by Letter, the more especial 5s you
were bound to Lisbon.I t is there you will be able to o t a b the
best information on the opperations of the persons sent from hence by
Muley Soliman to employ the sum of money he has destined (chiefly)
for the encrease of his Marine.This is a matter in my oppinion
merits our most particular attention.It will be extremely proper
that you communicate to Government from Lisbon all you may be
able to learn on this subject and also of the prospect there may be of
the Emperours two Ships at Lisbon and Setubal being laid up during
the Winter Months where they are, or if it be expected they will be
The third Ship by latest advices remained at
sent out to Cmize.Rhabat.I t is not necessary for me to say more to you by Letter
but I shall hope you will anchor in this Ba on your return as I
be desirous of communicarting with you at eisure.By a Letter from M' Gavino of the 17t@I h d the Spren was still
a t Cadiz, until I see you it does not appear adviseable to recommend
Captain Stewart following the Orders you handed me for him, unless
some other Vessel of War of the United States should in the mean time
arrive in this neighborhood, and to remain.Enclosed I send you copy of a Letter from Mr G a ~ i n ofor Captain
Barron of the Eases, for your information on subject of certain Stores
for the Squadron lodged a t Gibraltar.-

g

T

d

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

213

I have requested of M' Jarvis to send me a small sum of money and
some other articles which I beg you will allow to be put on board the

Constitution.-

[Enclosure]

Stores lodged in Gibraltar Bay for use of the Squadron

100 Barrels Gun Powder
600 Shot-32pr?
1 Bowsprit & Cap
1 Top Mast
2 Top Gallant Masts
2 Top Sail Yards.30th Decemr-nothing farther worthy of communicating.[NDA. Captain's LB, Vol. 1, 1805.1

To Secretary of State from James Simpson, U.S. Consul, Tangier, lorocco

TANGIER
24'h December 1804.SIR On the lgt@Inst the United States Frigate Constitution arrived
here from Syracuse and proceeded for Lisbon without anchoring.Understanding from Captain Rod ers tlhe John Adams is on her
nay Down the Straits and in hopes 8aptain Chauncy may call here,
I have made second copies of the Letters I have had the honor of
addressing you from N Q82 to 86 inclusive, to be transmitted by that
conveyance. I have been enduced to trouble you with these, for the greater certainty of your being in possession of the whole of what I have seen
proper to la before you, on subject of my apprehensions that this
Country wil take part in the War with Tripoly. - You have been
told of the Emperours intention of sending Wheat there last Summer,
it was on knowing that would not be permitted by the American
Squadron, that he changed the destination of his three Ships, all intended for the Mediterranean, and ordered them to be fitted for a
Cruize. Instructions for that purpose was sent by two of his particular
Friends to the Governours of Salle 8: Larach and to Tetuan a t same
time. The night these Messengers arrived with Alcayde Hashash he
mote me complaining of the opposition made to the mentioned Cargo
of Wheat being sent, and said "grant this Passport and Peace will
continue to subsist between us and you" - This was the first cause
pf my alarm. -Subsequent advices from my Friends a t Rhabat and
in other Channels strengthened my suspicions of the Emperours
intentions to resent the disapointment. I conceived it my duty to write to Sidy hluhammed Selawy on the
subject, but being a delicate point to write a Minister on, I availed
of the opening Alcayde Hashash's indescreet expressions offerred, and
you have seen his answer; - to my reply of the 26t'! August (copy of
which was transmitted also to you with NQ81) I never have received
any answer, nor has he written me a Letter since, notwithstanding I
sent h i a couple of Canary Birds he had asked me for. - Neither
has Alcayde Hashash answered my Letter saying the Meshouda could
not put to Sea during the War with Tripoly, but I knew he expressed
great dis-satisfaction on the occasion, and even went so far as to say

K Q88.

9

214

NAVAL OPERATIONS FBOM 1804 TO 1806

should the Emperour order me out of the Country again, that I
should not have the indulgences shewen me in 1802. It is my decided oppinion that had not Commodore Barron arrived
so opportunely and left the two Frigates he did on this Station, the
Frigates on their last Cruize would have had orders to detain American Vessels.The supplying Tripoly with Wheat I am persuaded
will be required by Muley Soliman, and that a denial will be the cause
he will assign for taking part in the War in their behalf. - M: Jarvis
will no doubt have acquainted you of the Emperours Agent a t Lisbon
having bought an armed Brig. - I am told he is to purchase two
more a t that place and then proceed to England. - I shall only add
that I still think it will be ext'remely proper to have some Vesesls of
War on this station as earl as possible in the Spring, a couple of
Frigates and two Brigs or Sc ooners \%-illbe quite sufflcirnt to prevent
their doing any thing, whatever their present intentions may be. -

4

{NA. SDA. CL, Tangier, Vol. 2, Jan. 1803-Oct. 1810.]
To William Eaton, U, 8. Navy Agent for the Barbary Regencies, from Master
Commandant Isaac Hull,U.S. Navy

UNITED
ST.~TEB
BRIGArg'l.44
ALEXANDRIA
24 Dee? 1804
SIR,I h a ~ ebeen honoured with your Let,ter of the lgth with the
accompanying Packets, thro' the hands of Major Missett.Your
Letter to the Secretary of the Navy and all the Letters you left with
me to forward, goes by Cap: Thorn enclosed to M' Higgins at Malta He sails tomorrow, and will most likely arrive some time before mre
shall. - I have made arrangements for paying hlessr? Briggs the
Thousand Dollars, which you inform me ou had drawn for, but as for
the four or five Thousand you say you s all want - God knows how
we are to obtain that, unless you have the means a t Cairo, for I
know of none here. - I am already pennyless, and the disbursements of the Brig amounts to more money a t present than our Credit
on Messr%Briggs, so th%t if we can avoid it we must not enter into
many engagements for Cash under our present circumstannes. - I
am anxious to hear whether you can get any intelligence from our
friend, and what our prospect is, you inform me that provision must
be made for an hundred Men - it cannot be possible that he has
that number about him should it be found so, we shall not be able to
carry F'rovisions and -dater for them for any length of time, not even
for a passage down a t this Season of the year.The plan you have formed of taking Derne, I think rather a Hazardous one, unless the Bashaw can brin into the field from Eight hundred to one Thousand Men, particu arly as we are destitute of every
article necessary for an expedition of the kind - I am willing to
grant you, that a very few men will take the place, and hold it, yet
they must have the means, they must have and be sure of supplies,
which is out of our power to promise them - I think the most we
can do, is to get the Bashaw, make as many friends in this Countv
as possible, and make the best of our way to Syracuse, get some little
addition t
o our force, and make arrangements for our being supported, when we have got possession, and set off anew for Dern or
Bengane as may appear most proper, from the information you must
have gained however a t Calro, you must be better acquainted ~ l t h
the dispositions of the People, than I can possibly be, and consequent13

H

f'

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

215

a better judge. - You must be satisfied that it is my wish to do
every thing in my power before we return, but when I look a t the
situation we are sent here in, I loose all patience - With a little
Vessel, without friends, without authority to act, without a single
friend except such as we have by our own good fortune procured in short, without everything that is absolutely necessary to insure
success to an Enterprize - I say as I have said before, that I do
not see that anything more then getting the man can be done should we be fortunate enough to get him, I think it will be doing a
great deal, and I am sure good use may be made of him with proper
management and supplies, the latter of which I hope will be granted
us, the former I am sure you will take care to regulate. - You will
have been informed of our Voyage to Rosetta by M ~ o l d s b o r o u g h
and Mf Severick, we are all well and anxiously wait your return. I
left your Trunk, Small Sword, dressing Case and Hat a t M! Petruchas,
and a Cask of Wine for M-~arquhar, which I hope is for Major Misset I am now sending him some small articles, but I think with you, we
shall never have it in our power to repay their civilites, however if
we cannot pay to them we must to somebody else. [NDA. Isaac Hull LB, 1803-1806.1
To Major E. Misset, British Miister to Cairo, Egypt, from Master Commandant
Isaac Hull, U. 8. Navy

UNITEDSTATES
BRIGArgus
ALEXANDRIA
2dt?Decf 1804
DEARSIR,I have been honoured with your notes of the 22d with the
Letters accompanying them from M' Eaton - I should have acknowledged the receipt of them before, but my time has been so much
occupied with the sudden departure of Cap: Thorn, that I have had
scarcely a moments leisure, he dines with us today a t Mr Briggs,
and sails the first fair Wind. I have been on board his ship with
Mr Briggs he has built a very proper place for the Horse, and I have
no doubt but he will arrive safe at Malta. I find by Mf Eatons Letters that he will not leave Cairo so soon as
we expected, I hope however he will not make his stay long - I am
anxious to see you and the party at Alex*
I send by the Boat a few articles, which I pray you and Mr Patrucha
to accept, they are not of the first quality, but perhaps such as cannot
be obtained in this Country at all times. I had like to have forgot to tell you we arrived safe a t this place
the Evening after we left you, and had the satisfaction to find all
our friends well. ray you to make my best Respects to Mr Patrucha and all the
fami
I yAnd believe me

P

[NDA. Isaac Hull LB, 1803-1806.1

To William Higgins, U. S. Navy Agent, Malta, from Master Commandant Ieaac
Hull, U. 6. Navy

UNITEDSTATES
BRIG*4rgus
ALEXANDRIA
2dt?Deer 1806
SIR, I have the pleasure to inform you that I arrived here after a
?ugh passage of 7 days, and had the satisfaction to find your friends
lrfl this Country all well M: Frampton only excepted, who died some
time before we arrived. - MessrQBriggs have done every thing in

216

NAVAL OPERATIOATS FROM 1804 TO 1805

their power to forward the expedition, and to make my stay here
pleasant, for which to them and you, I consider myself under many
obligations I spent ten days with Major Misset, British Resident and
Mr Patrucha British Consul a t Rosetta, from whom I have received
many civilities - in fact they have kept open House for me and the
Officers that visited the Nile.Mq Eaton left this for Cairo two da s after we arrived here, and is
not yet returned, I expect him about e last of the month, by Letters
from him every thing appears favourable to the e,xpedition, and I
ho e the object for which we came will be obtained. 8ur stay has been longer than I expected, and I fear I shall be
obliged to draw Bills on you for supplies a t this place, to perhaps a
larger amount than your Letter to M Briggs authorized. I shall not do i t however if Bills can possibly be negociated on
London.I pray you to forward the enclosed Letter by the h t
oppertunity - and believe me

2

N. B. just after writing the above I have drawn on you for $1000,
which you will honour.
[NDA. Iaasc Hull LB,1803-1806.1
Extract from log book of U. S. S. John Admnr, Xaster Commandant Isaac Chauncey,
U. 6. Bavy, commanding, Monday, 24 December 1804

Light airs from W S W. At single anchor in Kaples Bay ready for
weighing. At 3 P M a breeze sprang up S S W - We weighed &
came to sail in order to work out of the Ba . By the close of the
Evening we were three or four miles without e Anchorage - From
6 P. M till 9 a constant rain with variable winds - By 10 P M the
weather cleared away - From this till 4 A M pleasant weather
with a light leading wind out of the Bay. At 2 AM - set Top-Gall'
& fore top mast studding sails At 5 AM the wind shifted from S E
to W N W. In studding sails & tack'd to the Southward-Unbent
the Cables, and stowed the Anchors
Noon - Winds South - We are 5 or 6 miles S W b W % W from
the South extreme of the Island of Ischia.
Latitude Observed 40' 36' N.
[LC. EPP, John Adams, 1804-1805.1

2

Extract from journal of Hezekiah Loomis, Steward, U. S. Navy, in U. 13. Brig
Vixen, Paster Commandant John Smith, U. 6. Navy, commanding, Mondsy,
24 December 1804

This day commences with pleasant weather and fresh breeze. We
beat to the westward until 3 o'clock when we discovered the town of
Tripoli. At 4 o'clock we put about and stood off shore. Saw no
sail this day except what we s a v in Tripoli. This being Christmas
Eve they called the music for a short time. Alex Jacks and Levi
McCabe got their grog.
IL. F. Middlebrook. NDA copy.]
Extract from log book of U. 8. 8. John Adam. Master Commandant Isaac ChaunceYl
U. 8, Navy, commanding, Tuesday, 26 December 1804

Moderate breezes from S B E. We are standing to W S W with
the Island of Ischia in sight - I n the course of the Afternoon we

217

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

struck down into the Main Hold the four foreward Guns on the Gun
Deck
At Sun-Set we took our departure from Ischia, bearing by compass
N E b E E 8 leagues, in order to proceed down the Mediterranean
We steered by compass W S W in order to pass the South side of
the Island of Sardinia
We had a fresh leading breeze during the night At Midnight
double reefd the Topsails & reset the Top Gallant Sails
Bv 8 AM the wind had veered to S S W - After this till noon ove;cast weather with strong W N W and N W winds - At 10 AM
tack'd to S W
Towards noon - in third reef in the Topsails & down Top Gallant
Yards
Latitude Observed 39' 13' N
[LC. EPP, John Adams, 1804-1805.1
Extract from journal of Hezekiah Loomis, Steward, U. S. Navy, in U. S. Brig
Vixen. Master Commandant John Smith, U. S. Navy, commanding, Tuesday, 25
December 1804

This morning commences with a gale of wind. We carried our
fore sail until 9 o'clock A. M. but were obliged to take it in and take
a double reef in our top sails. This day being Christmas there was but
little work done. Kept it up man-of-war fashion. No sail appeared
off the coast this day.
[L. F. Middlebrook. NDA copy.]

[26 December 18041
Concerning David Valenzin

Our readers will probably recollect a very interesting report made
during the session preceding the last, by the Committee of Claims, in
the case of the unfortunate David Valenzin. Some persons having
taken the liberty of representing that the committee were imposed
upon, and that the circumstances stated in their report were unfounded,
we publish the following letter from our distinguished countryman,
Mr. Eaton, to John C. Smith, esq. chairman of the Committee of
Claims, as substantiating those circumstances. For this publication
at this time we have another reason. It, in some small degree, throws
light on the character of Eaton, and evinces the sense entertained
abroad of a just government, that "rara awis in terris" cognitis.
GRAND
CAIRO,Dee. 26, 180.4.
SIR, This morning two Jewish merchants came, with essential oil of
roses for sale, to the British Resident's house, where I am. The were
dressed in the habit of Egypt. But one of them speaking rench
intelligibly, took my attention. I entered into an enquiry concerning
the actual state of commerce on this count , which naturally led him
to mention the names of sundry commercial'gouses here; among others,
that of Moses Valenzin. This name brought to my recollection the
unfortunate Valenzin, whose case last winter, so seriously occupied the
h n m i t t e e of Claims, and whose fate so justly moved their sensibility.
Engaged with the more immediate concerns, I do not know that my
thoughts had once before turned to those events since my departure
from America, But this accident induced particular enquiry; the
result of which I thought too interesting to pass unnoticed: wherefore,

i

218

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1804 TO 1806

c c t l l i lieut. OIBannon, Mr. Goldsborough, a purser in the navy, and
Mr. Farquhar, an English gentleman, into my appartment, I made the
examination hereafter transcribed, as attested by these gentlemen.
It corresponds so exactly with the account David Vdenzin gave of
himself, that it cannot, I am persuaded, be indifferent to you; especially as the justice of your report on that case, and consequent act of
Congress, have been the subject of comment in certain circles.
Enquiry made of a Jewish merchant in &and Cairo, touching the story of
David Valenzin.
What is your name?
"Leon Reubin."
Of what nation are you?
"A Hebrew."
Where were you born?
"In Leghorn, where my father is now estabIished."
How many years have you been in Egypt?
"Seven,"
Do you belong to any commercial house?
"To a house in Leghorn, by the fkm of -4bram Reuben, of which
I am the agent here."
Are you acquainted with the IIebrew mercantile houses in Alexandria?
"Yes; there are Lorca and Tilkey, the most considerable house;
Moses Valenzin, a respectable merchant, and others of less note."
Has Moses Valenzin any relations?
"He has a brother, David Valenzin, and an uncle."
Where is David Valenzin?
"David Valenzin came to Alexandria with a cargo of wine; sold it
to the commissary of the English Army; took a bill of exchange for
half the avails, and cash for the other half. But, as he had no correspondent in England, he went to Smlana and negotiated his bill
for merchandise; which he put on board a vessel for Malta. He departed from Malta for Tripoli; and, near Malta, we learn, was taken
by the Americans, who are a t war with the Bashaw of Tripoli; and
who have carried him-we h o w not where."
Do you know how Iong since David Valenzin was taken by the
hericans?
"No! I t is two years and a half, or three years, since he left
Egypt. I do not know how fong he remained in Smyrna: but it is
about twentv months since u7eheard he was taken."
Where w& David Valenzin born?
"David Valenzin was born in Venice, but came very young to T r i p
oli with his father, who was then a rich merchant."
Did Valenzin, the father, establish a house a t Tripoli?
"Yes."
Was the establishment, and was Valenzin under the protection of
the Bashaw of Tripoli?
"NO. Both his father and himself always wore hats,* and christian
habits-And hi brother, a t Alexandria, is now under the protection
of the imperial flag, as a subject of the Emperor."
Has David Valenzin any wife, or children?
"No; neither one nor the other: he was never married."
I have to inform you that David Valenzin is dead."How! Dead!"

219

WARS WITH BARBARY POWEBS

Yes. Impatient of the delay occasioned by want of documents in
his application for redress in the case of his capture; and, perhaps,
despairing of a successful decision; he put an end to his own existence
about ten months ago, in the Capitol of the United States.
"Is it possible!"
I saw him in his clotted blood.
"Alas; Valenzin!-Too unfortunate Valenzin!-He was but about
twenty-eight or twenty-nine years of age!"-Wept.
I have put these questions to you that I mi ht learn Valenzin's story;
and that we might be enabled to find out his awful heirs.
"I know not that he has any heirs except his brother a t
Alexandria."-Paused-"Or,
perhaps, he may have left a sister in
Tripoli; who must be very wretched."
You are at liberty to acquaint Moses Valenzin, of Alexandria, with
the particulars of these questions; and with the information thence
resulting. You may inform him also, that, the answem you have
given to my questions being established as the truth of facts, there
remain in deposit by the government of the United States, for the
heirs of David Valenzin, between one and two thousand Spanish
dollars; which will be transmitted to them by proper applicationto
said government; or to the administrator of said Valenzin's estate,
thus deposited, appointed at the City of Washington.

f

ATTESTATION

"The above examination was made b William Eaton, esq. in
the Italian language, and translated into English, verbatim, by Mr.
Richard Farquhar, a t Grand Cairo, in Egypt, December the 27th,
1804, in presence of the under written."
(Signed) Th. O'BANNON,
Lieut. Marines.
R. W. GOLDSBOROUGH.
Purser U. S. Brig. Argus.
RICH?FARQUHAR."
Leon Reuben knew not the object of my enquiry; nor could he possibly frame any conjecture concerning it, whatever imaginations
it may have exclted; for he thought he was all this time speaking mth
Englishmen. But on explaining myself to him, and lettin him
h o w that I had no other object in view than to find out the awful
heirs oi an unfortunate man, who had fallen a victim to the disasters
of war, in order that the wishes of my government may be accomplished in the restitution of his property, Leon seemed amazed-Turning towards his companion; raising his eyes to Heaven; and laying
both hands gravely to his breast, he exclaimed in Arabic, "Great God!
What an astonishing country that must be where the government takes
SO much pains to render justice to a Hebrew! Even a t this distance
to inform his heirs of cash in deposit, which might so easily have been
concealed!"
Certain1 the Jews are not accustomed, on this continent, to similar
testimonia s of national justice. The droit d' aubaine is very apt to
pffect them here, as it seldom fails to do rich sub'ects: indeed the right
1s frequently anticipated, or rendered timely y a friendly cup of
coffee.
,*Adistinctive mark of foreign protection in Barbary.

9

9

b

[LC. Nat'l Intelligencer, January 1, 1806.

N A V ' OPERATIONS FROM 1804 TO 1805

220

Extract from journal of Bezekiah Loomis, Steward, TI. S. Navy, in 0.S. Brig Vf~sn.
Master Commandant John Smith, U. S. Navy, commanding, Wednesday, 26
December 1804

This day standing in for Tripoli. I went to the bread room a t
9 o'clock A. M. to serve out bread, I unlocked and opened the door.

At this instant I was caught by the nose by one of the most nauceous
scents ever was. I immediately went on the quarter deck and informed Mr. Creighton the S. Master that the otatoes he ordered in
the bread room were spoiled and I was fearfu they had ruined the
bread. He sent some hands to get the bags on deck and found not a
fourth part good. The bread was much injured which when we came
to examine, condemned 560 pounds, which left only enough for 3
days a t half allowance. At noon I served the last of the spirits.
Being in this situation and our cruise long out, Captain Smith thought
best to go into port. We put about a t 2 o'clock P. M. and made all
sad. John Wdlers is made Master-at-Arms. No sail in sight this
day.
[L.F. Middlebrook. NDA copy.]

P

-

To Captain Samuel Barron, U. 8. Navy, Syracuse, from Tobias Lear, If.S. Consul
General, Algiers

MALTA
December d7th 1804
DEARSIR NP 2 The Transport to which you had given a passport
to go from hence to Tripoli, for Bullocks, arrired here on the 12th

ins3 with One hundred & nine Bullocks and some Sheep, all in a very
miserable Condition; and having been informed that she was to
return again to Tripoli, for another Cargo of a Simdar nature, I

waited upon Sir Alex! Ball, this day, to know if she was destined for
Tripoli with a Passport from you. He informed me that it uras his
intention to send her to Bruganza; but that he had intended first to
request a letter from me to the Officer commanding our Vessels off
Tripoli, to permit her to go to Bruganza. I told Sir Alexander Ball
that I should not think myself justifiable in giving any document
which could be Considered as a Passport to any port of the Regency
of Tri ofi unless upon very urgent Business of our o w n which would
not a1 ow me time to communicate with you on the Subject; but as
I was informed there was a Sparonaro bound tomorrow to Syracuse,
I would write to you on the Subject, and your answer would determine
whether she should go or not. He said he wished to send some
money and other thing to some of our Officers, in Captivity s t Tripoli,
by whose friends he had been desired to send them. And Mr Hi gins
wishing to send Blankets for the men, and other articles which 8 a p t ~
Bainbridge had requested, this would afford a good op ortunity for
that purpose, and the Vessel would go from Tripoli to gruganza for
the Bullocks
Should you think proper to give permission for this Vessel to go to
Tripoli, care shall be taken to have a particular account of every
thing she takes from hence, and the Ins ection, which will be uni , prevent her tak@
doubtedly made by our Vessels off ~ r i ~ o ywill
that can be useful to our Enemies.an$!!aptain
of this Transport (who had two days passage from
Tnpoh and saw not a Vessel in the way) says only two Cruizers had

f

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

221

one from thence, both of which had returned and brot in two small
5from
essels, one from Genoa & the Other from Sardinia. This differs
Mr Robertson's account. His report of wants agrees with

Robertson's.N Q1. I am distressed to find, by the letter from Mr Dyson of the
14thins! that you was too ill to write the latter part of his letter part
of his letter saying your complaint had taken a favorable turn the
night before, releived me a little from my anxiety; but I shall not be
The
satisfied untill I see you here or hear directly from you.Westerly Winds have prevailed for 15 or 20 days; but on the h t
change I shall look for you every hour. I wish much to see you on
many accounts; and nothing but the long quarantine has prevented
my going over to Syracuse before this
N ? 3. ILP? Lear unites with me in most sincere prayers for the
restoration of your health, and in Compliments and best wishes for
all those with you
A Brig arrived this day in 33 days from London war had not then
been declared against Spain. She brings no other news of consequence [Stephen Decatur Col.

NDA photostat, Book A.]

To George Dyson, U. S. Navy Agent, Syracuse, from Tobias Lear, U. S. Consul
General, Algiers

MALTA
December 27th 1804
DEARSIR,I had the pleasure to receive your esteemed favor of the

14th inst- The dangerous situation in which CorndoreBarron has
been, gave me great anxiety; which was somewhat relieved by your
saying he was then considered out of danger. I pray god he may
Had not the quarantine been so severe I
soon recover his health.should have have had the pleasure of seeing you a t Syracuse before
this. Your letter of the 25t"f
November was handed to me on the 4th
of December by M: Pulisse; but after all my enquiries I could not find
the person who brought i t ; or I would, most certainly, have given
him a letter to Algiers on the subject of his Mission.I had the pleasure of seeing MrP Dyson & your daughter for a few
moments when the Constitution called off this place. They were
well & in good spirits; but I fear the strong westerly winds which
have prevailed the last 15 or 20 days will make their passage to
Lisbon very tedious.
A Brig arrived here to day in 33 days from London. War was not
then declared against Spain. The Convoy for this place lay a t
Falmouth ready to sail she brought no news of consequence & saw
but one Vessel on her passage.I enclose a letter for you from Mr Higgins, and one for Commodore
Barron, whom I hope by or before this gets to hand, will be on his
Way over here.Mr"ear
is now in better health than she has been since she has
been since [sic] we arrived here, and sends her best wishes to you.
[Stephen Decatur Col.

NDA photostat, Book A.]

222

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1804 TO 1806

To William Eaton, U. S. Bavy Agent for the Barbary Regencies, from Maeter
Commandant Isaac Hull,U. S. Navy

UNITED
STATES
BRIGArgus
ALEXANDRIA
2dtQ127*] Decr 1804
SIR,I have been honoured with your letters of the 17th and 1gt@
Ins: the former of which however did not come to hand till last Evening - the Letter with the accompanying Packets came through the
hands of Major Misset some days past. - I had previous to receiving
them placed in the hands of Mess'? Briggs Brothers One Thousand
Dollars to meet your draft on them. - You inform me that most
likely you shall want four or five Thousand more - if so god lcnow~
where we shall get it, unless you have the means at Cairo or Rosetta,
for I know of none here, I am anxious to see you that we may make
arrangements for the passengers you say you shall have with you, for
it will be necessary to hire or purchase some other Vessel to carry them
in, as the Argus will not carry Provisions and Water for that Number
for any length of time, and I should suppose it would be proper to
make those arrangements before they are promised a passage for fear
we may disappoint them after they arim here. - I hope on your
arrival a t Rosetta you will send the Gentlemen forward as fast as
possible - The Purser is wanted and the other Gentlemen had
much better be on board than remain a t Rosetta, for I assure you
I am ashamed of receiving their Civilities without any chance of returning them, for they are too good. - I left with RIS Patrucha for
you a Trunk, dressing Case, Sword and Hat, and for Mr Farquhar a
Cask Wine, which I hope he intends for the Major. - Our friends
Messr"riggs are well and I assure you we spent a v e q merry Christmas with them, drinking success to your party &$ I pray you will make my respects to the Major and family And believe me your friend

P. S. I expect to see your party with you, and I hope very soon.
{*In H. E. Huntington Collection this letter is dated 27 not 24.1
[KDA. Isaac Hull LB, 1803-1506.1
Extract from journal of U. S. Frigate CohtNfution. Captain John Bodgers, U. S.
Ravy, commanding, Friday, 28 December 1804

At midnight moderate breezes and Aying clouds, a t daylight saw
the rock of Lisbon bearing East, ji past 7 got the anchores off the
bows, at 10 sent up Top gallant yards, 3; past 10 fired a gun for a
pilot
At % past 11 hove too 8: took a pilot On board fil1,d away & made
sail At Meridian fresh breezes and Rainey W' Cape Epichel bore
S 3 E the light house bore E 36 N.
[USNA.]
Extract from journal of Hezekiah Loomie, Steward, U. 6. Navy, in U. 8. Brig
Vkm. H a t e r Commandant John Smith, U. 8. Bavy, commanding, Friday, 28
December 1804

This day fair wind. We past through the channel which divides
Malta from Gozza and arrived off the mouth of the harbour at 12
o'clock at noon, sent our boat into the harbour to see if our Commodore
was there, but found he was not, but were informed he was in Syracuse dangerously ill. There were two American ships in Malta from

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

223

Leghorn. At half past two P. M. we made all sail and stood for
Syracuse, the wind directly abaft. Could not see the land a t sunset.
Saw one sail which appeared to be large. Night coming on we did
not speak her.
[L. F. Middlebrook. NDA copy.]
To Captain Stephen Deretur, Jr:, U. S. Havy, commanding U. 6. Frigate
from Captam J ~ m e sBerron, U. S. Navy

Congrcs~,

SIR Commodore Barron has this day directed me to inform you
t,hat I t is his wish you should proceed with the United States Frigate
Congress under my [your?] command to Tunis Bay, and take under
your convoy the smallVesse1 captured some time since by that ship
and see her safe to an anchor, It is then His wish you should see the
Consul & After ha-ring gained all the information that he may have
to communicate, to sail for Tripoly and cruize 4 or 5 Weeks in such a
direction off that City as may appear to you most adviseable keeping
in view the Strictes[t] attention to the Blockade and Persuing such
other Plans for the detection of sundry Cruiers, said to have sailed
from thence, as you may think best for the good of the service, commodores Barron extreme illness prevents his addressing you personall
on this occassion but directs me to add that should you meet w i d
strong adverse winds, you will see the Vessel into Malta, and place
her under the protection of the American Consul until another
opportunity Offers and should necessity compel you to leave her in
this situation the commodore wishes you to glve the commander a
Certificate that may protect him hereafter, [HS of Pa. NDA photostst.]

To William Jarvis, U. I. Consul, Lisbon, Portugal, from Captain John Bodgers,
U. s. Navy

SIR I h a ~ eto acquaint you that I arrived here last evening, last
from Syracuse; which place I left on the 2gtQUltQMy stay here will be but short, and if Practicable it is necessary the
Ship should be permitted to Prattique immediately, as she has been
so much buffeted within these last three Weeks as to require a number
of new sails & a Bowsprit. - I can see no reason why I should not
be permitted to Prattique, as I have had no communiration with any
Place or thing, since I left Syracuse, on account of my having some
howledge of the rigid Quarantine Laws of tlus Place. The Constitution is much in want of Seamen, having lost a number
in last Summers Expedition, If any that are Idlc call at your OfEce be
pleased to direct them to this ship. [NDA.

Captain's LB, Vol. 1, 1805.1

To laster Commandant Iaaac Bull, U. S. Navy, commending U..S. Brig A r m , from
W i a m Eaton, U. 6. Navy Agent for the Barbary Regencies

GRANDCAIRO
2gt@Dee' 1804
SIR, KO doubt by this time you begin to have some solicitude for
our return to Alexandria, I confess f do not feel altogether at my

224

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1804 TO 1805

'

ease remaining so long in a state of uncertitude, something worse than
suspence - hitherto I have received no Answer to any of my Letters
to Efamet Bashaw though besides the Special Couriers dispatched to
him from Alexandria and Rosetta, I have sent off expresses by different Routs since our arrival at Cairo - I am beginning to apprehend
that access to him is not so easy as I a t first irnmagined, yet am far
from admitting a doubt, of the h a 1 success of our expedition, Jealousy,
Suspicion, or perhaps self interest may have prevented the Mameluke
Beys from suffering the Letters to be delivered into his hands, or from
permitting him to separate himself from them - indeed it is not
impossible, that he himself after having been so repeatedly trifled with,
may entertain some doubt of our sincerrity. - If I get no intelligence from the Bashaw between this and Sunday Evening, I shall
dispatch M' Farquhar to you with this Letter and a small party of
recruits for the Bengaize expedition, to wait my arrival a t Alexandria shall remain here yet a few days, and if no intelligence comes from
the Bashaw, am inclined to think it will be best to mike an attempt
to pass both Armies, and seek an interview with him in person, it
would a t once do away dl doubts on his part, and remove any suspicions his friends the Beys may have conceived unfavourable to his
views - the undertaking will be hazrardous, but this is a world of
adventure, in which little is to be expected without enterprize and
perseverance, and not a great deal to be realized with them.
I
shall advise M' Goldsborough to profit of this occasion to return on
board the Brig,as I am persuaded you will need his services, and as
we can very well dispense with them. December 3Ots 9 P. M.
Mr Goldsborough and MT Farquhar have not appeared today, they
have had a Battle a t fisticuff last night a t a Billiard Table, and both
got Mack eyes, in consequence of which they have kept themselves
in Coventry - Good God! when will OW Young Men learn the weight
of respect which ought to attach itself to Uniform and a Sword, I t
were to have been wished that M? Goldsboroughs curiosity to see
Grand Cairo had been restramed, he has behaved disgracefully, and
very much to thf injury of the reputation of the cloth he wears - he
is accused of swmdlmg at-play at a Gentlemans board, of offering
indecencies to Turkish Ladles in the public Streeh, and what is sornewhat more base of bilking his Courtezan in a Brothel. - I certainly
should not mention these last two circumstances, were it not that
jomal Complaint of them as an znjury has been made to me, and a demand
of redress, which I with difficulty silenced - I n the Billiard Table
quarrel with Mr Farquhar, the spectators, who you may be sure were
numerous on so extraordinary occasion seem universally to think
Goldsborough the aggressor, in so much that if i t had not been for the
interference of Selim my .Janisary they would have suffered Farquhar
to break his Bones - hhzs shameful exhibition originated in a subject
equally shtuneful, a bet of half a pint of Rose Olio!!!It is matter of great exultation to the Turks, and I confess I am
mortified with regret that an incident so unfavorable to American
&am.cter has happened a t our first introduction to this Capitol.
I do not give you h s information to be used in law Martial, but only
that you may be e%bled to udge of Proper Characters, where to
grant indulgencies, in Order t a t your own feelings may not suffer
mortification - I do not know how the Gentlemen of his rank will

-

-

h

U'ARS WITH BAKBARY POWERS

225

reconcile their sensibility, and their respects to such a representative
of their characters. 11' Goldsborough will certainly have passage in the Packet for
Alexandria tomorrow. December S I B $5 P.M.
Nothing New since yesterday, the Packec herewith enclosed to the
Secretary of the Navy department, 1s a duplicate of that I passed open
through your hands, which Ma or hlissett says has gone to its address,
but of your receipt of which I ave no certain advice. If this arrives
within Six days I desire you will write me, otherwise I hope it will be
too late. Of the People who go with hl: Farquhar, some perhaps will willingly
enter tbe Brig for a term, others will come with me, among them a
French Musician, will you be w i h g to pay $150, 130 or 100 for a
Sword and carriage. -

h

[NDA. IssacHullLB, 1803-1806.1
Extract from journal of U. S. +gate ~ m f i t u t i o nCaptain
.
John Bodgers, U. S. Navy,
commandmg, Saturday, 29 December 1804

At past 2 [PM] the ship Not answering hir helm shorten,d Sail
and let go the anchor
At 3 hove up $ made sail & stood In. a t 4 Shorten,d sail & came
Too with the starbg bower anchor in 16 fathoms water, the light house
Bore West.
At 10 Moord ship.
Lisbon Roads
[USNA. I
Extract from log book of U. S. S. John Adorns, Master Commandant Isaac Chamcey,
U. S. Navy, commanding, Saturday, 29 December 1804

We are standing to the Westward along the S IT part of Sardinia
At 2 P M we took our Departure from Tot-o I?], in order to proceed
down the Mediterranean - At this t,ime it bore by compass E % S
distant seven leagues
Latitude Observed 39' 41' K.
[LC. EPP, John Adams, 1804-1805.1
Extract from journal of Wdshipman Charles Morris, Jr., IT. S. Navy, on board
U. S. Prigate President. Xaster Commandant George Cox, U. 6. Navy. commanding,
Saturday, 29 December 1804

[In the Harbour of Syracuse]
10. A M the U. S. Brig 'C/Tixen arrived from a Cruise.
11 A Survey was held upon the fore Mast by Captains Campbell
and Decatur and the RIasters and Carpenters of the Squadron, who
reported the larboard cheek fish unfit for Service - 40 Allen Sick.
[Mrs. C . E. Fox original. NDA photostat.]
Extract from journal of Bezekiah Loomis, Steward, U. 8. Navy, in U. S. Brig
Vixen, Master Commandant John Smith, U. 5. Navy, commanding, Saturday, 29
December 1804

A t ten o'clock A. M. came to anchor in Syracuse. Found there
the Frkates Essex, President, Constellation and Congress. Were informed the Commodore was recovering. Received on board 2 bbls.

226

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1804 TO 1805

of bread and 60 gal. spirits. At sun setting we weighed anchor and
dropped astern of the Essex and moored.
[L. F. Middlebrook. NDA copy.]
To Secretary of the Navy from Captain John Bodgers, U. 6. Navy

(Duplicate forwc)

U. S. FRIGATE
Constitution

HARBOUR
OF LISBON
Decemf SO. 1804

SIR I have the Honor to make known to you that I arrived here
the day before yesterday (last from Syracuse) after one of the most
Tedious 8: disagreeable passages I ever Experienced - I call'd at
Gibraltar & Tangier, but at the former was prevented from having
any communication, owing to the Plague not having yet subsided. At Tangier I had Verbal communication with M: Simpson (altho
my Boat was not permitted to land, nor he to come on board a11
Vessels being subject to quarantine) and informed by him that every
thing stood perfectly well in that quarter - I pass'd Tangier on the
19tQInst & from the moment I got fairly into the Atlantic, until my
arrival here, I had one continued Gale from the Westward, & this
under the unpleasant circumstance, during the most Violent part of
the Gale, of being obliged to carry a press of Sail, to avoid the dreadful
consequences of being cast away on the Moorish Coast, with a Bowsprit so bad1 sprung as to prevent carrying any Sail on it, and our
principal Sa' s so indifferent that they were not equal to withstand
the Violence of the Wind: In this situation we were unbending,
four Days. - I was
mending, bending and reunbending &"or
perfectly decieved in the Bowsprit, for when I took charge of the ship,
I was informed that it had been supposed defective, but that it had
been examined, repaired & afterwards considered perfectly secure;
however the third Day after I left Syracuse, I met with a fresh Gale
from the Westward, which convinced me to the contrary, as it was
with difticulty I t could be secured sufficiently to support the Foremast. - The Constifution is the most laboursome & uneasy Ship I
have ever commanded, but this I concieve is owing to her Kentlidge
being improperly stowed. - I am a t present in Quarantine and
have not as yet heard from our Consul, altho in sight of his residence;
however I am in hopes that this apparent neglect is owing to some
primary cause, such as ought not to detract from his merits in his
OfEcial Capacity. The flattering accounts that Mr Jarvis gave Cap! [James] Rarron,
when the Essexwas here about two months ago, of his being able to procure any number of Seamen the Squadron might want, induced Commo'
Barron to send the Constitution to this Port to complete her crew,
which is about 80 short of Complement, in preference to any other,
and a t the same time shew-the Emperor of Morocco that our ships
are in motion, as you will discover by his Letter of Instructions to me
on the subject. - The Constitution is in want of a new Bower Cable
& owing to the severe Buffeting she met with on her passage, will
require three new Topsails, a new Foresail & Mainsail & Bowsprit if
it can be procured; however I am in hopes no time will be lost by thesz
outfits, as they can be executed in the necessary time it will take to
procure the Seamen that are wanted. I understand by the Pilot that the Brig Siren (which has been
since Commo: Barrons command on the Gibraltar station) left this

~r

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

227

place n few days ago: her destination I suppose Tangier, where I
left orders (by instruction of Commo. Barron) for her to proceed to
join the Squadron Aloft, in case Mr Simpson was of opinion that her
services could be dispensed with in that uarter. - I have not as
yet learnt the destruction that the last Ga e has caused on the Coast
of Spain, between Cape St Vincent & the Entrance of the Straights
& on the Atlantic coast of Morocco, but I am too well satisfy'd that
it is very considerable; An American Brig is this moment coming in
with the loss of her Bowsprit, Foremast & Main Topgallant mast,
with her Decks cleared of Boats & every other movable.
The Brig Scourge Cap! Prebles Prize, pass'd through the Gut the
Evening before I did and altho she had got a good offing I am afraid she
suffered very considerably. As the John Adams sailed fromaSyracuseon tho 16 Nov: for America, 12 days before me, she will u7~thoutany doubt have arrived long
before this reaches you; I am therefore prevented from saying an thing on the subject of Pass'd or Future opperations against l'ripo$,
further than you have a right to Expect that next Summer will complete Every thing perfectly conforma[ble] wit11 your wishes - I
have nothing further to add than that you may rely on Every Exertion
by me being used to rejoin the Squadron as soon as possible. -

9

[LC. JRP, Letters & Orders, Book A, 1804-1805.1
To William Kirkpatrick, U. S. Consul, Malags, from Captain John Rodgers, U. S.
Navy

U. S. FRIGATE
Constitution
LISBON
Dec? SO. 1804.

Every Effort is now using to give Tripoli her death blow next Summer,
and no doubt it will he effected in a manner to prevent them ever
again from feeling an inclination to malie War on our Commerce,
Commo. Barron recieved a letter from Poor Bainbridge at the commencement of this Ivf ont,h, but it contained not,hing very particular
farther than that he was well and had experienced not,hing ver
severe in his treatment - his confinement I feel very sanguine w1.8
not be longer than next Summer, when I flatter myself the Bashaw
will curse the Day he ever knew him - I shdl sail from this for
Syracuse in about t,hree Weeks and if circumsta'nces of duty admit,
I will allow myself the pleasure of giving you a Call. - Barron,
Campbell $ Chauncey desire t,heir best regards to you - Pray
present my most respectful compliments t,o Mq Kirkpatrick, Your
Father in Law, Brother in Law, and their Familys, as also the amiable
Mr & Mro Rose, & believe me I am Dear Sir, with Sincere
[LC. JRP, Let,ters 8: Orders, Book A, 1804-1805.1
T o Master Commandant Charles Stewart, U. S . Navy, commanding U. S. Brig
Siren, from James Simpson, U. S. Consul, Tangier, Xorocco

TANGIER
30thDecember 1804
SIR Yesterday I received by way of Tariffa your favours of the
4 t b & 15th Inst, sorry to find t,he wants of the Bng under your Command has occasioned you so material a delay a t Cadiz, when comCOPY

228

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1804 TO 1805

-

pleted I shall hope for the satisfaction of seeing you in this Bay Inclosed is a letter for you from Cap9 Rodgers, but Circumstances,
certainly do not admit of my recommending your proceeding as
there mentioned, which I have acquainted Cap$ Rodgers; he proceeded for Lisbon the 19tb Ins; and I expect will be here again in
about three weeks - I thank you for the Copy of the letter from
M' Jarvis, since then he has advised me the Emperor's agents have
purchased a t Lisbon a Coppered Brig Capable of mounting 12 or 14
Guns, and I make no doubt but we shall soon hear of their having
bought more Vessels of the Same Nature - My Letter for Caps
Barron lodged a t Algeziras is so old, its Contents can now be of
little information to you; however I shall make enquiry after i t When you have occasion to write me, direct your letters Via San
Roque, Tariffa or from any part of Spain, and there will be no need
of Sending them to Gibraltar - About half an hour after Anchoring here, if you send a boat to the Beach, I will have a letter ready
to be sent you - Coming from Cadiz you will not be admitted
to Pratique; but you may be supplied with such articles of Provision,
as are permitted to be Ship'd for Vessels of War, if you desire it [Mrs. James S. Barron Col.]

Extract from log book of U.S. S. ]oJm A d a Master Commandant Isaac Chauncey
U. S. IFavy, commanding, Sunday, SO December 1804

Samuel Sloan, a Seaman, was found to have the Small Pox, supposed to be caught a t Naples Mustered the Ship's company &
read the Articles of War On mustering the Ship's compan twenty
four were found among the Seamen not to have had the sma pox They were inoculated by the Surgeon per order of Captain Chauncey
Noon - Fresh breezes from S b E
Latitude Observed 3 9 O 59' N.

I?

[LC. EPP,John Adams, 1804-1805.3
Extract from journal of Hezekiah Loomis, Steward, U. 6. Aavy, in U. 6. Brig Vixen,
Master CommandantJohn Smith, U.S. Bavy, commanding, Sunday, 30 December
1804

Syracuse. N. B. The Congress sailed this da a t 10 o'clock A. M.
and her prize likewise which was said was to e restored.
[L. F. Middlebrook. KDA copy.]

g

To Master Commandant Isaac Bull, U. S. Navy, commanding U. S. Brig Argus, from
William Eaton, U. S. Bavy Agent for the Barbury Regencies

GRANDCAIRO
31" Decr 1804
SIR,Permit me to introduce to your acquaintance Colonel Jean
Eugene, an Engineer late in the Austrian service, and who is engaged
wjth me in the next Summers operations. [NDA. Isssc Hull LB, 1803-1806.1
To Master Commandant Isaac Bull,U. S. Navy, commanding l3. S.Brig Argw, from
Major E. Msset, British Xinister to Cairo, Egypt

ROSETTA
31'5 Deer 1804
&a, I am happy to h d by your favor of the 25's which wag delivered
to me this morning, that the Packet of Mr Eaton, for which I had

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

228

entertained some apprehensions has reached you - By the last
information I have from Cairo, I am induced to tW that Mr Eaton
will not be down for some days, I understand he is extremely uneasy
a t not having received any Answer to the Various letters he has
Foritten to Achmed Pacha, but I fear that the object he has in view
is not to be obtained in Cairo. I do not know [how] to thank you sufficiently, for the Wine and
other good things you have been so kind as to send our little party
here, all feel the value of the present, and join with me in sincere
acknowledgments. Cairo begins ahead to experience the want of the necessaries of
life, and many indivi uals of the more indigent classes of the people
have deserted a City, where even Bread is not always to be procured. A Caravan of 800 Cammels Conveying Coffee, Gums and Aromatics
from Suez to Cairo has been plunderd by the Arabs, and it is said that
100 Cammels only have been permitted to reach their destination. Do me the favor to present my best Compliments to Messr!
Blake & Read

i?

[NDA.

Isaac Hull LB, 1803-1806.1

TOPurser Robert W. Goldsborough, U. S. Navy, from William Eaton, V. S. Navy
Agent for the Barbary Regencies

GUND CAIBODec. $1. 1804.
COPY.
SIR,A packet boat, in the service of the United States, will leave
this for Rosetta a t six oclock this evening; of which occasion I should
think it advisable for you to profit to return on board the brig Argm
at Alexandria. A persuasion that your services will be required there
before I shsll return with the Gentlemen who accompany me, as well
as other circumstances which cannot but be interesting to you, induce
me to recommend this measure [LC, Personal P, hljsc, Eaton, h c No. 2553.1
To Richard Farquhar, from Willism Baton, U. 5. Navy Agent for the Barbary

Regencies

COPY.
GRAND
CAIRODec. 31.1804
SIR, I notified you yesterday morning that I should dispatch a
packet boat for Alexandria this evening, in which F should desire you
to take passage together with Colonel Eugine in order to be on the
spot to receive and communicate to me any intelligence which may
be directed to that place from Hamet Bashaw; or to make revisions
for him in case of his arrival thither - I desire you mi make i t
convenient to call a t my lodgings this morning to consult on this
measure, and to assist me with your advice concerning the provisions
necessary for the passage to Alexandria P. $3. It may be useful to engage some recruits for our expedition
at Alexandria; which I request you to do conditionally - that is to
say, provided we succeed in m a h g the tour to Bengazi b land -

W. E a T o N .

[LC. Personal P , Misc, Eeton, AC No. 2553.1

230

-

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1804 TO 1806

Extract from log book of U. 8.8. Jobnddms, Master Commandant Isaac Chauncey,
IT. 6.Navy, commanding, Monday, 31 December 1804

Strong S b W winds We are situated nearly 110 miles East from
the Idand of Minorca, under a11 la,in sail, steering to the Westward
Took in and set Top Gallant Stu ding Sails as necessary The S b E
and S b W wind continued fresh till 7 in the evening, from which time
till midnight variable winds from the Westward
All the middle part moderate and pleasant weather From 5 till ?
in the morning calm - At Day light saw a strange sail to the
Southward At j( past 7 a breeze sprung up from S Mrb S The strange
sail bore d o n to speak us
At $6 past 8 - shortened sail, and received an officer from H. B.
Majesty's Ship Superb
At 9 Filled and made sail in for Minorca, which was in sight bearing
NWbW.
We bad fresh breezes all the Forenoon, with theSuperb in company We out sailed her three miles, under the same sail, in three hours
At 10 We passed a strange sail running to the E.ward.
At Noon - the Harbour of Port Mahon bore b compass TI7 ij S
17 miles - The N E. extreme of the Island bore 1%' ji 15'.
Latitude Observed 39' 53' N.

1

K

[LC. EPP, John Adams, 1804-1805.1

I18041
To Midshipman John Trippe, U. 6. Navy, from William Whitehead

will please to pardon me in takmg the liberty of addresSIR,
sing you thus, at the same time probably I am oversteping the bounds
of common decorum,
I have receired information, that the
Schooner Enterprize which you had the honor to command, is to be
dismantled, and the Seamen discharged; consequently I deem it a
duty incumbent on me as an aged Man; and one who it is well Knou-n,

-

has spent the Youth, the Stren h, and the best of his days in the
United S. Service under some o the first commanders, and have encountered many difficulties a t the Battle of Tm+oli, ilfghting for the
Sons of America, this should be held in remembrance and as I am now
in my old age I tlink it would be the duty of my commander, to see
that there should be a method planed to procure me a livelihood
With marks of respect and reverential esteem
I have the honor of Subscribing myself your humble and most
obedient Servant

8'

WILLIAM
WHITEHEAD.

To, John Tripp Esq?
Commander of the United States Schooner Enterprize
[F, D. Roosevelt Collection.)

I18041
Bemark@regarding the claim of HIS. Stephen Decatur, Jr., for prize money for the
capture of the U. 6. Frigate Philadelphia

Remarks upon the claim of Mrs. Decatur, as representative of the
late Commodore Decatur, in behalf of herself, and of the officers
and men of the ketch Intrepzd, for com ensation in the nature of
rize-money, for the capture of the ~h$z.del~hia,
in the harbor of
&riPoli.

231

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

That the captors mi ht, if not peremptorily enjoined to the contrssg by their orders, Eave brought off their prize, and reaped the
pecuniary reward designed them by the law is a matter of the highest
probability; and approximates certainty as near as any unaccomplished event can do. They found her com letely equipped and fitted
for sea, and prepared for action even to the oading of her guns. After
all the time spent in the action, in preparations to execute the order
for the destruction of the ship; in the effectual application of the means
of destruction, accordmg to the details of the order; and in waiting to
see the pro ess and effect of the same, and to repel the apprehended
attempts o the enemy to retake the ship, before her destruction had
been placed beyond doubt; after all this lapse of time, the captors
effected their retreat, in their own vessel, without the loss of a man.
I apprehend that the means and the chances of escape in the captured frigate, were incalculably greater and more certain, if the captors had been a t liberty to cut her cables and hoist sail, the instant
they had mastered her decks. Two obstacles were to be apprehended
and guarded against, whether they retreated in their oum vessel, or in
the prize: recapture and impediments of navigation. Against the
first, the superior means of defence in the fri ate are too obvious to
be insisted on; and I take it for granted, that er facilities as a sailer,
the depth of water, and other circumstances, must have opened her
way to the sea, at least as safe and speedy as that of the ketch Intrepid.
But the time which would thus have been gained, must be held conclusive. The advantage it would have given the captors is incalculable; and even if i t were possible to suppose that the intrinsic difEculties opposing their egress in the frigate, were greater than what
they encountered in the ketch, (an hypothesis deemed wholly inadmissible,) still the advantage of time must more than have compensated them. Commodore Preble framed his order when a t a eat distance from the scene of action; and, reasoning from probab ties and
circumstances in general, he inferred that the enterprise, even to the
extent of talrin and destro g the frigate, would have been attended
with more di culty and oss than actually occurred. He did not
anticipate the consequences, to their full extent, of the panic terror
with which the suddenness of the attack, and the heroic bearing of
the assailants, struck the enemy; he probably anticipated desperate
resistance, and a, serious sacrifice of life. It was obviously impossible
for him, a t that distance, to judge of the actual state and condition
of the frigate, or of the existing means and facilities for bringing her
off; which must have depended on contingencies which he had no possible means of ascertaining; such as the losses to be sustained by the
assailants in carrying her; the state of her equipment for defence or
for sailing; of the mnd, weather, &c. Her destrucbon, b so wellplanned and daring an enterprise, was deservedly considere as of the
utmost importance to the operations then going on against Tnpoli;
as well from its moral effect upon the enemy, as the abstraction of so
much of his positive force. This great ob'ect, the Commodore concluded from the facts and circumstances t en known to him, would
have been put in too much hazard, by an attempt to push the .enterprise to the point of still more signal and glorious success, by bnngmg
off the prize in the face of the enemy. But it turned out, in the event,
that this would have been far the safer and easier achievement. It is
understood, indeed, to be the opinion of the moat experienced and

f

F

%

P

&

r"

'I

h

232

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1804 TO 1'805

skilful naval commanders, that if Commodore Preble had conducted
the enterprise in person, he would, upon the s ot, and with a full view
of all the circumstances, have changed his p an, and brought off the
frigate. This is well known to have been the decided and clear opinion of the illustrious commander, who first suggested, and then executed, the enterprise with so much glory and advanta e to himself and
his country. 'Tis well known that while he faithfu y andpunctually
fulfilled the orders of his superior in command, he would gladly have
followed the bent of his own genius, by taking the course pointed out
by the circumstances and the event of the action.
As to one of the questions which have been suggested in this case,
whether the captors acquire a beneficial property and interest in a
maritime prize of war, before adjudication, I have, on a former occasion,
been called upon to give i t full consideration; and the opinion then
expressed, and the reasons advanced in the affirmative, I yet adhere
to, with a coddence corroborated by the success with which they
were maintained before a tribunal of pre-eminent learning and talent.

P

I

*

*

DECEMBER
9, 1825.

*

*

*

*

*

WALTERJOKES.

[NR&L. PamphIet File.]

[December 18041
Statement of 116. M. Noah, late U. 6. Consul, Tripoli

The memorial of Mrs. Decatur to Congress, praying for herself ana
the captors of the Philadelphia frigate, that the value of said frigate
may be paid, has excited considerable surprise in the country. I t
was not for a moment supposed, that amidst the gratuities, pensions,
and appropriations for services rendered during the revolutionary and
late wars, that a debt of so high and important character was still
unpaid by the nation. There appears, however, to be but one voice
on the subject, viz., that the same justice and liberality which has
been awarded to others, should in this case cancel a claim which has
slept too long.
The Mediterranean was the made of the American navy. Its
character and discipline -its subsequent success in war- its i d u e n w
in peace, and its present high character throughout the world, have
their origin in the wars declared against the several powers on the
Barbary coast; and in that school of fierce contention and ultimate
glory were the Hulls, Bainbridges, and Decaturs - the Perrys, Lawrences, McDonoughs, Joneses, and the galaxy of naval heroes, taught
to fi h t and conquer. It is not, therefore, surprisin that the nation
sho d be anxiously alive to the discussion of any c aim arising from
services rendered in that remote quarter of the world.
Having passed some time on the Barbary coast in the public service,
it became necessary to make myself familiar with the relations between the United States and those regencies, not only from their
commencement, but to trace their history, the treaties, tributes, and
diplomatic intercourse, as well as the wars, which finally established
the independence of our flag on the coast of Africa.
Our difficulties first commenced with Tripoli - with the ~ a c h a ~ o f
which kingdom, as well as the other States, we had some indefimte
arrangements; and for some time prior to the appearance of a naval

3

f

WARS WITH BARARY POWERS

233

force in the Mediterranean, our merchant vessels and seamen were
protected by the British, Swedish, and such friendly powers, who had
for many years treaties with the Barbary States, aided by occasional
donations and tributes; which were considered advisable in preference
to war, a t a period when the naval force of the country was too limited
for a hazardous experiment, and when the formidable strength and
atrocious piracies of the Barbary corsairs paralyzed the efforts of the
Christian powers.
As the commerce of the United States increased in the Mediterranean, the friendly interference of European powers in our behalf was
considerably diminished, and i t is not uncharitable to believe, that
commercial rivalry first suggested to the Pacha of Tripoli to demand a
considerable and perpetual tribute, or give us the alternative of war,
either of which was not a t that period desirable.
The capture of several of our vessels, and the consequent slavery of
our citizens, roused the people to a sense of their wrongs, and war was
formally declared against the Pacha of Tripoli; and our disposable
force was sent to the Mediterranean, with all the young officers, including Decatur, who have subsequently perpetuated the glory and
triumphs of the American flag.
This war with Tripoli was of vital importance to a nation having
an infant navy, and desirous of establishing a name and a character
among the governments of the earth. It was not simply to chastise
an African pirate and abolish tribute - i t was to secure forever to
the American flag that freedom which it claimed, and to which it
was every where preeminently entitled.
The nation, therefore, in tracing the triumphs, the disci line, and
i,
high character of the American navy to the war with ~ r i ~ o fcannot
avoid being grateful to all who distinguished themselves in that
memorable contest, and to reward with honor and profit those who
achieved important victories.
The war a t its commencement, and for two years, dragged heavil ,
without any of those animating results which the people fond y
anticipated. I t was a dull routine of blockade, costly, unpropitious
and discouraging - occasional proofs of valor and seamanship were
discernible - jealousies and bickerings broke out among semor
officers,who, far removed from their government, were compelled to
exercise discretionary powers - the expense of the war was not unfelt,
and taking the unpromising state of things into consideration, the
Government of the United States did contemplate st one period
proposing such terms of peace and payment of a small tribute, which
several of the European powers then complied with- and the unfortunate capture of the Philadelphia frigate, and long captivity of her
officersand crew, did not tend to inspirit the nation to a further and
more active prosecution of the war. The circumstances attending
the capture of that vessel are well known.
The Philadelphia frigate, commanded by Captain Bainbridge, in
sailing close to the town, struck on a rock, and became stationary,
under the powerful batteries of the citadel. A brisk fire between each
was sustained for several hours, until the tide falling, the ship settled,
and her gunwales were under the water, and the captain,. o5cers,
and three hundred men, became prisoners of war. The Tripohtans
to* possession of the ship, warped her a t high tide from the rocks,
moored her under the castles, with the crescent waving over the star-

7

234

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1804 TO 1806

spangled banner, while the crew were carried captives to the dungeons,
to undergo the most painful suffering.
I t was at this juncture, when the ship was in possession of the enemy,
and under the protection of several hundred pieces of ordinance
frowning from the battlements, that Decatur and a handful of brave
men, in a little xebeque, disguised as fishermen, fastened themselves
to the frigate, sprang on board, and after a fierce and bloody encounter
with the "maligant and turban'd Turk," on the quarter-deck, carried
her a t all points, drove the Turks into the sea, tore down the crimson
flag, fired her in several parts, and took to their little fishing smack and
sailed off triumphantly, regarding a t a distance the sublime spectacle
of the crackling flames illuminating the crescents of the mosques, and
the turretsof the castles - the blaze of artillery from the ernbrazures the blowing up of the ship - the shrieks of the dying, and the imprecations of the Turkish soldiery together, "making night hideous."
I t has been said that Decatur, after recapturing the frigate, could
not have brought her out; and in reply to that charge, it is said that
hi orders were positive to burn her. Burning her to the u-ater's edge
was calculated to make a more deep and appalling impression upon the
Musselmen then merely carrying away the ship; and this spirited act
of Decatur's, while it reflected the highest honor on hi courage, was
loudly applauded throughout Europc, and infused new hopes in the
nation, while it created on the part of the Pacha a higher respect for
our national capacities and resources, and compelled him to propose
terms of peace.
The results of this extraordinary attempt were of incalculable
advantage to the nation; they led to an honorable peace - to the
abolishment of tribute - to the liberation of the suffering captives to future peace and honor -to a grtllant, ambitious spirit in the navyto an increasing popularity in that branch of our defence - to a strict
discipline, and all of which were productive of future and ermsnent
glory in the war with the greatest naval power of the wor d. These
consequences go far to strengthen a claim which is in itself unquestionable, and would be recognized by all well organized and just governments.
The war with Algiers in 1815 was declared upon the same principle,
and prosecuted with the same views as the former one with Tripoli;
but the Algerines were a much more formidable power, possessing a
stronger navy, and fortifications almost impregnable, oi a hiih, audacious, and unsubduable spirit. The command of the squadron was
ven to Decatur, from the settled conviction *at his name was more
l i l i a r to the Barbsry States, in consequence of hie exploits befofe
Tripoli, and in this idea the Government was not mistaken. I was ln
that neighborhood during the Algerine war, and it is a fact unparalleled in history, and almmt inconceivable in the annals of warfare,
that injfty days after fhe squadron sailed from Sandy Hook, a treaty
of peace was signed between Algiers and the United States, which
included indemnification.for the past and security*fort h f d u r e . I n that
short space of time Decatur had arrived in the Mediterranean, fought
and capture+ a .frigate, and some small vessels, killed the Algenne
Admiral, sslled mto the ha~borof Algiers, and r&iJ;ed the treaty at the
cannon's mouth.
I t was not expected that our differences with Algiers would t e ~ i nate without delay, bloodshed, and cost. The nation was determined

f'

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

235

to abolish tribute and punish the barbarians a t every sacrifice,
but the name of Decatur, the promptness of his movements, and his
success on the threshold of the contest, saved a large sum to the Government, the loss probably of valuable lives, and secured additional
honor and freedom to our flag.
Here was the harvest of that fame and national honor which &st
sprang up a t Tripoli. From Algiers, the squadron sailed for Tunis,
where a gross Infraction of the treaty had been committed, and nearly
$50,000 of American property had been cut out by the British. We
were on the spot at the time, and perceived the effect of the same
influence. "Tell your Admiral to come ashore and see me," said the
Bey. "He declines coming, your highness, until these disputes are
settled, which are best done on board ship." "But this is not treating
me with becoming dignity; Hamuda Pacha, of blessed memory,
commanded them to land and wait a t the palace until he pleased to
receive them." "Very likely,. your highness, but that was twenty
years ago." "I know this adrnlral, he is the same one who, in the war
with Sidi Yusef, of Trablis, burnt the frigate." "The same." "Hum!
why do they send wild young men to treat for peace with old powers?
Then you Americans don't speak truth - you went to war with England, a nation with a great fleet, and said you took their frigates in
equal £ight - an honest people always speak truth." "Mrell, sir, and
that was true. Do you see that tall ship in the bay, with a blue flag?
(the h r r i e r e ) that one was taken from the British; that one near
the small island, (the Macedcnian,) was also captured on equal terms;
that sloop near Cape Carthage, (the Peacock,) was also takenin battle."
The Bey laid down the telescope, reposed on his cushions, and with a
small tortoise-shell comb, set with diamonds, combed his beard.
A small vessel got under weigh, and came near the batteries; a pinnance with a few men rowed about the harbor, and one person,
dressed in the garb of a sailor, was taking soundings - it was Decatur.
"Tell the Admlral to land," said the Bey, "and all shall be settled to
his satisfaction," which was done.
From Tunis Decatur went into Tripoli with the squadron, where
di5culties had also arisen. These were soon and satisfactorily settled,
and the old Pacha received in the most friendly manner the commander
of the squadron, who, when a young man, had destroyed his frigate,
and bearded him under his very batteries.
I t is. however, unnecessary to recapitulate the naval triumphs of our
flag in the Mediterranean; they are known, duly appreciated, and are
sources of great and honest pride; they have procured us indemnity
for the past and security for the future, and probably no officer has
done more to bring about the desirable state of things than Commodore
Decatur.
Whilst these facts are every where admitted, and whilst the nation
is disposed to pay the debt of gratitude due to a deceased gallant
officer, the question a t present relates to indemnity for destroying
the Philadelphia frigate.
I am not apprised of the nature of the objections to the claim, if
any objections are made. I can only say that the nation has derived
a greater benefit from the destruction of the Philadelphia frigate,
than from the possession of the frigate itself. She had been captured,
and was in possession of the enem , and was recaptured and
destroyed - the claim is therefore lega and equitable, and loses none

9

236

NAVAL OPERATIOOVSFROM 1804 TO 1805

of its force from its not having been heretofore liquidated. I t .is a
claim that the nation recognises, and is bound in honor to pay, and
one that the American people, I am persuaded, d feel a pleasure in
adjusting to the satisfaction of the representative of Commodore
Decatur, and the gallant crew who fought and conquered under him.

NEWYORE,November 8, 1826.
[h'R&L. Pamphlet File. J

[December 18041
Conaerning reward for destruction of ex-U. S. Frigate Philadelphia

Mr. Jarvis's report to the House of Representatives, January 27, 1836.
The Committee on Naval Mairs, to which was referred the petition
of the legal representatives of Edward Preble, James Lawrence,
Joseph Bainbridge, and Thomas Macdonough, in behalf of themselves and others, the survivors and legal representatives of the
officers and crew of the ketch Intrepid, under the command of
Capt. Stephen Decatur, at the time of the destruction of the
frigate Philadelphia, in the harbor of Tripoli, on the night of the
16th of February, 1804, Report:
That the subject of awarding a recompense to the officers and crew
of the ketch Intrepid, for the gallantry of the daring exploit in which
they were so successfuly engaged, has been under the consideration
of every Congress since the year 1824. Every committee to which
it has been referred has made a favorable report; and the House of
Representatives, under all the changes to which it is liable, has
appeared to be invariably impressed with the justice and merit of
the claim. The obstacle which has hitherto prevented a satisfactory
decision, has been a difTerence of opinion upon the mode of apportioning the reward, to which it has always been conceded that the
participants in that achievement were entitled. The want of success
of their predecessors, shall not restrain the committee from using
their endeavors to frame a bill which may find acceptance with s
majority of the House.
It would be superfluous to offer a detailed statement of the destruction of the frigate Pldadelphia. Every fact connected with this bold
attempt is too well known to the nation to need recapitulation. I t is
sufficient to say, that no deed of adventurous daring or successful
enterprise in our naval annals, teeming as they do with brilliant
exploits, deserves more exalted praise or more ample reward; and yet
it stands alone in being denied the meed which an admiring and
grateful country in every other instance, has been eager to bestow.
The statement annexed to this report will show that, not only when
vessels were destroyed, but even when they were recaptured, Congress
has not hesitated to decree a large pecuniary reward; and, when we
consider the lapse of time between the action and the reward, in the

237

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

present instance, the sums which have been appropriated are proportionably greater than that of which it is the purpose of the oommittee to urge the grant, and which is the same heretofore recommended. I n providing for the distribution, it has been deemed sdvisable to follow neither the bill reported at the second session of the
19th Congress, which was framed in conformity with the prize act,
nor the bill of the last Congress, which was founded upon an ingenious
but arbitrary allotment. The distribution recommended by the
committee is founded upon the relative proportion of the pay of the
officers and seamen of the navy, according to the pay bill adopted
at the last session of Congress. This is considered to be as equitable
and reasonable a mode as can be devised, and its adoption will remove
the objection of the great ine uality in favor of the commanding
officer, which was made to the b' reported to the last Congress, while
it avoids too great an increase in the value of the shares in the lower
class of distribution, arising from the small number of persons to be
found in them, which was the objection made to adopting the provisions of the prize act. The tabular statement, annexed to this
report, will explain the operation of the principle adopted for the
distribution, in conformity to which a bill is reported, and will furnish
the means of instituting a comparison between the several plans of
apportionment.
A Table of the distribution of $100,000 to the captors of the frigate
Phdadelphia, showing the amount which each individual would be
entitled to, according to the prize act, the bill of 1834, the bill of 1836,
and by the British order in council of March 19, 1834.

3l

I

No. or1
per-

Sham of each Share of each Share of each
person by person by the p e m n by the
the prize act. hill of 1834. bill of la%.

Station.

B$~o:ier
in council.

I

Commander of the squadron.
Captain of the hllrtwpid-...............
Lieutenants. each ......................
1 8 u r g e o n................................
1 Boatswain..........................
0~~ .
2 I Master's mates, each. ..................
6 Midshipmen, each-- ...................
2 Boatswain's mates, each ................
1 Steward ...............................
4 Quartermaster's, each.. ................
1 Pilot ...................................,
1 Sergeant of marines.................. .I
1 C o m r a l of marhes-. ..................
4 Quartcrmners........................
42 Seamen and marines.. .................
1

1

3

,

/

72 ,

-1

l,W 4-9
I,W 4 - 4
1,944 4-9
1.136 4-11
1.136 4-11
1,136 4-11
1, I36 4-11
I, 1% 4-11

1,103 76

1,357 33
1,357 32
1.357 32
1,006 81
1,006 81
1,006 81
1.006 81
i,OlM 81
304 13

833 f6

i

971 14

92003
817 80
817 80
945 59

5; :
35
6613

1 236 16
1:236 16
88892
1 236 15
f1: 236 15
1,m 15
888 92
618 08
618 08

1

in council the Brst lieutenant rewives a lnrgrn portion thnn the othm llentemta.
t ~ bpilot
r is not mentioned by &me in the British order incouncil:he is assimilateflto the quartermasters.
:The COIpOrnl of marines3share Is increased beyond what h n pay would entitle h ~ m
to, in the same p w
Portion that the share of the private of marines Is increased.
tThe share ot the marines would beless than that 01 seamen, Becording to their pay, but It was considered
*%T. the British order

that it was bettor that they should share alike.

[SR&L. Pamphlet File.]

238

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1804 TO 1805

CALENDAR

1804

1804

JANUARY

APRIL

MARCH

6 7
I ;
13114
1 1 12 13 14 15'16 17 15 16 17 18 t9 20 21
18 19 20 21 22 23 24 22 23 24 25 2 6 27 28
41 26
5 27
6 28
71 29 30 31 29 30
25

MAY

JUNE

JULY

AUGUST

1 1 1 1 1 : 1
l i l :
15 16 17 18 19 20 21 12 13 14 15 16 17 18
5 20 21 22 23 24 125
22 21 24 25 I26 27 28 ; l9
6 28
7 29 30 1 31 ,
29 30 31
26 27

51
.(
,I
I

SEPTEMBER

OCTOBER

1 ; 21 3 , 4
6
21 3 ; 4 1
8 9 ' 1 0 1 1 12 13
9 10 1 1 112 13 14 t 15 14 15 1 6 117 1 8 1:I
20
16 17'18 19 20 21 , 2 2 21 22 23.24125 26 27
23 24 25 26 27 28 29 28 29 130 131
30
7 ;
/
I
/
I1
_-

: A

T
r

NOVEMBER
---

A

5
J 1 5
2
1 1 12 13 14 15 16 17
9
18 19 ' 20 21 22 23 24 16
25 26 27 28 29 30
23
-30

/

;

1

DECEMBER

.I;;"

3
10 1 1 12 13 14 15
17 18 19 20 21 22
24 25 26 27 28 29
31

/ /

239

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

CALENDAR

1805

4

JANUARY

-- ---- '

Sw M a . fur W@d. T&.'

1805

FEBRUARY
M.

z1:il:

SaL

- - -_I-'___

13
6 14 15 16 17 18 19
20 121 22 23 24 25 26
27 I28 129 30 31

'

Sun Mm. / lust 1 W a l 'Thur. FrL
3
10
17
24 1

Sat

1 2
61 7 ;8
1 1 12 13 14 15 16
18 19 20 21 22 23
25 26 27 28

MARCH

APRIL

MAY

JUNE

31

1

JULY

AUGUST

SEPTEMBER

OCTOBER

NOVEMBER

DECEMBER

10 1 1 12 13 14 15 16
17 18 19 20 21 22 23
3 25
41 26
5 27
6i 28
71 29 30
24

1 1 1 1 : 1 :
15 16 17 18 19 20 21
22 23 24 25 26 27 28
29 30 31

A1

240

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1804 T O 1805

[January 18051
To Secretary of the Navy from Captain William Bainbridge, U. 6. navy
NAVYYARD,
WASHINGTON
9btQFebry 1809
SIR,Havin by chance last evening met with a volume entitled
"Horrors of S avery" written by one William Ray, who was a private
on board the frigate Philadelphia under my command, and perceiving, by the volume, that documents were furnished him by the Navy
Department, I presume the work has come to your hands. Altho I
do not deem it necessary for my reputation to enter into a paper controversy n-ith an ungrateful wretch who has no chrtracter to loose,
I nevertheless conceive it proper, to elucidate to the Government
which I have the honor of serving, any infamous publication that may
be made against me & of which I have knowledge. I therefore solicit
your indulgence to the perusal of the enclosed copies of letters; which will a t once show the true character of the base Calumniator.
I have many other letters that would further prove his Book to be
replete with calumny & falsehood but I do not consider it necessary
to trouble you with them

f

-

[January 18051
To Captain William Bainbridge, U. S. Navy, from William Ray
?,IONTGOMERY
COVNTY.FLORIDA.
Januay 1807
SIR,I am engaged in prefering for publication, a volume containing

an account of our unfortunate captivity in Tripoli. I t is to be published by subscription, 8: I wish to make it as useful & interesting
to the public as possible, and as you have ever manifested a generous,
ready, and cheerful disposition to grant me any favor in your power I have ventured to solicit your patronage & furtherance of the undertaking, by forwarding to me such as you may deem important art,icIes,
documents or communications & such as you can with convenient
propriety impart without any trouble or detriment to yourself
I have just received a letter from Genl Eaton, in which he promises
to furnish me with all necessary information of his operations on the
Barbary coast, and assures me in very friendly & flattering terms of
his aid in & support of the work. I have also very good encouragement
from gentlemen of means 8: respectability - A subscription will
soon be opened and if you think proper, I will send you one - but as
I was uncertain where you were, I thought best to m i t e to you first
& to receive an answer - which I wish you to send me as speedy as
convenient, that I may know the better how to calculate, and in the
condition specify the contents, size & price of the book
I am now a t home with my friends & although I am under the
dominion of that imperio* tyrant Poverty, am free from the tyrants
of a more sanguinav & trouble nature and though I have the misfortune of a severe sickness, and have been deprived by a hurt of the
temporary use of my write hand - by a comparative estimateofmy
past sufferings m t h my present circumstances - I derive a large ballance of contentment m my favor - and find myself - I can imperfectly express myself why, more real happy than ever I was in my
life - sucb is the salutary use 8: benefit of adversity, if properly
applied - and I sincerely hope that it has had the same effect on
yourself, and that you may increase in public honors & domestic
felicity through the various walks of life

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

241

Remarks on the preceding letter,
It came to my House when I was absent from the United States on my return home, I did not answer it, which I presume is the cause
of the malice & falsehoods exhibited against me in the "Horrors of
Slavery". I had rendered the author of that infamous work, all the
services in my power while he was under my immediate command,
and after he left me, I obtained for him a Clerkship on board of one
of our Frigates (which increased his pay from $6 to $25 per month)
At the period of writing the foregoing letter, no doubt he felt the
sentiment towards me which he expresses therein - and which he
could not have done had he believed what he has since published I can therefore attribute the change, only to disappointment to an
ungrateful heart & unprincipled mind
Wq B
He has accused me of a total disregard and dereliction of the unfortunate Crew in Tripoli - The following letters written by Ray
himself, for the Crew, and which beyond doubt expressed hm own
sentiments at that time - will fully rove his falsehoods on that point
a,nd how unworthy of oredit his pubication is - I have many other
letters which passed between the Crew and myself during our imprisonment and which equally proves my great attention to them &
their warm acknowledgements. To hi infamous lies relative to the
surrender of the Ship - I appeal to the mass of evidence examined
on the court of inquiry. And to the authors own contradiction in
his relation of that unhappy event.
[Enclosm N o . 11

[21 August 18041
To Captain William Bainbridge, U. S. Navy, from the Crew of late U. S. Frigate
Philudclphia

SIR AS a11 hopes of release for the present are vanished it is our
unanimous wish provided it is in your power, that you would grant
or procure us a trifling sum of money in daily allowances. There
are not any of us paid for our work as heretofore. And the two small
black loaves and scanty allow-ance of 02 are scarcely sufticient to afford
us subsistence
We are fully persuaded Sir, that did you know our wants, you would
do every thing in your power to relieve them
We are totally ignorant of your pecuniary resources, and would
not by any means willingly trouble you with vain and unreasonable
requests, for it is not in your power to assist us we must patiently
submit to our sufferings by the keen knaffings of hunger
(Signed) THECREW
Captn WILLIAM
BAINBRIDGE
(Note by Wq B - This letter was not in Ray's handwriting)

242

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1804 TO 1805
[Enclosure No. 21

[21 August 18041
To the Crew of the U. S. h i a t e Philadbhh, friaonera in Tripoh, from Captoin
W i s m Bainbridge, U. 5. Navy

To the Crew of the U St,ates late frigate Philadelphia now prisoner
in Tripoli
I have this day received a letter from you, under the Signature of
the Crew. Whenever you have occasion & are permitted to write
to me - let some of the petty Officers sign the letter in behalf of the
whole. for I shall then know from whom it comes.
I am sorry to learn that any change should have taken place in
your situation for the worse, and also that the allowance which you
receive from this Regency as prissoners is not suflicient to keep you
from the pangs of hunger. You will recollect, that the allowance of
Beef u-hich was furnished you by my order, was by your request
stopped
I n respect to our solicitation for an advance of money to procure
yourself daily a owance of Provissions. I have to observe, that the
confined situation in which I am kept detached from all communication with you, & many other strong reasons prevent a compliance
with your request. Altho our funds in this place are but small and
intended for the subsistence of the Officers (who are not allowed any
support whatever from this Government) I feel every disposition to
relieve your necessary wants as much as lays within my power,
And if you will let me know what additional quantity of bread,
you are daily in need of - I will give orders to have it sent to your
prison and if you wish, I will have fresh meat sent twice a week or
oftener if our finances will admit of it - Let me hear from you on
the subject. and take care that those who sign the Letter. gets the
opinion of the whole Crew & not of a part of them so that there may
be no misunderstanding hereafter
Conduct yourselves becoming American Seamen $ Soldiers Keep your spirits up, & hope for better days
from your Commander

i

WmBAINBRIDGE

2l8t A U G1804
~
[Enclosure No. 31

[23 August 18041
To Captain William Bainbridge, U. S. Navy, from certain Prisoners of Tripoli

COPY
To William Bainbridge Esqs Commander in cheif of the late United
States Frigate Philadelphia
SIR. Your favor of the 2l"t Inst we have received, and return you
our sincere thanks for the anxiety you feel and the pains you are taken
to relieve our necessary wants - Inclosed we send you a list of those
who do and those who dont wish for an additional supply of provissions. Those whose names appear in the negative are such, as the
Cooks and Waiters in the Castle, Painters, Coopers $ 9 who receive
more sustenance than the majority; some few who refuse it from
economical motives, and some for the same reason which induced
them to petitioq for the meat on Sundays to be discontinued - We
w-ish for the additional allowance of two white or finer loaves of bread

-

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

243

cvery day, and meat twice a weelr or oftener if convenient. We beg
leave to suggest Slr, that to prevent confusion & murmuring for the
future, it would be well for 11115 Fountain, l l r Hodge, 11r Douglas or
either of them, or any person you please to appoint, to see that the
men be arranged into proper messes, and that the provissions be
equally & justly divided & distributed
R e shall endeavour Sir, to conduct ourselves as becomes S e m e n
& Soldiers, and hope with patience for better days
We are Sir,with much Respect &- Esteem your most obt Humble
sert"n
behalf of the whole Crew
HOGG
signed. JAMES

I

THOMAS
HAZLETON
GEORGE
GRIFFITH
Petty o f i e r s
JAMESSTANFORD
GEORGE
URRY

PRISON
IN TRIPOLI
234 Augt 1804
(Note by VTm 3. This letter is in the handwritkf; of Wp Ray)
[Enclosure No. 41

[27 August 18041

To James l o g g , Prisoner in Tripoli, from Captain William Bainbridge, U. S. Maw

To JAMES
HOGG,
$ 9 &F $9
I have received your letter in behalf of the Crew of the U States
late frigate Philad+r~owprisoners in Tripoli. And have ageably to
the request of those whose names you sentame,ordered 224 loaves of
bread to be sent daily to your prison (whlch will be a loaf for each
person) and have also directed 224 'Pa of Beef with vegetables to be
deli~eredyou twice a week - this quantity with what you receive
from the Bashav, I hope will be found sufficientfor your subsistence.
and it is the utmost that our finances will allow. ,4nd I am doubtfull
of their admitting a continuance of this allowance. I shall always
be ready & feel happy t,o relieve your wants when it is in my power but when it is not, you cannot expect it
Situated as we are I do not see proper to select any one to receive
and serve out your provissions. I leave it for the Crew to do, choosingany person or persons whom they may thinlr proper charecters, and
whose duty it will be to do justice to all
L I q you soon be liberated is the viish of your Commander
BAINBRIDGE
Signed

TRIPOLI
PRISOX
27 Augt 1804
[Enclosure No.51

I22 January 18051

To the Crew of the U. 6. Frigate PLiladclpLia, from Captain WWam Bainbridge,
U. S. Navy

To the Crew of the late U Stat;es frigate Philada
I received your letter on the 22q inst and answered it immediatdy informing you, i t was out of my power to give you a further allowance
of bread, but I had made application to this Government, for aIlowing
vou a greater qumtity of provissions. I hope e're this that the B d a w
has complied with my request. In my last letter to you, I mentioned,

244

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1804 TO 1805

that if those men who did not draw any bread, from the funds placed
in my hands, to send me their names with their request, & I would
give orders accordingly. I trust before many months, we shall have
Peace until then keep up your spirits
KmBAINBRIDGE
22@JANY
1805
[Enclosure No. 6)

[23 January 18051
To Captain William Bainbridge, U. S. Navy, from the American Prisoners in
Tripoli

To M-illiam Bainbridge Esqr Commander in cheif of the Crew of the
United States late frigate Philad?
SIR,Your note of yesterday we received this morning, and though
we had previous verbal information that it was not in your power to
comply with our request contained in our last letter, we thank you for
the anxious desire you evince to mitigate our sufferings bj- your prompt
attention to erery communication of our wants - And though we
have not recently, received any additional quantity of provissions
from this Government, we ascribe to your application for us; the
beneficial cause of our being better and more punctually paid than
heretofore for our labour
Tendering you our sincere respects and hoping that Peace may
speedy restore us to Liberty and the arms of our Country.
l4-e remain Sir, unanimously
Pour most Obed "umble
Servants
THEAMERICAN
PRISONERS
PRISOE;
IK TRIPOLI
January ;2Sd 1805

(Note by m"p B. This letter is in the handwriting of T P Ray,
the author 8: vile caluminator of the "Horrors of Slavery")
[A copy of this book, Horrors of Slavery; or, The American Tars i o Tripoli, by
William Ray (Troy, 1808) may be found in The Rare Book Sectiori of the Library
of Congress.]
[NDA. Captain's LB, Vol. 1, 1809.1
To Secretary of the Navy from Captain John Rodgers, U. 6. Navy

U. STATESSHIPConstitution
Lisbon Jany. 1805.

N? 6

SIR I n consequence of a request of Lieu! Wyer's I have given him
permission to return to t h e u . States, with orders to report himself
to the Navy Department - Immediately on his arrival - This
I was induced to do in consequence of the Constitutions having one
Lieu! more than was absolutely necessary, and to relieve Mr Wyer of
those unpleasant feelings which he complains of in his letter, which
I enclose you - Altho I have not strictly conform'd to Etiquette
in panting him this permission without the written authority of
Commodore Barron, y e t 1 flatter myself you will percieve the necessity
I was under to grant h ~ request.
s
[NDA. Captain's LB, Vol. 1, 1805.1

WARS WITH BARBABY POWERS

245

To Secretary of the Navy from Captain John Rodgers, U. 6. Navy

U.S. FRIGATE
Comtt%ution

Harbour Lisbon Jany. 1" 1805.
SIB An American Ship is this Ins! passing & I have only time to
say that I arrived here on the 28th Lltm;but as yet have had no communication with the shore, or even our Consul - No doubt Commo.
Barrons Letters which accompanys this, will inform you the cause of
the C'onnstitution being here; it is to procure Seamen - All Stands
well with Morocco. [LC. JRP.

Letters & Orders, Book A, 180&1805.]

To William Jarvis, U. S. Consul, Lisbon, Portugal, from Captain John Rodgers,
U. 6. Navy

U.STATESS H I PConstitution

o j BeWem January 1" 1805.
SIR,The situation of this Ship is such that the Duty I owe my

Country compels me to be very Explicit. - I wrote you on my arrival
here, which is five Days since, mentioning in part the cause of the
Constitutions coming to this Port, but as yet have received no answer
from you: A circumstance unparalleled in the History of Consular Bdmenistration at least with those U-ho know their Duty and wish well
to their Country. - I should not take the liberty of expressing myself
with such
was it not that a Man who calls himself your Vice
Consul called along side two Days after my arrival, and received
from me Verbal Instructions relative to the Ships wants, the necessity
of her being admitted to Pratique 1mmediat.ely or of my being acquainted with the result. - I now demand of you an answer. which
if not comply'd with, I shall feel myself bound to solicit the Interest of
some respectable Xerchant in procuring the aid and assistance which
the United States Ship Constitution at this moment requires. If I have done you an Injustice by the apparexlt warmth with which
I have Express'd myself, I am sincerely sorry for it; If I have not,
I shall report your conduct to the Goverment, as the only means left
me to prove that I have not neglected my Duty. [Mass. HS. Jarvis Cor.

NDA photostat.]

To Captain John Rodgers, U. 6. Navy, from William Jarvis, U. S. Consul, Lisbon,
Portugal

LISBON
Is! Jan? 1805
No 1
SIR The night before last I was favoured with your letter acquainting
me with the arrival of the Constitution: and am sorry to inform you
that in consequence of the fears entertained here owing to the ravages
which the yellow fever has made in Spain I am apprehensive that
you u-iIlnot be releas~dfrom your present disagreeable situation under
15 or twenty days, but rest assured that I shall use my utmost endeavours to get the ship to Prattic as quick as possible. As it is
necessary to make a Petition for this purpose in which must be mentioned the particulars of your voyage, I will thank you to favour me
with the date of your sailing, where touched, what spoke with, the
number of pour Crew, the number sick if any, & the day arrivod Two months since there was the greatest number of unemplo ed
seamen here but the Spanish & English mTar holding out the iifeal

246

NAT7,4L OPERATIOATS FROM 180L TO 1805

prospect of much prize money has tempted them to enter voluntarily
into the British service; but I think we shall be able to obtain a number, notwithstanding, before your departure.
In a day or t ~ Ioshall do myself the pleasure to see you a t Paqo
d'Brcos.
[NDA. Captain's LB, Voi. 1, 1805.3

T o William Jfuvis, U. S. Consul, Lisbon, Portugal, from Captain John Rodgers,
U. S. Navy

U. S . S H I PConstitution
off BELLEM.
Jany. 1% 1180 [1805]. at 6 P . A4.
SIR After an Elapse of five Days 8: not until this moment have I
received an answer from you, and even now, you sport with my
feelings by requiring of me Information which I gave you four Days
ago. - I now must be permitted to tell you that your neglect of
this Ship is beyond any bounds, which can restrain me from informing you, that your delay has led me into Errors of no little Importance; conceiving that when I heard from you it would be with information of the Ships berng admitted to Pratique, 8t with such Idea,
have half uarigged her, & unbent & tuli~nto pieces many of her
principal Sails, after which I am now told that if I will submit to a
Vague unmeaning detail of Inquiqs which I should feel degraded
by answering, and such as are Known only to Merchant Vessels of
other Nations, that T may be Perhaps admtted to Pratique - Sir
let me tell you that I have neither come here to sell a Cargo, nor to
ask any favours of the Portuguis~Govcrment further than what
is due to a Natio~lalShip of the 'C'. States and my Word as her commander; I therefore can only repeat to you, that I am last from
S racuse, uhich place I left on the 28Th of Kovernr, and that m.r
d e w (354 in number) is in perfect health, Twenty Days is tire fdl
Extent of the time that 1 could in conformity with my Instructions
wait here, even if all my Wants (which are many) could be supplied;
I t therefore now only rests with you to inform me u-hethcr I can be
permitted to Pratique on my word of Honor that I have had no communication with any Port, Place or thing since I left Syracuse,
without submitting to any Incon~renience; other than a Man of
War of the most favourerl Kation: If you answer me in the negative
I will quit the Port, so soon as I can possibly get my Mainmast
rigged & my much shattered Saib tacked together, and proceed to
Gibraltar and Encounter the Yellow Fever & every other inconvenience sooner than tamely subject the American Flag to such
Disgrace. I t may appear to you t h t this letter contains invective intcnded
to wound our feelings; but when you consider that I have come
upwards o r 1,500 Miles, in tho Dead of Winter, Expressly for the
purpose of shipping Seamen, and Encouraged to this by your owp
report to the last of our Ships that was here, as being the most Ellgiable place; Z feel satisfied that you will ac uit me of such a charge;
particularly when you reflect that I have Been five days within 8
few Miles of & in sight of your residence u-ithout seelng or even
hearing from you.

-

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

247

The Enclosed note containing an account of Beef & Vegetables,
being directed to the U. S. Frigate Essex,you will be pleased to inform
me whether it is a Bill, which the Essex left unpaid; or of the Beef
which it accompany'd.
I have only further to add that my Heart is always open to conviction, and if you can convince me that I have trespass'd the rules
of Politeness or that I have infringed the rightful respect that is
due to your Office, I am ready to make any appolegy that one Gentleman can make to another. but if you do not, I shall always co-nsider
that I have done no more than my Duty.
[hfa~s. HS. Jarris Cor.

S D A photostat.]

To Secretary of State from William hggin, U. 6. Consul, Trieste
TRIESTE1st January 1805

SIR. I have the honor of your letter of the 26 June informing me
of five ships of war being further sent into the Mediterranean.
I hare now the honor to inclose you the report of Vessels belonging to the United States arrived in this district, for the last twelve
months in future, this report shall be forviarded to you every six
months agreeably to your instructions.
The Gnited States Schooner Enterprize, Captain Robinson has
been ordered up to this district by the Commodore to repair and
permission has been obtained that she enterns [interns] into the
Arsenal a t Venice, and for her wants receires the Government Stores
at a fair and e uivalent valuation, the Austrian Government in this
instance as we 1 as all others, have shewn a friendly disposition
ton7ards the U. States; - it d l occur to the Secretary, that this
is the first Vessel of TI-ar of the U: S: that has ever entered into the
Ports of the Bdriatic.
Strict regard has bitherto been paid by this Government to a
ri id system of neutrality that it does not appear their is any probabfity of their entering into a Continental TTTnr a t the same time i t
may be proper to remark that considerable revieu7s of troops are
intended this Spring in the Ex Venetion territory, and at which the
Emperor himself is expected to assist.
The Emperor of germ an^ has declared himself hereditary Emperor
of Austria, by public proclanlation throughout all his hereditary
dominions, t h s new Title has been acknowledged by most of the
Por~ersof Europe, and their Diplomatic relations renewed accordingly.
I have some intentions of appointing s Vice Consul at Venice,
the probability is our intercourse with that City wd1 never be. of any
consequence, it's Commerce being restricted by duties, while thls
remairis a free port; but as our Smaller Ships of T a r , whilst in the
Mediterranean may perhaps Occasionall come up for repairs, it
becomes then desirable to hare an offici person to address; in the
instance of the Enterprize I sent my Vice Consul with Captaln RobmEon to render any assistance that the service might require; on future
occasions I could act in a similar manner, though if I meet.w~tha
person that I conceive adaptcd for the situation, I shall appomt hlm
to the Office
This city enjoys & has enjoyed a perfect system of health, and the
most ri orous measures are pursued to prevent the introduction of
the Iv1afadY which has during the Autumn infested the ports of the

9

9

248

NAVAL OPEEATIONS FROM 1804 TO 1805

haediterranean; the last Vessel that came from the U: States with a
clean bill of health has been subjected to a quarantine of 21 days,
and though this appears hard yet ot,her Nations are not more favored.
I inclose you my account against the United States since my appoifltr
ment the Vouchers for the same accompanying it*, amount flor!ns
357.47, there being no Minister at present at the Court of Spam.
I cannot settle it through that medium, and provided there was one,
I could not negotiate o, bill hero on Madrid, it would be more convenient to settle my account with the Minister in London. WILL,RIGGIN
[ S A . SDA. CD,Trieste, Vol. 1, 1800-1832.1
To Master Commandant Isaac Hull, U. 6. Navy, from Samuel Briggs, British
Consul, Alexandria, Egypt

ALEXANDRIA
2c Jan? 1805

DEARSIR,Many happy returns of the New Year to you 6t friends,
as I had not the pleasure of seeing you Yesterday - I resort to my
pen to submit to you whether or not on this grand festival of the
Turlrs your rules permit saluting - if there is nothing to the contrary,
I think it would be policy to pay them this compliment - You
perhaps on the Coast of Barbary may have had some precedents in
your own Navy - English I can quote none since the evacuation
of Egypt, as no Man of War has happened to be here on this festival,
but when the English were in Garrison here, all the Forts & Shipping
used to fire. the Turks fire for three days at sunrise and Sunset - if
you determine on honoring them with a salute by giving it at 12 or
1. OClock, according to the practice of your Navy, it will be more
conspicuous, than if fired at the same time with them, and they will
conclude the int,ention was originally the same. - do as you like
with these friendly hints. (Signed) S. BRIGGS
[SDA. Isaac Hull LB, 1803-1806.1
To Samuel Briggs, British Consul, Alexandria, Egypt, from Master Commandant
Isaac Hull, U. S. Navy

UNITEDSTATES
BRIGA T ~ U S
Alexandria 2d Jan?'1805
DEARSIR, Please accept my thanks for your Kote of this morning,
and the friendly hints it contained - I shall fire a salute at 12
O'clock, with the red flag at the Fore, as my Vessel is not in readiness,
shall not do it before. I should have called on you yesterday, hut being unwell, did not
go on shore - Should I not have the pleasure of seeing you this
day, I wish you many a happy year in the same way you did me [NDA.

Isaac Hull LB, 1803-1804.1

To Captain John Bodgers, U. 6. Wavy, commanding U. S. Frigate Constlidion.
P q o d'Arcos, from William Jarvis, D. S. Consul, Lisbon, Portugal

NQ2

Consulate of the United States,
Lisbon .2d Jan? 1805
SIR Your letter of esterday's date came t80hand at two o'clock
p. m. to day & by the earer I will trouble you with the answer I must express my surprise that a person bearing a Commission

i:

WRnS WITH BARBARY POWERS

249

under the Goverrlment of the United States should so far have overstepped the bounds of civility as to m i t e such a letter upon such slight
&: suppositious grounds to an Officer holding a respectable Station
under the same Government. Did I want any other incitement than
a desire to be of service to my Country to release you from your
unpleasant situation, it, certainly would not be produced by the expressions I\-luch you have been pleased to make use of. Your threat of
cornpIaint to Government might alarm me had I the smallest apprehension that they were disposed to censure as precipitately & with as
Iiltle examination as your letter indicates that you are: as for this
purpose you have either intentionally or by mistake mis-stated facts
that in part no person can be better acquainted with than yourself.
Your first letter is dated the 2gt4 ultimo in which you say you arrived
the last night, which leaves at a fair computation only three days to
the date of your second viz from saturday morning to tuesday morning
(probably) sunday afternoon it was brought to my House, but not
being at home did not receive it till the night & early on Tuesday
Morning I replied to it &- sent the Beef &- Vegetables you required.
I also desired the Vice Consul on saturday to go to Paqo d Arcos, to
know what was wanted, but the weather bein bad he could not go
till sunday where he got by 8 o'clock a. m.; so t at you have not been
personally neglected, much less the interest of my Country. But as
I cannot be persuaded that the interest of our Country, which you say
has caused your warmth will be promoted by a misunderstanding
between its officers, I certainly shall not court a diierence with you,
at the same time shall leave you the most unlimitted permission to act
as you think proper. RIy letter of yesterday anticipates a reply to
what relates to the quarantine -

i

[XDA. Captain's LB, Vol. 1. 1805.1
Extract from journal of Eezekiah Loomis, Steward, U,S. Navy, in U. S. Brig Vixcn.
Master Commandant John Smith, U. S. Navy, commanding, Wednesday, 2
January 1805

This day hands cmployed on shore and on hoard fitting, rigging
and spars etc. John Jarrel went to the hospital. Officers on board
to dine. Captain Smith's birthday. Received from John Dyson,
Esqr. 108 lbs. fresh mutton.
[L. F. Middlebrook. NDA copy.]

To Captain John Rodgers, U. S. Navy, commanding U. S. Frigate Co~~tifEdion,
P q o d ' k c o , from William Jarvis, U. S. Consul, Lisbon, Portugal

CONSULATE
OF THE UNITED
STATES
XQ.3
Lisbon Sr'+Jan.uary1804 [5]
SIR Your second letter of the lac Instant I received yesterday
evening & least my omitting to notice cvery paragraph may be distorted into a subject of offense, I shall go into some detail in my
answer; but as I have not lately read the elegant irony of Dean
Swift, nor the more finished invective of Junius, I hope that I shall
be excused if in animadverting on your two letters, I should descend
from the dignity of the officialstyle to the lower walks of Billingsgate.
Not being deeply conversant in the traditional history of "Consular Administrations" for I beleive our Country does not afford a
written history (which is very astonishing when we come to recollect

250

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1804 TO 1806

the immense importance it is to the world to know whether a Consul
went three leagues to visit a frigate on the day of her arrival or whether
he did not go at all, or whether he answered a letter received from
the Commander the next day or the next day but one) I cannot say
whether my conduct is unprecedented or not; but this I can say that
I am perfectly satisfied of the propriety of it, as it relates to the Frigate under your command.
It should seem somewhat singular that what you should p l ~ a s eto
term "my neglect" should have involved you in any embarrassment,
when in your f i s t letter you say you have "some knowledge of the
rigid quarantine laws of this place", as such I should have supposed
that you must at least have expected fifteen or twentp days quarantine & made your arrangements accordingly. ,4s to the propriety of
your quarantine I must be silent; the Government of this as well as
of all other Countries taking the liberty to think and arrange on
this point as they may deem the most conducive to the health of the
inhabitants, .ct-ithout consulting the foreign Agents resident in the
Country but presume you cannot have any very great reason for
complaint; if you are not detained longer than the British & other
vessels of War under similar circumstances. Quarantines being mere
memures of precaution to prevent the introduction of dangerous disorders, I cannot perceive that Vessels of War ought to be exempted
from a scrutiny as strict rts what Merchantmen are subjected to; and
I confess myself so blind as not to be aware that any "disgrace" is
attached to our Il-ational character or to our officers from submitting
to such investigation when it is a general custom. I n asking for this
information I only requested such as1 thought would be the most likely
to get the frigate released the soonest, if satisfactory; and if in my
haste I put a question that a reference to your first letter would have
solved; vizg the day of your sailing for I think that is the only circumstance you minutely informed me of, it was not a very heinous subject
of offence; nor without the greatest Fiolence to language couid it be
twisted to mean that I insinuated that you come here "to sell a Cargo"
or "to ask any favours of the Portuguese Government". I t is a subject
of much mortification to me that you have come so great a distance,
as I hope my language will not be deemed too strong, when I say,
your precipitate & unjustifiable n~arrnt,hand I think determination,
is likely to deprive the service of the benefit that would probabh
have resulted from a more temperate line of conduct; and I shall
leave i t to yourself, to calculate the consequences that are likely to
ensue from it.
After adverting to the several parts of your letters that are most
exceptionable, if any one part is more so than the other, allow me to
express my surprise a t the liberty you have taken to m i t e in such a
style to an Officer with whoh you are totally unacquainted, bearing
a Commission under the same Government, as respectable at least q.s
the one you hold; and was I not apprehensive that you would set ~t
down as the vaunting of a vain man I should ask leave to add, to an
Officer who has rendered as much service to his Countr in his Station
as he beleives you have done in yours. But i t is possi Ie I may hayc
put a wrong construction on your moaning from the want of an intimate knowledge of the Marine Style and that it mny only be intended
as a burlesque on the compliments of the season.
The preceding remarks I hope ou will consider as from M' Jarvis
of Boston to Captain Rodgers of altimore & as growing out of your

g

6

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

251

letters; & as a correspondence of crimination & recrimination is exceedingly disagreeable to me & must be to every Man of sentiment
and feeling, and as I do not think a &spute between two officers under
the same Government in a foreign Country adds to y' consequence or
redounds to their honor, I hope that it will terminate here, and what
letters the service of our Country requires should pass between us may
at least be couched in terms of civility. To set you the example,
what foUows will be written in trhe style that 1 think a Consul of the
United States ought to address the Commander of an American
Rigate.I am very sorry to learn from your letters of the 1" Instant, that
you are so circumscribed as to time; and I a litt<lewonder a t it when
james Barron Esquire must have supposed there was not much
chance of your getting Prattic under twenty days; but you may rest
assured that I shall not fail to exert myself to the utmost of my power
to get you released so soon as possible. I cannot think that even if
you are to be detained twenty days that the service will be benefited
by your sailing for Gibratter, in preference to waiting, as that bay
certainly not being so safe as where you now lay, as the Men that are
required & which is the principal object of your visit, I conceive cannot be had there; and rtltho: the prospect of immense gain has enticed
most of the unempIoyed seamen into the British Service, yet unquestionably some may be had here; and as to what repairs the Frigate
wants, if I am not much deceived, they can be made here a t a lower
rate & with more safety b convenience than a t Gibralter, and with as
much expedition. The stores she may want can also be had as cheap
or cheaper. Taking all these circumstances into consideration I
should suppose unless your orders are peremptory, that i t would be
the most adviseable for you not to leave the Port until you have accomplished your object; especially a t this season of the year whenso
heavy a ship can not be eminently useful in the Strelghts; I imagine
not near so much so to the service as would be the seamen the next
Spring 8: Summer, that may be picked up here. However should you
determine to leave here in the twenty days & will trust to the makin
the Bowsprit & sails on shore; if you will send me the measures,
will engage them to be done at once, or if you wish to give any directions I m i l l desire the Carpenters 4% Sail Makers to go to Pago dfArcos
for the purpose. The Cable & Anchor can also be sent down. Will.
you let me know on what terms $ for what time the seamen are to
be engaged? m?lat you wish you d l please to inform me of as your
occasions may require.
The memorandum sent down was the particulars of the Beef &
Vegetables, which was done to prevent any embezzlement on the part
of the boatmen.

f

[NDA. Captain's LB, Vol. 1, 1805.1
TO raster Commandant Isaac Hun, U. S. Wavy, from William Eaton, ?J. 5. Navy
Agent for the Barbary Regencies

GRAND
CAIRO3QJan? 1805
DEARSIR, I wrote you by Farquhar under dates the 29t@30t@
&
31't Ultimo, nothing has since occured, I am becoming fixed in the
suspicion that Hamet Bashaw is under the restraint of the Mameluke
Beys; though we have hitherto no direct advice from him, this may

252

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1804 TO 1805

retard our progress with him, but does not threaten to defeat the
object The suspicious disposition of Eli Bey ail1 keep T'igds about h i p
until satisfied of the Candour and loyalty of our intentions and wlll
then most probably let him go with assistance. I shall not leave this 'till after receiving your Answer to m i n ~above
mentioned. - The hilameluke Army is approaching Cairo wlth imposing strides - let which party soever be rnaster it alters not our
situation.

-

[KDA. Imac Hull LB, 1803-1806.1

[3 January 18051
To Wilham Eaton, U. S. Navy Agent for the Barbary Regenmes, from Hamet
Caramardi, rightful Bashaw of Trrpoli
[Transiat~on]

Thanks be rendered unto Him unto f horn thanks are due.
To our friend and the friend of our Grace the American General
Mr. Eaton.
X e hare received your letter and after having noted its contents,
we rendered thanks unto God on learning that you are in perfect
health. You must know that I am always the same as you have
known me, being at Tunis, my steadfast friendship is the same.
Nevertheless, you have delayed. However, the d e l q must h a ~ e
had a good cause. On this d&teI am leaving for the Rehera in order
fo go to the house of the Sheik el arrab called Abdelgavir el Bekouchi,
where I suggest that you go also. I have written t,o my children and
to my servitor 3lahmoud h'ogea as well as to the Sheik el mediln
hluhamed son of Abdelrallrnan, so that they may speak with you,
and eveqvthing that you shall arrange nil1 be approved. Thus you
must assist from tshe sea and I from the land, and God will aid us
in establishing peace and tranquillity.
My compliments to -Messrs. Mendrici and Cap; Vincents
Signed on the original:
.!!HMET

28 ra.madan 1228
3 January 1805

PASHASON

OF

ALI PASHA

m.E. Huntington L t A G . EA 1.1

Extract from log book of Master Commandant Isaac Chauncey, U. 8. Navy,
commanding U. S. S. JafmAdams. Thursday, 3 January 1805

Moderate Breezes from NbE We are running to the Wetward
along the Island of Carbera At 2 PI1.l the wind veered to KNJV
In lower & main Top ma& Studding Sails
At Sun Set the West extreme of Carbera bore by compass N >6 I T seven leagues
Between 9 cP: 10 in the evening the clouds to the NJT had the appearance of the wind from that Quarter - In Top-Gallant StuddingSails, and down Stay Sails By 11 P.M we made d l plain Sail ctzd
set Top-Gallant studding sails
At 8 in the morning Vie saw the Island of Formentera, a sm$
Island 30 leagues NE from Cape Pdlas, - bearing by compass NRb%
By 9 AM the wind veered to the EbN. Set the larboard studding

-

253

W7ARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

sails - At 10 I n starboard studding sails The weather has been
remarkably pleasant all these 24 hours - We continue our passage
down the Mediterranean under all possible sail
Noon - Moderate breezes from ESE with black clouds to the
SSE. The Island of Forrnentera KM-bNgh'. Cape Pallos not in
sight - supposed to bear, Variation corrected, TTbSXS - 38 leagues
Latitude observed. 38O07'x
[LC. EPP, Log of John A d a m , 1804-1805.1
Extract from journal of Heaekiah Loomis, Steward, U. S. Navy, in U.5. Brig Vixen,
Master Commandant John Smith, U. S. Navy, commanding, Thursday, S
January 1805

[Syracusej The U. S. S. ,\'autilus
arrived and came to anchor at
half past 7 o'dock P. 31. This day received 119 lbs. fresh mutton
from Esqr. Dyson. James P. Mix went on board the U. S. Frigate
President.
[The Il'autilus sailed 3 P. M . on 4 January .]
[L. F. Middlebrook. K D A copy.]
To William Jarvis, U. S. Consul, Lisbon, Portugal, from Captain John Badgers,
U. S. Navy

Ti. STATESSHIPf?~?t~t?%~ti~?L
of Bellem Jany. 4rh 1804 [1805].
Inst I have this moment received and

SIR Tour letter of the 3 d
am sorry to add, with as little inclination to notice the low
invective it contains, as I am ill versed in the Catalogue of unmeaning
observations & applications with which it abounds; I therefore must
with due difference to your opinion be permitted to address you in
that Language which I consider incumbent -on the Cap5 of a X l a n of
War to a Consul who has so far forgot his Duty or neglected the
the Interest of his Country, as to suffer the Ship he commands to
remain unattended to, Even one Hour after her arrival, without
some primary cause, & that too without the Consuls arrogating to
himself the right of directing the movements of the Squadron to
which he belongs, or Even the Ship he commands - and before
we enter into the Business of the Ships wants &$, I must be permitted
to intrude farther; By observing that it is of so little come uence
to me whether you hare read "Dean Swift" or "Junius", or w ether
you are h!ir Jarvis of BOSTONor J2' Jarvis of SAVANNAH, but as I
consider you the Consul of the U. States, I must beg leave to assure
you, that you shall not only be accountable to your Goverment
for your neglect of her Interests, but to me IndidduallJr for your
ungentlemany invective and Every Di~respect~ful
Epithet which YOU
have applied to nlyself & the Service: and be assurcd Sir, this sh31
neither be in the style of "RilEinggate["f
"Marine", or any other
than such as you will fully comprehend. My own conve~enceis
not of such Importance as to make any difference, whether I am
permitted to Pratique or not; provided the Ship can be supplled
with the articles she requires.
The Seamen belonging to the last Squadron are entered for two
Ytars, but if this Term is Exceptionable to those that may offer a t
Llsbon, a shorter period say 12 or 1% months, will answer, as no

B

254

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1804 TO 1805

doubt the Business for which they are shipped will be completed
next Summer. The Anchor wanting for the Constitution is 60 Cw$ Weight and
the Cable 20 Inches - So soon as the Carpenter & Sail Maker
can asscertain the Dimentions of the Sails & Bowsprit, which wiU
be early Tomorrow, you shall be furnished with them; however I
could wish to see the hfechanicks who are to make them a t Potto
d Arco, before they are began [Mass. RS. Jarvis Cor. NDA photostat.]
Extract from journal of Midshipman Charles Morris, Jr., U. S. Navy, on board
U. S. Frigate Pruidd. Master Commandant George Cox, U.S. Navy, commanding,
Friday, 4 January 1805

Light Airs. The U. S. Schooner lVautilus arrived from Xessina [In
Harbour of Syracuse]
[Mrs. C. E. Fox original, XDA photostat.]
To William Eaton, U. S.Navy Agent for the Barbary Regencies, from master Commendant Isaac gull, 8 . S. Navy

UNITED
STATES
BRIGAryus

Alexandria 5t@Jan? 1805
SIR, I have been honoured with your Letter by hi17 Farquhar, trho
has this moment arrived with 1.l:Goldsborough and the party. I
must confess I am very anxious to leave this, and was in hopes of having the pleasure of seeing you with them, in fact nothing prevented
my writing to you a t Cairo, but the probability of your leaving t.here
before my Letters woug arrive. - I am unhappy that appearances
are so much against our getting information from the Bashaw, as we
have been here so long, and not able to gain the least intelligence from
h i - I fear that something stands in the way, that we are not
acquainted with, and I expect we will find that to be the case - In
fact I am led to belie~ethat French interest is the cause. - I shall
send this by express, and should you not learn anything further, by
the time you receive it, I should suppose it would be either proper to
abandon the expedition, and get from this as soon as possible, or for
you to remain here, and the Argus to return with such information
as you may have for the Commodore, what your prospects of success
are &v which will enable him to furnish you with every thing proper
for the Expedition, and give us such assistance as he may think necesTaV. -. At aU events it is time to determine on something, for ~t
1s lmposslble for us to remain here long, and have a sufficiency of
Provisions to carry us down, And you well h o w if they were to be
purchased here, u-c have not ihe means.
I have paid your draft on Messre Briggs for One Thousand D o l l a ~ ,
and am indebted to them about that sum for the Brigs Expences
since we firrived here, and are daily encreasing, u4thout any means of
paying them; as yet - Should you be in want of any more money,
I should suppose it would be more proper for you to draw on the
State or Navy Departments, as you may be authorized, and to. ?revent your Accounts interfering with the Brigs, as I do not thl* 1
have any authority to draw money for any other purpose than paymg
her disbursements; and no doubt you have authority to draw for other
purposes. -

THE

U. S. S C H O O N E R N A U T I L U S

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

255

Should you determine to remain here, and go in search of the Bashaw
for you to let me know as soon as you can, that I may
it will be
make arrangements accordingly, and leave this as soon as possible,
as it will certainly be improper for me to remain here while you make
the experiment, for most likely I shall have time to go down, and return,
before you arriue at this place.
Your Letters have gone forward by Cap! Thorn, who sailed from
hence on the 26* ult? and has since had a fair I h d , so that most
likely they urill soon hear from us - By your Letter, you do not
say you have absolutely engaged those People, that came with Mr
Farquliar, if so, I think it %-illbe u-ell, not to do it a t present, but to
hare them and as many more as can be found, in such a situation,
that they can be collected in a short time, without making any further
promise. t,han to Employ them, if you should leave this by land, as
they w-ill be only Lumber on board of a ship. Should you give up the idea of going in Pursuit of our friend, and
still wish to remain some time longer in this Country to try to hear
from him, whether it would not be better to return to this place, as
you will hear from him nearly as soon, if not sooner than at Cairo,
and we shall both be 0x1 the spot to acq as we might think best. Add to that, I fear so large a party at Calro, for such a length of time,
pi21 be imposing on the goodness of our friends. I am sure you will pardon the hints I hare given in this Letter,
when you loo$ at the situation we have conle here in, the many obligations we are obliged to be under to our friends; and the uneasiness
it must necessarily give me - and I am confident your own feelings
will not allow you to look back upon their goodness. Please make my best respects to your party; and believe me
Your sincere friend $ well wisher

ISAAC
HULL

[KDA. Isaac Hull LB, 1803-1804.1
To Secretary of State from William Jarvis, U. S. Consul, Lisbon, Portugal

LISBOX Jan" 1805
The
Romulus,
CaptWickerson
by
which this letter goes is
SIR
the first Vessel that has sailed for the United States since the ship
Venus CaptYJames E. Can] for Kew York: a mortifying circumstance
at a moment so pregnant with important events: and no doubt must
have afforded time for the advice of the actual declaration of War
on the part of Spain against Great Britain to reach Government
before this letter will be recei~ed. Least this should not be the case
& that the inclosed letter from MF Pinckney should not contain the
Manifesto, I shaU inclose the translation published in the Portugee
Gazette with an English Translation.
Government are best able to appreciate the beneficial consequences
that are likely to result to our Country from this event. And their
moderate but firm determined conduct has placed our Country in
that commanding situation, that not to exceed the bounds of reason
& equity in our demands must universally be esteemed a proof of
our forbearance and of the justice which governs our Councils.
Daily advices reach here of the great number of Spanish vessel^
captured by the English, several of which are very valuableThe hloorish Ship a t St Ubes after undergoing a partial repair

256

NAVAL OPERA TIONS FROilf 1804 TO 1805

put to sea the 15Q Cltimo & after being out three or four days returned again. The one here has had all his Masts taken out; and new
lower masts 8E. bow-sprit put in, wit,h entire new standing rigging. I
understand that she is to be coppered. They are putting a wooden
bulwark on the Dutch Brig that the Agent purchased. No other
Vessel has get been bought nor do I learn that the Agents are doing
any thing
The Clonst.Ltution.arrived here the 2st? Ultb in 30 days from Syracuse.
Capt? Rogers informs me that his object 1s to obtain hands; but this
will now be difficult, as the prospect of rich prizes since the Spanish
War has induced most of the unemployed Seamen to enter the British
Service. His Bowsprit is sprung & she s7ants a new fore Main sail,
top-sails & a main top sail a 20 Inch Cable & an anchor of 60001b- I
am afraid she will not be rel[e]ased under 20 days quarantine, wluch
is about the time the British frigates from Malta & other unlnfected
ports are detained Report says that two English frigates which were driven into Ferrol by stress of weather have been taken possession of by the Spaniards.
By a letter I have lately received from Kicholas Gilman Esqr
I learn that in addition to the enw, mdice, detraction & abuse concomitant with a public Office, hlercantile jealousy & intolerance
has been making very free with my character as you will see by the
extract at foot,. Kot feeling that I deserved the censure I immediately
called on MessrVacob Doh~mnn8; C? who after many apoligics for
the misfake which had arisen from the hury of business signed the declaration of which a t foot is a copy. I sliall leave you to judge, Sir,
whether they must have felt the most humiliated at such an unqualified contradiction of their unfounded assertion, or I chagrin'd at
finding that an attempt had been made to injure my reputation by
persons to whom I nas not sensible of having given any just cause of
Offence since in office & wit411whom I had always Kept up an intercourse of civilities & general acquantance. As the accusation goes
to impeach my public conduct I hope you will excuse my giving the
particulars that led to it. - It bas long been a custom in this
Country, when it 112s intended to take the bencfit of the Law granting
the priviledge of going out with the inward Cargo, to report the
Vessel at Bellem as bound for some foreign port & t l ~ a tshe put in
here on account of winds, weather or accidents, the Law requiring
circumstances of this nature to entitle Vessels to the priviledge. With
a declaration of this report from the proper Officer at BeIIem a etition
was made by the Vice Consul to the Administrador of the ustomhouse (here) t,o grant the Vessel franquaie, (that is thc priviledge of
going out again without breaking bulk) and with very few excrptions
the petitions u-ere granted in two or three days. Some time in July
last an aviw was received h t the Cu~t~ornhouse,
purporting, that in
future all franquaie for Bread Stuff loaded vessels should be granted
at the Cornmarket only. Two Swedish & English Vessel w-ere the
first subjected to i t ; and had been severaI days embarrassed when
the Brig Traveller of Newbury port, CaptQalph Randers arrived
from Philad* the 30 July and the Brig Venus of New York, Capt*?
James, E, Carr arrived from that port the lBtAugust - Learning
from my Vice Consul that they were likely to be embarrassed also,
I went t.o the Corn market & finding that they would grant the necessary sertificate to clear those two Vessels at the Customhouse, without
.our making the pititions that had been customary at the Custom-a

E

257

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

house, & which the English & Swedish Vice Consuls had made. I
desired the Vice Consul to take the Certificates & to clear thevesssels,
which he did the next day the 4 t h & they both proceeded directly to sea
notwithstanding, one of the Swedish Vessels was detained 22 days,
a
the other 20 %.I the British 17 days. The g t @ arrived the ship h
of & from Philadelplva - C a p t v h i l i p Miughan, but as a petition
was required for her (asthey have ever since done) she w7asnot cleared
to the 2Qn4Augt The 22"G arriwd the Brig Factor of Kewbedford
Capt? SSilas Bllgg from 11'. York & was cieared the 4t!' Sept' but the
Capte afterwards sold his Cargo here & came to an entry. (The
Orlando arrit-ed the 2Ot@& her Cargo was sold I believe the 22°C -)
I had waited thus long in hopes that the Swedish, British, Danish or
Spanish Consuls would make a representation on the subject; conceiving it a matter of delicacy to interfere with the internal arrangements of a Country & not wishing on all occasions to be the k t to
to call in question the propriety of the arrangements of this Government. But finding they did not move I waited on the Deputy Administrador who assured me that he u*ould do what he could to get them
dispatched sooner, & the pa.pers urere afterwards made Current in
five to seven days: till lately when our Vessels being again embarrassed,
what steps I took & the result, the inclosed copies of my letters on
the Subject 8: the postcript of my letters on the subject & the postcript to the preceding letter has or will acquaint you Inclosed I have the honor to forward a letter from Mr Simpson

P. S. Mr. Rademaker the Portugueze Consul Gen! & ChargB des
Aff90 the United States informed me a few days since that he should
take a passage in the ship Hare for Nk'ork she sails about the
2otQ Inst - I do not perceive that the English here seem to be much
alarmed at the doubts Mr. Pitt espressed to the Spanish merchants
of this Country being forced to take a part in the War. I understand
that Geni La.nnesis expected here soon -T h e n probably the political
fate of portugal will be decided. I can not however but believe that
the danger of throwing her Colonies into the hands of GQrit,ain wilI
secure her neutrality James Madison Esqr

*

[XA.

*

SDA.

*

*

*

*

*

CL, Lisbon, Vol. 2, 1803-1805.1

To William Jarvis, U. S. Consul, Lisbon, Portugal, from Captain John Bodgers,
U. S. Navy
U.STATESSHIPConsiitution
03Bellem Jany. 6tQ1806, at 112 past 9. A. M.

SIR AS leaving this port with the Ship in her present condition
would not only endanger her safety but pcrhaps cause myself a great
Deal of perplexity & vexation, I must say that it is only the last
Extremity that would oblige me to go to Gibraltar or leave this before
she has received the necessary repairs I now send you the dimensions of the Sails & Bowsprit wanting for
her, in hopes that they will be so far advanced by the time she is
admitted to Pratique as not to obllge me to remain many Days after She is in want of many other articles, but not of such magnitude ss

258

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1804 TO 1806

to require that they should be procured before she is admitted to
Pratique. - PFhen I left Syracuse it was Expected by my commanding Officer, who is the Person that makes all arrangements for the
Squaclron, that I would return, at farthest, in two months; and with
this belief, certain Service has been determined on for the Constitution
to perform, which the long &- Boisterous Passage I have Encountered,
added to the unforeseen detention I have met with here, will I am
afraid derange in a manner prejuditial to the service. Cap; James Barron had not the most distant Idea that I would
have met one moments quarantine, neither had the Commodore or I
should have gone Elsewhere to procure the Seamen I want, and as
Syracuse has been particularly pitched on, as a Rendezvous for the
Squadron, owing in a great measure to its having no Commerce and
of course Vessels from it not subject to such rigid restrictions as they
are from the Commercial Ports of Sicily; This being the case I was
particular.ly careful not to have communication with any Port or Vessell since I left it - I believe that no British Man of War has been
in this Port under similar circumstances for these four months, if
Ever. I t is necessary that all the sails should be made of Canvass in
strength equal to PI;? 1, 8: I should prefer Rusia if it can be procured If there is an English Sail Maker at Lisbon the furnished dimentions
will be fully sufficient to govern him, without any thing farther on
the subject. [Mass. HS.

Jarris Cor.

XDA photostat.]

To William Jarvis, U. S. Consul, Lisbon, Portugal, from Captain John Rodgers,
U. 8. Navy

U. STATES
SHIPConstitution
ojf Bellern January 5*Q1806 at 9 A. M
SIR Your letter of the 2 g Ins! came to hand too late to admit of a
Boat being sent on shore this Evening u-ith an answer. - The
surprise you express that a Person holding a Commission under the
Goverment of the U. States should "so far h a w outstepped the
bounds of Civility" is Eaqually astonishing to me after reading a letter of yours, which I have this Ins! before me; and in which is couched
Terms, not only replete with abuse to myself, but in language Pointedly insulting to every officer in the Service, and even so, to every
Man who is by profession a Seaman; and that altho the Business
which brought me here, in an Illogical sense, very ill comports of my
disputing with you, yet that I am neither disposed silently to submit
to what I had reason to consider an Official neglect of your Duties to
the Publick Ship I command or with any abuse to myself. - If I
had "outstepped the bounds'z as you were pleased to consider, which
ought to have secured a respect to you as the Consul of the U. States,
you had redress in your Goverment, as my letters were of a Publick
Nature: But Sir, you have been pleased to put them on a different
footing, and altho fully aware of the unpleasant consequences & injury
that may arrise to our Country by a Personal dispute, yet as a Soldier
you have left me no alternative, but either that of heniously distorting
Tears from the Steel of the Sword I wear, or take you at your Word;
which I shall do and make my arrangements accordingly. - I t is
unnecessary for me to dissect your letter of the 3@or enter into a repe[ti]tion of your different quotations of abuse, to remind you of the
Private

WARS WITH BARBABY POWERS

259

Satire which it contains, as it does not require t'hat I should have a
Knowledge of the BeUes letters to understand either its meaning or
our intention; and I have only farther to add that it, with your other
Ltters, are the only Justification or Evidence I require in support of
the measures which I feel it incumbant on me to pursue and this Sir
is the last time that you shall hear from me on the subject, until I can
see you tete a tete - With all that good humour which I feel towards
a Gentleman who had the inclination to Insult me and afterwards
candor to confess it, I beg leave to subscribe myself your much Obliged
& very Humble Servant.

JN?RODGERS
Cap; in the U S ATaty

[Mass. HS.

Jarvis Cor.

NDA photostat.]

To ~ o h nGavino, U. S. Consul, Gibrdtar, from Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Navy

UKITED
STATES
SHIPJohn Adams
Oibraltar Bay Jan: 5 , 1805
DEARSIR,I enclose you Captain Chauncey's requisition for provisions for this Ship, u-hich ou will please to have sent off immediately,
as she must, positively sa from this Bay in a few hours.
It is of the utmost consequencp that she should not be detained
longer than can possibly be avoided; I hare, therefore, no doubt but
you will make use of every exertion in your power to dispatch her
m-lthout any regard to whatever additional expence may be necessary
to effect the thing in the shortest possible time. Should we lose the
present fsvorablc wind and the West Winds set in, it is probable the
ship may be detained here a month, which may be attended with
incalculable injury to the U. S. and to the operations of our Squadron
in these Seas the ensuing Summer.
P. S Send us of?' immediately two Boats for watering well manned,
furnish them vc-ith lodging and provision on board.
and we

B

for the use of the U S Ship John
Memo. Pro~isionskc"-anted
Adams. Cap. Chauncey 30 Barrels Beef, 30 Barrels Pork, 10 Barrels Flour,
130 Barrels Bread, 10 Barrels Beans, 3 Tierces Rice,
1 Hhd hfolasses, 4 Barrels Vinegar, 7 Puncheons of Rum, 12 Boxes
Candles, 600 lbs cheese, 200 lbs Butter and Suet if to be had.
[LC. Edward Preble LB, Nov. 1804-Mar. 1805.3

To Secretary of State from Anthony Terry, U. S. Vice Consul, Cadiz, S p h
JANUARY
5 th 180j,

HONOURED
SIR. By the inclosed Copy of an Official Lettaerpassed
me, by the Governor & Captain General of this City, you will be informed of Admiral Ord having put this Port in a State of Blockade,
which I communicate you without loss of time.
I likewise take the liberty of inclosing you Copy of Admiral Ord's
o£Ficial Paper, and of the answer thereto.
[Nb. SDA. CL, Cadiz, Vol. 1, 1791-1805.1

260

hTAVAL OPERATIONS FROIII 1804 TO 1805
To Accountant of the Navy from Purser Charles Wadsworth, U. S. Navy

U. S. SHIPP~esidentSYRACUSE
HARBOUR
January 5th1805
SIR I herewith forward you my Quarterly Book to 3ls! December
1804.
The request in my letter of the 7 t h Septr last respecting the dates
of e n t q , of all the Officers, I now beg leave to repeat.
I wrote you the 7'h Sept: last that the public provisions at Malta
were r e d by 3%' Higgens without Invoice, since which the Transport
Ship AEfred has arrived here with provisions and other Stores, and
without a particular Invoice there was a general one of so many Cask,
boxes &c. - but a quantity of Cheese and bread r e d by her had no
mark whatever on the Cask nor did the general Invoice throw any
light 011 rt. The Cheese recQhere by the John Adams wTasall spoil'd
before it was landed, immediately after which, it was surveyed by
Order of Commodore Barron and the whole of it condemn'd, the
cheese which I recd from the last Store Ship was at least two thirds
of it rotten - would i t not be much better to purchase Cheese and
Vinegar in the Mediterranean as they may be wanted; than to Ship
them from the United States. - Dutch Cheese I beleive may be
purchased a t Malta much cheaper than American Cheese can be
Ship'd from the United States, including freight and the great probability of its ~ o t t i n g- Vinegar can be purchased in these Seas much
better, and I beleive for less than the freight of that ship'd from
America. - The Candles r e d by the John Adama are all unfit for
use, being run together, having been melted by the heat of the hold
indeed all the Candles wc get from the United States are very soft,
and bad, I n consequence of which I am certain that more than
double the quantity are used - would it not be a piece of econemy
to send out Wax Candles or Wax & tallow. half of each.
[KDA. Officers LB, 1802-1805.1
Extract from journal of Midshipman Charles Morris, Jr., U. S. Navy, on board
U. S. Frigate Pruidenf, Master Commandant George Cox, U. S. Navy, commanding, Saturday, 6 January 1805

Hazy 3. p m the ATautilzcs Sailed for Messina. M' Long Carpenter went with her to procure timber for ships use. 4 Men Sick [In Syracuse Harbour]
[Mrs. C. E. Fox original, K D A photostat.]
To Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Navy, from John Gavino, 0.6. Consul, Gibraltar

GIBRALTAR Jan? 1805
DEARSIR In complyance with the request in your favr of this day
I inclose a Copy of the Cost of the Plank sent you by the TradEer
also the acct of urhat is due me pr Duplicate Rect being $243:18 Cta
wChyou say will pay for I have found some Rice that is two Tierces & part of another which
will go off in the Morning with the other articles w" have beell able
to find & Purchase, & will have to pay for, Except Bread Beef, Pork,
& Candles we are Govt Stores, had we been out of bread, t,here is none
to be purchased, & I may say there will not [be] 30 Bar's after I send
you your supply in the Morning, Suet there is none to be had.

-

261

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

The Ship with Stipulations for Algier arrived last Month by whom
I r e d 100 Barr'? Powder, 600 shott of 32 lb for the use of the Squadron,
a Bow Spritt, & 5 Sparrs, u7Qgave me great trouble, as the Govt
Magazins were full 8; no place to lodge the[m] beside we then were
alorvd no Communication with the Bay, & by great favour obtaind
the hire of a Place on board a Hulk, think the two former articles
are now Reshipd on board an Eng? Transport of 10 Guns for Malta,
but could not take in the Sparrs, or Bowsprit; will sail ~ 5 t hthe &st
Convoy, has 10 Guns & 25 Men The Constitution past this the 18'WltQfor Tanger & Lisbon Cap?
Rodgers sint me word would [stop] here on his way back I anex you Copy of a Paragraph from Consul Jarvis of Lisbon
regarding the Moorish Vessels there, they have purchased for the
Empc of Morroco a Dutch Sloop of Wan- that mill carry 14 Guns.
The Siren has been a long time a t Cadiz is refitting, will cost $5000
or upwards for wh have sent Captr Stuart a Credit Gen! Fox lives at the South, & will Embrace first opportunity in
Complying wh your & CapWhancys desire Boats from ships in the Bay are alorved to come to the Lazaretto, or
Sorthering Landing place from 9 to 2 oClock, there to lay on their
Oarrs & Comunicate with the People on shore, may Deliver & receive
any thing, with the Quarantine assistance. You will obsert-e I have
signd pour account & the Receipts for same. [LC.

EPP, 5'01. 14, Dec. 18, 1804-June 13, 1805.1

To Captain Edward Preble, U. 6. Navy, from John Gavino, U. S. ConsuI, Gibrsltar

GIBRALTAR
6th Jan: 1805.
DEARSIR,
I received yours of this date, and it is impossible to send
off any thing this day, as can get no one to work, being Sunday, and
a holyday besides - We hare scarce any Cart men or Boat men left;
the yellow fever having take11 them off. Every exertion possible will
he done to see and dispatch you tomorrow. Consider the situation
of this place, when the sick have not had any fresh Broth for these
eight days past and scarce any pulse to be had - No Rice or Beans
to be had - Cheese is Very doubtful - in short I am going to
see what can be done, and get the Boats to Water, if possible a number of Transports to unload, and they press, as no work has
been done these eight days on acc "of the weather - Every communication with the Bay, is under Quarantine Regulations - On the
27th U l t ~
Consul OBrien was at Malaga - Your brother is a t Madrid,
and intends coming to Cadiz or Malaga, to go for the United States You have herewith, a statement of your Account, that you may give
an order for the same on Government P. S. Consul Simpson requests - Any Frigate going home to call
at Tangier for his comnlunications, which are of consequence Statemelit of Accr
To Error in Interpreter's Acct pr Voucher- - - - _ . _ _ - - _
._
--$80
--- To Sundries pr the Traveller pt Acct Sent - - . - - _ . _._
-_
_
.
..
_ -106
_- 18
To Cash supplied Mt Lewis - who brt Dis~~q
----..
._.
-.
.-.
- .. - - 57 243

[LC. Edward Preble LB, Nov. 1804-Mar. 1805.1

- 18

262

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1804 TO 1805

To Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Navy, from John Oavino, U. S. Consul, Gibraltar

GIBRALT-4~
6th Jan: 1805
DEAR
SIR,I have just answered your letter, and sent it to Mr Sweetland the prnttique Master, M' Williams having died. I t is with difficulty I could get this Boat to get you a trip of Water this day; the
People and Boat by regulation must come on shore this evens they
Rill be off early in the morning wit,h Provisions, and then go for Water.
Please order your Boat to Town then for Water also, to come on shore
as if the Boat does not come on shore in the evening, uaill be burnt,
and people punished. - You will also order their getting dinner
I have not time for More.
kc"
P S. I am the only one left of the family, the fever having disposed
of them all. [LC. Edward Preble LB, Kov. 1804-Mar. 1905.1
Extract from Memorandnm Book of Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Navy, U. S. 6
John Adonu. 6 January 1805

Arrived a t Gibraltar.

R ecd. provisions and water.

[LC original.]
Extract from log book of Master Commandant Isaac Channcey, U. S. Navy,
commanding U. S. S. John Admns, Sunday, 6 January 1805

Moderate Breezes from ESE - lye are under all possible sail,
seven leagues SSE from Malaga, running for the rock of Gibralter At 2 PM the Clouds cleared away to the Westward, \{-hen we saw
Gibralter bearing by compass FtTbXj4N nearly 27 miles
At 3 Phf spoke the Ship Howard of Salem - from some port near
Naples bound to Halmstadt - on the close of the Evening moderate - Gibralter WbN 5 or 6 miles Between 7 & 8 PM hauled in for
the anchorage in Gibralter Bay, when we were boarded by the Guard
Boat from his B M Ship Fishguard From this time till $ past
10 -light baffling winds At 11 PM we came to off the neutral ground
in seventeen fathoms - hard bottom Furled sails & mustered the
Starboard Watch as an anchor uratch - Calms or light airs during
the night - Our stop here is for Water & provisions At 9 AM the Prattick-Boat came alongside, and informed us
that above Six thousand persons had died a t the rock of the present
fever
[LC. EPP, Log of John Adams, 1804-1805.1
To Captain John Rodgers, U. 8. Wavy, from William Jarvis, U. S. Consul, Lisbon,
Portugal

.

CONSULATE
OF THE u~~~~~
STATES
Lisbon 7 @Jan? 1804 [5J
SIR Conscious of the rectitude of my intentions & propriety of my
conduct I should not have troubled you with an answer to that part
of your letter of the 4 t h & private letter of the StQInsts, which I suppose
were intended as a reply to the first part of my letter of the 3l4, it
likewise not appearing to me that they require a serious answer, had
you not with that disengenuousness which has marked your letters,
attempted to wrest a single word in my letter to imp1 a reflection on
our Navy. But I trust that the good sense of the O&cerJ will never

K?4

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

263

allow of such an illiberal construction; as they must observe, that so
far from such a reflection, I declared in the most explicit terms that
my observations entirely grew out of your letter & by consequence,
as originating with you the expressions could not apply to any other
Man or body of Men & renders you the only censurable person, &
farther that I made a distinction between the Officer & h e Man by
o b s e r ~ n gthat my letter was to Captv Rogers of Baltimore & considering the observations as to a private individual, it must evidently
appear that they were not intended t o apply to a professional body:
for then as now I really thought your unprovoked unfounded & virulent attack did no credit to a Commander of a Ship of War or to any
Officer of respectability in the Navy. But to do away d l doubts or
misapprehension on this point I declare in the fullest manner that I
had not the most distant idea of passing an indiscriminate nor any
reflection on the service: so far from which I think the Officers of our
Nary have done great honor to themselves & as a whole, i t has done
much Credit to our Country. I must farther declare that I am personally acquainted with several Officers for whom I have a great
respect & esteem; and as the only frigate before the Constitution
that has been in this port since I have been in Office I hope i t will not
be distorted into an invidious distinction to declare that the Gentlemanly conduct of James Barron Esq' & his Officers while in port,
impressed me with these sentiments in their behalf. - After this
declaration I trust the service will exonerate me from intending any
expression derogatory to it: and even without this explanation I
cannot conceive that such an imputation could in any shape be
attached to me, unless the character of the Xayy depends on the
reputation of a single Man, which would imply such a dearth of Merit
that I am certain it will not be trhecase in our day It neither according with my feelings nor leisure to continue a
correspondence of this disagreeable nature, altho it certainly is the
easiest thing in the TYorld, both by fact & arournent to prove you wrong
in every sentence, after the following rema& I shall take a final leave
of the subject; my duty to my Government & my Country as a ublic
Officer, however free from such an obligation you may fee[ not
allou-ing me to notice your letters in any other manner than to submit
the whole correspondence to Government & trust to its fiat for our
or my censure or acquital, particularly as your remarks have geen
levelled a t my public conduct - And by way of close I must say that
had you instead of writing violent letters to me because you happened
to fancy I was in the wrong, employed the time in minutely informing
me what was wanted for the frigate & giving such instructions (without waiting till I was obliged to request this information) as would
enabled me to have made the engagements, would indubitably havebeen
much more for the advantage of the service, as you say, you are pressed
for time, and whether it would not have been more within the line of
your duty & more to your honor, I shall leave, as I before observed,
to Government to determine.
The petition is dispatched for the ship to be admitted to Prattic
the last of this week, say friday or saturday.
The seamen n7hom I sent down the 5'8 say that you engaged to
give them $20 in advance: but I think they might easily have been
engaged for $12 - however, I don't know but its good policy to offer
the $20 as this is generally of more consequence or a t least more
mteresting, than the Wages pr Month on time of Service and every en-

264

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1804 TO 1805

couragement at this time is necessary. But I have only engaged to
give the rest $12 in advance, paying them five dollars down under
Security & the rest to their Landlords when I have your receipt for their
bein on board; I could have wished you had informed me the Wages
for a73le & do. for ordinary seamen, & particularely how far to go asto
advances I was glad to hear that there is a probability of part of the Bowsprit answering again. I observed to the Carpenter, that I thought
it probably would & this to-gether with the enormity of the expense
I desired him to inform you of.
The Cable is engaged to be made here; it will be done in a day or
two - I s it required on board before the frigate ets Prattic. I
cannot obtain an anchor of the size, of any individun in Lisbon; the
lar est to be found is about 4,500 9 - Possibly the Government
\ilji spare one The sails are in hand & will be done in ten days - NO 1 English for
the fore sail N" for the Main & 4 for the Mizen Top sail - the Main
& fore top sails of the first quality of Russia Canvass, tho: not the
best of the first quality but the best in Lisbon Will it not be well to take the Bowsprit out & let it be towed up &
examined: the moment it is out it will be sent for: as the Carpenter
can see when i t is out with his spy glass - or word can be sent up
when it will be taken out -

I

[XDA. Captain's LB, Vol. 1, 1805.1
To William Eaton, U. S. Navy Agent for the Barbary Regencies, from the owner
of the ship Vegline
[Translation*]

ROSSETTO

7th J a n m r y 1805

ILLUSTRIO~S
SIGNOR:I possess in Suez a ship built in the Indies
acquired formerly from Mahamed Pajcia by an Englishman, and then
ceeded to me in compensation of what was owed me by his Au ust
Retinus. The entire crew is composed of European sadors, it wiR be
commanded by an American by name Barthoro at present in Alexandria occupied with the acquisition of a few fittings and sails belonging to aforesaid Barthoro. The name of the ship is T'egliere, under
the protection of the auspices of the illustrious hlajor Missett, my
worthy chief, and backed by the friendship of Signor Mendrici.
I take the liberty of asking you for an American passport for my
aforesaid ship, the voyages of which will be limited to Suez, Geddn
and Mocca. I realize that my request is very bold, but I fort worth^
repose great confidence in the noble spirit of your Excellency, always
disposed to distribute benefits to those who ask them in emergency as
I do a t this time.
My gratitude to your Excellency for such a special favor will be
infinite, and I will make it a solemn duty to show you on every occasion
my sincere gratitude.
In the hope of a favorable result, I have the glory to tender my
respects, great esteem and consideration to your excellency.
Your most humble and obedient servant.
[Signature illegible, possibly Petruccil

265

WARS' HTITH BARBARY POWERS

To the Illustrious Signor Et,hon,
Consul General and Commandant, for the U. S. of America, to the
Barbary Pourers in Cairo.
[*Translated by Lt. Comdr. Breed, U. S. N. R.]
[H. E . Huntington L$AG, EA 491.1
To Dr. Francisco Mendrici from the Owner of the ship Veglim
[Translation*]

CAIROROSETTO
7 January 1805
SIGNORXIANDRICE:
Through the assistance of the worthy Signor
Charles Rosetti, our mutual friend, I hare been successfd in finding
in Alexandria the necessary fittings for my ship at Suez, and through
this I hope that it will soon be arallable to mate your voyage to
Gedda as we have previously planned.
Knowing the close friendship between you and Mr. Etton I take
the liberty of asking yon to procure for me from bim an American
Passport for my ship called the Vegliere which will be commanded
by a Captain of that nation by name Barthoro a t the present time in
Alexandria occupied in acquiring the rigging and equi ment, and
fitting the sails. Major Nissett is u-riting directly bo t e aforesaid
Signor Etton for the same object, therefore, adding his intrigue to
your good offices, I hope to attain the desired end for which I will be
infinitely obliged to you.
Awaiting the results, I remain
Your most devoted servant
Is/ [indecipherable, possibly Petrucci]

R

[* Translated by Lt. Comdr. Edward Breed, U. S. N. R.]

[H. E. Hurltirigton L&AG, EA 490.1
Extract from log book of Master Commandant Isaac Chauncay, U. S. Navy,
commanding U. S. 6. John Adam, Monday, 7 January 1805
Moderate breezes from KbW -

R e are at single anchor in Gibralter Bay - The SW extreme or
Europa Point SbE - The Korth post of the Rock ESE On these
bearings we are two miles from thr neutral ground, and one mile and a
half from the nearest part of the Rock - We have no communication
~ i t hthe silore except by some of the Inhabitants, who bring off
RTater and Provisions - And thep are not permitted to come on
board the Ship - I n the forenoon of this day a Shore Launch came
alongside & took away 32 Empty Water-Casks -- She return'd
towards Evening She was towed ashore and off by our boats - Our
Men intermixed with the Men from the Shore as little as possible A M Moderate breezes from TTKW We sent two of our Boats
for Water to the neutral ground - Commodore Preble rowed to the
lending place at Gibralter, but did not go on sllore
Noon - fresh breezes from IVNW
[LC. EPP, Log of John Adan~s,1804-1805.1
To Secretary of the Navy from Blaster Commandant John Shaw, U. S. Navy

BALTIMORE.
Ji~?i?
StQ 1505
SIR,Feeling rnpself in d u t ~bound to render every service to my
Country and the freedom of my fellour Citizens in Tripolp. I now
offermy services in an espeditiori of Gun T3oats to the Mediteranean.

266

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1804 TO 1805

If circumstance would admit of our dispatch. we ought to leave
this coast on or about the 20th March. and if providence guided the
Enterprize I should hope to be able to act in conjunction with our
squ8dron by 20th May - Say. 12. or More of our large G. Boats to
be immediately got ready and a rendezvouse to be appointed for
their collection., I t would be necessary that each Boat should have
a faulce Keel bolted on prior to sailing. this Keel may be pleaced on
in such a manner. so as. to be taken off when Necessary., I t will
add considerably to the performance of our boats particularly in
turning to Windw* If a Convoy Vessle could be got ready it would
be a great protection for the fleet in case of any unforeseen accidence However - I am of an opinnion that I can carry the fleet safe to
there destination - or otherwise, suffer in the attempt. We find
from Consul OBriens letter that nothing affective can be done against
Tri oly without G. Boats & Bombards and it is evident that if a
G g o a t fleet would arive in time from the U. States, so as to be able
to Cooperate with our squadron .on the Next attack. that Tripoly
must submit to our termes - If this proposission should meet your
a probation and the Consent of the President all I request is that
t e Commodore of the station be instructed to give me the sole
command of all the G. Boat,s which may enter the Harbour of Tripoly
after my arival on the. station
I am ready for sea and all I wait for is your orders -

%

[KDA. M C LB, 1804-5.1
To Eon. Abraham Baldwin, United States Senate, from Georgia, from Secretary
of the Navy

NAVYDEP!
8 Jan? 1806.
Your letter of yesterday's date has been received. The President has deemed it expedient to put all our public Ships
in a state of preparation for service. The Frigates now in ordinary
require great and expensive repairs, and to repair them the sum of
$200,000 has been considered necessary. This Item for repairing
Vessels may be moreover supported by the consideration that it
will be an ultimate saving to repair them thoroughly in season. The sum of $22,935 is required for the payment of the OfEcers
and Seamen comprehended in the two last lines of the Table laid
down in the 65w page of the printed report referred to by you, which
are preceded by the words "at navy Yard Washington, & other
places" & "OfIicers on furlough and on half pay" - and the sum of
4772-10 is required for provisions for the officers and Seamen a t the
Navy Yard a t this place - and the sum of 1250$ is required for
Medicines &g for the same. The first sum in the 8OtPpage of the printed report above alluded to,
is required, as is there stated, for improvements a t the Navy Yard
(such as the erection of ware houses, sheds, enclosures, houses for
the Officers &?) the pay of Superintendants, Storekeepers, Clerks
and Laborers a t the Yard.
The 2. sum in the 80. page is required for completing the Marine
Barracks a t this place, which are now incomplete.
[NDA.

Cong. LB, 1798-1811.J

267

WARS WITH BARBARY POJT7ERS

To John Gavino, U. S. Consul, Gibraltar, from Ceptain Edward Preble, U. S. Navy

UNITED
STATES
SHIPJohn Adam8
Gibraltar Bay 8q Jan: 1805
DEARSIR,The Wind coming about fair to proceed, I have enclosed
you the Am$ of your Bills in a Bill on the Secretary of the Kavy
for 1586 Doll: 87 Cents - Viz
John A d a m s ' b i U - - - - - - . - _ - - - - - - - - - - - - - _ . - _ _ _ _ _ - - _1396.27
-_
163. 18
Plank and M? Lewis' Bill-- - - - - - - - - - - - _ - - - - -.- - - - - - - 25.42
Coffee and Sugar my private AccG - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - Sail Keedles for J o h n Adams - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - _
.-_
.-.
2. $1586.87

We must endeavour to do without the 30 Barrels of Bread which
you u7asto have sent off- If we have a favorable passage, we shall
have enough to last us.
I have sent you a Letter of advice to accompv the Bills, uhich you
will please to seal after reading.
Accept my best wishes for your health & happiness, and believe
me with much esteem
[LC. Edward Preble LB, Nov. 1804-Mar. 1805.1

[S January 18051
To Secretary of State from James Leander Cathcsrt quoting letter from Wiiliam
Higgins, U. S. Navy Agent, Malts

WASHINGTON
M a y SrdI805 SIR If you have recd no later intelligence from the mediterranean
the following extract d l give you some information

JAMES
LEANDER
CATHCART

MALTA Jans 8 t h 1805Commodore Barrot] has been some time ill onshore a t Syracuse. he has been
at the point of death, but by my last letters from his brother Cap*" h m e s Barron
1 am inform'd that he is on the recovery - I have recg late letters from Cap**
Bainbridge & his officers they were all well, but still closely confined, the
Bashaw was obstinate & apparently not inclined to make peace, but I think
his courage will fail him wlien he sees off his port the force which is now collecting against him
bl? Eaton is gone to E jpt in the Argus t o make some arrangements witb
the er-Bashar of Tripoli
imagine it will not be long ere he returns
OBrien
rf: his cata sposa left this place some time since for Cadiz where he must have
arrived about the time the yellow fever made its re-appearance there, after
ravaging Gibraltar in an unexampled msnner; it bas subsided, but has left a
wound which years cannot heal, 3000 persons have fallen victims to it which
is an immense number in a population not exceeding 12,000 one third of whom
had fled
war with Spain is problematical, not less than 50 sail of their merchantmen
are here waitilrg the issue of the pending negotiations between the two Courts
CapQ Rodgers i11 the Conslilutinn is gone to Lisbon to recruit men: Captp
Decntur ronimands the Congress 6r Captn James Banon the Essez they are now
off Tripoli
Eign'd G7v HIGGENS
[XA. SDA. CL, Tripoli, VoI. 2, June 1801-Sept. 1805.1

-

f

-

-

-

To Master Commandant Isaac Hull, U. S. Navy, fro- William Eaton, U. S. Navy
Agent for the Barbary Regencies

GRANDCAIROat? J a y 1806
S ~ R ,Yours by express of the 5t@Inst came this morning I had
Previously resolved to leave Cairo friday next, but if no direct information come from the Bashax- in the mean time I shall put the pro]-

268

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1804 T O 1805

ect of an interview with him upon the experiment - it is certain
that ten days ago he was spoken with in Company with Eli Bey.
Your suspicions of F, interest strike impressively; your plan of returning with Communications to the Commodore is certainly judicious,
my dispatches in detail will go by Friday occasion - in conformity
to that plan, M' 0-Bannon will enterprize with me the tower of the
desert. We shall have three perils to encounter, danger of Robery
and assassination by the wild Arabs; danger of falling into the hands
of the Arnaut Turks and bein murdered as Enemys, and danger of
being executed as Spies by the%ameluke Beys; If we surmount these
perils, we shall have carried a point, and gained an object, if we fail
of success you will do us the justice to believe u s A$arty[r]s to a cause
in which we feel the honour and interest of our Country deeply
involved - Release of our Prisoners without Ransom, and peace
without the disgraceful condition of Tribute. -

-

[NDA. Isaac Hull LB, 1803-1806.3
To Haster Commandant Isaac Hull, U. S. Navy, from William Eaton, U. S. Navy
Agent for the Barbary Regencies

GRAND
CAIRO8%hJan? 1805

SIR,Scarcely had my Letter of this morning gone off by your
Courier express, when a Letter from Hamet Bashaw came to hand,
of which the following is a copy by translation --[See 3 January 18051
The date of the Bashaws Letter co~~esponds
with the 30 Ins: the
place of assignment about eight hours march from Alexandria, so
that probably he will arrive thither before we can with you, because
the day of our Congee with the Vice Roy is fixed on Thursday next I cannot but congratulate you and felicitate myself after so much
apprehension doubt and solicitude, that we now calculate with certainty on the success of our expedition, we are sure of the Bashaw The Derne and Bengaize Expedition will require deliberation, these
places having been reinforced with Troops from Tripoli, and a Gun
Boat stationed at each Port, since the Brig first received orders to
proceed on this service - I suspect Pulis of treachery as he alone
was my Confidant a t Malta, and as noboddy else in the Brig could
have had any. - Tomorrow I dispatch the Bashaws Secretary to
him with the Vice Roys passport, and advice to him to meet me at
Alexandria, whither I shall repair without delay after Congee. - Our
Voyage to Cairo has not been uaproductive
[NDA. Isaac Hull LB, 1803-1806.1
To Master Commandant Charles Stewart, U. 8. Navy, commanding U. 6 . Brig
Sirm, from James Simpson, U. S. Consul, Tangier, Morocco

COPY
TANGIER
gtb Jan? 1806
SIR, My Iast respects to you was 3OtQUlt? Two'days ago I received
from Mr. Gavino your favor of 226 covering copy of another letter
from Mr. Jarvis for which I thank you; that Gentleman writes me
under 15th Decr the Moor's Ship was then ready to sail from Setubal
and that he had been assured, she was to Cruise on the Coast of
Portugal fourteen days

WARS WITH B A R B A R Y POWERS

269

Yesterday a Portuguese Frigate & Bri of War arrived from Lisbon
in five days, they left the Constitution %rigate in the Tagus, but I
have not any letters by them. - I still consider it necessary that
that Station should not be left, wit,hout a Vessel of War of the United
States, altho' I do not believe the Colnmerce to be in any immediate
danger, but from it's known Enemy I n hopes of soon having the pleasure of seeing you I will only add
the Assurance of my being with Respect
[Mrs. James S. Barron Col.]
To William Jarvis, U. S. Consul, Lisbon, Portugal, from Captain John Rodgers,
U. 6. Navy

U. STATES
SHIPConstitution
o j Bellem Jany. 9 t h 1805
SIR I have this afternoon received your letter of the 7 t h Inst & to
that part relating to the Constitution, beg leave to acquaint you that
I have this Day received 16 Men as pr list herein Enclosed - As the
Ship will be admitted to Prattique on Friday, I could wish to see
the Cable previous to its being sent on board; as no time will be
saved by sending it before; The Completion of the Bowsprit & Sails,
requiring so much time as to leave room for every thing else being
furnished long before they can be ready - I agree with you that it
is better the Seamen, procured at Lisbon, should on1 receive in
advance $12, provided the difTerence between that L Jwenty, does
not make any material difference. - I t is robust healthy Men, and
at the same time good Seamen, that are most wanted; Indeed I would
rather have one Man of this description, than a Dozen Ordinary: Seamens Wa es is $10 & Ordinary Seamen $8 pr month - However
I do not wisfl any Ordinary Seamen except they are Stout, Robust
Men The Enclosed list of Surgical Instruments are wanting for the
Hospital at Syracuse & if they are not to be had at Lisbon, you will
promote the Interest of the Service by procuring them from London
and forwarding them to William Higgins Esqr Navy Agent at Malta
by the first opportunity. The Carpenter has this afternoon recieved the Bowsprit and I am
pleased to hear that the sails are so far advanced. - The Constitution is in want of a considerable quantity of Slop Cloathing of different Kinds; however they can be defer'd until after the Purser can
be permitted to see you on the subject
[Mass. HS. Jarvis Cor. NDA photostat.]
To James Simpson, U. S. Consul, Tangier, Morocco, from Captain Edward Preble,
U. S. Navy

UNITEDSTATESSHIPJohn Adams

O j Tangier Jan: 9th, 1805
SIR M' Gavino informed me t,hat you had Dispatches for the
United-States; I have, therefore, desired Capt: Chauncey to send a
boat on shore with an Officer to receive them; he has orders to wait
an hour to receive them, and collect what Vegetables, Fowls and Eggs
he can procure in that time. I sball be obliged to you, to let some of
your people assist him.

270

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1804 TO 1805

I beg you to present my best respects to MrS Simpson, and to accept
my best wishes for your health and happiness.
[LC. Edward Preble LB, Nov. 1804-Mar. 1805.1
To Master Commandant Isaac Hull, U. S. Navy, from William Eaton, U. S. Navy
Agent for the Barbary Regencies

GRAND
CAIROgt@Jan? 1805
SIR, In my letter of yesterday I communicated the information we
have obtained here of Bengaza and Derne having been reinforced
with Troops, and a Gun Boat at each place, further intelligence states
that these Boats were obliged to press hands for the service by a descent on shore a t those places, and taking them by a Coup de Main.
This Augurs well, i t will certainly be proper to look into those places,
and if a good providence should put them into our hands with a little
hazard i t will compleat our expedition and your glory, objects worth
an exertion. - I shall have need here of another Thousand or Fifteen Hundred Dollars, which I shall receive on Account of M' Briggs,
and which I will reimburse by drafts on Leghorn, Naples, or the
department of the Navy. It is impossible to leave this Capitol respectfully without making
the accustomary presents, and I do not think that prudence or economy, situated as we are uill justify me in attempting a precedent. [NDA. Isaac Hull LB, 1803-1806.1
To Master Commandant Isaac Hull, U. S. Navy, from Samuel Briggs, British
Consul, Alexandria, Egypt

ALEX?9 Jan? [I8051
DEARSIR I enclose a Letter for you this morng received from
Majr Missett. I was sorry to hear you were confined by your Cold. - I wished
to call on you with Mr Gordon - but when people are indisposed,
the cannot relish the importunity of Visitors, without inconvenience,
$ ?therefore defer my visit till I learn you are better, which I trust
will be in a day or two with the fine weather that has now set in. Ever Your's
SAM!BRIGGS
[Mrs. James S. Barron Col. KDA photostat.]
Extract from Memorandum Book of Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Navy, U. S. S.
Vohn Adorns, 9 January 1805

Sailed for the U. States. Touched at Tangiers.
[LC original.]

-

To Sir John Acton, Prime Minister of State, The Two Sicilies, from Captain
Samuel Barron, U. 6. Navy

SYRACUSE
January 10th 1805
May it please Your Excellency
The Letter which Your Excellency did me the favor of addressing
to me on the 20th ult? shou'd have been earlier acknowledged had not
a severe Indisposition rendered me incapable of any application to
Business for several Weeks past. I avail myself of the first moments
of Convalescence to convey to Your Excellency my unfeigned thanks

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

271

for the friendly Disposition evinced in your Rep1 to my Communication
respecting the Outrage committed on some i%oefl Sailors by Individuals belonging to the Crew of a French Privateer in thisHarbor, and
I feel much satisfaction in being able to add that this Affair has terrninated more favorably than its fist aspect denoted - the wounded
Americans being on the Recovery, the Privateersmen have with my
consent been liberated by the Governor & all further proceedings
suspended. I now again take the liberty to address Your Excellency on a
matter of immediate & serious moment to the Interests of the United
States and not entirely indifferent to those of His Sicilian Majesty By the papers [I5 & 21 December 18043 which I have the honor to
transmit enclosed for Your Excellency's perusd, you will precieve
that the application recently made by Commodore PrebIe, to the
Royal Marine Department for a renewal of the Loan of a certain
Number of Gun Boats and Bornb Vessels to co-operate with the Squadron under my Command in the ensuing Campaign against Tripoli,
has not met with that Success which he as well as myself expected &
ardently desired. The accompanying Copy of General Fortinguerra's
Answer contains a statement of the reasons for the refusal - I am
fully sensible of the weight which upon a general View of the Subject
these reasons derive from the present Situation of His Majesty's
Dominions in relation to the Barbary Powers, but at the same time
it is impossible for me to reco-pize their force or propriety as they regard
the application in question, which embraces so small a proportion of
that description of Naval force adapted for the defence of the Coasts,
and vc-hich proportion cannot be considered as entirely diverted from
that object, since it is to be employed in offensive measures against
the common Enemy of His Majesty and the United States, I will not
time by discussing a point upon
however trespass on Your EX-CY'~
which I am 1%-illingto flatter myself that our Ideas are the same - it
is sufficient for me to declare openly to Your Excv that this unexpected
refusal operates as a severe Disappointment to my plans and shou'd
the Neapolitan Go\~ermlentpersist therein, the operations of our
Squadron will I fear be comparitively weak and ineffectual for want
of those Succours from which y e derived such essential advantage
during the last Campaign, and it 1s scarcely necessary to state to Your
Ex: the difficulty of procuring Vessels, suited to the Warfare in which
we are engaged, from any other quarter a difficulty which is augmented
by the advanced state of the Season - Impressed therefore with the
Urgency of the Occasion, & encourag'd by a recollection of the friendly
Sentiments which Your Ex: has in repeated Instances manifested
towards the United States, I am induced earnestly to solicit you to
exert that influence near His Majesty, urhlch I cannot but believe a
long series of eminent Services added to the Weight of Superior talents
must yet preserve to Your Ex. in His Majesty's Counsels, in order
that He may be pleased to reconsider the application without dela
and grant me if not all, a part a t least of the Auxiliary force to whic
it refers. The Bomb Vessels are of particular consequence to our
contemplated Operations against the common Enemy, I consider
them indeed as indispensable to ensure our Success; Could these
therefore be had even without Gun Boats, they would form an addition
to our force of no inconsiderele value. I make no apology for this claim on Your EX:'^ friendship and

f,

272

-

N A V A L OPERATIONS FROM 1804 TO 1805
-

interference, influenced as I am by the importance of the object to my
Country, and I prefer i t with the more confidence from the reflexion
that in the great end to be obtain'd the Interests of His Sicilian
Majesty are intimately connected with those of the Nation under
whose flag I have the Honor to command.
I shall remain a t this place until my Health is fully reestablished
and shall wait with great anxiety Y' Excellency's Reply, I n the
mean-while I request You will accept the assurances of the high
Respect, and Consideration with which I have the Honor to subscribe myself
[Italian Naval Attacl~B,Washington, D. C., and Comdr. Charles Moran, U. S.
N. R.]

To Captain Samuel Barron, U. S. Navy, from Tobias Lear, U. S. Consul General,
Algiers

MALTAJan? 10th1805
Commodore BARRON
DEARSIR Since the letter that I r e d from Mr Dyson, under date
of the 14tW1timo, and which was answered on the 27th I have been
in a very unpleasant suspense respecting your health. - M' Higgens
informed me that he had received a letter from M: Dyson of the 24tQ
of Dec' and one from Mr Kadsworth of the Is! inst in the first of which
was your health mas stated to be worse than when he wrote on the
14th - And in the latter it was said to be better, and as we have seen
none of our Vessels here from Syracuse since your departure, I am
much in want of that full information respecting your health which I
wish to have.
Mr Pulisse, Consul has just called upon me, and informed that he
has been told by the Cap? of a Vessel from Constantinople, on whom
he says he can rely, that a Tripoline Corsair has taken two Ragusian,
two Greek and two English Vessels loaded with Grain, and sent them
for Tripoli or rather for the Port of Benjesza; That in consequence of
this, the Port had Ordered a Frigate to go in pesuit of this Pirate and
her Prizes. How far this account is to be credited I cannot pretend
to say. If i t is true it will be favorable to us, as it will create more
Enemies for Tripoli -.
A Convoy from England is now off here, some of the Vessels have
entered the Port; but the Ship of War, on board which are all the
public letters, not having yet come in, we have no particular accounts
of What is doing in that quarter. - The war with Spain seems yet
uncertain.We have nothing from the U States - The cause of
the Am. Brig Favorite CaptWove brot into this place, for attempting
to go into Genoa, came on last Tuesday; when the Judge pronounced
on the Violation of the Blockade, that the Americans having been
heretofore exempted from the same rigour on this point, to which
the Neutral Europeans were subjected, he could not condemn the
property; but he should subject it to pay the Expences of the Captors
in bringing her in. This penalty is a New doctrine in such cases.
There a pearing to be some defect in the Papers as to the Keutrality
of the essel and Part of the Cargo, i t was ordered to be retained for
further proof. -

4'

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

273

I have heared Nothing from Algiers or Tunis since I wrote you last. -

I received a letter from the Spanish Consul a t Tripoli under date of

the lath ultimo, on the Subject of a Negotiation with the Bashaw,
founded on an intimation on t,hat Subject from M' Davis at Tunis,
to the Spanish Cons! a t that place in January last; but evidently
recur[r]ed to now, to draw something from us. I shall not answer it
until1 I have the pleasure of seeing and consulting with you, which I
hope may be very soon both on this, and other Accounts - We are
informed that the Quarantine in Sicily is reduced to 14 days, and I
hope it will soon be taken off entirely, when I shall certainly go over
to Syracuse, if you should not come here before. - I have heared
nothing more on the subject of sending the Tra.nsport to Tripoli for
stock since I wrote to you last. She still remains in Port. - Robertson has informed me that the small Vessel in which he went to
Tripoli is now Chartered by the Bashan's Agent here to carry over
Powdcr & Military Stores, and he has promlsed to give me further
information on t,h&Subject, but as I do not find his account confirmed
from other Sources, I have some doubts of the fact. Should i t however, be so I trust she will be arrested in her progress Mr+Lear
unites with me in best wishes for your speedy recovery & in respects
& Compliments to all with you
[Stephen Decatur Col.

XDA photostat, Book A,]

To Captain Samuel Barron, U.S. Navy, Syracuse, from Captain Stephen Decatur, Jr.,
U. S. Navy
TUNISBAYU.S. SEIPCong~es

Jan? 10tQ1806
SIR On my leaving the Harbour of Syracus I was becalmed, in
which time the vessel I had under convoy swept away from me, I
cruis'd for her two days when not finding her I stood for the coast of
Tripoly, & cruis'd between that place & the Island of Lampedosa;
having the wind from the Eastward I bore up for this place, where I
arrived on the 7 t h
The vessel I had under convoy has not arrived at this place; she
was bound to Sphaxa at which place she has w-it,hout doubt arrived
as the winds have been favorable. The Bashaw has requested that I should be the bearer of his letter
to you; not conceiving it of sufficient consequence to autorise me to
deviate from my orders, I excused myself I am now underway & shall repair off Tripoli again. [Mrs. James S. Barron Col.]
To William Jarvis, U. 15. Consul, Lisbon, Portugal, from Captain John Rodgers,
U. S. Navy

U. STATEB
SHIPConstitution
O$ Bellem Jany 10.1805
SIR Agreeable t,o your request I now make you a Return of the
Names of Men that was received on Board the Constitution to Day,
& Sent by you from Lisbon, making in all 24 [Mass. HS. Jarvis Cor. NDA photostat.]

274

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1804 TO 1805
[About 10 January 18051
List prepared on board U. S. Frigate Constilufion

1 John Rodgers
2

3
4
5
6

7
8

Ephraim Cooke
Charles Harper
Michael Miller
John Mintin- - - -0. S
John Wilson
Lucas Daniel
Bill Tom - - - - - - - BOY

[Mass. HS. Jervis Cor. NDA photostat.]
Extract from log book of Master Commandant Isaac Chauncey, U.S. Navy, commanding U. S. 8. John A d m Thursday, 10 January 1805

Moderate breezes from EKE We are running through the Straits
of Gibralter, steering in for Tangier Bay At $4 past 1 f M we brought
to in the Bay of Tangier, with the main Topsail to the mast, at about
half a mile from the Beach The Commodore sent an officer and a
Boats crew ashore with Dispatches - On approachin the Shore,
the Boat was met by M' Simpson, the American cons$, who could
not get permission for the Boat to land, as beino from Gibralter Bay
At 4 P A4 the Boat return7d,and we made all sai? to the Westward We found in Tangier Bay a Portuguese Frigate, and a Man-of-War
Brig At Sun Set we took our Departure from Cape Spartel, bearing
SW - Distance one mile
We had a pleasant leading breeze during the night, and carried all
possible sail as being on our passage to America
Forenoon - cloudy - overcast weather with a swell from NW Unbent the Cables & stowed the anchors
Noon - Moderate Winds from SSW We judge Cape St Vincent
to bear, Variation corrects' distant [space] miles
[LC. EPP, Log of John Adams, 1804-1805.1
To Captain Samuel Barron, U. S. Navy, from George Davis, U. S. Charge d'Affaires,
Tunis

TUNISJanuary l l t Q1805.
SIR,I have the honor to inform You, that the U. S. Ship Congress,

No 5

anchored in this Roadsted, on the 5th Inst. without the Xebec; which
had left Capt. Decatur, in a calm; we trust however, that she has
arrived on the Coast. - On the morning of the 8 t h I communicated
the same to His Excellency the Bey, uvho, charges me to return his
thanks for Your prompt a.cquiescence to a Con~oy.
He observed, that We had frequently been placed in a Situation to
evince Our friendship; but tha't we had not granted any of his requests
for more than four years; that he now had one to make which he trusted
would not be denied him - that of bringing, or Convoying a Tunision
Corvette and Xebec, from Malta to this place. he added, that he
would write You; and requested that I would send his letter by an
express, Solliciting Your prompt reply.
After stating all the objections, which the nature of the application
admits of, I informed him; that his letter should be sent by the Frigate
if possible.

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

275

These Corsairs, have remained a t Malta, for fear of falling in with
the Neapolitan force; and are now unmann'd; he wishes them brought
by our People; or if that is not practicable, Tunisien Seamen, will be
sent; and we to Convoy them. - Captain Decatur, has politely
offer'd to charge himself ~ r i t hthis dispatch; as the most Safe, and
Speediesf conveyance.

P:S:

Your answer to the Bey should be written in Italian or french

G: D:

[Mrs. James S. Barron CoL]
To WilIiam Eaton, IT. 6. Bevy Agent for the Barbary Begencies, from Msster
Commandant Isaac Bnll, U. S. Navy

UNITED
STATES
BRIGArgus
Alexandria 11tP Jan7 1806
SIR,Your Letter of the 8tb has this moment come to hand, by which
I find you have come to a determination to follow the plan you mentioned to me in your last letter, to endeavour, if possible, to gain

-

some information from the object of our expedition
The experiment I think with you, is a hazardous one, but there is yet a probability
of success, and I have no doubt, should you be able to have an intervrew with him, but you would & on something that would prove
advantageous to both parties.
You will perhaps be a httle surprized to receive another dispatch
from me, dated at this place, but as your Letters did not leave Cairo
before Friday, or perhaps a day later, I have thou ht proper, for
reasons which I shall mention, to send off this letter, eing confident
that it will not detain me more than two or three days longer than
otherwise I sllould have stayed. 1" A fear that in our hurry to send off your dis atches, you might
not recollect to sen forward such Receipts and ouchers, as will be
absolutely necessary for me to have, for Moneys Bdvanced, on settlement of my accounts a t the Navy Office,agreeable to promise in your
Letter of lot@Dec'
2"d a fear that you might not think of making arrangements for
M' Farquhar and his party
They are here on shore at a very
heavy expence - if you have not already fixed on some plan, I
should suppose it would be best for him, if i t can be done by honourable
means, to disengage himself a t least from the men by giving them a
few dollars, each with a promise to Employ them when you might be
in a situation to do it - I can see no manner of use he can be of to
you here at present, and should recommend his returning with me,
as he has been at Cairo with you, and is acquainted with most circumstances, he might be able to state to the Commodore, some things
perhaps that you may not cal! to mind a t this moment. 39 And a principal reason IS a hope that before ou receive this,
you may have hear'd something further, or before get en Answer
from you, some of the Couriers, sent from here or Rosetta may
return. I am convinced that you have made every proper aod necessary
arrangement for your expedition, and my departure from this Yet for fear something may have slipt your memory, I thought it
would be aining time to send off another Courier, and shall remain
here unt' I receive an Answer, which will most likely be as soon,

-

5

vP

d

-

f

d

276

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1804 TO 1805

within two or three days, as Mr Mann will arrive here
nothing happens, I shall positively sail on the 20th -

- so that

if

[NDA. Isartc Hull LB, 1803-1806.1
Extract from journal of Besekiah Loom~s,Steward, U. S. Navy, in U. S. Brig
Vixen, Master Commandant John Smith, U. S. Navy, commanding, Friday, 11
January 1855

[Syracuse] At night the men ashore [assigned to work in the
arsenal] went on board the President and remained all night.
[L. F. Middlebrook.

NDA copy.]

Extract from log book of Master Commandant Isaac Chauncey, U. S. Navy, corn.
mandig U. 6. S. John Admm, Saturday, 12 January 1805

Moderate breezes from ESE We are under all ossible sail running
to the westward with a swell from NW By 2 . M. a dead calm,
which continued till 4 P M. when a breeze sprung up from WbN I n studding-sails, and came to the wind to the SSW By 5 P AM.a
calm which continued till 2 AM, when a breeze sprung up from WNW
From 4 till 6 AM the weather appeared squally - Up Mainsail, and I n Top-Gallant-Sails At 6%AM - set them Last Evening, Robert McNight, Seaman, fell from the Fore-Top on
the Forecastle - He broke both hi Jaw bones and in falling struck
Lieutenant Lawrence, whom he slightly wounded
At 9 AM squally - Double reefed the Top Sails Fresh breezes
from WNW - all the Forenoon a t +!
past
i
I1 - a light Rain-Squall
from the Westward In Top Gallant Sails Xoon - fresh breezes and
cloudy weather
Latitude observed. 34" 09' N
Longitude by account 9" 33' ?T

F

[LC. EPP, Log of John Adams, 1804-1805.1
To Tobias Lear, U. S. Consul General, Algiers, from Capt%in Samuel Barron,
U. S. Navy

SYRACUSE,
14 Jan'ry 1805.
(red 17th Jane 1805)
MY DEARSIR The long and painful illness which I have suffered
and under whose effects I am still laboring will I trust afford sufficient apology for a Silence on my part that has caused me many moments
of uneasiness and regret. Your respected favors dated 12 & 27 ult.
and 10 Instant are before me (the latter just recei~ed)and I Beg you
to accept my sincere acknou~ledgementsfor the various information
they contain, all of which is duly noted.
I now enclose for your perusal, Copies of Commodore Preble's last
Communication to me and of his application to the Neapolitan Government for a renewal of the Loan of Gun Boats &c. with the Answer
of the Minister of Marine, from which you will perceive that that
application has not met uith the Success which Corn. Preble as well
as myself expected & ardently desired. I am in daily expectation of
a Letter from General Acton a t Palermo in Answer to one written
him a few days since stating the ill Success of our request & earnestly
soliciting him to exert that influence with the King, which I conceive
he must still retain in his Counsels, to induce him to reconsider the
Subject and grant us, if not all, at least a proportion of those Succours

WA4RSVTTH BARBARY POWERS

277

so essential to our contemplated operations against the common enemy
of his Majesty and the United States; but, I must confess to you m
dear Sir, that my hopes from this quarter are very slender indeed:
for I consider the reasons assigned, by General Fortinguerra for his
refusal as a mere political pretext or Subterfuge, intended to veil the
secret influence which is evidently operating to our disadvantage in
the Neapolitan Counsels and appears already to have converted their
former Spirit of Amity and accornodation into a marked Coolness
and indifference. Whence this secret influence has its Spring, I cannot as yet determine - a very short time will probably bring it on
the face of day; but I am the more persuaded of its existence and its
fruits from information which has just reached me from Messina,
where Captain Dent of the Nautdus has been denied all Supplies of
Tinlber &c. from the Public Stores in that Port, notwithstanding the
united exertions of our Agent Mr. Broadbent to procure them. I
fear this business will be productive of many serious inconveniences
to the Service - indeed we begin to feel them already, for the frigate
P~esidentis now waiting here for Timber suitable for fishes for her
fore Mast, (damaged in a Gale of Wind off Tripoli) which I calculated on receiving from Messina without delay, and cannot be got
ready for Sea until it is obtained. You may rely upon my taking the
earliest. opportunity of acquainting you with General Actons Reply,
to the Receipt of which I look forward with no small degree of Interest
& Anxiety. I notice particularly what you mention in your last Letter respecting a Communication of recent Date from the Spanish
Consul at Tripoli, relative to a Negotiation with the Bashaw, grounded
on some Intimations from Mr. Davis at Tunis, and I coincide entirely
with your idea that the business is now recurred to, with a view to
draw something from us. I beg leave to refer you to Captain Campbell for the particulars of a Conversation which took place on the
same Subject betwixt him & Mr. Davis whilst the former was at
Tunis early in last ?rfont,h; From the information He will give you
added to the perfect Knowledge you have of my Sentiments on this
subject; you will doubtless feel yourself fully prepared to answer the
Cornmun~cationsof the Spanish Consul.
I beg you will accept my warmest thanks for the kind Solicitude
expressed in your several Letters respecting my Health; the anxious
wish you mention to see me a t Malta, be assured is perfectly coincident with my feelings and wishes, but my Recovery from the painful
Siclmess I have experience is so slow and gradual and impeded by
such frequent & debilitating Relapses that I cannot calculate with
any certainty on leaving this place at present. I beg ou will present
mine & Capte pames] Barron7s most friendly ~ e g a r &to Mrs. Lear
and waiting the pleasure of further Intelligence from you I remain
with d e i g n e d Respect & Consideration
[Stephen Decatur Col.]

To Master Commandant Isaac Hull, U. S. Navy, from.Willism Eston, U. S. Navy
Agent for the Barbary Regencies

ROBETTA
14th Jan? 1806
DEARSIR,We left Cairo day before yesterday at 3 0.Clock in
the afternoon, and arrived here at e!even thiq morning, shall depart
for Alexandria this Evening if the wlnd permit, and hope tomorrow

278

hrAVAL OPERATIONS FRO34 1804

TO

1805

to dine with you on board the Brig, no interesting occurrence since
my last by special Courier. I introduced Mr Severac to the Vice Roy at my Visit of Con ee,
in consequence of which he received a present of a superb
which he intends for you worth $200, all the Gentlemen with me
received the same compliment. -

afore

[NDA. Isaac Hull LB, 1803-1806.1
Extract from log book of Master Commandant Isaac Chauncey, U. S. Navy, commanding U. S. S. John Adam, Monday, 14 January 1805

Under a press of Sail, on a wind, the Ship makes between 12 & 14
Inches of water every four hours
This forenoon we commenced serving half allowance of Rum to the
seven Tripolitan Prisoners, who joined us two or thre.e days before
we left Syracuse - Several boxes of the oranges & Lemons received
at at Messina for the use of the sick have been issued to them Twenty seven of the Ship's company, who were inoculated for the
small pox, are on the recovery - these added to other sick persons
on board & the inva.lids from the Squadron make in all sixty two
on the Sick List this day
Latitude observed 33' 54' N
[LC. EPP, Log of John Adams, 1804-1805.1

TO Don Hicolo de Manza, Russian Consul, Naples, from Captain Samuel Barron,
U. 6. Navy

SYRACUSE
15th January 1805.
HIS Excellency DONN r c o ~ oDE MANZA
Consul of His Imp~rialMajesty
the Empe~oroJ aU the Russias, hTaples.
SIR! The severe Illness which had rendered incapable of attending to business for some time past, is the sole reason of my having
delayed to write our Excellency on the subject of the Ship under
Russian Colours etained by part of the American Squadron before
Tripoli - The Consul for the United States nt Naples has transmitted me the Copy of a Letter from your Excellency on that affair,
and I am greatly concerned to observe that the false representations
made by Captain De Riga have led you to suppose that the flag
of His Imperial Majesty has been violated and insulted.
Having already communicated to the Russian Consul at hlessina
all the circumstances and details of this transaction in a Letter which
I had the honor of addressing him on t,he 3 d ultimo, i t is useless to
repeat them to your Excellency as you will have an opportunity of
informing yourself of said circumstances from the Representative of
your Nation at Messina who has been made acquainted nith every
particular relative to the detention of the St. Michael
Your Excellency will permit me to assure you that the Squadron
which I have the honor to Command will never be wanting in that
Respect to the flag of His Imperial Majesty which is due to the Friendship & good understanding that subsists betwixt the two Countries,
but your Excellency cannot certamly be ignorant, that the duties of my
Command oblige me to detain every Vessel (no matter under what
flag she may havigate) attempting to enter the Harbor of Tri oli,
which place for a consider~bletime past has been acknowldgeB by

B

WARS WITH BARBARY POTf7ERS

279

all the Powers of Europe as blockaded by the Naval forces of the
United States of America.
I pray your Excellency to accept the assurances of high Respect &
Consideration with which I have the honor to subscribe myself.
[LC. JRP, Vol. 1, Series Two, Feb. 1775-May 1805.1

To Master Commandant Isaac Huli, U. 6. Xavy, from William Eaton, U. 8. Navy
Agent for the Barbary Regencies

ROSETTA
15* Jan? 1806
DEARSIR, Yesterday I noted to you our arrival hither, & my
intention to leave this last Evenq, the unusud storm of wind & rain
setting in tl. heavy Sea against the Current of the Nile a t its mouth
has barred the bogas so that u-e shall probably be compelled to remain
here yet two or three days Under a sanguine expectmation
of seeing you thls morning I omitted
in my wmmunications of yesterday to mention a circumstance which
is not wholy indifferent - the morning we left Cairo, Saturday last
intelligence came from Harnet Bashaw to his Minister, that he had
gotten as far on his march in lower Egypt as the Province of Fiaune,
it appears he is accompanied by a host of arabs, who are gathering
round his standard, Zealous to aid the measure of recovering their
Country - I am impatient to have an interview with you and him
in Order to arrange & decide on proper measures to be pursued. This event cannot now be retarded many days, I shall seize the earliest oppertunity of coming to you, and no doubt the Bashaw is equally
solicitous. [NDA. I s m Hull LB, 1803-1806.1

[About 15 January 180511
To William Eaton, U. 6. Navy Agent for the Barbarj; Regencies, from Hamet
Caramsnli, rightful Bashaw of Tripoli
[Translation]

To our highly esteemed Friend, the American General.
If you ask for [are seeking] news of me we arrived in the village called
Ohu'isa after 3 o'clock Saturday, in good health. I began immediately
to make purchases and [attend to] our business with the money given
me; we found the horses and camels very dear.
Know [understand] that here there are no provisions for either men
or animals, for either much or little money. Therefore, our Friend, it
is necessary for you to think about preparing for us in the village
called Abusir provisions for the men, camels and horses, everything
necessary including "plitirr6" [?I. I t is also necessary [for you] fo
think about finding 3 or 4 tents for me and my men; send me what
you have with the bearer of this letter and also give him 4 pesos
duros; we are hurrying, and do you hurry also; I inform you that my
men are naked and the weather cold; i t is necessary for you to prepare
clothing for them. Friend, you must have courage; do not think
about money because the occasiontdemands heavy expenditure. It
is a matter of making war, and war calls for money and men. I shdl

280

NAVAL OPERATIOILS FROM 1804 TO 1805

make known what I need most [to ?] our son and secretary Mabmud.
Know [understand] that I have many followers. I [shall] write you.
As is customary, I salute you respectlfully,
CARAMANLI
s/ AHMEDBASHAW
[H. E. Euntington LkBG.1

!About 15 January 1805J
To Signor Mahmud from Hamet Caramanli, rightful Bashaw of Tripoli
[Translntion]

To our dea.r son, SIGNORMAHMCD,
Know [ye] that I have arrived a t this hour in t.he village called
Hou'issa.
Know that we have found no provisions for either the men or the
animals, the money that was given me [by] tihe general [was] very little
and this displeased me [but] a t the moment I could say nothing.
This way [of doing] is not as you wrote me when I was in Upper
Egypt; know that he gave me 1500 pesos duros; this is not enough for
the horses nor the camels nor for the horses for my men nor for the
provisions.
You know my situation very well, and that [the money which] I
had was in Gise [Ghizeh] is all gone and we have no more, so tell the
General that he must have much courage with respect to espenditures;
make him understand that this [is] war, and whoever wishes to make
war must spend without thou ht and take no account of the money;
know that my people are nakej, deprived of everything, and also need
saddles for the horses; we are in the desert, we do not lmow what to
do, I hope in God [to the end that] he will do well [by us]. Deliver
the horse which the Greek rides to the bearer of this letter and also
give him 4 pesos duros in payment of said horse.
I salute you,
AHMED,BASHAW
CARAMANLI
[H. E. Huntington L&AG.]

To Midshipman WiIiiam H. Allen, U. S. Navy, from Captain John Rodgers, U. S.
~ P V Y

U. STATES
SHIPConstitution
Lisbon Januury 16. 1805
SIR YOUare desired to Enter for this Ship as many able Seamen
as you can procure, taking particular care at the same time that they
are free from Scorbutic & Consumptive complaints - If the term
of two years should be objectionable to such Men as may offer you
are a t liberty to Limit the period of service, keeping in mind that
their Services will not be indispensably necessary longer than next
FallShould any Ordinary Seamen offer you may Ship themprovided they are particularly robust & of good appearanceYou must
advance no Monies without proper security; nor make yourself responsible for more than $12 to each Man-$10 is the Pay pr Month of
Seamen 8: $8 of Ordinary Seamen; and to comply with your Engagements I herein Enclose you an Order on Mr Johnston, Purser for
five hundred Dollars. [LC. JRP. Letters & Orders, Book A, 1804-1805.1

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

281

To Captain John Bodgers, U. S. Navy, from William Jarvis, U. S. Consul, Lisbon,
Portugal

CONSULATE
OF THE U. STATES
Lisbon 15q J a n y 1805 (Duplicate forwg)
SIR I have the honor to enclose for your inspection a letter this
day rec'd from James Gambier Esqr, his Britanick Majestys Consul
General for Portugal. At his particular desire I shall wait your
reply before I give an answer to his Letter -

N? 5

[LC. JRP, Letters & Orders, Book A, 1804-1805.1
[Enclosure]

To William Jarvis, U. S. Consul, Lisbon, Portugal, from James Gambier, British
Consul General, Lisbon, Portugal

LISRON Jan? 1805.
SIR, Since I ha,d the honor of a conversation with you Yesterday on
the Subject of the American frigate now in the Tagus receiving
English Sailors. I have learnt that the evil I complained of, is
increasing to such an extent, as to render it necessary for me to
trouble you with some further Observations.
The Spirit of the British Constitution requires the Services of all
our seafaring Men, for the general defence of the Country, whenever
our fleets may stand in need of them, and altho' in some instances
Protections are granted, they are only given with the view to encourage
our own Trade, and are only valid so long as those who possess them
are serving their own Country in some way or other, consiquently ever
British Sailor who enters into the Service of another Country when
called upon to serve His Majesty is guilty of a breach of Duty, and
is in effect a deserter from his profession and the cause he is bound by
allegiance to espouse.
In returning you therefore my thanks, for your assurance that
deserters of evey d~iacriptionshould be given u p ; I must at the same time
observe that it is evident from what I have stated, that under the existing circumstances all British Sailors in the Service of other States,
may be considered as coming under thls discription. There can be no doubt, but that it is the interest of every Nation
to discourage as much as possible acts of disloyalty committed by a n y
Subjects or Citizens towards their respective Governments -but when
the Nature of the War in which great Britain is at present engaged
is considered; it is not too much to say, that those States, which in
the present contest profess to observe a perfect Neutrality, are peculiarly called upon not to endeavour to diminish our means of carrying
on an effective War by encoura 'ng our Seamen to depart from their
duty by serving them instead o us. I feel confident that under the circumstances the Government of
the United States will acknowledue the Justice of my requesting; that
Captg Rodgers will have the Goodness to discharge such Brltish
Sailors as may have abondoned their duty by entering on board the
Ship under his command, which request I beg of you to communicate
to him, and to inform me of his answer.

P

[NA. SDA. CL, Lisbon, Vol. 2, 1803-1805.1

282

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1804 TO 1805

Extract from journal of U. S. Frigate Consfitufion. Captain John Bodgers, U. 8.
Navy, commanding, Tuesday, 15 January 1805

[In Lisbon Roads since 29 December 1804.1 At 10 [AM] unmoord
ship bent the Main top Sail and hoisted out the pinnace At ?4 past
10 weigh,d made sail & stood Up for the t o m of Lisbon, At )i Past
11. came too with the Iarbd bower In 20 fathoms water abreast the
town Of Lisbon.
[USNA.]
Extract from journal of Herekiah Loomis, Steward, U. S. Navy, in U. 8. Brig
V h . Master Commandant John Smith, U. S. Navy, commanding, Tuesday, 15
January 1805

[Syracuse] Two Turks sent ashore to the prison.
[L. F. Middlebrook. NDA copy.]
To Captain Thomas Tingey, U. S. Navy, from Secretary of the Navy

NAVYDEP?
16 Jan? 1805.
Cap$THO?
TINGEY
Navy Yard.
As i t is intended to keep the John Adam constantly employed as
a transport ship, it is proper that the Cargoes be seasonably provided.
She is expected to arrive in this port in all march next - possibly by
the last of February, and I do not wish her to be detained here longer
than cannot be avoided. She must return to the Mediterranean with
a Cargo with all practicable dispatch. You will therefore provide in
season 150,000 'Qn Bread. - 150 Barrels of Flour, 2500 'be of Suet 1000 'Qa of Butter -4000 'be of rice - 4500 'be of cheese - 150 Bushels
of Pease - 500 Gallons of Melasses - 3500 Gallons rum - & 1500
Gallons of Whiskey - 4 Tons of assorted Cordage - 100 bolts of
Canvas of different sizes and a proportionate quantity of Twine. [NDA. OSW, Vol. 6, 1802-1805.1
To William Jarvis, U. S. Consul, Lisbon, Portugal, from Captain John Bodgers,
u.S. Navy

N9 8

LT. STATES
SHIPConstitution

Lisbon Jany. 16,1806
SIR I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your Letter of
this da.te Enclosing another from James Gambier Esq' His Britanic
Ma'estys Consul for the Kingdom of Portugal - Complaining of the
~ v i i that
s
arise to the British Goverml by their Seamen entering into
the service of other Nations, with some Explanatory observations on
t,he propriety of Nations (particularly those rofessing a perfect Neutrality) &scouraging British Seamen from entering into any other
service, than such as the necessities of England prescribe; & requiring
of me to discharge such British subjects as have abandoned their duty
by entering on board the U. States Ship Constitution, under my Command. - I n answer to Mr Gambier I have only to observe, that as
I have no Men, to my knowledge, of the description he mentions: that
se of his request is conse uently complied with b my acof such Fact; as t e Men which I have s 'pped in
a single exception, say that they are Danes, Sweedes,
Frenchmen & Americans.

B

L

283

WARS WITH BARBARY POWEBS

At the same time I beg leave to Express my candor by saying, that
as I am not acquainted with any stipulation between Great Britain &
the U. States of America, either by Treaty or otherwise, that would
authorize m discharging unemployed Men which I may have entered
in a Neutra or any other Port not subject to the Exercise of British
Laws. - so far as the Theory of Mr Gambiers arguments tend to
promote & secure a good understanding between the Goverments of
Great Britain & the U. States, I must beg leave to acknowledge their
Justice & propriety: But as I have no particular instructions on this
subject from my Goverment, I can only say that I shall not consider
a compliance with his demand my Dut ; until the practice of British
Men of War shall so far correspond wit his Theory, as to prove that
the U. States is not Greviously Injured by ten Fold more than the
very fact of which he complains - a t the same time I beg ou to
assure him that the high respect which I entertain for the ~riti4hPGOTement, will prevent my detaining one of its deserters a Single moment
after I know him to be such. -

3

i

[NDA. Captain's LB, Vol. 1, 1805.1
To Levett Harris, U. 6. Consul General, St. Petersburg, Russia, from Captain
Samuel Barron, U. 8. Navy

SYRACUSE,
SICILY
16 Jan? 1805
Triplicate
SIR! The letter, which you address'd on the 18 August last to my
Predecessor in the Command of the Naval forces of the U States in
the Med-as
transmitted to me from Constan? about the middle of
last Month & opened by me in the absence of Comm: Preble who a
short time before had sailed on his Return to America - The long
& severe Indisposition I have suffered & which by confining me to my
Bed for several Weeks past has rendered me incapable of application
to Business, will I flatter myself afford s ~ c i e napology
t
for not having earlier opened a Correspondence with you. - I n your Letter I
observe nothing that requires particular Observation on my
derive much satisfaction from the assurances you give of the %""Y ighly
favorable Disposition of the Russian Court towards the U. States a Disposition so congenial with that entertained by our Government
and I cannot but regret that our Warfare with Tripoli & the Duty
which those entrusted with the defence of our Commerce & the Honor
of our flag, owe to their Country & to the Service, shoud give rise to
events that may for a moment put a t hazard the Good understanding
so long subsisting betwixt the two Countries - You will readily
perceive my allusion to the Detention by part of the Squadron under
my Command, of a Vessel called the Sb Miguile loaded with Grain
under Russitm Colors, which took place in Sept: last & of whicb you
are doubtless 'ere this inform'd, But judging from the Duplicity &
falsehood employed by the Master (Dede Riga) in his statements to
the Russian Agents in this quarter, I have every reason to suppose
that your information touching the &air must be imperfect & unsatisfactory - perhaps garbled and erroneous, as i t is to be presumed
that those Gentlemen who appear by their Correspondence with me,
to have taken up the matter m a style of warmth & pre-'udication,
inconsistent with that Colness & Deliberation which oug t ever to
mark the Diplomatic Character, have written to their Court in the
same spirit of Intemperance & Misrepresentation, I therefore embrace

'

6

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1804 TO 1805

284

the first moment of retuning Strength to convey to you such correct
& circumstantial Information as may enable you to answer any complaints which the Russian Government may address to you in this
case
The inclosed Letter to which I refer you from Capt: Campbell, Cornrnandg the Constelhtion frigate, by whom the St Miguel was
captured will acquaint you fully with all the particulars of her Capture On comparing this Account with the Communications from the
Russian Consul in this Island, Copies of which are also inclos'd you
u~illobseme that they vary in several essential points, & in those upon
which the legality of the Capture entirely hinges. I t is scarcely
necessary for me to point out to you Sir which of these Statements
is most consistent with Truth - Captain Riga has stated, that where
captured he was 60 Miles b e t w i ~ tGerbys & Tripoli - At the t,ime
he was discorered by our Squadron. I was myself cruizing off with the
President frigate in Sight of Tripoli & when the signal uTasmade for
the Constellation to chase the strange Sail, the latt'er was to the Eastward of Tripoli (whereas Gerbys is to t'he Westward) & according to
our observations not more than 6 Miles from the Coast - He further asserts that he made no attempt to escape, & the Russian Consul
as you will perceive lays great stress upon this as a proof of the Captain's Innocence, but the position being false the inference drawn
from it must be the same, for you will observe by Capt Campbell's
account that the Vessel was not captured till after a smart Chase of
24 Hours, during which he tacked & maneuvred evidently with the
desipn to escape from the pursuit; I n short the representations
which Captain De Riga has made to the Agents of his Nation are
palpably disingenuous & unfounded and calculated to conceal his real
Intintion, which from the Situation we first discovered him in the moderate Weather we had for some time before experienc'd $
thence the improbability of his being driven on that Coast - his
attempt to escape Examination - the scarcity of Water on board his
Vessel - his sudden separation from two Ottoman Ships in company
with him & in fact every incident attending his Capture, I am persuaded was to enter the Port of Tripoli, in defiance of the Blockade
which he well knew to exist - Acting then under these impressions
which the sequel has tended to strengthen, I thought i t my duty to
send him to Malta, where the Cargo, being in a perishing condition,
was sold - The Polacre remains there until the favorable Season,
when she will be sent, with the tm-o others detained at the same time,
to America, unless I shou'd in the interval receive contrary Orders
from Government I now request your attention to that part of the Consuls Letter
to me, relating to an Indignitv which he says was offered to the
Russian Flag on board the St Xrligue1e whilst discharging her Cargo
a t Malta and in treating of which, He has thought fit to assume a
very lofty and in my opinion imperious tone, taking for granted
every thing that the artful & interested Greeks whose Names are
subscribed to a Certificate (Copy of which is attached to his Letter)
have deposed on the Subject - until this Certificate reached me
from M?, DeBecker I was entirely ignorant of any Occurrence of this
nature, no complaint having been made to me a t Malta, altho' I
was there during the time i t is stated to have happened - The descharging of the Polacre was done by Maltese. & I consider this
affair as having originated in some dispute betwixt them and the

-

285

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

Greek Sailers in itself of no importance, which Captain Riga in the
same spirit of perversion & duplicity which characterizes his whole
Conduct has seized upon as a handle & represented in the light of
an intentional Insult offered to his £iag, in order the more strongly
to interest the Russian Agents in bis favor The Papers which I have the honor to inclose relative to the affair
are Capt Campbell's Letter with the Certrficate of the O&cers to
whose charge the St Miguel was entrusted after her Capture marked A. - B. Copy of a Letter from the Russian Agent at hfessina - C. Copy of my Answer and D. a Second Letter from the
same, annexing the Certificate referred to above - These papers
adding to the preceeding particulars will I trust afford you all the
Insight & information requisite to meet any representations from
the Russian Cabinet on honorable & advantageous ground and I feel
confident shou'd a Discussion arise that on your side it will be conducted with that Judgment and ability, which, the importance of
the principle embraced in the affair 87, a due but independent estimation of the political consequences it may involve, will call for. I beg you will take an opportunity of assuring the Minister for
foreign affairs, that I entertain in common with the Nation, under
whose flag I have the Honor to command the most pacific & friendly
sentiments for His Imperial hlajesty b his Government & that the
Russian flag will ever meet with that Respect from the American
Commanders wLich the subsisting amity betwixt the two governments
mutually demands, but at the same time you will give his Excellency
to understand that in our Warfare with Tripoli we must be governed
by a strict adherence to the Laws of Nations & the principles of
Blockade recogniz'd therein & that as such it is the duty of my office
to detain any Vessel, under whatever flag, that may attempt to
enter the Port of Tripoli, so long acknowledged by all the Powers
as blockaded by the Naval forces of the U States. At the close of Your letter to Commo: Prebble I notice some
observations, respecting the disposition recently manifested by the
Ottoman Porte to encourage an intercourse with America, which
had been officially announced to You thro' the medium of the court
of St Petersburg and You suggest to this consideration the proriety of granting certain facilities to the Vessels of that Power k'hatever plans may conduce to the extension of our navigation &
the improvement of our commercial intercourse with distant & friendly
Nations, will undoubtedly experience the fostering hand of Government Q whist I remain in these seas I shall bestow on this object
of which I feel deeply the importance, all the care & attention it
merit's; but the instance you mention, we ought to consider how
far it would be politic or consistent with our National di nity to
court such advantages by a diriation in favor of any partic ar flag,
from these principles which thus far in our contest with Tripoli have
governed us, in relation to Keutrals, as such a diviation would inevitably excite the jealousy of other Powers in amity with the United
States, & tend to involve us in diaculties for which remote & uncertain benefits afford no compensation. I thought it necessary to
ke these remarks to you on ace! of the Dentention of two Vessels
(Greek) under Ottoman colors; captured at the same time with the
Sr Miguele & under similar circumstances, of which you have no
doubt 'ere this received advice.

3

286

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1804 TO 1805

Together with your Letter I recieved a few lines (also addressed
to Commodore Prebble) from the Chevalier dlIt&sky at Constan-

tinopel, stating that he was still without any answer from his Court,
on the Subject of the requested mediation with the Bashaw for the
release of American Prisonners a t Tripoli. - TKhatever expectations
might have been form'd from the Russian interference & I believe
that my Predecessor had grounds to flatter himself that somethmg
favorable would result, the event appears to have completely disappointed them. For myself I am convinced, and I believe my opinion to be coincident with the sentiments of our Government that
our only Hope of our captive of our captive Brethren, or of a speedy
& durable peace with the Barbarians, rest's in the decision & promptitude of our Counsels a t Home & the Spirit and energy of our naval
operations on their coasts. I shall be anxious to have from you in reply to the present, & with
unfeigned esteem $ consideration I remain
(signed) SAM!
BARRON

-

@nclosurn No. 11

To Captain Samuel Barron, U. 6. Navy, from Captain Hugh G. Campbell, U. S.
Navy

B STATESSEIP Consdellation

8.

S y ~ a m s eHarbor 1Ytb Decr 1804
SIR, I have learn'd with e ual surprize & regret that complaints
have been made to the consul of his Majesty the Emperor of ell the
Russias residing a t Messina, by the Master of the Polacre Ship
St Michael, detain'd off Tripoli in Sept' last, by the U, States Frigabe
under my Command, respecting an Insult offered to the Russian Flag
under which she sailed and ill treatment experienced by himself and
crew whist in our possession, and I deem it incumbent upon me to
give to the Commodore of the American Squadron, a succinct detail
of the Circumstances attending her detention,
On the 12@ day of Septr last, being off the Harbor of Tripoli
in company with the Blockading Squadron I gave cllace, in compliance
with the Signals of the Commodore to a Polacre Ship, being one of
three Vessels discovered a t the same time by the several Ships of the
Squadron; The chace was continued until Night, the Polacre going
from us under a press of Sail, when the Wind dying away we lost sight
of her, but at Day-break the following Morning, she was descried again
about 8 Mles to the Windward and the chace was renewed, the
Polacre a t the same time crowding all Sail, and making repeated Tacks,
evidently with a view to escape from us, the Wind however freshining
towards the Evening, I came up with her about Sunset & sent a Boat
with my Second Lieutt on board who returned immediately with the
Captain and his Papers The Polacre proved to be the St Miguel;
D Riga Master loaded with grain under Russian Colors, I n consequence of the orders which I had received, and the suspicious circumstances attached to a Vessel loaded with Grain, found
in the immediate Vicinity of a Port in a State of Blockade I conceiv'd
i t my Duty, to take possession & carry her to the Commander of the
Blockading Squadron, I therefore sent my Second Lieutenant with
three midshi men & 12 Hands on board with orders to take char e
of the Vesse & follow the motions of the Frigate, and immediate y
made Sail to join the Squadron off Tripoli which we did the second day

P

k

WARS WITH BARBARY POWEBS

287

after, The Polacre was then given in charge of officers a pointed by
you Si, and my 06cers and men return'd on board the Ebnstelldion,
You are apprized that I have no knowledge whatever of any thing
that took place on board the Polacre, from that time, - It is
scarcely necessary to state to ou sir, tbat during the two Days, that
Captain De Riga was detain180nboard the Frigate, under my Command, He was treated with all the attention & Respect due to the
Master of a Vessel, belonging to a Respectable and friendly Power,
or to assure you that I feel such confidence in the Conduct & discretion
of the Officers to whom the char e of the Polacre was committed,
as well as the Officers generally un er my Command,and in their strict
adherence to my orders, that I have no hesitation in pronouncing the
complaints made to the Russian Consul, as far as they relate to them, a
malicious and mischevious misrepresentation, and altogether devoid
of Truth, for your satisfaction however I shall accompany this with
a declaration sign'd by the Officersthemselves With regard to the Indignity said to have been offered to the Russian
flag on board the Polacre in uestion, I consider the complaint as
equally malicious and unfoun ed, No orders whatever were given
by me for striking the Flag, nor was there any interference of this
nature on the Part of the Officersand Men whilst on board her, I hope Sir that this Plain statement of Facts accompanied by the
Certificate of my Officers will be sufficient to remove from the mind
of the Consul of his Majesty the Emperor of Bussia, anv unfavorable
impressions which such pal able misrepresentations, m a i have created
touching the Conduct of t e American Commanders to the Flan of a
long in Amit with the United States; And One for Ghich
Power
our Government as we as we Ourselves entertain the most Pacific,
respectfull & amicable Sentiments:
I have the Honor to be with sincere Regard Sir, your Mo: Obt
Serv 5
HUGH
G. C-~MPBELL.
Cap1
BARRON
COMMODORE
SAMUEL

t'

3

!i

f

-

[17 December 18043
Concerning capture of Russian Polacre St Mfgud

The Undersign'd Oliver H Perry Second Lieutt on board the
States Frigate Constellation Hugh G . Campbell Cornm: does hereby
certify that he was in said Frigate off the Harbor of Tripoli on the
day of Septvast, when after a chace of 24 hours, she brou ht to a
Polacre Ship under Russian Colors, called the S I Mipel d: laten with
grain, That he the said Oliver H Perry did by order of the Cornmander, board the said Polacre Ship and brou ht the LMaster with his
Papers to the Frigate That immediately a terwards he the said
Lieutenant received orders to take charge of the Polacre, and to foQow
the motions of the Constellation, 8:that accordingly Herepaired on board
with three Midshipmen and [msmutdated]That no Person excepting the
Master [ms mutilated] the Polacre, that he found on board her 20
Muskets and some Side arms, deposited in a State Room in the Cabbin,
which Room he suffered no Person to enter, that besides these, the
Crew of the Polacre had other arms, which they were not deprived of
and that the Crew were allow'd to go a t pleasure, and unmolested to
any part of the Vessel; to serve out their own provisions and Water,
and in ali other respects to foilow their own modes and Customs: -

5

288

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1804 TO 1805

He the said Lieutt having a t the time of taking charge of the Polacre,
given the most positive orders to his People, not to offer the smallest
molestation to those on board, nor to interfere in any manner with
them or their Effects, And he verily believes that these Orders were
rigidly observed, as during the Forty eight Hours which the said
Polacre was in his charge, he heard no complaints, whatever, nor did
any occurrence of an unpleasant nature take place,
And the undersign'd Oliver H Perry further declares, that when
he took possession of the said Polacre, She had no Colors flying, they
having been previously hauled down by the People belonging to the
Polacre & put away - And that her Colors were not afterwards
hoisted - Done and Sign'd on board the U. States Frigate Constellation, in Syracuse Harbor 1 7 @ Dec' 1804
(Sign'd) [Oliver H Perry]
We m-hose names are hereunto subscrib'd Midshipmen on board
the U. States Frigate Constellation Do certify that We were on board
the Polacre Ship S a i g u e l whilst she was in charge of Lieutt Perry
& We do testify to the correctness of the foregoing Statements ITmE. CHEESROROUGH.
Midshipman
CHARLES
ROBINSON Midship
[Enclosure No. ?.I

[27 November 1804?]
To Captain Samuel Barron, U. S. Navy, from Monsieur de Becker, Russian
Counsellor of State and Consul General, The Two Sicilies

B
The undersigned Counseller of State & Consul General in Sicily of
His Imperial Majfxsty of all the Russians presents his obsequies to the
above commander and anxiously informs him, that He has been called
Riga Russian, who having sailed
upon and informed by Cap-ede
with his merchant Vessel named the St Michael and loaded with hard
Grain on his account and his own Crew destined for Spain & Navigated on the Coast of Barbary, when at the distance of 60 Miles or
thereabouts between Girba & Tripoli met with a Frigate & Brig of
the United Sta%esof America by which he was arrested & Afterwards
conducted by the Brig Alone, against all the laws and Customs of all
Maritime Powers, into the Island of Malta as a good prize, under the
supposition of his having intended to enter Tripoly a port blockaded
by the Americans, To contradict that Idea it is sufficient to know that the Vessel taken
was bound direct for Spain as may be seen by his instructions & that
on account of contrary winds alone He approached Barbary in hopes
of meeting on that shore the periodicd winds which might enable him
to perform his Voyage to Spain, Added to these truths which ought to convince the above Commander of the illegality & injustice of this proceeding let him examine
minutely the Circumstances & see if in Any way it tends to verify
the supposed Idea of Cap! Dede Riga it was on the 12tQof September
&hat He approached the Coast of Barbary about 60 Miles between
Girba & Tripoly, this distance shews that all conjectures is False, for

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

289

if the said Captain wished to enter Tripoly he would have approached
near that port, He did not attempt to escape, which He might have
done when He saw the Frigate & Brig a t a distance of about 12 Miles,
is this not a clear sign of the Captains Innocence and that the Prize
is illigitimate & Illegal, The undersigned is astonished that not finding a sufficient quantity
of water on board for the destination and the Ship being armed with
4 pound Cannon & a quantity of small Arms should be motives for
detention of said Vessel, - The undersigned as authorized by the
duties of his Oflice and the good understanding existing between His
August soverign and the United States of America, Vigourously reclaims from the above Commander B, the liberation as well of the
ship as the Cargo to Capt Riga & all dama es costs & Interests, the
undersigned is further surprized that the 8fficers of the Frigate &
Brig dared to take & strike the Colours of the said Russian ship &
regard such conduct as absurd in its principle & despicable in its consequence, He cannot do less than inform his Imperial Court of the
manner in which the Russian flag is respected by American Officers &
in what
- - manner the Commerce & Navigation of their subjects is
impeded, The writer hopes for the pleasure of seeing the restitution of the
ship & Cargo, and the Captain indemnified for all damages, praying
the above commander for a prompt Answer has the honor to sign
himself with distinct Esteem & perfect consideration, (Signed) Becker [Enclosure No. 3.1

To Monsieur de Becker, Russian Counsellor of State and Consul General, The
Two Sicilies, from Captain Samuel Barron, U. S. Navy

c-

SYRACU~E
QB December 1804 SIR- Your Letter of the 27 t @ Novemr has been this Day Delivered
(& interpreted) to me, I t appears by the Tale [?I that you have
given full Credit to the assertion of the Captain, Dedi Riga, & that
you think it proper to demand the Restitution of the Said Dedi Riga's
Vessel, Cargo &c, &c - without having thought it necessary to enquire of me, as to the grounds, on which the Said vessel was captured
& Sent into the Nearest Port You express your Surprise, that American officers should dare to
take, or Strike the Colours of the Russian Ship, which conduct, you
regard, as absurd, & despicable, & that you shall inform your imperial
Court of the Manner, in which the Russian Flag, is respected by
American Officers, & the Commerce & Navigation of their Subjects
impeded As it Respects your charge ai treating with disrespect, the Russian
Flag or impeding the Lawful1 Commerce or navigation of Russian
Subjects, I beg leave to assure you SIT,lt never has been done, by any
officer under my Command, and at the Same time, I beg you to be
informed, that the Flag of no nation, will protect him, who dares enter
the Port of Tripoli, while blockaded by the Squadron under my
Command,
The San-Michael (Captain Dedi Riga, a Greek Himself) m a ~ e d

290

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1804 TO 1805

with greek Sailors in company with two Greek Ships were Seen from
the Ships of the American Squadron, then Blockading the Port of
Tripoly & in Sight of the City not more than five miles from the Shore)
on the 1Zt4 of Septembr Steering directly for the Said Town, On observing our Ships before the Harbour, one of the Strange Ships (the
Sun-Michael) altered her Course, & was pursued by the Frigate and
Brig - by whom She was captured the Succeeding Evening about
fifty Miles from Tripoli, from the time I arived the two Vessels aforesaid to chase the Sun-Michael until1 she was overtaken, every means
was used to elude the pursuit by frequently tacking and by other
Manuovres But By the Superiour Sailmg, of the American Ships, she
was captured, This Sir, contradicts the Assertion of Captain Riga,
"that he did not attempt to escape which could have been effected,
had he been disposed to do so," - I am so confident that it was his
intention to have entered Tripoli in direct violation of the Blockade,
& contrary to the Laws of Nations, that I felt no hesitation in detaining
him, nor Shall I feel myself justiliable in restoring either the Ship, or
Cargo, without an Order from the Goverment of the United States,
[Endosure No. 41

[ l o December 1804?]
To Captain Samuel Barron, U. S. Navy, from Monsieur de Becker, Russian
Counsellor of State and Consul General, The Two Sicilies

D

The undersigned counsellor of State of his imperial Majesty of all
the Russias & Consul General in Sicily, having received the above
mentioned Commanders Letter dated the 3'6 Current, has the honor
to tell him that, the Assertions of Cap! Dede Riga were not the sole
motives for his Official Letter of the 27Q November, but attested &
authentic papers convinces the writer of the contempt shewn the Flag
as well as the illegality of the Prize, - to prove clearly to the commander, the undersigned encloses a Copy of a Certificate signed by
sundry persons by which he will be convinced that the Russian flag
was really struck, As the writer observes the Aforesaid Letter that the Commander is
not Justifiable in the Restitution of the Prize without an order from
t,he United States of course He will lose no time in giving information
to his Imperial court, & make known the above circumstances, mean
time He subscribes himself with all possible respect
DE BECKER
MESSINA10 December 1804
Copy of Cap: Dede Rega Russian subject
Appeared personally in this imperial Consular Office for Malta &
Goza the undersigned who upon oath depose that on the 23'd of
October the day destined for the discharge of Cap: dede Regas Grain
who commanded the Pollacre under Russian Merchant Colours taken
by the Americans they saw the Sailors of the Polacre hoist the Russian
flag & after a short interval was struck a disrepectful manner by the
American Officer said Colour in the Act of being taken down fell at

WARS FVITH BARBARY POWERS

291

the said Officers feet, by whom it was taken contemptiousely & put in
the Cabin for the truth of which we have signed our names
Malta 93 November 1804
ANTOXIO
RENEAUD
CARCAS
PANAJOTTI
ZICHTIRA
ZIROSIVAEASLOS
STAMATO
Capt CHIRIACO
Cap$GIO DI DEMETROI GIACOMO
CHACIZIA MALTA
NINCENZO
CARCAS
- DO
ANTONIO
[NA. SDA. CD, St. Petersburg, Vol. 1, 1794-1809.1
Extract from journal of Midshipman Charles Morris, Jr., 1J. S. Navy, on board
U. S. Frigate Presided, Master Commandant George Cox, U.S. Navy, commanding,
Wednesday, 16 January 1805

Clear. 6 A M the U S Frigate Constellation sailed for Malta
[Mrs. C . E. Fox original, KDA photostat.]
Extract from journal of Hezekiah Loomis, Steward, U. S. Navy, in U. 8. Brig
Vixen, Master Commandant John Smith, U. 6. Navy, commanding, Wednesday,
16 January 1806

[Syracuse] This morning I served beef in lieu of pork. At 6 o'clock
A. M. the Constellation got underway bound as I was informed, to
Malta. Pleasant.
[L. F. Middbbrook. S D A copy.]
Extract from journal of HezeJsiah Loomis, Steward, U. S. Mavy, in U. S. Brig
Vixen, Master Commandant John Smith, U. S. Navy, commanding, Thursday,
17 January 1805

[Syracuse] This morning all hands came on board from the President. I served beef and flour. Mr Crane the First Lieutenant sent

for me in the ward room and told me to pump off 8% galls. spirits which
I did and charged to the gun room mess according to his orders.
Captain Smith came on board and ordered F. Gleason to receive 14
lashes on the naked back and then put in irons for taking from J.
Irvine's bag 1 pair trousers and offering them for sale on shore.
IL. F. Middlebrook. NDA copy.]
Extract from Memorandum Book of Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Navy, U*6. 6.
John Adam. 18 January 1805

Saw Palma and others of the Canary Islands
[LC original.]
To Secretary of State from WiUiam Jarvis, U. S. Consul, Lisbon, Portugal

LISBON
18th J a n u a q 1805
Duplicate
SIR,The original 15 January 18051 of the accompanying duplicate
went by the Ship Romulus via Philadelphia.
The Con.stitutio.n got Prattic the l l t @
(i e in 14 days) she has since
parted a Cable and another has been spoken for of 21 Inches. Her
old Bowsprit is so decayed & sprung that not any art of it will
answer. By t,he 27t%r 28th I imagine her repairs will e compleated.
I have already sent on board about Hty good Seamen & probably 20 or

B

292

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 180.4 TO 1805

-

30 more will be obtained. Inclosed is a Copy of my letter to Mr de
Araujo relative to the supply of an anchor & his answer. An order
would have been much more agreeable but I suppose this will be
granted.
A few days ago M' Gambier met me on Change & spoke to me
relative to the allowing of British Seamen to enter into our service.
Much conversation ensued on the subject, In which I animadverted
on the conduct of the Commanders of British Vessels of War, and
finally ended by obser~ingthat I thought it an affair more proper for
our respective Governments to come to an understanding about than
for discussion between their Agents, as it did not appear to me a subject
that was left to my option & the only step I felt myself a t liberty to
take was to advise the giving up of Men who had deserted either
from hlen of War or Merchantmen. The next day I received a letter
of the 15@from him, which I had copied & sent to Captain Rodgers:
from whom I received a reply the 16@a Copy of which I inclosed
in my letter to Mr Gambier of the same date. Copies of all which go
inclosed. The correspondence terminated here, nor do I learn that
M TGambier has taken any other steps on the subject The Moorish Frigate here, two or three days ago began to get out
her outriggers preparatory to heaving down I understand from the
Portuguese Agent to the Agents of the Emperor, that it is to inspect
& clean her bottom & that it is probable she will not be coppered.
The Bulwark of the Brig is not yet compleated. With the Frigate at
St Ubes they are not doing any thing. I cannot learn that any steps
have been taken to-ward a Peace with the King of Prussia. As that
Court has been much more in the habit of Receiving than paying
Money for their friendship and it is understood that money is not an
article they are fond of parting with; it is possible they may not be
willing to disburse as much as will sat~sfythe avidity or enlarged expectations of the Emperor founded on the recent success of the Admiral.
But still I imagine that some measure of precaution may not be unworthy of the attention of Government, if two or three Vessels can
be spared for the purpose.
In a conversation the other day with M' Johnstone the Purser of the
Constitution relative to the forgery, I mentioned that it must have
been by some person well acquainted with the arran ements of Government & told him the information I had received rom Cadiz relative
to the Man. He observed that there was an Italian who had been
Secretary to Commodore Morris, that understood three or four languages and whom from the circumstance of his quitting Commodore
Morris about that time without assi ng any sufficient reason, from
his capability & from the Knowledge e must have had of the arrangements of Government he really beleived to be the person. Upon this
I shew him the inclosed letters & he believed it the same hand. He
will look to see if he has not some of his w~itingon board for a comparison; but as I can obtain several of his lett'ers, I c.oncluded it best to
forward those as there no doubt must be some of his writing in the
Secretary of the Navy's Office and also in the possession of Captaln
Morris. The best of the two is about the hand he wrote all his English
letters in, but the French letters to Gonne, Harrison & Lupton are
more of a french hand than the worst; but as well as m y recollection
serves me not compleatly disguised. Mr Johnstone did not remember
his real name.

f'

f?

-

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

293

Inclosed is likewise a Copy of Admiral Sir John Orde's letter to the
Governor of Cadiz announcing the blockade of that Port with a translation of the Governors answer; also dupt Copy of the translation of
the Spanish Manifesto. The alarm about this Country being involved in the War seems to be daily subsiding. We have nothing new
of importance. I understand that Mr hrlunroe has arrived in Madrid.
Inclosed is a letter from Mr Pinckney & M' Simpson.

MT Rademaker takes his passage in the Ship Hare & will sail in 3 or
4 days [KA.

SDA. CL, Lisbon, Vol. 2, 1803-1805.1

To Secretary of State from William Kirkpatrick, U. S. Consul,Malag&,Spain
MALAGA
l g t Q J m a q 1805

SIR Three days after I had last the honor of addressing you on
the 24@November, this City was declared by our Governor, as President of the Board of Health, entirely free of tho Epedemy under
which i t had so long, and cruelly labored, but it was only on the 15tQ
of this month, that our port, and inland Communications were
opened, in ~ i r t u eof an Order from the Captain General, residing in
Granada; all our difficulties have consequently been removed, and the
several American Vessels detained here, such a length of time, have
had permission to load, and proceed on their voyages. On the 12th of last month, War was proclaimed in Madrid against
En land, this measure was necessarily expected, after those previous y adopted, of which I informed you in my last; some rumours
prevail of a General Peace in Europe, I cannot say how far they are
founded, but they have a good effect on our Paper Currency, which
was loosing a couple, of weeks ago, 57 @ 58 p' Ct and now only 52
@
53Ipr Ct
Consul OBrien is now here, on his way to the United States; he
will proceed in the course of two or three days, if the wind setts in
fair. In a few days I %-ill transmit the semi Annual return of arrivals
in this place

I

[NA. SDA. CL, Malaga, Vol. 1, June 1793-May 1814.1
To Captain John Rodgers, U. S. Navy, from Wiiliam Jarvis, U. S. Consul, Lisbon,
Portugal

CONSULATE
OF THE U.STATES
Lisbon 19 Jany. 1805
SIR John Asyres Esq' the Danish Consul General 8: chargi des
affairs has this Morning informed me that Cap?Sordt has made a, complaint to him that four of the Seamen belonging to the vessel of which
he is master, have deserted; and he is informed by a Portugees bqatman that they went on board the U. States Frigate Conshtulwn.
Should this prove to be the fact I have no hesitancy to b+ieve that
you will give them up to the Captain. Their names are Nells Dominicus, Martin M. Almending, Claus Repke, and Johaun B u ~ ae
Bay [Boy1 N9 6

&C.

.TRP. Letters & Orders. A. 1804-1805.1

294

N A W OPEBATIONS FROM 1804 TO 1806

T o William Jervis, U. S. Consul, Lisbon, Portugal, from Captain John Bodgers,
U. S. Navy
U. STATESPRIGATE
Gon~tiluiion
Tagus [Lisbon]Jany l g t @1805

SIR I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your letter
of tbis date acq[uainting]me of a complaint made to you by the Danish
Consul Genl of certain deserters, from a Merchant Vessel of his nation,
being on board the Constitution - In answer I have to inform you,
that in case such men are on board the Constitution, they shall be
sent onshore
[Mass. HS.

Jarvis Cor.

SDA photostat.]

To Captain John Rodgers, U. S. Navy, from William Jarvis, U. S. Consul, Lisbon,
Portugal
CONSULATE
OF T H E U. STATES
~ T 7G
Lisbon 19 Janp. 1805

SIR The first moments leisure since I received your Letter, I
embrace to inform you, that it is contrary to my desire as an Officer
under the Goverment of the U. States, that the Men be released
that I applied for this morning (if on board) in any other shape, than
as liberality will dictate; and that is, as it appears to me; in such a
manner as the Cap! from whom they have absconded should regain
them again: which I suppose can only be effected by delivering them
up to him (if on board) when he comes alongside; for if they are put
on shore you must be sensible that he will never see them again; of
course that it is only doing a just thiig by halves. And we who have so often reason to complain of injustice, ought
not at least to shew a disposition to act so, or set an example of t,he
Kind. In this affair however it is only my business to express my
opinion and it is at your discretion to act as you think proper. Still
I hope that you may view the thing in the same point of light that I
do; and if you pa.y any attention to my application that it will be
such as will prove satisfactory to the party aggreived and will do
credit to those dignified sentiments of justice which our Country has
always professed & acted upto. P. S. If it is not agreeable to deliver them up alongside, it may
be a well to send the men to my oflice & let me take on myself to act
as I may think the Character & Interest of my Country demands.
{LC. 3RP.

Letters & Orders, Book A, 1804-1805.3

W. J.

Extract from journal of Midshipman F. Cornelius deKrafft, U. S. Navy, U. S. Brig
Scourge, Xidshipman Ralph Izard, Jr., U. S. Navy, commanding, Saturday, 19
January 1805

Pleasant weather. At past 1 saw a sail to the Nc bore away
& stood for her. At 3 spoke her she prov* to be an American ship
from Cadiz bound to New York, out 35 days, hove too, the Captain
Q M' Nlathan]. Baker purser of the Brig Siren, passenger, came on
board. )d past 3 bore away & stood our course, the Ship in Co: the
American Eagle, Cap! Pindir. At 5 back'd the M? yard the above Per-

sons went on board their ship, fili'd away & made all sail. At 9 took
in Mo T. G. steering sail. L:0: 28' 44' N.
[NDA.]

To Secretary of State from Thomas Appleton, U. S. Consul, Leghorn

LEGHORN
2O* January 1806
SIR I have now the honor to transmit you a list of American
Vessels sailed from this port, from the 1'; of July to the 31'1 December
1804. likewise my Accounts Current with the U: States for the said

year, with the attendant Vouchers, balance due me 148. Dollars for
which amount I have drawn on the department of State in favor of
Samuel Emery of Philadelphia.
Some time since I was informed by M: Emery that the account
of my advances for the govt during the year 1802 still meets with
some obstacle towards its h a 1 adjustment, but as he has not explained
the nature of it, I am utterly a t a loss to know from whence it can
Arise, inasmuch as, all the original Vouchers were forwarded by me
to the de artment of State, excepting for that part relative to the
postage o letters, which you will readily perceive Sir artre impossible
ever to procure. The late law of congress regarding American seamen I presume
every where must have had the most salutary effects, for since it has
been known to me, not a citizen has evaded from this port, or entered
into foreign service, the captains are less unjust in their treatment of
their sailors, and both we can compel to their duty. - I n my letter
of the 26* of June, I took the liberty of particularizing some of the
benefits which would Arise to the commerce of the U: States in obtaining a permission from the Ottoman port for our Vessels to trade in
the black sea, they were the result of an intimate acquaintance with
the Levant trade, and a long correspondence on this subject with persons residing in those scales, and who are of aclmowledg'd repute. 7
a very few days since I receiv7d a letter from a friend at Constantinople under date of the la*of November; I shall therefore translate
a passage it contains, without a ain trespassing on your time, except
only to observe, that on this d o m a t i o n the most implio~tereliance
may be placed. - "Should an accredited Agent appear here from
the U: States, be assured he would easily obtain every reasonable
demand; this I know from an unquestionable source". - The yellow
fever which in the Autumn was introduced here, intirely subsided in
the beginning of December. - this disorder was conveyed to US by
a vessel from Mdaga, but a t so late a season of the ear, that its
effects have been much less severe than in other parts o the Mediterranean; for on no day did the number of deaths exceed 50. in a poqulation of 40,000. inhabitants who remained in the City. - at Pisa
distant only 14 mdes, altho' the communication was uninterrupted,
yet there was no instance of c o n t a ~ o nin the place; indeed the Malady
did not extend beyond the gates of Leghorn, altho' no salutary
precautions were observed within a circuit of 20. miles.
[NA. SDA. CL,Leghorn Vol. 1, Oct. 1793-Dec. 1806.1

P

9

296

NAVAL OPERATrONS FROM 1804 TO 1805

To Secretary of the Navy from Lieutenant Nathaniel Fanning, U. 6. Navy

CHARLESTON
SC
Jan?' the 2Ot9 1805

SIR After a boisterous passage of Twenty days from New York,
(having in that time been driven by Stress of Weather several times
off of soundings) I arrivc in this place on the 12t? Ins! a t night; Since
that time I have been at Fair Bank, superintending and inspecting
the Building of the Gun Boat on the Stmocksa t that place conformable
to W@Smiths Instructions, shall repair thither again tomorrow morning, & give my constant attendance on Her. I am much pleased
with y"onstruction of the Boat and give it as my opinion that She
has the Stoutest and best materials in her Frame of any Vessel I ever
knew of her size; I n fact, her Timbers are throughout as well as her
plank large enough for a Sloop of War and has been thus far faithfully
Built. - I n about Twenty five working Days more, She will I believe
be afloat this is also the opinion of MI Pritchard the Master Builder.
Nothing however shall be wanting on my part to expedite this event ;
"nor do I believe will any thing be neglected on the part of the Navy
Agent here to the same object". The Guns and other articles embarked as M' Smith tells me (at Washington City on Board of a Vessel)
about Thirty days ago for the Gun Boat in Question has not arrived
here. My Commission has not come to hand as yet and beg of you
when you forward it to direct it to the care of M? Smith the Navy
Agent here.
[NDA.

Misc. LB. Vol. 1. 1805.1

To William Jarvis, U. 6 . Consul, Lisbon, Portugal, from Captain John Rodgers,
U. 6. Wavy

U . STATES
SHIPConstitution

N Q11

Lisbon January 20,1805
SIR, I have rec'd your second Letter of the lgth Inst, & now beg
leave to acquaint you that the Danish Seamen you mention (Neils
Dominicus, Martin M. Almmding, Claus Repke & John Bugge) have
been discharged & sent on shore in conformity with the intimation
which I made you of my Intentions yesterday. As i t appears that,
your Ideas, & mine on the subjects of Liberality & Justice bear no
promenent similarity of feature: I take the liberty to make known to
you, that as an Officer in the Navy of the U. States, I should feel
myself degraded, as also the hf~ssionthat brought me to Lisbon irrevocably assassinated, by my Ouw Cons~nt,was I to comply wit-h your
demands; as I cannot conceive that I am bound either by National or
Personal honor to deliver Men into the hands of an authority that
would punish them for their wishing to serve our Country in preference to thew own, particularly when a t the same time, I had no Election in the motive that influenced their conduct.
No Sir I must be permitted to tell you that I concieve such a proceding would be contrary both too Liberality & propriety; as ~twould
a t once be sacrificing one of the essential advantages, which by the
properties of our Soil & the purity of our blessed Constitution we
derive, over all other Nations; & it does not a little astonish me that
you as the only representative of the Goverment of the U. States,
In this Port, should wish to furnish the means of punishing your fellow
beings for prefering F R E E D O M to SLAVERY, particularly when you are

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

297

not bound even in t,he slightest Degree either by the Laws of your
Country, the Laws of Personal honor, the Laws of Justice or your
Duty to perform such an act.
If the party Agrieved (if such constr~tctionis applicable) is in any
way injured, I can only repeat that I have not been the cause; and
that by discharging the Men in the manner I hare, I have no more
than exercised the Intention of the authority vested in me by my
Govermt, by leaving the parties in the same situation they were
previous to the Mens entering on board the Constitution - An
application was made to me on Friday last for two Seamen, said to
have deserted from an English Merchant Vessel, & my answer was
that (If on board) they should be sent on shore: Self prepossession
has no weight with me in the Exercise of my Official Duties, consequently I do not feel myself a t Liberty to favour one Nation more than
another without having the special authority of Go-cermt for so
doing. And I hope if in animadverting on certain p a r a ~ a p h sof your
Letter, I shouId tell you that I concieve you have far exceded the
limits of your office, as well as ability, when you attempt to arrogate
to yourself the right of directing in what manner I should perform my
Duty, that my language will not be considered as precipitate or unjust.[NDA. Captain's LB, Vol. 1, 1805.1
Extract from journal of Midshipman F. Cornelius deKrafft, U. 6. Ravy, U. S.
Brig Smurge, Midshipman Ralph Ixard, Jr., U. 8. Navy, commanding, Sunday,
20 January 1805

At % past 8 saw a sail to the Nd hove up for her, (%past 9 took in
sail & spoke her,) proved to be the Schooner Polly ~4 Sally, Cap!
Hodge 14 days from Boston bound to Gaudeiloupe; he inform'd us
he had taken 4 men from off a wreck but could not learn her
name. L: 0:29' 42' N.
[NDA.]
To William Jarvis, U. 8. Consul, Lisbon. Portugal, from Captain John Rodgere,
U. S. Navy

NQ13

U. STATESSHIPConstitution

Lisbon J a n ? 21, 1806
SIR I have rec'd your favour of to Day on the subject of Francisco
de Sousa, a Seaman belonging to this Ship - This is the ?\tan that
exceeded his liberty on shore &whom by your representation & request
I pardoned for his offence. - The Constitution is yet more than 50
men short of compliment, of course t,hc services of a single seaman
1s an object; yet you may be assured If I can without prejudice to
the service comply with your humane request, that I shall feel a
easure in so doing - However I cannot discharge him until the
ay previous to the ships leaving this, as there are several Portuguise
on board & perhaps in the situat~on.-

g'

[KDA. Captsin'~LB, Vol. 1, 1805.1

298

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1804 TO 1805

To Captain John Bodgers, U. 6. Navy, from William Jarvis, U. S. Consul, Lisbon,
Portugal
LISBON
.%Q
Jany. 1805
h-9 9

SIR I do not pretend to talents or abilities of such a size that I
could possibly refute such soIidity of argument & ingenuity of reasoning without supernatural aid, as is comprised in your Letter of the
2ot@Ins? received last night. Nothing short of a Hercules in mind
is adequate to it. But Sir an sntient story in which you no doubt
are perfectly conversant, relates, that a Giant was slain by a Stone
from the sling of a simple Shepherd boy, I am encouraged to essaye
this mighty task, purely from the belief that if I fail it will be no dlscredit to me, but if contrary to all reasonable expectation I succeed,
that eternal honors await me.
To state our question with logicaI accuracy, I think it stands thus,
Whether it is proper to deliver Seamen to the Captains from which
they httve deserted? I contend it is, you say no. Now let me see
what I can say in favour of my opinion. That i t is encouraging the
Commission of crimes to protect criminals: that to make a ship of
war an asylum for deserters is to encourage desertion, that desertion
IS a crime ergo that granting protection to deserters .or affording them
an opportunity to escape is to encourage the commlsslon of crimes &
therefore as destructive of social order every means ought to be made
use of to suppress desertion. If my point is not proved as clear as
noon day sun by fair logical deduction, why Sir I will never attempt
to prove another logical1 . You see that I have confined myself to
School boy Rhetoric for ear of exceeding my ability & to reduce my
reasoning to a level with all capacities. But as you have given the
Men up my sage deduction cannot apply to you; still, with a due regard to secreting themselves until their Ship proceeds to sea, which will
be the first fair Wind, you will no doubt have an opportunity of
receiving them on board again, without exposing yourself to the
smallgst censure. If I do not answer your Letter with that gravity which becomes a
public officer, it is because I conceive that any person who attempts
to support an oppinion evidently mong is not entitled to be treated
sereously -

I

[LC. JRP, Letters & Orders, Book A , 180&1805.]
To Captain John Rodgers, U. S. Wavy, from William Jamis, U. S. Consul, Lisbon,
Portugal
N? 10
CONBULATE
OF THE U. STATES

Lisbon Jany. $8. 1806
SIR Altho: a t the first view of your Letter of the 20th I did not
conceive it deserved a serious answer, yet as I am not in the habit of
sporting with the rights of individuals or treating with levity questions
of National importance, upon further consideration I have concluded
it most judicious to make a few observations in language more worthy
of the subject than in my letter of yesterday least in tivoiding to
assasinate your own honor, the character of your Country may feel
the point of the Steel. Will you aUow me to ask you whether you can make a fair distinction between true honor $ Justice. you certainly must answer in
the- Negative. I must then ask you whether you conceive it just or

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

299

honourable in a diplomatique character because he happens to be a
priviledged Man to protect a C r i m b l ? The United Voice of mankind
has answered no. To go to history, you no doubt are perfectly acquainted that the Church assumed this priviledge, in what is emphatically called the ages of Ignorance; but Knowledge has condemned
the practice & the interest of the most influential body of Men that
ever existed has given way to the light of reason & the priviledge is
exploded. Can it be believed that at this moment any other Man or
body of Men, under false notions of honor should attempt to assume
the same priviledge? you no doubt w
ill answer no you, as you "discharged the Men in question & sent them on shore". Had you not
recieved them on board this answer would have been correct, as you
certainly would then in no shape have been implicated; but admitting
them into the Ship entirely changed the case: for if you did it with a
Knowledge of their having Deserted or had reason to suppose this to
be the fact, affording them a refuge was becoming a party to their
crime; if on the contrary it was done without such Knosvledge or
suspicion, or t,hey had deceived you or the Commanding Officer on
board, it certainly was not contrary to the Laws of Ho~pitalit~y
nor
true honor to give them up. But I see no difference to the party
aggrieved, except in the name, between the acknowled ed injustice of
holding them or placing them in a situation to escape; w ich, it appem
to me, is in some sort countenancing $ by conse uence encouraging
the crime. - To say that they went on board rom a love to our
Country is confounding all ideas of causes & effects. As well might
the priest say that the henious criminal who fled to the altar as a Sanctuary did it from a love of religion. His assertion would not decieve a
pious old Woman & his inference of protection would be treated as
absurd.
If I mistake not, the propriety of delivering up deserters has likewise upon some occasions been supported by some of the ablest
Commanders in our Navy; and if the doctrine was othordox then ~t
cannot be heterodox now, without the immutable Laws of Justice have
given way to your convenience, and her scales are to be ballanced to
your interest. To render the thin more palpably indefensible, you
have not even the thin covering o necessity to offer in Vindication
for giving the most indirect encouragement for the desertion of
fore@ Seamen & thereby distressing the Flag of other nations, for
I think I have sent about fifty seamen on board the Constitution.
& it is h~ghlyprobable that nearly the whole number wanted will
be obtained in a way that is by no means exceptionable. However as it appears that you & I differ so widely in sentiment
upon almost every subject & as it is not likely from the partiality
which almost every Man has for his own opinions that we should
come nearer to an understanding, I have concluded i t tbe most
advisable thin I can do to lay our whole Correspondence before
Goverment to et them determine between us, should they deem any
part of it of suflicient consequence to draw their attention from thelr
important concerns.
I have the honor to be Sir Y-0:
obt Servant
sigd WILLIAM
JARTIS
Cap: JOHNRODGEES.
I?. S. I am not in possession of any information relative to the
Moors other than what I have communicated to Mr Simpson in my

%

9

f

f

300

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1804 TO 1805

Letters of the 14th lgth 26t@& 30t@October, 218t & 2gtQNovem' 14@
Decemr & 7th Jany. & to the Conirnander on the Gibraltar station
the 20 26$h & 30 tQ Octr 24 tb Novem' &. 29 & 17 January - Beside
a number of Letters to $5: Gavino the last dated the 20th Inst If
you are desirous of any information yourself for the public service
1shall with pleasure communicate it.
{LC. JRP, Letters & Orders, Book A, 1804-1805.1
To =aster Commaniiant Isaac Hull,U. 6 . Navy, from William Eaton, U. S. Navy
Agent for the Barbary Regencies
DEMANHOUR
2.4 tQ Jan? 1806

SIR, Yesterday we pursued the Kourchet of this Province to its
frontier, and found him with his Camp at eight in the Evening,
fortunately fell in there with the Arab cheif of the said Allis, who
had advice five days from Hnmet Bashaw who was then in this
Province with the cheif, named in his letter to me, I have dispatched
the cheif first mentioned to him, who has engaged to bring hunhere If you have any Counter intelligence, please to express it-, I am
suspected and close watched here English Spies; thank the French
Consul, pray request Mr Briggs to desire the Governor to write this
Kourcheck, that he give liberty and an escort to meet Hamet
I should have prosecuted this intention, but the Kourchet would
s lines, in every thing else he has behaved
not permit me to p ~ s his
with great hospitality - If I hear nothing from you tomorrow
evening I shall send back the Ma'ority of my party, and wait here
myself the return of my Oued A li chief. Let me know whether your OEcers may remain with me, if you
send by a faithful hand, I should be glad of my gilded Trowsers and
long plain Coat. N. B. Ten days is the longest time my Messenger requires to
bring Hamet here. -

-

i

[NDA. Isaac Eull LB, 1803-1806.f
Extract from journal of Surgeon Jonathan Cowdery, U. S. Navy, 24 January 1806

Renegado Wilson, who pretended to be a great engineer, was ordered by the Bashaw to fire hot shot at a mark, but succeded indifferently. The Bashaw, however, was highly pleased, gave Wilson
eight. dollars, and promised to reward him in proportion to his exertions in his future warfare. Wilson engaged to teach the Turks how
to throw bombs, hot shot, and hand grenades; and t,o alter and improve
the fortifications, &c.
[LC. Rare Books, American Captives in Tripoli or Dr. Cowdery's Journal,
Boston, 1806.1
To Captain Edward Preble, U. 8. Navy, from William Eaton, U. 6. Navy Agent
for the Barbary Regencies

EGYPT
PROVINCE
OF BE HER.^[^]

VILLAGE
OF DIMANHOUR
25 Junuuy 1806. -

DEARSIR,After touching a t Malta, the Argus arrived a t Alexandria on the 26th November - Tour letter to Governor Ball produced letters of introduction from him to the British resident at

W D S WITH BABBABY POWERS
Cairo and Consul at Alexandria, and those Gentlemen have cbonsiquently rendered us every assistance which the nature of our affairs
At Alexandria it was
and their duty could require and admit
intimated to me that Hamet Bashaw was not to be had without application to Elfi Bey, to whom he had attached himself, both of whom
were in upper Egypt acting with the rnameluke Beys against the
Ottaman Government And to whom access was barred b the Turkish
army - Under these discouraging appearances, anj contrary to
the advice of every body on the seacoast, on the 30th November I
left Alexandria for Grand Cairo with three officers, Lieutt OBannon,
Messre Mann & Danielson, and a few men from the brig; who, together
with some others recruited on the spot and a t Rosetto made an escort
of eighteen - This precaution was necessary on account of the
banks of the Nile being infested by the wild Arabs of the Desert
and by straggling Amout deserters from the Grand Signor's Army;
the former subsist by plunder, the latter rob and murder indiscrinlinately every defenceless being whose appearance denotes property,
both move in bodies and have rendered themselves terrible throughout Egypt. On the 8th December we arrived without accident, at
Grand Cairo - There 1 found the Prime Minister and one of the
confidential Governors of Hamet Bashaw who confirmed the intimation I received at Alexrtndria thalt] the Bashaw was actually with
the Mameluke Beys and Considered as an enemy to the Government
of this Country. I had dready dispatched to him secret couriers
from Alexandria and Rosetto; and now sent off a third and fourth
from the Capitol - But I had not yet had Audience with the Vice Roy
and not knowing his accessable points the difficulty I apprehended
of getting the Bashaw out of the Country exceeded that of access to
him, for I found it impossible to do it privately; and to attempt i t
might not only defeat out main object but endanger our own personal
Wherefore, at my first interview, finding the Vice Roy a
safety -:
man of much more frankness and liberality than commonly falls to
the character of a turk, I unreservedly opened to him the Object
of my visit to his Country, and received his profer of friendlv
offices - This cleared a little my prospect, whiie it created new
embarrassments; for the interference, or even the amnesty of the
Vice Roy, in behalf of Hamet Bashaw, might excite the jealousy of
the mameluke beys and have the efl'ect to barr his de arture. But
a new difficulty beset me, which I little expected and ess from the
quarter it came. The French Consul, apied-mantese at Alexandria,
a Mr Drovitte, had insinuated that we were 6ritish spies in American
~Wasks- and that our pretext of friendship for Hamet Bashaw
aimed a t nothing but an intercourse with the mamelukes, who are
suspected of being in british subsidy; of course an insinuation as
injurious as it was malignant - I am yet totally at a loss to account
for this strange conduct of
Drovitte - as I am equdly so a t
the indignity of our flag being refused by that of the French throughout this Country, those marks of civility never refused to a fore@
flag, in ordinary cases, and which we received from every other Natlon
represented here; except that, informed of our Object, and pursuing
the same line of conduct with his colleague at Tripoli he thought by
these means, to defeat that Object - I found means however (the
means that move every thing in this quarter of the globe) to remove
this difficulty; and finally obtained the Vice Roy's letter of Amnesty

-

P

302

N A V A L OPERR4TIONS FROM 1804 TO 1805

and passport of Safe conduct to Ramet Bashaw, which was dispatched to him on the 15th, in quadruplicate, and by different conveyances. I now patiently waited the issue of the measlires thus
far pursued - Meantime busied myself in finding out the Tripolitan
emigrants in the Country; their attachment to the rival brothers; and
their feelings to wards the Americans - Among these one appeared
who was only Ninety days from Tripoli, an Arnout Turk, who had
been in the service of Jussuf Bashaw during the blockade of last summer, whom I had under particular examination - Supposing himself
conversing with Englishmen he was very unreserved in his confessions; and being decidedly in the interest of the enemy (he was
enthusiastic in his cause, though willing to dispense with his honors)
his story deserves the more credit. He said Tripoli had lost many men
in the diferent attacks oj the Americans last summer - the town was
much damaged and the inhabitants under such a state oj consternation
that nobody slept in the city, and that no business was done there. He confirmed the account of the fire ship, Infernal, being blown up
by Captain Summers after being boarded by two row-gallies - Statthis fact, the fellow wept! He observed that this was an unfortunate
war for the poor cruisers - They had been lead to beleive that the Americans were all merchantmen; and that the[y]should have nothing to do but
to go out and bring them in: but they found them Devils; from whom
nothing was to be gained in war; and therefore he had quited the senrice
of Jussuf Bashuw - The Bashaw was nevertheless determined not to
make peace with these inJidels until he shall have humbled them and made
them pay for the damages they had done to his navy and city. He acknowledges that Hamet Bashaw had many friends in Tripoli: but said
that Jussuf Bashaw had taken care [?I of him! I t is ascertained that
the latter has employed and payed assasins to poison the former these undoubtly have reported that they had executed their commission and hence we account for the report of Hamet Bashaw's
death - On the 8th instant I received from the Bashc~wan answer
to my letter from Cairo; dated the 28th of the month Ramadan,
corresponding with the 3g of January stating that he should that
day depart for this Province and take lodgings at the house of an
Arab cheif, by name Abdel gamr el be Rouchi where he should wait to
meet me - But as my letters to him dated after the Vice Roy's amnesty all advised him to repair to the English house at Rosetto, under the
arantee of the Vice Roy's passport, and beleiving he might push
h s march thither, I left Cairo for that place the 13 inst and arrived
in three days - Nothing additional appearing there I proceeded
to Alexandria the 19th, on the 20th received the Bashaws answer to
my letter of 28 November of the same tenor & stile that I received
from him a t Cairo - I t appeared that, not confiding in the Vice
Roys dispositions concerning him; or perhaps, not having received his
letter before leaving the Mameluke Beys Camp, the Bashaw had
determined to expect an interview a t the place he first named near the
lake Fiaurne on the border Of the desert, about One hundred and
ninety miles from the Seacoast - Nothing can be more incredulous
than a Turk of a Turk's honor; and for a good reason; nothing can be
more equivocal than their plighted faith. it is an article of barter
and sale. Though travelling in the interior of the country has become
unusually hazardous on account of the jealous of the Turkish cheifs;
of the reins given to licentiousness by the bar arity of civil war; and

t

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

303

of the strong grounds the wild arabs hold by reason of all restraint
being relaxed on the part of the Turks and mamelukes, who are too
seriously occupled with each other; I determined to attempt a passage
to Fiaume. Accordingly on the 22nd instant left Alexandria with
two o5cers from the Argus, Lieutt Blake and M' Mann, and an
escort of twenty three men indifferently mounted, and on the evening of the 23d found myself arrested at the Turkish lines, between
Seventy & Eighty miles on my rout, by the Kerchief of Demanhour
commanding a detachment of about five hundred Ottoman troops
on the frontier - No Argument I could advance could at all modify
the severity of his first resolution not to let me pass his lines; though in
every thing else he treated us with distinction and great hospitality However mortifying the concession I cannot but applaud the correct
military conduct of this chief: for it was, in itself a suspicious circumstance that a body of armed, unknown foreignersshould be foundshaping
a course for his enemy's rendezvous with no other pretext than to search
for a refugee Bashaw! But this suspiciouscircumstance was strengthened
and aggravated by the insinuations gone out from the French Consul
that we came into this country with secret wiews hostile to the Turks Our situation here was somewhat erplexing and vastly unpleasant.
I do not recollect ever having foun myself on a ground more critical
To the natural suspicion of a Turk this General added a fierce and
savage temper - Of course pround and arrogant. I soon found my
point of approach - I passed high compliments on the correctness
of his military vigilance and conduct; said i t was what I apprehended:
and what I certainly would have done myself in similar circumstances,
but, knowing from character the magnanimity of his soul, I was determined to have an interview with him, in full confidence that he would
aid a measure so purely humane & so manifestly to the Turkish
interest in Egypt in case he would not permit me to pursue my object
personally. At the same time, recurring to the example of thevice
Roy, whose letter I had showed him and signified that I had it in
charge to tender him a douceur in testimony of our exalted opinion
of his name and merit. He was moved - said my confidence should
not be desappointed - and called into his tent a chief of the Arab
tribes called ore ed allies; a wandering host who have from time been
driven or emigrated from the Kingdom of Tripoli since the ursurpation of Joussuf Bashaw; to whom he stated my business, and asked
if he could give any account of Hamet Bashaw? The young chief,
in an extacy, exclaimed that be Knew every thing! I requested him
to declare himself; for I had no secret in my relation with that Bashaw:
You have, Sir, already anticipated his story in the statement I haven
given of the Bashaw's actual position - He added that, twenty
thousand Barbary Arabs, were ready to march with him from this
border to recover their native country and inheritence; repeated that
he knew our plan; and, now that he had seen me, he would plight his
head to the Turkish General to bring me Hamet Bashaw in ten days The Turk accordingly dispatched him with a companion on this
message the next morning - I could yet perceive some simptoms
of suspicion and ap rehension on the brow of my newly acquired
Military friend - h e r e f o r e , without seeming to have any particular view other than a solicitude to meet the man I sought, but really
with a view of removing his ap rehensions, I proposed to him to
return to his head quarters, this h a g e ; send off my escort to Alex-

B

304

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1804 TO 1805

andria; and to wait myself with only the gentlemen in company and our
Servants until our Arab chief should return from Fiaume with the
Bashaw, - This proposal had its desired effect - We left him and
retired to a handsome markee prepared for the purpose; took refreshments he had ordered to be in readiness; and the next morning returned with an additional escort from his camp to this place; where
we found lodgings in Turkish stile provided for us. Thus far I have sketched an abstract of my Journal since we
parted - Do you expect something of Egypt! I t s Antiquities?
Curiosities? Its wonders? You must be disappointed. I am too
much occupied with modern affairs to ransack catacombs or climb
pyramids - for the same reason I have not time to gratify curiosity and as to wonders, can only notice, what I cannot help being impressed
with, the W o n d e w ignorance; wonderful stupidity; wonderjul tyranny;
and wonderfull wretchedness which so strongly mark the features of a
count.ry once the Wonder of the World for Science, Wisdom wholesome
police and rational happiness - There is matter for a volume - I
can only devot,e six Lines to the subject. Not a man reads here; yet
none but thinks himself divinely taught. The Kerchief, of whom I have
spoken above, in a little exercurtion together contrebutions has cut off
between fifty and sixty peasants heads for no other crime but poverty and, just without the eastern gate of the village a gallows is now erecting to hang a child of twelve years, the only son of a chief of the village
Rahonania, because his father cannot pay the contribution levied on
him! God! I thank thee that my children are Americans
JANUARY 31. Since I began this letter Circumstances have accumulated to render our situation more aukward, and I may well say,
ridiculous - The next day after our entering the house where we
quarter a Markee was pitched upon the terrace of an adjoining house,
and a turkish guard mounted there under pretext of resh Air Armed turks were sent into the house for the purpose o accompanying us as a liife guard in our walks - And a sentinal was placed a t
our door in the lower court, t o prevent intruders - Though these
arrangements were vastly polite I should have been very willing to
have dispensed with thern - Yet by appearing frank and easy with
the turkish General his suspicions seemed to have subsided - I
received all these marks of vigilance as marks of attention; thanked
him for his civilities, and assured him that I should be carefull to
make suitable mention of them to the President my master - By
this kind of adulation, Yesterday I so much drew him from his guard,
that he opened his heart and unequivocally confessed that "In the
present convulsed state of this country the Turks ought to suspect
every body, especially the English - but they had peculiar reasons
for suspecting us as the French Consul had declared us British Spies!"
What does not that Savage merit for this wanton and base manner of
exposing our lives to the infamy of a Jibbet! I hope not to meet
him a t Alexandria.
FEBRUARY 16. At Alexandria - We arrived with the Bashaw &
suit a t the English Cut between Aboukir Bay and lake Merioty a
week ago last Wednesday - Here we had new difficulties to encounter: the french Consul had been before hand of me in gaining the
Admiral of this Port and governor of the city; and they, Consiquently,
came to a resolution not to permit the Bashaw to enter the City; nor
to embark a t this port Arguement was useless, for we were too late

f

305

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

in our application of it - But we felt no other inconvenience than
delay; for The Bashaw had before Come to a resolution to march by
land to Derne and bengazi; and he now moved round the lake to form
his camp at Arab's Tour, about thirty miles west of the old part of
Alexandria - In the mean time I stated to the Vice Roy the contempt his letter of Amnesty suffered from his Subalterns in this place;
in consiquence of which he addressed a firman, by a chaux, to the
Governor commanding immediate compliance with the intention of
his letter of Amnesty - and imposing a h e on him of twenty five
thousand piasbers - This gives us a final triumph in Egypt, though,
I confess, I could have wished the Vice Roy's resentment had not
fallen so heavily upon his disobedient Governor. I din't think it
prudent to advise the Bashaw to enter the City; least Veangence
should retaliate on him the chastisement he has brought upon his
turkish brother of this place We shall therefore take up our lime of
march through the Desert of Lybia towards Derne next Wednesday Our party consists of five hundred men - One hundred of whom are
christains recruited on the spot and employed in our Service - We
shall make a stand at Bombay, and wait fhe return of Captain Hull
with supplies & re enforcements to seize the provinces of Derne &
Bengazi - for which purpose he sails for the Rendezvous day after
to morrow Here is a Ketch in port from Tripoli Sent up by the enemy with
an envoy, to prevent Hamet Bashaw being permitted to leave Egypt;
but not having with h m ~the only Argument which carries all causes
here, the poor d e d must go back in season a d y to give Joussuf Bashaw
information of the fate which awaits him - If our measures are supported he must fly his Kingdom or die - How Glorious would be
the exhibition to see our fellow citizens, in captivity at Tripoli, march
in triumph from a dungeon to thelr tyrants palace and display there
the flag of the United States. [LC. EPP, Vol. 14, Dec. 18, 1804-June 13, 1805.1
To Master Commandant Isaac Hull, U. 6. Navy, from William Eaton, U. S. Navy
Agent for the Barbary Regencies

DEMANHOUR
25thJanl. 1806
DEARSIR,Agreeable to my note of last Evening I send off S e l i i

tomorrow morning-with all the Animals engaged at Alexandr~aYour Officers remain with me at my request till your Orders are
expressed on the subject - I wish they may remain untill the return of
our messenger to Hamet Bashaw or until we have other intelli ence
from him. - If p? accident you sbould not have received my etter
by Courier, of last night, I ask leave to refer you to Mr Briggs. INDA. Isaac Hull LB, 1803-1806.1

f

[25 January 18051
To Xaster Commandant John B. Dent, 0.6. Navy, commanding U. S . Schooner
Nautilus, from Cavaliere Giiorgio Guillichini, Governor of Messins
Translation of a Letter from His Excellency the Governor of Meesins to Captain

Dent.

SIR I t appearing from the enquiries which I have caused to be
instituted, that two Officers belonging to the Schooner Nauti2u.s under
your Commd, are the Authors of the Homicide committed on an Eng-

306

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1804 TO 1805

lish Subject a t the Marina of this Port on the Evening of the 23d,
instant. I do therefore and in compliance with the presslng instances
of Don Giovanni Bomester, His Britannic Majesty's Consul here,
request of you Sir, to take those steps which in like cases are prescribed for the punishment of the Delinquent as well as the satisfaction of the injured party by delivering up into one of the Castles
of this City the perpetrators of so cruel a Murder.
(Signed) Gov. GIO: GUILLICHINI
M E S ~ I N25
A Jan? 1805.
[NDA. Captain's LB, Vol. 2, 1805.1
Extract from journal of Midshipmap Charles Morris, Jr., U. S. Navy, on board
U. S. Frigate President, Master Commandant George Cox, U. S. Navy, commanding, Friday, 26 January 1805
Pleasant - The Constellatwn Returned [from Malta to Syracuse

Harbor]
[Mrs. C. E. Fox original, NDA photostat.]
p~

-

To Secretary of the Navy from Captain John Bodgers, U. S. Navy
U. STATESSHIP Constitu.tion
Lisbon Jan?: 26th 1806

SIR I wrote you on the 30 Ultm" at which time being in quarantine I could not exactly say when I should be able to leave this place;
however I now have the happiness to acquaint you that I shall complete my requisitions by the 3s of the ensuing Month, and sail immediately after for Syracuse, taking Tangier, Gibraltar & perhaps Naples
(where i t is likely I shall find Commodore Barron) in my way.
The Disbursements of the Constitution will amount to considerably
more than I had calculated, as I am under the necessity of purchasing
a Bower Cable & Anchor more than I mentioned to you in my last
letter, having lost an Anchor since in a severe Gale which has done
very considerable injury to the Vessels in this Port - indeed some
tot811y lost. After getting the Bowsprit out & stripping the Fishes off, I was
supprised to find that not only, at least, one half of the Spindle was
rotten, but that it was intirely broke off just in the very part where
it required most strength, so that no part of it could be made to answer
again - The Bowsprit procured here will cost a great deal of Money,
but I have the satisfaction to know that i t is a ood one -4ltho I was not able to get quite so many eamen here as I had
calculat,ed,yet on the whole I shall have so good a Crew, that I sanguinely flatter myself (in next Summers Expedition) you willnot derive
the smallest degree of pain by the procedings of the Consiitulion. Since writing you last I am Informed by Consul Gavino of the
arrival of the Store Ship William & Mary at Gibraltar. -

-

B

[NDA. Captain's LB, Vol. 1, 1805.1

[26 January 18051
To Maeter Commandant Isaac Hull, U. S. Mavy, from Samuel Briggs, British
Consul, Alexandria, Egypt

S. Briggs' Compliments to Capt. Hull and encloses the Governors
Orders to the Kourchief of Demanhour to furnish an escort to Mr.

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

307

Eaton to meet Hamet Bashaw on his approach to Damanhour, if
Cap1 Hull wishes to send an express to day, one will be Kept in readiness, and will take charge of any small Packet besides the Letter Cap$Hull will remember to desire M' Eaton to send back the Horses,
and if when he wishes to return, he cannot procure a sufEcient number
at Demanhour, some can be procured here a t a days warning. Saturday 3 0.Clock. [NDA. Isaac Hull LB, 1803-1806.1
To William Eaton, U. S. Navy Agent for the Barbary Regencies, from Master
Commandant Isaac Hull,U. S. Navy

UNITED
STATESBRIGArgus

Alexandria b6th Janv 1806
SIR,Your Letter of the 24th did not come to hand until late in the
Evening of the 25@ Consequently we could not see the Governor,
to obtain from him the Order you wished, and it appears he has been
so much engaged this day, that as yet we have not been able to see
him, I have an Officer walting his Answer, should he give the Letter,
I shall forward it, otherwise I do not think it of much consequence. I am sorry that the delay is like to be so great, but I see no way
of avoiding it, and am sure you will do every thing in your Power to
expedite our departure from this I am happy that you have come to a resolution to wait tho Bashaws
arrival, as I think he must certainly come, when he hears you are on
i
l
l please dispose of the Officers as you may t h i i
the spot. - You w
best - if they are useful to you, they are at liberty to remain,
otherwise they had better return. - I find it is necessary the Horses
should be sent in. as they were taken out of the Mills, and of course
they will be stopped until they are returned. Should you not be able to get Horses there, we can send the same
out again after they have had the use of them a few days. - I
send your Pantaloons and Coat, should you be in want of anything
more, you have only to Command me. - I have nothing new
since you left, only that the servant of our friend, has red a letter
from his friends at Derne, saying that a Vessel had arrived there with
wheat, and was taken away by one of the Bashaws Armed Vessels
and carried to Tripoli. - Not a word about Gun Boats. - You
have said nothing of the men on shore, whether you are still of opinion,
they had better be kept. - I expect to hear from you this Evene
as ou mentioned sending off some of the party. - I hope you
wil let us hear from you every oppertunlty, as you well know our
feelings for you (Signed) ISAAC
HULL

!i

LND-4. Isaac Hulf LB, 1803-1806.)

To William Eston, U. S. Navy Agent for the Barbary Regencies, from
Major E. Misset or Missstt

ROBETTA
26'e Janwlry 1805
SIR One of my Couriers, returning from Up er Egypt, met in

%

the Province of Fayum Achmed Pacha from w om he received a
letter which being directed to the English General I have had translated. Its contents, however, prove that it was intended for you, as

308

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1804 TO 1806

you will learn from the inclosed translation - Not judging it prudent to expose the original to the danger of falling into improper
hands I keep it by me at your disposal.
It a pears from that letter, and it is confirmed b the Courier who
had a ong conversation with Achmed Pacha, that t e latter is almost
determined not to quit his present residence in the Fayum until he
ets into his own hands the Teskere of Arnan granted by Harshid
f'acha. To prevent further delays I! am on the point of dispatching
an Express to the Pacha with information of your having proceeded
to the Baheira in Search of him, and, a t the same time, I shall invite
him to move downwards in order to meet you, Allow me, Sir, to avail myself of this opportunity to return you my
sincere acknowledgments for the Pistols you have been pleased to
send me. I shall be proud to keep them as a pledge of your friendship.
E: MIBSETT.
E.Huntington L&AG, EA 367.1

P

m.

E

-

[Enclosure]

Translation of Achmed Pacha's Letter.
Thanks to the Only God by whose will every thing is accomplished To our friend the American General. We have received your letters.
As you have requested us t-ocome to you, we are arrived in the Fayum
& reside in t,he house of Bagoushy. You have sent us a Courier &
we have followed your instructions. We have read the letters which
came under cover to Elfi Bey. When t.he Courier delivers this to your
hands, come near us with the Aman and hasten our departure. We
are in the middle of the Arabs; come to us, or let us Know by letter
where We are to repair; but it is necessary to Send the Tesker6 of
Aman. We have sent you two Messengers; one to Cairo, the other
to Alexandria.
PACHA
Sealed by ACRMED
[H.E. Huntington L&AG, EA 2.1
Extract from log book of Maater Commandant Ieaac Chauncey, U. S. Navy,
commandmg U. S. S. John Adam, Saturday, 26 January 1801

Light ESE winds. Running to the Westward at 5 past noon,
saw a strange sail bearing SW, Gave chase, a t 5 past 3 P M shortened
sail, and boarded the chase, a spanish* vessel from Rio de la Plata
bound to Santillana near B a o a 65 days out - . a t 5 past 4 P M
parted compan
and made sail to the Westwg Pleasant Weather
until Y past 7P h i h e n we had light rain with Squalls from the SSE lowered down the Royals - at 8 P M hoisted them again - a t 9
cloudy with rain, down royal and Main top Gall? Stay sails a t 5 past,
in Royals and Top Gallant Steering Sails - at >ipast 9 moderate and
clear weather set Top Gallant Steering sails Between 3 and 4 A M Cloudy weather in fore & mizen Royals.
At 5 the wind hauled to the Sout,h, in lower and Main topmast Steering Sails - set the Fore and Mizen Roy& at % past set the Main
sail at 34 past 11 Rain with Squalls from the ESE - Up Main sail,
and in Top Gall! sails a t X past 11, the weather cleared away
Made sail, set the Larboard Steering Sails excepting the Main top
mast Ditto - At Noon fresh Breezes from ESE. Water expended
178 Gallons

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

309

* Ship Providence Josef Ramoraxta a Master from Mountisidica on
the River of Plate - bound to St An era - Ships' Crew 19 men, and
2 passengers - 65 days out - Laden with Hides & Tallow
Latitude observed. 22' 45' N
Longitude by Accr 39' 16' W

f

[LC. EPP, Log of John Adame, 1804-1805.1
Extract from journal of Heaekiah Loomis, Steward, U. 6. Navy, in U. 6. Brig Vhn.
Master Commandant John Smith, U. S. navy, commanding, Baturday, 26
January 1805

Port of Syracuse. This day bent all sails. At 6 o'clock arrived
the Frigate Constellation from Malta. Splendid ball on board U. S.
Frigate President.
[L.F. Middlebrook. NDA copy.]
To Secretary of t'he Navy from Master Commandant Thomas Eobiison, Jr.,

U. 6. Navy

V E N I CJanV
E 2Yt*1806
SIR Soon after being honor'd with the command of the U. S.
schooner Enterprize by Comde Preble, I recd orders from Commodore
Barron to proceed with her to Trieste and give her a thorough repair,
in consequence I left Syracuse on the 3'J of Xov' last & arrived at
were an acct of an alarm respecting the Yellow
Trieste on the 20%"
fevere raging in some of the Ports in the Mediteranean orders were
receiv'd from Vienna to put all Vessels from without Cape Otranto
& Corfu under a Quarantine proportionate in time to the Nature
of the case, & I was obliged to remain without communication untill
my case was made known at and an answer recd from Venice, when
I was immediately admitted to pratique. - MT Riggins our Consul a t Trieste was a t Naples, but M' Holland his Partner & deputy
gave me every necessary assistance - I made myself acquainted
with the manner in which the work coud be done, how the necessary
articles cou'd be procured, the terms & quall~tyof those Articles,
and the time it wou'd take to complete her, - I n the result I was
by no means satisfied, - Trieste is a place sprung up within these
25 Years, every Art particularly ship-building in infancy, but one
Yard of any consequence in the place & in that not season'd timber
sufficient for our use,-- 1 fear'd much if the Master got us once
under his Adze he might perhaps make a Job of us, - I therefore
thought best to visit the Arsenal at this place before I determined
(as advised by M' Broadbent our Agent a t Messina) I did so, &
my Mind was soon made up in favor of the Arsenal, every article
was here I wish'd & I had Officers to deal with - I waited on
Count Lespine the Commander of the Imperial Marine, immediately
on my arrival, his mode of receiving me was sincere & friendly, when
I open'd to him my business he discover'd a pleasure in offering his
services, he requested me to Visit the Arsenal (the Officers of which
he wou'd order to go round with me) and if I was pleased with the
place and the work I wou'd see there, lt wou'd give him great pleasure
to issue the necessary Orders for my reception, I found the Arsenal one of the most astonishing places possible
for the human Mind to conceive, for the purposes i t is calculated;
there is not an article necessary for building or repairs that is not

310

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1804 TO 1805

to be obtain'd within the Walls. - Being satisfied this was the
place to repair the Schooner I wrote my wishes to Count Lespine &
requested an answer in nature of a permission, I obtain'd it & on
the third Day after my arrival left Venice for Trieste to bring
the Schooner, we arrived here on the [space] of December
and haul'd her up on the [space] of [space] i t was done in a most
Masterly manner. she was out of the Water & shored up in one
hour from the word heave, (they have five or six hundred slaves
attatchd t,o the Arsenal for this kind of heavy Work) When we came to rip the Schooner to pieces we found her in a most
deplorable situation, it was the astonishment of every one, how
she brot us here, Her Beams were all off a t the ends, the floorings
& futtocks perfect powder & in fact to sum up all its only necessary
to inform you that in addition to building a new schooner we have
to pull to pieces an old one - but there is this pleasing reflection,
she will be more durable than her companions, for better Timber
I never saw than we are puting in her. I have the pick from frames
of Frigates that have been from twenty to five Years dress'd out
numberd & piled away under cover for use, - There never was n
pendant treated with more respect, or Officers with more attentioa
than the Enterprizes has been both here and a t Trieste, being the
first of our Vessels of War in either of those Ports & her construction
so different from any thing they had ever seen, she astonish'd
& delighted, Count Lespine with whom I stand very fare is a French Man,
was an Officer in the french Marine during the revolution in America,
built a Bri In Boston, much of an American in sentiment, and
apears mucf pleased that its in his power to reciprocate in some
measure the favors he recd in our Country, he has often told me
"if you don't put good stuff into the schooner its our OWTI fault,
take the pick of the Arsenal for every thing," - %he fact is that
there are piles of Timber in the Arsenal sufficient for twenty line
of Battle ships but since the Venetian states have come under the
Imperial Government & the Emperor giving no encouragement to
a Navy (which was formerly the pride & strength of Venice) this
Place is going rapidly into decay. The Arsenal is only now a
memento of what it was - when the Venetian States were in their
Zenith. Oh! that one Quarter of i t was in Washington; - what
they cou'd spare so well & we want so much, - I am hurrying on
with the Schooner; as many as can work to advantage are employ'd
daily, I shall certainly be ready to opperate with the Commodore
in his first attack on Tripoli, no curcumstance wou'd be more
mortifying to me than by an unforeseen accident to be prevented
lending a hand in giving the Turban'd Rascals another drubing Please to forward the inclosed to MrB R I beg7d h l r Turner to
this is necessary Sir for her
continue forty Dollars pr M ? to M'"
comfort in my absence, be so good as to Order i t regular until1 my
return
This takes its chance by the way of London & may get to you
before you can get any information of the Enterprise, & I consider'd
i t my duty to give you this, The political state of this Country is in a very critical situation,
the Emporer is a t a loss to determine which side to take in the Spring,
he is embodying a groat force & marching them towards Italy. It is
generally supposed here, that if he is obliged to take a part he will

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

311

oppose the French. - I n my humble oppinion there is little doubt
but he will be forced into the Field & that the ensuing Spring will
open with a very general War on the Continent. [NDA. MC LB, 1804-5.1
To Tobias Lear, U. S. Consul General, Algiers, from Captain William Bainbridge,
U. 6. Navy

TRIPOLI
BARBARY
Duplicate

2YtQJanuary 1806

[Added in different writing] recd March 25th 1805 Ansd March 28. 1805

Dr SIR, I have not had the pleasure to hear from you since the
28$Qof August last; I presume that your letters must have miscarried.
I frequently write to you, and hope that my letters will come to hand,
although they contain no material information; but as they keep ou
informed of our situation, I have no doubt of their being accepta le,
and believe me that yours are truly so to us.
I have had but one letter from Commodore Barron since his being
in these seas, but I daily expect to hear from him and to receive letters
from our friends in America.
The Crew are all in tolerable health, and we are in the same situation as when my last letter was wrote.
I hope that the United States and His Excellency the Bashaw will
soon make a peace on just and honorable terms.
Please to present my respects to my friends hlonsr Thainville and
Consul Bille.
Myself and Officers offer our most respectful compliments and best
wishes to Mrs Lear.
[Thejollow-ing was written in invisible ink.]
I have wrote you many and lengthy letters since the arrival of
Com. Barron in these seas, but I have not had the pleasure to hear
from you since that event. I have said so much in my last communications that I have scarcely any thing to add. I believe the Bashaw
is desirous of peace, and was a negotiation attempted I think it probably would succeed, for the Bashaw apprehens a very severe attack;
and the apprehension perhaps would have as great an effect as the
attack itself. He is making erery preperation to resist the forces
that may be bro! against him - As I am entirely ignorant of that
force I cannot give my opinion what impressions it will probably make
on these fortifications aud the town, the houses being Euilt of stone
or very little wood about them, they will not su[s]tain that damage
as if they were of wood construction. I sincerely hope that Com
Barron's force will be formidable, and our most fervent prayers are
offered for the greatest success to attend it - I hope when an attempt
is made to negotiate it will be by a person coming on shore, and not
carried on by letter as it was last summer
How happy I should be dear Col? to see you here on that embassyfrom your efforts I should greatly calculate to have our fetters
broken, and again breath the air of [MS mutilated] liberty, and that
compatible with our country's dignity. Should you come here, it may
not be amiss to inform you that the ceremony of audience with the
Bashaw of Tripoli is not like that with the Dey of Algiers that is,
the Consuls do not kiss his hand, - I cannot form an opinion what
the Bashaw's demand will be, but I believe he would take a t thls

g

312

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1804 TO 1805

moment much less than what he demanded of Com. Preble last
August; and should the attack not prove successful, he probably will
persist on a large sum. I am extremely anxious to hear from you to
know the determination of our Gort respecting the unfortunate situation of its Captive Citizens. Our funds are all expended and mon
for Bills on Tunis is at a very great exchange. I hope a vessel
soon arrive from the Corn. and bring us a remittance - We are
extremely indebted to to our friend Mr Kissen - indeed was i t
not for him. we should suffer greatly in o w confined situation.
Believe me to be with unfeigo'd regard
Y' unfortunate friend

mT.BAINBRIDGE

[Stephen Decatur original.]
To George Davis, U. 6. Char& d'Affaires, Tunis, from Captain Iilliam Bainbridge,

U. S. Navy

Sympathetic ink
TRIPOLI
BARB?
27 tQ Jan7 1805.
Dr SIR,I have been anxiously expecting to hear from you and to
receive some information on the determination of our Gov! - not one
word on that subject have I yet heard - I am anxiously expecting
letters from Com. Barron. - I believe the Bashaw is very desirous
for peace, and has great apprehension of the intended attack; and was
a negotiation to be attempted I think it very probable that it would
succeed, for the apprehension of the attack might have as great an
effect as the attack itself; and shd the attack prove unsuccessful, he
will no doubt continue in demanding a considerable Sum. As I am
quite ignorant of the force which will be brought against this place, I
cannot give my opinion of the probable effect it may have - We
offer our most fervent prayers for the greatest success to attend it.
I cannot say what the Bashaw's demand will be, but I believe he
would take a t this moment much less than what he demanded of Corn.
Preble last Bug" Ourfunds are all expended, and Bills on Tunis are
a t a great exchange against the drawer. Pray have you heard of
Eaton - I n our next, which I anxiously expect soon, I shall receive
a great deal o news, I hope. I assure ou, was it not for our friend
Ms Nissen, we should suffer considerab y for necessaries in our close
confinement, but he is a friend in need, of course a friend indeed.
My dear friend, when do you think we shall have the happiness to
meet.

9

r'

[The following was added to another copy of this letter: The Bashaw is now
very attentive upon your transactions with hfs brother in Alexandria - A camp
is gone against Derne - The Bashaw's Agent at Malta Gaitano Schembray
[Gaetano Andrea Schembri] endeavors to persuade the Baahaw that by hard treatment of the captive officers he might force his terms of peace - Hitherto Schembry has not entirely succeded but he may - Give me leave to tell you that I
find your plan with his brother very vaste and that .ou sacrifice your prisoners
here in case of success. (signed) N. C. N. Dan. Eon. Source: NA. Sen. 9
B-B6, Pres. Message, Jan. 1806.1
[NYfIS. Geo. Davis LB, Vol. 1.1
To Master Commandant Isaac Hull, U. S. Navy, from William Eaton, U. S. Navy
Agent for the Barbary Begencies

DEMANHOUR
2rth JANT1806
DEARSIB,I this moment received yours of Yesterday and enclosures, mine of the 25t@will shew you arrangements of that date in

lNVfSlBLE I N K LETTER F R O M WlLLlAM BAINBRIDGET O COL. TOBIAS LEAR

(SEE

P. 31 1 .

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

313

regard to the Horses &$ but an intimation of an Ambush determined
me to wait the benefit of a Caravan which departs tomorrow morning,
on first meeting with this Kercheif I found him fierce and savage, but
as a Soldier I must confess correct; Appearances till yesterday were
i
m returning to his Village, and profitting of
suspicious, but finding h
the occasion to be ahead of him, in civility I met him Six Miles distant
by way of respect and accompanied him in - He appeared elated
with this mark of distinction, and to be even with me, placed me a t
his right hand, and caused his people to perform feats of horsemanship
in front of us, on entering the Village I complemented him with the
elegant English Pistols I wore out in my Belt, this put every thing
right, and I am now on the best terms with him,insomuch that I am
in danger of having another wretched horse in Rgalio, this moment
a Brother of the Arab Cheif, who is dispatched to Hamet Bashaw is
with me, he assures me that my messa e will be delivered to our
friend this Evenin and that five or six ays mill bring the Bashaw,
he adds that Eight undred men are ready to march with the Bashaw,
and that he can bring from Twenty to forty Thousand to his escort,
the moment that it is determined to take the tour by land - Profitting of your goodness I retain the Gentlemen and escort, in case of a
reverse of fortune, which has hitherto been promising, they wilZ make
a stand - I shall carefully keep you informed of my progress, and as
the prospect before us is so cert.ainI hope you will not loose patience Mr Farquhar received my instructions not to augment the expences
already bcured in his engagement, it seems a ngsessary policy however not to make any derangements in the stem heretofore taken untilI
our measures shall have takYen shape. -

B

[NDA.

f

Isaac Hull LB, 1803-1806.1

[27 January to 1 February 18051
Notes made by William Eaton, U. S. Navy Agent for the Barbary Regencies,
while at Demanhour

Jan. byt@
Mahomet, a French renegade, chief of three viusges, visited Selim - Said most of the villages had revolted throughout this province And refused to pay their contribution
Jan. 9gtQ
It is reported that all the neighbouring villages have revolted, except such as have already paid their tribute; because, they say, the
English have arrived at DEMANHOUR!
Discovered that two Frenchmen, in Mahornedan dress, are in the
suit of the Kourchief of Demanhour - incogniti - They are every
where! Behera is the most considerable province of Egypt, Demanhour its chief town - The most n u m e m garrison in all Egypt,
except Cairo, is here Mahomet, the French Renegade, told me yesterday that a great
number of Mamelukes from upper Egypt were disposed to follow the
fortune of Hamet Bashaw Jan. 30q
The Kercheif of Demanhour told me "The french consul had denounced us as Bribish Spies!" - and gave tbis as a reason for his
cautious behaviour concerning us -

314

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1804 TO 1805

This Commissary must answer for
1 Contempt of our Flagg -

2 Indd to the nation by prohibiting a n intercourse between his subjecfs
and us.
3 Conduct criminally hostile to our country injurious to our measures,
and hazardous to our personal safety by d e n o u m n g u s as BRITISH
SPIES!
Jan. 31.
The Kerchiefs Secretary assigned for reason of the partiality of the
Turks in favor of the French and hatred towards the English That the French were the ancient friends of the Turks - "That they
saved Constantinople in the war of Eugene - and the later war when
the Germans were advancing to that Capital by that. their entry
into and progress in E pt was intended for the Good of the Turks by
driving out the mame ukes; but that the English betrayed (meaning
I suppose deceived) the Grand Signor into war with the French, which
has ruined Egypt." Such are the ideas prevalent among the turks Feb. 1.
A Beautiful boy of about eleven years came to our lodgings - melancholy sunk on his countenance - he stood in the porch of the
door, looked in as if looking into the grave of a friend; but would not
enter! What is the matter? - His father was the proprietor of
this house -he was one of the richest villagers - About four months
ago the Kerchief cut off his head and took away all his property The lad & his mother lives with five children a few doors distant; they
are without bread! I gave him all the money about me - The
child kissed my hand; and wept! God, I thank thee that my children
are Americans!
[H. E. Huntington L&AG,EA 267.1

F'

To Secretary of the Navy from Captain John Rodgers, U. S. Navy

U. STATES
SHIPConstitution
Lisbon January 27.1805
SIR. The respect & regard which my nature as well as particular
situation teaches me to feel for the honor & interest of my Country
are the sole inducements which I have for troubling you with the
Enclosed Correspondence between Mr Jarvis & myself in order to
prove in part, that he is censurable in the highest degree by his want
of regard to the Interests of his Country, as also his qualifications &
conduct derogatory to the important trust which he naturally derives
from his situation. "He took the most Effective means to prevent my getting the
Seamen required to complete this Ships crew as you will discover by
his Letters NO 5, 6, 7, 9 & 10 & I can prove that had the U. States
have had no Consul here, that I could have got more Seamen with less
difficulty. "He is totally regardless of the respect & attention that is due to
the Men of War of his Country, and he appears entirely inser~sible
of the importance of the present Expedition as you will discover by
his Letter Nq 3.
"He is living here, as relates to his style & appearance, more l i e

-

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

315

an indigent Exile than the respectable Representative of a Great
Nation. "He has dsgraced the Consular Office by his contemptible ungentlemany conduct in several instances. "He has entirely lost all regard & respect of the Portuguise
Goverment,
"His intimacy here with respectable Persons is very confined,
except such as make him subserviant to their views to the discredit
& prejudice of his Goverment, and not to trouble you with farther
detail, pardon me in saying that I confidently believe his situation
affords him an opportunity of doing the present Executive Govermt as
well as our Country generally great injury. I have said much to the prejudice of Mr Jarvis; but I have said no
more than his conduct to me as an Officer merits; and if I have said
more than I can demonstratively evince by unquestionable authority,
such as your own & every other liberal mind will approve: I will for
ever hereafter acknowledge that my Heart is only worthy of the Breast
of an Assassin. You are at Liberty Sir to make use of this Letter as you may judge
most proper. [LC. JRP. Letters & Orders, Book A, 1804-1805.1
Extract from journal of Midshipman Charles Morris, Jr., U. S. Navy, on board
U. S. Frigate Pruidd, Master Commandant George Cox, U. S. Navy, commanding, Sunday, 27 January 1805

Received timber from the Constellation [In Syracuse Karbourl
[Mrs. C. E. Fox original, NDA photostat.]
Extract from journal of Hezekiah Loomis, Steward, U. S. Navy, in U. S. Brig Vixen,
Master Commandant John Smith, U. S. Navy, commanding, Sunday, 27 January
1805

[Syracuse] This day got underway and exercised sails until half
past 1 o'clock P. M. then came to anchor. Received from Geo.
Dyson Esqr. 110 lbs. F. beef.
[L. F. Middlebrook. NDA copy.]
Arming U. 8. Merchant Ships

Janwzry W8th 1805.
In Senate of the United States.
RESOLVED,
That the President of the United States be requested
to cause to be laid before the Senate such documents and papers, or
other information, as he shall judge proper, relative to complaints
against arming the merchant ships or vessels of the United States; or
the conduct of the captains and crews of such as have been armed.
ORDERED,
That Mr. Giles and Mr. Tracy be a committee to lay
this Resolution before the President of the United States.
Attest.
SAM:A. OTIS Secretary

-

[NA. SDA. Misc. Let., Jan.-Dec. 1805.1

131 January 18051
The Secretary of State, to whom the President of the United
States has been pleased to refer the resolution of the Senate of the

316

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1804 TO 1805

28@ instant, requesting that there may be laid before the Senate,

such documents and papers, or other information, as the President
should judge proper relative to complaints against armin the Merchant Ships or Vessels of the United States; or the con uct of the
Captains & Crews of such as have been armed - has the honor to
annex hereto:1" A Copy of a letter addressed to the Secretary of State by the
Envoy of Great Britain, dated on the 31" of Au s t last.
24 An extract of a letter to the same from the ate Charge d'AfTaires
of France, dated 6 + May last, which was preceeded & followed by
other letters and conversations of the same Gentleman, urging the
subject upon the attention of the Government. I t has been also urged,
by the present Minister of France, in his interviews with the Secretary
of State.
Of the instance, alluded to in the aforesaid letter and extract, the
only authenticated statement relative to the conduct of American
private armed vessels, which has been received at this Department
~s
contained in the annexed letter from M' George Barnewell of New
York, and the Documents accompanying it.
All which is respectfully submitted.
JAMES
MADISON.
OFSTATE
DEPARTMENT
January 31.1805

f

Y

[NA. SDA. Dom. L., Vol. 14, May 1802-May 1805.1
To William Lyman, U. 6. Consul and Agent, London, England, from Secretary of
State

DEPARTMENT
OF STATE
January bgtQ1805.
SIR. In addition to the ordinary duties of Consul at London resulting from the several acts of Congress, and the instructions from this
Department with which you have been furnished, you are to take
upon yourself the Agency for Seamen and Claims for captured property in Great Britain, for which latter service you will receive a compensation a t the rate of two thousand dollars to commence on
superseding Mr Erving, and to cease on your receiving notice o the
Agenc ceasing.
As &r as respects Seamen it will be your duty to attend to their
applications for release from impressment; to apply to the proper
board or Officer to effectuate them; to forward notice to this Department of such cases wherein the proof usually demanded by the British
Officers may be wanting; on the release of' any seamen to see that
he is provided with a proper document to protect him against another
impressment; and to send him home or find him a birth on board an
American Vessel. You will correspond regularly with the Consuls in
Great Britain & Ireland on the subject of impressments, and with such
other Consuls and public Agents as that subject may occasionall
require. I n the pecuniary relief you may afford the men, you
keep in view the laws and the explanatory instructions from this
Department. You will also pay the accounts of the Consuls in Great
Britain & Ireland for such pecuniary aids to Seamen as you shall
ascertain to be authorised by Law. The business of claims under
the 7tP Article of the British Treat will be closed by Mc Erving, so
to put the finishing hand to it.
far as to enable Sir F: Baring d

f""

d

89

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

317

But in the branch of your Agency which relates to claims for captured
property, it is required that you should act as Agent of such American
claimants as havmg no correspondence in London, may prefer you to
a stranger. From such persons you are to receive no commissions nor
other compensation, and you are to incur no pecuniary charge or
respo[n]sibility on the public account; it being an indispensible preliminary to your interposing that due provision be made for the charges
of rosecution by the persons interested.
~ O are
U subject in the character of both Agent & Consul to the
direction of the Minister of the United States in London, to whom
you will address yourself for advice & patronage in every emergenc
rendering them necessarp. He is to be kept advised of your procee8ings, and to this Department you will make regular communications
of the same. Your accounts are to be punctually sent thro' this
Department for settlement every quarter, viz. l e t January, April,
Jul & October.
is payable on the same days to your
or er at the Treasury
in this
Your
s a l aity.
~ The funds for the relief of Seamen
are to be drawn from Sir Francis Baring & C? in such sums as may be
necessary from time to time.
JAMES
MADISON.

2

[NA. SDA. Despatches to Consuls, Oct. 18WFeb. 181'7.1
To William Eaton, U. 6. Navy Agent for the Barbary Regencies, from Master
Commandant Isaac Bull, U. S. Navy

UNITEDSTATES
BRIGA r w
Alexandria 28+ Jan? 1805
DEARSIR, On going on shore this morning, I found that the Governor had sent to Mr Briggs, to say to him that he had received a firman
from the Vice Roy, forbidding our recruiting Men here, for the service
of the United States, and mshing you and your party to return to
this place, as the People here are becoming very much alarmed. I sent word to the Governor that we had recruited a few Men, since
he gave permission, but as he received orders that they must not be
recruited here, I should give orders for their being discharged, that
they were mostly Maltese, and intended for the Brig. - He appeared
perfectly satisfied, but said he had received information that we were
recruiting, and that some of the Turkish Soldiers were about to desert
c&, - I left Mr Briggs to come on board, to write you, and called on
Mr Farquhar to desire him to discharge the men he had engaged,
After belng there a few moments, a Guard of about twenty Soldiers
came in from the Governor. - I enquired what they wanted.
They said they had orders to warn the Greeks against visiting that
House. - I suppose however their object, was to see if any Turks
were there, and on informin the Commanding Officer, that I was
there, for the purpose of disc%argingthe few Men that were engaged
by the Governors Permission, he went away apparently satisfied. I have however desired Mr Farquhar to discharge them all, and give
up tho house, and take quarters on board. - Should you think proper
to remain, which perhaps you had better, it will be well to send back
all the party to do away their fears, as I have told the Governor, that
I expect them this Evenin . - You will see by what has happened,
that they are very much a f m e d , both at Cairn and here, but without
cause, but, God knows how far their fears may carry them. - I have
no doubt but orders may have been sent to the cheif of the ViUage

-

318

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1804 TO 1805

where you are, to keep a good lookout for you, but I hope, the more
they look, the better satisfied they uill be of our object. [NDA. Isaac Hull LB, 1803-1806.1
To Xaster Commandant Isaac Bull, U. S. Navy, from William Etaton, U. S, Navy
Agent for the Barbary Regencies

DERMAX'HOUR
9athJan? 1805
DEARSIR, Yours of the 2Gth came yesterday, this morning the
Horses went off for Alexandria, today has produced nothing new,
except circumstances confirmative of the insinuation gone out from
the French Commissary that we are British Spies, does that Madman
refle~tthat his presumption in ex osing u s to an infamous death to
gratify a cowardly resent.ment, wil not pass unnoticed

f

-

[NDA. Isaac Hull LB, 1803-1806.1
Extract from journal of Surgeon Jonathan Cowdery, U. 6. Navy, 28 January 1806

The Bashaw was informed by Wilson, the renegado, that our crew
were all armed, and about to rise upon the town. Search was made,
and the report found to be false. But the Bashaw was much intimldated and an additional guard was placed over us.
[LC. Rare Books, American Captives in Tripoli or Dr. C o d e r g ' s Journal,
Boston, 1806.1
Extract from journal of lezekiah Loomis, Steward, U. 6. Navy, in U. S. Brig
Vixen. Master Commandant John Smith, U. S. Navy, commanding, Monday,
28 January 1805

him to Augusta, but at
anchor at 6 o'clock P. hf.
[L. F. 3Iiddlebrook. NDA copy.]
To Secretary of the Navy from Captain John Rodgers, U. S. Ravy

U. STATES
SHIPConstitution
Lisbon January 2 g t V 805
SIR,Enclosed I forward for pour pprusal a Letter from IbF Simpson,
and now have the honor of acqurtintir~g.pouthat I have used every
Duplicate

mefins in my power to obtain the proper information on its subject. There is at present in this port a Moorish Frigate of 30 Gum, a Bri
intend~dto carry 14 or 16 Guns, which has been purchased here, an
a Prusian Merchant Vessel, prize to the Frigate, which she captured
& brought in here some time last Fall. - At St Ubles there is a Frigate of 30 & a Ship of 20 Guns, but neither them nor those in this Port,
is it concieved will (whatever their intentions may be) put to Sen
before the Spring is so far advanced as to insure them ood weatherand I must confess that from anything I can learn ere, either by
their grocedings or intentions, that I have no. reason to suppose the
American Commerce is more likely to be thelr object, than that of

5

R

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

319

any Nation with which they are at Peace, Prusia and the Hance
Towns, till of which they are a t War with, will afford them a sufficient
exercise of their piratical intentions, without risk, to prevent their
molesting our Commerce. The remittances of Money made to the Moorish Agent here which
hi: Slmpson mentions in his letter, is equal I find to 250,000 Spanish
Dollars and intended principally I am informed by the very best
authority, to purchase Naval Stores in England. [NDA. Captain's LB, Vol. 1, 1805.1

To Blaster Commandant Isaac Hull, U. S. Navy, from Wiiam Eaton,
U. S. Navy Agent for the Barbary Regencies

DEMANHOUR
2gt+ Jan? 1806
DEARSIR, Yours of yesterday came a t 12. - The alarm excited
from the circumstance of our recruiting a few Christians comes from
the French Commissary, and is of a piece with all his other treatment
concerning us - he shall not have the gratification to succeed even
in this project. - You have certainly done wisely in discharging the
men, & breaking up the Randevouz, but I will have the Vice Roys
permission to take those Christians out of his Country if necessary. I t is to be recollected that every step we took in Alex-as
with
the knowledge and approbation of the Governor, but my instructions
have been surpassed - lMake yourself easy Sir, truth is Almighty. I shall retain the People with me, though I should be willing to dispence with some of them. - I send you a Courier this Morns. [NDA. Isaac Hull LB, 1803-1806.1

To Master Commandant Isaac Hull, U. S. Navy, from William Eaton, U. S. Navy
Agent for the Barbary Regencies

DEMANHOUR
2gt+ J a n ? 1805
DEARSIR, I hasten to communicate to you a translated copy of a
letter I have this mornlng received from Hamet Bashaw through the
hands of Major Missett. "Thanks to the only God, by whom all things are accomplished To our friend the English General. We have received your let,ters, As you h ~ v requested
e
us to come
to you we are arrived in the Fiaume and reside in the House of Bagoushy - You have sent us a Courier and we have followed your
instructions, we have read the letters, which came under cover to
Eli Bey, when the Courier delivers this into your hands, come near
us in with the Aman [or Arnan], and hasten our departure, we are
in the middle of the Arabs, come to us or let us know by letter
where we are to repair, but i t is necessary to send the Tiskere of Aman
[or Arnan], we have sent you two messengers one to Cairo the other
to Alexandriav-Sealed by Hamlet Bashaw.There then is a t length an end of our uncertitude, we shall have the
Man, I had already anticipated his arrangements, by sending off to
him the Arab Chief of the Oued Allies - Let us now think of the
Derne and Bengaize expedition, an article in your Letter of the 26@
discredits the accounts we have had of reinforcements being sent to
those places, they will therefore be an easy conquest, and will give
an honorable and advantageous termination to our expedition, the

320

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1804 TO 1805

-

-

recruits at Alexandria will be useful in the execution of this plan
Some small field Pieces should be sought for and conditionally be
stipulated for. - The object before us seems so certain and the
advantages so important, that it seems to me we need not hesitate a
moment about som? extraordinary preparations. As I know you wlll impart every thing to Messr$Briggs and therefore do not write them, Please use your discretion in communicating
the subject matter of this letter to Mr Farquhar I think it proper. [NDA. Isaac Hull LB, 1803-1806.1
To William Eaton, U. 6. Navy Agent for the Barbary Regencies, from Master
Commandant Isaac Bull, U. 8. Navy

UNITED
STATES
BRIGArgus
Alexandria 2gtVanY 1806
DEARSIR,Your Letters of 25tQ & 2TtQ came safe to hand I am
happy that you sent forward the Horses, but yet, you will see by my
Letter of the 2gth that it is the wish of the Governor of this place,
that the party return, I have this day been with him, to try to do
away his fears, but find that he is as much alarmed as ever - he informed me that the chief of the Village where you are, had written to
the Tiftidar, who has late1 arrived from Constantinople, informing
him that you had hoisted t e American flag at Demanhour, and that
we were recruiting a t Alexandria, and that our object must be something more than that of getting the Bashaw- in fact there seems to
be a general alarm. - I have as I wrote you discharged the men
here, and on our visit to the Governor, found two of them under
examination, but got them released immediately, together with the
Keeper of the House where M' Farquhar stayed who had been put in
Prison, and in chains after I left the House yesterday but every thing
is at present quiet. - I fear that something may happen to prevent
their remaining so long. - You will see by what has happened,
that it is necessary to act with great caution, for the eyes of every
body are upon us. The Governor complains very much of the flags
being hoisted, as it appeared at once like enlisting men &c, and 1
must confess he had some grounds to found his suspicion's upon,
after the Letter had been sent to him, and what had taken place
though unseen by us. Should you find the Bashaw approaching you with a number of
men about him, it will certainly be mprudent for him to come near,
under the present circumstance, for fear of alarming the People more,
it will therefore be necessary to send and meet him, and fix on some
place if possible a distance to the Westward to see him. - In fact, take
what steps you may, I fear the Peoples ignorance will prevent their
seeing our object, I hope you will take the earliest oppertunity of
sending in such of the party as can be spared, and if you should want
an Escort, when you are ready to come, we can apply for one from
this place. - I think from what has happened today, it will be
proper, not to shew the flag any more as that seemed to be the grand
ob'ect, with the Governor. hope in God, you will take such measures as will prevent our
having any di5culty with this Government, and that we shall h a l l
convince them, that nothing has been done without their know{
edge. - Pray let me know what steps you take as often as may be,

E

321

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS
and be assured I shall give you every information from here.
the mean time believe me

-

In

NDA. 1s-c Hull LB, 1803-1806.1
Extract from journal of Hezekiah Loomis, Steward, U, S. Navy, in U. S. Brig
Vixen, Master Commandant John Smith, U. 8. Navy, commanding, Tuesday, 29
January 1806

[Syracuse] Wei hed anchor at 8 o'clock A. M. sailed round in the
harbour until 2 o'c ock P . M. then came to anchor.

f

[L. I?. Middlebrook. NDA copy.]
To Tobias Lear, U. S. Consul General, Algiers, from George Davis, U. 6. Charge
d' Affaires, Tunis

TUNISJanuay SOt* 1806.
No. 21
red Feb? 10tQ
DEARSIR. - My last respects were under date of the lltQ Inst.
with several enclosures, detailing to you, whatever concerned our
affairs in this Quarter.
The Tunisien Xebec, has arrived at Sphax; the Rais came to Tunis
on the loth inst. and made a complaint of having lost when captured
two Chests of Cloathing &c I beg you to refer to my letter of the
g t h of Dec', and ive your orders - they also complain of the loss
of one or two sa& & of some damage done to the Vessel; I have already refused to the owner of the Prize an recompence: the Bey
sent me a message on the 2l8$,requestin t i a t I would satisfy the
complainants, as it was promised by apt. Campbell, that the
vessel should return in the same good order she was Captured. I t is probable this Subject will be renewed, when Commodore Barron's answer to the Bey's letter arrives. - By the return Courier
from Tripoli, I am favour[ed] with a lengthy communication from
Capt. Bainbridge; and one for your self, which I have the honor to
enclose you. Mr Nissen has drawn on me for Eight hundred dollars
for the use of the American Officers & Seamen a t Tripoli, and advises
that his drafts will be continued. I am again without a shilling of
public Funds or Credit. With profound Respect and Consideration

6

(COPY)

[NA.

SDA. Algiers, Vol. 7, Part 1, 1804-1805.1

To Secretary of the Navy from Captain John Rodgers, U. 6. Navy

U. STATES
FRIGATE
Constitution
Lisbon Jan? SO tQ 1804 [1806*]
SIR I am induced through motives of respect for your opinion,
connected with regard for my own character, to cite to you again my
abhorrence of the unprecedented & detestable conduct of Mc Jamis
our consul, who has, instead of promo[ting] the public interest; used
every means which a confined and pitiful Intellect could or, at least,
dare suggest: by opposing every obstacle, within the compass of his
confined imagination, to my convenience & the interest of this
ship: and what makes him the more despicable; he has done this under
the dissimulation of Friendly & Zealous professions: However his
conduct has been too plain to be misunderstood

322

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1804 TO 1805

He made objections to taking bills on London, for the amount of
supplies furnish'd the Constitution, until after he had understood that
upwards of a Dozen of the most respectable merchants had, through
the Influence of Mess'? Brown, Reid & C b f this place; tendered
me their services, with offers of any sums. of money I might require
for such bills; and without even reqwmg a commission on the
exchange: - and to satisfy you that my complaints are instigated
solely through motives of regard for the honor & interest of my
country; I presume it is only necessary to prove that h.lr Jarvis,
either by intention or Ignorance, shew a want of confidence in Bills
which I was authorized, by your instructions, to draw on London;
& endeavoured to oblige me to draw direct on the Navy Departmt,
for small supplies that did not amount $1,000 ; when at the same time
he knew that the disbursements would amount to upwards of $12,000
before the ship left Lisbon; and persisted in drawing in this way,
until I was oblig'd to make arrangements for, and inform him that
I would advance the money's for all the supplies as t,hey were furnish'd: This I was enabled to do through the influence of &lessr"
Brown & Reid, without their requiring any other compensation than
the pleasure of having been instrumental in contributing tro t.he
Interest of the service I do assure you that Rlr Jarvis's conduct was, in almost every
instance, such as to require me the greatest forbearance, to avoid
exposing him by personal chastisement: Indeed nothing could have
prevented me but the respect which I feel for t,he authority that
gave him his appointment - I am aware of the circumstances
under which M r Jarvis is placed here, but I have too much confidence
in the Just sentiment of the President, & the Heads of Department,
to believe for a single moment, the mere assertions or professions
of such a man as Jamis; can injure me, or entitle him to; his, or
their confidence, w-hen i t can be provided by incontrovertible authority, that, the interest he feels, in the execution of the duties of his
office, is entirely measured by the pecuniary advantages which he
derives by their exercise In case any of our ships should want large supplies, Lisbon would
be the most e'tigeable place in this quarter to furnish them; provided
we have an active Kavy Agent there
I have not been in any part of Europe where more extraordinary
attentions have been paid to one of our publif: ships, than has been
shewn to the Constitution, in every instance, wlth the mere exception
our own Consul [+Copy of this letter is in Library of Congress, Manuscripts Division, dated
I February 18051
[NDA. Captain's LB, Vol. 1, 1805.1

NQ14

To Secretary of the Navy from Captaln John Bodgers, U. 6. Navy
U. STATESSHIPConstitution

Lisbon Jan? SOth 1805
SIR Since writing you on the 2gth Inst I am informed t,hat the
Moorish Agent here, has absolutely purchased British Gold & Bills;
which now leaves no doubt of the remittances of Money, mentioned
in Mr Simpson's letter, being intended for the purchase of Naval
Stores in England: and it is more than probable that the Moorish

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

323

Frigate & Brig now in this Port, will proceed to England to carry
those stores to Morocco - This I am induced to believe in consequence of the Moorish Agent's having already made application to
the British for Convoy to England for these two Vessels. - I t is
impossible almost to describe the damage that has been sustained
by shipping on this coast this Winter - Accounts have been
received here a few Days since of the loss of a British Frigate & Brig
(part of the Cadiz Squadron) being lost on the Spanish Coast between
Cadiz & the entrance of the Straights - I t is now blowing a severe
Gale from the Westward.
[NDA. Captain's LB, Vol. 1, 1805.1
To Master Commanaant lsaac Hulf, U. S. Navy, commanding U. S. Brig Argus, from
Pchard Farquhar

ALEXANDRIA
30tQJan? 1806
SIR,Two Servants belonging to Hamet Bashaw, called on me with
the agreeable news, that the Bashaws Secretary has arrived at Rosetta,
on his way to Alexandria, and they expect him tomorrow, therefore
we may expect some certain intelligence of the Bashaw, this is the
same person whom I introduced to M' Eaton at Grand Cairo and who
forwarded the dispatches to the Bashnw. - As I expect him to call
on me tomorrow - if you please I will bring him on board the Brig. [XDA. I~atlcHull LB, 1803-1806.1
To Master Commandant Isaac Hull, U. S. Navy, from William Eaton, U. 6. Navy
Agent for the Barbary Regencies

DEMANHOUR
31'; Jan? 1806
SIR, Yours of the 2 g t h came a t 12 0.Clock today the American
flag has not been displayed here, nor has a proposition been made
to any Mortal here to engage in our service, since we left you - We
have indeed shewed our flag, but only in our own Room and only by
way of discrimination - As to recruiting a t Alexandria let the Governor be informed that M' Farquhtr never had Orders to open a
Rundezvous there, though I thought lt u-auld be violating no rights
of hospitality to permit him to enquire if there were any Christians
without imploy, there who would be willing to enter our service
against the Bashaw of Tripoli, to be ready at our departure - had
M' Farquhar pursued my instructions, we should have been spared all
this difficulty, but even now suspicion will end when truth is known. We have but three Men with us besides our Servants, and as I expect
an interview with Hamet Bashaw day after tomorrow, it seems needless to go to the expence and trouble to make two detachments on
returning - we shall be with you I hope in four days. I have Written to the Vice Roy, concerning our recruiting - explained to him candidly my object and have taken on myself the
entire responsibility of the measure - Indeed I have asked his
permission to take those People away if necessary. - I an1 on good
good terms with the Kercheif, have proposed to him to send back the
party, but he says it is unnecessary - he confessed to me yesterday, that the French Consul had occasioned all this embroh, and
that he had in fact denounced us British Spies he shall have his

324

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1804 TO 1805

turn, Be tranquil, Sir, the more we are examined the better for
US.

-

WILLIAM
EATON
Translate this to the Governor except what concerns the French
men. [NDA. Isaac Hull LB, 1803-1806.1
To William Eaton, U. S. Navy Agent for the Barbary Regencies, from Master
Commandant Isaac Hull, U. S. Navy

UNITEDSTATES
BRIGArgus
Alezandria 31" Janv 1806
DEARSIR, I sent off your Messenger last Evening, and nothing has
since happened worth notice, one of the Bashaws servants called on
M: li'arquhar yesterday, and informed him that the Bashaws Secretary was at Rosetta, and that he is hourly expected here, should
that be the case, I shall send him or some of the Servants to you, that
you may send them forward to the Bashaw if you think proper, as
they would be able to assure him, that you are on the spot waiting his
arnval. Should your messenger return without him, and you should find
it necessary to communicate with him again from where he is, I
should suppose it would be better to return here and wait an Answer,
and perhaps you will think with me, that the Brig had better return to
the Commodore as proposed before, should the Bashaw come down
with the Messenger, and have a number of Men about him I should
think you had better send and meet him, and fix on some spot at a
distance from Demanhour (say half a days journey) and let him come
with a few Men, and have an interview, as I am sure his bringing a
large number of Men near this place d l excite suspicions prejudicial
to us. Should the Bashaw not arrive, and you think with me that I had
better return, I will thank you to acquaint the Major, that hilt Gordon
may arrive here in time. f think with you that what has happened has been occasioned by
the French Commissary - yet it might be improper to charge him
with it, unless you can asscertain to a certainty that he has made use
of his influence against us, which perhaps we shall be able to discover before long by some means. - I am very anxious to see you
at this place, and hope you +.have
l
it in your power to return with
the Bashaw, or some certain Intelligence from him, but I fear he will
not come so near as we once expe~ted,from the precaution he has
taken heretofore, and perhaps he d l not put that confidence in the
Vice Roys pass, that he might do, and come on without fear - yet
he must certaidy be persuaded, that we should not urge him into
danger, or make use of the passport ~f we did not put the greatest
confidence in it. 1" February 12 O'Ciock
I called on Mr Briggs this morning, found that he was with the
Governor Yesterday evening, and it a pears that he is a little better
satisfied, than he had been for some ays past. it appears that Mr
Briggs has wrote the Major [Missett]what has happened, and he hinted
to me this Morns that it wg be well to advise you to prevent if possible the Bashaws bringing too many men near this place - which

B

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

325

you see I have already done, and hope you will think with us. - I
have learnt where your Servant is, and we shall be able to demand
him when you return. 6 O'clock P.M. Your Letter has this instant come to hand, I
am happy that every thing appears well with you, and that things
bear a better appearance here than they did some days past. P. S. I send you Wafers, and Wax, but having no Mead I do not
furnish it. [NDA. Isaac Hull LB, 1803-1806.1
Extract from journal of X6idshipman F. Cornelius deaafft, U. S. Bavy, in U. S.
Brig Scourge. Midshipman Ralph hard, Jr., U. 6. Bavy, commanding, Thnrsday,
31 January 1806

At 8 AM wore ship set close reef'd top sails & courses. a ship
pass'd us: - At 10 a ship to wind ward under english colours (union
down) backd the main topsails & spoke her (from plymouth 100 days
out in distress supplied her with meat, bread, rum & water. Latt: Obs: 36' 52' N
[NDA.]
To John Gavino, U. S. Consul, Gibraltar, from Timothy Xountford, acting for
Tobias Lear during his absence from Algiers

(COPY
A L G I E R l~@
~1806
~?
DEARSIR My last to you was by the WiU* & Mary Cap?Tipling,
whose Cargo agreeable to Bill of Lading I have deliverd to the
Regency & have taken Receipts for the same
I wrote you of the adjustment of all difficultys between England &
Richd Cartwright Esq' is the New Consul Gent whom I find
Al~irss.
to e a worthy Gentleman, he has sent me word of his intending to
send des atches for Gibraltar & promises to forward this, I have
only % o an hour to prepare myself. On the 20th Ins; the Dey sent me word by our Drogerman demanding from the United States a 74 Gun ship, to be built for him and deliverd in the Port of Algeir in Complete order with all Expedition and desiring me to communicate the same to the President - adding
he would pay the cost on delivery I was certain he did not know the Expence of such a Vessel in the
U. S. - I therefore took the proper steps to inform him, & told him
the General of Marine & all the Divan that we had in America Timber
only, all other materials were of foreign Growth & manufacture that
our frigates oweing to this; the high Price of labour, the want of dry
Docks &c*with many other Conveniences, to which as yet, we were
strangers cost the U. S. on an average the round sum of $600,000
each - he replied that in France a ship of the Line could be built
for 100,000$ - I answerd I thou ht not - but that in F~ance,(&
in short all Europe) could build essels of this discription cheaper
than we co~rldin the U. S - because they had all the materials of
which they were made a t hand &ce - we had not The Dey then askd what can you furnish a Ship of the Line for I replied, I was not the Consul of the U. S. I was only left to transact the Common business of his office - he says you can only say,
what you suppose such a ship would be built for - I replied in

!'

#

326

NAVAL OPEBATIONS FROM 1804 TO 1806

America she would cost more than one Million Dollars - This has
entirely put him out of the Idea of having a 74 - & I have taken the
proper steps, to let it stand in this manner.
I beg you to send Copys of this to Coil! Lear (from whom I have
not had a line, indeed there has been no opportunity) and the Sec?
of state and inform all is well here notwrthstandlng the repulsed
demand of the Mighty Dey, for a 74 Gun Ship. (Signd) T. MOUNTFORD
[NA. SDA.

Algiers, Vo1. 7, Part 1, 1804-1805.1

To Master Commandant Isaac Bull, U. S. Navy, from W i a m Baton, U. 6. Navy
Agent for the Barbary Regencies

DEMANHOUR
1't Feb? 1806
DEARSIR, This evening I received a letter by express from Doctor
Mendrici dated a t Rosetta the 31"t Ult? informing me that Mahmoud
the Prime [Minister] of Hamet Bashaw, and Hamet Aga his Governor
of Police has arrived thither and taken lodgings a t the English house,
in a letter in answer to his, I beg him to advise them to pursue the
passage to Alexandria, and place themselves under your protection
Should they arrive before I do with the Bashaw, I am persuaded you
will afford them civility, they are intelligent, and will be usefull. as
they are very influential
I pass this Letter to Doctor M. to be put into their hands as an
introduction to you, I hope tomorrow will bring the Man who has
given us all so much solicitude, and that a few days more will give
us a triumph over Jealousy, suspicion and infamy. [NDA. Isaac Hull LB, 1803-1806.1
Extract from journal of Surgeon Jonathan Cowdery, U, S. l a v y , 1 February 1805

George Grfiths, one of our crew, having informed the Bashaw
that he could build an air furnace, and cast guns, shot, &c. furnished
with a mason and nine of our crew, and set to work, with a romise
he should have a hundred dollars for the first shot he shou d cast.
After expending about five hundred dollars in the experiment, Griffiths
this day attempted a blast in his furnace; but with all the wood and
coal that the Bashaw could furnish, he could not melt the iron, and the
furnace cracked in several places. I t aft'erwards appeared that
Griffiths had no intention to cast any shot.
[LC. Rare Books, American Captives i n Tripoli or Dr. Cou!deryJsJournal,
Boston, 1806.1

Il'

To Easter Commandant Isaac Hull, U. 6. Navy, from William Eaton, U. S. Navy
Agent for the Barbary Regencies

DEMANHOUR
2 d FebY 1805
SIR,Last Evening I received advice from Doctor Mendrici a t Rosetta, that two of Hamat Bashaws Ministers, his Secretary of St.ate,
and Governor of Police have arrived thither from Grand Cairo, I
dispatched the Courier in return, and requested them to proceed to
Alexandria, and place themselves under our protection, they wi!l
probably be on board of you Monday veng if not sooner - M!
0.Bannon will recognize them. -

2

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

327

Today we expect the arrival of Hamet, possibly he may be detained
a day or two longer - At all events you may expect us Wednesday
Eveng or Thursday Mornlng - every thing is tranquil with us, it
will be so with you when the truth of facts shall have expelled the mist
of misrepresentation. [NDA. Isaac Hull LB, 1803-1806.1
Extract from journal of Hezekiah Loomis, Steward, U. S. Navy, in U. S. Brig
Vixen. Master Commandant John Smith, U. S. Navy, commanding, Saturday,
2 February 1805

[Syracuse] The U. S. S. Nau.tilus arrived from Mossina and came
to anchor at half past 3 o'clock P. 14.
[L. F. Middlebrook. NDA copy.]
Extract from journal of Hezekiah Loomis, Steward, U. 6. Navy, in U. S. Brig
Vixen, Maater Commandant John Smith, U. 6. Navy, commanding, Sunday, 3
February 1805

[Syracuse] At 9 o'clock weighed anchor and sailed round in the
harbour until 1 o'clock P. M. It lying too near in to the shore we
warped further out and anchored a t 3 o'clock.
[L. F. Middlebrook. NDA copy.]
To Secretary of the Navy from Captain William Bainbridge, U. S. Navy

BARBARY
TRIPOLI
dth February 1805
SIR I have the honor to inform you that our situation in this
place, is the same as it has been for twelve months past; the Officers
are kept in close confinement, and the crew at labour
We bear our captivity with the firmness of Americans, and have
the fullest confidence that our Government will take such measures
as will soon restore us to the arms of our Country
I am daily expecting to hear from Commodore Barron, and to receive
the letters which he brought out from America for us
The inspection which my letters receive in this place prevents my
communicating to you on subjects which I should otherwise do; but
you no doubt will be kept informed of all matters relative to our
affairs with this Regency by the Commodore of the station, and
Colp Lear; to whom I frequently write
Enclosed you will receive a list of our Crew who have died here, and
those who have turned renegadoes
In justice to the philantrophy of Nicholas, C. Nissen Esqr His
Danish Majesty's Consul in this place, I cannot omit assuring you
that his unremitted friendly attention, has contributed much to alleviate our unfortunate situation; altho we are deprived of .personal
communication with him; he is nevertheless permitted the liberty of
supplying our necessary wants; which he does in the most fnendly
manner
Beleive me Sir, tlo be with the greatest anxiety for an investigation

328

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 180L TO 1806

of my conduct on the loss of the F, P[hiladelphia],and the resumption
of my arms in my Countrys service.
[Enclosure]

NQ

- Thomag Prince_ - . - . . _ _
(3rd.
_Seam?
--_
_
_
_
_
_
Tuned
.Turk
- John Wilson-- - - - - _ __ _
_ - -.
__ Qua? Mar - - - - - -Ditto
.
110 - Peter West- -. - - - _ _ _ ...._ Carp: Crew-__- Ditto
._
- . _Seaman
_
--__....
Ditto
123 - Thon Smith l e t _ - - _ - _ _ _
251 - Lewis Hickshaw [?I--- - - - - - - - Landsman--. .-. Ditto--5
55 - John McDonald 1st--..
....__
Seaman- _ .
_
._
.
Dead
111 - John Morrison - - - - - - - .-._ _ _ Seaman- _ _ _.
_ -Dead
82
84

-

-

132
Edward Gorman--- - --.-.
.- - Ord: seam^_-_ _ Dead
151 - John Billiard- - - - - - ....
... Ord: Seam"_ - . - Dead
244 - James Anderson l e t - _ . _ _ -Ord:
__
Seam+
_--_.Dead-5

INDA.

1805 Febry I
Captain's L3, Vol. 1, 1805.1

-

-

Total to this date-- - - - 10

To Secretary of the Bavy from Captain John Rodgers, U. S. Navy
U. STATESSHIPConstitution
Lisbon February CtQ 1806

SIR I n addition to my letter of the 26tQUltm?, I now have the
honor to inform you that t,he Constitution is ready for Sea, and will
Sail tomorrow, provided the sett,lement of her accounts does not
prevent. I n the last Gale, considerable damage was done to the shipping
here, and in which the Constitubion broke one of her bower Anchors
which has obliged me to get another in addition to the one already
mentioned in my letter of the 26th Ultm? The information I ave in my letter of the 30tQDecemr, and which
I received from the got, of the Brig Sirens having left t,his but a
few Days previous to my arrival, I have since found is incorrect;
as she has not been here at all: but it appears that in consequence
of the sickness at Gibraltar she has made Cadiz her rendezvous
generally. I have not procured quite so many Men here as I could have wished,
altho t.hose I have entered are generally h e fellows & such an additiop to the former crew, as to induce me to flatter myself, that I
shall be able to give you a very fair acct of the services of the Constitution next Summer - I have nothing at present farther to communicate, than that I shall call a t Tangier to learn how our affairs
stand in that quarter, and at Gibraltar to take as many of the Stores
from thence to Syracuse as I can conveniently Stow [NDA. captain'^ LB, Vol. 1, 1805.1

5

[4 February 18051
To Secretary of the Bevy from George Dyson, U. 6. Bavy Agent, Syracuse

H O N ~ ~ M Since
I R the departure of Commodore Preble from Naples
which was on the 23'G of December last, we have had no arrivals
from America to this Port the Brig laden with Naval Stores ex ected
to arrive with the Alfred store ship has not yet been heard o& consequently we have given up the hope of seeing her - I have given
a statement of provisions on hand to Commodore B a m n , who saild
in the Essez on the 4tQIns; and is now m Malta. His health still
continues very bad & 1 am fearful his recovery is very doubtful, the

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

329

ConsteUation & Vixen sail'd the same Day & the Nautilus yesterday-the Constitution is not yet return'd from Lisbon but is hourly
expected, by Letters of the 8 t h January from Gibraltar we learn that
the fever had abated in a great degree but not entirely past Mr John
Gavino was then living but his Brother & sister dead as to any political Ideas on the approaching summer's success I leave to better
information than I have power to give, the President & Congress will
be ready for sea in a few days - On Commodore Barron's return
into Port we shall have qpwards of two hundred Bbls Beef & pork
(brought out by the Traveller Store Shi ) to be survey'd and condemn'd as u d t for use also some C eese brought by the John
Adams-I have this moment r e d Letters from the Navy office for Captg
Campbell, Rodgers, Stewart &c which I shall take care to deliver as
the ships come in, - a few Days ago arrived a Greek Ship from
the Levant, the Capt? says He was spoke by Lord Nelson's Squadron
steering towards Corfu in search of the French Fleet which had
escaped from Toulon their Destination not known, that they are out
we know to be fact, & his Lordship is in pursuit. [NDA. Misc. LB,Vol. 1, 1805.1

f

Presumably to Master Commandant Isaac Hull, U. S. Navy, from William Eaton
U. S. Navy Agent for the Barbary Begencies

DEMANHOUR
Sunday dt@Febv 1806
DEARSIR, By express of yesterday I stated to you my arrangements concerning the two Ministers of Hamet Bashaw at Rosetta
although I have not yet received an Answer to my letter from this
place b~ the Arab Cheif - I am assured in pos~tiveterms by the
Kercheif of this Village that an Answer cannot be delayed more than
two da s longer - It would seem hardly possible that the Bashaw
would oose this oppertunity of an interview, but should it so happen
and my Messenger return without him I am entirely of opinion with
you, of the Brigs returning to the Randezvous, I have anticipated
$our Ideas concerning the impropriety of the Bashaws approaching
the Turkish frontiers with a force and have given instructions to
my Messenger to signify to him that he can advance with his suit
only which are not to consist of more than eight men, Am not confident he will yeild to these terms, for it appears his jealousy and
suspicions with these of his Turkish Brethren are reciprocal. 3 O.CLOCK
P. M. I had just turned this period in answer to your
letter when, when a messenger from Hamet Bashaw entered .my
appartment, and to convince me he was not an impostor he put lnto
my hands my first letter to Hamet Bashaw from Alexandria of 30tp
Novr this was a fortunate occurrence because it assured the Bashaw
of our high respect for the Grand Seignior and cautioned him agaiflst
any steps which might go to compromit our good intelligence m t h
that sovereign, and it having an Arabic translation on the back, 1
went with it to the Kercheif, who by the by is a fierce Savage Turk
but a good General. - this at once did away all suspicion, he took
me by the hand for the first time, conplimented my candour and
invited me to ride out and dine with him at his Camp, thls messenger
was followed by several Arabs who had kept in the back ground
'till they know whither they might enter with safety, accompanied
by the two Maltese whom I dispatched secretly from Calro, One

9

330

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1804 TO 1805

of the Arabs is a servant of the Bashaw and accompanied him on
his route towards this place as far as Fiune, he will be in Demanhour
tomorrow and Wednesday morning we shall set off for Alexandria
the Bashaw has only his suite with him consisting of about forty
Persons, which gives no uneasiness to the Kercheif, on the Contrary
he has voluntarily offered us an escort to secure our passage to
Alexandria and will go out himself with me tomorrow to accompany
our friend into Demanhour. I shall want a thousand dollars to clear out from this, and request
you will arrange the affair with Mr Briggs, so as to send them safely,
and if possible in Marboote this sum I hope and trust will put an
end to our expences of this sort, as i t certainly will to our danger &
anxiety if the hazard of sending cash, should be thou ht too great, must
pledge my credit with these people 'till I arrive wit you, on consideration I shall wait your answer to this express before I start from this
place. - I beg Sir you will accept my congratulations and assurance
of respect & Esteem.

i

W. EATON
NB. I give the Courier who carries this letter one Man Book &
promise him four if he returns on Tuesday with an answer and a
Parcel. I have serious doubts of sending Cash, unless you can pack
it away in some article of my Ward Robe. the courier engages to
bring my Toledo Sabre. I shall have no occasion for it as I intend
this I have with me for the Bashaw. [NDA. Isaac Hull LB, 1803-1806.1
To William Eaton, U. S. Navy Agent for the Barbary Regencies, from Master
Commandant Isaac Hull, U. S. IYsvg

UNITEDSTATESBRIGArgw
Alexandria dt@Febr 1806
DEARSIB,Your letter of the 4t+ came to hand at 12 this day, but
owing to the Governors being engaged, we could not see him till nearly
four in the afternoon, when M' Briggs and myself called on him to
know what number of Men he would suffer to enter this Town with
you, he would not consent that more than three or four besides your
party should accompany you and the Bashaw, but a t same time
wished to consult the Admiral. M' Briggs and myself went with him
to the Admiral, who we found rather in a bad humour, after making
known to him our visit, he agreed with the Governor that three or
four men was as many as could be allowed to pass throu h the Gates
with you, but after talking the matter over and on our eaving him,
he consented to suffer six besides your party to pass the Cutt, and
said he would gire Orders to that effect to the Officer Commanding
at the Cutt. Should the Bashaw bring more men with him than the
eight you mentioned he had better leave them a t Demanhour until
you arri~ehere, and perhaps we shall be able to obtain permission
to get the whole of them on board - while M' Briggs and myself
were with the Governor, I had men out collecting small money to
send you. it ttp ears they have only collected five hundred dollars,
wbich I hope w' 1 Answer your present purposes, had they collected
more, I think the risque too great to send to the amount of One Thousand dollars by one Courier, should the five hundred not be sufficient,
I will send the remainder by another conveyance. - The Sword I

f

I

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

331

do not send for fear it might be an inducement for the Arabs to plunder
the Courier of both Sword and money.
11 O'Clock at Night. -

I sent M' O'Bannon on shore with the above Letter to M' Briggs
to be forwarded by the Courier, but i t appears that when he ot on
shore, that the Governor and admiral had sent for MT Briggs' 8mgoman to inform him that they had chan ed their minds, that although
they had consented to suffer Hamet ashaw to pass with six men,
that they would now not allow him to enter Ale~andria~without
theV~ce
Roys permission, and that they had sent off an express to the Vice
Roy, to know whether he would be allowed to pass - in short I
desired Mr OIBamon to state to you what passed at the Admirals
between him and M' Briggs.
I had forgot to mention to you, that
the Governor bad produced a Letter which he said was from the Vice
Roy, limiting the number of men to two or three, that were to be
allowed to enter Alexandria with the Bashaw, but it appears that Mr
Briggs offered to confine them to the Vice Roys Letter, but they
refused, so that it is possible, no such Letter has been sent from him. I am happy you have wrote the Vice Roy, and hope you will receive
a favourable answer, as you will then be before hand of the Courier
they have sent off, but I think it will be necessary to write him again,
to do away any difficulties they may make, or objection they may
state to the Bashaws learing this. - If you can place him in a situation
to be safe, it will be proper by all means, that you come to this place
as soon as possible, and bring with you the Vice Roys firman, and
such other Papers as you may have to do away the suspicions that
have gone out against us. If the Bashaw will not part with you, it may be well to send the
firman, by MK Blake or some safe conveyance, or if he will remain
with M' Blake, and let you come here, I have no doubt but we shall
be able to convince them, that we have conducted with upwrightness
and candour. - from what I have stated, you will perceive, that it
is necessarv something is done very soon You will be a little astonished to see so sudden a change in our
affairs,but we must be patient untill we can convince them that they
have been led away by intriegue,
Should any thing further happen, I shall take the earliest oppertunity to inform you. - I have not sent the Money as things have
taken such a change - I was fearful of the Couriers being stopt. You will see by the conversation that passed between the Captain
Bey, and A$! Brlggs in the presence of M' O'Bannon, that he IS .no
friend of the Bashaws, as he said that nothing but a fear of offendng
the English and American Governments prevented him from talung
him by the Beard, and trampling him under his feet. - M' Briggs
gave him to understand, that he was the American Consul as well as
the English, and that he must be cautious, how he interfered &"
1
should think it will be well, that he is cautious, and keep a good look
out, as they appear to act in direct contradiction to the Vice R O ~ S
Orders, or they must have received a Counter Order or firman slnce
YOU left Cairo, perhaps it would not be amiss to write to the Governor
of this place, and inform him of your situation $ 9 -

%

-

-

[NDA. Isaac Hull LB, 180&-1806.1

332

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1804 TO 1806

Extract from journal of Midshipman Charles Moms, Jr., U. 6. Navy, on board
U. S. Frigate P r u i d d , Master Commandant George Cox, U. 8. Navy, commanding,
Monday, 4 February 1805

[In Syracuse Harbour] Pleasant with Moderate breezes. the Frigates Essex and Constellation and the Brig Vixen sailed for Malta
Lt ChaQLudlow & M' Augustus Ludlow Midshipman joined the
Essex
[Mrs. C. E. Fox original, NDA photostat.]
Extract from journal of Hezekiah Loomis, Steward, U. 8. Navy, in U. 8. Brig
Vixen. Master Commandant John Smith, U. 6. Navy, commanding, Nonday,
4 February 1805

At half past 8 o'clock A. M. we weighed anchor, as also the Essex,
Constellation and Nautilus. Pleasant weather. Steered for Malta.
Mr. Hunt gave me 30 returns to make out in a different method.
At 4 o'clock P. M. the breeze decreased and left us almost becalmed.
The Essex and Constelation could not sail with us and of course kept
astern.
[L. F. Middlebrook. NDA copy.]
To Secretary of the Navy from Captain John Rodgera, U. S. Navy

U, S, FRIGATE
Cmtitution

Lisbon Feb? 6tQ1806
SIR Actuated by a sincere respect for your opinion, and presuming
on your friendship; I am induced to solicit your attention to the
Intimations w3ich Mh JarviS may make to the Sect? of State, respecting a dispute which happen'd between us during the stay of the
Constitution in this Port - I should not consider this request necessary; had I the least reason to consider M: Jarvis an honorable man,
but on the contrary, and knowing him to be malicious; I am induced
to fear that an unjust representation might tend to, injure a character
which I hold next in estimation to the salvation of my soul, in the
opinion of Goverment The respect which I feel for the high authority that placed M'
Jarvis here was sdllcient inducement to prevent m taking such steps,
as to prove by document, that he has forfeited t e trust deposed in
him by his overment; as such a proceding could not fail to injure
him in his o cia1 capacity; and of course the Interest of his country however you may rest assured, that when such process shall be consider'd necessary, I can and will prove to the satisfaction of dl concern'd; that his conduct, as relates to myself has been derogatory to
the character of a Gentleman; and to his goverment such as will not
admit a single ray of doubt that he has forfited their confidence

E

6

[NDA. Captain's LB, Vol. 1, 1805.1
To William Eaton, U. 9. Navy Agent for the Barbary Regencies, from l a s t e r
Commandant Isaac Bull, U. 6. Navy

UNITED
STATES
BRIGArgw

Alexandria 6tQFebv 1806
DEARSIR, I sent off the Courier this morning with a letter, in which
I mentioned to you, that I should not send the money on account of
the risque of its miscarrying, but going on shore found that it had
been sent, and I hope it will arrive safe. - I was with M' Briggs at

WARS M71TH BARBARY POWERS

333

11 this morning & sent to the Governors to know if he was at home,
that we wished an enterview with him, we found that he was a sleep
and could not be seen 'till Three O'clock, at which time u-e waited
on him to come to an explanation about last nights conduct, we
found him as fearful as ever, and pretended he had received a Letter
last night from the Vice Roy, forbidding any of the Party's returning
to this place, until further Orders, and that he was receiving Letters
from Demanhour, every moment, some stating that the Bashaw had
a number of men dressed in Mameluke dress, others that he has with
him Sixty or Seventy Men, and five or six hundred, not far distant.
from Demanhour - in fact there seems to be a general alarm, and ji
fear we have not as yet seen the worst of it, for it is impossible to sa
how far these peoples fears may carry them, but a short time I hope w' 1
determine - After a little warm conversation with the Governor,
he left us in a very great passion, and went to the Admirals, after
stopping a few moments, Mc Briggs and myself left the house. After this statement you will easily perceive that you must rest
quiet, until you receive Answers from the Vice Roy to your Letters I hope you have made statements to him, that will counteract any
falsehoods from this place. - I beg Sir, that you will take such
measures, as will prevent our having any dif£iculty with this Government, or involving our friends. Should you have had an interview with the Bashaw, and find him
determined to go by land, I should suppose your arrangements might
be made as well a t or near Demanhour as a t thls place, therefore it
would not be necessary for him to come here, but should you determine to come on board, I see no other way than your fixing on some
place to the Westward, where he may be taken off, as I should suppose there would be no risk in doing that whilst he holds the Vice
Roys pass, unless he should give Counter Orders, either this must be
done, or you must remain untill you can get a firman from the Vice
Roy, that he may embark from this place. -

9

[NDA. baac Hull LB, 1803-1806.1
To Master Commandant Isaac Hull, U. 6. Navy, from William Eaton, U. S. Navy
Agent for the Bsrbary Regencies

DEMANEOUR
6 t h FebT 1806
DEARSIR, Hamet Bashaw arrived here from 0,Clech [possibly
meaning four o'clock] this afternoon, he was met by an escort of
Twenty Cavalry Six Miles from the Village and conducted to a handsome Pavilion pitched for the purpose, reposed there for ? moment
when the Kercheif waited on h m with his sulte accompamed by an
honorary Guard of twenty Infantry, and saluted h i with marks of
cordial friendship. Tents were pitched for the accommodation of his eople, and pmvlsion made for their refreshment - the Bashaw s eeps toni ht a t
the Kercheifs house, and tomorrow afternoon we depert for
drla - shall be with you Wednesday Morning. While setting under the Pavilion a letter was ut into my hands
from, the Vice Roy in answer to mine of 30tQ t9, he has granted
every thin I requested we have permission to embark the Christians
conditions y engaged in our Service a t Alexandria. Ii remains for us to determine whither the can be used to the
~ m o of
r our Country, think of the Derne ang Bengaiee wedition,

P

up

fi

de~m-

334

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 180L

TO 1805

after all that has passed we should not doubt of success in any enterprize undertaken with reasonable prospects. I fear we shall never have the means suitably to acknowledge our
obligations to Mesdr Briggs Brothers.

-

[NDA. Isaac Hull LB, 1803-1806.]
--

Extract from jonrnaI of Surgeon Jonathan Cowdery, U. S, Navy, 5 February 1805

While a number of our men were at work at the north corner of
the castle, a lar e body of the %.all fell, and killed Jacob Dowdesher.
The only conso ation we received from the Turks, was, that he was
amka deirc and sansafedah - that is, D-----m his mother, he has got
no faith. Romo Kelp - He is a Christian dog.

f

[LC. Rare Books, American Captives i n Tripoli or Dr. Cowdery's Journal,
Boston, 1806.1
Extract from journal of Hezekiah Loomis, Steward, U. S. Navy, in U. S. Brig Vixm,
Master Commandant John Smith, U. S. Navy, commanding, Tuesday, 5 February 1805

Pleasant weather, little winds, and that ahead. Malta about 10
miles to windward. We beat in and came to anchor at half past 2
o'clock P. M. (quarantined). The Essex came to anchor about sun
setting. The Constellalion came to anchor at half pa.st six o'clock

P. M.

[L. F. Middlebrook. NDA c0py.j

[About 6 February 18051
To Willism Eaton, U. I. Navy Agent for the Barbary Regencies, from Lieutenant
Joshua Blake, U. 6. Navy

ALEXANDRIA
10 0.CZock
DEARSIR, All is well! I have not seen Cap: H. but have been an
hour with the Governor and Admiral, they have reason on their side,
you have had an incorrect translation of the firman - be assured Sir,
it expressly says that Hamet Bashaw may approach Rosetta or Alexandria, it is then necessary, that the Commanders in either place
should have an order directed particularly to them from the Vice Roy
to pass him. The Admiral and Governor have dispatched a Courier
asking that, and by return they solemnly declare it will give them
infinite pleasure to receive him with proper honours, that our real
friend tne Kercheij of Demanhour may not suspect our h a ~ i n gdirected him (as he naturally will suppose from this arrestation) You
can inform him that the Admiral and Governor both, in presence of
Messr? Briggs 0.Bannon and myself, that he had been perfectly correct after having recelved the Vice Roys Order, and that they only
waited the same. I t is the opinion of Mr Briggs, and I think with him, that you had
better Camp a t Bricket, the communication will be easy with you,
and I am sure more agreeable than Demanhour - At Bricket you
are surrounded with friends in case of necessity - I am confident
however they will not be needed - Pardon the liberty I take to
advise - You know every motive by which I am actuated. - All
my Party are on board the AT us, Your servant will be sent you this
afternoon, after I have seen 8ap5 H. I shall send your two Horses,
that you may have for Servant and Hassen - the Horses of Deman-

WARS WITH BARBARY POWEBS

335

hour shall be just.1~sent forward - You will be informed of m y
'ourney by the bearer - by your sel-c-ant you will have every articular with the papers put in my charge, they have been properyy used
and produced more than the anticipated effect. - You will read&
perceive Sir, this is written m such haste as a just Idea of your anxiety
promps me to dispatch the bearer. God Bless vou Sir
-~

-~

-

1 shall join you again if possible
[NDA. Isaac Hull LB, 1802-1806.)
To William Eaton, U. S. Navy Agent for the Barbary Regencies, from Xaster
Commandant Isaac Hull,U. 6. Navy

UNITED
STATEB
BRIGA r p
Alexandria 6 ; b Feb? 1805

DEARSIR, YOUwill be informed by Ms Blake what has passed
this morning, and what our prospects are - I have only to say, I

fear we shall have diificulty and delay in getting the Bashaw on board,
and if it is his determination to proceed by land I do not see the necessity of his coming here perhaps you can make your arrangements at
or near Demanhour and by appearances, the sooner i t is done the better for fear of a Counter Order. - You perhaps had better fix on
some piace near Derne for us to meet him, at a stated time (say two
rnont*hs)at such place as he may name, and you will b o w what the
Commodore authorised us to say to h i , if he is confident he can go
down near Derne, he may be sure we shall be there at the time
appointed by you. From the obstinacy of the Governor and Caps Bey, I fear they are
trying to delay the business as much as possible, in hopes to receive
Counter Orders from the Vice Roy. -it will be necessary for you
to write to the Vice Roy, and state to him the manner in which they
act in the face and eyes of his Orders &"
I am happy to hear that
you have r e d my Letters and the Cash sent, as I had determined not
to send it, but it came through mistake.

I have had some conversation with h1: Blake since writing the
above, and find it is the determination of t,he Bashaw to go by land if so I think you had better place him among his own friends, where
he vc-ill be safe, and come here yourself, as soon as possible, that we
may make arrangements for our departure. - Please let me know
what you determine upon as soon as possible. [NDA. Isaac HuIl LB, 1803-1806.1
To Master Commandant Isaac Hull, U. S. Navy, from John Gordon

ROSETTA6 Feb? 1805

DEARSIR,In consequence of the Accounts which Major Missett
has this morning red from Demanhour I am inclined to suppose that
your friend hl: Eaton, his Suite will have already joined you before
this Letter can reach Alexandria. - I t is now I immagine pretty
certain that the Pacha, with his attendants wiIl sail in the Bri &
as they will necessarily occupy much of the spare room I am unwikng
to incumber you with three additional passengers and Baggage. Believe me Sir I am highly sensible of your kindness in offering to

336

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1804 TO 1805

take me as far as Syracuse, and had circumstances permitted I should
have been most happy to have availed myself of so favourable an
oppertunity - You are however equally entitled to my sincerest
thanks, and before I finally leave the Mediteranian, I hope we shall
be fortunate enough to meet, when I shall be glad to return my a,cknowledgements in Person. Do me the favor to present my respectful
compliments to M Eaton, and remember me kindly to a11 those
Officers on board the Argus, with whom I have the pleasure of being
acquainted. [NDA. Isaac Hull LB, 1803-1806.1

JOHNGORDON

To Secretary of the Navy from ldidshipman James T. Leonard, U. S. Navy
NEWYORE
Fe6T Yth 1806

SIR I have the honor to acquaint you that the two gun boats
built at this city, were launch,d one on the 4t* and one on the Gth inst.
That from the uncommon severity of the weather, and quantity of
Ice in the river, they could not safely be launch,d a t the time mentioned
in my last of the l g t @Jan?.
The Ice yet continues to impede their conveyance to the Navy
wharf, where they will be taken when it can be done with safety &
will progress in their equipment.
I have further to inform that those boats have been built of thc most
durable materials, and the workmanship faithfully executed, the plan
and dimensions have been followed in every instance and they meet
the most sanquine expectations in their buoyance and stiffness on the
water; their further qualities can be better Judge,d when completely
equipp,d
Should it be contemplated to establish a superin tendan t of Naval
affairs a.t this port for the ensuing summer, in the care and management
of the Gun boats now built or in the building of others, I have presumed the establishment if myself should be deern,d qualified (or
until another whose abilities should be unquestionable) would meet
your favor in the appointment
[NDA. Officers LB, 1802-1805.1
Presumably to William Eaton, U. 6. Xavy Agent for the Barbary Regencies,
from First Lieutenant f. N. OYBannon,U. 6. Marine Corps

BRIGArgw Ye@ Feby 1805
SIR A letter of tbis date from Cap9 Hull will inform you, what
transpired during an interview, yesterday morning with the Admiral
and Governor of Alexandria, and last evening when I was with M'
Briggs. His droga.man entered and informed him that the Governor
& admiral had sent for him some time previous, and informed him,
that they had upon reconsideration, altered their opi~ionsof permitting Hamet Bashaw to enter Alexandria, without further orders from
the Vice Roy of Cairo Mr Briggs did not wait to enquire the cause of this sudden change,
and I accompanied him to the Admirals house, where we expected
to find the Governor, but in this we were disappointed - however
M' Briggs did not fail to tax the Admiral, with a want of Firmness,
and sincerity, in changing so suddenly - and without any apparent
cause - This could only be answered, by pretending a dread of not

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

337

meeting the Vice Roys approbation, in acting without his direct
order Mr Briggs finding that remonstrance was in vain, and no argument
could prevail in favour of Hamet's coming to this place; is of opinion
that you will do well in loosing no time to procure positive orders from
Courskeck Bashaw, or in proceeding to this place immediately with
the original b a n , which he thinks will be sufficient to satisfy a set
of ignorant commanders, who have nothing to recommend them but
power, and who are obstinately determined not to let Hamet enter,
without furtber orders, or a reconsideration of the former, or rathar
a reexamination My respects to Mess* Mann & Blake
(Signed) P. N. O'Bannon [NA. Sen. 9 B-B 6, Pres. Message, Jan. 1806.1
Extract from journal of Midshipman Charles Moms, Jr., U. S. Haw, on board
U. 6. Frigate Pruidenl, Master Commandant George Cox, U. 6. Navy, commanding, Thursday, 7 February 1805

[In Syracuse Harbor] Light Airs. the Nautilw sailed for Malta
[Mrs. C. E. Fox original, NDA photostat.]

Extract from journal of Hesekiah Looes, Steward, U. 6. Navy, in U. S. Brig
Vixen, Master Commandant John Smith, U. 8. Navy, commanding, Thursday,
7 February 1805

[Malta] This day pleasant. Dropped down to the outer harbour.
In the evening there appeared to be a storm approaching. I n attempting to shift our berth we ran foul of an English ship which did us somdamage.
[L. F. Middlebrook. NDA copy.]
To Secretary of the Navy from Lieutenant Nathaniel Panning,U. 6. Navy

FAIRBANKNEAR CHARLESTON
S. C.
Feb? the
1805
SIR Since I had the honor of writing you the First Instant, the
Building of the Gun Boat a t this place has progressed but slowly,
owing to bad Weather. The Master Shipwright assures me however
that She will be Launched a t or near t'he next change of the Moon.
The variation which has been made in regard to the Building of this
TTessel, by the direction of Mr Wm Smith, from the original plan,
meets m full and entire approbation, as well as others who have seen
her on t e Stocks and who are I believe pretty competent Judges;
the most msterial alterations of which I speak are; three feet more
Beam; one Foot Nine Inchcs more hold; The Bilge peices or Keels
about Ten feet longer; (inside of the Vessel and opposite to them)
the Cieling Plank instead of being only TWOIn: thick, are three
Inches; through which last and the Bilge peices besides the ordin
security, d l be driven composition Bolts, and riveted inside, and whc
are to pass through every other Floor Timber; this in my estimation
will make the outer Keels doubly secure. and as a further alteration
from the ori al plan a shoring will be put on to the Bottom of the
Main Keel ( hree Inches thick) which I much approve of - as the

fi

"E

5?

338

NAVAL OPERATIONS FRO.ii 1804 TO 1805

Vessel will in consequence of it when under way and plying to the
Windward hold a better 'VC'ind; taking all these alterations into one
point of view as they vary from the original plan and I am decidedly
of the opinion that the Vessel when finished will be all the better for
the Public Service. Her Frame is an excellent one; and the best I
ever saw in a Vessel of her size; her other materials are also very good;
her Deck plank instead of Two Inches thick, are Two & 5 in thickness,
very long, clear of Sap, and Shakes; The plank on the Bottom are
also free from the two East; And both the Deck and Bottom plank are
of the best of Yellow Pine, which are generally esteemed more durable
than white oak. hfr IT. Smith was here a few days past and informed
me that the Vessel (mentioned in this communication) is to carry one
Gun only of a large Calibre; If this is correct, I t is a pitty it had not
been known here some days sooner especially before her Deck was
Framed; which would have saved expence in time, Timber &c. But
since the Deck is framed and keeping in view that She was to carry
according to the o r i e a l plan one Cannon of large Calibre a t each
End; I am Sorry that I t has been thought expedient to depart from
that plan; submitting to your consideration the following reasons
with all deference to your better Judgment. Because the Vessel in
Question is sufficiently Strong Built enough & Burdensome to carry
one Thirty Two pounder at each End; Because at both extremities
her Deck has been equally well secured with Timber, plank, and Iron,
for carrying Two such heavy Guns. Because agreeable to the Method
of Sparing, Rigging, & Sailing of her; as is now directed to be done
having a Rudder a t each End, and to advance one way the same as
the other, I t results from this, that She ought to have one Gun a t
Each End. Because having Two Guns She will be more formidable
strike more dread upon an Enemy & will be in my opinion more
serviceable to the public in any onset, or attack upon which She may
hereafter be ordered.
However if it is determined that She is to mount but one heavy
Cannon at one End, I beg I may be permitted to give directions to
have 3lounted Two Guns, Four or Six pounders a t the other End,
with a few Swivels, or Cow Horns; having had no directions from the
Kavy Department how the Cannon a t one or both Ends of the Vessel
are to be mounted; and hearing &I: Smith Say he did not expect
any from that Quarter; M' P. Pritchard, and myself, have fallen
upon a plan and which we are confident will answer that end better
than any other plan, which perhaps has hitherto been addopted
in this Country; which is upon Two Circles the under one to be
secured to the Deck, the upper part of which to form a Water
level and upon it to have a plate of Iron: The upper Circle to traverse
all round upon Brass Sheeves fixed in the outer part of s'J Circle; which
will run upon the Iron plate of the under Circle. The upper Circle,
in the Centre of which to have an Iron Saucer in which an Iron pivot
is to play, which will project from the Kelson through the Deck, and
the lower Circle being will secured the upper End of which being
taper'd away so as to have sufficient play in the Saucer, - upon the
End of this Iron pivot, and a Number of brass Sheeves fixed as above
observed, & the weight of the Cannon and its two Carriages (one of
which to be secured to the upper Circle, the other to slide backwards
& forwards upon the one which is fixed to the upper Circle) this

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

339

last, will be turned with facility with the aid of a Couple of Men in
any direction and the Cannon will have a t least Nine feet recoil.
This is the outlines of our plan; should it meet your approbation
please to notify me of i t by the return of post. otherwise you will have
the goodness to give directions to Mr W. Smith in what manner the
Gun or Guns ere to be mounted on board of the said Vessel.
I hare been thus particular in my duty relative to the Gun Boat
Building here (by consent of Mr Smith) whose duty I told him I did
not wish to interfere in; and who said he wished me to inform you the
particulars now communicated to you.
[NDA. Misc. LB, Vol. 1,1805.1

[8 February 18051
From Dr. Francisco Mendrici
[Tmlation*l

MOSTEBTEEMED
FRIEND:
I understand from Major Missett that
you are a t Cottar Salem. If you ever have di5culty in embarking
Baschia by way of Alexandria have him go by way of Rosetto and
advise Captain Hull to go to Aboukir with the brig.
The sheik, El Belled, is a t the home of Captain Vincenzo and is
ready to go with me as soon as we know where to meet you, if by
any chance we are not able to find you in Alexandria the above mentioned person swears he does not have the intention of which he is
accused by the secretary and affirms all the charges are false. Up to
this time I have not received either the horse or the sailor, I continue
to look for it but do not find anything good.
Major Missett tells me that if you will pass by the coast you d
surely be able to embark Bascia.
Good bye dear friend. My compliments t o the Bascia sndithe
officers.
Believe me always your affectionate friend.
/s/ Da. FRANCIS
MENDRICE
ROSSETTO
8 February 1806
P. S. A thousand regards on the part of the Ceptain Vincenzo
and Signor de Rossetti and from avoctin person; guess who? Madame Rossetti; and still avoctin; - it is the Sheik sadded.
goodbye again.
[*Translated by Lt. Comdr. Edward Breed, U. S. N. R.]
[H. E. Huntington L&AG, E A 633.1

[About 8 February 18051
To Hamet Caramanli, rightful Bashew of Tripoli, from the Vice Roy of Cairo
[Ranalstion]

This noble Firman from our gracious Divan ta the most eminent
and esteemed Brother, Ahmed, Bashaw, "Tribulino". May God
keep you in all prosperity.
I have heard, to my extreme pleasure, of your safe arrival in Alexandria, as I have already written you before now.
with you for your needs in your affair
With regard to loud be
with all our heart [this]
be made k n o w to you by our sincere

3

340

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1804 TO 1805

friend, full of kindness and intelligence, General William [Eaton],
American Adjutant [Agent?] General, who is in Alexandria, and all
this with respect to [for the purpose of] pleasing our said friend, the
General. We hope in God to the end that you will have all that you
desire and more than your desire and pleasure.
However, we desire a service from you for the Sublime Porte,
which service will bring you very great honor and the approval of the
Sublime Porte, that is,
We wish you to know the Arabs called Aulad Ali, part of whom
are a t Behira and a part of whom have gone to Upper Egypt [or, we
wish you to know that of the Arabs called Adad Ali, part are at Behira
and part have gone to Upper Egypt]; therefore you will arrange to
bring them under you by strategy and perhaps you d need troops
to go into Barbary; friend, it is necessary to bring them all under you
immediately and take them there [where you are] ; this a very great
and important service, and you will be recognized by us, and render
great service to the Sublime Porte, land] for this [you will] obtain
the greatest honors imaginable, and I shall do my best for you; I have
also written to your said friend, the General; in short, do not fail in
this particular because i t is a very great service for the Sublime Porte,
when this service is terminated you will obt,ain many "inconsiderable"
honors if you bring [the] Aulad Ali with you; this is the only service
[we shall ask of you]; do it. I salute you
AHMED
Curciud [?I Vice Roy of Cairo
a t once
9 Zel'chede IZul'QadaP] 1619
B.E. Huntington LkAG.1
Extract from journal of U. S. Frigate Constitution. Captain John Rodgers, U. S. Navy,
commanding, Friday, 8 February 1805

[Lisbon] At 6 [A. M.] light airs unmoord ship
At 9 weighd and made sail
a t 11 the wind hauling to the Westward shortened Sail and Came
too
[USNA.]
Extract from log book of l a s t e r Commandant Isaac Chauncey, U. 6. Navy,
commanding U. 8. 6. John Adomc. Friday, 8 February 1805

The John Adams on a wind and under a press of sail makes ten
inches of water every two hours - before the wind three inches in
two hours.
Latitude observed. 26' 56' N
Longitude by acct 67" 49' W
[LC. EPP, Log of John Adams, 1804-1805.1
To Jsmes Qambier, British Consul General, Lisbon, Portugal, from Captain
John Bodgern, U. 8. Navy

U. STATESSHIPComtitution
Tagus February 9- 1805
SIR In passing a Spanish Prize of his Britanick Majesty's Ship
Emerald this morning a Seaman Swam along side who is a deserter

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

341

from our service; - being under way & all sail set I was under the
necessity of detaining the Man without being able to explain the
subject to the Cap; of the Emerald; however this shall be done in
Gibraltar to his satisfaction - Nothing less than my personally
knowing the Man to be a Deserter, from the U. States service would
have induced me to detain him - I have not the honor of knowing
the Capt of the Emerald, but I beg you will explain the circumstances
under which the Man has been detained to him.
PC. JRP. Letters & Orders, Book A, 1804-1805.1

-

To Captain Edward Reble, U. 6. Navy, from George Dyson, U. S. Navy Agent,
Syracuse

SYRACUBE
grnfeby 1806
DEARSIR Your much esteem'd favor at the time of your departure
from Naples I receiv'd since which time nothing new has transpired
in this place, Commodore Barron still continues very ill He sail'd
in the Essex on the
Insf.to try the air of Malta but I am of opinion
He never can recover; his disorder has Kept him down so long & I
think He gets weaker every time I have seen Him for some time past,
the Argus is not yet return'd nor have we heard any thing of Her since
she left us with Mr Eaton, the Constitution is not yet return'd from
Lisbon she pass'd Gibraltar on her way there on the 18tWecember so
that I hope to hear of hl'! Dyson's & Mary's safe arrivd in London
every day, the Enterprise is repairing a t Venice & I beleive nearly
hished the Constellation & Vixen are off Tripoli & the Congress &
Pres&nt are in this Port the latter has had considerable repairs in
dl her masts I beleive she will be ready for Sea in the Course of next
week,

*

*

*

*

[LC. EPP, Vol. 14, December 18, 1804June 13, 1805.1
To Xaster Commandant Irraac Hull,U. 15. Mavy, from William Baton, U. 6. Navy
Agent for the Barbary Regencies

ALEXANDRIA
Feby 8* 1805
SIR,By my letter to you of 30t9 December last, I stated the very
improper and disgraceful conduct of M' Rob$ TT. Goldsborough, a
purser under your Command, while at grand Cairo, the silent manner
in which we wished to pass over that conduct, has had an effect very
different from what was hoped, I t has brought the Character of the
American Officer into dis[r]epute, a t the same time that it seems to
hare given countenance on our part to that Impropriety of behaviour,
it is become therefore Indispensible with o u r own and the honor of
Service, that we bear public testimony against conduct so dishonorable by requiring 34: Goldsboro h to answer before the proper court
to the following charges for whic purpose I wish he may be ordered
in Arrest Vixt

3

Ungentlemanly and Uno$icerlike Conduct,
Specified as follows Intoxication at a public billiard room the common resort of
Vagabonds, in Grand Cairo on or about the evening of the twenty
ninth of December last. -

342

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROAf 1804 TO 1805

2nd I n said Grand Cairo and said billiard room for a bet of a small
bottle of rose olio, or for some other trivial occasion, entering into a
quarrel, in that Capital of Egypt in the View of turks and Spectators
of different Nations, publicly fighting at fisticuffs with MT Richard
Farquhar a North Britoner, then in the serrice of the United States. 3rd I n said Grand Cairo in Voilation of the known Sacred laws, and
customs of the Country, offering indencies to one or more women in
the City, by attempting in the public streets to lift their Veils, 4th Swindling at the table of the most respectable Christian house
in Grand Cairo, where he was invited with the American Officers to
spend one or more evenings, and entertained with cards, In support
of which charge and Specifications, Lieut OBannon of the Marine
Corps, Sf: George Washington Mann and Eli. E. Danielson Midshipmen in the Kavy of the Unit,ed States Kavy Colonel G h i l ? ] Selim
Comb my interpreter and said Richard Farquhar may be adduced as
Witness's
[Mrs. James S. Barron Col.]
To Maater Commandant Isaac Hull, U. S. Navy, from Richard Farquhar
ALEX~NDRIA
g t h Feb? 1805

SIR,I received Yours of this morning, wherein you observed that
I had made an agreement with his Excellency Commodore Barron,
I made no agreement with the Commodore for either pay or expences,
nor never did, for the many services I have done to America; except
with Mt Eaton, and that I left for hlm to mention. The Bashaws Secretary called again to inform that, there is a vessel
arrived from Tripoli, but last from Bengaize & Derne, they have
heard of our being here, and i t is supposed they came for news, she
e
a good prize, she is expected to sail soon,
would h a ~ been
You forgot to let me h o w when you are likely to Sail. [NDA. Isaac Hull LB, 1803-1806.1
To Richard Farquhar, Alexandria, from Blaster Commandant Isaac Bull,
U. S. Navy

UKITED
STATESBRIGArgus
Alexandria.gth Feb? 1805
SIR,I have this moment received your Note i n f o n n g me of the
arrival of a Vessel from Tripoli, and Derne, we saw her come in, and
su posed she was from the Westward
Pou will see that I took the idea of your having made an agreement
with the Commodore from your Letter of this Morning, wherein
you say, he had given you Orders, I very readily concluded, if he had
given you Orders, he must have made some agreement with you. It is uncertain when the A T ~will
S sail, but most likely in three or
four days. [NDA.

Isaac Hull LB, 1803-1806.1

WARS TVITH BARBARY POWERS

343

Extract from journal of U. S. Frigate Conslildion. Captain John Rodgers, U. 8. Navy,
commanding, Saturday, 9 February 1805

[Lisbon] At )i past 1 weighd and stood Up the harbour At 6
came Too a breast the Queens rope walk I n 14 fathoms water.
At Midnight DQWeather a t 7 weighd made sail and Stood down
the river
a t 10 discharg,d t,he pilot the Light house bearing E B N. the West
point of the rock of Lisbon N E 4 or 5 leagues
[USNA.]
[lo February 18051
To whom not indicated from Dr. Francisco Hendrici
[Translation.*I

RESPECTABLE
FRIEND:
Having had a search made for the Shiek,
El Belled, everywhere without being able to find him I am inclined
to believe that this rascal has returned to Cairo in spite of his word
of honor given me in the presense of Captain Vincezo in the house of
Major Missett. I would like to have a copy of the receipts for the
monies that you have dispensed and then I will see that he pays you
back. This is the third letter that I have had the honor to write you.
I am anxious to have you answer for my guidance.
If by any chance I am not able to find you a sailor, I'll give you one
of mine. I await with impatience a meeting with you. Tell me
something concerning the interpreter.
I beg you to accept the offer of my services, and continue to believe
Your friend.
in me, which with all my heart I conform.
Is/ DR. FRANCIS
MENDRICE
ROSETTO10 February 1805
[* Translated by Lt. Comdr. Edward Breed, U. S. N. R.
[H. E. Huntington L&AG,E A 364.1
Extract from journal of U. S. Frigate Consfiiution, Captain John Rodgers, U. 6. Navy,
commanding, Monday, 11 February 1805
At 3 past 10 [A.M.] shortend sail & spoke the Defence an english

74 - She sent hir boats on board of us a t 11 The boat left the
ship filld away And made sail
Latitude Observed 36' 44' N.
[USNA.]

Extract from journal of Midshipman Charles Morris, Jr., U. S. Navy, on board
U. S. Frigate President, Master Commandant George Cox, U. S. Navy, commanding, Monday, 11 February 1805

[In Syracuse Harbor] Pleasant.
Arrived from Malta.
[Mrs. C. E. Fox original, NDA photostat.

10 A M. the U. S. Brig V b e n

344

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1804 TO 1805

Extract from journal of Midshipman F. Cornelius deKrafft, U. S. Navy, U. S.
Brig Scourge, Midshipman Ralph Izard, Jr., U. S. Navy, commanding, Monday,
11 February 1806

6 A. M several sail in sight. - % past 7 pass'd a brig, spoke
her, from Norfolk 14 hours out. - 9 saw a Pilot boat to windward
standing for us. - 10 the Pilot boat came along side, the pilot came
on board. - 11 saw the American shore. - Cape Henry bore W
by N 18 miles
L:0:36' 55' N.
vDA.]
Extract from journal of Bezekiah Loomis, Steward, U. S. Navy, in U. S. Brig
Vixen, Master Commandant John Smith, U. S. Navy, commanding, Monday,
11 February 1805

Pleasant weather, light winds, the entrance of the harbour of Syracuse in sight. At half past 10 o'clock we went in and came to anchor.
We found there the President and Congress.
[L. F. Middlebrook. NDA copy.]
To Master Commandant Isaac Hull,U. S. Navy, from Richard Farquhar

ALEXANDRIA
12'5 Feb? 1806
SIR, I was determined to go on board the Argus to day as I promised to you yesterday, but I have been reflecting on the consequence
of my not going by land on the expedition, as the Bashaws Secretary told me that unless I went, neither him nor the Bashaw will
go, therefore as you and the Secretary wish me to go on the expedition, I will do it on the following Conditions - JTiz.that Mr Eaton
shall be more reserve in his manner of speaking, and that my Account
shall be paid up till today, and that at least one hundred and fifty
men shall go from this to join the Bashaw, with three or four small
Guns, and an agreement stating the pay and time of service, and
on these Conditions I will go on the expedition. I understand the English Consul will talie the trouble to endeavour
to settle this business, and if you will do the same they will go on
better. RICHARD
FARQUHAR
[NDA.

Isaac Hull LB, 1803-1806.1

To Secretary of the Navy from Midshipman F. Cornelius de Krafft, U. S, Navy

U. S. BRIGScourge

AT NORFOLK
February l B t @ 1806
SIR! I have arrived in the U. S. Brig Scourge from the Meditterranian, under an arrest in consequence of the unfortunate circumstance that occurr'd between Mr Wm Nicholson & myself, & now
wait your further orders.
F. CORNELIUS
DE KRAFFT.

[NDA.

Misc. LB, Vol. 1, 1805.1

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

345

Extract from journal of Midshipman F. Cornelius deKrafft, U. S. Navy, U. S.
Brig Scourge. Midshipman Ralph Iaard, Jr.. U. S. Navy, commanding, Tuesday.
12 February 1805

Light breezes & pleasant, Cape Henry bore W by S. 10 miles
dist X past 1 P. M. set top gall$Steering sails. 3 set top mast ditto
& gaff top sail. - sunset cape Henry light bore S W % S - At
9 came too in 4 fathoms water the light house on Point Comfort
bearing W by S. 4 miles distant. Midnight cloudy & pleasant. 7 AM. hove up & stood for Hampton
Roads wind from S. W. 10 Edward Hansford harbour master for
the port of Norfolk & Portsmouth boarded us opposite Crany Island. Meridian moderate breezes & pleasant, all sail set standing in for
Norfolk. [NDA.]
Extract from log book of Master Commandant Isaac Chauncey, U. S. Navy,
commanding U. S. S. Jolm Admnr, Tuesday, 12 February 1805

Light breezes with cloudy weather - At Sundown clear Saw a
sail bearing Nj4W hauled our wind for her and at 8% P M shortened
sail and boarded her - An American Schooner 34 days from Dominico bound to Edenton. (N C) Her Captain, Orlando Dana, reports
that he has been blown off the Coast and is in distress for the want of
provisions, water, Sails & rigging Supplied her with one Bbl of Beef one of Pork - 336 pounds of Bread, 192 Gallons of Water in three
Ironbound gang casks, 4'4"ewing twine - 12 sail needles 35 fathoms
3 Inch & 80 fathW I n J4 wornrope, a new storm mizen - a half worn
mizen T gall! sail and 20 yards canvas Nq 3. At 11%P M up boats,
and made sail - From this time till 4 A M light and variable
breezes At 4 AM a breeze from SbE - from which time till noon pleasant
Noon - moderate SbW - winds and pleasant weather Water
(including that supplied the Schooner) expended 370 Gallons
Latitude observed. 30. 57 N.
[LC. EPP, Log of John Adame, 1804-1805.3
To Captain Samuel Barron, U. S. Navy, from James Simpson, U. S. Consul, Tangier,
Morocco

TANGIER FebT 1806. DEARSIR When Captain Rodgers passed this Bay the lgth Decemr
he sent me a Letter from ou, which at this moment I cannot lay my
hand upon, but as to the est of my recollection it did not require an
answer on any particular point, besides the state of our Public affms
in this Country, it is the less material. Enclosed is copy of my last respects to you 2gt@Novemr, which
would have been forwarded 'ere now by the way of Leghorn, but that
I have for some time back been in daily expectation of seelng the
Constitution, that being a conveyance far prefferable to any other. Captain Rodgers will be able to tell you better than me what the
Emperours Agents hnve done, and the prospect of what they may do
at Lisbon. Neither this Government or any of its Agents have made any Communication or application to me on busyness, since I last wrote YOU;

i?,

346

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1804 TO 1805

but I have had private information that Alcayde Hashash in a moment
of exhileration talked loudly of what the Emperour would be able to
do next Summer against the Americans if they persisted in not allowing Wheat to be sent to Tripoly. I have strongly recommended to Government to allot two Frigates
and two Brigs or Schooners for this Station early in the Spring, which
I am hopefull will be done - Such part of that force as you can
spare until we hear from America on the subject, I should recommend
your sending down, as I am fully satisfied if there be not a Naval
force on this Coast the pretention of sending Wheat to Tripoly will
be brought again on the Carpet so soon as the Season will admit of
the Cruizers acting. - Your sentiments on this subject I shall be
happy to receive as soon as possible, in the mean time I shall not
fail to publish my expectation of an American Squadron being a t
hand. [Mrs. James S. Barron Col. NDA photostat.]
To James Simpson, U. S. Consul, Tangier, Morocco, from Captain John Rodgers,
U. S. Navy

U. STATESSHIPConstitution
Tangier Bay Feby. 1.3. 1805
SIR In conformity with the intimations contained in your Letter
of the 24tQ Decem'; I now hare the satisfaction to inform you that I
used every possible means to obtain the proper information on its
sub'ect '?he re,ttances
made to h e Emperors Agent a t Lisbon is equal,
I find to 250,000 Spanish Dollars, and I have every reason to believe
from the best authority, is intended principally for the purchase of
Naval Stores in England, as the remittances to Lisbon was
p d y in Spanish Gold, and the Agent finding there is a great oss on
such Gold in England; he in consequence has authorised the House
of Messrs Buckley & CQof Lisbon, to write to London to ascertain
which will be most advantageous, to carry the Gold to England, or
to purchase Bills with it a t Lisbon: and when I left Lisbon (loth Ins:)
he was waiting the result.
At Lisbon there is only one Frigate of 30 Guns and her Prize a
Prusian Merchant Brig, with a Brig pierced for 16 Guns, which they
have purchased and are now fitting for a Cruizer - There is a Frigate of 30 Guns & another of 20 Guns a t St Ubes, the one of 30 Guns
is ready for Sea, and i t is said is watching the motions of a large
Prusian merchant Ship in that Port. Application has been made to
the British I understand, by the Moorish Agent, for Convoy to England, by the next that sails, for the Frigate a t Lisbon; however it is
said that he has since been endeavouring to charter a Merchant Vessel
of their proceedingsor intentions1 have notbeen able to learn further.The Frigate at Lisbon has recieved some damage in the late Gales,
she was repairing when I left there: The Brig they have purchased is
also repairing. -

Princi-

[LC. JRP.

Letters & Orders, Book A, 1804-1805.1

347

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS
-

-

To Captain John Rodger~, U. S. Navy, commanding U. 6. Prigate G ~ t i ~ i ~ n .
from James Simpson, U. S. Consul, Tangier, Morocco

TANGIER
ISt? Feb? 1806 SIR MI Johnston has delivered me your favour of this date, which
I will answer by him, altho' I will now premise by telling you that
since the letter you acknowledge of the 24th Decemr nothing whatever
has passed between this Government and me - all has been in a
calm My Interpreter is providing the Poultry Mr Johnston has desired
to have - they will be ready when the Boat returns - if you will
have the goodness to order the articles Mr Jarvis put on board for
me to be sent in her, I will be much obliged to you. - Enclosed is
an appolegy I have received from the Danish Consul for his Flag not
being hoist - the English Flag Staff is also down. There is a Friend of Mr Gavinos and mine, formerly a Clerk to
both of us, here desirous to go to Gibraltar, if you will allow him
to go in the Constitution I will esteem it a favour. Good Health has been enjoyed there ever since the first week of January, and the Port was of consequence opened on the 30th that month.

-

[NDA.

Captain's LB. Vol. 1, 1805.1

To Captain John Bodgers, U. S. Navy, cornmandig U. S. Frigate ConcNlution,
from James Simpson, U. S. Consul, Tangier, Porocco

TANGIER
lSt9 Febrv 1806 DEARSIR When Mr Johnston delivered me your letter he a t
same time communicated your Invitation to go on board the Constitution, but as I had Letters to write and he told me you intended
sailing today, I could not do myself that pleasure. I was hopefull you would have stayd some days with us - the
American Flag being so seldom seen in these Ports, and when it is,
so constantly but in a transient manner, is in my oppinion to be
regreted. last month from Cadiz that he
Captain Stewart wrote me the
was then nearly ready for Sea - but I have not yet seen him - by
a paragraph in a Paper published at Algaziras I have reason to think
the Syren was in that Bay about a week ago. - I still think this
Station should not be left without one or or more Vessels of War of
the United States. The Emperours Ship was a t St Ubbes arrived in this Bay on the
12@ Jan? from thence, and continued here until1 the night of the
g t h Inst when she sailed for Larach; but the Wind shifting to the
Westward on Sunday & blowing hard on Monday, she passed this
on that forenoon & appeared to me to steer for Gibra1t)arBay, where
I conclude she now is - the other is at Larach & the third you tell me
is at Lisbon, which I have also heard from & I s Jarvis. I believe I have it from good authority that the h400rs at Lisbon
have bargained for a French Corvette is there - but as the orders
from France were to sell the Stores in Lotts & the Hull apart, lt has
been found necessary to recurr to that Government for fresh Instructions 'ere the purchase can be closed. - I enclose with this three

348

N A V A OPERATIONS FROM 1804 TO 1806

Letters were sent me for Captain Barron after he left this StaDion,
dtho' their Contents can now give you but little information. M: Stewart has returned and delivered me the articles from
Lisbon for which I thank ou - The preceeding will satisfy you
so far as I can, respecting t e Syren - assuredly she should remain
on this Station and be as frequently as possible on this Coast untill relieved by some other States Vessel of ITiar. I requested of you to give passa e to a Friend of hi: Gavinos and
mine to Gibraltar -M' Anthony A rims - Nephew of Mr.Searnishia
of Lisbon. - your silence on the subject would have most, justly
revented my allowing him to go off in the Constitution'sBoat, but hlr
fohnston assures me it has been occasioned by m oversighttrusting that is the case and that you will do rile the favour, I Lake
the liberty of sending him with M: Johnston. &Ir? Simpson desires me to make a return of regards to you, and
I beg you will be assured I am with Respect and Regards
I trouble you with a Letter for Commodore Barron.

i

%

-

INDA. Captain's LB,Vol. 1, 1805.1
To Secretary of the Navy from Master Commandant Isaac Hull,IT. S. Navy

U. STATES
BRIGArgw
Alexandc (Egypt) Febv 13 1806
SIR, I have the honor to inform you, that I have this day taken
up money of Messr! Briggs brothers to the amount of three thousand
dollars, Negociated at four shillings and ten pence the dollar, equal
to seven hundred and twenty five pounds sterli
for which sum I
have given them bills on Messr. MXenzie and%le-e
of London,
i t being for monies furnished William Eaton Esqr to defray the Mecessary expences of his expidition to grand Cairo, for which I hold his
duplicate receipts,
[NDA. M C LB,1804-5.1

To Secretary of the Navy from William Eaton, U. 8. Bavp Agent for the Barbary
Regencies

ALEXANDRIA
Febmury 13.1805
SIR, The letters which have passed between Captain Ed1 and
myself, copies of which are herewith annexed to a duplicate of that
I had the honor to address you on the 13th December, convey a
detail of our transactions since that date - The apprehensions I
then entertained of impediments on the part of the Mameluke Beys
were just - The Bashaw seperated himself from them with his
suit immediately on receiving my first letter from Cairo, and repaired
to Fiaum a neutral province; but the evening of his departure thirty
Arab chiefs were put in chains by the mameluke Osman Bey Berdici
to prevent their following him with their tribes - Of four copies
of the Vice Roy's letter of Amnesty which I dispatched by different
conveyances not one reached him - Three 3laltees in disguise of
Arabs, charged with one of them, entered the hlameluke camp; were
arrested; the packet taken from them and they sentenced to death:
They intoxicated the sentinel who was an European renegade, and
escaped to Fiaum; by whom the Bashaw obtained the first infor-

WARS W I T H BARBARY POWERS

349

mation of that act of grace; and it was not till he joined me at Demanhour that he first saw the letter - This has delayed our measures
& given us embarrassments - My three enterprizing Maltees are with
me but we have no returns from any of the other three couriers We left Demanhour last tuesday and arrived a t the English cut
between Aboukir bay and lake Mareotis the day following; where
we were arrested by a Turkish guard and forbid to enter the City. This comes from the French Consul - He had been before me in
gaining the Turkish admiral (here is but one way of access to these
people;) who, considering himself chiefly charged with the safety of
the city and harbor, & not admitting the jurisdiction of the Vice Roy
to extend be ond low water mark, absolutely refused admission into
the City to fIamet Bashaw, or permission to us to embark him a t
this place - The french Consul excuses himself for this intrigue,
as he does also for the open indignity he has offered our flag, by saying his "Zeal for the interest of the Emperor will justify his conduct,
and save him from reproach". This goes in support of an opinion
Commodore Preble had formed from his intercourse with the French
Consul of Tripoli, that "the intervention of the Emperor in our
behalf covers a design; or that his Agents on this coast have used
an unwarrantable discretion". But this impediment does not stop
our progress - The Bashaw had already determined to take the
desert of Lybia to Derne; giving for his reason, which I think a
sound one that by taking shipping and seperating himself from the
Arabs, they would loose patience if not confidence also and abandon
his cause - He has consiquently moved round the lake and will
to morrow take his station a t Arabs' town thirty miles Westward
of the old port of Alexandria; where I am to join him with a detachment from the City next Sunday and proceed with him to Bomba
at the head of five hundred men and there take post. Meantime
Captain H d repairs to the rendevous for suitable reenforcements
and supplies to secure an establishment at Derne and Bengazi Those provinces in our possession will cut off from the enemy and
turn into our own channel a source of provisions; and will open a
free intercourse with the interior of the country - I have requested
of the Commodore, for this purpose, an hundred stand of Arms with
catridges and two brass field pieces with trains and Amunition; and
also a detachment of one hundred Marines, if necessary, to load a
coup d.e main. I calculate the whole expenditure of cash in this
expedition, including expences in Egypt, will amount to Twenty thousand dollars - Further disbursements and supplies will be necessary to carry the plan into final effect. But to indemnify the United
States I have entered into a convention with Hamet Bashaw to
pledge the Tribute of Sweden, Denmark and the Batavian Republic; which convention I shall reduce to writin and forward by Captain Hull if time permit; otherwise by the ear iest occasion.
Day before yesterday an envoy arrived in a ketch from Joussuf
Bashaw of Tripoli to the Governor and Admiral of this place for the
express purpose of prevailing on them to stop Hamet Bashaw from
going out of the Countrv Intelligence of our having left Syracuse for
this place with a view of taking him away was conveyed to the enemy
by a resident a t Malta known by the sobriquet, I1 Conte Gdlini
[Gaetano Andrea Schembri]. I do not [know] his real name - The
agent made great promises, in the name of his master, to these Turkish

I

350

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1804 TO 1805

commanders. But perceiving they seemed not to have full faith in
his assurances, he resorted to the sensibility of their compassion said, ij Hamet Bashaw was permitted to return Joussuj must jly the
kingdom or loose his head. The subjects oj Tripoli were getting weary
of the war with these new Infidels; they could not learn from their movements, their intentions, and were attacked unaware: The Bashaw beleived
he could resit them upon his batteries - but ij they made a descent with
his brother, his people would all leave him.
This statement comes from the private Secretary of the Governor
who is secured in our interest, and who heard the cause of of Joussuf
Bashaw argued before the Governor and admiral I don't learn what
effect i t has taken: but if the client has not the means of touching a
more sensible nerve than a turk's pity his case is forlorn - at any
rate we are secured against his influence by the secure position we have
taken - Except therefore some unforseen accident thwart us, my
next will be dated a t Bengazi - The Arabs and Moors are universally with us; and if we had the means of subsistence, we might march
twenty or thirty thousand from the borders of Egypt, who from time
to time have taken refuge here since the usurpation of Joussollf Bashaw. - Messr@Briggs, Brothers, have furnished us with ten thousand dollars; for three thousand of which Captain Hull has drawn bills
on London the balance I have receipted and reported to the commander in cheif; who will undoubtly refund it out of the funds appropriated to this service - I have promised the Vice Roy of Egypt
the sword I saved from the arms sent out to Tunis - I had not any
other resort to satisfy his expectations and I hope the President will
approve the measures we have thus far pursued.
P. S. Feb. 15. A firman from Grand Cairo has compelled permission to Hamet Bashawto enter Alexandria and suit: [?] am not certain
prudence would sanction his availing himself of it. His prime minister
goes in the AT-gus to the Commodore [XA. Sen. 9 B-B

6, Pres. Message, Jan. 1806.1

To Secretary of the Navy fro- William Eaton, U. S. Navy Agent for the Barbary
Regencies

ALEXANDRIA,
February 13th) 1806.
We left Demanhour last Thursday and arrived at the English Cut,
between Aboukir Bay and lake Moeriotis, the day following; where
we were arrested by a Turkish Guard, and forbid to enter the City.
This comes from the French Consul. He had been before me in gaining the Turkish Admiral: (there is but one way of access to these people:) who, considering himself chiefly charged with the safety of the
city and harbor, and not admitting the jurisdiction of the Vice Roy
to extend beyond low water mark, absolutely refused admission into
the city to Hamet Bashaw, or permission to us to embark him a t this
place. The French Consul excuses himself for this intrigue, by saying
his zeal for the interest of the Emporer, will justify his conduct and
save him form reproach.
This goes in support of an opinion Commodore Preble had formed
from his intercource with the French Consul of Tripoli, that "the intervention of the Emperor in our behalf, covers a design; or that his
agents on tbis coast have used an unwarrantable discretion". But

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

351

this impediment does not stop our progress. The Bashaw had already determined to take the desert of Lybia to Derne; giving for his
reason, which I think a sound one, that by taking shipping and separating himself from the Arabs, they would lose patience if not confidence also, and abandon his cause. He has consequently moved round
the lake; and will tomorrow take his station at Arab's Tour, thirty
miles westward of the old post of Alexandria; where I am to join him
with a detachment from the city next Sunday, and proceed with him
to Bomba at the head of five hundred men, and there take post.
Mean time Capt. Hull repairs to the rendesvous for suitable reinforcements and supplies, to secure an establishment a t Derne and Bengazi.
Those provinces in our possession will cut off from the enemy and turn
into our own channel, a source of provisions; and will open a free
intercourse with the inferior of the country. I have requested of the
Commodore for this purpose, an hundred stands of arms, with cartridges, and two fieldpieces with trains and ammunition; and also a
detachment of one hundred marines, if necessary, to lead a coup de
main. I calculate the whole expenditure of cash in this expedition,
including expences of Egypt, will amount to twenty thousand dollars.
Further disbursments and supplies will be necessary to carry this plan
into final effect. But, to indemnify the United States, I have entered
into a convention with Hamet Bashaw to pledge the tribute of Sweden,
Denmark and the Batavian Republic, which convention, I shall reduce to writing, and forward by Capt. Hull if time permit; otherwise
by the earliest occasion.
[NR&L. No. 9217, Bml E 14.1
To Master Commandant Isaac Hull, U. S. Navy, Alexandria, Egypt, from John
Gordon

ROSETTA
lQt+
Feb? 1806
DEARSIR, AS the Germs [*I bring us Accounts of the departure of
the Argus being defered till the 15t?' I am happy in having now an
oppertunitp of acknowledging the receipt of your very kind letter of
the gt?-Ins; which was but this morning delivered to me. - If I
had not determined to protract my stay in Egypt from the fear of
incommoding in the Brig when there was so much reason to believe
that Mr Eaton the Bashaw and his attendants would sail in her, and
in consequence, on my arrival here of having found my friend Major
Missett, in very low spirits for want of a Companion, I think I should
now accept your obliging offer of a Passage to Syracuse, however
as it is, I have only to repeat my acknowledgements, and to wish you
a speedy and agreeable passage. I have not words to express my gratitude for the very handsome
offer you have made me to carry any part of my Baggage- I may
wish to forward to Syracuse, but as I do not accompany you myself,
and as I know nobody to whose care any thing I might wish to send
could be Entrusted in Sicily, I shall hot incommode you with any of
my Cumbersome Packages.
In the sincere hopes of having an
oppertunity of shaking hands with you before I leave the Mediteranian. JOHN
GORDON

-

[* Germe or jenn (obsolete) a small Levantine vessel with one or two masts
and lateen sails.]
[NDA. Isaac Hull LB, 1803-1306.1

352

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1804 TO 1805

To Mnater Commandant Isaac Hull,U. S. Navy, from William Eaton, U. S. navy
Agent for the Barbary Regencies

ISt+ Febv 1805

DEARSIR,The Governor has given permission that Hamet Bashaw

enter the City tomorrow morning, he will send me a f i m n to that
effect our friend Alli Aga is the Messenger of this news to you, a t his
particular desire, you will be a t no loss to understand his object, and
expectation. I have sent you ten Zequins to pass into his hands, and if not too
much trouble should be glad to consult you, together with Mr Briggs
on the expediency of the Bashaws corning in. [NDA.

Isaac Hull LB, 1803-1806.1

To Richard Farquhar, Alexandria, Egypt, from Master Commandant Isaac Hull,
U. S. Navy

SIR, I have this moment received your Note by which I find i t will
be impossible for you to join the expedition by land as I am sure M'
Eaton will never consult you about the number of Men, or Measures
he is to take, as he is the only responsible person, You will settle
matters with him and go by land, or come on board this day as best
suits you. [NDA. Isaac Hull LB, 1803-1806.1
Extract from journal of U. S. Frigate Comfiluffon.Captain John Rodgers, U. S. Navy,
commanding, Wednesday, 13 February 1806

At sunset cape Spartel bore S E B E a t X pa& 5 shortened sail
and Spoke the [space] an english brig of war At Midnight light breezes
and pleasant Weather at %past6 made sail and Stood in for Tangier Got the anchors Off the bows a t 8 tangier bore South
Distance 3 leagues at % past 8 rigged Out the flying Jibboom
At 10 sent the Jolly boat on shore at Tangier
At Meredian the boat returnd the town Of Tangeir bearing
W B S. - distance 2 miles
[USNA.]
Extract from journal of Midshipman F. Cornelius deKrafft, U..S. Navy, U. S.
Brig Scourge, Midshipman Ralph Izard, Jr., U. S. Navy, commandmg, Wednesday,
13 February 1805

Light winds & pleasant weather. At 1 came too an anchor in 7
fathoms water at Gosport abreast the Navy Yard, wind S. W sent
down T. G. yards. 2 L! Ralph Izard Jr left the brig with dispatches
for Government from the Meditterranian. - Unbent all sails. Midnight pleasant. At 4 sent the sails on shore and moorJd
Ship, ends clear & pleasant wind S. E red from shore a quantity of
paint, for painting ship. [NDGI

353

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

T o Captain Samuel Barron, U. S. Navy, from W e m Eaton, U. 8. Havy Agent for
the Barbary Regenmee

ALEXANDBIA
Feb. 14.1806
SIR, The dispatches to the Secretaq of the Navy accompan
this, which I pass open through your hands, will exhibit a view o E
measures we have pursued, since our arrival in Egypt; and of the
actual situation of affairs in regard to a co operation with Hamet
Bashaw. For minute circumstances, which may be omitted in those
communications I bet to refer you to Captain Hull and the Gentlemen
under his command, who are witnesses to eve transaction which
has taken place with us - and also to collaterz original correspondencies has taken place & which I send ybu I calculate to leave this on Sunday and in two days after proceed
on our march with Hamet Bashaw to Bomba, by the desert; where,
it is hoped, we shall meet re enforcements and supplies suf3cient to
secure positions at Derne & Bengaze. This, we are of opinion, will
require two additional small vessels and a bomb - a gun boat also
would be usefull, if the navigation at this season should not be thought
too hazardous. Two brass field pieces (four pounders) with their
trains and Amunition, and one hundred stand of arms with cartridges
will be requisite; And, to place the success of the expedition beyond the
caprice of incident, one hundred marines with bayonets should be a t
hand to lead a Coup & Main in case of necessity - By the time we
shall have arrived, a t Bomba, I shall have disbursed about ten
thousand dollars, which we have taken upon credit of Messr~Bggs,
Brothers; for four thousand of which sum Captain Hull has drawn
bills on London and Malta; the balance we have promised, shall be
sent up in one of the small vessels. Ten thousand dollars more at
least will be necessary to accomplish our views on Derne & Bengazi The Bashaw aesures me he will be able immediately to refund these
sums when established in those provinces. And to indemnify the
United States for all expences arising out of a cooperation with him, he
pledges the tribute of Denmark, Sweden and the Batavian Republic in
case of recovering his throne; which may be calculated upon as a oertain event -if measures to that effect are supported by suitable energy
and address. He engages also to release to you, without Ransom,
Captain Bainbridge his officers, and all American prisoners who may
be in captivity at Tripoli - to stipulate with the United States a
permanent Peace without tribute and on the footing of the most
favored nation - He engages that in case of future War, Captives
shall be treated as prisoners and not as slaves, and subject to reciprocal exchange - He will surrender the enemy, with his family and
chief admiral into our hands, in case he does not escape by fight to be held as hostages - and he agrees to deliver up to you, if required,
all vessels of war which may or shall have been employed against the
United States by Joussuf Bashaw In consideration of the friendly offices of his majest the I(ing of
the two Sicilies towards the squadron of the United tat?, Hamet
Bashaw invites his Majesty to renew with him their ancient friendship;
and proffers to him a peace on the same footing as that to be stipulated
in his convention with the United States - If time and cirournstances
admit we shall reduce this convention to writing and forward copies by
Captain Hull; Otherwise it will be done at Bomba, - At the m t a -

d

354

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1804 TO 1805

tion of the Bashaw and his Divan, and in conformity to the sentiments
expressed to me by the Secretarg of the Navy, I have taken on myself
the command in chief of the Bashaws army and the direction of all
operations by land, And I cannot but flatter myself that we may
realize the success of our calculations on this coalition; and that you
will have the glory of carrying the ursurper a prisoner in Your Squadron to the United States; and of releiving our fellow citizens from the
chains of slavery without the degrading conditions of a ransom Lieut OBannon and M: Peck will Accompany the expedition to
Derne by land; and I request as a particular favor that you will
consent that Mr OBamon should continue with us with his command
of marines and that you will permit Lieut' Bainbridge to join us A company of christains, principally old soldiers, recruited on the spot,
at the head of whom I have placed a French commander of light
Artilery, will proceed with us to Bomba in order to take the field
pieces we expect there
They are engaged for the expedition only;
but they will be found useful during the continuance of hostilities P. S. I have promised the Vice Roy of Egypt the sabre I sated
from the arms sent out for the Bey of Tunis - I t is in the hands of
Colonel Lear - When the Colonel shall have been made acquainted
with the necessity of this engagement I cannot doubt that he will
send it forward by the vessel which comes up with Cash - I request,
Sir, you will give your approbation and influence to this measure

-

[Mrs. James S. Banon original.]
Extract from journal of U. S. Frigate Conrlitufion, Captain John Rodgers, U. S.
Navy, commanding, Thursday, 14 February 1805

At 3 past Meredian shortend sail and came Too with the Starbd
Bower in 17 fathog Water the town of Tangier bore W B S. Europetl
pointEBXgN
At 5 weighd and made sail, at 3 past 11 calm shortend sail and
let go the Kedge anchor in 40 fathoms water
At Midnight calm and cloudy weather at 5 past 12 a light breeze
from the Southq weigh4 the Kedge and made sail Made and took
in sail as occasion Required,
At Meredian shortend sail and came Too with the starbd bower in
23 fathoms, Europea point bearing S B E. St Roque N B E algesires W B N,
Found laying here the US. brig Syren
[Gut of Gibraltar]
[USNA.]
To Secretary of the Navy from Captain John Rodgers, U. S. Navy

U. STATES
SHIPConstitution
abraltar Bay February 1iit@1805.
SIR I have the honor to make known to you that I arrived here
yesterday in five Days from Lisbon, - In my way here I call'd at
Tangier on the 13tQIns!, to learn of Mr Simpson how matters stood
in that quarter, & for your information enclose you two letters from
him. - Commodore Barron gave me orders to send the Siren aloft
in case her services were not wanting here, but you will discover by
Mr Simpsons letters, the propriety of her remaining until the motive

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

355

which produced the unusual movements of the Emperors cruizers s h d
be clearly understood by their procedings
-4ltho I crtnt conceive they will attempt to interupt our C o m e r c e
so long as they can depredate on others with so much less risque The Brig Siren is here but owing to her being in quarantine I have not
yet learnt from Cap! Stewart any thing in particular, relative to his
procedings since he has been on this station \iTiithii the last six Weeks the destruction in this Eay among the
shipping, has been incalculable; The shore is covered with Wrecks.
I have call'd here to take such articles to Syracuse as are wanting at
that place, (Spars, Canvass kc)in case of the probable emergency's of
next Summer, and shall leave this the Instant my requisition is complied with, which will I am in hopes not take longer than two Days On my passage from Lisbon, we experienced some hard weather, which
gave me an opportunity of judging of the capacity of my present crew,
& I think I can with propriteysay, that after theyhareseen two Months
more ser~ice,they will be superior to any Crew I ever commanded. As I came into this Bay yesterday thirteen Spanish Gun Boats were
partially engaged with three British Ships (two Sloops of War and
a Frigate) however the Rinds falling light, the Ships were glad to
go off &- the Spaniards had not the resolution to pursue them; for if
they had, they might have taken the Ships, as it fell a perfect calm
in one hour after: particularly as the Frigate had, it is since said, not
more than one hundred blen. I am particularly anxious to get back to Syracuse again, as when
I left there Commodore Barron was in very bad health. P. S. The Emperors Ship Marboka mentioned in h/ir Simpsons
letter, enclosed [13 February 180.51, is now a t anchor a t Algeziras.

-

-

-

[NDA.

Captain's LB, Vol. 1, 1805.1

115 February 18051
To General Bradley, from William Eaton, U. S. Navy Agent for the Barbary
Regencies

Hamet Bashaw's letter to Corn'? Barron, copy by translation herewith inclosed, was dated a t ,4rabJs Tower, near ,4lexandria, about
the 15t"eb.
last - Compared with the answer i t will shew the
expectations he had reason to form from our Commander in chief Inclosed also is a detail of Corn? Prebble's operations while on the
station of Tripoli, which will shew something of the impressions made
on the enemy by his arms and t,he apprehensions thence impressed
I ha%-emade search in the Office of the Kavy department for my
letter, to the Secretary, of June 1804 refusing to receive any compensation for my service as an agent for that department except the
successes of the enterprise in the estimation of my Country should
entitle me to it; but find it has been mislaid - The receipt of it,
in duplicate, was aclinowledged to me by 31' Gouldsborough the chief
clerk, at Hampton, about the la?of July following - Of this document I have no recollection of having kept a copy
22 FEBRUARY
1806
[H. E. Bimtington L&AG, EA280.

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1804 TO 1805

356

[15 February 18051
To Captain Samuel Barron, U. S. Navy, from Hamet Caramanli, rightful Baahaw
of Tripoli

-

Copy
Translation
HAMET
EXBASHAW
of Tripoli
to C O M S.
? ~BARRON
&c. &c.
DEAR& ESTEEMED.I have to inform your Excellency of my perfect health and to express my sincere wishes for yours. I beg you to
be assured of the hi h regard and consideration I have for your Excellency, and I hope t at by the assistance of the Divine Being I shall
shortly be a t Tripoli, my City, to drive from thence my perfidious
enemies I make known to you the arrival of Mr Wq Eaton my General of
the Army & that we have agreed upon a plan of operations, which I
have no doubt d
l lead to that success which we both desire Said Mr Eaton begged me to come to Syracuse in order to confer
with your Excellency, and to form a personal acquaintance with you.
I must inform you, my worthy & esteemed Friend, that time does
not allow me to cross the sea, and that I am too much occupied with
my camp, consisting of Infantry and cavalry, and would not leave
them for the acquisition of the world With the present I send you my Secretary of State, named Mahumed,
as my proper representative to treat in my stead whom I request you
will receive, and trust your ideas will be similar with regard to the
great object we have in view My Dear Friend - You must know that I am already on my march
with my camp, & I earnestly solicit you to send me as speedily as
possible, the following succours of which I stand greatly in need Viz. Powder - Field artilery - Muskets, money -& a few soldiers These once arrived we are agreed with hlr Eaton on the plan explained
in his letter: & further, as provisions of all kinds are very scarce in
Barbary, I beg you will send some likewise - I hope that in the
course of about Mty days we shall form a system of Co-operations
a t Mensurat - M dear Friend, consider me in all things as your
son, and that my dngdom shall be always as your own I salute you with cordial regard & remain &c.

%

{Hamet Bashaw
[H. E. Huntington L&AG, EA280.1
To Secretary of the Bavy from Captain John Rodgere, U. S. Bavy

U. STATESSHIPConstitution

Gbaltar Bay Fe by: 16 te 1806
SIR Since writing you yesterday, the Brig Siren has been admitted
to Prattique and I have consequently since seen Captain Stewart. Cap! Stewart I find has been in Cadiz making some repairs on his
Vessel whose lower Masts, in particular, required as he has informed
me, alterations & repairs owing to their being made of white pine The Siren is now ready for service and as ME Simpson appears to
think the services of one Vessel, at least, indispensibly necessary in
this quarter, she will consequently remain here until he is of opinion

357

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

that she can be better spared, without Commo: Barron should order
otherwise; a t an rate until the Summer is so far advanced as to
enable the Squa on-to act m conjunction against Tripoli, her services cannot be matenally wanted in that quarter. - I can scarcely
describe the anxiety which I feel for the aproach of Summer, as I am
satisfied that, if we do our duty, we shall reduce Tripoli in a manner,
that will be particularly advantageous, and highly honourable to
our Country. -

g,

[NDA.

Captain's LB, Vol. 1, 1805.1

Extract from log book of Master Commandant Isaac Chauncey, U. 6. Navy, commanding U. 5. S. John A d a m Saturday, 16 Februery 1805

Fresh WNW winds with a rough sea - At 1 P M in Top Gallant
Sails - At 2 P M Charles Berryman, Seaman, fell overboard Brought the ship to, lowered down a boat and used every means to
save him but in vain as he sunk before the boat could reach him At 3% P M - fill'd - bore up and spoke an American Brig from
Sf Thomas' bound to Rhode Island - At 5% P M in second reef
in the Topsails stowed the Jibb and down T G Yards - At 7 close reef'd the Topsails - From 8 P M till 12 (midnight) strong
NW & WNW winds - Handed the Mizen T. Sail
A M. At 1% up mainsail 7 At 2% a heavy squall from NW.
Kept the Ship before the IVmd - and handed the fore and main
Topsails and courses - At 2% Brought the Ship to under Storm
Mizen & Mizen Staysail - Launch'd T G Masts and rigged in the
flying Jibb Boom. At 8 AM set reef'd Fore Sail and Main Staysail At 11%Split the Main sail by the foot rope givi-m way - Unbent
it for repair All forenoon -heavy NR & miNW gales - Saw
several Water spouts By the Thermometer the Ship is still in the
Gulf Water on hand 12%Casks
Latitude by acct 36. 23N
[LC. EPP, Log of John Adam, 1804-1805.1
Extract from journal of Henekiah Loomis, Steward, U. S. Navy, in U. 6. Brig
Vixen. Xaster Commandant John Smith, U. S. Navy, commanding, Saturday,
16 February 1805

[Syracuse] Pleasant morning. At half past 10 o'clock A. M. we got
underway. Sailed around in the harbour until 2 P. M. then came to
anchor.
[L.F. Middlebrook. NDA copy.]
To Secretary of the Navy from Captain John Rodgers, U. S. N a v

U. STATESSHIPComtitution
Cibrdtar Bay li8buT l r t h 1805
SIR I have the honor of Enclosing you a Copy of the accounts
of the Disbursements of the ConstitzGtion a t Gibraltar, with m letter
of advice to Mess?@James MgKenzie & A Glennie of Lon on, on
whom I drew for the am: in favour of Mr John Gavino. - I am
this very instant getting under weigh for Syracuse -

B

[NDA. Captain's LB, Val. 1, 1805.1

358

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1804 TO 1805

Extract from journal of Hezekiah Loomis, Steward, U. 8. Navy, in U. S. Brig
Vtren, Master Commandant John Smith, U. S. Navy, commanding, Sunday,
17 February 1805

[Syracuse] This morning the wind blew very fresh and fair for
Malta. At half past 9 o'clock got underway. At 11 o'clock we
were forced to put back, the wind coming ahead and delaying, and
a heavy sea. We came to anchor at half past 12 o'clook at noon.
The [space] gave orders to have 2 of the bullocks killed, which was
done and the quarters hung up to main stay to remain through the
night.
[L. F. Middlebrook. NDA copy.]
To Secretary of the Navy from Master Commandant Thomas Robinson, Jr., U. S.
Navy

VENICEFebY lStb IS05
SIR I had the pleasure of addressing you under date of 27@ Jane
to which I must refer you for particulars respecting the U S Schooner
Enterprize, but as we proceed in her repairs and you consequently
must feel1 anxious to know our progress I feel a great pleasure in
executing that part of my duty. I have this day got her Bends on and her ceiling compleated. I was Obliged to put in a new Stem and Stern Post, in doing the
latter I have taken out the Square tuck and have also altered in a
small degree the fashion of her top sides, by not giving her so much
tumble home aloft, which will afford a better Deck and more room to
manage her Guns, but in every instance I have been particular in preserving her model below, that she ma continue to possess her good
qualities as a fast sailer and good sea oat I t astonishes me how her stern hung together, it was at &st a miserable piece of work and when we broke it down perfectly rotten. The schooner is as full as I think necessary of the best Timber I
ever saw, the Master Carpenter of the Arsenal says (and I think with
great reason) that she will be a good Vessel after this repair forty
years. Oh! how I wish I had got permission to give her a few feet more
Keel and opened her a little what a sweet Brig I would have made
her, and with no apparent exTence, but Sir it is dangerous for Officers
young in rank to take libertys. Commodore Barron gave me a letter of credit on the house of S C
Holland & CQf Trieste for the expence of repairs &c, through the
concern of Ross & C? Malta
I perceived the irregularity of this arrangement and the loss of at
least one commission to the U S (which the house in Malta must be
paid) when eventually the fund must be in London, Leghorn or Naples
and having the power to draw from here on those places direct there
is great advantages to be taken of the Exchange. I therefore immediately communicated my sentiments to Commodore Barron and have received his answer authorizing me to draw on
our Agents at Leghorn or Naples or on Glennie & MqKenzie London.
I shall take whatever advantages may offer in favour of the U, S,
as respects the Exchange on those places, and in every other instance
you may rely on my Attention to the interest and honour of my
Country. -

8

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

359

I can say but little yet what the expences of the Schooner will be,
but Timber is not high and carpenters wages is not more for the best
workmen than half a dollar per day, Others in proportion, Their best
sail duck about the same as the English, cordage reasonable, and Iron
work much more so than with us in fact it is a fine place for the convenience of repairs &c. I think it will prove by far the most reasonable
in those Seas.
I have never been more hurt in my feelings as an American than
since my arrival in the Adriatic, how egregiously sir, our Government
is imposed on b some Consuls on the Continent of Europe, there is
scarcely an ~ n ~ f s h m ahere
n that has not in possession an American
Passport, and most of them never saw America; these are Obtained
by some rascally means for the purpose of passing through that part
of Italy possess'd by the French, and a designing man might under
the character [of an American] do S n i t e injury to a Belligerent
[power] with whom we are at peace and perhaps on terms of warm
frrendship. This information is a little out of my sphere of duty but I hope you
will excuse the libert when I offer my feelings as an American. Please forward to
R. the inclosed and if you would condecend
to write her a few lines consoleing her by the prospects of our return
&c &c
(for I was only to be absent one year) you would add greatly
to the many obligations I with pleasure acknowledge. -

bre

-

[NDA. MC LB, 1804-5.1
TOGeorge Davis, U. S. Charge d'Affaires, Tunis, from Nicholas C. Nissen, Danish
Consul, Tripoli

TRIPOLIIN BARB?Feb? 18th 1806
DEARSIR, Not till the 6th inst. had I the pleasure to receive your
favor of the 6th ult. this displeases me so much more, as I have been
in the case to draw upon you several Bills of exchange payable in
Spanish Dollars, not being informed till now of your desire in that
respect. Give me however leave, Dr Sir, to observe to you, that it
will be impossible for me to draw Bills upon Tunis payable in Mahboobs at 4%, Tunis Piast:, as nobody will here give money to such an
exchange, and that when Bills are drawn payable in Tunisian Piastres;
a Spanish Dollar or Coin of the Country to the amount thereof is
valued at 4. T: Piast., which certainly is about 6. pro Cent dearer,
than their price a t Tunis notwithstanding that the price has been
extremely high. Capt. Bainbridge was in the necessity about a year
ago to draw upon you Sir, at such a price. I t appears to me likewise
that if a sum of Sp. D o l l w a s lodged with you for the Service
of the American Prisoners of war in Tripoli, it would be the most
convenient way, as any change in their price at Tunis would,
if not be indifferent a t least not occasion any loss; and at Malta the
Spanish Dollars certainly must lower in price by the same reason as
the price is increased in Tunis.
I now, however hope that Capt. Bainbridge is furnished with funds
for some time & that in the interval some change or other can take
place for the better. With respect to the Bill of exchange of Sidi
Hamida, I don't think, that there has been any real loss by the delay
of payment, because had the payment been effected in due time,
Capt. Bainbridge, would not have made use of some favourable oppor-

360

-

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 180-4 TO 1806
-

tunities to procure funds b Bills directly upon Malta, & would therefore now have been oblige to draw greater Sums upon ou; as to me,
it is indifferent whom I pay to you Sir, to Capt. Bain ridge, or the
Bashaw.
N. B. I send you a letter from Capt. Bainbridge, to the Secretary
of the NavySympathetic inkDr SIR,MT Holck, will tell some news I have wrote him in Danish.
The Bashaw is now very attentive upon your transactions with his
brother in Alexandria - a Camp is going against Derne. - The
Bashaw's Agent at Malta Gaetano Schembry, endeavours to persuade
the Bashaw, that by very hard treatment of the Captif Officers, he
might force his terms of peace; hitherto Schembry has not entirely
succeeded but he may. Give me leave to tell you that I found your
plan with the Bashaw's brother very vaste, & that you Sacrifice your
prisoner's life here in case of success -

d"

5

[NYHS. Geo. Davis LB, Vol. 1.1

[18 February 18051
To William Eaton, U. S. Navy Agent for the Barbary Regencies, from Richard
Farquhar

SIR,I callld on Abdala for the Account he will Send it to day the Quantity of Provisions in Store is viz
" Ardeb 4 5
Rice
Barley
"
16
Beans
" 12
~ G c u i t C,mtar 18
Wine 2 Hogshead
as the People know that the English Commissary served out three
Pounds of Bread for two days we canot give them less than one
Pound a day. Therefore we will require a Cantar pr day as we can
expect none a t Derna, I have Endeavoured to perswead the men to
take Eight Dollars telling them they would get Prize Money but they
will not go for less than ten Dollars Therefore all is at a Stand which
I am very Sorry for They all want a Months advance Their Officer
will be Securety for them
ALEXANDRIA^^?^^ 18,1805
[ H . E. Huntington L&AG,EA 296.1
Extract from journal of U. S. Frigate Constitufion. Captain John Rodgers, U. S. Navy,
commanding, Monday, 18 February 1806

[Gibraltar] At 2 [P. M.] Weighg and made sail At 4 Europea point
bore N W B N 3 N Distance 3 leagues. a t Sunset the Rock of
Gibralter Bore West distance 5 leagues
[USNA.]
Daniel Bedinger, Navy Agent and Superintendent of Navy Yard, Norfolk, Va.,
from Secretary of the Navy

NAVD E P ~
Febr l g t h 1806
I have this day directed you a Remittance of 1800$ for the purpose
of Paying Off the Crew of the Brig Scourge - If this sum should
not be s a c i e n t you will make a requisition for the deficiency

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

361

The Purser of the Scourge will apply to you and upon his application you will advance the money to him, to pay off the Crew The Scourge is to be dismantled previously to the Crew being paid
Off after being dismantled all the Crew excepting Ms [George A.]
Marcellin and the Boatswain and three or four Seamen who are to
remain on board until further Orders for the purpose of t a k i i care
of the Vessel, are to be paid off & discharged.
I have written to MT Maroellin to whom you will be pleased to g i ~ e
every necessary assistance to enable him to execute the instructions
given to him
[NDA. GLB,Vol. 7, 1803-1805.1

To Captain Stephen Decatur, Jr., U. S. Navy, commanding U. 8. Frigate Congrus,
from Robert Denison, Secretary to Captain Samuel Barron, U. S. Navy

LAVALLETTA
MALTA19t+FebB 11 804

SIR Commodore Barron being still too unwell or rather not being

yet sufEciently recovered to write himself has directed me to express
to you his wish that as soon as your repairs are completed, you p ~ ceed with the United States Frigate under your command to h s
place, and to request that you will take on board for the use of the
squadron some sheep, to the number of about 40 or 50, & also half a
dozen Bullocks or as many of each as you can carry on you decks
without inconvenience, The Sheep can be pastured here if not wanted
for immediate consumption, I have written to Mr Dyson to have this
supply in readiness for the moment of your departure, I feel much pleasure in stating to you that the commodores health
is visibl improving, and we have every reason to hope that a short
time w$ completely restore him, there is no news of importance in
this quarter, Lord Nelsons fleet appeared off the harbor yesterday but
did not come in, i t is said they are gone to the Westward,
[HS of Pa.]

[I9 February 18051
Extract from

letter to an ofEcer on board U. S. Brig Artus, from Midshipman
Poscd Paoli Peck, U. S. Navy, son of Colonel William Peck
8.

dated Mdta, Jdy 4.
"By the Presideni, which sails for America in a few da.ys, I embrace
the favorable opportunity of writing you a few lines. You will no
doubt be anxious and feel a little surprised at my long silence, and
will, perhaps, plwe it to neglect or want of affection; but when I
assure you I have not been in a chistian country for nearly eight
months before, you will form an opinion that will be more correspondent to the feelings of my heart. Time and duty will not permit
me to write you as lengthy as I could wish; I will, however, give you
a short account of our journey across the L y b i ~ nDesert, where we
suffered almost every thing possible, hut in the end gained a glorious
victory, and in a great measure contributed to the bringrng the
Bashaw of Tripoli to terms of peace. About the middle of November
we sailed from Malta, bound to Egypt (having on board, as passenger,
William Eaton, esq) in search of Hamet Bashaw, the rightful soverelgn of Tripoli, to endeavor to effect rt. cooperationwith hlm againat
his brother, the reigning Bashaw of Tripoli. We arrived at the port

362

NAVAL OPEEATIONS FROL%?1804 TO 1805

of Alexandria on the 24th Nov. and Mr. Eaton went to grand Cairo
in search of the ex-Bashaw, After a long series of difficulties, dangers and vexations, Mr. Eaton arrived near Alexandria with the Bashaw, and about 40 persons in his suit, about the 6th of February.
Mr. E. returned on board, and the Bashaw formed his camp 11 miles
from Alexandria, where he was occasionally reinforced by the Bedouin
or Desert Arabs. At the pressing solicitation of Mr. Eaton, and at
the request of capt. Hull, I consented to accompany the former across
the desert, with the proviso of joining the brig at Bomba. On the
19th of Feb. Mr. E. our lieutenant of marines, myself, and seven
marines, left the brig and joined the army, and the brig sailed for
Syracuse. On the 6th of March we commenced our march with about
300 well mounted Arabs, 70 christians recruited at Alexandria, and
105 camels, laden with our provisions and baggage. Our 1st day's
march was near 40 miles. On encamping, we found the well, to all
appearance, dry, and there was no water within 6 hours' march.
Here commenced the first of our sufferings-after marching near 40
miles in a burning sun, buoyed up with the idea of finding water at
the end of our march, we found on encamping, not the least sign of
water, nor was a green thing to be seen. All hands were employed
in clearing out the well, but were so thirsty and fatigued they could
hardly move. For myself, not having taken the precaution to procure a small skin of water to carry on my horse, had it not been for
a few oranges I had, I should hardly have been able to move next
morning. I laid myself down on my bed to sleep, but I could not,
being for the first time in my life almost dead with thirst. Had I
possessed thousands I would have given them for a gill of water.
About day light, a little water was found, worse, if possible than bilge
water; but to me it was more delicious than the most precious cordial
We moved on the 8th and continued our march, by irregular stages,
until the 22d, halting wherever water was to be procured, and frequently suffering very much for the want of it; our only provisions
a handful of rice and two biscuits a day, and every day perplexed and
harrassed by the Arabs for money, who finding us in their power,
endeavored to extort every thing from us. The 22d about noon, we
encamped on a spacious barren plain, where there were about 5000
Bedouin Arabs encamped, all in our interest, about 10,000 camels
and 50,000 sheep fed. Here we remained 5 days to refresh our troops.
The 27th we commenced our march with a small reinforcement, consisting of 37 Arab families, with about 150 fighting men. We might
have taken the whole of them, had we had a svfficiency of provisions,
which were now reduced to rice only.-Water was growing more and
more scarce every day, and the Arabs becoming more troublesome.
They seemed determined not to proceed to Bomba until news came
of the arrival of our vessels, never once supposing they would arrive,
but remained under an idea that we wished to get possession of some
strong hold in their country, and reduce them to christianity. They
said it was impossible for a christian and a mussulman to have the
same interest. Our provisions were drawing to an end, and our
christian soldiers on the point of mutinying. Our prospects were now
gloomy indeed, when, on the 10th of April, a t the time when we had
discovered a mutiny, a courier arrived with news of our vessels being
off Bomba. I n an instant the face of things changed from pensive
gloom to enthusiastic gladness; the soldiers who had refused to mount

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

363

guard returned to their duty. The next morning we marched on in
high spirits, being only three good days march from Bombay, although
we had only provisions for the next da . The 12th, our provisions
being expended, we killed a camel for su sistence, which lasted us the
13th. On the 16th we arrived a t Bomba, having been 3 days without
a mouthful of provision, except a little sorrel we found now and then,
and a small root we dug out of the sand. To add to our distress,
no vessel was to be seen, and no water to be found; we remained that
night without a drop. The Arabs again began to murmur. Early
on the morning of the 17th I was roused by the joyful sound of a
sail! a sail! I went out of my tent, and enjoyed the pleasing sight of
the A ~ g wcoming down the coast under full sail. All was now rejoicing, and mutual congratulation. About 8 the Argus discovered us,
and a t 10 I enjoyed the pleasure of embracing my messmates, and
sitting down to a comfortable meal, which I had not enjoyed for near
40 days. When I think on our situation in the Desert, where no
other christian ever sat his foot, and consider what thieves the Arabs
are, who would shoot a man for the buttons on his coat, and their
relqgous prejudices, which mould have been sufficient to warrant our
deaths, as christians and enemies to their religion, I frequently wonder how i t was possible for us to succeed in reaching Bomba. Certainly it was one of the most extraordinary expeditions ever sat on
foot. We were very frequently 24 hours witbout water, and once 47
hours without a drop. Our horses were sometimes three days without, and for the last 20 days had nothing to eat except what they
picked out of the sand. The country was a melancholy desert throughout, and for the space of 450 miles we saw neither house nor tree, nor
hardly any thing green, and, except in one place, not a trace of a
human being.
"To-morrow morning we sail again for Alexandria. I have but a
few minutes to spare from my duty to finish this. Suffice it to say,
that on the 27th of April, Derne, the most valuable province of the
kingdom of Tripoli was taken by the united forces of Hamet Bashaw
and Mr. Eaton, and the Argw, Nautilus, and sloop Hornet; and that
about the middle of June a peace was concluded with the reigning
Bashaw of Tripoli; and the Ex-Bashaw, with about 60 of his followers,
obliged to abandon their country, without knowing where to seek a
home or subsitence. There is not the smallest doubt but that our
getting possession of Derne was the reason of the Bashaw's co*ng
to terms. But I must hasten to conclude, as a boat is now waiting
to take the letters on shore. Our whole squadron is at Syracuse, and
will go down the Mediterranean in a short time. The President sails
for America shortly. Commodore Barron is on board her in a very
low state of health. The John Adams and three gun boats have
arrived a t Syracuse."

g

[LC. National Intelligencer, 9 Oet. 1805.1
TO Vice Admiral Vicomte Horatio nelson, R. B., Commander-in-Chief, British
Fleet, Mediterranean, from Tobias Lear, U. S. Consul General, dlgiers

MALTAFeb? 19%1805

MY LORD. I have duly received the Very polite letter which your
Lordship did me the honor of writing on the 16th Ultimo I feel extremely pleased that Mr Mountford, my private Secretary has fulfilled,

364

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1804 TO 1806

in a Satisfactory manner, my wishes in affording every accomodaand the Gentlemen whom
tion of my house at Algiers to Capt-eets
you had occasion to send there on a Mission to the Dey. - I only
request [regret] that I was so unfortunate as to be absent a t the time
of their being there, which deprived me of the Opportunity of evincing
personally the pleasure I should have taken in shewing them every
attention in my Power.
I pray your Lordship to accept my best thanks for the polite expressions contained in your letter, and to be assured that I have a proper
Sense of the manner in which you appreciate the marks of Civility
which we were so happy as to have an opportunity of expressing.
[Stephen Decatur CoL NDA photostat, Book A.]
Extract from journal of U. S. Frigate Conrtihrfion.Captain John Bodgers, U. S. Navy,
commanding, Wednesday, 20 February 1805

At 7 [A. M.] Strong breezes and Squally took 3 reefs in the top
Sail.
At 11 the gig was washed off the Quarter & was lost, At 5 past
11 Sent down top gallant yards At Meredian strong gales and cloudy
weather rigged in the Flying Jibboom
[USNA.]
To Secretary of the Navy from Purser Nathan Baker, U. S. Navy

NEW YORK2l.t Feb? 1806.
SIR I arrived here on the 14 Ins5 after a passage of Sixty two days
from Cadiz - & should have written immediately on my arrival,
had it not been for indisposition The Siren sail'd from Malta the 12t@October, to releive the Essex
on the Gibrdter Station, which Ship had proceeded up before our
arrival - Cap$ Stewart was in Cadiz Bay, or rather in a Dock
some distance above the City overhauling the Rigging & making
the Brig I suppose would be
alterations in the Ward Room &cready to go to sea about the la!Jan? On my passage home we spoke the Brig Scourge, thirty days from
Palermo, bound for Norfolk this was on the 19 Jany in Lat: 28 N.
Long: 50 W. Lieu! Yzard who commands her informed me that he
left the Frigate John Adams at Palermo, that she was to touch a t
Naples & from thence to sail for America - Commodore Preble
intends returning in her - He likewise inform'd me that Comr
Barron was sick on shore a t Malta & that the Blockade of Tripoli
was continued - When we parted with the Scourge there was a fine
breeze, & as she sails well there was reason to suppose she would arrive
a t Norfolk in 10 or 12 Days - but as no newshas reached this place
yet of her arrival - I presume she has met with bad weather & put
away for Charleston - I hope nothing worse has happened to her I shall be well enough I hope in a few days to set out for Philad*
& as it will take me a short time to arrange my Books & accounts in
a state for settlement, with your permission I will remain in Philad*
during this time - I t is not my wish to continue in the Navy longer
than till my accounts are settled - with your permission I will then
reaign.
[NDA. Misc. LB, Vol. 1, 1805.1

365

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

To Captain John Bodgers, U. 6. Navy, from Robert Deniaon, Secretary of Captain
Samuel Barron, U. S. Navy

Extract from the Commodore's Orders

LA VALLETTE21 Febuy, 1805
ROBERTDENISONSecT to the Comm'?

The President is ordered to proceed off Tripoli -to cruize betwixt
Benjazry & Gerbys & on falling in with the Constitution to place
herself under Capf Rodgers command. [LC. JRP, Letters & Orders, Book A, 1804-1805.1
To Xaster Commandant John B. Dent, U. S. IVavy, from Captain Samuel Barron,
U. 6. Navy

LA VALLETTE,
Malta, 21" Fe&y 1805
SIR The United States Schooner Nautilus under your Command
having been reported to me in readiness for Sea, you are hereby directed
to proceed forwith, with the American Brig called the CEio Gamble
Master under your Convoy, till within sight of the Taro of Messina
from thence directing your course to the Course of Tripoli where
you will endeavour to fall in with the ConsfelEadion Frigate which
ou will very probably secceed in doing betwixt Tripoli and Cape
gonn, in which direction Cap: Campbell has instructions to cruize
dureing the space of twenty days
[NBF. Dent's LB, 1803-1810.1
To Master Commandant Isaac Channcey, U. S. Navy, from Captain Edward
Preble, U. S. Navy

UNITEDSTATES
SHIPJohn Adams
At sea in Lat. 39' 13' N. Lon. 7 2 O 30'
February 22q 1805
SIR By report of the Master of the United States Ship John
Adums, under your Command there is this Day only 1079 Gallons
of Water on board; it is therefore prudent that you make the first
safe Port in the United States, The Wind a t present being directly
against your reaching the Chesapeak: the only proper ports for you
are Kew Port or New York, it is my Advice that you proceed to
the Latter, and report your situation to the Honb!" Secretary of the
Navy as soon as possible
COPY

w.

[NDA. MC LB, 1804-5.1

To William Eaton, U. S. Navy Agent for the Barbary Regencies. from John Gordon

ROSETTA
22q February 1806SIB At a late hour, on the Evening of yesterday, I received your
letter of the 20t?; in answer to which, I beg leave to assure you that
I shall be hap y to comply with the requests it contains. My
Mamlouke sad e is very much at your service; and, in consequence
of the directions I have given my servant, not only the Saddle, but
also the Bridle, & Accoutrements, will be transmitted to you, m the
same good order, & condition, in which I myself recelved them: It gives me pleasure to hear of the signal victory you have obtam'd

dP

366

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1804 TO 1805

over the French Consul, a t Alexandria, & his Party; &, as I have
no longer any hopes of our meeting, before you leave Egypt, I take
this opportunity of repeating my sincere good wishes for the success
of your Expedition. [H. E. Huntington L&-AG,EA 305.
Extract from journal of Midshipman Charles Morris, Jr., U. S. navy, on board
U. S. Frigate P r u i d d , Master Commandant George Cox, U. S. Navy, commanding,
Friday, 22 February 1805

[Syracuse Harbor] A M. 6. Weighed and sailed F i n d N. E.
Made and shortened sail as occasion required.
Noon Cape Passaro bore S. IT-.by W.
6 men unfit for duty.
Latitude Observed 36' 50' K.
[Mrs. C. E. Fox original, NDA photostat.]
Extract from journal of Kezekiah Loomis, Steward, U. S. Navy, in U. S. Brig Vixen.
Master Commandant John Smith, U. S. Eiavy, commanding, Friday, 22 February
1805

We weighed this morning at half past 6 o'clock and steered for
Malta (the Frigate President in company). Killed a bullock which
weighed 153 lbs. served the ship's company and officers. At 12
o'clock noon the wind came ahead. Head wind continued until 6
o'clock P. M. then it blew a fresh gale about 3 points free. We
outsailed the Presihnt and dropped her astern fast. Served pork
for Saturday.
[L. F. Ivfiddlebrook. NDA copy.]
To Secretary of the Navy from Josiah Fox, Naval Constructor

XAVYYARDWASHINGTON
23TdFebv 1805
SIR One of the Gun Boats building in this Yard being in a state of
forwardness to be launched in the ensuing Week, I have thought it
proper that you should be made acquainted with the circumstance,
that timely notice may be given me to launch her a t any period
after Thursday next - I t would no doubt considerably prolong her
duration, if she should be continued in her present situation untill
wanted for service - and she could be launched at 2 Days notice
when occasion might require it
I t may not be improper in me to take this Opportunity of stating,
that it is my opinion, she is competent to be sent across the Western
Ocean, and should it be deemed necessary to send her to the Mediteranean, she could be speedily equipped and rendered efficient for
such service All her Masts, Yards and Spars are ready to go on board [NDA.

Misc. LB, Vol. 1, 1805.1

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

367

[23 February 180.51
To Secretary of State from William Eaton, U. S. Navy Agent for the Barbary
Regencies

CAMPOF HAMET
BASHAW
MARABOUT,
LEFT OF ALEXANDRIA,
distance 12 miles
March 4th 1805.
SIR, I have the honor to inclose herewith a convention concluded
by me on the part of the United States, with Hamet Bashaw
We have been detained here twelve days by reason of delinquency
in our commissary Department - The camp moves tomorrow
morning for Derne [KA. SDA. CD,Tripoli,Vol. 2, June 1801-Sept. 1805.1
[Enclosure.]

Convention
between the United States of America and his Highness, Hamet,
Caramanly, Bashaw of Tripoli God is infinite
Article I. There shall be a firm and perpetual Peace and free
intercourse between the Government of the United States of America,
and his Highness Hamet Caramanly, Bashaw the legitimate sovereign
of the kingdom of Tripoli, and between the citizens of the one and the
Subjects of the other. Article 11. The Government of the United States, shall use their
utmost exertions, so far as comports with their own honor and interest,
their subsisting treaties, and the acknowledged law of Nations to reestablish the said Hamet Bashaw in the possession of his Sovereignty
of Tripoli against the pretensions of Joseph Bashaw who obtained
said Sovereignty by treason & now holds it by usurpation, and who
is engaged in actual war against the United States
Article 111. The United States shall, as circumstances may require,
in addition to the operations they are carrying on by Sea, furnish to
said Hamet Bashaw on loan, supplies of cash, ammunition and provisions, and if necessity require, deparkations of troops, also to aid
and give effect to the operations of said Hamet Bashaw by land
against the common Enemy.
Article IV. In consideration of which friendly offices once rendered
effectual, his Highness Hamet Caramanly Bashaw, engages on his
part, To release to the commander in Chief of the forces of the
United States, in the Mediteranean, without ransom, all American
prisoners, who are, or may hereafter be in the hands of the Usurper,
said Joseph Bashaw
Article V. In order to indemnify the United States against all
expence they have or shall incur, in carrying into execution their
engagements expressed in the second and third article of this convention the said Hamet Bashaw, transfers and consigns to the United
States the Tribute stipulated by the last, treaties of his Malesty the
King of Denmark, his Majesty the King of Sweden, and the Batavian
Republic, as the condition of a peace with the Regency of Tripoli
untill such time as said expence Shall be reembursed.
Article VI. I n order to carry into full effect the stipulation

-

368

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1804 TO 1805

expressed in the preceding article, said Hamet Bashaw pledges his
faith and honor faithfully to observe and ful£ill the treaties now
subsisting between the Regency of Tripoli and their Majesties the
Kings of Denmark and Sweden and with the Batavian Republic. Article VII. I n consideration of the friendly dispositions of his
Majesty the King of the two Sicilies toward the American Squadrons,
his highness Hamet Bashaw, invites his said Sicilian Majesty to renew
their ancient friendship; and proffers him a peace on the footing of
that to be definitavely concluded with the United States of America,
in the fullest extent of its privileges according to the tenor of this
convention Article VIII. The better to give effect to the operations to be
carried on by Land, in the rosecution of the plan and for the attainment of the object pointelout by this convention, William Eaton,
a citizen of the United States, now in Egypt, shall be recognized as
General, and Commander in Chief of the land forces, which are, or
may be called into service against the common Enemy. And his
said Highness Hamet Bashaw, engages that his own Subjects shaU
respect and obey him as such. Article IX. His Highness said Hamet Bashaw grants full amnesty
and perpetual oblivion towards the conduct of all such of his Subjects,
as may have been seduced by the usurper to abandon his cause and
who are disposed to return to their proper allegiance Article X. I n case of future war between the contracting parties
captives on each side, shall be treated as Prisoners of war, and not
as Slaves, and shall be entitled to reciprocal and equal exchange,
man for man, and grade for grade and in no case, shall a ransom be
demanded for prisoners of war, nor a tribute required as the condition
of peace, neither on the one part nor the other. All prisoners on both
sides shall be given up at the conclusion of Peace
Article XI. The American Consular Flag in Tripoli shall forever
be a sacred asylum to all persons who shall desire to take refuge under
i t except for the crimes of Treason and murder Article XII. In case of the faithful observance and fulfillment, on
the part of his Highness said Hamet Bashaw, of the agreements and
obligations herein stipulated - the said commander in chief of the
american forces in the Mediteranean, engages to leave said Hamet
Bashaw, in the peacable possession of the City and Regency of Tripoli
without dismantling its Batteries.
Article XIII. Any article suitable to be introduced in a definitive
treaty of Peace between the contracting parties, which may not be
comprized in this convention, shall be reciprocally on the footing of
the treaties subsisting with the most favored Nations.
Article XIV. This convention shall be submitted to the President
of the United States for his ratification in the mean Time there shall
be no suspence in its operations.
Signed by HAMET.
and witnessed by
WILLIAM
EATON
Lt. O'BANNON
Dr. FRANCESCO
MENDRICI
PASCAL
PAOLIPECK
Done at Alexandria in Egypt Peb? 23rd 1805 and signed by Hamet
Bashaw for himself and successors and by William Eaton on the part
of the United States -

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

369

Additional Article. Secret
His Highness Hamet Bashaw will use his utmost exertions to cause
to surrender to the Commander in chief of the American Forces in
the Mediteranean, the Usurper Joseph Bashaw together with his family and Chief Admiral called Mamad [Murad] Rais, alias Peter Lisle,
to be held by the Government of the United States as hostages, and
as a guarantee of the faithfull observance of the Stipulations entered
into by convention of the 23@February, 1805 with the United States,
provided they do not escape by flight A Copy, Verbatim of this Convention between the United States of
America and His Highness Hamet Caramanly Bashaw of Tripoli, in
the English, Arabic, & Italian Languages, has been Deposited in the
British Consular Office at Alexandria, in Egypt, by desire of William
Eaton Esqr Agent General for the United States of America, at the
Several Barbary Regencies - Quod Attestor
Alexandria l B t March 1805 BARTHY
Gv MUTTI,Cancellier
We Samuel Briggs British Consul in Alexandria of Egypt, & it's
Dependencies
Certify that the above mentioned M: Barthy GmMutti is Cancellier
of this Office, & that to all his Deeds, & Writings so Signed, Full faith,
& Credit is & ought to be given in Court, & without
Given under our hand, & Seal of Office at Alexandria this first day
of March 1805 SAM!BRIGGS
British Consul.
[NA. SDA. CD, Tripoli, Vol. 2, June 1801-Sept. 1805.1
TO Captain of the U. 6. Frigate at Malta from Lieutenant (List of 1800) Robert
Pettet, R. N., H. B. 116. S. Termagant

HIS MAJESTYB
SLOOPTermagant
at Sea 23@ Febwcr? 1806
SIR, I have to acquaint you that the Constitution Frigate and an
American Schooner saild from Malta esterday Afternoon, I suppose
from the Course which the Frigate teer'd that she was bound to
Cruize off Tripoli, the Schooner had a Merchant Brig under Convoy. Commodore Barron in his Frigate is still at Malta - about the 2gt@
of January I boarded two Tripolen Cruisers, four days out, and were
bound to Cruise off Ligorn, If ou have an information which you can give me for Admiral
My %rd Nelson !shall be much Oblidged to you
[LC. JRP,Vol. 1, Series Two, Feb. 1775-May 1805.1

i7

Extract from log book of Master Commandant Isaac Chauncey, U. S. Navy
commanding U. 6. S. John Admns. Saturday, 23 Februruy 1805

Light NNW winds which gradually died away till 5 P M at which
time calm - Sounded 65 fathoms - soft bottom, with green ore and
shells The Calm continued till 8%P M at which time a llght breeze

370

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1804 TO 1805

sprung up from the Southward - Set the larboard T. Gallt and Fore
T mast studding sails At 10 P M. the wind had shifted to WSW.
I n studdf sails At 12 (Midnight) brought to and sounded 44 fathoms
soft brown sand
At 5 sounded 23 fathoms - At Daylight moderate breezes
made all plain sail, and set the larboard fore T Mast and TG Studding
sails - At 7 AM saw the land bearing NW%Wnearly nine leagues Stood in for the land - At 9 AM bore up for Kew york Bent the
two bowers and unstowed the anchors At 9%Sandy hooklight-house
bore NbW in sight from deck At 11 fired a Gun and made a signal
for a Pilot Between this time and noon we made several boards to
the Southward of the Lighthouse Repeated the signal for a Pilot
at different times with four Guns Our Soundings in standing off and
on were from 8 to 6% fathoms - hard bottom - Noon fresh SbW
winds - The lighthouse NW nine miles Water on hand 1079
Gallons

-

[LC. EPP, Log of John Adarns, 1804-1805.1
Extract from journal of Heaekiah Loomis, Steward, U. S. Navy, in U. S. Brig
Vixen, Master Commandant John Smith, U. S. Navy, commanding, Saturday,
23 February 1805

This morning a t 8 o'clock we anchored in Malta. Found there the
Frigate Essex, the President not in sight. Quarantined. At 4 o'clock
P. M. arrived the Constitution from Cadiz, the Rock of Gibraltar
etc. Recruiting men. The President not arrived at sunsetting. Salt
provisions.
[L. F. Middlebrook. NDA copy.]
Extract from journal of U. S. Frigate Constitution, Captain John Bodgers, U. S. Navy,
commanding, Sunday, 24 February 1805

Standing In for the harbour of Malta At 3 [P. M.] Shortend sai
and came Too with the Starba bower in 19 Fathoms Water
At Midnight Moderate Breezes and pleasant weather At 9 arrived
the US. Frigate President. At % past 10 loosd Sails to dry
[USNA.]
Extract from log book of Master Commandant Isaac Chauncey, U. S. Navy,
commanding U. S. S. John Admns, Sunday, 24 February 1805

Fresh SbW with hazy weather - Standing off & on Sandy Hook
waiting for a Pilot P M at 1 P M single reefd the Topsails - Stood
off into ten fathom Water, and inshore into 5% fathoms Towards
evening stood out some way - Two pilots standing out from the
Light house, We immediately bore up and ran in for the directions
of the Bar W%S, & stood in within two Cables length of the North
Buoy which lies on the outer extreme of the North shoal - Our
soundings here were 4 fathoms - The Pilot Boats at this time were
nearly 1%mile inshore of us, and although we had in the course of the
afternoon repeated seven & when close in with the Buoy of the Bar
two Guns, with the signal for a pilot fl ing at the Fore, neither of these
Pilot Boats came out tu the Ship - f n standing out we passed nearly
a Cable's length to windward of the Buoy - Set the Courses - One

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

371

mile without the Buo we had ten fathoms water - Sundown strong breezes from ~ b kwith
, every appearance of a gale of wind Thelight-house at this time WXN 7 miles -Mount Pleasant WbS;@Down T G Yards At 7 PM strong breezes - close reefd the T
Sails and stowed the Jibb. Stood off to SE & SEbE - sounding
every half hour and gradually deepening our water from 15 to 18
fathoms, hard bottom - At 12 (midnight) more moderate - Wore
to the Westward AM At 1. out second reef from the Topsails, & set Jibb and
Spanker - At 2 up T G yards & set the sails At 4%tack'd the Southward - Wind WSW. At 6% tack'd to the Northwd Winds moderate
WgS At 7 saw the highland of Never-Sink, bearing by compass N.W.
5 leagues - Made all plain sail Ships company on allowance of one
Quart of water pr day - All forenoon - moderate breezes WbN
At 10%fired a n & hoisted a signal for a Pilot At noon repeated
the signal - R e Light house WKN - 4 leagues - Tack'd as
necessary to work to Windward Water on board 1024 Gallons
Water expended 50 Gallons
[LC. EPP, Log of John Adams, 1804-1805.1
Extract from journal of Midshipman Charles Morris, Jr., U. S. Navy, on board
u. 6. Frigate Pruident, Master Commandant George Cox, U. S. Navy, commanding, Sunday, 24 February 1805

9 Came to in the Harbour of Valette in 12 Fathoms Water - The
Essex Constiiutwn and Vixen in port
[Mrs. C.E. Fox original, NDA photostat.]
Extract from journal of Bexekiah Loomis, Steward, U. S. Navy, in U. S. Brig
Vixen, Master Commandant John Smith, U. S. Navy, commanding, Sunday,
24 February 1805

[Malta] The President arrived at 11 o'clock this morning and
this evening she warped up near the Essex. Served pork.
[L. F. Middlebrook. NDA copy.]
To Richard Farquhar from William Eaton, U. S. Navy Agent for the Barbary
Regencies

ALEXANDRIA
Febmry 96tQ1805
SIR,YOUwill immediately m&e out your account, supported by
proper vouchers, to cover the sum of one thousand three hundred and
sixty two dollars and twelve cents, which I have advance you for the
service of the United States, and for which I hold your receipts The statement of your account will specify the dates, weights, and
measures. The weights and measures of all articles brought forward,
will be reduced to English Standard. No articles except such as you have been prdered by me to purchace, or such as shall be received fo? the service of the United States
after examination, can be admitted m your account. The delay in your accounts have already caused a suspence in our
operations injurious to the interests of the United States The e edition will move day after tomorrow morning; after which
period, a your unclosed accounts, must be submitted to the depart-

?If

372

N A V A L OPERATIONS FROM 1804 TO 1805

ment of the treasury of the United States, to be audited, and passed,
or rejected, according to vouchers you may produce The balance of monies you have on hand, not expended for the
service of the United States, as herein directed, you will deliver over
to M' Pascal P Peck, an officer in the United States Navy; and his
receipt for the same, shall be your proper toucher - You will also
deliver over to MT Peck, all effects you may have purchaced for account of the United States, now in your possession, which he will
receive and receipt to you, after they shall have passed inspection,
agreeably to the foregoing order, and give you his receipt for the
same. P. S. A Copy of this order will be registered in the Consular Office
of his Brittanic Majesty in Alexandria.
Wq EATON.
Alexandria 25. Feb. 1805. The letter, of which the above and
foregoing is an exact copy I this day delivered, with my own hand,
to M: Richard Farquhar PASCAL
P PECK
Registered in the British Consular Office a t Alexandria this
27. Febru 1805. in Register A Folio 92 -.
Quod Attester
PLATI
AGOBTINO
Concell' ad Int
[H. E. Huntington L&AG, EA 269.1

Extract from Memorandum Book of Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Navy, U. S. S.
John Adams, 25 February 1805

Arrived a t anchor off Sandy Hook Light House.
[LC original.]
To Secretary of the Navy from Master Commandant Isaac Chauncey, U. S. Navy

U. S. SEIPJohn Adams
LAYING
AT SANDY
HOOK
25th February 1805
SIR AS Commodore Preble is this Moment leaving the Ship I have
only Time to announce to you my Arrival at this Place; but as it is
probable that the Ship will get up to Town tomorrow, I then shall
detail to you our Movements since1had the Honor of writing you last [NDA. M C LB, 1804-5.1
Extract from log book of Master Commandant Isaac Chauncey, U. S. Navy,
commanding U. S. S. John A d a , Monday, 25 February 1805

Moderate Westerly winds Employ 'd in working Ship in for Sandy
Hook Light House - bearing WgN four leagues In the course of
the Evening repeated the signal for a pilot three time - At 3% P M
shortened sail and brought to in 20 fathoms - the Light House b&ring NWgW nearly three leagues At 3%P M - A Pilot (Mr Marshall) came on board & At 4 P M we filled and made sail - light
airs from SWbW - At 8 P M nearly calm Came to with the best
Bower in 7%fathoms, hard bottom - Veered to 40 fathoms and furled
sails - the Light House bearing by compass WKS abt 5 miles
[LC. EPP, Log of John Adams, 1804-1805.1

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

373

Extract from journal of Midshipman Charles Morris, Jr., U. S. Navy, on board
U. S. Frigate Prwidcnl, Master Commandant George Cox, U. 6. Navy, commanding, Monday, 25 February 1805

P. M. 5. Warped farther up the Harbour [of Valetta] and moored
with half a Cable each way in 10 fathoms Water
[Mrs. C . E. Fox original, NDA photostat.]

Extract from journal of Herekiah Loomis, Steward, U. 6. Navy, in U. S. Brig
Viren, Master Commandant John Smith, U. S. Navy, commanding, Monday,
25 February 1805

[Malta] This day employed watering ship. Arrived the U. S.
Schooner with a Tripolitan prize. Served s. beef.
[L. F. Middlebrook. NDA copy.]
To Secretary of the Navy from Master Commandant Isaac Chauncey, U. S. Navy

U. S. SHIPJohn Adams
New York b6tQFebruuy 1805
SIR, I had the Honor of writing you from Syracuse on the 16tQ
of September last, since which time I have been immediately under
the Orders of Commodore Preble, who I presume has kept you informed of our Movements since that Period.
We left Syracuse on the gt@ of October for Malta and arrived the
Day following where we discharged the remainder of the Stores:
Ballasted the Ship and waited untill the 4t@of November for Commodore Preble, on which Day I sailed, with him, and M: Randolph
on board for Syracuse, where I arrived the next Day. - sail'd on
the Ist?' for Messina, arrived on the lgt@- sail'd the 21" for Palermo.
arrived on the 2gth- sailed for Naples the Is! of December arrived on the Gt9 in the Evening, it then blowing hard from the
Southward anchored with both Bowers in 12 Fathoms Water, and
veered 60 Fathoms on the Larboard and 30 on the Starboard and
brought up, struck lower Yards and top Gt Mast
At 10 P. M. parted the Starboard Bower, let go the Sheet Anchor,
and veered on both Cables untill the Ship's Stem was in the Breakers
and then brought u struck Top Masts, and got top Gallant Masts
on Deck - from t&s Time untill Daylight we lay with extreme
Anxiet , expecting every Moment to art and go onshore - At
6 A. M? sent a Boat on board of H. B. h?Ship Renown which lay near
us for Assistance which was handsomely granted, by sending hls own
Boat with Cables and an Anchor which they dropped three Cables
Length to Windward of us and gave the End of the Cable on board.
We also very soon got Assistance from the Naval Arsenal, which also
sent off a new 19 In. Cable, bent to a heavy Anchor which they let
go three Cables' Lengths to Windward and gave us the End of a
10 Inch Cable which was bent to the large One, the Wind moderating,
we before Night hove off into a safe Situation and moored with the
Anchors and Cables sent us. On heaving up our two Anchors that
we were riding by (the Sheet and Bower) we to our utter Astonishment found them both broke off in the Shanlr. The Anchors are
American Manufactory and the worst I ever saw; what prevented
the Ship's going on shore God only knows. We the Next Morning

374

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1804 TO 1806

fished for, and got the Starboard Bower Anchor which we parted
from the evening of the 6@.
Commodore Preble tryed every Means to purchase an Anchor for
the Ship, but could only procure one of about eighteen hundred
Weight, and was obliged to take Cable with it as they would not
part with one without taking both - the Cable is a New one of
14 Inches but not fit for us. The Commodore procured the Loan
of an Anchor from theNeapolitan Government, which is to be returned
to Messina or Palermo with those two Anchors and the one we got
at Malta we were obliged to sail with; and are aJl the Anchors that
we have got at this Time, we were obliged to take the 19 Inch Cable
from the Neapolitan Government after riding by it. We sailed from
Naples for Gibralter on the 23s Decr and arrived on the 5th of January; Watered and provisioned the Ship and sailed on the gt+ for the
United States. On the gth sent our Boat on shore a t Tangier for
M' Simpson's Dispatches and in the Evening took our Departure
from Cape Spartell. On the 13th Instant discovered that between
two and three Thousand Gallons of Water had leaked out, owing
to the Badness of the Casks. Put all Hands on a short Allowance
of Water.
On the 226 after experiencing very severe Weather and the Wind
constantly prevailing from the Westward the Ship very Crank and
short of Water, Commodore Preble gave me an Order to proceed to
the Nearest Port, and recommended this; bore up for it accordingly
and got a pilot on Board on the 24tQand arrived here last Night,
where I shall wait your Orders. shall water the Ship tomorrow and
be ready to proceed for the Eastern Branch in one Hour after I receive
your Orders to do so.
If the Ship should be fitted for Service again, she wants to be corked
throughout, outside and in, two Bower Anchors of 32 Cwt each,
three Boats a Suit of Sails Complete, two Topsail Yards, One Top Gt
Mast, a Number of Water Casks and about three Tons of Cordage
assorted, exclusive of her Stores for the Cruize
I forward you a Muster Book by which you will perceive the State
of our Crew, and the great Number of Changes that have taken
Place. The Supernumeraries were sent on Board by Order of Commodores Barron and Preble with the seven Prisoners of War.
The Men whose Time of Service has not expired would be an Acquisition to any Vessel1 fitting for Service I have been obliged to take up from Commodore Preble ten Thousand nine Hundred Dollars for the Purchase of Anchors, Cables,
advances to Officers, and other Expences for the Ship and for which
I have receipted to him for [KDA. MC LB, 1804-5.1
To Secretary of the Navy from Sailing l a s t e r Levi Bardin, U. 6. Navy

PHILADELPHIA
Feb. 26t@1805
Gun Boat. N Q8
SIR The Gun Boat is finished and I wait your orders for Shipping
Men.
I have not yet been informed w-hat Number of Officers and Men
are to compose her Crew
[NIIA. Misc. LB, '5101. 1, 1805.1

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

375

To Secretary of the Navy from Captain Thomas Tingey, 0.6. Navy

NAVYYARDWASHINGTON
Feb? 1806.
SIR If it is intended that, the new Brigs now building are to be
immediate1 rigged - and also the two Gun boats building at this
place - TVhe quantity of rigging necesssry for these purposes together with that ordered as supplies for the Squadron in the Mediterranean - and the probable wants of the John Adam - dl exceed
thirty tons - I directed Capt? Cassin to examine the Yarns on
hand by M' Chalmers - who reports that t,here is thirty tons - and
farther informed me that they are excellent in quality - With
your approbation I shall therefore order the rigging for the Brig to be
made without delay [NDA. Captain's LB, Vol. 1, 1805.1
Extract from journal of U. 6. 5. Frigate ConsUlufion, Captain John Rodgers, U. 6. Navy,
commanding, Tuesday, 26 February 1805

[Malta] At 2 [P. M.] arrived a brig, prize to The Nauiilzls
[USNA.]
To Captain Samuel Barron, U. S. Navy, Malta, from Robert Cutchens

Febmtary the 2Yth1805.
SIR,I have refrained as long as possible from making any disagreable intrusion, & should not have done it at present, had not I have received the pleasing intelligence that your health has been allmost
entirely reestablished - My expences in the ward room have
amounted to more than 50 Dollars I have not drawn a dollar since
I entered the Naqr - I hope, on these consederations, you will be
so good, as to advance me a small sum & be assured Sir, I should not
have made this application, unless I had been absolutely forced to it ROBERT
CUTCHENB.
[Jlrs. James S. Bsrron origil~al.]
To Lieutenant Natheniel Fanning, U. 8. Navy, from Secretary of the R a w

NAV.DEP.
28Q Feb: 1805

I have received your letter of the 8t4 inst
I am very much pleased that the general opinion of the Gun-boat,
is so favourable - I hope we shall not be disappointed. From
your letter and the previous communications made to me respecting
you, I feel a confidence in your judgment - and altho the change
in the plm of the armament of the Gun-boat, from two Guns one
Gun was suggested by practical Gentlemen, I have no ob].ection to
your mounting two Guns, one at each end as was orignally mtended.
After -king the experiment, you will be particular in your report
to me on the subject, and you will suggest any further improvements
that may occur to you.
I .have sent on no directions as to the plan of mounting the Guns
*g
that professional Gentlemen should exercise their judgements
on this point - by which I hope we shall be able to ascertain ulh-

376

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1804 TO 1805

mately the best plan of mounting the Guns - The plan suggested
by you appears to be a good one - and you can adopt that or any
other better plan that may occur to you.
Communicate the contents of this letter to Wm Smith senior Esquire - the Agent.
[NDA.

Off. Comg. Gunboats, 1803-1808.1

To Secretary of the Navy from Eon. Joseph Hopper Nicholson, Representative
from Maryland, U. S. Congress

WASHINGTON
Feb. 28. 1805
SIR I have been informed that the young Gentleman who was
lately engaged in a Conflict with a very near Relation of mine, a t
Syracuse, in which the latter unfortunately fell, is now confined on
ship board, a t Norfolk, and that it is contemplated to bring him to
Trial under that Article for the Government of the Navy, which
prescribes the Punishment for Murder To you I need not say that however reprehensible the Practice of
duelling may be, yet the wisest Legislators and the most able Magistrates, have for some hundred years, in vain endeavoured to check
i t - It is one of those Evils which is consequent upon Society. It
and most frequently proceeds from the noblest feeling of the Heart.
Before i t can be stopped, the State of Society itself must change,
and till then, human Laws, and human Punishments will be vain.
But if the Executive should think differently from me in this particular, permit me to ask if the first Instance of severe Punishment
should be directed to a Boy, who may have been led to the Commission
of his offence by the too prevalent Example of older, wiser and more
exalted men than himself, and who perhaps a t the Moment conceived
his own Life or that of his adversary a necessary sacrifice to his
Reputation.
I have conversed with Lieutenant Izard on the subject and from
him have learn'd that no doubt can exist as to the fairness of the
Duel. If I know the Family to which I belong, to every Member of
whom our young and amiable Relation was deservedly dear, I am
persuaded that under these circumstances Mr Dehart's [*] Pardon
would be infinitely more grateful to them than his Punishment. However sensibly we may all feel the Loss we have sustained, I trust we
could none of us suffer any Portion of Resentment to mingle itself
with our Regret.
As a member therefore of the same family, as one attached to the
deceased by the warmest Affections, I venture respectfully to ask
that Mr Dehart may be forgiven, and that hereafter he may be considered as though this unfortunate Event had never happened. In
making this request I do no more for this young Gentleman, whose
Person and connections are entirely unknown to me, than I should
have expected from his Friends, had my Relation been the survivor JOSEPH
H. NICHOLSON
P. S. As this subject is immediately connected with your Department, I have deemed it more proper to address this Letter to you
than to the President, before whom however it can be laid if you
consider it necessary -

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

377

[*Duel between Midshipmen F. Cornelius de Krafft and William R. Nicholson
18 September 1804.1
[NDA. Officers LB, 1802-1805.1
To Midshipman F. Cornelius deKrafft, U. S. Navy, U. 6. Brig S c o ~ g c ,Norfolk, Va,,
from Secretary of the Navy

NAVYD E P ~
68 FebP 1806.
Immediately upon Receipt hereof, you will repair to the City of
Washington & report yourself a t this office.
[NDA. OSW, Vol. 6, 1802-1805.1
To Captain John Bodgers, U. S. Navy, commanding U. 8. Frigate ConrffMion,
from Captain Samuel Barron, U. S. Navy

LA VALLETTE
(MALTA)
28 Febuury 1806
SIR As soon as the U States Frigate Constitution under your cornman is in readiness, you will proceed immediately to sea & act in
conformity with the enclosed instructions -

-

[Enclosure No. 1.)

Heads of Instructions to the following Vessels of the U. StatesThe Constellation, to cruize for the space of Twenty Days, betwixt
Tripoli and Cape Bonn; occasionally looking into Tunis Bay. The Vixen Brig, to proceed off Tripoli and thence to cruize (the
weather permitting) Westward betwixt the Islands & the Barbary
Coast and on falling in with C a p t ~Campbell, Cap$Smith is to place
himself under his Command - for Twenty five Days. The Nauti2us Schooner, to proceed of[f] Tunis Bay & thence to cruize
during Twenty five Days betwixt Cape Bonn & Cape Farina, occasionally looking into Tunis Bay & communicating with our Consul near
that Regency for information.
The President - To proceed off Tripoli, subject to CaptP.Ro[d]gers
orders, unless anything should occur in the course of two or three
Days to induce the Commodore to give her a diierent Destination The Essex - To Cruize from Tunis Bay in a Notherly direction
with s View to intercept the Enemy's Cruizers that have been seen
in that Vicinity with discretionary Orders to act as circumstances
may dictate. [Enclosure No. 2.1

To Captain John Bodgers, U. 6. Navy, commanding U. 6. Frigate G~wtihttion,
from Captain Samuel Barron, U. S. Navy

LA VALLETTE,
MALTA
$8 Feb? '06 [I804
SIR YOUare herby directed to proceed with the U. States Frigate
under your command, off the Harbour of Tripoli, and thence to cruize
Westward or Eastward as you may deem most advisable - you
will remain on that station for the space of twelve or fifteen days, a t
the expiration of which you will return to this Port unless in your
opinion it should be expedient to prolong the time. - I n case of
your falling in with any of the U. States Vessels cruizing in that direc-

378

NAVAL OPEBATIONS FROM 1804 TO 1806

tion, you will please communicate with the Commanders, & should
you have recieved any information with regard to the Enemys Cruizers, or should any event occur that in your judgement may rinder an
alteration in their Instructions necessary, you will adopt such amngements as are best calculated to promote the good of the service in
which we are engaged - Inclosed you will find for your Goverment
a Copy of the heads of my Orders to Cap! Campbell of the ConsteUation, Capt Barron of the fisex, Lieu$ Commt Smith of the Vixen &
Dent of the Nautilus and to the commanding Officer of the President.
The information I have rec'd of the Tripoliie Corsairs is that they
were seen off Sardinia, apparently making for the gulph of Genoa they are described as two Ship Xebeques carrying each 6 Guns &
it is supposed about 50 Men. With my sincere wishes for your safety & success I am with real
respect P. S. The foregoing Instructions you will always View as subject
to the changes that may result from the operation of circumstances
which cannot be foreseen or calculated upon, As the senior officer on
the station and having the fullest Confidence in your judgement, I
wish to give you the utmost Latitude in adopting such Dispositions
as you may deem best adapted to accomplish the important objects
confided to us - I n case of your falling in with the several Vessels
that have been ordered to Tripoli - & its vicinity, you will re-oulate
their respective terms of cruizing according to circumstances & in
such a manner that all do not return to Port at the same time, but
that a sufficient Force remain to Blockade the Harbour & to watch
the Coast - I t is my wish that you enjoin upon the different Commanders, not to expose their Vessels unnecessarily to the Enemy's
Battery's as I cannot but deem it imprudent as well as detrimental to
the service to hazard the loss of Masts Spars & g b t a moment when
neither the season nor our preparations permit us to act combinedly
& offensively against the Place, unless some adequate object should
present i t self to justify the risk - From the last advices from
Syracuse I have reason to expect the Cong~essin a few days completely
prepared for a Cruize - I n determining her destination I shall be
governed by such information as I may recieve betwixt this time &
her appearance - Should I not deem it expedient to dispatch her
on some particular service, she will be ordered to join you off Tripoli. The unfortunate Indisposition under which I have so long laboured
and from which my Recovery is slow & gradual incapacitates me
from acting personally with that energy & promptitude which are
nevertheless the favorite objects of my Wishes, I therefore leave it to
you Sir to act in the course of the cruize on whch you are destined as
well with regard to your own operations as those of the other Vessels
of the Squadron, in such a mode as will approve itself to the servlce
to our Country & to ourselves. [LC. JRP, Letters and Orders, 1804-1805.1

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

379

To Mr. Fahr, English Merchant, from Hamet Caramanli, Rightful
Bashaw of Tripoli
[Translation*]

[ALEXANDRIA
28 February 18051
To Our Friend and Son, MISTERFAHR,
English Merchant.
I inform you if God wills it, you are our friend, I swear to ou by
ou are
God if you will come to me it is no concern of anyone else.
like my son and not l i e the others, and when you come, you may do
as you desire. If you come you will be welcome, you are as one of
my sons Mhamed and Omar and Ahosen.
I have need from you of a little money, and I will give you a letter
written in my own hand; to you I owe much money, and you have
spent much on me and I have much love and friendship for you.
The camels have arrived and we wish to depart with the money in
safety. If you love me you will get along with me better and better.
Not to know a11 is to know nothing.
I salute you.
/s/ AHMED
BACIA
Caramali
Translated from Arab language into Italian by me, the Subscribed,
in good faith.
/s/ ANTONIO
FADALLA
AL SISIAMI
Interpreter of General Stwzrd
in the Mediterranean at Alexandria
in the Service of His Brdunic Majesty.

?

[* Translated by Lt. Comdr. Breed, U. S. N. R.]
[H. E. Huntington L&AG, EA 513.1

To Master Commandant John H. Dent, U. S. Navy, U. S. Schooner Nuatilw, from
Captain Samuel Barron, U. S. Navy

LA VALETTE,
MALTA,
28th Feb'ry 1806.
SIR The United States Schooner Nautilus under your command
being ready for Sea, you are hereby directed to proceed off Tunis Bay
and to cruize betwixt Cape Bonn and Cape Farina, You will occasionally look into Tunis Bay and hold Communication with our Consul Mq Davis for any information he may be able to afford you From the intelligence received of the Tripoline Corsairs having been
seen in the Vicinity of Sardinia there is every reason to suppose that
any Prizes they may take will be sent or convoyed to the Westward
of the Islands as the most likely direction to avoid our blockading
Ships - The discription I have received of the Enemies Vessels seen
in that Quarter is that they are two ship Xebeques carrying each six
Guns and it was supposed about fifty Men - The Term of your
Cruize is for twenty days from the day of your departure, at the
e iration of which you will return to t h s port unless you are sooner
re eved or that your instructions are changed by some SeniorOfficer
having authority to that effect -

P

[NHF. Dent's LB, 1803-1810.1

380

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1804 TO 1805

To Secretary of the Navy from Lieutenant James Lawrence, U. 6. Navy

NEWYOREMarch la![I8051
SIR I have the honour to inform you that I arrived in the John
Adams after an absence of upwards of three Years - as some material alterations have taken place in the family during my absence, I
shall esteeme it a particular favour if you will grant me permission to
visit my friends for a month, should the John Adams not go to Washington, - you will much oblige me by allowing the Agent at this place
or Purser to pay my account with the Enterprize, as I am much in
want of money and have none and have none due from this ship the
account is approved by Capt? Decatur [NDA. Officers LB, 1802-1805.1
To Captain Samuel Barron, U. S. Navy, from Captain John Rodgers, U. S. Navy

Constitution MALTA
March 1%1806
SIR I have the honor to make known to you that the Constitution
is provisioned & ready for sea - She waits your orders
[Mrs. James S. Barron Col.]
To Captain William Bainbridge, U. 6. Navy, from Captain John Rodgers, U. 6. Navy

U. S. SHIPConstitution

Malta March [ I ] 1805

MY DEARSIR By this Vessel which brings you some Clothin &q,
is the first opportunity I have had of dropping you a line since ?left

America, as I was but about three Weeks on this coast during the
command of the Congress; since which, and since m command of the
Constitution, I have the greater part of my time, een to the Nrestward. - I am now only thirty three days from Lisbon, from whence
I wrote Mr@
Bainbridge; having heard through Commodore Barron, a
few Days previous to my leaving Syracuse, 30th November, that ou
were well, about three Weeks prior to that date - Altho I am ast
from a quarter you might expect news from, America; I am sorry 1
cant afford you that pleasure; as the only thing new or interesting, 1s
that two Brigs have been launched and the Keels of two 74qaid since
the departure of the late Squadron. - Shaw commands one of the
Brigs. I have seen the Presidents last speech to Congress, but it contained
nothing particular or interesting. Chance has placed you in a situation which requires patience and
fortitude to withstand! fortitude I know you possess and patience you
must summons to her aid a little longer - The Officers of every
denomination in the Squadron, participate in your sufferings, every
nerve will be exerted in your behalf, and every face will beam w t h
leasure the Day that Fate shall decree you & your fellow suffers free
&en PATIENCE! Pray make m regards to Messrr Porter L
~ e n i h a w ,and be pleased to inform &r Renshaw that his friends in
PhiladQre well, as also those of Mq Gibbon in Washington & Virginia - I have sent two Trunks containing wearing apparel - One
for Doctq Ridgely & Mr Harwood & the other for Mr Gibbon, which
were sent out from Washington in the Congress - These Trunks,

g

f

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

381

when it was determined I should remain on the Gibraltar station, I
had put on board the Constellath, which after my arrival in this
quarter, I took back again, but have not had an opportunity of forwarding them sooner With sentiments of regard & hoping ere long to have the pleasure
of shaking ou by the hand, I am very respectfully
P. S. dmmodore Barron has been very Ill, but is recovering
fast. - J. R
[LC. JRP. Letters &- Orders, Book A , 1804-1805.1
To William Eaton, U. S. Navy Agent for the Barbary Regencies,from Samuel Briggs,
British Consul, Alexandria, Egypt

ALEXANDRIA
In$
Mu~ch1806
SIR On receipt of the letter you did me the honor to address me
under date of the 27 Febr? I intimated to Mr R. Farquhar, to render a
regular & just Account of the Expenditures of the Cash you advanced
him for the service of the United States. - and as he has signified
his intention of complying with that Order, & has since been wholly
engaged in making up his Accounts, I hope it will prove unnecessary
to take any compulsory measures against him - particularly as he
asserts, that on a fair statement of his Acct"t will appear that his
expenditures have exceeded his Receipts & consequently that a Balance is forthcoming to him. This will be ascertained on production
of the Acct"hich
I expect will be deliver'd in, either this Evening or
to morrow morn5
[H. E. Huntington LkAG, EA 44.1

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1804 TO 1805
[l March 18051

382

Muster Boll of men engaged for the service of the United States under William
Eaton, U. S. Navy Agent for the Barbary Regencies
Muster Roll Of Men Engaged for the Service of the United States

1 1

Y
tE'
Decemr
gg 3

ma.2

3

gazs
z

$a,

hinner
Eugine
Johana Tedesh
Romano
Deboa
hIustaf4
Tambore
Joseph

I

Rank

Abraham

Abauof
Sapin

a R'

1805
Roseta
Jan?

Johan Tudre
Dematre
Cristo
Joseph
Johan
Vaselia
Paolo
Rocco
Giorgi
Cap? Luca
Luca Valenu
Spiro
Johana
Andria
Cosma
Spiro 24
Giorgi
Michel
Giorgi Gago
Anastasi
Danul
Johana 24
Cosma 24
Frane[u]?
Giovp Milano

Cap?
Priyate
71

1)
11
11

Office
Private
officp
Prfrate

Private
Do
Do
Do
1,

Constanti Bart
Natal Marha
Spiro
Petro
Constantin
Constantin 24
Danele
Cosmo
Dimitri
Dimitri 24
Giorgi
Pietro
Giorgi
Jerasimo
Alexandria March l r t 1805 RICHQ
FARQUEAB
[H. E. Huntington L&AG, E A 297.1

383

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

Extract from journal of Burgeon Jonathan Cowdery, U. S. Navy, 1 March 1805

An American frigate appeared off the harbour. The Turks were

a l l a t their quarters, and were manning their gun boats.

The Bashaw was preparing an armament to go against some of

his refractory tribes on the borders of Egypt.
[LC. Rare Books, Americun Captives in Tripoli or Dr. Cowdery's Journal,
Boston, 1800.1
Extract from journal of Bexekiah Loomis, Steward, U. 8. Navy, in U. 6. Brig
Vixen, Bdaster Commandant John Smith, U. S. Navy, commanding, Friday,
1 March 1805

Malta. This morning pleasant. We got underway at half past
8 o'clock and steered for the west point of Malta. Fresh breeze.
On a cruise off Cape Bon Tripoli.
[L. F. Middlebrook. NDA copy.]
12 March 18051
[Note:-On the 2d March 1805, Robert Smith was appointed Attorney Geneml
and Jacob Crowninshield waa ap ointed Secretary of the Navy. Both declined
these appointments and Robert &ith was continued aa Secretary of the Navy
until the end of Thomas Jefferson's administration or until January 1809.1
To Doctor Samuel Brown, Lexington, Kentucky, from Secretary of the Navy

NAVD E P ~
2 Mar 1805
M' Brown & Mr Breckenridge of the Senate have informed me that
you manufacture Gun powder of excellent quality - & they presume that you are disposed to make a contract for supplying a quantity for public use We have our powder put up in Barrels to contain 100 lb9 each & for navy use we require %O to be cannon & $0 to be priming powder
The Barrels are made very strong & Substantial and hooped with
Copper hoops Will you be pleased to inform me on. what terms, and by what
period of time you would engage to f m s h for the use of our navy
a quantity of powder, deliverable either at this place or a t Norfolk
Virginia I will here inform you that the powder which we have generally
used in the Navy has been materially. defective m one respect that I am very desirous of removing t h s defect - and I ask your
aid to enable me to do it - The defect complained of is its imbibing
a moisture in the course of a short cruise, which destroys all its active
& efficient qualities From what cause this defect has roceeded we
are yet rncertain - A Gentleman of Very considerab e science has
stated to me on this Subject that this defect ought not to be ascribed
to the carbonic or sulphureous ingredients used in making the powder,
because the Preparation of these ingrehents 1s extremely plain $
Simple and they do not possess the power of attracting moisture from
the atmosphere in any memorable degree - The evil therefore must
be supposed to exist in the Salt petre - the component parts of
which have not been generally pure or if pure they have not been
compounded in due proportion -

P

384

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1804 TO 1806

The beds in Kentuckg from which Salt petre is taken are I am told
remarkably free from lime - and I understand that the Salt Petre
is of very superior quality - I therefore indulge the hope that you
will be able to remedy the defect which we have heretofore experienced - It is from this expectation & a desire to encourage the
domestic manufacture of the Very important article of powder that
I now address you

-

[NDA. GLB, Vol. 7, 1803-180.5.1
Extract from journal of U. S. Frigate Comfifution.Captain John Rodgers, U. S. Navy
commanding, Saturday, 2 March 1805

[Malta] At 6 [A. M.] cast of[f] the stern fasts from The shore a t 7
weigh,d and made Sail a t 8 the t o m of Malta Bore west the S E point

SMW.

Latitude Observed 3 5 O 19' N.
[USXA.]
Extract from journal of Wiiam Eaton, U.S. Navy Agent for the Barbary Regencies,
Saturday, 2 March 1806

Our provisions, which were embarked on board a Nile boat to be
transported to the Marabout were arrested in the new port of Alexandria. - The lines which defend the city were manned, and orders
'ven that no one, American Officers exceped, should depart. - The
gashaw's servants who were leal-ing town with sundry articles of
baggage, were arrested and imprisoned. - Turkish guards and
patroles advanced towards the Bashaw's camp. - He was alarmed,
and with his people, was on the point of flying to the desert. The
&rn and decided conduct of Mr OBannon prevented their movement.- We found the impediments raised to us were occasioned by
d u e n c e of t,he supervisor of the revenue, who had not yet been
bought. - The day was spent in accommodating the affair. The
influence of the British Consul prevailed; - and we obtained the
order of the Governor & Captain Bey for free passage.
[H. E. Huntington L&AG.]
Extract from journal of Midshipman Charles Morris, Jr., U. S. Navy, on board
U. S. Frigate President, Master Commandant George Cox, U. S. Navy, commanding, Saturday, 2 March 1805

1 [P. M.] Unmoored ship.
5. Weighed and sailed [from Malta)
7. the Light house bore W X K 2 leagues
8% the hght bore W N W. 33 Iegues
Lat. Observed 34" 20' N
[Mrs. C. E. Fox original, NDA photostat.]

385

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

[3 March 18051
To the President of the United States Senate from Secreterg of the Navy

THEPRESIDENT
OF THE SENATE
-

NAVY
DEP~
Decr 6, 1806.

In obedience to the resolution of Senate of this day, requiring the
S e c r e w of the Navy "to lay before the Senate, the reasons why an
additional appropriation is required for the naval service of the carrent year" I have the honor to state,
That out of the sum appropriated for the support of the Navy for
the year 1805, the sum of $312,370 has been paid for extra expences,
not contemplated in my Estimate for that year. Statement A. gives
a view of these expences.
The s u m of $287,630, has moreover been paid out of the money
appropriated for the support of the Navy for the year 1805, for expences
incurred during the year 1804, by the Squadron fitted out under the
Act entitled "An Act further to protect the Commerce and Seamen
of the United States against the Barbary Powers" - & by Commodore Preble in his preparatory arrangements for attacking Tripoli.
With respect to these Iast mentioned expences, it may be proper to
observe that there existed at the time they mere incurred an adequate
appropriation made by the Act under which they were authorized,
to pay them, if payment had been necessary during the year 1804,
but it was not necessary to pay them until the year 1805 - and as the
appropriation made by the Act above referred to was not, agreeably
to the Treasury Construction, subject to my order at the time that
payment of these expences was required, they were paid out of the
money appropriated for the support of the Navy for the ear 1805. From the preceding statements it appears that the fo owing sums
ha>ve been paid out of the money appropriated for the support of the
for the year 1805 for expences not contemplated in my Estimate
for t a t year, v i z t

ii

"1

For extra expences incurred during the year 1805 Per statement A----- 312,370
For expences incurred during the year 1804 explained above- - - - -- 287,630

- -- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -- - - ..- - - - - - - - - - -- - - -$600,000

Constituting a Total of--- - - - - which is the existing deficiency.

Estimate of the e d r a expences of the Navy Department incurred during the year 1806

For vessels & gun boats captured & put into commission in the Mediterranean bv the Commd* officer ---------------------..-..-------32,000
For building the 2 vessels of war authorized by the Act entitled "An
Act further t o protect the Commerce & Seamen of the United States
against the Barbary Powers" by which Act an adequate appropriation wm made
but which appropriation was not subject to my
order after the close of the year 1804- - - - _ - _ - - - - - - - 63,120
.-------For expenditures under the resolution of Congress of the 27 Novr 1804,
voting a Sword to Cap+ Dectatur, & 2 months' extra pay to each of
the officers of the Ketch Intrepid
for which no appropriation was
made--,--,,---,----------------------------------------2,000

-

-

386

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1804 TO 1806

For expenditures under the resolution of Congress of the 34 March
1805, voting a Medal to Comv Preble, a Sword to each of the Commissioned officers and Midshipmen who distinguished themselves
in the attacks ag* Tripoli, and f month's extra pay to each of the
petty officers, seamen & marines of Com.9 Preble's Squadron, for
which no appropriation was made- - - -- --- - - - -- - -- - ---- --------For 6 months service of the Frigate The Adams, doll^ 23,000, & 4 months'
service of the Brig Hornet $16,500, which vessels were put into cornmission for the protection of our commerce on the Coast- - - - - - - - - For 9 months service of 8 gunboats having only men enough to navigatethemaeroastheAtfsntic--------------- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - For 2 Bombsrds, purchased & fitted out by Corn- Preble and 7 month's
service -------------------------------------------- ---------For 9 months' service of 400 extra men sent out in the J. Adams, to the
Mediterranesn----------------------------------------------For BOUNTYto Seamen which we were obliged to give to induce them
to enter the service - the pay in the Merchant service being extravagantly h i g h _ - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -

20,000

39,500

35,000
47,000

63,750
10,000

$312,370

[NDA.

Cong. LB, No. 1, 1798-1811.1

[3 March 18051
To Hon. John C. Smith, Chairman of Committee of Claims, United States Congress,
from Secretary of the Navy

NAVY
DEP~
21 Deer 1806.
In answer to your letter of the lgth ins, I have the honor to inform
you.
That prior to the Burning of the Frigate Philadelphia, Silvado
Catalona [Salvadore Catalan01 was taken into the service of the Navy
in the Mediterranean, as a Pilot at thirty Dollars per month - that
as a Pilot he was ordered by Cornr?Preble to attend Cap; Decatur in
the Ketch Intrepid at the time the Philadelphia was burnt - That for
the special service of piloting the Intrepid into and out of the Harbour
of Tripoli, he was paid the sum of 100$
That under the resolution of Congress of the 27 Kov: 1804, he has
been paid the sum of - $60
And that under the resolution of the 3'a March 1805 he has been
paid the sum of $30
He arrived in this Country a short time since in the Frigate Congress
and was paid off with the rest of the Crew of that Frigate.[NDA, Cong. LB, No. 1, 1798-1811.1

To Captain James Barron, U. S. Navy, commanding U. S. S. Euu, from Captain
Samuel Barron, U. S. Navy

LA VALETTA
(MALTA)
Srg M a ~ c h1806
DEARSIR,The several vessels of the U. States Squadron under my
Command, having sailed w m p l ~ t l yfit-ted for Cruizing and being
disposed along the Barbary.Coast m such a manner as closely to blockade the Harbour of Trip011 and give us hopes so far as we are able
to judge of uncertainties of intercepting the Enemy's Corsairs which
b y e been seen a t sea, I deem it expedient to dispatch the Essex Frig-

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

387

ate in a different direction, on a particular Object, which I consider of
urgent importance to our affairs; independent of the possibillity that
some one or more of the Tripolines may have taken the rout here
contemplated: you are therefore hereby directed to proceed with all
due expedition to Venice, where your first Object will be to procure the
loan from the Goverment of that place of two Bomb Vessels, to be
employed in our opperations against Tripoli during the approaching
Summer.
From the want of Political connections between the Imperial Court
& the U. States and the pacific relations of the former with the Barbary Powers, I cannot flatter myself with much prospect of Success
in this application, but having experienced an unexpected disappointment in another Qdarter, I conceive it my bounden duty to have no
means untried for obtaining that description of Force, so essential to
ensure the prosperity of our future plans, For the same reasons stated
above, I cannot give you any precise instructions as to the mode of
application; you will therefore in this particular be regulated by your
own Judgement and the information you may collect on your arrival. - Should you find it impracticable to procure the loan of Vessels,
your next object must be to purchase for account of the U. States &
on the most moderate terms possible Mortars & Shells, in number and
dimensions, such as you may think best suited to the service for which
they are intended, taking them on board your Frigate or Chartering
a Vessel to transport them hither as circumstances may direct.
You will afford to Captain Robbinson whom it is probable you
will find at Venice whatever assistance he may stand in need of and
recommend him to accellerate as much as possible the repairs of his
Schooner, When these are compleated you will dispatch her direct to
this port, or in case you should receive any information rendering it
expedient - to give her a different destination. you are authorized
to act therein at your discretion.
As you will require funds, as well to defray the conti[n]gent expences
of your Ship, as for other arrangements, I have lodged a Credit on
account of Government with their Agents at Naples Leghorn &
London, as you will perceive by these letters addressg to them respectively, accompanying these instructions, you will consequently draw
on either of those places for the needful sums, accordingly as the Exchange or the opportunities of ne ociating Bills may be most favourable
taliing care however when you %r aw to forward the necessary Letters
of advice. - From the nature of the Service, on which you are destined, you are aware I cannot make any limitation as to time, but as
you must feel equally with myself the value of dispatch to our affairs,
you will use all the expedition which the nature of circumstances may
admit of, I n case you Succeed in obtaining Bomb Vessels, you are
directed to have them compleatly equipg and fitted for service if it
can be done with advantage at Venice and either take them under
the Protection of your own Frigate or send them under convoy of
the Enterprise to this Port. - Should the Vessels not be properly
fitted it wilI be most advisable to send them to Syracme - where
the can be put in a State of action.
$
0 P o C William Riggens the American Consul at Triest you will
apply for any information advice or assistance you may require all
which will doubtless be chearfulIy granted, Having obtaind the
object of your Mission, or if after waiting a sutficient Space of time to

388

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 180.4 TO 1805

give full effect to your application, you find them unattainable, you
will return without delay to this Island.
I have thus explained my Ideas & Intentions with regard to the
service on which you are bound; you will keep those steadily in view,
considering them however, as subject to those changes and deviations
which may result from the opperation of circumstances unforseen &
not to be calculated upon, and in anticipation of which I leave you
the utmost Latitude, to act in such instances as your own Judgment
shall point out.
[NDA.

Captain's LB, Vol. 1,1805.1

To Monsieur B. Drovetti, French Charg6 d'Affaires, from William Eaton, U. S. Navy
Agent for the Barbary Regencies

ALEXANDRIA
March 3 0 1805
SIR, Learning by your letter of yesterday that you represent the
french government here, candor obliges mt to give you notice that
my reports of transactions in this country slnce my amval m it must
go forward so arranged as to require your explanations to our respective goverments and to the world, for the open indignity you have
shown the flag of the United States in this port; for the singular and
calculated insult you have offered the American character by your
order that French subjects in this city should haw no intercourse, with
Americans and for the more extraordinary outrage towards the American nation by the insinuation you have propogated that Our flag in
Egypt has humiliated itself to the purpose of covering espionage
& fraud u on the crudelity of the ottoman Government represented
here - g u t g would compel this measure even if I had no national
feelings on the subject [H. E. Huntington L&AG, HM 3538, Vol. VII.]
Extract from journal of William Eaton, U. S. Navy Agent for the Barbary Regencies,
Sunday, 3 March 1805

Left Alexandria, and joined Hamet Bashaw at the Marabout. We
had been several days delayed by the delinquency of Richard Farquhar, to whom I had entrusted the commisary's and quarter master's
department, and to whom time to time I advanced a sum of $1350.
which he chiefly embezzled or misapplied. - I n consequence of
which I discharged him; - and was obliged to make myself the
provisions for our passage through the desert.
[H. E. Euntington L&AG.]
Extract from journal of Midshipman Charles Morris, Jr., U. S. Navy, on board
U. SIFrigate Presided, Master Commandant George Cox, U. S. Navy, commanding,
Sunday, 3 March 1805

5 [A. M.] filled away. 6 Saw the land from South to S. W. Made
sail
6%. Saw a Sail to the Southward & Westward made the Ship's
Signal which was answered by the Constellation. laying too head to
the Eastward
8%Spoke the Constellation. Capt. Cox went on board.
9. Capt Cox returned

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

389

Noon the Town of Tripoli bore S W. 3 leagues.
20 men unfit for duty.
Latitude Observed 33' 10' N.
[Mrs. C. E. Fox original, NDA photostat.]
To Secretary of the Navy from Midshipman George A. Marcellin, U. S. Navy

U.S BRIGSCOUT^^

Gosport March 4 t h 1806
SIR Permit me to acquaint you with our proceedings respecting
the Brig since the reception of your letter of the 19 th of februaq.
Unfavourable weather prevented us from dismantling her with
that expedition which might have been expected. The Spars,
Rigging, Guns &?are, however carefully deposited in the Nav -yard,
and accounts and receipts taken of them. The Boatswain a n l ~ e v e n
Men, including the Marines, I have retained agreeable to your orders;
but I must confess that I am ignorant how to act with respect to some
circumstances of which I shall take the liberty to make mention.
The Gunner and Carpenter I did not think proper to Discharge, as they
come under the Denomination of Warrant officers I will thank you
for instructions respecting them and the arrested officers, who are
very anxious to learn their fate.
I am afraid, Sir, that you will think me presumptive when I ask
your permission to proceed to Washington - As it is better than
two years since I saw my Relations I hope I shall Succeed in solliciting
your permission to pay them a short visit and if my services are not
immediately wanted I flatter myself with hopes that it will be
granted - The Boatswain is a good officer and will no doubt justify the Confidence you have been good enough to place in him [NDA. O5cers LB, 1802-1805.1
Extract from Memorandum Book of Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Navy, 4 larch
1805

Arrived at Washington and waited on the President.
[LC original.]
Extract from journal of Surgeon Jonathan Cowdery, U. S. Navy, 4 March 1805

Hassan Bey, the Bashaw's chief mameluke, was appointed to command the expedition towards Egypt, on the borders of the dominions
of Tripoli. Hassan and his officers were attended by the Bashaw and
several stand of colours to a Marabewt about three mi!es from town,
to receive absolution and assurances of victory in the intended expedition. A great part of our crew, and many Turks and Jews were
employed in packing up ammunition, &c. for the camp.
[LC. Rare Rooks, American Captives in Tripoli or Dr. Cowdery's Journal,
Boston, 1806.1
Extract from journal of William Eaton, U. S. Navy Agent for the Barbsry Begencier,
Monday, 4 March 1805

Messrs Briggs, brothers, and Doctor Mendrioi visited camp. Witnessed the convention concluded with Hamet Bashaw on the 23c
Feb. - liquidated the account of monies they had a.dvanced for the

390

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1804 TO 1806

service of the U States, and took leave. Their whole am$ of
a d v a n c e s - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - $16500.balance due them, - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 12500. -

P@by Cap. Hull---- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -

4,000

-

[H. E. Huntington LbAG.]
To Bidshipman Benjamin Turner, U. S. Navy, from Captain John Rodgers,
U. S. Navy
U. STATES
SHIPConstdution

o$ Tripoli March 5 t h 1805
SIR YOUare hereby appointed, for the present, to act as sailing
Master of this Ship - You are therefore from the present Inst to
consider yourself responsible for the duty and every thing else thereto
belonging. [LC. JRP.

Letters & Ordcrs, Book A, 1804-1805.]

To Xonsieur B. Drovetti, blexanlia, Egypt,.from Samuel Briggs, British Consul,
Alexandria
[Translation8]

ALEXANDRIA
March 5, 1805
ILLUSTRIOUS
SIR:I have the honor of answering your letter of the
8th Ventose, 13th year, not as Charge dlMaires of the United States
of America to the Commissioner appointed by the general committee
but as an ordinary private citizen to another private citizen not being
invested by the government of the United States, nor permitted by
my Government in public relations, according to our policy to have
any official dealings with the official agents of France, and it is only
because of the lack of a public American agent that I accorded the
protection of my government to individuals of that Nation which
claims such protection according to the agreement with Ottoman Porte
and tbe good understanding which exists between the government of
the United States and my own, but I have had no authority over the
public officials of that nation these latter being only accountable for
their acts to their own government.
Behiid the idea that your excellency has connived that the fugitives sought b you may have taken refuge among the service personnel of the
erican commandant. I have communicated to him
the contents of your letter, and from the well l i n o ~ nsentiments of
this same commandant, I am persuaded that a regular report directed
to him will receive all the consideration that it merits.
If the fugitives mentioned above were found under my jurisdiction
they would instantly be handed over to justice, my sentiments being
perfectly in accord with those of your excellency in general principles
as set forth in your letter.
I have the honor to salute your excellency with all distinction.
/sl SAMBRIGGS

h

[* Translated by Lt. Comdr. Edward Breed, U. S. N. R.]

[H. E. Huntington L&.4G, EA 43.1

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

391

To Secretary of the Navy from Lieutenant Nathaniel Fanning, U. S. Navy

FAIR
BANKNEAR CHARLESTON
March the 6tQ1806
SIR - I have the honor of acquainting you that at Ten o'clock
yesterday Morning was Launched at this place the Gun Boat Built
here. She is now safe on her destined Eliment. The most exalted
praise has been bestwowed upon her here by the best Judges of her description. She sets very Bouyant upon the Water and is in my opinion
suEciently large and Burthensome to bear on Board of Her, Two,
Thirty Two pounders, as well as one. The Sparing, Rigging of Her,
& Joiner work; are all in a train of progression; (and it appears to me
to be necessary that Her Officers and Men ought to be appointed or
engaged to serve on Board of Her, without delay.) however this is
only a sugestion of mine; your better Judgment on this score I
submit to; with the utmost deference and beg leave to subscribe
myself [NDA. Misc. LB, Vol. 1, 1805.1
Extract from Memorandum Book of Captain Edward Preble, U. 6. Navy, 5 March
1805

Rec orders from Boston or Portsmouth to build 2 bombs and two
gun boats.
Settled up to the 27 Feby. with the Navy Department as Comm.
and recd. 3000 dollars in a draft.
[LC original.]
Extract from journal of Surgeon Jonathan Cowdery, U. S. Navy, 5 March 1805

Two frigates and a brig, supposed to be American, appeared off the
harbour. The people of Tripoli were preparing and movlng thew
effects into the country, expecting a seige by the Americans.
[LC. Rare Books, American Captives i n Tripoli or Dr. Cowdery1s Journal,
Boston, 1806.1
Extract from journal of William Eaton, U. S. Navy Agent for the Barbary Regencies
Tuesday, 5 March 1805

Freighted a caravan of 190 camels, as I supposed for the passage,
@ 11 dollars pr head. The Chiek il Taib raised fresh demands for cash; - and seemed
determined to retard the march until his pretentions were satisfied. Pacified him with promises. [H. E. Huntington L&AG.]
To Master Commandant Isaac Chauncey, U. S. Navy, commanding U. 8. S. John
A d a . New York, N. Y., from Secretary of the Navy

NAVYD E P ~
6 March 1805. The John Adam must be completely prepared for sea with all
practicable dispatch. You will therefore without delay have all needful repaim done to the Ship and you will take all other necessary
measures to prepare her for Sea.

392

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1804 TO 1805

It is my wish to send to the Mediterranean as many Men in the
John Adums as she can conveniently carry thither. I want to send
out 500 Men, of which number at least 200 must be Able Seamen.
You will begin to recruit as soon as you conveniently can. Enter
the Men to serve 2 years (although it is probable they will not be
kept in the Mediterranean for 2 years). Allow Able Seamen $12 per
month - ordinary Seamen $8, Boys $6. Engage healthy, active
men who can fight. Allow 2 or 4 months' advance on the Customary
security. Let me know by return of Mail, or as soon as you can,
how many Men you will probably be able to engage in New York and
how many the John Adams will conveniently carry out.
I have ordered Lieu! Lee, of Boston, to report himself to you, and
to open Rendezvous at Boston to enter 100 Men, 50 of which to be
Able Seamen, the residue ordinary Seamen and Boys. He will report
to you the progress he may be making, and you will report to me
his progress and your own. When Lieut Lee shall have entered 100
Men I shall order him to repair with them to Newyork & join the
J. Adums. The Navy Agent upon whom you will make your requisitions will
render you all needful assistance.
The necessary blank Shipping Papers are enclosed.
Commodore Preble thinks that the John Adams can carry out 500
Men. [NDA. OSW, Vol 6, 1802-2805.1
-

-

To John Gavino, U. 6. Consul, Gibraltar, from Tobias Lear, U. 6. Consul General,
Algiers

MALTA,
March Bth 1806
DEARSIR, I t was not until1 the middle of January that I had the
pleasure to receive your favors of the gt@& 17th of Nov' - and since
that time we have had no known opportunity directly for Gibraltar
till the present. Most Sincerely do I lament the General Calamity which you have
experienced during the last season; and with the most unfeigned sympath do MTBLear and myself feel your particular afflictions. The
Khdvand Motherly attentions which M" Lear experienced, during her
illness in Gibraltar, from your lamented Sister, made a deep impression on her mind, and she considers her loss as that of one of her
dearest relatives.
On Subjects like these the mind must find Consolation from that divine source which never fails to give i t when we
are properly disposed to receive it from thence. Mr Mountford has informed me of the receipt of the articles which
you were so good as to send to Algiers for me, and they are noted accordingly. I have not heared from him since tbe arrival of the ship
with stores &+a t this place; but I resume all is well there, as it relates
to us; or I should have received! d ue notice of an Change
Capt-odgers
arrived here after an extraorc? inary passage of less
have been here in four; but went
than 5 days from Gibraltar. He
off Syracuse, where he was informed that the Commodore was here,
and came then to this place. When I left Algiers, I expected we should have settled our affairs
with Tripoli to have allowed me to return thither again in about 6
or 8 weeks; but the season was too far advanced to admit of any active

-

+

WARS WlTH BARBARY POWERS

393
operation before that place, after Commodore PrebIe's Attacks, unW

the ensuing Summer; and in the mean while I remain here to receive
propositions if the Bashaw shg be inclined to send any which we may
think proper to admit; before the season arrives for an attack upon
him; which with the force we now have, he will find most serious
For three months past Commodore Barron's health has been such
as not only to prevent him from taking any actual Part in our affairs
in this Sea; but to make his Iife despaired of. He came to this place
about a Month since, from Syracuse, and with the Medical aid which
he finds here, I hope be may recover but he is still very low indeed
We have r e d information that two Cruizers have got out of Tripoli,
and are in the Gulf of Genoa. Should this be true, I hope they d l
never be able to get home again, all our Vessels are now out, and so
stationed as to destroy every chance of their returning, or sending in
any prizes.
I shall probably be in this place till the month of June, and if any
dis stches for me should come to your hands before that time I
wil thank you to fom-ard them here
MI8 Lear's health is much better than it was last Y e a . She is
thankfull for your kind rememberance and begs ou to accept her best
Fyer's hmily, and
wishes for your health d happiness. - To ~ 0 %
our other acquaintances who are left in Gibraltar, we send our best
regards.

P

[Stephen Decatur Col. NDA photostat, Book A.]

To James Mackenzie 8 A. Glennie, London, England, from John Gavino, U. S.
ConsuI, Gibraltar
GIBRALTAR
6t4 March 1805

SIRS I hope we have at last found out the pretended Chaq Borney,
as on comparing his handwriting with that of a young Italian who
Come Morris had for a short time as Clerk, they answer exactly, as
does the description of the Person, he also spoke the several Languages which Borney did - Deserted Com? Morris in this Bay on the
23c Septr 1803, and had the Copying of said Cornr~Wrders,Instructions &F when gave up the Corns' to Captc Rodgers, he had been
recommended by Mess:" Degan & Purviance of Leghorn as I am told
to Capt Morris, so that I have sent said Letters &F to Mr Purviance
as Navy Agent to see & find him out that he may be secured, his
handwriting when with Morris fell by Chance in my wsy. - I t will
give me pleasure that he may be detained - and am truly
INDA. Misc. LB, Vol. 2, 1805.1

To whom not indicated from Dr. Prancisco Nendrici
ITradation*]

ALEXANDRIA
6 March 1805
RESPECTABLE
FRIEND:
Reawning with the Messrs. Briggs Brothers
we have considered that a ship will be of great use to yo? in Bomba,
with such food stuffs as you might need in case the Brlg should be
late in coming. If you think our supposition log~calyou may commission the three good friends, the Messrs. Briggs-Brothers,and they
will see to chartering the ship and indicate some signal of r e c o ~ t l o n

394

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1804 TO 1805

for the Captain in some other Bay or Port before arriving in Bomba,
it being probable that they will not furnish pilotage; according to the
information that I have had from the British consul in Ragusa.
I have received the powder and render you infinite thanks, I beg
you to compliment on my part of Bascia and renew my farewell to
the most brave Captain OIBenan, remember me to Calvalier Filippo
and all your suite individual particular.
Believe me always your best friend.
Is/ D. F. MENDRICE
P. S. Through persons in your suite, the Signor Drovetti, has
obtained full information of your force, and I believe has sent a
courier to inform Bascia. I hope all this chicanery and intrigue will
not serve to torment him after the happy issue of your expedition.
Good bye again Dear Friend, and a good voyage.
"Ca Ira" (French for "all will go well").
[*Translated by Lt. Comdr. Edward Breed, U. S. N. R.]
[H. E. Huntington L&AG,EA 365.1
Extract from journal of William Eaton, U.S. Navy Agent for the Barbary Begencies,
6 March 1805

Broke up camp & marched to Arab's tower, forty miles from
Alexandria, - leaving part of our baggage behind. [H. E. Huntington L&AG.]
Extract from journal of Hezekiah Loomis, Steward. U. 6. Navy, in 0.S. Brig
Viren, Master Commandant John Smith, U. S. Navy, commanding, Wednesday,
6 March 1805

This day at 9 o'clock saw the land and found ourselves to the
westward of old Tripoli. We wore and stood for New Tripoli which
we made a t 1 o'clock P. M. Saw 2 sails to the eastward, a t 8
o'clock spoke one which we found to be the Frigate Constellation
and the other we were informed was the Constitution.
[L. F. Middlebrook. NDA copy.]
To oeorge Harrison, Navy Agent and Superintendent of Navy Yard, Philadelphia,
Pa., from Secretary of the Navy

NAV.DEP.
7 March 1806
The Gun-boat a t Philadelphia which we will call NQ.5 [*I must be
prepared to sail for the Mediterranean with all practicable dispatch I have this day written to Lieu!. Barden, and given him instructions
on this subject. He will make his requisitions on you for every
thing necessary to the equipment & preparations of the boat - pray
let there be no delay, but further this business by every expedient
in your power - and keep me informed of the progress that may be
making
I have given similar orders for all the other Gun-boats in the
Country $be prepared for the Mediterranean
-

-

[*Letter to Levi Bardin, 15 December 1804, refers to this gunboat as No. 3.1
[NDA. Off. Comg. Gunboats, 1803-1808.1

395

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS
To Captain Samuel Barron, U. 6. Navy, from Secretary of the Navy

NAVYD E P ~ .
7 March 1806.
Commodore Preble having suggegbed to me the improbability of
your p r o m a sficient number of Gun Boats to ensure success
to your operations against Tripoli, I have ordered 10 Gun Boats to
be prepared with all racticable dispatch to join you. I shall send
them off as fast as t ey shall be prepared, and you may calculate
that the whole Fleet will join you in all the month of June next.
From the tempestuous weather which generally prevails in the Mediterranean in the earlier months of the year, we presume that you
will not make any very serious attack on Tripoli till about the h t
of July. I hope therefore that these Gun Boats may join you in good
season.
Presuming that the Squadron is in want of Men I shall send you
in the J. Adams a, Reinforcement of 500, if we can possibly rocure
that number in season. I shall also send you a supply of owder
and Shot. You may expect a supply of Provisions early in May next. The John Adams will probably join you in the month of May
next. (Original to Phil*. Dupli: Balt?. Trip1 - Boston. Quadr - N
York. Cinque pr. provision vessel Ceres, Cap!. E. D. Brown, from
BaltQ.)
[NDA. LB, 1799-1807.1

F

To William Eaton, U. S. Navy Agent for the Barbary Regencies, from Briggs
Brothers

ALEX*March 7 1806.
DEARSIR We understand you commenced your march yesterday & our best mshes accompany you - but to provide against all contingencies, our mutual friend Dr Mendrice has suggested the plan of
hiring a small vessel to be sent round to Bomba with such provisions
as can be collected, & for the purpose of procuring intelligence of the
designs or approach of your Enemy - & in the worst hypothesis,
to afford a shelter in case of a reverse. - As the plan to us appears
a very prudential one, we give it our support - tho it is very doubtful
what quantity of Provisions could be amassed with present scarcity.
Rice might perhaps be procured from Rosetta, & for the other species
we would do as much as circumstances would allow. M' Farquhar has hired a Greek Boat for 6 Mon%t 770 Turk?' Pias"
P'Monh to go to any port in the Mediterranean, & he means to sail
for Syracuse within 5 days.
[H. E. Huntington M A G , EA 42.1
TO Briggs Brothers, Alexandria, Egypt, from William Eaton, U. 6. Navy b e n t
for the Barbary Regencies

CAMPARAB'STOWR
March 7 t@ 1806
GENTLEMENThe packet herewith enclosed I wrote this mornipg;
it exactly fits circumstances - Yours by express came t h s evemg.
The plan you suggest of sending a small vessel to Bomba with pro-

396

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1804 TO 1805

vissions, is a good one, and can be done on safe grounds,whatever
may be the issue of this expedition; as the articles suitable to be sent
forward, may serve our Sq[u]adron, and may be purchased a t a better
rate in your markets than any other in the Mediterranean - or than
they can be brought from America It would be very apt to open an intercourse between the Sqadron
and our house mutually advantageous - I annex a list of necessary
artic es; which may go consigned to me a t Bomba or Derne, or, in
case of a reverse in my expedition before arrival thither, to the Commander in Chief of the United States forces in the Mediterranean a t
Syracuse - The articles may be augmented or diminished in quantity
as suits your convenience - Payments will be made by remittances
to ou in cash, or by Drafts on London, as most agreeable goctor Mendrici states that the French Sow Commiasa;~e has
obtained exact information of our force and dispatched advice to
Joseph Bashaw. That zealous Agent must penetrate Tripoli to learn
Hamet Bashaw's force, and traverse the desert to be informed exactly
of that which will enter Derne - I shall leave this with about Three
hundred men, - The information he sends forward of our movements,
will be essentially serviceable to us; as it goes from a quarter which
will attach full credit, and of course leave no doubt with the enemy
of a coalition which he most dreads, and which he has used all possible
means to counteract: it will through his Capital into convulsions We shall leave this tomorrow morning List of articles of provissions to be sent forward agreeably to the
foregoing letter.
300 Ardeps [ardebs] rice
200
d
Barley
200 Quintals bread
10
D? Coffee
4
D? Sugar
2 Casks Table wine. 32 Gallf each 4 DQ
brandy - And some small supplies for a Camp
Table W EATON
NB - The Bashaw requests you will have the goodness to cause
a sabre, carried away by a mamaluke Deserter who is with the Gov?
of Alexandria, to be put on board the vessel, to his address -- He
begs that you will accept the assureance of his high Consideration, I have just found the key to Fauquhar's project of Chartering a
Craft for any port in the Mediterranean - He has proposed to the
Bashaw to take his Alexandria wife, child, and black slave to Derne a speculation -

i

[H. E. Huntington L&AG, E A 270.1

Extract from journal of William Eaton, U.6. Navy Agent for the Barbary Begencier,
7 March 1805

The rear of our baggage came up. [H. E. Huntington LkAG.1

WARS WITH BARBARY POU7E.S

397

Extract from journal of Henekiah Loomis, Steward, U. S. Navy, in U. S. Brig
V~XCR,
&faster Commandant John smith, V. 8. Navy, commanding, Thurday,
7 March 1806

[Tripoli] This da pleasant. We made all sail and stood for the
the land. Saw 2 sa' to the E. and W. Stood for the one to the E.
and came up to her at 2 o'clock P. M, found her to be the U. S.
Constitution. This day John Gerard, John Monson, Robt. Robineon
and Timothy Hurley were taken out of irons and Gerard was flogged,
the other three forgive^. They all had their grog stopped. Captain
Smith went on board the Frigate. We stood off shore this night.
John Gerard and Alex Jacks grog stopped.
[L.F. Middlebrook. NDA copy.]

S

To Secretary of the Navy from George Dyson, U. S. Navy Agent, Syraonse

SYRACUSE
8*@March 1806
H o ~ ~ 4 - 1 ~I t is with much concern that I am compd'd by duty

as well as iutrest to intrude a moment on your Valuable time in relating
a circumstance thtlt cannot be interesting to you, but I will be short
as possible
When Commodore Preble did me the honor of recommending me
to your notice by which I was appointed naval Agent to the United
States Squadron at Syracuse, I was by Him allow'd the usual Commission of five pr Cent to provide fresh provisions and other articlee
which the ships of the Squadron when in this Port stand in Need
of this is proportionably less than two p' Cent in a Commercial Po*,
as here an Agent must abandon every other Idea of Business to the
service of the squadron this has been & must be the case if any degree
of Justice is to be expected from Him; in order to explain this it is
necessary to have a Knowledge of the Country which is peopled with
Sicilian Nobility, Imposters, Beggars, & Theives, Consequently
every transaction must be very minutely exarnin'd & Body & mind
Kept on the Constant rack to avoid Impositions in every form. permit me Honbi"ir to remark that I have on e-rery ocoation cheerfully attended the duties of the squadron, I have never witnessd
the displeasure of any officer till a short time back, then, one whom I
thought & esteem'd a Friend, (for reasons only &own to himself)
is become my formidable Enemy - He this Day refuses to accept
my account for supplies purchased & sent on board His ship a t the
usual Commission of five per Cent & insists on my reducing it to two,
this I have declined and for ever must, as 2 pr Cent for my laboq &
trouble in procuring all articles that ships of war want in a place hke
this would leave me a Considerable Sufferer, & L am convinced it is
not the wish or intent of the United States Navy department to accept
of the whole of my time & exertions devoted to their service without
a Just & reasonable recompence being made - this I mention'd to
Commodore Preble on the arrival of rn appointment and He had the
goodness to promise me He wou'd exp ain the business to the Sec? of
the Navy department on his arrival in America, mean time to continue my usual commission this prevented me troubhg you at that
time and as it may have escaped the Commodores memory, (having
thmgs of greater importance to attend, 1 now beg permission @ refer
you Him for a more particular account of my sittuation w$ch He
can give in few words, more than I should be able to ex~lalnm a
whole Vollume -

I

398

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1804 TO 1805

if on the whole i t should appear that my claim of five p' Cent is
Just & reasonable. I shall then be happy to Continue my exertions
with unabated attention, & if on the Contrary it should be determined
that a less Commission is sufficient for my services, I must then
reluctantly resign an Employ that I accepted with so much pleasure
& have hitherto fill'd with so much Sattisfaction to myself & and the
Squadron
[NDA. Misc. LB, Vol. 1, 1805.1
To Captain Samuel Barron, U.S. Navy, from George Davis, U. S. Charge d'dffaires,
Tunis

TUNISMarch gtQ 1806.
N? 6. (Duplicate)
DEARSIR, Your favour of the 28tQof Januarg, did not reach me
untill the 3P Inst. - the letter addressed to His Excellency the Bey,

was delivered to his Minister on the 4t@without any observations
being made, relative to its contents; I am directed to appear a t the
Palace to morrow - Your answer is such as was expected; and Your
well founded objections anticipated and stated to the Bey. - Your
'~
respecting the detention of
remarks relative to His E x c ~menace,
Tunisien prizes, shall be fully entered into, on another occasion; I
have only to observe that the granting of blank passports, as safe
conducts for their prizes, would be attended with evils, infinitely
greater than those we now labour under. Two Tripolitan Corsairs are out; a Xebec of S
i
x Guns, (off the Isle
of Elba) and a Ketch of eight; the Xebec, has made four prizes,
(Neutrals laden'd with grain) two Imperials, which have arrived a t
Bengaza - one Ragusean arrived on some other part of the Coast;
and an Imperial, which anchored in this Bay a few days since, having
on board a Rais & fifteen Tripolitans - they immediately embarked
on board the Tripolitan Corsair, which has been so long detained at
Tunis - they are fitting her out with all possible expedition, but
cannot sail untill the arrival of the Imperial seamen detained on board
the Xebec - if You could dispatch immediately a Vessel for this
place, it is probable her destination would be changed - an express
has this moment arrived from Susa, informing me of the arrival of
the Tripolitan Xebec at that port - this letter will be sent you by
an express from Messina: neither of the Tripolitan Corsairs can sail
under fourteen days.
I sincerely rejoice a t the recovering of your health, and wait with
much anxiet the pleasure of seeing you a t Tunis. - I have the
honor to enc ose you letters for Govt, Col? Lear, & one for yourself
from Capt. Bainbridge.

9

[Mrs. James S. Barron Col. NDA photostat.]
Extract from journal of W i a m Eaton, U. S.Navy Agent for the Barbary Regencies,
8 March 1805

Arranged our caravan and organized our force; - which now consisted of nine americans, including LieuWBannon and M' Peck, a
noncommissioned officerand six private marines; a cpmpany of twenty
five cannoniers, commanded by Selim Comb, & Leutq Connant and
Roco; and a company of thirty eight Greeks comman.ded by Cap:
Luco Ulovix and Lieu1 Constantine. - The Bashaw's suit consisted

4

22'

2 4"

23O

25"

27"

2 6"

28 "

30"

29'

R O U T E O F WILLIAM EATON'S A R M Y
F R O M ALEXANDRRA T O DEENA
8 MARCH T O 25 APRIL, 1 8 0 5
HORNET

ARGUS
2 5 N O V E M B E R 1804-

2 4 APRIL

euae

30 MARCH

SCALE

22O

23'

OF

-

EL 'ARAB

2 APRIL

MILES
24 "

25"

2 6"

27"

28"

30'

29'

i
-~

*

WARS WITA BARBARY POWERS

399

of about ninety men, including those who came from Fiaume and those
who joined him since his arrival a t Alexandria. - These, together
with a party of Arab cavalry under the orders of the Chieks 2 taib
and hlahomet, and including the footmen and camel drivers, made
our whole number about four hundred. Our caravan consisted of one
hundred and seven camels and a few asses. Marched at 11 a. m. fifteen miles. - Camped on an elevated bluff
upon the sea board. - Good water near the shore. [H. E. Huntington L&AG.]
Extract from journal of Heaekiah Loomis, Steward, U. 6. Navy, in U. 6. Brig
Vixen, Master Commandant John Smith, U. S. Navy, commanding, Friday,
8 March 1806

OffTripoli. This day commences with fresh ga.les. At

9 o'clock

A. M. saw a sail to the windward. We made sail and gave chase.
We soon found her to be the U. S. Frigate Constellation. We spoke
her a t half past 3 o'clock P. M. and stood in shore. The Prigate
hauled close upon the wind. We kept away and stood within gun
shot of their infernal forts, but we had such press of sail and went
so fast through the water that they thought i t useless to give up a
shot. At sun set we were standing ofF shore with reefed topsairs.
[L. F. Middlebrook. NDA copy.]
To General Mason, from Captain Alexander Murray, U. S. Navy

PHI*iWarch 9 tP 1805
D': SIR After closing m last respects I am compelled to draw your
attention to a disagreeab e subject but I count upon the goodness
of your heart to listen with a patient attention to observations arrising from the enclosed copy of a Letter just recQfrom my old antagonist
Eaton & if proper beg as a favor that you will lay it a t some leisure
moment before M' Madison & the other Gentlemen of the Administration conscious of the unmerited system to destroy my reputation
in the view [?I of my Country, if I have been the guilty wretch that
he threatens to proclaim me, why have I not been called to account?
If this Letter is intended to awe me into a temper to mediate with
Government in his behalf, he is mistaken, I am not of a temper to
be intimidated by his threats & defy his utmost rancor, 'tho I confess
I feel a remorse a t being handed down to posterity (however infamous
the Author) whose motives will be unknown to the World, as this
Man is now in the service of Government The Sec? of the Navy well knows that I never had any instructions
from him but in a subordinate stile to authorize this wanton abuse of
my conduct while in the Mediterranean Seas, can an UfGcers merits
be estimated in a proper scale who never had it in his power to act
with energy? hard indeed is my fate never to have beenentrusted witha
Command and to bear all the malovelence of party rage in vain
have I urged for an explanation on this head; have I not cause to
conjecture that this Man bath been the cause of t,he many mortifications, I have experienced, & by his ingenuity prejudiced the Government against me? but we shall see the effects of imploying him again
after what has pasd I well know that he has actled ungenerously by
me in prejudicing many of the Officers ready to beleive his foul insinu-

9

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1804 TO 1806

400

ations & willing to put me out of the way with the same facility that
~MorP.iswas, which woud no doubt be a gratifying object with him &

the most virtuous of Administrations may be deceived by malevolent
Men - this Letter is not only levelled at me but at the few friends
who have patronized me & am bold to say that I am not unworthy
of such Patronage
It now rest with the Administration to say whether I have merited
this treatment & to be handed down to Posterity by the venemous
Pen of this Miscreant, not but that I am capable of shielding myself
from all personal attacks but where an Officer is unworthyly traduced
in the line of his duty Government ought to defend him in his reputation; you may remember the original cause of this persecution,
which was owing to my discharging bis Ship from Got-ernment serrice, which Cap$ Rarron ought to have done before my arrival, but
Eaton was his friend I can send the whole detail of this business if
necessary so anxious am I to support a fair & Honorable Kame & if
I do not ask too much of you & theres no impropriety in it I coud wish
at least to start fair with our now Sec? of the Navy on this subject as
well as others that no undue prejudices may arrise, but I presume he
will revert to the correspondence of all the Officers to, & from, to
investigate the merits & sen-ices of each such Letters being filed in the
Office I hare just red a Letter from Dan! Murray dated Malta 23'd Octr
who tells me Eaton is begining to shew his Cloven foot & is in Coventry
but must know more of this a t Washugton - Adieu -A. M.

-

IKDA.

.4. hlurray's LR, 1799-1SO5.l

To Master Commandant Isaac Chauncey, U. S. Navy, commanding U. 6. S, John
Admnr, New York, N. Y., from Secretary of the Navy

NAVYD E P ~
9 March 1805. You ha-re been a long time in constant senrice and if Indulgences
are allowed to Officers I know of no Officer who can more rightfully
claim indulgence than yourself. I shall not therefore order you into
service a t present unless it should be your wish to return to the Mediterranean. Presuming that you wish a short respite, I shall order
Cap: Shaw to the Command of the John Adams. But I wish you to
continue in the Command, and I ask your best exertions to prepare
her for Sea. b superintending her repairs and recruiting men for her
until you sha 1 be relieved by Cap$Shaw which you will probably be
some short time before the Ship shall sail. Capt Shaw ~ h isonow in
Baltimore, has been ordered to open rendezvous at that place to enter
50 able Seamen. As soon as he shall have procured them he will
repair to Kew York by water.

9

[NDA. OSW, Vol. 6, 1802-1805.1
-

--

-

To Captain Thomas Tingey, U. S. Navy, from Secretary of the Navy

NAVYD E P ~
8 March 1805.
You will ship to New York directed to John Beekman Esq: Na
Agent at that place, 130 Barrels of Beef, and 42,000 l" of ~ r e a y
These Articles are intended for the John Adams now fitting for sea a t

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

401

New York. M' Beekman will pay the freight agreeably to Bill of
Lading which you will transmit to him. You will procure a Vessel or Vessels to transport to the Mediterranean, all the Articles mentioned in my letter to you of 16 January
last & in addition to those articles we must also send from this place
400 or 500 Barrels of Beef, and considerable quantities of 32Q & 24lP
& 18lP round Cannon Ball - and grape shot, and I have ordered
Doctor Bullus to prepare 2 chests of Medicine which are also to be
sent from this place to the Mediterranean. Charter the Vessel or
Vessels to go first to Gibraltar - thence if required by the Consul
there, to Malta or Syracuse. [NDA.

OSW, Vol. 6, 1802-1805.1

To Riddle and Bird, Navy Agents, Newcastle, Del., from Secretary of the Navy

NAVDEP
March 9 th 1805
I have Understood that a Gentleman of the name of Dupong
[Dupont] who resides in or near Wilmington, manufactures powder of
ve Superior quality %ill you be pleased to make enquiry and let me know whether you
can procure from him 300 barrels of good cannon powder & thirty
Barrels of priming powder - & on what terms & in what time
I shall consider myself favored by a very early answer [NDA. GLB,Vol. 7, 1803-1805.1
To Captain John Rodgers, U. S. Navy, from Captain Hugh G. Campbell, U. S. Navy

Constellation, OFFTRIPOLIMarch. gth1805
SIR Be pleased to inform me if it is your desire that I continue
longer on this coast, or terminate my cruise in a rout by way of Cape
Bon Tunis Bay &Q & c my reason for mentioning The latter is, that
we have Thirty of the Crew Innoculated for the small pox, and should
we Experience bad weather their situation will be truly unpleasent
N B - Be pleased to Accept-Keg of Tongues [LC. JRP, Vol. 1, Series Two, Feb. 1775-May 1805.1
To Captain Hugh G. Campbell, U. S. Navg, commanding U. 8. Frigate CorastJZation.
from Captain John Rodgers, U. S. Navy

U. STATES
SHIPConstitution

off Tripoli, March gt!' 1805
SIR I n reply to your Letter of this Date, I beg leave to say that
the services of the Constellation can be spared, provided you think
their is a necessity for your going into Port, in consequence of the
disease on Board; however as it is necessary that the Blockade should
be kept up in a manner not to give one ship more service than another;
(in order that the w h o l ~may be in perfect readiness when their combined services shall be wanting) If you ha\-e not Water & Provisions
for at least a Month, it will be better for you to proceed to Malta, as
soon as possible, taking Cape Bon in your way, agreeable to your
Instructions, in order that you ma7 may be in readiness to relieve one
of the Vessels here, before necessity shall compel1 their return. -

402

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1804 TO 1806

When I left Malta Commodore Barron expected me back in 15 Days,
yet I shall not quit this coast until I am relieved by an adequate Force,
to continue the Blockade in a proper manner - Two Vessels at least
ought to be here. [LC. JRP.

Letters %I Orders, Book A, 1804-1805.1

To Captain John Rodgers, U. S. Navy, commanding U. S. Frigate Constitution,
from Captain Hugh G. Campbell, U. 6. Navy

U. STATESSHIPConstitution [Constellation]
o$ Tripoli March 9 t h 1805
SIR In answer to yours of this date, respecting the Blockade of
Tripoli I beg leave to state my opinion which is that we never should
have less than three Vessels near that port, say one Easterly a second
Westerly & a third in front of the Town - but unfortunately the
resent state and distribution of our Ships renders it Inconvenient to
stablish that arran ement You observe that the Constellation has not Water and Provisions
for a t least one Month I had better proceed for Malta as soon as
possible taking Cape Bon in my way, Permit me to remark for your
consideration that she has Provisions and Water for Two Months,
which might Enable her to continue the Blockade for at least that
time, a service I would cheerfully prefer were it not for the consideration of our Crew, Thirty three of which are Innoculated for the small
Pox and as the season is advancing that their services and every Exertion on our part will be required I presume it advisable to have them
recruited with all possible dispatch - With these considerations
aided by conviction that your presence is required at Malta, I make
no hesitation in saying that the service demands your Immediate
return to that port. -

5

%

[LC. JRP.

Letters & Orders, Book A, 1804-1805.1

To Captain John Rodgers, U. S. Navy, from Captain Hugh G. Campbell, U. S. Navy

U. STATES
FRIGATE
ConsteUation
o$ Tripoli March 9, 1806
SIR In reply to yours of this date, I have To inform you that the
Constellation has on Board provisions and Water for a t least two
Months, which will enable her to continue the Blockade for that time,
with these considerations aided by conviction that existing circumstances require your presents at Malta, I make no hesitation in saying
that the latter should be prefered. [LC. JRP, Letters & Orders, Boolc A, 1804-1805.1
To Captain William Bainbridge, U. S. Navy, from Lieutenant David Porter, U. S.
Navy

TRIPOLIPRISON
March gt@1806
SIR After having deliberately reflected on the prospect of a change
and the expected proposals; the probable evil concequences of my
acting agreable to my first determination and m present inclinations,
I have considered it most proper to suffer mys f to be governd in my
actions by the Majority of my companions in misfortune, not that
I am now convinced that their opinions are correct, But, the proba-

2

bility is that no separation can take place, (nor does my inclinatiom
lead me to wish it) so that the concequence of my acting agreable to
my sentiments would be a continuation of the whole in our present
situation; These reflections, the probable concequences of our remaining here, and a desire to accomadate those whose inclinations may
lead them to wish a change on the suposed [?]conditions, has induced
me to wave all personal consideration, and consent to join in a proceedmg, on the propriety of which I cannot help differing with many.
[HS of Pa.

Grata Col. NDA photostat.]

Extract from journal of William Eaton, U. S. Navy Agent for the Barbary Regencies,
Saturday, 9 l a r c h 1805

Remained in camp. Some di5culties with the owners of the camels
and horses hired for the passage. - They demanded advanced pay. I t was not safe to do it. - They became mutinous. [H. E. Huntington L&AG.]
Extract from journal of Hezekiah Loomis, Steward, U. 6. Navy, in U. S. Brig
Viren. Master Commandant John Smith, U. S. Navy, commanding, Saturday,
9 March 1805

Pleasant, fresh gales, and we stood off and on [Tripoli] until 4
o'clock when the Constellalion and Constitution came up with us. We
then stood off shore.
[L. F. Middlebrook. NDA copy.]
To Captain Samuel Barron, U. S. Navy from Purser Robert W. Goldsborough,
U. 6. Navy

UNITEDSTATES
BRIGArgus
Malta March 10" 1805.
SIR, MI Eaton, in making a representation against me, upon which
Capt Hull has thought proper to place me in arrest, has most injustly
injured my reputation, without iving me either the explanations, or
satisfaction to which I conceive myself entitled. Permit me therefore to enclose you a statement of circumstances,
in evidence of the grounds upon which his assertions have been built Whilst at Cairo in Egypt, being in the habit of resorting occasionally
with several other American Officers to a Billiard Table in the neighbourhood of the E n lish Cmsul, a misunderstanding arose one afternoon between Mr fiarquhar L myself, concerning the points at a
Game of billiards, the consequence of which was a fight at fistycuffs I nm, Sir, far from advocating a habit which I have ever held in great
contempt, & which at that time inspired sentiments of much uneasiness, nor should I have descended to this mode of redress for the insult
I received, had it not been of the grossest nature On this occasion, Mr Eaton thought proper to take exception at my
conduct, and in a letter addressed to me the day following, recommended my return to Alexandria - I complied with his request,
and in company with Mr F'arquhar two days afterwards embarked from
Cairo, but in consequence of some expressions which came from Mr
Eaton in assertion of his right to order my return, did not take leave
of him.
From this period, Sir, The arrows of hi revenge poisoned by malice
have been directed towards me.

f

404

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1804 TO 1806

Some weeks after my return to Alexandria, I was accidentally
informed, that M' Eaton had given publicity at Cairo at the Consular
Table, to the malevolent assertion which he has brought against me,
Viz that of improper conduct at a Card Table.
I confess myself unable to express what were [my] feelings on the
receipt of this information, of which I had never before been apprized,
and of which untill that moment I had heard nothing of, and imrnediately resolved to seek an explanation on the return of Mr Eaton who
was then absent about 40 miles from Alexandria. On the return of Mc Eaton, in order to a full investigation of the
subject, I wrote to him the following Note.

Mr Goldsborough begs the favor of Mr Eat.on's company in t h e ward room U . S . H n ~ cArgus
Pebruaru 6 t h 1806.

With this request he complied, but on being asked by me whether
he had made the assertion contained in his report, and what were
the Grounds upon [which] his assertion had been formed, simply
answered that it was not a proper time to ive explanations, & left
the ward room, much disconcerted, and t,he ay following, after many
abusive expressions uttered at the Consular house at Alexandria,
which were afterwards told me, requested Capt Hull to have me
arrested
Finding myself destitute of explanation, I determined to wait a day
or two longer without resorting to further measures, impressed with
a belief that he would certainly come forward, but perceiving on his
part no other disposition than that of evasion, addressed to him a
second Letter - Vz.

f

"SIR, Yo11 have accused me in a foreign country of a dishonest Act -you
have given geueral publicity t o this assertion, amongst t h e first characters
of this place, without producing a single evidence of the fact I now call on you a second time, in the name of t h e Flag under which
I serve, in t h e nams of every American Officer, and as a d u t y due t o a n
injured reputation, t o produce your authority I cc~lsiderthere is no time nor place so proper for t h e adjustment of
the injury I've received, as this - I t is here i t has originated, and i t
is here t h e consequences are felt. I call on you in the Integrity of my
heart, t o prove this assertion before you leave -4lcxandria.
Sgg Rob* W. GOLDSBOROU~H
U. S. B. Argus. Feb? 7. 1805.

-

Mr WILLIAM,?ATON.
Present.

I had not the most distant Idea he would longer evade the subject,
but in place of giving it any consideration, the letter addressed to
him was barely read, and returned by the Servant.
Finding every step I had taken ineffectual, I then resolved on a
personal Interview; the consequences of which were a candid avowal
of the contempt I felt for him, of the sentiments which actuated me
to that confession, and of my fixed resolution towards him should we
ever meet. I t is impossible, Sir, to give you a minute account of every circumstance which formed the basis of his malevolence towards me; They
are not within my immediate recollection I feel it a misfortune, that the imperious situation of circumstances
should at this moment preclude the possibility of an immediate investigation of the subject, and hope Sir, that conduct so replete with
malice & revenge will not be countenanced.

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

405

I will not presume to express an opinion, of the measures which
have already been taken, to render my situation unpleasant, but will
with pleasure submit the subject to your consideration [Mrs. J s n ~ c sS. Rarron Col.]
Extract from journal of U. S. Frigate Comlifufion. Captain John Bodgers, U. S. Navy.
commanding, Sunday, 10 March 1805

At Sunset the town of Tripoli Bore S W 5 W distance 3 or 4 leagues
At 10 hoisted out the la$2°C 3 6 & 4tQcutters Armed & manned for
the purpose of Cutting the guard boat out of the Harbour of Tripoli
Lt Evans commanded the 1"' L' Henley the 2°C Lt Allen 3 g & Ms
Downs the 4Q at 11 the boats Left the Ship - wore ship and stood in
For the town of Tripoli. at 4 stood In to 17 fathoms water wore
ship & Fired a broadside into the town the Bashaws castle bearing
South distance % mile a t 3 past 4 made the signal For the boats which
they answerd to windward a t 5 the boats camealongsidehoisted Them
in
Latitude Observed 33" 03' N.
[USNA.]
Extract from journal of William Eaton, U. S. Navy Agent for the Barbary Regencies,
Sunday, 10 March 1805

The camel drivers and footmen who followed the horses revolted
and made a stand. - The Chiek ii Taiib had insinuated a suspicion
among them that if they performed their services before being paid
the Christians would be apt to defraud them. The Bashaw seemed
irresolute and dispondent.- Money, - more money was the only
stimulous which could give motion to the camp. - The forenoon
was consumed, and no appearances of a disposition to proceed ahead.
I ordered the Christians under arms and feinted a countermarch;
threatning to abandon the expedition and their Bashaw, unless the
march in advance proceeded immediately. - This project took effect ;
the mutiny was suppressed; and we marched twelve miles. [H. E. Huntington L&AG.]
Extract from journal of Hezekiah Loomis, Steward, U. S. Navy, in U. S. Brig
Vixen, Kaster Commandant John Smith, U. S. Navy, commanding, Sunday,
10 March 1805

[Tripoli] Saw the 2 Frigates to the eastward. We stood for the
town and at half past 11 A. hl. we came within gun shot of the shore
about 6 miles to the westward of the town. We discharged our bow
gun which sent a shot among a drove of camels and mules which were
driven by a large company of Turkish light horse. We then put
about and stood for the frigates.
[L. F. Middlebrook. NDA copy.]
To Secretary of the Navy from Captains Edward Preble and Thomas Tingey,
U. S. Navy

WASHINGTON
March l l t Q1805
We
take
the
liberty
to
recommend
by
wa
of e-xperiment,
SIR,
that the Gun Boat at the N. Yard in this place be S oop rigged, with
the mast in the Centre. The Masts and Spars of the following dimensions

9

406

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1804 TO 1805
Vir

Main Mast whole length- - - - ---- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - _ - _- - - - - -

Fed Inc[lr]

57 "
H e a d - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - . . - . - - - - - - - - _ _ - _ - _ - _ - - 7----

Diameter a t the Partners - _ - - - - - - -- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - I
4
Main Boom to traverse within the extremes of the Deck - - - - - - - _ - _ _ _ - _34
6
Main G a f f - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 25---Bowsprit t o rig out through a clasp Boom-Iron without the Bows_--___ 15---Top mast whole l e n g t h - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 24---Head-----------------------------------5__-_
Top Sail Y a r d - - - - - - . - - - - - - - - - . - - - - - - . - - - - - - - - . - - 23---Square sail yard----,---,--------------------------- 32.._-Jigger Mast for a Sprit-sad - _ - - - - - - - 18- _ - Ditto- Boom O u t b o a r d - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - _ - _ - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 1 3 _ _ _ _
Sprit------------------------.--..-------19---Mainsail t o be made of NP 3
Foresail with a Bonnet Head----___________-----.-----.-.-----N
- -9 2
Bonnet---------------------------------------N P ~
A Small Storm Foresail of- - - - - - - . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
NP 1
a Try-Sail o f - - _ - _ - - _ - - . _ _ _ _ - - _ - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -NP 1
Jib------_---_---------.-..------------.
N Q ~
Jigger Canvass--------------------------------- N P ~
Gaff Top Sail a"'
....................................
N97
Square Top-Sail
_-----------_---_N97
-__-.--Square-Sail with a Bonnet " H e a d _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ - _ _ _ - . - - - - - . - - - - - - - - - - - - - - . - - N93
.
" Bonnet----------------------------------------N P ~
-

-

To be rigged with 3 Shrouds on each side, middle one abreast of the
centre of the Ma,st
[LC. Edward Preble LB, Nov. 1804-Mar. 1805.1
To Sailing Master Humphrey Magrath, U. S. Navy, from Secretary of the Navy

NAV.DEP

11 March 1805
You will without delay proceed with Gunboat NO 1 to Char[l]eston
S. C. and there wait the further orders of this Department. On
your arrival at Charleston, you will report yourself to this Department.
[NDA.

Off. Comg. Gunboats, 1803-1808.1

To Lieutenant Nathaniel Fanning, U. S. Navy, Charleston, S. C., from Secretary
of the Navy

NAV.DEP.
11 March 1805
Gun-boat N"
(the number by which we distinguish the Gunboat, the building of which you have been superintending) is to
proceed to the Mediterranean as early as she can be equipped and
prepared for sea. You will continue to pay every attention to her
equipment and preparation with a view to this voyage until she shall
be ready to recieve her crew - by that time we shall require your
services in New York.
When the Gun-boat shall be ready to recieve her crew, you will
be relieved in the command by Lieu: Elbert - and when Lieutenant
Elbert takes the command you will proceed to New York, and on
your arrival there you will report yourself to this Department. The
rigging of Gun-boat N" is left to yourself. Some material alterations, in the original plan (proposed with a view of her being employed
in the land locked navigation & near the coast) will doubtless be

407

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

necessary - and you will make such alterations as shall appear to
you necessary to fit her for crossing the Atlantic.
[NDA. Off. Comg. Gunboats, 1803-1808.1
To Lieutenant Samuel Elbert, U. S. Navy, from Secretary of the Navy

NAV.DEP.

11 March 1806
You will repair to Charleston S. C. and when Lieutenant Fanning
shall have completed the rigging and equipment of Gun-boat N Q9,
you will take the command of her, and pursue such orders as
you shall hereafter recieve from this Department. I do not order
you to the immediate command of Gun-boat K W because it is due
to Lieu$ Fanning who has heretofore superintended her buildhg,
that he should complete her rigging & equipment. When ou shall
take the command of the Gun-boat you will report yourse f to this
Department. [NDA. Off. Comg. Gunboats, 1803-1808.1

9

To William[Smith, Sr., U. S. Navy Agent, Charleston, S. C., from Secretary of the
Navy

NAV.DEP.

11 March 1805
Lieut Murdoch has been this day ordered to give up the command
of Gun-boat N? 2 to L! Izard, and to open Rendezvous in Charleston
for the purpose of entering 40 or 50 able seamen for the Jn? Adams
now a t New York. Lieut Elbert has been ordered to the command
of Gun-boat N? 9 (the boat building under your superintendency)
after LWanning shall have completed her rigging & equipment for
sea. Lieut Fanning upon being superceded in the command is to
repair to N Yorl~where his services will be required. Gun-boats
NQ 1. 2 & 9 are all to be fitted for the Mediterranean - they will
all Rendezvous a t Charleston prior to sailing for that sea. I shall
give the necessary orders to their respective commanders, and you
will be pleased to render them every needful assistance. Lt Murdoch
will call on you for money to recruit. supply him, and assist him to
procure the men, and procure a passage for them to N Tork.
[NDA. Off. Comg. Gunboats, 1803-1808.1
To Lieutenant John Spriggs, U. S. Navy, Boston, Mass., from Secretary of the
Navy

NAV.DEP.
11 March 1805

I have recieved you letter of the 27Q ult. I wish the Gun-boat
to be completed without delay. I have informed Mr Brown that
she is to be coppered. As I intend sending her to the Mediterranean,
she must be so rigged as to be fit to cross the Atlantic. The rigg$g
heretofore proposed was devised with the view of the boat belng
employed in our landlocked navigation only. As you are an experienced seaman I shall leave it with you to determine upon the most
eligible plan of rigging the boat so as to fit her for crossing the Atlantic. Commodore Preble approves the idea of mounting a gun on each
end of the Boat - this plan must therefore be pursued.
[NDA. Off. Comg. Gunboats, 1803-1808.1

408

-

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1804 TO 1805
-

-

-

-

-

-

-

--

To Captain Samuel Barron, U. S. Navy, from Briggs Brothers, Alexandria,
Egypt

ALEXANDRIA
I 1 March 1805.

SIR! We presume that Capt Hull of the U. S.Brig Argus, who

Sailed from hence on the 1gt"ltQ must long since have arrived a t
the Rendezvous - and M' Eaton's Dispatches will consequently have
made you acquainted with our Disbursements to him for Account of
the United States, to the extent of Six Thousand Span?'Dollars; which
M? Eaton engaged should be refunded with all possible expedition. The Service he is employed on, has since unexpectedly required further supplies, and to promote its object, we have advanced him on
Account of the U. S. Seven Thousand Span?' Doll? more; making the
whole of our actual disbursement $13,000, for which we hold his Receipts. - In a Country of small resources like this where Banking
operations are totally unlmown & Specie is consequently the more
valuable, you will easily conceive that it was not without considerable
inconvenience, that at so short a notice we could collect, and dispose
of this Sum Mr Eaton stated to us, that to provide against all contingencies, he had recommended in his Dispatches by the Argus, that
as much as $20,000 should be sent up in the vessel which was to replace the f i s t $6000 we advanced - & he has assigned our reimbursement of the surplus on that fund - Tho' we do not apprehend any
disappointment yet for the greater certainty, we deem it prudent to
apprize
- .
-you of the circumstance that every possible delay may be
obviated
Mr Eaton h a l l y commenced his march with H. E. Ahmed Pacha,
across the Desert to Bomba. on the 6 ins! - He has collected here
&sGreeks, & is accompanied by sevabout One Hundred ~ u r o ~ e k n
eral Sheiks of the most powerful Tribes of Bedouins, with about Two
Hundred Men, whose number will be considerably increased on t,heir
progress
We avail of this opportunity to tender you our best Services, whenever they can be useful to the Squadron under your command, & wishing every Success to the Expedition you are engaged in, we remain
with the highest consideration,
[Mrs. James S. Uarron Col. NDA photostat.]

Extract from journal of William Eaton, U. S. Navy Agent for the Barbary Regencies,
Monday, 11 March 1806

Marched twenty miles.
[H. E. Huntington L&AG,FEA 206.1
Extract from journal of Hezekiah Loomis, Steward, U. S. Navy, in U. S. Brig
V h , lllaster Commandant John Smith, U. S. Navy, commanding, Monday,
11 March 1805

This day standing off and on [Tripoli], the Constellation and ConAt half past 4 o'clock P. M. stood off shore and
hove to, the wind blowing very fresh and the sea beginning to rise.
stitution in sight.

[L. F. Middlebrook.

NDA copy.]

409

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

To Captain Hugh G. Campbell, U. S. Navy, commanding U. S. Frigate Gnsfddion
from Captain John Rodgers, U. S. Navy

U. STATES
SHIPConstitution
o$ Tripoli March 1.2, 1806
SIR In consequence of the authority Vested in me b Commodore
Barron (as relates to the disposition of the different U. Vessels now
on this Coast) I have to desire that you remain here in continuance
of the Blockade until you are relieved by an adequate force to effect
the same, without some precarious circumstance should oblige you to
return sooner - An effectual Blockade cannot be maintained by less
than two Vessels - When the President joins you I think it advisable that you send either her or the Vixen into Port (Malta) taking
Cape Bon in her return, in order that a relief may be formed for the
convenience of your own Ship, & which ever of these two Vessels you
may think proper to detain, as also the general benefit of the service For your Information & Goverment, I do myself the pleasure to
enclose you a Copy of the heads of Commodore Barrons instructions
to the different Vessels now at Sea, as also Transcribe herein a paragraph of his orders to me. - "It is my wish that you enjoin uppon
the different commanders not to expose their Vessels unnecessaril
to the Enemys Battery's, as I cannot but deem i t imprudent as we
as detrimental to the service to hazard the loss of Masts, Spars
at a moment when neither the season nor our preparations permit
us to act combinedl & offensively against the Place, unless some
adequate object sho d present its self to justify the risk". -

g.

-6

2'

[LC'. JRP.

Ietters 8: Orders, Book A, 1804-1805.1

To Captain Samuel Barron, U.S. Navy, from Captain John Hall, U. S. Marine Corps

SYRACUSE
124 March 1805
SIR I have the honor of informing you of my return to Syracuse
with the remainder of the Band enlisted in Catania by me, which in
all are thirteen persons, and as there are at present none of our Squadron in Syracuse will be extremely obliged to the Comdr" for Orders how
I shall act - as House Rent &c%n Syracuse will be rather expensive I shall remain in this place Sir until1 farther Orders from you
hoping you have recovered your health I have the honor to be with
great esteem

-

[Mrs. James S. Barron Col.]
Extract from journal of William Eaton, U. S, Navy Agent for the Barbary Regencies,
Tuesday, 12 March 1805

Marched twenty one miles.
[H. E. Huntington L&AG, $:A 206.1
To George Harrison, Navy Agent and Superintendent of Navy Yard, Philadelphia,
Pa., from Secretary of the Navy

NAVD E P ~
Mar IS@ 1805
By the enclosed copy of a Resolution of Congress you will erceive
that the President has been requested to present a Gold edal to
Commodore Edward Preble emblematical of the attacks on the Town,

J!

410

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1804 TO 1806

Batteries, and Naval forces of Tripoli and the Squadron under his
command I am anxious that tbis medal should be executed in a masterly
manner I understand that there is an engraver in Phil? of the name
of Reich who is a very destinguished artist who can design with taste
and execute with great skill Be pleased to apply to him and if agreeable to him ask him to make
a device and know of him the terms upon which he will undertake
to execute the medal - After he shall make and deliver such devise
to you you will be pleased to forward it to the Secretary of the Navy
for his consideration
As the medal is to be emblernatical of the attacks on the Town
& q of Tripoli it may be well to obtain from Commodore Preble
information relative to these attacks, I mean the great outlime of the
Order of attack so as to make the devise as descriptive as possible of
its Object [NDA. GLB, VoI. 7, 1803-1805.1

To Secretary of the Navy, from Messrs. Riddle and Bird, Navy Agents, Newcastle,
Delaware

NEWCASTLE
lQtQMarch 1805
SIR, Yours of the 9 t a t came duly to hand. I n reply thereto
we have to say, that we can procure the Powder warranted to be of
the best quality from the manufactory of M' Dupont, near to Wilmington a t forty dollars per barrel of one hundred pounds - the
whole quantity deliverable a t this place or Wilmington in tuTomonths
from this time: - But if the money should be paid on the deliverg
of the Powder, a deduction of one dollar per barrel will be made by
the manufacturer.
Mr Dupont informs us that he does not manufacture cannon
powder in large quantities unless the same should be ordered, therefore he has none on hand at present; and that it will require a period
of about sixty days to make that quantity in.
If this price and those terms should answer your purpose, we shall
be infinitely obliged by having your authority to contract for the
powder, and to have your further orders with respect to its delivery
This day our John Bird was a t the Manufactory, which is on the
Brandywine, about five Miles N. N. West of Wilmington.
[SDA. Misc. LB, Vol. 1, 1805.1

Extract from journal of William Eaton, U. S. Navy Agent for the Barbary Regencies,
Wednesday, 13 March 1805

Marched twenty five miles. - These three days we have passed low
sand va,lliesand rocky, desert plains. Few vestages of ruins except a
castle B t y miles from Arab's tower, which has all the appearance of
Grecian architecture. - About 2 oclock p.m. this day a courier met
the Bashaw from Derne, informed him that the province was armed
in his defence, and the Got-ernor shut within the walls of his castle,
(which we afterwards found to be false.) In consequence of this good
news, feats of horsemanship and a feu de joie mere exhibited in front

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

41 1

of the Bashaw by his people. - Our foot arabs who were in the
and apprehending that we
rear with the baggage, hearing the -,
were attacked by the wild Arabs of the desert, attempted to disarm
and put to death the Christians who escorted the caravan. They
were prevented by an Arab of some consideration among them, who
insisted that prudence dictated they should suspend the* execution
till the cause of the firing should be known. - At thls camping
ground, on the seaboard, are numerous wells of great depth cut through
solid rock, and producing water of a pretty good quality. - A
little to the %'estward is rt handsome bay about twenty miles deep
and fifteen broad. [H. E. IIuntington L&AG, E A 206.1
Extract from journal of Midshipman Charles Morris, Jr,, U. S. Navy, on board
U. S. Frigate President, Master Commandant George Cox, U. S. Navy, commanding, Wednesday, 13 March 1805

P. M. Light Airs and clear.

1%Set all the Staysails Royals and Larboard Studding sails. Carried away the larboard topmast Studding sail Boom. 3%Shortened
Sail. The harbour of Bengasi in Sight. no vessels of any description in it.
4. The Fort bore S E % E 10 miles. hauled off to N N W.
8. reefed the Topsails and Topgallantsails.
Midnight. fresh breezes and cloudy 6 Turned the reefs out of the Topsails and Top Gallt Sails. and
made all sail with the wind Free.
Noon. pleasant.
Surgeon reports 16 Men unfit for duty
Latitude Observed 33' 49' N.
[Mrs. C . E. Fox original, NDA photostat.]
Extract from journal of Hezekiah Loomis, Steward, U. S. Navy, in U. 6. Brig
Vixen, Master Commandant John Smith, U. S. Navy, commanding, Wednesday,
13 March 1805

[Tripoli] Fresh breeze, stood in near the land, then stood off
toward the Constellation which we spoke a t half past 11 o'clock A. M.
then made sail off from land, the wind blowing fresh on shore.
[L.F. Middlebrook. N D A copy.]
- -

To Lieutenant Joseph J. Maxwell, U. S. Navy, from Secretary of the Navy

NAV. DEP.
14 March 1805
You will continue your services to the Commanding Officer of the
John Adams in preparing her for sea, and will remain on board
until you hear further from this Department. I t is my intention
to [give you] the command of Gun-boat N? 8 a t Boston, of which you
will recieve notice in due Season.
[NDA. Off. Comg. Gunboats, 1803-1808.1

412

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1804 T O 1805

To John Beskmun, Bavy Agent and Superintendent of B a q Yard, New York,
N. Y., from Secretary of the Navy

NAV.DEP.

1.4 March 1805

I have this day ordered Lieutenant Lawrence to take the Command
of Gun-boat T\'? 6 - and Lieutenant Leonard to take the Command
of Gun-boat NQ7 - these Boats are intended to be sent to the Mediterranean - and I have ordered their respective Commanding
O5cers to prepare them for such a voyage.
You will render them every needful assistance.
[NDA. Off. Comg. Gunboats, 1803-1806.1
To Midshipman James T. Leonard, U. 8. Navy, from Secretary of the Navy

NAV.D E P M ~
1.4 March 1805.
Lieu1 Lawrence being your Senior Officer, I have this day ordered
the name of the one
of the two lately built a t New York which he shall choose. His
Seniority in Rank entitles him to the choice, and it is for this reason
that it has been given to him. You will assume the Command of Gun Boat NQ7 - the name of
the Boat a t New York which Lieut Lawrence shall not choose and use
your best exertions to prepare her for Sea. It is intended to send
her to the Mediterranean; she must 1;herefore be prepared for such a
Voyage. PCTithrespect to her Rigging you will pursue the plan suggested in the enclosed Copy of a letter from Commr*Preble and Cap1
Tingey to me. You will keep me informed of your progress.
Mr Beekman Kavy -4gent will render you every needful assistance.f.S. Gunboat N? 7 is to have 1 long 32 Pounder at each End.
The plan of rigging heretofore suggested was proposed with a, View
to the Boat being employed in our Land locked Navigation only. -

him to assume the Command of Gunboat N",

[NDA. Off. Comg. Gunboats, 1803-1808.1
To Lieutenant James Lawrence, U. S. Navy, from Secretary of the Bavy

NAV.D E P M ~
14 March 1805 You will assume the Command of Gunboat N Q 6 at New york.
You are to take your choice of the two lately built there and the one
which you shall chose will be called Kg 6 - t,he other which will
be called NQ 7 will be commanded by Lieu? Leonard. Your rank
entitles you to a choice of these two Boats; it is therefore that I give
it to you. Gunboat NQ6 must be prepared for Sea without delay. I t is
intended to send her to the Mediterranean; she must therefore be
prepared for such s Voyage. With respect to her rigging, you d l
pursue the plan suggested in the enclosed Copy of a letter from
Commodore Preble and Cap: Tingey to me. You will keep me informed of your progress.
Mr Beekman Navy Agent will render you every needful assistance.

-

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

413

P. S. Gunboat N? 6 is to have 1 long 32 pounder a t each end. The
lan of rigging heretofore suggested was proposed with a view to the
goat being employed in our Land locked navigation only. [NDA. Off. Comg. Gunboats, 1803-1808.1
To Sailing Master Humphrey Magrath, U. S. Navy, from Secretary of the Navy

NAV.DEP.
14 March 1805
I t is intended to send Gun-boat N? 1 to the Mediterranean if in
your opinion she can safely perform such a Voyage in the month of
hilay - Of her fitness for such a voyage you must from having commanded her for a considerable period of time must be more competent to form a correct Judgment than we can be - and you w~ll
decide from your own lmowledge, whether she is fit or not.
Should you think her fit for such a Voyage, you will immediately
prepare her for sea.
The plan of rigging proposed in the enclosed copy of a letter from
Commde& Capt. Tingey to me must be pursued, unless in your opinion
her resent rigging will answer, either as it is now fitted, or with some
sma 1 alteration.
Keep me informed of your progress.
Wm Smith sen: Esq: will render you every needful assistance.

P

[NDA. Off.Comg. Gunboats, 1803-1808.1
To Midshipman Ralph Izard, Jr., U. S. Navy, from Secretary of the Navy

NAV.DEP.
14 March 1805
Gun-boat N? 2 must be prepared for sea. I t is intended to send
her to the Mediterranean - You will therefore use your best exertions to have her prepared for such a voyage. The plan of rigging
proposed in the enclosed copy of a letter from Commodore Preble &
Captain Tinge to me must be pursued - unless in the opinion of
practical Gent emen on the spot, the manner of her present rigging
will answer, either as it now is, or with some small alteration.
WmSmith sen: Esq' N a ~ yAgent at Chapton will render you every
needful assistance to enable you to execute these orders.
P. S. I t is thought by some that the present rigging of Gunboat N? 2
will answer with the addition of a Bowsprit.
[NDA. Off. Comg. Gunboats, 1803-1808.1

i?

To Secretary of the Navy from Stephen Decatur, Sr.

PRANKFORD
March 1dtQ1805
SIR I beg leave to offer, my services to you for manufactoring of
Gun powder as I have a large manufactory for that purpose and formerly made for the Navy which was much approvd of I will make it
at the same rate that others have done as there is a large Quantity
of saltpeter in Philadelphia belonging to the United States. I have
tcken the liberty of Addressing you on this subject - a line respecting
the business will be attended to
Yours Respectfully
STEPHEN
DECATUR
JACOB
CROWNINGSHIELD
ESQ:
[NDA. Misc. LB, Vol. 1, 1805.1

414

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1804 TO 2805

Extract from journal of William Eaton, U. S. Navy Agent for the Barbary Regencies,
Thursday, 14 March 1805

Marched twenty six miles, - over a barren rocky plain, - Passed
some vestages of ancient fortifications: - raised and encamped upon
the dividing ridge bets-eon E a p t and Triploi, - near a cistern of
excellent water. - The site of t,he ridge a vast plain, barren of
vegetation. p.E. Hr~ntingtonL&AG, EA 206.3
To Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Kavy, Washington, D. C., from Secretary of the
Kavy

NAVYD E P ~
16 March 1803' After your long absence from America and the honorable services
you have performed, I could not feel otherwise than disposed to grant
you a respite from duty; but as you have volunteered our services,
me will avail ourselves of them. I have therefore to request that you will repair to Boston and to
Portland and a t whichsoever place you may find the most convenient
and fit, build 2 Bomb Vessels, and 2 Gunboats. I have already verbally comrnunicat.ed to you the object for which we require the Bomb
Vessels, and you know that it is desireable to have them built and
equipped with all practicable e-xpedition. The Gunboats you may
build when more at leisure. You have manifested such zeal for the service, such attention to the
public Interest, and such intelligence on Karal Subjects, that I shall
restrict you upon no point in rela.tion to the Building of these Vessels.
You will therefore build them upon such plans as may in your judgment be the most eligible. After determining upon the plans you will
transmit drawings of them to me - particularly drawings of the Gunboats, which I u-ish, as soon as you shall have it in your power conveniently to furnish them, with the View of hal-ing
- other Gunboats
built after them.
I have ordere,d Lieu; Gordon and Mids? Lewis and Hunewell to
report themselves to you & obey your orders. Mc Brown Navy Agent at Boston will render ou every needful
assistance and he will pay all the Accounts for bui ding those Vessels
that shall be approved by you. I enclose Ispace] from the Secretary of War, for
2 - 13 Inch iron Mortars
500 - 13 Inch Shells
500 Fuzes for d"
2 - 8 or 10 Inch brass Howitzers. 500 - Shells & 500 Fuzes for d"
4 - 5%Inch Houitzers
500 - 5% shells & 500 fuzes for d QWhich are to be delivered to you or to your order. I have sent an
order to the Navy Agent at h'ew York to deliver to you or your order
such Cannon and Carronades and Carriages &o as you may require.-

9

[NDA.

OSW, Yof. 6, 1802-1805.1

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

415

To Lieutenant Colonel Commandant Franklin Wharton, U. S. Marine Corps,
from Secretary of the Navy

NAV:D E P M ~
15 March 1805.
The John Adams now preparing for sea will require,

and each gunboat will require
The John A h s is now lying a t New York and the U. S. Gunboats
are at the places mentioned as follows,
N? 1 - 2 & 9 at Charleston S. C.
at the Navy Yard here.
N? 4 & 10
N? 5
at Baltimore.
N? 3
at Philadelphia.
N96&7
at New York.
NQ8
at Boston. You will without delay take the necessary steps to provide these
Detachments. As Gunboats N? 1 & 2 at Charleston have each, 1 Sergeant, 1 Corporal, & 12 Privates a t present on Board, you can retain on Board,
the Detachments herein ordered for them, and the Surplus will enable
you to supply from them a Detachment for N ? 9 and a Detachment
for the Frigate John Adams; and the Detachment for the John Adams
may be delivered to Lieu; Murdoch now recruiting at Charleston
Seamen intended for that Vessel, and he can take the Marines and
the Seamen with him to New York.
To enable you to effect this arrangement, I have this day written
to the Commanding Officers of N? 1 & 2 to deliver to your order
such Marines as you may direct. I t will remain with you to order
1 Corporal & 4 privates to be delivered to the Commanding Officer of
Gunboat N? 9, and to Lieu! Murdoch all the Marines that may
remain after supplyin Detachments for Gunboats N? 1 - 2 2 9
and I shall order ~ieu'%urdoch to take charge of them & carry them
to N York to join the John Adums. [NDA. Off. Comg. Gunboats, 1803-1808.1
To Sailing Master Levi Bardin, U. S. Navy, commanding Gunboat No. 3, Philadelphia, Pa., from Secretary of the Navy

NAVD E P~
March 15 1805.
Gunboat N? 3 must be immediately prepared for sea. I t is intended
to send her to the Mediterranean; you will therefore use your best
exertions to have her prepared for such a Voyage.
The plan of rigging heretofore proposed was intended for land
locked Navigation only, therefore the plan of rigging proposed in the
enclosed Copy of a Letter [I1 March] from Commodore Preble and
Cap; Tingey to me, must be pursued and you will keep me constantly
informed of your progress. You will receive from George Harrison
Esqr every needful assistance in the execution of these orders. -

416

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 180.4 TO 1806

You will not consider these orders as superceding the Instructions
for Recruitk given to you on the gth Instant, but will use your best
exertions to effect both Objects to which it is presumed you are fully
competent. [NDA. Off Comg. Gunboats, 1803-1808.1
To John Stricker, Navy Agent, Baltimore, Md., from Secretary of the Navy

NAVD E P ~
15 March 1805.
The plan of Rivging proposed in the enclosed Copy of a letter from
Commodore ~rebqeand Cap: Tingey to me, must be pursued in rigging
the Gunboat lately launched at Bait? which we will call N? 5 . I t
is intended to send her to the Mediterranean and I wish her immediately fitted for the voyage. Lieut Harrison who is now a t the Southward has been appointed to the Command and ordered on to Baltimore
but as it will take him some time before he can come on, I have given
you these Instructions that no time may be lost. I request your
attention to them 8: frequent Information of your progress. [NDA. Off. Comg. Gunboats, 1803-1808.3
Extract from journal of William Eaton, U. 6 . Navy Agent for the Barbary Regencies,
Friday, 15 March 1805

Marched twenty five miles: - camped in a ravine, at the head of
which we found rain water, preserved in natural reservoirs excavated
in the rocks by the cascades of water during the winter rains. The night was cold and rainy. A musket, bayonet, cartouch box
and cartridges stolen by the Arabs from the marine tent, and all our
provisions of cheese from the magazine. - We had heretofore
experienced daily losses of provisions & barley, which they stole and
concealed. [H. E, Huntington LkAG, E A 206.1
To Captain Samuel Barron, U. S. Navy, from Captain William Bainbridge,
U. S. Navy

BARBARY
TRIPOLI
16'b March 1805
DEARSIR I am acquainted that Sidi Mahammed Dhgies Minister of Foreign affairs to His Excellencey the Bashaw of Tripoli
has written to you on a certain subject.
The Minister has been much indisposed for several months past with
an idamation in his eyes, and Doctr Ridgeley his Surgeon has done
every thing in his power, for him, without its having the desired
effect; for the many obligations that myself and OEcers are under
to the Minister, I wish that it may be agreable for you to render him
some aid, through one of the Surgeon's of your Squadron
Permit me to observe that whatever Sidi Mahammed Dhgies, or my
worthy freind, Nicholas, C, Nissen Esqr His Danish Majesty's Consul in this place, writes to you on the subject will in my opinion merit
your attention, for, from my knowledge of the freindly disposition
of the Minister, I have reason to beleive that his assertions are

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

417

founded on candour - It is unnessecary for me to say more as
you no doubt will fully comprehend me

[Thefollowing was written in invisible ink.]
16 March 1805
D' SIR This day Sidi Mahammed Dhgies sent for me and informed
me in a confidence, that he had wrote to you recommending a person
to come to negotiate and requested me to write a letter [ms illegible]
in the obscure manner that I have done, that in case of discovery
it would be [unlintelligble or foreign to the subject
I really beleive that the Minister is sincerely desirous for peace
for exclusive of his freindly disposition it is greatly his interest to
have it, and was a person to come and remain a few days to negotiate I have not a doubt but what peace could be made on the terms
that Com Preble offered at all events i t would in my opinion have
the happy effect of making the Bashaw%ubjects clamorous, as they
would then see that America had the disposition to make peace, and
that the continuance of the war was owlng to the Bashaw,
The Houses here of stone and mud and badly furnished, of course
the damage in Bombarding cannot be as great as if i t was otherwise.
Permit me my dear Barron to make one observation - To reduce
the Bashaw to moderate terms I suppose is the object of our Govt
and your expectation to release us from captivity without paying
is in my opinion impossible without land forces and I hope that our
Country will not think that it is the subject of peace they pay for,
but the liberty of their unfortunate Citizens fell captives in its service,
and it may be assured that what ever is paid, no (Tripolitan from
what they they have experienced of the Americans) will consider one
farthing of it paid for purchasing [MS mutilated] of Tripoli.
I n my letter of the 13 I gave you some information about Mr
Beaussier
I candidly beleive that any person might come here with the
greatest safety and I beleive that an American d l answer much
better than any Frenchman or any other countrymen
The Minister has great influence with the Bashaw and is doing
all in his power to bring- him to a disposition of making peace on
moderate ierms.
I know you will do me the justice to believe that my representations are actated for the good of our Cause
Yours truly
[Stephen Decatur original.]
Extract from journal of William Eaton, U.S. Navy Agent for the Barbary Regencies,
Saturday, 16 March 1805

Bold, high winds from W.N.W. heavy thunder and incessant rain. Remained in camp. - At 3 p.m. our camp inundated. - Moved
to high ground. At the foot of this ravine is an extensive bay of
the sea. [H. E. Huntington L&AG, EA 206.1

418

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1804 TO 1806

Extract from journal of Herekiah Loomis, Steward, U. S. Navy, in U. S. Brig
Vixen, Master Commandant John Smith, U. S. Navy, commanding, Saturday,
16 March 1805

Off Tripoli. This day in sight of the land. At 8 o'clock A. M.
found we were off old Tripoli. Stood off land, and then beat toward
the town of New Tripoli until half past 12 o'clock at noon when the
man at the mast head cried out "Sail 330''. We then about ship and
stood for her. At half past 3 o'clock P. M. we were almost within
gun shot. We made signals. She would not answer them. We
played off and on, tack and tack displaying different colours and signals until 4 o'clock then stood off and beat to windward to join with
the Constellation.
[L. F. Middlebrook. NDA copy.]
To Master Commandant Isaac Chauncey, U. S. Navy, commanding U. S. S.
John Adam, New York, IT. I.,from Secretary of the Navy

NAVYDEPM?
17 Afarch 1805.

I understand that you are desirous of obtaining a furlough for the
purpose of retrieving the pecuniary losses you have sustained since
you have been in the public Service. The very honorable manner in
which you have at all birnes been mentioned to me,, and the Zeal with
which you have devoted yourself to the service of your Country, dispose me to p a n t you every reasonable indulgence. You udl therefore Sir, consider yourself on furlough to make an European or East
India Voyage. Let me know when you leave the Country and on your
return report yourself to this Department. - I wish you a safe and
prosperous Voyage,
f.S. Ycu will continue in the Command of the John Adams & attend
to her outfits until relieved by Cap: Sha~v.[NDA. OSW, Vol. 6, 1802-1805.1
TO Master Commandant Isaac Chauncey. U. S. Navy, commanding U. 8. 6.
john Adam. from Secretary of the Navy

KAVYDEPMT

17 March 1805. 1 this day recd your letter of the 1 l t b Inst The John Adums IS to go to the Mediterranean as a Transport Ship,
to carry as many men as can conveniently be sent out in her with
Provisions enough to last them to the Mediterranean. I t is proposed
to house the guns on the Gun-Deck so that the men may be birthed
on the Gun deck as well as on the Birth-Deck. If by this arrangement
the John Adams should be able to carry 600 Men I shall be the more
pleased and we shall send that.number out in her if convenientIy to
be procured. Make your repalrs accordingly.
I have made arrangements for relieving Doctr mTeems.Money has been remitted for the purpose of paying off the Crew as
you have been already advised. Be pleased to make to-me a return of your M c e r s with your opinion
of their respective mer~ts. I have understood with much concern
that some oi them are unfit for the Stations they hold. - Encourage
the resignation of such Men. We do not want them in the Navy,
and t.he sooner we can rid the Navy of them, the better. In your

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS
-

419
-

-

return, let me know who are desirous of resigning: it is probable that I
shall indulge all who are so disposed in their inclinations. I am very much pleased to hear that the John Adams will be so
soon prepared for sea. Let me hear from you frequently. [NDA. OSW, Vol. 6, 1802-1805.1
To Captain Stephen Decatur, Jr., U. S. Navy, commanding U. S. Frigate Congrew,
from Captain Samuel Barron, U. S. Navy

(MALTA)LA VALLETTE
17 March 1805
SIR Finding i t impossible to procure a t this place the field Artillery requested by M r Eaton in his late dispatches from Egypt, which
are deemed indespsnsible to ensure the success of his plan of cooperation on the coast of Tripoly, and there being a strong probability
of obtaining them on loan or by purchase in Sicily you are hereby
directed to proceed immediately in the United States Frigate under
your command to Syracuse, where you will endeavour to procure
from the Governor, two or if they can be had (four field peices) their
Calibres not to exceed 6 pounders, with carriages, trains, implements
&c complete for use, & embark them on board your ship. From
Syracuse you will proceed with all possible expedition to Messina and
in case you should not have succeeded a t the former place, you are
authorized to make a similar application there, - I t is left to you to
adopt such arrangements with the Government for indemnifying
them or for replacing the field peices as you may deem best - Anticipating the possibility of a disappoint[mentj a t both those places, the
Navy agent has been directed to send on board the Congress two brass
Guns, which should you not be fortunate enough to procure the Field
peices complete, you will have mounted & made fit for service in as
short a time as possible, I have instructed M r Broadbent of Messina
to place under your care the two Gun boats, the property of the United
States, which you will see safe off the Harbor of Syracuse and direct
the persons having charge of them to report themselves to the senior
officer of any of our Vessels in that harbour, or if the American flag
be not flying in that port to the Navy Agent for the United States
The Guns belonging to the Boats you will take on board your Frigates,
and bring them to this place, - I n the accompanying Letters to
Mr. Dyson and to M i Broadbent, I have directed those Gentlemen to
make you such adpances as you may require for the contingent
expences of your S h ~ pas well as the other object of national concern,
you will therefore make your requisitions upon them & I will charge
the agent a t this place with reimbursements, - as you are destioed
on a particular service, i t would be useless & inappropriate to fix
any precise time for your Return, being yourself fully sensible of the
importance of dispatch to our Affairs you will accelerate the objects
of your Mission and your Return to thia Port, as much as Circumstances will permit,.
(Signed) SAMUEL
BARRON
p S on further consideration, I think it proper to state to you,
that as dispatch is the object, you will leave the Gun boats & Guns,
should there be any probability of your being embarassed or delayed
by them, you will however in this particular use your own discretion, SB
Jun
Captain S. DECATUR
U S. Frigate Congress

420

NAVAL OPERATIOR,TSFROM 1804 TO 1805

Captain Decatur will have the goodness to make some arrangement
with Mr Broadbent respecting the two Gun Boats so as to have them
sent round to Syracuse as soon as possible - The Guns appertaining to them Cap! D. will leave a t Messina or bring in his Frigate as
he may think proper, [HS of Pa.]
Extract from journal of Surgeon Jonathan Cowdery, U. S. Navy, 17 March 1806

Walking by the house called the American house, I perceived that
it was full of Turks, and a strong guard was at the door. On inquiry,
I found that they were the sons and nearest relations of the Bashaw's
officers,who had gone in the expedition to the frontiers. The Bashaw
kept these people as hostages for the fidelity of his officers, whom it
appears, he was afraid to trust, least they might join in the rebellion
and come against Tripoli. I t was said that his highness had received
a letter, stating that the Americans were making great preparations
to attack Tripoli. A tent was pitched on the battery of the castle,
and orders given to keep watch all night, and every night afterwards.
Orders were also given to make every preparation to repel the
Americans.
[LC. Rare Books, American Captives in Tripoli or Dr. Cowdery's Journal,
Boston, 1806.1
Extract from journal of WiIIiam Eaton, U. S. Navy Agent for the Barbary Regencies,
Sunday, 17 March 1805

Morning rainy. Our Arabs refused to proceed farther without
money. - Reconciled them with promises. - Marched twelve
miles. - Camped in a deep ravine: - some small brush and good
rainwater. [H. E. Huntington L&AG, EA 206.1
Extract from journal of Midshipman Charles Harris, Jr., U. S. Navy, on board
U. S. Frigate Prwidenl, Master Commandant George Cox, U. S. Navy, commanding,
Sunday, 17 March 1805

P M. Fresh breezes and cloudy 2 3 the U S Brig. Vixen made the
private Signal for the Day - which we answered Tacked occasionally plying to Windward.
Midnight Fresh breezes and clear. 11 the U S Frigate Constellotion
made the private Signal, and signal to speak answered them
Noon Moderate Breezes. Tripoli S E B E X E by Compass Lat Observed 33' 00' N
[Mrs. C. E. Fox original, NDA photostat.]
Extract from journal of Bezeltiah Loomis, Steward, U. S. Navy, in U. 6. Brig
Vhen, Master Commendant John Smith, U. S. Navy, commanding, Sunday,
17 March 1805

Commences with a stiff breeze and pleasant weather. At 8 o'clock
saw a sail beating to the eastward the same course that we were steering. At 9 o'clock saw another sail to N. and E. standing in for the
land. 32lustered the men and Roswell Thomas and Joseph Smith had
their grog stopped for uncleanliness. At half past 4 o'clock we spoke

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

421

the Constellakion and Captain Smith went on board. The other frigate was the President commanded by Captain Coxe. He also went
on board the Constellation. St. Patricks Day and not an Irishman
drunk!
[L. F. Middlebrook. NDA Copy.]

[18 March 18051
To Secretary of the Navy from George Harrison, Navy Agent, Philadelphia, Pa.

SIR I have rec'd your letter of the 13@w-ith its enclosed - Agreeably to yr directions I have had an interview with Reich who is certainly the first Engraver in America but he has neither ability, or
taste to design. We must look to some other quarter - U'till he
is furnished with y' Drawing & ye size of the medal he can form no
estimate of his Labor - The size of that executed for Truxtun was
adapted to ye Force of the Machinery at y' mint - I expect the
Force has been encreased & a larger diameter may be taken - You
have not mentioned what is to be the reverse of the medal - If the
Head & Bust of the Commodore it will be well to have his profile
taken by Stewart with a view to the Medal -.
If he has left W. &
passes a day or two here it can be taken by Peale
If the Commodore will furnish me with a sketch of the Action I will lay it before some amateurs & wc may obtain something from
their pencils - handsome
I have this day received your circular of the 12tb which shall command my attention.
PHILAD
18 March 1805
Lt Bardin has commenced recruiting has entered this day Seven
Seamen & Seven ordinary - giving three months advance - these
men sh'J be disposed of, or they will run - & we shall have to look to
their Securities - The India Men have commenced shipping which
interferes - 3000 Tons will go this Spring to China.
[NDA.

Misc. LB, Vol. 1, 1805.1

To Commanding OBcer, United States Ships of War off Tripoli, from Captain
William Bainbridge, U. S. Navy

BARBARY
TRIPOLI18@March 1805
Dr SIR The letters for Commodore Barron which accompany this,
I conceive of consequence, and I hope that it will be in your power
to give them a speedy conveyance to him.
We are all well, kept very close, but in hopes that measures will
soon be talten to releive US.
1 will thank you to present my compliments to the Officers before
Tripoli, success and honor attend them 1s my smcere wish
[Stephen Decatur original.]
To Captain Samuel Barron, U. S. Navy, from Nicholas C. Nissen, Danish Consul,
Tripoli

TRIPOLIMarch 18 1805
SIR The Bashaw's Minister Sidi Mahomet Dghies personally
desirous of a reestablishment of peace with the U. S. of America and

422

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1804 TO 1805

wishing to contribute whatever may be in his power to the conclusion
of it has requested me Sir, in his name to address you this Letter. Sidi Mahomet Dghies is convinced that you are informed of his
endeavors in 1801 to prevent the declaration of War; He alone opposed
the general opinion of the Divan in this respect - The Letters of
Mr Cathcart late Consul for the U. S. at Tripoli, to his Government
a t that time will bear testimony of this fact. The War having nevertheless been declared, nothing has since been
omitted by Sidi Mahomet Dghies that could contribute to the conclusion of a Peace. Sidi M. Dghies has personally too much Interest in the undisturbed
tranquility and Security of the trade of Tripoli not to avail himself
of every mean that could be conducive to what has been his Interest
& constant desire. - In this moment he wishes to prevent further
hostilities; the state of his Health, his family & his private concerns
are so many reasons for him to endeavor to persuade both parties to
come to an agreement; he is certain that these are likewise your
wishes Sir & the intention of your Government - The situation
besides of your unfortunate Countrymen here which Sidi M. Dghies
has endeavored to alleviate as much as it has been in his power, is
nevertheless such that they & their relations in America cannot but
look upon it as an act of Humanity to accelerate the conclusion of a
peace that again can restore them to their Country. - Sidi M Dghies
is desirous of a peace, and he wishes that a Negotiation should be renew'd before the commencement of any direct hostilities against this
place. His health & particular1 the state of his Eyes will oblige him
to retire with his family in a s ort time to the Country, & will not
permit him again to return to Town at any future overture or Negotiation of Peace, & he is afraid that being absent he shall not be able
so easily to suscitate in the mind of the Bashaw equal peaceful sentiments with his own - A Negotiation entirely by Letters is tedious
and difficult; to negotiate by a person sent on shore from a Ship of
War & who returns again on board after a short Stay & nayb be after
a momentary Interview with the Bashaw has many difficulties &
proves often more detrimental to a Negotiation than productive of a
Peace - Sidi M Dghies don't think it necessary to enlarge upon the
difficulties that attend this way of negotiating&their cause; Youcannot sir but be aware of them yourself; He proposes therefore as the
most effectual manner of conducting a Negotiation of Peace to send
to Tripoli a person properly authorized & furnished with Instructions Whoever shall be sent can be assured of the most perfect Inviolabilit,y - Shou'd his & Sidi M. Dghies' earnest endeavors to reestablish Peace prove successful, the business is thereby naturally brought
to a happy conclusion; should it however unfortunately prove otherwise, the Negotiator will have liberty to return free from molestation
of any kind & in what manner he may judge convenient.
You will please Sir yourself to fix upon the securities you may
require for the faithful observation of these conditions, in case you
shall think proper to agree to these proposals, & whenever you in
answer to this Letter may request the admission of a Negotiator After having in this manner candidly & coddenteally stated to you
Sir his mind, Sidi M. Dghies hopes to have precluded eve suspicion
of his peaceful intentions & convinced you that every fac%ty will be
shewn for a mutual satisfactory conclusion of peace; he don't believe

H

WARS WI TIT BARBARY POM7ERS

423

it necessary tto observe that a sincere $ lasting peace is at any time
preferable even to a successful. War, that War has many chances &
that often unforeseen accidents occasion losses, however prudent the
measures were taken to assure Success.
That Sidi Mahomet Dghies has requested me to write you Sir in
his name this Letter, & that the Contents have been faithfully translated I have no doubt but that you will readily give Credit, but give
me likeuise leave to assure you Sir that I, in case I did not myself
believe the sentiments contain'd in this Letter sincere, would have
excused myself from putting them to paper, & in this persuasion I
shall consider i t as a very favorable circumstance for me, if I have
been found any way instrumental to the means of bringing about a
Peace between the U. S. of America & the Bashnw of Tripoli & of
procuring the liberty of your unfortunate Countrynlen here, having the
Honor to be with the greatest Respect Sir:
[TA. Sen. 9 B-B 6,Pres. Message, Jan. 1806.1

-

Extract from journal of Surgeon Jonathan Cowdery, U. S, Navy, 18 March 1805

The Bashaw sent his son-in-lau- into the country for troops to
protect Tripoli.
[LC. Rare Books, Arncrzcan Captives in Tripoli or Dr. Cowdery's Journal,
Boston, 1806.1
Extract from journal of WilliamEaton, U. S. Navy Agent for the Barbarj Regencies,
Monday, 18 March 1805

Marched fifteen miles to a castle called by the -4rabs Massouah: an extensive plain valley, surrounded in the rear and flanks by a
stoney desert, and in front by white sand drifts of great height which
cuts the view from the sea. - In this valley are found vest,ages
of ancient fabrications, gardens, mansions and pleasure houses, evidence of former cultivation and improvement, of which the place is
very susceptible; though now all lies buried in ruins, except some miserable patches of badly culti~atedwheat and barley. - Here was a
chiek, wllo held the castle, and a few Arab families in tents. - The
modern castle is a square of about one hundred and fifty feet, built
of rough stone about eleven feet high, - without bastions or battlements, but with loop holes. - I t is the de osit of the produce and
trafic of the place. Cattle, sheep, goats, fow s, butter in skins, dates
and milk, were found and offered for sale, but very dear. I now learned, for the first bime, that our caravan was freighted by
the Bashaw only to this place, and that the owners had received no
part of their pay. - KO persuasion could prevail on them to proceed to Bomba nor to wait our arrival thither for their pay. They
alledged that they had fulfilled their engagement with the Bashaw,
and would now return to their families in Behara, for whose safety
they had serious apprehendsions from the Kerchief of Demanhour.
The Chiek il Taiib favored their pretentions. - I promised to procure the cash for their payment on condition that they would proceed
two days further, where we expected to find Arab tribes and hire
another caravan. This they engaged to do. - I reduced mv stock
of cash to 3 Venitien sequins, and, with a hundred and forty dollars
borrowed of the christian officers and men, passed into the hands of the
Bashaw, six hundred and seventy three dollars 50/;o~;which sum, together

P

424

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1804 TO 1805

with what he raised among his own people, enabled him to meet the
claims of these chiefs of the cara-can.
[H. E. Huntington L&AG, EA 206.1

-

Extract from journal of Midshipman Charles Morris, Jr., U. 6. Navy, on board
U. S. Frigate Presidenf, Master Commandant George Cox, U. S. Navy, commanding,
Monday, 18 March 1805

P M Fresh breezes and cloudy. 3 spoke the U S. Frigate Constellation. 4 - C a p W o x went on board the Constellation. 8 Captr?Cox returned - Sent d o m top Gallant Yards - and took
the 3'3 reef in the topsails - 9 Launched top Gallant mast Midnight Strong gales and cloudy 1 close reefed the Topsails. 3
Wore Ship and handed the hIain sail - 3%Set the Stormstaysails %ore ship occasionally the Constellation in sight Noon Cloudy no Observation [Mrs. C. E. Fox original, NDA photostat.]
Circular to Recruiting Offlcers from Secretary of the Navy

NAVY
DEPM:
19 illarch 1805.

-

Circular To Recruiting Officers, M. Comdt I. Chauncey- - - - - - - - - - - - - - New Pork.
Lt George G. Lee- - - - _ __ _ - _ - - - - _ _ -_ - - Boston.
LC J. IT.Murdoch - - - __ - _ - __ - - _ - _ - _ - Charleston
_
SC.
Lt Ed".
Cox- - - - - - - _ - _ _ _ - -_- - - - - - Balt?
SIR. The high rate of wages allowed ia the Merchant service renders i t expedient to add something to the wages of Able Seamen.
You will therefore allow a bounty of Ten Dollars to each good Able
Seaman and two dollars to the Landlords for each able Seaman entered
by them. [NDA. OSW, VoI. 6, 1802-1805.1
To Master Commandant Isaac Chauncey, U. S. Navy, commanding U. S. S.
john Adam. New York, N. Y., from Secretary of the Navy

NAVYD E P ~

19 March 1805. Inst - I am pleased to hear
of the rapid progress you are making towards preparing the John
Adams for Sea. Allow ten dollars bounty to each good able Seaman, and two Dollars to the Landlords for each Able Seaman entered by them. Enter
the usual number of Petty Officers. The John Adams is to carry out all her Guns provided it shall not
lessen the number of Men to be sent out in her. As I have already
informed you she is, for this Voyage intended principally for a Transport Ship, any arrangements to make her formidable, that may not
interfere with this principal object, I shall acquiesce in ~f approved
by you.
I hare already informed you in a letter which you could not have
received at the date of your last of 15 Instant, that the John Adams
is to carry out as many Men as can conveniently be put on Board of
her, with provisions enough to last them till the Vessel shall join the
Squadron in the Mediterranean. -

I have recg your letter of the

-

[NDA. OSW, Vol. 6, 1802-1805.1

ljth

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

425

TO Secretary of the Navy from Sailing Master Levi Bardin, U. S. Navy
PHILADELPHIA
March l g t h 1806
SIR I have the Hon. to acknowledge the receipt of your Letter
of the 15t+ Inst. with the Inclosed copy of Commodore Prebles Last
Evening and this Morning. Set the Different Mechanicks at work
to Execute the orders therein mentioned.
No exertion of mine Shall be wanting to Expedite the proposed
alteration of the Gun Boat and prepare her for her Intended Cruize I have this Day Shiped one Seaman and Seven ordinary Ditto.
Mid? Stut and Surg? Mate McAlister have not yet made their
appearance. - Suffer me Sir to mention the Expediency of having
Lee Bohrds to this Gun Boat, to put her in a condition to Sail on a
wind, as she has no Dead rise.
[NDA. Misc. LB, Vol. 1, 1805.1

[19 March 18051
Presumably from Captain John Rodgers, U. S. Navy

SIR I have the honor to acquaint you that I arriv'd at Malts
on the 23c UltmQ,in five days after I wrote you last from Gibraltar:
and after replenishing m provisions & X-ater, Sail'd again on the
2"s inst for Tripoli from w ich I have this Moment return'd, Agreeable
to my instructions from Comandt Barron, - The Constellation &
Brig Vixen I left before Tripoli with orders to Cap' Campbell to
remain in continuance of the Blockade with at least two Vessels
until he is reliev'd by an adiquate force to continue the Blockade
Effectually - When I left Tripoli the President was between it and
Bengazi but she has, by her orders, Join'd the Constdlation by this
time

K

[LC. JRP, Vol. 1, March 1791-Dec. 1814.1
To Captain Samuel Barron, U. S. Navy, from Captain John Rodgers, U. S. Navy

U. STATES
SHIPCmstitutwn

Malta March 19. 1806
SIR I have the honor to acquaint you that I have this moment
arriv'd from the Coast of Tripoli; which place I left on Thursda
last. - During the short time the Constitution was before ~ r i p o g
the weather was generally very fine which enabled us to preserve a
close Blockade, and reconoitre the harbour almost every Day Two days after my arrival on the Coast I met with the Constellation
and in three with the Vixen, after which & during the time I remain'd
the three Vessels were disposed in the following order Constitution abreast of the Town, Constellation to the Eastw'd and
Vixen to the Westw'd. The Enemys Cruizers - Brig, Schooner, two Gally's & Gun Boats
(except one which is Anchored as a Guard within about one hundred
Yards of the Bashaws Castle) are crowded so close in behind the
Mole, that I was not able to ascertain exactly their number, farther
than by counting their Masts: There are however either Sixteen
or Seventeen exclusive of one on the Stocks, at the gate, contiguous
to the Bashaws Castle - The Brig is yet without Masts and not
a Vessel in the Harbour except the Guard Boat, has a Sail bent. -

426

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1804 TO 1806

I could not discover any material alteration in the Battery's, farther than what has been effected by white wash, except that some
of the Embrasures to the West & K W.parts of the Town appear
to have Guns, that had none last Fall. discover
The Constellation & Vixen I left before Tripoli as you
by the Enclosed copy of my letter to Cap"ampbel1
[12 March]
on the subject of Blockade, - The President had met with the
ConsteElatwn, off Tripoli, the day before I reached there and had
proceeded to the Eastward, towards Bengazi in pursuance of your
orders! Her return was momently expected when I left the Coast. [LC. JRP. Letters & Orders,Book A, 1804-1805.1

To Captain Samuel Barron, U. 6. Navy, from Captain John Rodgers, U. 6. Navy

U. STATES
FRIGATE
Cmstit&ion
Malta, March 19. 1805

SIR I[n] consequence of the discretionary orders you hare invested
me with, it is with due deference t,o your better judgement I take the
liberty to offer my opinion as to the measures most salutary to pursue,
in our present situation with Tripoli. The Blockade I conceive i t most advisable to preserve as minutely
as the season of the year will admit, not o d y to prevent the Enemys
Cruizers getting out of Port, which consequently must endanger our
Commerce, and add incalculable perplexity, by deranging every thing
like a systematic disposition being made, of the services of the different Vessels of the Squadron; but to prevent their recieving such supplies as can in any way augment their force to the prejudice of our
intended opperations. To maintain a Blockade effectually two if not
three Vessels, ought aIways to be stationed before the Port to prevent,
as far as circumstances of bad weather will admit, the possibility of
Vessels of every description getting either out or in. I t is true that some of their Cruizers having already got out renders
this disposition in some measure incomplete; but they nevertheless
I conceive ought to pursued, as the only definitive 8i determinate
means to prevent greater injury's. - Provided six Vessels were
formed into a relief solely to preserve the Blockade, the service would
be easy & the Vessels sure to be in order $ ready for service as soon
as the Weather wit1 authorise a combined attack - There are beside
these [space] Vessels employ'd in the Bloclcade, three others, exclusive
of the Enterprize & Syren, two of which it may perhaps be advisable
to employ on stations most likely to intercept the Enemy's Cruizers
(now a t Sea) entering other Ports, say Bengazi, Derne & Tunis; and
the third particularly charged with the procuration of such auxiliary
Force, as you may consider necessary to ensure success to your future
opperations. I should not have ventured to have given an opinion unaslc'd for
thus freely, was it not, with an intention of alle~iatingthe anxiety
which you must naturally feel in consequence of your being debared
from using those exertions which your capacity would enforce, was
you in Health, and I trust you will duly appreciate my Intentions,
even should you not consider them worth further consideration. With sincere Wishes of a speedy restoration of your Health
[LC.

JRP.

Letters & Orders, Book A, 1804-1805.)

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

427

To Captain Samuel Barron, U. S. Navy, from Sir Alexander John Ball, Governor
of Malta

MALTA19@March 1805.
SIR! I have the honor to enclose to your Excellency a Copy of a
Note which I have received from the Ottoman Minister, with a List
of Persons who were on board the Ottoman Vessel, [Mastico? commanded by] Kinth Monstaffa, which was captured by the American
Squadron; and as I shall have occasion to write to His Britannic
Majesty's Minister at Constantinople by a Vessel which will sail on
Saturday next: I shall be happy to convey your Answer by that
opportunity, or to execute any commands which you may have.
The Ottoman Minister complains of not having received any Answer
to the Remonstrance which he made against the Capture of some
Ottoman Vessels by your Squadron; which subject I communicated to
r your Inf~rmat~ion
there not being at that time any
Colonel L e ~ for
American Ship of War in this Port.
[LC. JRP, Vol. 1, Series Two, Feb. 1775-May 1805.1
Extract from Memorandum Book of Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Navy,
19 March 1805

Left the City of Washington on my way to Portland. Arrived a t
Baltimore.
[LC original.]
Extract from journal of U. S. Frigate Corwlitulion, Captain John Rodgers, U. S. Navy,
commanding, Tuesday, 19 March 1805

[Off the Harbour of Malta] a t 2 [P.M.] Discoverd a Sail on the
weather Beam at 3 spoke the US. Ship Cm~gress
At 6 the town of Malta bore S B E. Distance 3 leagues
At Midnight fresh breezes and cloudy Weather
At daylight Malta bore S S PO At 9 Shorten'd Sail and came too With the starb'! bower in 9 fathoms
Water furld sails and Moord ship
[USNA.]
Extract from journal of Surgeon Jonathan Cowdery, U. S. Navy, 19 March 1806

It was reported and genezally believed that the Americans had been
to Alexandria in Egypt, where they had got the Ex-Bashaw and four
thousand Egyptians, and carried them to Syracuse, where they were
to be landed to act in concert with the Americans against Tripoli.
I perceived many private councils and long faces amongst the Turks.
[LC. Rare Books, American Captives in Tripoli or Dr. Cowdery's Journal,
Boston, 1806.1
Extract from journal of William Eaton, U.S. Navy Agent for the Barbary Regencies,
Tuesda,, 19 March 1805

promised to proceed two days
The Bashaw paid off his caravan,
march a head. But, the same night, all except forty of them drew
off for Egypt; and the others refused to proceed, leaving us in a perplexed and embarrassed situation; as it was impossible to move without the caravan, and uncertain whether we could procure them to
start from this place - The Bashaw proposed depositing our baggage
in the castle and proceeding forward to the camp of sundry tribes.

428

,VATrAL OPERATIONS FROM 180.4 TO I805

who expected him two or t h e e days march ahead. - This I rejected;
being now destitute of cash, to proceed without provisions would be
throwing too much on contingency. [H. E. Huntington L&AG, EA 206.1
Extract from journal of Midshipman Charles BSorris, Jr., U. S. Navy, on board
U. S. Frigate Pruident. Master Commandant George Cox, U. S. Navy, commanding,
Tuesday, 19 March 1805

6 [P.M.] the Town of Tripoli bore S W - 6 Leagues.
Ldtitude Observed 33' 34' N.
Longitude Observed 23" 35' W.
IMrs. C . E. Fox original, NDA photostat.]

--

To Captain Samuel Barron, U. S. Navy, from Levett Harris, U. S. Consul General,
St. Petersburg, Russia

(COPY)

St PETERSBURG
8/20 M a ~ c h1805
SIR,The letter you did me the honor to address me from Syracuse
the 16 Jan? & it's inclosures came to hand the l e s inst? I lament the
occurence of the Circumstances which form it's principal sub'ect, &
sincerely regret with you that our Warfare with Tripoli shou d give
rise to events tending to commit our good understanding with any
Nation, & more especially one, with which our friendship appears
thus far to have so happily prospered. My first intelligence of the Capture of the Russian Vessel S! Michael
is communicated by your letter, & I conceived it both correct &
politic on a subject of this apparent importance to anticipate the
Prince de Czartoryski & by a just explanation of the facts to prepare
his mind against any improper prejudice which misrepresentation might
occasion. - I therefore on receipt of your dispatches requested an
interview of the Minister, on the succeeding day an opportunity was
afforded me of giving him a full detail of the transaction, in the progress of which, the principle of Blockade was discussed, & the right
of one Nation to interrupt the pursuits of another between which peace
& good understanding prevailed though those pursuits were directed
to an enemy's port. - The Minister conceived this right of late to
have been exclusively exercised by G. Britain, whose ascendency of
maritime strength gave her the means of annoying her ememies by
Blockade, & other modes of Warfare unusual in former periods, &
whidh he believed were disavowed by most Nations of the present
day, who were very generally attached to a measure opposite in principle, & to which America was also a partizan, that of a Support of
the independency of the neutral flag, except in Cases where i t aimed
to give protection to Articles, usually constituted contraband of war,
bound to an ennemy's port. - Finding the Minister has blended two
questions, wholly seperate of each other I was bold to inform his
Excellency, that his remarks on this Subject, which as far as they
applied, we Should ever be proud to recognize were irrelevant to the
principle of blockade, which was in et-ery respect distinct, a lengthy
discussion insued, in which I maintained that Blockade was not a
new operation of war, i t was almost as old as war itself, & it's light
& principle had been defined & acknowledged by Nations since the
remotest periods of History. - One Nation therefore, employing a

i

WARS T ~ ~ I TBARBARY
H
POWERS

429

force, at great expence against another could not allow a friendly
Power to convey Supplies to those ports declared blockaded i t would
render such blockade perfectly nugatory & an attempt to violate tho
Same, every acknowledged law of Nations on the Subject had declared
punishable by the confiscation of the property of the agressor.
The Powers who formed the armed neutrality the war before the
last, who aimed a t the establishment of the Principle espoused by the
Prince, understood blockade in this sense &- Russia who was the principle party in that confederacy described a piace to be in a State of
Blockade When i t was dangerous to approach it. The Minister a t length felt disposed to concede in part the principle,
which enabled me to proceed in an examination of the local circumstances attending this Capture, in which. in admitting it's legallity
on the above hypothesis, I proceeded to a deffence of the officers from
the imputation attached to their conduct by Monsr de Becker whose
letter & the authority on which it was written &- made a Subject of
particular comment, which the Minister entirely disavowed, & added,
that Mr deBecker has permitted himself to be improperly transported,
whose duty should have pointed to an opposite proceedure. - I
replied that I lamented extremely the necessity I felt myself under to
entertain his Excell? on this Subject, but the declarations of the
Consul were so incomparable with the disposition & Character of our
officers, which had ever been distinguished by honor & circumspection,
& were in such direct opposition to those Sentiments, which the Prince
w-as so well assured animatcd our Government, under whose orders &
authority they acted that I felt myself in duty impelled to a notice
of his Correspondence. - The Minister lamented the circumstances,
repeated his disapprobation of the manner the Agent has treated it, &expressed a hope that we should not again have occasion to meet on
such unpleasant business. I have thought i t necessary to offer you
the foregoing particulars of this Conversation on the Subject of Blockade (a matter in which You are well assured, my pro~inceno wise
embraces) merely as it may be considered to have relation to the Sequal
of this Conference, which alone came within my Sphere of action.
The remarks which the detention of the two Ottoman Ships have led
You to make, in reply to my Suggestion on the Subject of the proposed
intercourse with the Port with America, are in perfect unison with the
impression which dictated that Communication to Commodore Prebble;
those principles Sir, which should govern our Conduct toward all
Nations, which YOUhave so pertinently expressed, I trust will ever be
judiciously practiced by our Naval Commanders.
I informed the Prince de Czartoryski what you mention the Chevalier d'ltalisky to have written. - The Prince replied that the
Chevalier required no answer from his Court, he has received general &
explicit instructions in the name of his Sovereign, to make a reclamation for the Prisoners, & was directed to follow i t up, but unhappily
the orders of the Port were but too little regarded by those States
declared to be it's trebutaries. I confess I was myself sanguine upon
the happy tendency, I thought might attach to the mediation of thls
Powerful Court, & which joined to the interference of France. which
Livingston had procured strenghtened the hope I encouraged; that the
calamities of our Captive Countrymen would not be of lopg duration
&. I am disposed to think that the destruction of their Fngatje, & ~ t ' s
attendant consequences, n. measure of the first importance m itself,

430

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 180L 7'0 1805

which took place a few days before the arrivd of the Firman from the
Port & the french Messenger, as respect their fate may have been
unfortunate: I agree with you Sir, that our best hope toward the attainment of
this anxious object, & that of a Speedy peace with the Barbarians, is
in vigourous employment of the forces a t present in operation against
them, which I Zealously hope under your command may be prosecuted
with that success which circumstances so strongly indicate. [N-4. SDA. CD, St. Petersburg, Vol. 1, 1794-1809.1

To Sir Alexander John Ball, Governor of Malta, from Captain Samuel Barron,
U. S. Navy

MALTA
20th[or 211 March 1805.
SIR I have been duly honored with your Excellency's letter of yesterday, and the enclosures accompaning it.
On the Subject of the Ottoman Vessel, [,Mastico?] Commanded by
Kinth Mustaffa, Captured by the American Squadron, under the
Command of my predecessors, Commodore Preble, I have never
received any cornnlunications from the Ott,oman Porte; or I should
have given the information which I now beg leave to make to your
Excellency
It appears from the Communications from Commodore Preble, that
this Vessel was in the harbour of Tripoli when one of our Frigates, the
Philadelphia, unfortunately ran on a shoal near that place. - That
the Commander of said Vessel hoisted upon her the Tripoline Flag,
and in conjunction with the Tripoline Gun boats, went off and after
she had surrendered, took out the Captain, Officers & Crew and
delivered them to the Bashaw of Tripoli where they now remain in
Captivity and plundered Captain Bainbridge of his watch, and the
first lieut of his sword &$and several other things which \$-ereon board
his Vessel xhen taken, and of which he boasted to have taken from
them, when he boarded the Frigate. - This Act of hostility was
sufficient to induce Commodore Preble to Consider her as a proper
Subject of Capture; and he accordingly detained her when she came
out of Tripoli, with the persons on board. - The Chouss which had
been sent to Tripoli by the late Captain Pacha, and all others, excepting the Captain, who were found to be Turks, were liberated; but
those who wereTripoline Subjects were detained as prisoners of Xar. The Slaves have also been detained. But as I know it is the u-ish of
my Government to mantain harmony and a good understanding with
the Grand Senior, when [w-horn] we beleive would never justify such
an outrageous Act of hostilit as was committed upon us by the
Captain Kintll Mustaffa, I sha 1 not hesitate to deliver up said Slaves,
whenever I can be informed to JThom they are to be given, and also
to release any Others if such there be, who were not Tripoline Subjects,
on board said Vessel.
The Circumstances under which said Vessel was Captured, made
i t necessary that the case should be laid before the Government of the
U. States of America and a legd adjudication be had on the Subject.
As we have no Tribunal in this sea which can take cognizance of causes
of this Bind, it becomes expedient for the Captain to go to the United
States to appear on the Trial. - I expect very shortly, to learn the
decision on this Subject, and if it should appear that the Vessel is

r'

WARS W I T H BARBARY POTVERS

431

not a fair Prize, a full i n d e d c a t i o n will be made to those concerned.
But if it be proved that the conduct of the Captain was such as to
cause her to be condemned, 1 trust that His Hig[h]ness the Grand
Senior will have too much justice to consider it as an act of hostility
against him; but as a measure necessary and Justifiable by the laws
of War. CoIineI Lear communicated to me your Excellency's letter and the
extract of a Letter from his Excellency Alexander Straton Esq! to
yourself, on the Subject of the tn7o Vessels under Ottoman Colours,
which where Captured by the Squadroil under my Command, attemptr
to enter the port of Tripoli.
As these Vessels were taken within a very short distance of the
Port of Tripoli, standing directly for the harbour, under a full sail,
and with a wind which would have been highly favourable for them to
have taken another direction, had they been bound else where; and
from the Courses which they had steered from the place of their
departure as well as from many other circumstances, no doubt remained on the mind of the Captors of their being bound for for Tripoli,
which we were tehen blockading. - I therefore thought it proper
to detain them; and the Cargoes being of a perishable nature, and in
a state to render a delay in unloading them dangerous, they have been
sold, and the proceeds securely deposited to be delivered to WhomsoI have long since stated to my Governs
ever they may belong.
t,he circumstances under which these Vessels were taken, and am in
daily expectation of instructions either to send them t,o the U. States
for adjudication, or to deliver them up. In the latter case, the Vessels
will be ddivered in good order, and the proceeds of the Cargoes & s
accounted for to the satisfaction of the.proprietors, the the Agents of
whom 3: have seen since have been in thts place and who appear to be
satisfied with the situation in which this business stands.
I regret exceedingly that your Excellency has had so much trouble
in this affair; but as the Communications have been made to me
through you, I must beg the favor of your conveying the explaination
which I have here given in the way you may find most Convenient;
and I beg your Excellency will accept my best thanks for your kind
6.friendly attentions as well as on other occasions, which I shall not
fail to make known to my Government.

-

[Stephen Decatur Col.

S D A photostat, Book A,]

To Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Navy,from George Davis,U. S. Charg6 d'Affaires,
Tunis

TUNIS
hfarch 20tQ1805
DEARSIR Since the arrival of Comodore Barron I have did
myself the honor to address you several letters, under cover, & to t,he
particular care of hcfr Higgins, their receipt have been acknowledged;
and I presume long before this, have reached you in the U: States - it
would afford me part,icular pleasure to hear of your voyage, the state
of your health, with a paragraph on the political movements at home.
The State of Europe, must unquestionably be better known, at the
Seat of Govt, than in this isolated abode of distress and misery Russia has not yet declared her absolute intention with respect to
Europe - the first object of her armament speaks for itself; it seems
to be no less t'han the perfect, annihilation of the Ottoman Empire;

432

NAVAL OPEEATIONS FROM 1804 TO 1805

how such a Gigantic plan can best be executed, is left with the Statesman to decide - it is conjectured (and I think with much Justice)
that a secret understanding, on this point, exists, between the emperors, of France & Russia - Alexander, has refused to recognize
Buoniparte; has armed powerfull by Sea & land; has forced the
Sublime Porte, to follow his examp e, in all that relates to France; and
still perfect harmony seems to exist between the two Cabinets - the
prompt & decisive measures of the French Govr since the establiihment of the first Consul, with every European Power, by whom her
usurped dignity,has been asailed, renders her present silence a greater
Mystery; how & when these are to be revealed, I dare not hazard
an opinion Recent advises from Syracuse, speak confidently that the King of
Xaples, has ordered his Capt General & Governors, to give quiet
possession of the Island, to the Russians, who are daily expected, in
force - this is an old Story new dressed and -4th me has very little
credit.
Spain is making immense preparations for a vigorous prosecution
of the War - Portugal cannot escape - and La Petite France, is
approaching her death bed - Italy, Holland, & Switzerland, are
not yet organized; but the Crown, is preparing, which will forever
annex them to the french dominions and as Nations wipe them from
the face of the Earth Of Tripolitan affairs, I can say very little - Comodore Barron
has been ill these four or five months, and is still a very feeble convalescent - his complaint is said to be an affection of the Liver The Constitution has been t o Lisbon for men - the Argus, to Alexandria for "the man" and the Enterprize to Trieste for repairs; The
object of all their visits has I beleive been accomnplished; without
affecting the Blockade which is strictly kept up The Bashaw has made considerable preparations for a ~igorous
defence; but he is much streightened - he has to contend against
civil comotions, Famine, and an enterprising enemy - the rumour
is spread of the arrival of his Brother Achmet Bashaw; and Jussuph
has actualIy sent a Camp against Derna - thus far every thing
favours, our approaching Campaign; I pray God that the Comodores
health may be sufficiently established to endure its fatigue Tunis is again on growling order; and His Excellency, daily gives
me more reason to beleive that our peace cannot be very lasting;
If I had the power I would bring him to a decision before I close
this letter; it would be to the honor and dignity of my Country;
and free me from the painful suspense under which I have laboured
for eighteen months -

S

ILC.

EPP, Vol. 14, 1804-1805.1

Extract from journal of William Eaton, U. S. Navy Agent for the Barbary Regencies,
20 March 1805

Last night the rest of the camels left us to return to Egypt. I now discovered a complot between the chiek il Taiib and sundry
other chiefs, at which I thought the Bashaw connived, purporting a
resolution to proceed no further until they should have assurance
A report had been started,
of the arrival of our vessels at Bomba.said to be brought by a pilgrim on his way from Morocco toMecca,

WARS WITH BARBARY POWEI2S

433

that a force consisting of eight hundred cavalry and numerous foot
mere on their march from Tripoli for the defense of Derne, &- were
actually passed Bengazi. - I thought this an argument that urged
acceleration rather than delay - A great deal of noise and some
counsel was heard among the Bey's chiefs, in which I was not consulted, and a final resolution taken that they would remain on the
spot till a runner could go Bomba and return. In consequence of
which I ordered their rations stopped, and resolved myself to take
possession of the castle and fortify myself there until I could get
intelligence to our naval detachment to come to our relief, when I
would take off our Christians and leare them to take measures for
their oum subsistence and safety. - I t was now twelve oclock a t
night. - I left the Arab Chiefs in the Bashaw's tent confused and
embarrassed, - and retired to my own markee and reflections.
We have marched a distance of two hundred miles, though an
inhospitable waste of world without seeing the habitation of an animated being, or the tracks of man, except where superstition has
marked her lonely st,eps o'er burning sands and rocky mountains,
whence the revelation of one of her most hypocritical fanatics trains
her wretched victims a tedious pilgrimage to pay their devotion at
his shrine. - But while we reproach the imposter we cannot but
ascribe some good to the effect of the imposition: it has here and
there opened a water source to its votaries, which now allays the
thirst of pilgrims, bound across this gloomy desert on pursuits vastly
different from those which lead to Mecca; the liberation of three
hundred Americans from the Chains of Barbarism, & a manly peace.
[H. E. Huntington L&AG, EA 206.1
To George Harrison, Navy Agent and Superintendent of Navy Yard, Philadelphia,
Pa.,from Secretary of the Navy

XAVD E P ~
21 .March 1806

SIR, I have received your letter of the 18t"st

I am so desirous of having the medal for Commodore Preble well
executed that I hare some thoughts of having it engraved in Europe If M' Reach cannot design I fear that he cannot execute with that
taste which I was induced to suppose he could when I &st wrote t o
you on this subject - I-Iowc~erat all events we must. fix upon the
devise in tllis Country and the re-rerse - Khen Commodore Preble
shall furnish you with a drawing of his actions at Tripoli shew it to
Amateurs in Philadelphia and ask them to exercise their taste upon
the subject - Ascertain the Opinion of Amateurs also as to the
most appropriate reverse and the most, appropriate size of the Medal
1 have sent some young midshipmen to Lieu+ Barden, who are
intended for the John Adams - On their arrival in Phil":
Barden
can order them to New York imrnedia!ely if necessary with seamen
for the John Adams assist him in making the best arrangements on
this Subject - How comes on the Gun Boat N U - I intend
that she shall sail for the mediterranean on or before the 1%May
next - Give Lieu: Barden every needful assistance in preparing
her for Sea

-

[NDA. GLB, Vol. 7, 1803-1805.1

434

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM I804 TO 1805

To Master Commandant Thomas Robinson, Jr., U. S. Navy, from Captain James
Barron, U. S. Navy

U. S. FRIGATE
Essex
Triest March 21" 1806
DEARSIR I sail$ from Malta on the
Inst. bound for Venice
and altho' I supposd that the best information was obtain* respecting
those Seas by Pilots end otherwise, I t was not until we were near half
passage that I learnt (with much mortification) that it was impossible for the Essex to pass the Barr of that Port. There is also another
circumstance which may opperate much against my visit here namely a long Quarentme this however, is not yet determined, I have
therefore conclude that it is absolutely necessary to see you without
loss of time, and in order that you ma be able to furnish me with all
the necessary information relative to t e completion of my object. I
herewith inclose you a copy of my instructions which I hope you will
make use of in the most prudent and secret manner possible, and by
no means make them known to any person whose confidence you are
not perfectly secure in.
Vessels proper for Bomb Ketches can be had in Malta without difficulty, and here I observe all the small craft - common in those
Seas are excellently calculated for Gun Boats of course Mortars, Bomb
Shells & 32 Pound Cannon will be the only things we may want that
will require a Govermental permission; to be refused will be disagreeable, & to obtain that permission without exposing our views will require all your address, but let me intreat you to lose no time in gaining
this information and repairing to this place
Since writing the above Mr Riggen's informs me that vessels can
be purchased & fitted here in any manner we may think proper, without interruption except arming. This question is not yet answered
can Bombards be had in Venice for the season?
J. B.
NB I anchord here this morning at 7 A M.

%

[NDA. Captain's LB, Vol. 1, 1805.1
To Secretary of the Navy from Sailing Master Levi Bardin, U. S. Navy

PHILADELPHIA
March $1" 1805
SIR I have the Honr to Acknowledge the receipt of your Letter of
the lgth Ins;
The purport of which I communicated to George Harrison Esqr
who advises me very strongly against giving two Dollars Gratuity to
the Landlords. as the 10 Dollars bounty allowed the Seamen would
be a Sufficient Inducement to the Landlords, to make them use their
best exertions in geting the men to enter I have Shiped 9 men to Day ([23] Seamen & 24 Ordinary) Total 47
The Gun Boat has been Striped of all her former rigging mast and
Spars, and I have the promise of the New mast to morrow
[NDA. Misc. LB, Vol. 1, 1805.1

Extract from Memorandum Book of Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Wavy,
21 March 1805

Got off for New Castle by stage a t 10 a.m. arrived at 2 p.m. Sailed
for Philadelphia in a Packet. At 5 p.m. arrived. Was visited by a
number of respectable gentlemen and invited to a public dinner.
[LC original.)
Extract from journal of Surgeon Jonathan Cowdery, U. I.Navy, 21 March 1805

A frigate and brig appeared off the harbour. The Bashaw told me
be suspected comnlodore Barron was dead, as he had not heard from
him for a time. Not ion before, he told me, that he had heard of
the death of his brother t e Ex-Bashaw. He seemed highly pleased
a t such news. Several of the sons and dearest friends of his chiefs in
the country, were brought into the castle, as hostages for their fidelity
to the present Bashaw. Symptoms of dissatisfaction appeared
amongst the people.

%

[LC. Rare Books, American Captives in Tripoli or Dr. Cowdery's Journal,
Boston, 1806.1
Extract from journal of William Eaton, U. 6. Navy Agent for the Barbary Regencies,
21 March 1805

The position taken yesterday had its effect. Fifty camels were
prevailed on to return to us, and to go on two days farther. - We
marched at 11. a. m. and proceeded to an elevated stoney plain barren,
about 13 miles, where we found good cistern water. IH. E. Huntington L&AG, EA 206.1
Extract from journal of Midshipman Charles l o r r i s , Jr., U. S. Navy, on board
U. S. Frigate Pruident, Master Commandant George Cox, U. S. Navy, commanding, Thursday, 21 March 1805

Commencing. with light breezes and Hazy, dull, weather. 5. Saw
the Iand a head, hauled our wind 536 the Land bore from S B W,
to. W B S. The Backland abreast the Ship high making a bluff to
the Eastward, the nearest, land a high white bank and white sand
hills, distant 4 or 5 leagues. Made all sail by the wind.
Midnight light breezes and Hazy with dull heavy clouds. 5 Saw the
ConsteUation and Vixen to the S. W. bore up for them and made sail Noon Pleasant Weather. the Constellation and Vixen in Company Latitude Observed. 33" 18' N.
[Mrs. C. E. Fox original, NDA photostat.]

To Secretary of the Navy from Master Commandant Isaac Chauncey, U. S. Navy

NEW YORK
22 March 1805
SIR I have had the honor of receiving your Letter of the 17tQ Inst
granting me a Furlough to make a European or East India Voyage,
and aprobating my Conduct since I have had the Honor of holding a
Commission which to me is of the highest Importance, and next to the
Satisfaction arising from a Consciousness of having endeavoured to
discharge my Duty, is the Approbation of my Country: If I have
manifested any Zeal it has proceeded from a Conviction that every
Officer holding a Commission should execute with Zeal and Promptltude any Order that he may receive for the good of the Service however it may interfere with his pecuniary Arangements.

436

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 180L TO
1805
-

- --

Be pleased to accept my Thanks for the Promptness and handsome
Manner in which you have been pleased to grant me this Indulgence
[NDA. MC LB,1804-5.1
To Master Commandant Isaac Chauncey, U. S. Navy, commanding U. 8. 6.
John Adams, New Pork, N. Y., from Secretary of the Navy

NAVYDEP!
22 -44arch 1805. I have received your let,ter of the l g t QIns? - Tour active exertions in equipping and fitting for sea the Frigate John Adams, command my acknowledgments. I have ordered Lieutenants from Charleston and Boston to repair
to New York and join the John Adarns. We hare very few in the

Country, ot,herwise I should not have taxed your zeal so h e a d y ;
however you will be relieved rery soon. [NDA. OSW, Vol. 6, 1802-1805.1
To Secretary of the Navy from keutenant John Spriggs, U. S. Navy

OR' THE SERVICE
OF THE UNITED
STATES

Boston iMarch 22nd1805
SIR I have recieved your letter of the 11 ulto with orders to fit
out the Gun Boat under my Command for Foreign Service & you have
complimented nie from exsperiance Seamanship to fit her out agreeable to my owne Ideas &- slender ability~. I must confess it requires
some thought to complent her, as a Man of War in miniature to cross
the Atlantic, from her construction, however I will cheerfully execute
your orders & indeavour to make her as compleat as possible, for the
Service intended for I beg leave to remark that all Water & Provision Cash must be
made adapted to her hold, being so flat floor$ am of an oppinion by
this attention, she might stowr 3
provisions, I should better judge
where I acquainted of each Rat~on'sfor 25 Men, compleatly t-ictualed
for that time. I beg leave to remark that would be the number of
men she would be able to stow, Officers included the crew should be
able Seamen on this plan I judge their would be ample provisions
& water for that number, as well as their health been preserv'd on so
long a voyage I should recommend the after gun not to be mounted until1 she
arrives on her Station, as being too great a weight at her exstreem,
perticular sruding before the Wmd, also an incumberance to the Helm
& am of an oppinion the Gun might attract the Compass, she might
be supplyed with a Gun & the necessary proportion of Ammunition
on her joining the Squadron These are my remarks which I submit to your Judgement.
The Boat is plank up & they are going to lay her deck everry
disspatch is using to compleat her. The copper is ordere'd

[NDA. OfEcere LB, 1802-1805.1

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

437

To Secretary of the Mavy from Lieutenant Nathaniel Fanning, U. S. Mavy

CHARLESTON
S. C.
March the 2651 1806
SIR The outfits of the Gun Boat Built a t fair Bank near this
place is progressing rapidly. She was transported from thence to
this place on Tuesday last. And She is now pronounced by able &
practical Men to be the very best Boat, on every account for Carrying Guns, and for safety at Sea, of any one urhich has hitherto been
built in the U. S. She is in fact so large Buoyant, and burthensome
that She might with a Skilful Navigator on Board double Cape Horn
and proceed round the World with perfect Safety. All praise her &
none condemn her. I have the honor to wait your further instructions
as to any improvement,^ whch may be made, m or upon this Valuable
Public Vessel, and I h a ~ the
e Vanity to add, that If She was ordered
to the Mediteranian she would be. an acquisition to our Squadron
highly serviceable to the public against the Tripolitans.
[MIA.

Rlisc. LB, Vol. 1, 1805.1

To Sailing Master Levi Bardin, U. S. Navy, commanding Gunboat No. 3, from
Secretary of the Navy

XAVD E P ~
22 AWarch1806.

I have received your Letter of the lgth Ins; I make no objection to your having Lee-Boards to Gunboat No 3.

It appears to me they will be useful, therefore have them made.
[NDA. Off. Comg. Gunboats, 1803-1808.1
Blockade of Cadiz and St. Lucar

Extract of a letter from Vice Admiral Sir John Orde Bart Commanding His Britain$ Majesty's Squadron off Cadiz.
To James Gambier Esq' Consul General in Portugal dated March
22!' 1805 I have thought it an imperious duty on my part to order the Blockade of Cadiz and St. Lucar - No vessel is allowed to go into the
former Port, or to leave i t except in Ballast nor is any Vessel laden
Stores or
either in whole or in part with Corn, i%filitary, or ~\~araZ
Provisions, to be permitted to enter thc latter. I think it proper to
give You the eadiest notice of these measures, which I request you to
communicate to all concerned, within your-reach, in order that
Individuals may be prevented as much as posslble from suffering, by
their necessary adoption, except from thew own imprudence.
A true Copy.
(sig) J GAMBIER.
[K.4. SDA.

CL, Lisbon, Vol. 2, 1803-1805.1

To Captain Samuel Barron, U. S. Navy, from Captain William Bainbridge,
U. S. Navy

BARBARY
TRIPOLI2 9 March 1805
DEARSIR I wrote to you on the 16tQinstant respecting a certain
subject, since then I have seen the letter alluded to in mine of that date,

and I beleive that the sentiments contained in it merits the credit of
veracity, and if experimented on I trust it will be found satisfactory
t o you.
If Commodore Preble did receive a letter last summer from a certain person here; he no doubt gave it to you, from which, you can
form some opinion of the present subject
I hare not had the pleasure to hear from you since October last,
am daily in expectation of it

[Thefollowing was written in invisible ink.]
22 Ilfarch 1805

DEARBARRONI n one of my letters to you in this month I have

mentioned that I had heard that Sidi Mahommed Dhgies Minister of
foreign affairs for the Bashaw had requested hit Beaussier the French
Consul here to inform Com Preble that if a person would come here
and remain a few days or until that Peace could be affected for one
hundred & fifty thousand Dollars. This day tho said Minister assured
me in confidence that he did thus reqiuest] M' B but does not know
wether Com P. received the information or not - I have no doubt
that if a Person was to come here to negotiate before an attack was
made that Peace could be effectedfor one hundred & twenty thousand
dollars 20/M and if the attack should not prove us[*] successfull it is
very probable that such a sum would not release us from captivity,
at least for some time. Apprehension is often worse than realisation
I sincerely hope that a Person will come for I think it a most favorable moment, and be assured that there is not the least risque for
us I t would be the best in my opinion to ask the Guarantee of the
Danish or French Consul in that case I think it is probable that
they would give the Danish whom[?] I should much prefer, as I know
him [to be] a man of unquestionable integrity
The other I have
not the highest opinion of - The danish has already gone great
lengths to serve us and hare ran dissinterested risques and you may
be assured that he can be trusted as a man of the strictest honor and, his complying with the.Ministers request is actuated by a principle to serve us - [word illegible] my Dear Barron may success
attend you either in negotiating or Combatting is the fervent prayer
of

-

WmB-

[*Writing indecipherable]
[Stephen Decatur, original.]

TO Willism Eaton, U. S. Navy Agent for Barbary Regencies,from Captain Samuel
Barron, U. S. Navy

MALTA2 9 March 1805.
SIR,By Captain Hull, who arrived in this harbor with the U S
brig Argus under his command on the. 10. inst, I receiv'd your favors
addressed to me, together with communications for the Secretary
of the Navy and copies of the correspondence betwixt yourself and
Cap? Hull relative to your proceedings from you arrival in Egypt
until his departure from thence; also by the hands of Mahumed
secretary a letter frclm H. Ex. Hamet Bashaw announcing his junction with you, all which I have perused with an at,tention and delib-

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

439

eration which the important and interesting nature of their contents
demands - I cannot but applaud the energy and perseverance that
has characterized your progress through a series of perplexing and
discouraging diffuculties to the attainment of the object of your
research - an attainment which I am disposed to consider as a fair
presage of future success - On receipt of these communications I
did not loose a moment in making the necessary arrangements for
sending you succours, and I now dispatch the brig Argus with the
sloop under her convoy carrying a variety of stores and provisions
according to the accompanying list - Captain Hull will shape his
course direct for Bomba where he calculates on finding you with
the Bashaw and his army, and where he supposes you will make a
stand - I have directed him to deliver these stores to you, to be
applied as your discretion may direct - He has also under his
charge a sum in specie amounting to seven thousand dollars which
is likewise to be placed a t your disposal - By the time these vessels
establish a communication with you, you will have been enabled to
form a correct opinion as to the prospect of ultimate success and
thence to estimate the advantages likely to result from this cooperation, & by this opinion you must be governed in the application of
the succours - Should you have encountered unexpected difficulties which place the chances of success upon more than precarious
grounds, your own prudence will suggest the propriety of not committing these supplies and the money uncontroledly to the power
of the Bashaw - Indeed in the point of view in which I regard
the measures already pursued as well as the subject of co-operation
generally, I concieve you ought to tread with the utmost circumspection It is far from my wish to damp your ardor or that of your
companions in arms by laying too great a stress upon the cold maxims
of prudence whereby the tide of success is often lost, something I am
aware, should always be left to fortune in undertakings of this nature,
but I must own that there are in your dispat,ches, certain things
which when applied to the test of my instructions from home give
birth to feelings of doubt and uneasiness, and these I think it incumbent upon me to point out to you with candor and explicitness in
order that we may be fully understood - You must be sensible,
Sir, that in giving their sanction to a cooperation with the exiled
Bashaw, Government did not contemplate the measure as leading
necessarily and absolutely to a rcinstatement of that Prince in his
rights on the regency of Tripoli - they appear to have viewed the
cooperation in question as a means, which provided there existed
energy and enterprize in the exile, & attachment to his person on
the part of his former subjects, might be employed to the common
furtherance and advance of his claims and of our cause, but without
meaning to fetter themselves by any specific or definite attainment
as an end, as the tenor of my instructions (whereof inclosed is an
extract) and the limited sum appropriated for that special purpose
clearly demonstrate - I fear by the convention you were about
to enter into with Hamet and by the complexion of other measures
that a wider range may have been taken than is consistent with the
powers vested in me for that particular object - These apprehensions may perhaps prove groundless on further representations from
you, but under my present impressions I feel it my duty to state
explicitly that I must withhold my sanction to any convention or

440

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 180L TO 1805

agreement committing the Lnited States or tending to impress upon
Hanlet Bashaw a conviction that we have bound ourselves to place h i
on the Throne - The consequences involved in such an engagement
cannot but strike you forcibly and a general riew of our situation
in relation to the reigning Bashaw, & our unfortunate countrymen
in Tripoly will be s a c i e n t to mark its inexpediency - I shall consider it my duty, as it certainly is my inclination to afford you every
aid compatible with the authority vested in me 6: commensurate
with the means placed at my dlsposal and you may depend upon
the most active and vigorous support from the squadron as soon as
the season and our arrangements will permit us to appear in force
before the enemy's walls, but I wish you to understand that no
guarantee or engagements to the exiled prince, whose cause, I repeat
it, we are only favoring as the instrument to an attainment and not
in itself as an object, must be held to stand in the way of our acquescence to any honorable and advantageous terms of accommodation
which the present Bashaw may be induced to propose - Such
terms being once offered and accepted by the representative of Government appointed to treat of peace, our support to Hamet Bashaw
must necessarily be withdrawn - You u-ill not however conclude
that these considerations, important and necessary as they are, ought
to induce us at once to abandon the benefits which the measures
you have adopted seem to promise - I consider a perse~erancein
these by no means incompatible with a total freedom from any
tramels with respect to a definite object, which freedom I dcem it all
important to preserve, especially when I *view the paritcular situation in which Captain Bainbridge and his feUow sufferers may be
placed by this cooperation - If by your energy and exertions added
to the supplies now sent forward, you succeed in getting possession
of Derne & Bengazi we may calculate that having received this
impuise from our strength, he will possess in himself sufficient energy,
courage Sr, talent, and, if accounts are correct, sufficient interest
among the people to move on with firm steps, and to conduct his
friends and adherents to the gates of Tripoli Every support will
of course be given him by a systematic union of operations uith
the squadron so as to enable him to come upon the rear of the town but should the Bashaw be found deficient in these essential qualities
or that it appears that we have been deceived with regard to the
disposition of the inhabitants, he must be held as an unfit subject
for further support or co-operation - I beg leave to mention to you
that as w-e are short of officers the services of all will be called for on
board the respective ships as soon as we enter upon offensive measures - Should yoa concieve however that any serious disadvantage may result from withdrawing those with you, I have no objection to their remaining as volunteers, but it is impossible for me to
comply with your requisition for one hundred marines to be sent
to the coast - Such a step in the present posture of affairs far
exceeds my powers, and besides, as we are in want of hands 1 could
not feel myself justifiable in detaching so considerable force from
the squadron - I have not been unmindful of your requisition of
field artilery which I think with you is essential, but here it is impossible to procure it, I therefore dispatched some days since the Congess
Frigate to Messina where I hope to obtain four field pieces complete

WARS WITH BARBARY POWEaS

441

for service, and as soon as they arrive they will be sent to the coast
with the necessary amunition As I am still too unwell to write you with my own hand, I must
refer you to Captain Hull, in whose judgement and discretion I have
the most entire confidence, for information on several collateral
points and for my sentiments on others - In this letter I have
endeavoured to explain as clearly as possible what are my ideas
with respect to the wishes & intentions of our government, and what
I feel to be the extent of my authority touching the cooperation with
Hamet Bashaw - I reiterate to you my fixed resolution to afford
you every support and assistance, which are consistent with the
powers intrusted to me adding a t the same time my dissent from
any guarantee covenant or engagement by which the United States
mag stand committed to place the exiled Prince on the throne, or
any conditions which militate against the most perfect and uncontroled power of choice and action in concluding a pacification with
Joseph Bashaw, should he offer terms honorable and advantageous
to our country I should be wanting in justice to you, Sir, as well as to the officers
who have thus far shared your toils and dangers, were I not to express
my full reliance on your Courage, Energy and Perseverance, as well
as my ardent desire that your most sanguine expectations mayebe
realized - The observations I here convey to you are far from be~ng
intended to cool your zeal or discourage your expectations, but they
are what I concieve it necessary to make and drawn from me by the
purest feelings of duty, and as such permit me to recommend them to
your calm and candid consideration, and request you will make them
the subject of conversation with Captain H. who is fully possessed of
my sentiments.
As in enterprizes similar to that you are engaged in much is left to
fortune, so also much is dependent on the operation of circumstances hence the impropriety of tying you down with positive instructions
Many things must necessarily occur in which your judgement and d ~ cretion alone can be your guide, and indeed your further proceedings
will depend so completely upon events and circvmstances impossible
for me to estimate or foresee that I must consider myself rather as
your Counsellor than your director - Enclosed you will find a letter
to Hamet Bashaw, which please to have interpreted to him - i t is
left open for your perusal - Should you have reached Derne or Bengazi in safety and established yourselves there, you will detail to
Captain Hull as minutely as possible the nature and place of your
further operations as well as your ideas and wishes respecting our
naval cooperations, and dispatch one or both vessels (accordingly as
may be agreed upon betwixt Cap: Hull and yourself) to inform me of
your situation and prospects The Bashaw's secretary goes in the Argus - He has conducted
himself with great propriety here, and I am much pleased with his
manners and respectable appearance .Captain Hull will acquaint you with any thing worthy of remark
that has happened in our affairs - I need hardly say how anxious
I feel for further intelligence from you - I bee you will present my
respects to your brother Officers and that you will believe me with the
most sincere wishes for and inte-t
in your safety and success
[NA. Sen. 9 B-I3 6, Pres. Message, Jan. 1806.1

442

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 180L TO 1805

To Hamet Caramanli, rightful Bashaw of Tripoli, from Captain Samuel larron,

U. 6. Navy

MALTA.
March 22c [or 211 1805. EXCELLENCY,
By the hands of your Secretary M a h u t who arrived
in safety at this place on board the Brig Argus I received your Excellency's letter which has been interpreted to me. I thank you with
COPY

sincerity for your Expressions of Kindness and regard towards me and
am happy that your Excellency remains in good health. With great
satisfaction I h a ~ received
e
from Mr Eaton the intelligence of your
junction with him, and of the measures you had adopted to commence
your march towards Bombs. YOsooner did I receive this intelligence
than I made every exertion to collect the succours required in your
letter, and I now send my faithful and worthy Captain Hull with the
Argus Brig and a Sloop under her Convoy loaded with provisions and
Stores. I have not been able to procure the Field Artillery you ask,
at this place, but I dispatched a Frigate to Sicily where I hope to
obtain it. As soon as it arrives no time will be lost in sending i t on
the Coast. I hope Cap1 Hull will find your Excellency and your Army
in safety and health and that your measures so far may have been
propitious to our cause. I have written very full to hlr Eaton to whom and to Captain Hull
I refer your Excellency for further information, and with my most.
ardent wishes for your individual prosperity as well as the success of
the Enterprize in which you are engaged,
[NA. Sen. 9 B-B 6, Pres. Message, Jan 1806.1

-

[Enclosure]

To Captain Samuel Bsrron, U. 8. Navy, from Hamet Caramanli, rightful Bashaw
of Tripoh
[Translation1

Hamet Ex-Bashaw of Tripoli
to Commodore Sam! Barron $ 9
DEAR&: ESTEEMEDI have to inform your Excellency of my perfect Health & to express my sincere wishes for yours - I beg you
to be assured of the high Re ard & Consideration wrhich I entertain
for T Excell? & I hope that y the assistance of the Divine Being I
shtd shortly be a t Tripoli my City t o drive from thence my perfidious
Enemies. I make known to you the Arrival of Mr Wm Eaton my General di
Campo & tbat we have agreed upon a plan of Operations which I have
no doubt will lead to that Success which we both desire. Said Mr
Eaton begged me to come to Syracuse in order to confer with your
Excellency and to form a personal acquaintance with you - I must
inform you my worthy and esteemed friend that time does not allow
me to cross the Sea and that I am too much occupied with my Camp
consisting of Infanty and Cavalry and would not leave them for the
acquisition of the morld - With the present I send you my Secretary of State named Muhumed as mv proper Representative to treat
in my Stead - whom I beg you w d receive and I trust your ideas
will be s i i a r with regard to the object we have in view.
My dear friend - you must Know that I am already on my March
with my Camp & I earnestly solicit you to send me as speedily as

E

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

443

possible the following Succors of which I stand greatly in need vizt Powder, Field Artillery Mu~lietsMoney & a few Soldiers These once arriv'd we are agreed with Mr Eaton on the plan explained
in his Letter - and further as provisons of all kinds are very scarce
in Barbary, I beg you will send some likewise - I hope that in the
course of about 50 days we shall form a system of Cooperation a t
Misurat - My dear friend, consider me in all things as your Son
and that my Kingdom shall be always as your own I salute you with cordial Regard & remain &F
(Seal of HAMET
BASHAW)
[NA. Sen. 9B-B 6, Pres. Message, Jan. 1806.1
A List of Articles on board the U. S. Brig Argus & Sloop Hornet

30 Hogsheads of Bread
20 Barrels of Pease
10 Tierces of Rice

1
2
10
100
1
7000

Hogshead of Brandy
Do of Wine
Boxes of Oil
Saclcs of Flour
Bale of Cloth
-say seven Thousand Spanish Dollars. -

[H. E. Huntington L&AG, EA 23.1
To Captain John Bodgers, U. 8. Navy, from Lieutenant Joshua Blake, U. S. Navy

Argus, MALTA
2@ March 1805
SIR, I wrote Commo: Barron, on the subject of yesterdays conversation, and agreeable to your direction; Commo: Barron, answers
me by Caps Hull, that the moment you make a requisition for an
Officer, that he will give me an order, but till then, he could not order
me as it might not be agreeable to you.
As the departure of the Argus may be sudden, and without giving me
an opportunity of acting, in case you should not wish me on board
your Ship, allow me Sir, to solicite your opinion on the subject, as
early as convenient. [LC. JRP, Letters & Orders, Book A, 1804-1805.1
Extract from journal of Surgeon Jonathan Cowdery, U. S. Navy, 22 March 1805

Two negroes were hung at the gate of the city for robbery.
The Bashaw's son-in-law who had been sent into the country to
collect troops to protect Tripoli, returned without success. The people
refused to fight for the Bashaw, because he had made unusual demands
for money, and even had stripped their wives of their jewels. For
several days, it had been reported that ten thousand troops were to
muster on the beach near the town; and his highness was to make
a speech to encourage them to fight for him against the Americans and
his brother. I prepared myself to see these troops; but to my disappointment not one of them appeared.
{LC. Rare Books, American Caplives in Tripoli or Dr. Cowdery'a Journal,
Boston, 1806.1

444

NAVAL OPERATIO-VS FROM 1804 TO 1805

Extract from journal of William Eaton, U.S. Navy Agent for the Barbary Regencies
Friday, 22 March 1805

Marched 12%miles. - At 3 p. m. arrived a t an extensive inclined
plain, bordering on the sea, called in Arabic Oak kerar ke barre, amidst
camps of numerous Brabs, consisting of three tribes of the Eu ed alli
race, supposed to amount to the number of 3 or 4,000 souls, inclusively,
covering a ground in a detached manner of 19 or twenty leagues
circumference. Here were vast herds of camels, horses and cattle,
and innumerable Bocks of sheep and goats. - We were the first
Christians ever seen by these wild people. - We were viewed by
them as curiosities. - They laughed at the oddity of our dress;
gazed a t our polished arms with astonishment: - at the same time
they observed the greatest deference towards such of us as bore any
distinctive marks of office. - They bro't us for sale everything their
camps afforded, and as rarities offered us young gazels and ostriches. But, being destitute of cash, we could only exchange our rice for their
produce. - We found dates here, which were brought five days
joufney from the interior of Africa, of an excellent quality. A11 our
gram (barley and beans) for the horses exhausted. Dispatched a
courier with letters to Captain Hull a t Bomba.
[H. E. Huntington M A G , EA 206.]
Extract from journal of Midshipman Charles Morris, Jr., U. S. Navy, on board
U. S. Frigate President, a s t e r Commandant George Cox, U. 6. Navy, commanding, Friday, 22 March 1805

5 The Town of Tripoli bore S S W. 4 leagues distant. Capt Cox
returned [from the Constellation] Made sail to the N N E.
Latitude Observed 33' 34' N.
Longitude Observed 13' 39' E
[Mrs. C. E. Fox original, S D A photostat.]
Extract from journal of Hezekiah Loomis, Steward, U. 6. Navy, in U. S. Brig
Vixen, Master Commandant John Smith, U. S. Navy, commanding, Friday,
22 March 1805

Off Tripoli. This da pleasant. R e stood for the town. -4t
half past 11 o~clocirA. %
we
I.fired upon 3 gun boats which were
sailing about in the harbour. What damage they sustained I could
not learn. At 2 04clock P. M. Captain Camel came on board and
dined. Day ends moderate.
[L. F. Middlebrook, NDA copy.]
To John Stricker, Navy Agent, Baltimore, I d . , from Secretary of the Navy

NAVDEP*
23d March 1805

I have received your two letters of the 21" It is important that the Provisions &"e shipped without delay Engage a Vessel therefore as soon as you can and load her without
delay - giving me information of her name, the name of her Commander, & when to send his sailing instructions - The Vessel expected from Boston may be the second Vessel to sail with Provisions
&c & as she is a fine new Ship the powder may be sent in her -when
she arrives dispatch her as soon as may be in your power I fear that

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

445

our Squadron will want provisions before the arrival of either of the
Vessels - as much of the provisions heretofore sent out has been
condemned as unfit for service I have Ordered Captain Tingey to ship to you for the Gun Boat two 32 pc Cannon wit'h Carriages & all the necessary apparatus [KDA. GLB, Vol. 7, 1803-1805.3
To Lieutenant James W. Murdoch, U. S. Navy, Charleston, S. C., from Secretary
of the Navy

KAVYD E P M ~

23Td Liarch1805.Gunboats Ne6 1, 2 2 9 are all to sail for the Mediterranean on or
before the 1% May next. On board of each of them we shall put,
besides Officers and a small Detachment of hlarines, ten able Seamen,
without any ordinary Seaman or Boy. Retaining therefore on Board of each of the Gunboats Nee 1 & 2,
10 able Seamen and transferring the residue of the able Seamen to K?
9, the ordinary Seamen and Boys that may be on Board, may have
their choice either to be discharged a t Charleston S: C, or to join the
John Adams in New York. I11 case they should prefer joining the
John Adams, you will conduct them to New k'ork and there deliver
them up to the Commanding Officer of that Ship. R1y wish is that all
those who are worthless may Consent to be discharged at Charleston,
and that those of a contrary description and who are healthy active
Men may consent to re-enter for a period of 2 years. Shew this letter to the Commanding Officers of Gunboats K Q1 & 2. Consult with them on the subject and make the best arrangements in your power not incompatible u-ith justice and good faith
towards the XIen, to car the views of Government into effect. 31: [William] Smith w' 1 render you every needful assistance. -

7

[KDA.

OSW, Vol. 6, 1802-1805.1

[23 March 18053
To Secretary of the Navy from George Harrison, Navy Agent, Philadelphia, Pa.

SIR I am this day honor'd with your letter of the 21s:
The Gun Boat K ?3 - mny be Sent to Sea in a Fortnight - As yet,
however, I have rec'd no Indent for other than hfilitary Stores Your orders respecting the Destination of the Recruits have not
been rec'd - from your letter to me, I presume they are to be sent
to New York, 6. or this - I shall take measures, to forward them, on
Monday Commodore Preble being in wit^ I have prevailed on him to sit
to Mr R. Peale for a profile likeness - this is necessary whether executed in America or Europe - hfr Reitch is the best Die Sinker in
America, a specimen may be seen in yohledal he executed of the
President. I have procured Several Medals from the Philosophical
Society - the best of u-hich (Gustavus of Sweden) he flatters himself
he can equal. If you will permit it, I will Send this, with some others,
mail, for your examination - I rather think i t is not an essential
to y' engraving and that its professor shc be acquainted with designing & drawing - they are distinct branches. I t is however a subject
I am but little acquainted with - A degree of knowledge may be

necessary - but not t,hat required to form a picture - or design for
an Engraving. [XDA. Misc. LB, Val. 1, 1805.1
To Briggs Brothers, Sexandria, Egypt, from Captain Samuel Barron, U. S. Navy

GENTLEMEN,
By Cap? Hull of the Vnited States Brig Argus, and by
the communications from Mc Eaton, I have been informed of the
polite and friendly attent'ion, which they and their brother Officers
experienced from you, as well as the active and useful services rendered
them in a public capacity during their stay in Egypt,
I hasten to convey to you Gentleman, in the name of my
Country my sincere acknowledgments, and the tribute of my individual
I have been made acquainted with the pecuniary
respects.engagements and advances you have entered into for Mr Eaton on
the faith of the United States, Capt Hull is on the Point of sailing
for the Eastern Coast of Tripoli, he has instructions to proceed from
thence to Alexandria, provided he is not prevented by unforeseen
circumstances - should he be obliged to return without executing
that part of his instructions, I shall adopt some other arrangement
t o settle the dependancies in question Cap".
will probably have an
oppertunity of sending this overland to Alexandria. - I feel happy
in this occasion of opening a correspondence with you, and assuring
you of my perfect consideration. [TDA. Isaac Hull LB, 1803-1806.1
To Master Commandant Isaac E d , U. S. Irlavy, commanding U. S. Brig Argus,
from Captain Samuel Banon, U. S. Navy

SIR,By the accompaning communications to Mr Eaton and to his
Excellency Hamet Bashaw, which are left open for your perusal, and
the personal knowledge you possess of my sentiments and wishes you
will be able to form a correct and to yourself satisfactory Idea of the
Brig Argus
service on which you are destined, with the United Stmates
& Sloop Hornet (Lieutenant Evans) under your Command. Its execution must necessarily depend so much on a Variety of
events and circumstances which may happen and it, is probable have
happened to M Eaton & his CqAdjetures and which we are totally
as well
unable to foresee, or to estimate, that I feel the impra~tibalit~y
as the unsuitableness of tying you down with precise and positive
instructions, hence you will perceive Sir, that your own judgment
and discretion, in which allow me to assure you I entertain the highest
confidence will frequently be your sole directors Agreeably to what we have agreed upon, you are directed to shape
your course for Bomba, or its vicinity and endeavour to establish an
immediate Communication with the Bashaws Army. - If they have
succeeded in penatring beyond Bomba, you will there obtain correct
information of their movements, which in all probability will be
towards Derne or Bengaize, whither you will of course follow with
your Vessels, unless you find contrary instructions from Mr Eaton -

H a ~ n opened
g
an intercourse with that Gent.leman, you will asscertain correct1 from him the posture of affairs and prospects of success,
end you wdfif he require it, land and deliver to him the stores and
Cash, under your charge, taking the necessary Receipts & Vouchers
As you will perceive by my Letter to M-aton I have left the application of these Succours, and consequently the responsibility wholly
to him, which I conceive proper, as well on account of his having the
cheif direction of the Land operations, as that by the time you arrive
on the coast, he will have it in his power to form a just estimate of
the chances of success, and thence, how far it is safe & expedient to
pursue the object. - Should it be determined to persevere, you are
authorised to afford him every support & assistance, consistant with
yours means and situation You will confer together, and obtain the most minute and circumstantial information, as to his future plan, and his ideas and
wishes with regard to Naval co-operation
On t.he Subject of your return it is impossible for me to furnish you
with precise Orders as it will depend altogether on the situation in
which you find matters on the coast, and the nature of the arrangements to be made with hlr Eaton - You will be aware of my anxiety
to hear from you - you will therefore dispatch the Sloop to this
place, or return with the Brig as Circumstnnces may direct. I n case of any unfortunate event having happened to Mr Eaton and
his Companions, and you can obtain no satisfactory intelligence of
them, it is left to you to act as you may think most adviseable. [NDA. Isaac Hull LB, 1803-1806.1
To Lieutenant Samuel Evans, U. S. Navy, commanding U. S. Sloop Hornet, from
Master Commandant Isaac Hull,U. S. Navy

U STATES
BRIGArgus
Malta March 2SrQ1805 SIR In consequence of Orders I have this day recei~ed from
Samuel B a ~ ~ oEsquire,
n
Commander in Chief of the U. States Squadron in the Mediterrenean, to sail the first fair Rind on an Expedition
to the Eastward, taking with me the U. States Sloop Hornet under
your Command, I have to request that you loose no time in getting
the Hornet ready for Sea, and hold yourself in readiness to get under
way a t the shortest h'otice. After feaving this port you will be governed by signals from the Argus, or My further Orders, but in case we
are seperated by bad weather or any unforseen accident you are to
make the best of your way off Derne, where you will remain three
days in sight of the Land, if possible, after which time if you are not
joind by the Argus you will run into the Bay of Bomba, and shou'd
you not find the Argus there, you are to continue to cruize between
Bomba & Cape Razatin until1 she arrives, or circumstances make it
necessary for you to go into Port. [KDA. Captain's LB, Vol. 3, 1805.1
To Captain John Bodgers, U. S. Navy, commanding U. S. Frigate Consfihrlion.

from Lieutenant Joshua Blake, U. S. Navy

Argus, MALTA
2 9 Afar. 1805
SIR The Argus being about to seperate from the squadron for a
length of time, I feel anxious to be placed on board your Ship agreea-

448

NAVAL OPERATIOILJS FROM 1804 TO 1805

ble to my rank, to f3l the Tacancy of first Lieutt I am sensible Sir,
the unfa~ourableimpressions that are on your mind, from reports
having been circulated that I had behaved with cowerdice in an Action
off Tripoli, feeling myself concious of perfect rectitude, I think i t a duty
due to you Sir, to wery Officer in service, to my family, and to myself, that a n investigation of my conduct should be had, this cannot
with propriety talie place, without a n opportunity shall offer, (and I
wish the earliest possible) that a Court of enquiery may be call'd, and
a full investigation may be had of every part of my conduct. I shall
then Sir, have it in my pourer to discover the authors of so base afalsehood, and punish them as they deserve. - I declare any Man n Lier
& Scound~el,who shall be proved to have made the assertion. [LC. JRP.

Letters & Orders, Book A, 1804-1805.1

To Captain James Barron, U. S. Navy, commanding U. S. S. Essu, from Master
Commandant Thomas Robinson, Jr., U. S. Navy, commanding 8. S. Schooner
Enterprize

VENICE
23 March 1805
D': SIR Pours I have &F & F &F from the moment I got it my time
was employed on the business therein mentioned - I must see you
to morrow by Mer? I shall have all the information possible to be
got here, and shall start Immediately after by post. Mortars are the
only difficulty at present. but I shall be able to tell you all about it
in 9 hours excuse this scrawl. I shan't sleep t h s night
[KD9. Captain's LB, Val. 1, 1805.1
Extract from Memorandum Book of Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Navy, 23 March
to 6 April 1805

Enroute north nothing of interest except public dinners Phila. New
York and Boston.
[LC original.]
Extract from journal of William Eaton, U. S. Navy Agent for the Barbary Regencies,
Saturday, 23 March 1805

Continued in camp. Eighty mounted warriors joined the Bashaw: all appear attached to him; but we want the means to engage their
services. - Cash, we find, is the only deity of Arabs, as well as
Turks - Good feed for our horses: - rain water in great ahun-

d w e , preserved in cavities of rocks worn by torrents of water descendfrom the high grounds in our rear. - But our prorision is reduced to hard bread and rice. - From Alexandria to this place there
is not a living stream, nor rivulet, nor spring of water. @

w.E. Huntington L&AG, EA 206.1

To Secretary of the Navy from Captain Samuel Nicholson, 0.6. Navy

NAVYYARDCHARLES
TOWN
March 2dt+1805.
SIR,I hope you will excuse my freedom when I request your influence with MI B i w the
~ N & vAgent
~
here on the Score of my paying
100 Doll ground rent for tbs Navy Yard, to which I am attached as

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

449
--

Superintendant and where I expect to reside in a few weeks in the
House now building by your orders for the Superintendt~ccommodation - I am induced to ask this favr from a belief that it is customary
in all other Navy Yards, or Ga~risonsin the United States, to indulge
the Officers attached to said Yard or Garrison, with the use of the
ground thereto belonging - At the same time I confess, I told Mr
Brown I would pay 100 Doll for the use of this place for pasture, this
I did rather than let a man have it for $80. Offered in my presence,
at the same time I declare I never expected he would call on me for
it. I took this place for those reasons to wit: Convenience to myself as pasture, and that it would be a great disparagement and verg
Injurious to the Public to suffer Individuals to claim a right of a free
Intercourse as well by Night as Day through the Yard where the
United States ha\~eso much property deposited. - The first year
after I took possession of this place it was mowed and the hay sold by
the agent for the want of a Barn to put it into -the next year it was
let to the proprietors of the Salem turnpike & bridge, to make their
frames on. The last year I pastured it, - The Injury done this
place by the chips left on it by the bridge & Hospital folks, have rendered it useless, otherwise than for pasture. I have heretofore had the use of that part of the Yard round the
buildings, - I will be thankfull to you Sir, if you will honor me with
a line in ansr to this, that will excuse me from the above charge wqh
I am very I'lly able to pay, & at the same time direct its future disposal - I have the Honor to be with high Esteem & regard
Your Obedt Hble Servt
S. NICHOLSON
[NDA. Captain's LB, Vol. 1, 1805.1
To Secretary of the Navy from Purser John Darby, U. S. Navy

NEWYORKMarch 2dt@1805
SIR I have receid orders from Capt. Chauncey to pay off the crew
of the U S Ship John Adams and have made up their accts & sined the
day of payment on the 22" Inst. and have paid those whose times
have expired and those who were discharged on that day, from other
causes. - I have also received orders from Capt. Chauncey to
repair to the City of Washington for the Settlement of my accts. this
I shall do as soon as possible. but the Nature of my business will keep
me many days longer as I have had so many different Vessels and
accounts to deal with, there being such a number of change's and
Transfers to and from the John Adams, all which it will be Necessary
for Capt. Chauncey to examine and certify, before I can take one
step towards the Settlement of them Independent of all the business which I have heretofore had and
the ships busincss a t this place - I have been obliged to furnish
all the supplies of provisions &(: to the Labourer's employed on the
ship. and to the new recruits. there being no person here to attend to
any thing of that kind, and Cap! Chauncey has given me orders to
do it all this with my old business keeps me forever in motion and
renders my business very complicated - but I beg you will be assured
that no time shall be lost on my part and that I shall repair to the
City as soon as possible as I am as much if not more anxious to settle
my accts, than government can possibly be - I believe I may be

allowed to say, and it is the opinion of my commander, that 1 have
had more to do from the nature of this ships cruize and the Various
exchanges and supply's of provisions &F &v than the business of any
two ships on a regular stat,ion [NDA.

Misc. LB, Vol. 1, 1805.1

To Secretary of the Navy from Lieutenant Nathaniel Fanning, U .S. Navy

CE-~RLESTON
S. C.
March the 2dtQ1805
SIR Your's of the 11th Instant I received last Evening the contents
of which I have duly noted, and shall punctually, and faithfully,
govern myself conformable to your directions. I t h i i it absolutely necessary that the original plan of Rigging the Gun Boat No 9,
ought to be materially changed (as She is intended to cross the Atlantic;)
consequently, I hare given directions to that effect. and 1 propose
(should i t meet your approbation) that instead of Rtounting Two
Guns of large Cal~breon Board of her at present. - to have but one
mounted, and to take the other into her Hold, which will serve for
Bdlast, and may be wanted when She arrives a t her place of destination. A l z Smith informs me that there were no Thirty two pound
Shot sent here mith the TWOGuns, and that there are none to be had
here. I thought it my duty to acquaint you with this circumstance;
as the want of Shot may retard the Sailing of the Boat so soon as you
expected. Lieu; Elbert arrived here yesterday Evening and is much
pleased with the Gun Boat which he is to Command. I am in hopes we
shall be able to get her ready to receive her Crew in a fortnight provided the Weather should prove good. This place however is a very
sorry one for the dispatch of Business, more espescially when it is of a
public nature Merchants, and Mechaniks, all appear disposed to
through obstructions in the u7ay of every call upon them of public
concern. Kothing howerer, I beg leave to assure you shall be wanting on my part to fom-md the outfits of Gun Boat K? 9. - I have
now due from the public, Wages, and rations, for about Three Months,
& an half, (besides, my expences from Kew Pork to this place), and
M' Smith the Xavy Agent, has told me, that He has no orders from
your department to advance me a single Dollar; you must be sensible
Sir, that by this time, I stand.in need of Cash If no more than enough
(to pay of[f] my expences t r u e I have been here, travelling Charges
from N. York to this place, and back). will you have the goodness
to cause W. Smith Sen: [ms mutilatedl to advance a part of the Money
already due me for my public Services; as without it, I shall find it
to discharge some little debts contracted since I have been
here; and return to Kew York as ordered, as soon as I shall have
fitted the Gun Boat for taking in her Officers and Crew.
[KDA. Mise. LB, Vol. 1, 1805.1
Extract from journal of William Eaton, U. S. Navy Agent for the Barbary Regencies,
Sunday, 24 March 1805

Remained in camp Freighted a caravan of 90 camels @. 11 d o l ~
pr head to Bomba.

m. E. Huntington L&AG.I

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

451

Extract from journal of Midshipman Charles Morris, Jr., U. S. Mavy, on board
U. S. Frigate President. Master Commandant George Cox, U. 6. Navy, commanding, Sunday, 24 March 1805

5 % [A.M.] Saw the land ahead. 6 Saw a sail to the E N E. made
all sail in chace. 9 discovered that the Sail had put into the harbour
of Lampedosa 10. hove to off the Harbour hoisted out our boats
manned and sent them in to bring her out if an Enemy
Latitude Observed 35' 30' N.
[Mrs. C. E. Fox original,

NDA photostat.]

Circular letter to Commanders of Gunboats from Secretary of the navy

NAVYD E P ~

25 March 1805.
Circular Letter to Commanders of Gunboats - vizt
Lieu; H. Magrath. N? 1. Charleston. S. C.
Lieut Ralph Izard. Kg 2. Charleston. S. C.
Lieut Levi Bardin. N? 3. Philadelphia. Lieu? J. D. Henley. N ? 4. Tashington.
Lieu! A. C. Harrison. N ? 5 Baltimore Lieu$ Ja-awrence.
NO 6. New Yorlc.
Lieu: J. T. Leonard. Kq 7. New York.
Lieu! Jos. J. Maxwell. NQ. Boston.
Lieu-am! Elbert. N ? 9. Charleston. S. C.
SIR. The Crew of Gunboat h'? - is to consist of
The Commander.
a Second Officer
1 Steward
10 Able Seamen
1 Corporal & Marines.
4 Privates
The Marines mill be provided by Col? I n a r t o n . The Steward and
able Seamen you will enter. Commence recruiting whenever you
shall find that the Men might be usefully employed on Board of the
Gunboat in assisting to equip her and fit her in other respects for Sea.
Allow the Steward $18 per month, and allow each able Seaman $12
per month, advancing 2 or if required 4 months' pay upon good and
sufficient security to indemnify the public in the event of desertion.
You may also, should you find it necessary to enable you to enter the
men, allow 10 dollars bounty to each man upon his signing the Shipping Papers. Enter the men to serve 2 years. You will perceive the
necessity of entering none but active, healthy, able Seamen, and the
more experienced the better. If you should find i t useful, you may
enter one of the ten as an Acting Boatswain, giving him the Bounty
and $15 per month. Blank Shipping Papers are enclosed. You will
have to do the duty of a Purser by keeping the accounts of the Boats.
I authorize you to enter a Steward to assist you in this business.
You will call on the Navy Agent for every needful assistance. -

I

[NDA. Off. Comg. Gunboats, 1803-1808.1

452

hTAVALOPERATIONS FROM 180-4 TO 1805
To Secretary of State from Joseph Yanardi, U. S. Consul, Cadiz, Spain

AMERICAN
CONSULATE.
Cadiz 25 tQ March 1805. RESPECTED
SIR. The inclosed is Copy of what I had the honour
of addressing you on the 31%ultimo to which beg your Kind reference.
The object of the present is to forward you Copy's of la!--- - _ - Vice -4dmiral Ordes Letter 26- - - - - - My Letter to said Vice ddmiral
34- - _ - - - the Letter I hand to American Captains going to Sea
and had their Registers endorsed 4t?-----My Letter to the Commander of the U. S. Brig Siren.
5t@-- _ -- - Vice Admiral Ordes Answer.
Since I received the above reply from the Vice Admiral I have Suspended given the Captains Copy of the Letter under N ? 3.
Notwithstanding the rigour of the Blockade sundry Neutral Vessels
with Cargos have entered this Bay - On the 18'h a Danish Ship
sailed with a Cargo of Salt, and was ordered back by the English,
which is a proof that they will allow no Vessel to Sail with such
Car os and only with ballast of Sand or Stone.
T'ie Ports that are in a State of Blockade at this moment are Cadiz,
Ferrol &- Cartagena of course the other Ports are free, which will
serve for the government of the Trade of the United States.
KO News from the Squadron u p the k!editerranean. The Srmement in this Port is carried on with the greatest activity but no Seamen, it is to be Commanded by Admiral Gravina, Alava, and
VilIavicencio.
Governmt Notes.. -48 34 a 49 j/zO/,.
[NA.

SDA. CL, Cadiz, Vol. 1, 1791-1805.1
[Enclosure]

From Vice Admiral John Orde, B. N., of If. B. 116. Ship Glory

N? 1, Copy

HIS MAJESTYS
SHIPCloy
03 Cadiz 11 tQ January 1805.

SIR; I have received this Morning the Letter you do me the honour
to address to me in date the 8 ' h instant, and desirous of conforming
to t,he well Known sentiment,^ of my Sovereign to prevent as much
as imperious circumstances will allour, the mischiefs of War from being
felt by Neutral Powers - I have given orders to the officers under
my Command to allow all Neutral Vessels that were in the Port of
Cadiz taking in Cargos before t,he declaration of War by Spain against
great Britain was Known there, and t'hat may leave that Port on or
before the 2!jt@of this Month, to pass unmolested to the place of their
destination. Provided a1wa s tha.t such Vessels are furnished with
proper Papers, and with a drtificate signed di sealed by the Consul
of their Nation (or if under Convoy of a Ship of War on the Commander
giving his honor) that they fall under the above discri tion and that
their Cargos are absolutely the exclusive property of ubjects of the
State to which they belong. Neutral Vessels in Ballast may quit the
Port without daculty.

8

[NA. SDA. CL, Cadiz, Vol. 1, 1791 - 1805.1

WARS W I T H BARBARY POWERS

453

[Enclosure]

To Vice Admiral Sir John Orde, R. N., H. B. M. Ship Glory, Commander in Chief
of H. B. M. Forces off Cadiz, from Joseph Yznardi, U. S. Consul, Cadiz, Spain

N? 2, Copy

AMERICAN
CONSULATE
Cadiz 2 Y t h February 1805.
Having Seen the Letter you was pleased to write to the Consul of
his Danish Majesty in this Port, restraining the Sailing of Neutral Vessels till the 2StQ ult? Since said period we have had verry bad Weather,
which has hindered the unloading and Shipping off the neat proceeds
for that Epocha - I n consequence 1 find myself under the obligation of representing to you on two points - the first .- to know if
you prolong the term for such neutral Vessels as were in this Bay a t
the time of its being declared in a State of Blockade - And the 26
to acquaint you that in the last War Lord St Vincent permitted
American Vessels which brought American Produce to enter this Port,
and invert their proceeds in Goods admitted m War time, under the
precise condition that the property was BonaJde American, proved
by my official Certificates, which Lord St Vincent honoured with full
Confidence; as the American Citizens in general do not carry Cargos
on freight and the inward & out Cargos are generally their own
property [NA. SDA. CL, Cadiz, Vol. 1, 1791-1805.1
[Enclosure]

To Master Commandant Charles Stewart, U. S. Navy, commanding U. S. Brig
Siren, from Joseph Yznardi, U. S. Consul. Cadiz, Spain

N? 4, Copy

AMERICAN
CONSULATE
Cadiz 1" March 1805.
SIR. A Number of American Vessels being detained, doubting
whether the English Division off this Port will permit them to proceed; and not having a proper occation to send off a Flag of Truce.
1 shall esteem it as a verry particular favour your taking under your
charge the delivery of my official Letter to Vice Admiral John Orde,
and request an explicit answer thereto, that the results may be made
Known to the respective Captalns that are in this Bay; it being likewise an object of high importance to our trade; relying that I will
give officialaccount to our government, not doubtin but it will meet
full approbation, and that you will receive grateful thanks from all
our Citizens.
[KA. SDA. CL, Cadiz, Vol. 1, 1791-1805.1

f

-

[Enclosure]

To Joseph Yznardi, U. S. Consul, Cadiz, Spain,,from Vice Admiral Sir John Orde,
R. N., H.B. M. S h ~ pGlory

N? 5

HIS MAJESTYS
SHIPGlory
at Sea 11 th March 1805.
SIR. Imperious Circumstances compel me to order the Blockade
of Cadiz to be Strictly enforced from this time, which deprives me of
the gratification I should othermse have had m complying with your
request.

454

N A V A L OPERATIONS FROM 1804 TO 1805

You would much oblige me by communicating this information to
all whom i t may Concern, as Speedily and as generally as convenient, in order that none may suffer by this necessary measure, but from
their own imprudence.
[NA. SDA. CL, Cadiz, Vol. 1, 1791 - 1805.1
To Secretary of the Navy from Degen, Purviance & Co., U. S. Navy Agents, Leghorn

LEGHORN
25thMarch 1805.
SIR We paid you our Respects last in date of February the st+
By the Mails of this morning we have received a Letter from Commodore Barron from Malta, in date of the 2"g Instant, advising that he
had given instructio~lsto Captain James Barron, Commanding the
Frigate Essex, to proceed up the Adriatic, on particular Service not
further explained. We have also Letters from George Dyson EsqQf Syracuse dated
lgth February with advice of his having valued on Frederick Degen
EsqQf Naples - for Four Thousand Dollars, which Drafts have already appeared, and have been duly honoured, - and a t maturity
will be duly forwarded to us by Mr Degen who will take his Reimbursement on us for the Same. Mr Dyson informs that all the Squadron were then at Sea, except
the Frigate Congress, - The Nautilus Schooner, he mentions being
i n our h'eighborhood. - She has not however made her appearance
here; - We presume She is in search of the Two Tripolitans which
are reported to have been seen off Corsica, some time since. - The
Master of a n American Merchant Ship, who arrived with us three
weeks ago, spoke with an English Frigate between this, and Toulon,
the Commander of which gave information of the circumstance. This account accords with a similar one brought to Palermo sometime
past by another English Frigate, who spoke them, then off Sardinia. They are said to be both Polacca Rigged, and carry each Six Guns
and Fifty Men, &- on first appearance shew Tunisian Colours but by
their manoeuvres, they exhibited Suspicion in the breast of the English
Commander, who in consequence brought them to, for examination,
and they confessed on finding i t was an English Cruizer they were
Tripolines in search of Americans We hope soon to have a favorable account of them, when we shall
lose no time in communicating it
[NDA.

Misc. LB, Vol. 1, 1805.1

Extract from journal of William Eaton, U. S. Navy Agent for the Barbary Regencies,
Monday, 25 March 1805

Forty seven tents of Arabs joined us with their families and moveables - I n this detachment are one hundred and fifty warriors on
foot.
[H. E. Huntington L&AG.]

WARS RrITH BARBARY POWERS

455

Extract from journal of Hidshipman Charles Morris, Jr., U. S. Navy, on board
U. S. Frigate Pruident, Master Commandant George Cox, U. S. Navy, commanding, Monday, 25 March 1805

Commencing with fresh breezes and dear weather.
2 the boats returned with infermation that the yesel was a Tunisian
Cruiser, Mounting 4 four pounders, 4 Leoants with 50 men having
the proper passports from our Consul and the other different Consuls
resident at Tunis. hoisted in the boats and filled away ran down to
the leeward of the Island and hauled our wind to the N* & Eastward 4. The N E. point of Lampedosa bore S E B S M S. the West End.
S B W jd W. 4 or 5 leagues. Fresh gales send down Top Gallant yards
housed Top Gallant Masts close reefed the Topsails and handed the
Mainsail 6. Two Greek Ships passed us before the wind
11 Saw the land bearing N N E.
Noon. The Land to the Wd of Gergenti in Sicily bore N B E % E.
8 leagues distant
[Mrs. C. E. Fox original, NDA photostat.]

To Secretary of the Navy from S a n g Master Levi Bardin, U. S. Navy

PHILADELPHIA
March LBth 1805
SIR I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your Letter
of 20tQInst - and have ordered Lee boards t o be made for Gun Boat.
N ? 3. I have shiped 80 men 40 - Seamen & 40 ordinary Ditto
LEVIBARDIN
[NDA. Misc. LB, Vol. 1, 1805.1

To Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Navy, from Secretary of the Navy

KAVD E P ~
26 March 1805
Bills to a considerable amount having been forged in your name
upon MessTs RfqKenzie & Glennie London, an enquiry has been instituted to ascertain and apprehend the Author. I t has been suggested
to me that a person who acted as Clerk to Commodore Morris in
the Mediterranean, was probably concerned m this affair. I send
you therefore papers N ? 1 & 2 uhich were written by the person
who committed the forgery, and papers N ? 4 and 5 which contain
some information relative to the transaction and a description of the
person of the forger. These papers I request you to shew- to Comp
Morris and ascertain from him Q-hether the hand writing of K?1 & 2
is that of the person who acted as his Clerk, and whether the description of the Forger answer that of the person who acted as his Clerk
in the Mediterranean, and who I understand left Conlmre Morris
rather in a mysterious manner. There is a suspicion that this Clerk was a person talien into Commodore Morris's employ in the Mediterranean. {NDA. OSW, Vol. 6, 1802-1805.1

456

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1804 TO 1805

To William Eaton, U. S. Navy Agent for the Barbary Regencies, from Captain
Samuel Barron, U. 6. Navy

MALTA26. Mar. 1805
SIR, The Argus being detained in this harbor by a strong gale
from the eastward I am enabled to add a few lines to my dispatches
which were consigned to Captain Hull yesterday evening - This
morning Captain Dent arrived with the Nautilus from Tunis-Bay,
with dispatches of a very recent date from ?rfr Davis accompanying
a letter of 27:" Jan? from Captain Bainbridge at Tripoli and copy of
one from that officer to ?rlr D. Of this latter I think it proper to
inclose you a copy - Captain Hull only waits a wind to go out [NA. Sen. 9 B-B 6, Pres. Message, Jan. 1806.1
Extract from journal of U. S. Frigate Constitution, Captain John Rodgers, U. S. Navy,
commanding, Tuesday, 26 March 1805

[Malta] At 8 [A. X4.1 arrived the US. Schooner Nautilas
[USNA.]
Extract from journal of William Eaton, U. S. Navy Agent for the Barbary Regencies,
Tuesday, 26 March 1805

A courier from Derne, in the interest of the Bashaw, brings intelligence that five hundred of Joseph Bashaw's cavalry, accompanied
by great numbers of Arabs, both horse and foot, were a few days
march from that place, and would certainly arrive before i t would
be possible that we could. - The alarm excited by this information
arrested our motions. The Bashaw seemed to hessitatc whether to
proceed farther. - The camel drivers fled with their caravan: and there seemed to be a combination among the Bashaw's people
and the Arabs of Behara to return to Piaum. I again suspended
their rations; forbidding any more issues till the caravan should
return and the march proceed ahead. A council was held: - despondency sat in every countenance. About eleven a. m. I learned
that the Chiek il Taiib had resolved to proceed no farther until
certain intelligence arrive of our vessels being at Bomba. I could
not but reproach that chief with want of courage and fidelity. He had promised much ancl fulfilled nothing. - I regretted having
been made ac uainted with him: - and should be well satisfied if
he would put is menace in execution of returning to Egypt, provided he would not interfere with the dispositions of other ch~efs.
He quit the camp in a ra e, swearing by all the force of his religion
to join us no more. - #he Bashaw would have sent an officer to
pacify and bring him back. - I objected. - And he took himself off
with a small detachment of his tribe. -

B

[H. E. Huntington L&AG, EA 206.1
To Secretary of the Navy from Master Commandant John Shaw, U. 5. Navy

BOLTIMORE
March .27tU805
SIR This day I arived here, and am sorry to say that able seaman
is very hard to be procured but be asured sir in the main time that
I shall use every exertion in my power to promote dispatch m entering men and fitting out the Gun Boat. Your instructions will be
necessary how the men entered is to be sent on to N. York. (but

WAEES WITH BARBARY POWERS

457

I think the water Carriage would be the saifist mode of conveyance)
or if there board is to be paid from the date of signing articles. Be
pleased to inform me what time it will be necessary to join the John
Adams as 1 wish to ship all my baggage
Baltimore has nevry been defitient in her supplies of men to the
Navy and I hope no delinquesey will exist in the preasant Case.
(but this week at furdest must terminate our success many ordinary seamen has offered but not one has been entered. I will request
a supply of 30 blunderbusses for the Manning of the Boats of the
J. Adams the[yJ will be excellant in a close shot and do great execution [NDA. MC LB, 1804-5.1
To John Stricker, Navy Agent, Baltimore, Md., from Secretctrq- of the Navy

NAVD E P ~
27 March 1805.
I enclose Capn Browns sailing Orders - they direct him to weigh
anchor as soon as he shall be prepared for Sea to proceed to Gibraltar and then take the Orders of Consul Gavino relatively to the
disposition of the Cargo of the Ceres - You will deliver these Orders
in proper season We want hospital St-oresin the Mediterranean - Purchase therefore and send out in the Ceres or the Vessel that &all sail after the
Ceres.
100 kb<hocolate good Quality
100 Zba Young Hyson Tea.
500 lba Coffee
1500 iba Brown Sugar
200
White loaf Sugar
If your arrangement relative to paying the freight of the Ceres
make it necessary that I should give any instructions on that subject
before she sails communicate to me immediately what your arrangements may be Send a copy of the Charter Party and an invoice and bill of la*
of the Cargo of the Ceres to John Gavino Esq Gibraltar William Higgins Esq. Malta & George Dyson Esq Syracuse - also one to the
Commodore of the Squadron & another you will send to thls Department The terms upon u-hicl-1you have freighted the Ceres and the Ann
are certainly reasonable for the present state of things and are entirely
ap roved have no occasion to remit ta the Mediterranean at presentCap" Tingpy will send you the 32 Pound Cannon - Carriages &
all the necessary apparatus - & the Cutlasses, boarding Pikes
Swords Pistols &"or the Gun Boat - so that you will have no part
of the arrangement to provide excepting the necessary Powder and
Ball -

-

*

ke

[XDA. GLB, Vol. 7, 1803-1805.1

458

NAVAL OPERATIONS FRO211 180.4 TO 1805

To Captain Elihu D. Brown, commanding Provision Ship Cerw, Baltimore, Md.,
from Secretary of the Navy

NAVD E P ~
27 March 1805
As soon as you are ready for Sea you will weigh anchor and proceed
to Gibraltar where you will apply to John Gavino Esq American Consul for further Orders respecting the disposition of the Public Property committed to your Care, and you will proceed whither he may
direct you agreeably to the Charter Party
You will receive enclosed a letter for Mr Gavino which you will
deliver, also letters of Comre Barron & others which you will deliver
agreeably to the Directions
[KDA.

GLB, Vol. 7, 1803-1805.1

To Captain Samuel Barron, U. S. Navy, from Secretary of the Navy

NAVD E P ~ .
27 March 1806 (per The Ceres Cap$ Brown from BaltWuplicate By the Ann
Ca t Smith from Balt? -)
$his Letter will be handed to you by Caps Brown Commanding
the Ship Ceres loaded with provisions and various Stores P: Invoice
which ColQStricker will transmit to you, for the Squadron under
your Command. Two other Vessels, one from Baltimore, the other
from this place, will shortly follow the Ceres with similar supplies and
the one from Baltimore will have 300 Barrels of powder on Board, and
the one from this place a quantity of 32Q - 24IP - 18lQ- 12Q- & 6Ib
Shot and a quantity of musket balls and grapnels and spare hawsers
for the gunboats. The John Adams will leave New York for the
Mediterranean in all next month. She goes out principally as a
Transport Ship: you may calculate upon receiving from 4 to 600 men
by her and 4 or 5 Spare Anchors for Frigates, a quantity of 24 & 32'9
cannon ball and from 4 to 500 bolts of Canvas. The Gunboats mentioned to you in my letter of the 7t@Inst will
generally have 2 guns mounted on board - 1 long 32'P gun at each
end. I shall endeavour to have them well provided with spare Spars,
Anchors, Hawsers, Grapnels &? I send in each Boat 1 Lieutenant 1 2nd Officer - 1 Steward - 10 Able Seamen - 1 Corporal and 4
privates of Marines. These Crews are put on board merely for the
purpose of navigating the gunboats and delivering them up to you in
the Mediterranean to be afterwards Officered and Manned as you
shall deem most expedient.
Commissions as Masters Commandants for Mr Dent and Mr Robinson have been issued and will be forwarded to you by the Frigate
John Adams, by which Vessel I shall also forward to you Commissions
for Mr B. F. Read, Mr Ralph Izard, Mr John D. Henley, Mr Chs L.
Ridgeley, Mr Levi Bardin & Mr Seth Cartee, as Lieutenants, which
Commissions are to be delivered when these Gentlemen shall have
passed the usual examinations. [Attention is invited to an article entitled Rank, in United States' Naval Chronicle, by Charles W . Goldsborough. 1824. p.p. 345-350.1

I enclose a Copy of the resolutions of Congress in relation to the
Conduct of Commre Preble and of the Officers and Men who acted

459

WARS U71TH BARBARY POWERS
--

under his Command before Tripoli. These Resolutions you w
ill
cause to be promulgated throughout the Squadron under your Command, that the Officers and Men may know that their Country is not
unmindful of their Services. The resolutions will in due Season be
carried into effect. [NDA. LB, 1799-1807.1
[Note: With reference to the monument in commemoration of the officers and
men who participated in the attacks on Tripoli by the U. S. squadron, 1804-1805,
this is now erected in the grounds of the U. S. Naval Academy. In the U. S.
Naval Institute Proceedings, Kovember 1922, there is an interesting article by
Captain C. Q. Wright, Ch, C., U. S. Navy, Retired. Attention is invited to this
for details.]

Extract from journal of U. 6. Frigate Constitution, Captain John Badgers, U. S. Navy,
commanding, Wednesday, 27 March 1805

[Malta] At 10 [A. &I.] arrived the US. Frigate President
[USNA.]

Extrsct from journal of William Eaton, U. S. Navy Agent for the Barbary Regenclea,
Wednesday, 27 March 1805

The Chiek il Taiib excited an insurrection among the Arabs of this
place who had engaged to proceed with us; drew off half their number;
and, putting himself a t their head, started for Egypt. - The Bashaw
sent a messenger to me praying that I would dispatch an officer to
request him in my name to return. - I answered that no consideration whatever could prevail on me to ask as a favor what I claimed
as a right. The services of that chief were due to us: - We had
paid for them: - and he had pledged his faith to render them with
fidelity. - I t did not belong to him, at this period, to make terms
nor dictate measures: I should not debase myself to propose an accommodation. The Bashaw was apprehensive that he would turn his
influence and take a part against us. - Let him do it. - I like a n
open enemy better than a treacherousfriend. - W h e n he shaU hane taken
this ground i t zuiU perhaps, give me an opportunitg to punish event*
what I w d d do summarily zf the respect I had for his ExceUency did not
prevent it. - I hud. a r i j e and a sabre true to their distance. - Catry
this message to the chief. - He was mad with rage; and swore vengeance against the Bashaw, and his Christian sovereigns, as he stiled
us. - I ordered a march. - We got underway ?4 past 7 am. At
10 a messenger came from the Chiek to assure us that he had taken up
his march for Behara. Since he has taken that rout I have nothingfurther with him but to take
steps for the recoveq of the cash and property he has fraudulently drawn
from me. Continued the march. At 12 oclock another messenger"The Chiek il Taiib will join if the camp halt seasonably." The
Bashaw desired, & we halted a t $ past 12. About an hour & )h after
the Cheik hove in sight with his party; - soon after came up; - and,
presenting himself at my markee, with visible chagrin in his countenance, said, "You see the influence I have among these people!"
Yes, and I see d s o the di.sg~acefduse you make of it. We gained about
five miles today.
[H. E. Huntington L&AG, EA 206.1

460

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1804 TO 1805

To Secretary of the Navy from Lieutenant Nathaniel Fanning, U. S. Navy

CHARLESTON
S. C. March the 28th 1805
SIR I had the honor to receive your Letter of the 14tQInstant,
yesterday, covering a plan for the Rigging a Gun Boat, from Commodore pribble, and Cap: Tingey; which on consideration, I should
have adopted for hT? 9 with some very trifling alteration, had I have
recieved it a few days sooner; as I believe it to be a good one; and
shall pay all the attention to it which so important a subject requires.
It may possibly admit of some improvement, or alterations, hereafter, after the experiment shall have been fairly tryed. I n my next
I shall be more explicit; I am very sure however that my opinion for,
or against, the proposed plan, coming from two such experienced
Commanders (for the Rigg of our Gun Boats) can neither add, nor
diminish any thing relative to this very important subject. Immediately on the Receipt of your Letter to me of the 11 th Instant I gave
directions for the new Gun Boat. (When I found She was intended
to cross the Atlantic) to be Rigged into a Ketch; and conformable to this,
arrangements were made, with the Spar Maker, Sail Maker, Rigger, &c
&c. for that purpose; And on the Receipt of your last Letter to me
the Rigger had already cut and partly fixed the principal Rigging
and other parts of this plan were in such a state of forwardness that I
did not think it warrantable in me as an oscer (and in whom you had
placed so much codidence) without positive orders - to persue a
new plan - besides, had I have done it it would have put the U. S.
to a n extra expence of several Hundred Dollars. - and being fully
persuaded that the present plan which I have adopted - for Sparing,
Rigging &c, of the new Gun Boat, will be upon consideration, approved
of by you Sir - (as it is already here by the best informed practical
Gentlemen, - and is perfectly a safe one in my opinion considering
the nature of the service on which She is to be sent! ! !
[NDA.

Misc. LB, Vol. 2, 1805.1

To Secretary of the Navy from Sailing Master Humphrey Magrath, U. S. Navy

U. S. GUNBOATNO 1 -

CHARLESTON
HARBOUR
March 28th 1806
SIR I am honord with your favr of the 14tQinst! and in rsply
thereto inform you that Gun Boat N ? 1 - cannot be considered a
safe Vessel to Cross the Atlantic Ocean, and am of opinion she would
not survive a heavy Gale; my eagerness to perform the voyage would
induce me to go in her were i t your pleasure to order me, its certain
the season of the year is greatly in our favour although I have frequently experienced very bad weather in May and June
As to her rigging I cannot think any alteration necessary and what
may be requisite to prepare her for the passage can be done a t a very
short warning if after having my opinion you may think proper to
Order her
[KDA. Officers LB, 1802-1805.1

WARS WITH BARBARY POWEBS

461

To Secretary of the Navy from George W. Erving, U. S. Consul, London, England

AMERICAN
CONSULATE
& AGENCY
London March 28te 1805
SIR Your letters of the 4t@of Sepr and Decr 6 Q 1804 to the Minister Plenipotentiary directing the purchase of two swords one for
Lieutenant Sterritt and the other for Captain Stephen Decateur
Junior have been delivered to me by Mr k i a n c e our Charge des
Affaires at this court in the absence of Mr Monroe.
M Pun-iance being in ill health and having retired a few Miles
from this city has directed me to attend to the commission, & has
also given me two Bills remitted from Baltimore one for £39.14.2, the
other for £39.18.9, which have been duly accepted, and will be applied
to the purchase of these articles.
I have presumed that you woud wish them to be made somewhat
emblematical, & as highly ornamented as the price allowed for them
d l admit of; this has accordingly been done, & I hope that they may
meet with your approbation; The one which is completed I take an
opportunity of sending by a Mr Patton who goes immediately to
Alexandria, the other shall be forwarded by the next suitable
conveyance.
P. S. April 30t* Mr Patton having left this Earlier than I expected
I lost the opportunity of sending one of the Swords by him. Both
being now completed, and Mr Ryland Randolph of TTirginia who will
pass thro' Washington having obligin ly offered to take charge of
he cost of these articles has
them, they are given into his care.
unavoidably Exceeded by £4.7.1 the sum which you have appropriated for the purpose, and the Cases add £3.3. - making £7.10.1
This Excess will not I hope be deemed material, I will take the liberty
of drawing on you in favor of my Agent a t Boston for the Amount say
£7'. 10.1 with great respect.

I

[NDA. Misc. LB, Vol. 2, 1805.1
To Master Commandant John H. Dent, U. S. Navy, commanding U. S. Schooner
Nauiilus. from Captain Samuel Barron, U. S. Navy

~ / I A L T A2gth March 1805.
SIR You are hereby directed to take under Convoy of the United
States Schooner Nautilus under your Command the Maltese Ketch,
called the Eliza, carrying supplies for the Prisoners at Tripoli - to
see her safe off that Harbour and return immediately to this place,
unless you should receive contrkry instructions from an Senior Officer
ampbell in the
on the Station - Should you fall in ~ ~ i Captain
th
Constellation you mill inform him that a relief will be sent to the
blockading Vessels in a few days. -

d

[NHF. Dent's LB, 1803-1810.1
To Captain William Bainbridge, U.S. Navy, from Tobias Lear, U. S. Consul Generd,
Algiers

MALTA
March 2St@1805

DEARSIR I have had the satisfaction of receiving your very acceptable favors of the 11t @ of Kovember, 1gt%of Decr and 27tb of January;
The Contents of which have given me very great pleasure so far as

462

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1804 TO 1805

the inform me of the health of yourself and our other fellow Citizens
in aptivity. The great difliculty of forwarding letters to Tripoli will readily
account to you for your not having heared oftner from me, and especially as I had nothing to communicate which would have been particularly interesting
I assure you my dear Bainbridge that no One feels more deeply
interested than myself in the liberation of yourself and Your unfortunate Companions, and I sincerely hope that the present season will
effect that desireable object. We have a very Considerable Force now
in this Sea, which, if exercised, must be productive of all the fatal
effects of War; for our Country will never admit of any terms of
peace which shall not be honorable and as permanent as we can
expect. - We consider Ourselves as having been unjustly forced into
this war; and therefore we do not look so much to the expences which
may attend it, as to the establishment of a Peace upon terms which
are cornpatable with the rising Character of our Nation, and which
will secure a future peace upon honorable and lasting grounds. Had we counted on the expence alone it would have been better to
have made peace at the price of half a Million of dollars You will receive hence a number of Articles which I trust will be
highly acceptable to yourself our Officers and Crew; and by the return
of this Vessel I hope we sha hear of your welfare, and that you still
keep up your Spirits, under a full reliance that the Great Author &
director of Events will shortly cause your liberation to be effected,
and that you may once more enter into the arms of your friends and
the bosom of your Country.
As you will receive many letters by this opportunity I shall add no
more at present but the earnest prayers and best wishes of Mr? Lear
and myself. that all good may attend you, Your Officers and all our
Citizens who suffer under that deplorable State of bondage
(Thefollowing was written to Cap? B. wt@invisible Ink)
I have been here since Octr last, and have had strong hopes that
some event would have brought me to see you before this time; but
I have been disappointed. - We made last year several propositions
to the Bashaw, which were rejected by him, and which will not be
renewed by us unless some unforseen accident should happen to our
Ships here to prevent their operating with their full force. - If the
Bashaw wishes for peace it now remains for him to come forward;
and if the terms are such as we can admit, he will fmd no disposition
on Our part to refuse them; or to Continue the War; altho' our force
is now such as we might fairly Calculate upon to destroy his Batteries and Town. The very ill state of the Commodore's health has been most sincerely felt; but as the Winter is Not the season for action the same
evil will not result therefrom as would have been experienced a t any
Other time. He is now recovering. Mr Higgins will send a bill for twelve hundred dollars from the
Danish Consul here on Mr Nissen for your use, and he tells me that
the English Consul in Tripoli has nine hundred dollars in his hands for
the same purpose. Mr Davis has been furnished by me from this
place with funds for your use. I tha& you, my dear Sir, for your hints respecting the Conduct of
When we have
a person who may negotiate with the Bashaw.

8

L9

-

.full assurances that we may negotiate on proper terms I shall Certainly
embrace the moment; but we cannot again hazard an advance unless
there are the most unequiz'ocal prospect of its being successfull.I t has always been my decided opinion that we should effect every
thing by Ourselves, and not rely on extraneous aid. Believe me to be, with the most Sincere regard, my dear Sir
[Stephen Decatur Col.

NDA photostat, Book A.]

[28 March 18051
To Don Joseph d e Souxa, Spanish Consul General, Tripoli, from Tobias Lear,
U. 8. Consul General, Algiers

To Don Joseph de Souza, Consul General of his Catholic Majesty,
near his Excellency The Bashaw, of Tripoli.
SIR The very few occasions which offer of Conveying letters to
Tripoli, has prevented me untiU this time, from acknowledging the
receipt of the letter which your Excellency did me the honor of writing
on the 1gt5 of Decr last. and of thanking you for the very friendly
intimations therein given.
During the last year several propositions were made, on our part,
to His Excellency the Bashaw of Tripoli for a termination of the War
now existing between him and the U.S. of Am. but they were rejected
by His Excellency. - We must now await Proposals from him; for
we cannot again hazard a rejection. Altho' our Force in this sea is Collsiderable, and will act with decided Trigour; yet we should not refuse to negotiate upon unequivocal
assurances that it would be upon honourable grounds which shall be
Cornpatable with the rising Character of our Nation, and with a
[hope?] of a permanent peace.
I have the honor to enclose for your Excellency tmro letters which I
brought with me from Algiers, which I flattered myself I should have
had the pleasure of delivering in person ere this.
I still hope I may have the satisfaction of meeting you in person,
and of assuring you of the high respect & Consideration with which
MALTAMarch 2StQ1805
[Stephen Decatur Col.

NDA photostat, Book A.]

To Nicholas C. Nissen, Danish Consul, Tripoli, from Tobias Lear, U. S. Coneul
General, Algiers

MALTA,March 2gt5 1806.
MONS:YISSEN
Consul de sa Majest4 le Roi de Denmarque*
Aupres de la Regence & le Bacha de Tripoh. SIR I have the honor to enclose a letter from your respectable &
Worthy Colleague Monsr Bille in Algiers, which I had hoped to have
had the pleasure of delivering into your hands before this time; but
as a favourable opportunity of forwarding it now offers, I cannot omit
sending it.
I still flatter myself that, I shall have the satisfaction of meeting
you before I leave this part of the Medit,erranean, and of expressing
the grateful1 sense which I have of your humane & kind attentions to
Capt-ainbridge
and our unfortunate Citizens in Captivity. -

464

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1804 TO 1805

These acts of humanity must be Congenial with a feeling heart, and
you will find a reward in a Consciousness of having done towards your
fellow Creatures as you would wish them to do towards you in a
similar Situation.
Beleive me to be with every sentiment of esteem & Consideration
[Stephen Decatur Col.

NDA photostat, Book A.]

[28 March 1805?]
To Monsieur Beaussier, French Charg6 d'Affaires and Commissary General,
Tripoli, from Tobias Lear, U. S. Consul General, Algiers

Tobias Lear, Consul Gen! of the U.S. of America, near His Excellency the Dey of Algiers &? &$ 8TF To Monsieur Beaussier, Charge dlAffairs and Commercial Agent
General of fiance, near His Excellency the Bashaw of Tripoli.
SIR I have the honor to enclose a letter for you, which I brought
from your worthy Colleague, &Ions: Thainville a t Algiers; and which
I expected, ere' this, to have had the pleasure of delivering in person
A favourable opportunity now offaring for Tripoli I cannot omit
forwarding this letter; and still flatter myself that I may have the
satisfaction of meeting you personally, before I leave this Part of
the Mediterranean.
I am sure it will give you great pleasure to promote the wishes of
M' Thainville, in affording every humane and friendly attention to
Captn Bainbridge and his Companions in Captivity a t Tripoli. [Stephen Dccatur Col. NDA photostat, Book .I.]
Extract from journal of U. S. Frigate Constilution. Captain John Rodgers, U. S. Navy,
commanding, Thursday, 28 March 1805

[Malta] At 6 [A. M.] Sailed the US. Brig Argw And sloop [Hornet] in company
[USNA.]
Extract from journal

William Eaton, U. S. Navy Agent for the Barbary Regencies,
Thursday, 28 March 1805

1 perceived a manifest reluctance in the Bashaw to advance, and evident calculations for a retrograde march. Joseph Bashaw's
forces had siezed on all his nerves. - He now took from my officers
the horses he had given them for the passage through the desert
and gave them to some of his footmen. - Drew off his Mohametans
and stood balancing, after theJfoops were drawn up for the march. I reproached him with indecision, - want of perserverance, - and
of consistency in arrangement. - I demanded the horses for my
officers. - High words insued. - I ordered the march in front. The Bashaw retrograded. - We proceeded in front with the baggage. The Bashaw came up in about two hours, and, making us
some compliments for our firmness, said he was obliged to dissemble
an acquiesance in the wishes of his people to render them manageable.
We proceeded 12;: miles to a castle Shemees, & camped at one oclock
p. m. I n the evening discovered that the Arabs who had joined us
on the 2Sth and who, as we expected, were following us, had all taken
up their march for the borders of Egypt. The Chiek il Taiib had

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

465

discouraged and dissuaded them from persuing the expedition. The Bashaw sent off a General Officer with sundry horsemen to
bring them back by persuasion. Hamet Gurgies, the officer who went for the Arabs, did not return
this day. [H. E. H~ntingt~on
L&AG, EA 206.1
Extract from journal of Midshipman Charles Morris, Jr., U. S. Navy, on board
U. S. Frigate President. Master Commandant George Cox, U. S. Navy, cornmanding, Thursday, 28 March 1805

4. Came to anchor in the harbour of Malta and was quarantind
for 24 hours
Found in the harb6ur the U S. S. Constitution and hTautilus [Mrs. C. E. Fox original, NDA phot.ostat.1
To Judge Tyler from President Thomas Jefferson

MONTICELLO,
March 29, 1805.

DEARSIR,

The war with Tripoli stands on two grounds of fact. 1st. It is
made known to us by our agents with the three other Barbary States,
that they only wait to see the event of this, to shape their conduct
accordingly. If the war is ended by additional tribute, they mean
to offer us the same alternative. 2ndly. If peace was made, we
should still, and shall ever, be obliged to keep a frigate in the Mediterranean to overawe rupture, or we must abandon that market.
Our intention in sending Morris with a respectable force, was to try
whether peace could be forced by a coercive enterprise on their town.
His inexecution of orders baffled that effort. Having broke him, we
try the same experiment under a better commander. If in the course
of the summer they cannot produce peace, we shall recall our force,
except one frigate and two small vessels, which will keep up a perpetual blockade. Such a blockade will cost us no more than a state
of peace, and will save us from increased tributes, and the disgrace
attached to them. There is reason to believe the example we have
set, begins, already to work on the dispositions of the powers of
Europe to emancipate themselves from that degrading yoke. Should
we produce such a revolution there, we shall be amply rewarded for
what we hare done. Accept my friendly salutations, and assurances
of great respmt and esteem.
TH: JEFFERSON.
[NR&L. Memoirs of Jefferson, Vol. IV, B' J35A.J
To Secretary of the Navy from Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Navy

NEWYORKMarch 89 1805
SIR I am hond with your letter of the 26th Ins; covering papers
Ns, 1. 2. 4 & 5. respecting the forgery commited in my name on
M~I(enzie& Glennie of London. I have shewn them to Commc Morris
who immediately recognized N V 1 2 to be the hand writing of the

466

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1804 TO 1805

Clerk he employd for some time in the Mediterranean - and on comparing them with his letter Book no doubt can remain but that person
was the forger. Comm"Morris says he engaged him at Leghorn, that
Mess1"egen
& Purviance recommended him but caution'd him
against letting him have concern in money transactions he says the
young man had free access to Gavinos counting room at all times, i t
must therefore be from thence that he took the letter of credit as
Gavino is generally careless of his papers. Commf Morris & Cap!
Chauncey who are the only persons here that have seen him say that
the description given of him in the letter N? 4 is correct - he was
a Neapolitan
who had been educated a Merchant spoke and wrote
English, french, Spanish & Italian with ease - his conduct for some
time beiore the ship saild had been suspicious. Commodore therefore sent a Midshipman on shore to watch his motions and prevent
his leavin him; but he made his escape from Gavinos counting room
about an our before the ship weigh'd for the U S. Comui"Morris
& Cap! Chauncey will write you respecting the villah and send you
his name I return you the papers N V . 2 . 4 &- 5.
P S Doctr Weems knows the young Villain who was C o m a o r r i s '
clerk & will give you some acct of him.

-

5

[NDA. Captain's LB, Vol. 1, 1805.1
-

To Secretary of the Navy, from Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Navy

KEWYORK
March 29.1805
I
have
viewed
the
mortars
at
this
place,
two
are Iron 13 Inch,
SIR

for Sea service with Beds &$ compleat, and are apparently sound good
pieces, the order I r e d from Gen! Dearborn was for one Brass & one
Iron Mortar. I wish you to obtain a new order for the two Iron.
There are also plenty of fuses shells &? for those mortars which were
prepared particularly for them, Genl Stephens has been so good as
to offerhis services to the Agent in giving directions for such apparatus
as the use of the mortars will require he being perfectly acquainted
with their use, Cap; Chauncey is all attention to the e uipment of
the Ship, her store-rooms are well contrived and she w d soon be in
very compleat order. The Gun Boats go on tolerably well and will
I am however sorry to see some of the
be ready in a fortnight
Lieutg commanding those Boats with the Epaulet on the right shoulder
unless they are actually commissioned as Lieu' Commandants as it
leaves no distinction and will create much difficulty on their arrival
in the Mediterranean unless a check is put upon their assuming that
Badge of distinction. The Agent not having any 32 pound carronades in his possession
has not been able to obtain a drawing which he was directed b you
to make, I have no doubt but that the plan which Mr
has
will answer very well & I should advise their being cast by it.
I shall proceed to Boston & Portland as soon as the wind is favorable
for the Packet.

-

oxh hat

[NDA.

Captain's LB, Vol. 1, 1805.1

467

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS
-

To Captain Thomas Tiwey, U. S. Navy, from Secretary of the Navy

NAVYDEPS29 March 1806.
Lieu? Henley has requested that he may have Studding Sails for
gunboat N? 4. I should wish to have your ideas upon this subject.
A false Keel must be prepared and put on NO 4, and also one on
N? 10. INDA. Off.Comg. Gunboats, 1803-1808.1
To Master Commandant John Shaw, U. S. Navy, Baltimore, Md., from Secretary
of the Navy

NAVYD E P ~
23 March 1805.
I have r e d your letter of the 27'4 Inst - The men entered at
Baltimore for the John Adam are to be sent to New York by water.
So soon as they actually enter into the public service they are entitled
to one ration per day each or the value thereof name1 20 Cents. You are not to proceed to New York till you sha have entered
the whole number of men directed to be entered in Baltimore. [NDA. OSW, Vol. 6, 1802-1805.1

lf

To Captain Samuel Barron, U. S. Navy, from Captain John Bodgers, U. S. Navy

U. STATES
SHIPConstitution
Malta March 29. 1806
SIR In answer to your Letter of yesterdays date, stating that a
supposition is entertained by Gen! Velletas of some Deserters from the
Garrison under his command, being on Board one of the U. States
Ships; - permit me to acquaint you that I caused a Muster to be
made this morning of the ships company, and find that no such Men
have ever been here - The Constitution has her full compliment of
Men; but if she had not no consideration would induce me to recieve
a deserter from the Garrison; as well on account of my own Ideas, as
the positive orders you have given to the contrarg. [LC. JRP. Letters & Ordere, Book A, 1804-1805.1

[29 March 18051
Proclamation of William Eaton to the Inhabitants of Tripoli
[Transbtion.]

To the inhabitants of the kingdom of Tripoli:
Brothers; Sons of Abraham; true believers of the true messengers of
the truth! I have come to you, sent by a natioq very far away from
your country, to greet you and to wish you happmess.
At the uttermost limits of the west, beyqnd the great and deep
Atlantic Ocean, we have for several centuries possessed a country
larger than the whole empire of the Grand Signor. We were formerly
composed of many elements. We grew, and we were beset by enemies
within and without. But we banded ourselves together and we gave
battle to them in man bloody encounters. We put them to flight;
and God, the God of A raham, whom we worship, it was his will that
we should settle there; and we became a united nation. Since that

1

468

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1804 TO 1806

epoch we have been called the United States qf America. We sought
peace with the whole world and we were happy in obtainin it. Soon
the United States of America became a sanctuary for a men who
fled from oppression and sought asylum there, and a refuge for those
who had no other country. People of every nation, every tongue and
every faith could come to us and dwell in safety, because our religion
teaches us to fear and to worship God and to be kind to all his creatures. MTeprofess the orthodox faith of Abraham which was not idolatrous. We believe in God and the revelations which he made through
Abraham and Israel and Isaac and Jacob and the tribes, and in that
which he reve4ed to the prophets. We make no distinction, and we
me resigned to the will of God.
Thus, being just to all, we lived for years a t peace with everybody.
We cultivated our soil and we sent products to all nations, and all
loolr upon us with the eyes of friendship and without jealousy. But
although we endeavored to maintain in good faith friendly relations
with all the powers of the earth, and while we offered the olive branch
of friqdship to all, Joussuf, the traitor, usurper of the throne of
Tripoli, a bloodthirsty scoundrel, having learned of our success, of our
wealth and of our ships which carry on trade in the Mediterranean,
mistrusting our peaceful inclinations and even mistrusting the justice
of God, sent out his armed pirate ships against our commerce and
even brought some of our ships into the port of Tripoli, and without
provocation had their crews put in chains and reduced to slavery;
thereby outraging every obligation of honor and decency, and transgressing against the law of God which forbids us to be the first in
aggression. Kevertheless, we did not wish to inflict on him the punishment which his crimes and his acts of violence merited, because
we realized the grievous error of making many worthy and honest
subjects of Tripoh, who had done us no harm, share his fa,te; on the
contrary, we sent him messengers of-peace with fair words and briwing him rich gifts of gold, silver, precious jewels and fine English cloth.
Joussuf, the traitor, on his part, after having heard our friendly words
sad accepted our presents, took an oath in the name of God and his
prophet to maintain with US a firm and lasting peace; he released our
brothers, who were in chains; and we left him, believing the promises
which he had made us. Scarcely had we returned home, when this
faithless traitor went to work and had all his pirate ships fitted out,
appointing foreign captains to command them, scoundrels who had
just escaped from certain Christian countries to evade the punishment
which their crimes merited, and having won over to his side bad
characters among the subjects of Tripoli, a t another time caused
war to be made on the United States, and p~raticallycaptured some
of our vessels and some of our brothers and reduced them to slavery.
B u t he had aroused the wrath of God, for Joussuf, the traitor, had
taken oath in the name of the Almighty to faithfully observe the
covenant of peace which he had entered into with us. Again we sent
him friendly messengers to ask him the reason of this new outrage and
violation of good faith. It is then that we learned that this same
Joussuf had been fmm his birth a miscreant, a murderer, a perjurer,
and an oppressor of the people. We were apprised of the cruel manner
in which he killed his younger brother even in his mother's arms; that
he had poisoned his brother, for which he is accursed of God; and that
he had betrayed and dethroned his elder brother, himself taking

lf

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

469

possession of the throne in violation of his duty towards his lawful
sovereign, who has now returned in order to revenge himself for the
wrong done him by the said traitor. That he always disdained the
counsels of true believers, lending his ears to hypocrites and to vagabonds who did nothing but flatter his vanity and his self-esteem in
the hope of sharing with him in the spoils of his piracy and the fruits
of his avarice, among whom there is Morad Reis, a renegade thief
from his youth up and a brutal drunkard whom the said Joussuf had
appointed as his Captain Bey. Furthermore, that he permitted himself to be led by Jews, Farfara and others, whose sole desire was to
encourage him to commit outrages against foreign nations so that
they might be able to stir up enemies against true believers. Nevertheless, we chose rather to offer peace to him than to mete out to him
the punishment merited by his misdeeds, because our religion teaches
us patience, and forbids us to shed the blood of the innocent, such as
the inhabitants of the kingdom of Tripoli, who had never wanted to
do us any harm, and whom the said Joussuf, the traitor, wished to
prevail upon to fight against their will. But he would not listen to
our offers of peace, or a t least only on such humiliating terms as
paying him an enormous sum of money and making ourselves m d
even our posterity his tributaries; which we disdained to concede to
him, for we are not accustomed to humiliate ourselves before men,
nations, nor the powers of the earth; much less before this base and
perjured traitor, whose naval commander is a drunken renegade, and
whose principal counsellor is a grasping Jew.
Know you not, you inhabitants of Tripoli and of all the neighboring countries, that it is through the just retribution of the Lord for
the bloody crimes of the said traitor that you are obliged to suffer the
scourges of famine and of war! You will again be visited by pestilence if you fail to avenge yourselves on this brazen usurper! Did he
not ally himself with infidel Jews to despoil you of your possessions!
Has he not turned over to them all the trade and commerce of your
country, thereby depriving you of all honest means whereby you
could earn money; and in order to enrich himself by a piratical and
unjust war, did he not lead you to the battlefield to die like cattle, on
false pretexts of religion. If you were to fall into the hands of his
enemies, would he pay one piaster to ransom you from slavery? No,
he sells you and your children to the enemies which he has made for
you. He leads you into war with no advantage to you whatever. He
does not hesitate to drench his shores with your blood, provided that he
be able to gain money by it! Yes, he scoffs a t your sufferings, saying:
Of what value are these Moors and these Arabs! They are just
beasts which belong to me, worth a reat deal less than my camels and
my asses. Let them all perish, if o y I be able to gain money thereby.
And his Jews also scoff while he is playing this tragic farce, he dares
to outrage the goodness of God by giving to his bloodthirsty avarice
the sacrilegious name of religion! Oh, Moors, oh, brabs, can you
calmly behold the shedding of your children's blood, without avenging
yourself! \Till you meekly allow them to be put in chains and reduced
to slavery in order to satisfy the cruel and savage cupidity of a usurper,
a traitor, a barbarian, who fears not the Lord and who has no regard
for human rights! No. The voice of God and the voice of justice
should inspire you with a desire for vengeance, even the blood of his
father and of his brother, assassinated by his own hands, cries to

f

470

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 180.4 TO 1805

heaven and to you for vengeance; and the groans of some of your own
brothers whose lives he sacrificed in an unjust war have risen to the
throne of the King to accuse him on the day of judgment. They
have been heard and Joussuf stands condemned. God has stamped
upon his forehead the mark of Cain, the first murderer. The measure
of the wickedness of his days has become full to overflowing; the end
of his usurpation and of his cruelty approaches; and woe to all those
who would strive to prevent the punishment which God has meted
out to him. The wrath of God has been aroused against the said
Joussuf, the Lreacherous scoundrel, because he wished to make you
believe that we Americans were enemies, of true believers; and God
has ordained that we never make peace m t h the said traitor, nor even
with subjects of Tripoli who belong to his party. But with Sidi Hamet
Caramanli Bashaw we wish to cultivate peace and amity as well as
with those of his subjects who desire to rejoin his cause, in order to
aid him in putting down the usurper and in re-establishing on his
throne, this lawful soverei , t,he first-born of his father, a just and
merciful prince, who great y loves his subjects, and who will faithfully observe and keep his covenants forever. Come on, Moors,
Arabs, Americans, brothers, come along from every corner of Barbary
where the truth of the prophet has been received. Be assured that the
God of the Americans and of the Mahometans is the same; the one
true and omnipotent God. Be assured, therefore, that there was no
thought of any difference in religion which could have induced us to
make war on the city of Tripoli and on its piratical ruler; on the contrary, we do not wish to harm any of the inhabitants of that city,
unless it be those who stubbornly adhere to the party of Joussuf;
we are joined and united with Sidi Hamet Pasha, and thus with the
loyal children of his country; and we are rcsolved to re-establish him
in the realm of his ancestors, by this means being able to offer peace
to his kingdom and to his city of Tripoli. Great, good and powerful
is our admiral, to whom we have entrusted the command of the American squadron in the Mediterranean, and always ready to assist you.
We shall furnish you with war supplies and with food supplies, with
money, and in case of need with regular soldiers to aid you in vanquishing your enemy, your oppressor. And I shall be always with you until
the end of the war and even until you have achieved your glorious
mission, in proof of our fidelity and our goodwill.
Be faithful unto God. Be loyal to the Grand Signor. Be loyal to
the rightful prince, Hamet Bashaw of Tripoli, and let us not doubt
that the Almighty will rant us his succor and his assistance to accomplish his wishes. A fasting peace; free and extensive trade, wealth
and fidelity will be the result.
God is infinite.

Y'

DESERT
OF LIBYA
29 March 1806

WILLIAMEATON.

[LC. Mss. Div.]
Extract from journal of William Eaton, U. S. Navy Agent for the Barbary Regencies,
Friday, 29 Karch 1805

Remained in camp, waiting for Hamet Gurgies. - At this castle,
which as a rough stone wall, laid in clay mortar, about ten feet high,

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

471

without bastions, and one hundred feet square, there seems to be some
trade with the inhabitants of the interior of Africa. - We find here
cattle, sheep, butter, fowls, eggs and dates, but very dear; and for
which we bartered rice a t great disadvantage. - The situation is
enchanting; vast plains, capable of high cultivation; - good well
water; - and some enclosed gardens of small fig and palm trees. But everything bears the ruinous aspect of ravage and war. - About
four p. m. Hamet Gurgies came up with the Arabs who seperated
themselves from us on the 27th. [H. E. Huntington L&AG, EA 206.1
To Secretary of the Navy from Master Commandant Isaac Chauncey, U. 6. Navy

NEWYORKMarch 30th 1806
SIR - I am happy to have it in my power to announce to you that
the John Adams is completely ready for the reception of her stores
The different store rooms cable stages &q &q are all compleated, the
Ship has been cleaned out and washed the ballast restowed and an
additional quantity taken in, we have also got 90 tons of Shingle
ballast in and the ground tier of Water cask stowed,
The Masts and Yards have all be[en] stripped and the rigging all
been overhauled We have now every thing on and the yards across
are ready to bend sails and I have no hesitation in saying that the Ship
could proceed to sea in six days if her provisions and men were here. L+Maxwell has entered upwards of two hundred men and boys out
of which number we have received on board 50 Seamen 120 Ordinary
Seamen & 18 Boys I have been under the necessity of entering a Master's Mate as we
had no Midshipmen who was competent to that duty - he has
commanded a Ship out of this port and appears like a smart active
man, there have been several applicants for Master's Mate's birth
by people who I think would be an acquisition to the service in that
grade
I wish that Mr Carr could join the Ship as soon as possible as Mr
Darby has made his accounts up and has now nothing to do with the
victualling the Ship
[NDA. MC LB, 1804-5.1
To Captain Elihn D. Brown, commanding Provision Ship Cnu, Baltimore, Md.,
from Secretary of the Navy

Nav D E P30
~ March 1805
I enclose letters directed to John Gavino Esq. Gibraltar, William

Higgins Esq. Malta & George Dyson Esq S.gracuse - On your
arrival at Gibraltar you will deliver to John Gavino Esq the letter
addressed to him and on your arrival at Malta or Syracuse you will
deliver to the agent there, the letters addressed to MI Higgins & Mr
Dyson unless you should have Occasion to proceed both to Malta &
Syracuse in which case you will deliver the letters to the Gentlemen
to Whom thev are directed GLB, Vol. 7. 1803-1805.1

472

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1804 TO 1805

Extract from journal of William Eaton, U. 8. Navy Agent for the Barbary Regencies,
Saturday, SO March 1805

At 6. a. m. Resumed our march with the Christians and baggage,
leaving the Bashaw to follow with his Arabs, who were mounted for
the purpose. - At this instant a dispute arose between the Chiek
il Taiib and Chaik Mahomet concerning the distribution of $1500; which the former had received of the Bashaw to be equally distributed;
a part of which he had concealed; and grew so warm that Mahomet
swore he would proceed no farther. - Three other Chaiks and several other considerable Arabs took part with him, and retrograded.
The Bashaw in vain endeavored to reconcile the parties. - Chiek
Mahomet persisted in quitting the expedition; & with his party moved
rapidly off. The Bashaw left them, & hastily pursued us, with a view
of arresting our march; having sent back Hamet Gurgies and two
other officers to endeavor to recover the malcontents. We had
gained fifteen miles ahead when he came up with us a t 2 oclock p. m.
But it was necessary to retrograde three miles to water, and there
camp. - The expedition could not proceed without those chiefs, as
they had many people and powerful influence with the eu ed alli
tribes near Derne, to which they belong. Pitched our camp at 5 p. m.
The Bashaw with twelve horsemen and my interpreter returned to
the castle in hopes of reconciling the shieks and of bringing up their
party. This will detain us tomorrow. - From Alexandria to this
place we have experienced continual altercations, contentions and
delays among the Arabs. They have no sense of patriotism, truth nor
honor; and no attachment where they have no prospect of gain, except
to their religion, to which they are enthusiasts. - Poverty makes
them thieves; and practice renders them adroit in stealing. - The
instant the eye of vigilance is turned from an object on which they
have fixed a desire, it is no more to be found: - Arms, amunition
and provisions most engage their furtive speculations; but sundry of
our people have been robbed of their cloaths and other articles. With all their depravity of morals they possess a savage independence
of soul, an incorrigible obstinacy to discipline, a sacred adherence to
the laws of hospitality, and a scrupulous pertinacity to their religious
faith & ceremonies. - Day before yesterday I was admitted, as a
mark of special distinction, within the walls of their castle. Curiosity brought every Arab about me who belonged to the tribe. They examined the lace of my hat, epauletts, buttons, spurs and
mounting of my arms. These they took to be all gold and silver.
They were astonished that God should permit people to possess such
riches who followed the religion of the devil!
My interpreter explained that the religion of the Americans was
different from that of all other nations who wore hats; (the hat and
turban are distinguishing marks of Christian and Turk:) that we
believed in God and respected all his revelations; that we made no
distinction in our respect to people of different creeds; all were free
with us to worship God as their consciences dictated; and that all
honest men were equally respected in America.

[H. E. Huntington L&AG, EA 206.1

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

473

To Master Commandant John H.Dent, U. 6. Navy, from Robert Denison, Secretary
of Captain Samuel Barron, U. S. Navy

MALTA31Bf.
March 1805
SIR, YOU are hereby directed to proceed immediately with the
United States Schooner Nautilus under your Command to Syracuse
for the purpose agreed upon in our conversation this Morning and
return to this place with all possible expedition - You will take
on board from the Nr Agent such Articles as you may want for a
Cruize on your return. [NHF. Dent's LB, 1803-10.1
To the Commander of the United States Vessels of War at Tripoli from Nicholas
C. Nissen, Danish Consul, Tripoli

TRIPOLIIN BARBARY
March S l Q 1805.
SIR The inclosed Packet for Commodore Barron has been dispatched from here to Gerbis with order to be sent to you Sir by a
boat.
The boat and the crew belong to Gerbii and of course are Tunesins,
the boat is to have no Cargo and is to return immdeatly to Gerbis
after having obtained from you Sir a Receipt for the delivery of the
Packet in good order, the Seals untouched. Should you have any
family letters or Newspapers for Captain Bainbridge or his Officers
you can deliver them likewise without fear of their not comming
to hand
The inclosed Packet you will please to forward to Commodore
Barron as soon as possible as it contains letters that can be of importance to him.
[LC. JRP,Vol. 1, Series Two, Feb. 1775-May 1805.1
Extract from journal of William Eaton, U.6. Navy Agent for the Barbary Regencies,
Sunday, 31 March 1805

Remained in camp. - Very rainy day, with thunder and wind;
the succeeding evening chilly. The Bashaw absent.
[H. E. Huntington L&AG, EA 206.1
Extract from journal of Heaekiah Loomis, Steward, U. S. Navy, in U. S. Brig
Vixen, Master Commandant John Smith, U. S. Navy, commanding, Sunday,
31 March 1805

[Standing off and on Tripoli since 6 iMarch.1
This day commences squally. We set more sail and at half past
ten o'clock saw a sail and gave chase to her. Sent up our top gallant
masts and yards and made all sail that we could carry. All hands
were called to quarters. When we spoke her we found her to be a
Polaive Bri mounting 16 guns and 150 men. We kept the Captain of the rig. on board until we came up with the Constellation
which was then in sight, and after Capt. Smith with this Turkish
Captain had been on board the Constellation a short time, the ViUians
were dismissed, and away they went. These rascals were all Turks
and said they were bound to Algiers.

%

[L. F. Middlebrook. NDA copy.

474

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1804 TO 1805

To Lieutenant Colonel Commandant Franklin Wharton, U. 8. Marine Corps,
from Captain John Hall, U. 6. Marine Corps

MESSINA1" April 1806
SIR I n consequence of an Order from Commodore Barron, I have
been to Catania for the purpose of procuring a Band, & have been
fortunate enough to enlist fourteen good Musicians for the Marine
Corps, the Instruments I have engaged a t this place & as soon as
hished shall render an Act? of all expences to the Comd": according
to his Orders I enlisted this Band for the Corps in consequence of an Order
received from Colo: Burrows before I left America, & have engaged
them a t the same rate as the rest of our Musick - they will come on
with me, & am in hopes you will be pleased with them - As I am
now on board of the Congreas, cannot forward any different returns to
the St&, but as we go for Malta in a day or two, shall as soon as I
join the President forward them by the Store Ship [MCA.

LR, 1805.1

To Tobias Leer, U, 6. Conrul General, Algiers, from Oaptah William Bainbridge,
U. 6. Navy
BARBARY
TRIPOLIl o t April 1806

Reg 24 Ap11806
MY DEARSIR I have not had the pleasure to hear from you since
August last, since that period I have written to you many letters; I
sincerely hope that indisposition has not been the cause of my disappointment, yet I am fearful that it has, as I know of no other to impute
the loss of your friendly correspondence to, I shall nevertheless a t a11
opportunities drop you a line, if it is only to inform you that our
situation has not changed for the worse (which, believe me I think
bad enough) and we are all thank God in tolerable health, and place
our hopes in our Country's exertions to put a speedy end to our hard
fate.
I have not heard from Corn B a m n since Oct' last and better than
twelve months since a line from America.
Please to present my respects and best wishes to Mre Leer and believe
me to be my Dr Colo! with unalterable esteem
Yours truly
W+ BAINBRIDGE
[Written in lime juice (inoisible ink).]
MY DEARCOL! I wrote to you last month informing that I had
heard that Sidi Mohammed Dhgies minister of foreign affairs to the
Bashaw of Tripoli had requested M' Beaussier the French [Consul] to
inform Com Preble that if a person came here that Peace would be
effected for 150 thousand dollars, Since the date of my last the said
minister in confidence has informed me that he did thus request Mr
Beaussier but does not know if Com Preble received the information.
The Minister is sincerely desirous for Peace it is his interest greatly
to have it You no doubt will be informed by Com Barron of the overtures which he has made to him, I have in my letters to Com B been
very explicit which I presume that you will be informed of The reports
of the Commodores force is greatly exagerated and the apprehension
I beleive is worse than the attack itself would prove and if a negoti-

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

475

ation is attempted before an attack is made I have not the least doubt
but what peace would be effected for 120 or [ms mutilated] thousand
dollars, and Tripoli would not consider one farthing of it paid as
purchasing its friendship but for the release of Unfortunate Citisens
fell captives in their Country's Service
Pray my dear ColQlet me soon hear from you
Yours affectT
WB
[Stephen Decatur Col.]

TO Captain John Rodgers, U. S. Navy, commanding U. S. Frigate Comtifufion,
from Captain Samuel Barron, U. S. Navy

LA VALLETTE
(MALTA)
19 Ap! 1805
SIR! AS soon as the U. States Frigate under your Command is
ready for Sea, you are directed to proceed off the Harbor of Tripoli
taking under your Convoy the Ketch Eiiza with Supplies for the
American Prisoners - On falling in with the Constellation you will
assume her station, and direct Cap! Campbell to return immediately
to this Port or to Syracuse. - As the Crew of that Ship have been
affected with the Small Pox, I suggest to you the propriety of her
going into Syracuse in preference to this place; however you will ascertain from Cap! Campbell the present state of his Crew, & give him
such Written Instructions on this head as you may think proper. You are directed to retain the Brig Vixen on the Station, until she is
relieved by some of the Small Vessels The Nautilus may be expected here from Sicily in four or five days
and it is my present intention to dispatch her immediately to the
Coast of Tripoli for that purpose.
When you arrive off the Station you will adopt such Dispositions
for blockading the Enemy's Harbour and scouring the Coast as you
may deem expedient Accompanying the Present you will find a Letter from M' Davis at
Tunis dated the StQ UltQ,giving an account of the two Tripoline Corsairs that have taken shelter in that Regency - they remained in
the same situation on the l g t Qwhen the Nautilus left the Bay Should the Winds prove favourable it may not be inadvisable for you
or the smaller Vessel to stretch towards Sousa and from thence to look
into Tunis Bay in order to watch their motions - The propriety of
this arrangement will depend upon circumstances, you will therefore
act in it at your own Discretion The term of your Cruize I leave entirely to yourself as well as the
general dispositions - I shall dispatch the President Frigate to join
you as soon as possible & whenever you think the Coast sufficiently
guarded, you will return to this Island or to Syracuse as circumstances
& arrangements may direct [LC. JRP. Letters & Orders, Book A, 1804-1805.1
Extract from journal of William Eaton, U. S. Navy Agent for the Barbaw Regencies,
Monday, 1 April 1805

Shiek il Taiib put himself at the head of five shieks, three of whom
were of the caravan, and presented himself at my markee to demand
an augmentation of the ration.
I refused. He manaced. I re-

-

476

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 180.4 TO 1805
-

proached him as the cause of all our delays in the march, and with a
total failure of all his engagements with me. - He had engaged me
four hundred mounted Arabs of his tribe at the Marabout and to
bring me to Bomba in fourteen da s. - His whole number of men
consisted of but twenty eight; we ad now been twenty five days in
gaining half our distance: - and, in stead of encouraging our progress,
he was on all occasions throwin obstacles in our way. - He recriminated the Bashaw and other s7.lieks. - I thought the Bashaw and
shieks he accused better men than himself; and would not hea[r] them
calumniated. He believed me partial. I said to him, if he had experienced any evidence of my partiality it was in his favor until after
his hypocricy betrayed itself. - I t was true I now held him in no
consideration, for I could place no reliance in any thing he said or
undertook. - He seemed ver indifferent about the opinion I entertained of him, provided he cou d obtain his object. - He cautioned
me against persisting in the resolution I had taken not to augment the
ration; it would unavoidably produce an insurrection. The other
shieks & caravan would leave me. As for himself, he could not subsist on rice alone; he zoo& have bread also! I asked him if he thought
to compel the measure? He said, with a menacing tone, - Remember you are in a desert, and a country not your own. - I a m a greater
man here than either you or the Bashaw. I retorted, " I have fou~ldyou
at the head of every commotion which has happened since we left
Alexandria. - You are the instigator of the present among the
chiefs. - Leave my tent! but, mark; - if I find a mutiny in camp
during the absence of the Bashaw, I will put you to instant death as
the fomenter of it." - He left the tent; mounted his horse; and,
with two other shieks took himself off. The Bashaw's Hasnadar
(Treasurer) had been called into my tent on the entrace of the Shiek
il Taiib. - He had the influence to pacify the other chiefs, or to engage them to wait at least till the return of the Bashaw.
Now 10 oclock and no news of him.
2 oclock p. m. The Shiek il Taiib returned. - Entered into the
tent of my officers: - regretted that he had lost my confidence: apprehended that some secret enemy had insinuated unfavorable impressions against him: - was devoted to me: - would even abandon
the Bashaw to follow me: - and begged Mr. Barquhar and Peck to
use their influence for a reconciliation. 5.p.m. He came to my tent. Professed eternal obligations and
attachment. - Would seek every occasion to give proofs of it; and hoped that an oppertunity would offer to him a t Derne to convince
me that he was a man!
I replied that I required nothing of him by way of reconciliation
but truth, fidelity to the Bashaw, pacific conduct among the other
chiefs, uniformity and perserverance in this conduct. These he promised b an oath; and offered me his hand.
6 oc ock p.m. The Bashaw not returned: Apprehensive that he has
suffered himself to fall into a snare of his brother. - The day has
been rainy, blowing, and chill . Visited the Arab camp. &eir young men, young women & children are perfectly well made, and thou h copper coloured, are handsome. - Never saw teeth so universal y sound and white, even and
well set. The women do not veil: -have nothing of the affected
reserve and biggoted pride of the Turks; yet in their general deport-

i

9

7

f

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS
-

477
-

ment modest and bashful. I took dates in the tent of their principal
shiek. One of his wives served them in an ozier pannier, and seemed
elated with the visit. I complimented her elegant proportion and
symitry She smiled and said there were much handsomer young women
in c.amp than herself. - I doubted it. To give me proof, sundry
h e girls, and young married women were invited in. - I admitted
they were very handsome; but could not give up my first opinion. [H. E. Huntington L&AG, EA 206.1
To Secretary of the Navy from Sailing Master Levi Bardin, U. S. Bavy

PHILADELPHIA
April 9 1805
SIR I hare recruited the hundred men for the John Adams, and
we ship off 25 t,omorrow morning under charge of Midshipman Keen
for Newyork
I Shall now commence Shiping for the Gun Boat. but expect to
malie but Lirttle progress as t,he Seamen are very much prejudice,d
against her
[NDA. Misc. LB, Val. 2, 1805.1

[2 April 18051
To Secretary of the Navy from Sailing Master Nathaniel Haraden, U. 6. Bavy

SIR I this day Receivd your Letter dated the 22 of March wherein
you have honored me with the Command of Gun Boat number Eight.
I am much plead wibh the command. Commodore Preble plan for
Masting affords Every Safety for Navigat,ion and Every a Conveniency for actual service, the spars and sails will be under way t h s
week. Mr Roads the Builder, Expects to Launch her in three weeks,
her Rigging sails and water cask shall be ready before that time, I
woul be glad if the Honorable Secretary will pleas inform me how
many men proceed to sea in the Boat, So I may make the necessary
arraingements for stowing, and what Quantity of shot shee will carre
out. Every article in the Boat, men included in my oppinion should
not Exceed 25 Tons in crossing the atlantic. I fear the Honorable
Secretay will think it impertinent in me in Giving my oppinion
unasked But I hope he will not. I am an old Seaman, my Self and
have Experenced heavy gales in Every a class of Vessels from a Cod
Smak to a ship of the line. there is but one danger those Boats will be
Expos!' to in crossing the atlantic, that is this in Scudding. in heavy
gales. adding there great length to there Easy draft, will occassion
there stern to lift out the water. This danger can be Easily Remeded,
By droping the Rudder
Shee is to Cross the atlantic with two feet Below the keel. I
request the Honorable Secretary will please to let me fit o m of the
Rudders in the above way. I fear it will be all most imposible to
Enter Seam[en] for the same wagers as the frigates dus, the Boat is
now nearly Ready for planking the Deck. the Caulkers will commence
in three or four days.
Leiutenant Maxwell is not pet arrived in Bost[on]. I mentione
this Because I saw Letters from you for him
BOSTON
2 A p d 1805.
[NDA. Misc. LB, Val. 2, 1805.1

ArA4VAL OPEBATIONS FROM 1804 TO 1805

478

To Secretary of the Navy from Samuel Brown, Nav Agent, Boston, Mass.

BOSTON
2 april1806
SIR The Letter from Commodore Barron which you were pleased
to transmit to me on the 9 ulto. I have forwarded to him by the ship
Thomas John Mantor Master which vessell departed on this day for
Naples.
[NDA. Alisc. LB, Vol. 2, 1805.1
To Captain Samuel Barron, U. S. Navy, from Secretary of theNavy

NAVYD E P$2~April 1805 I enclose to you herewith a Letter for Mr Benj. F. Read one of our
officers now a Prisoner in Tripoli, and below you have an extract
from the Letter to this office enclosing the Letter to Mr Read now

forwarded to you.
"As this letter bears to him the melancholy information of the
death of a Father, a Sister, and a Brother, all of whom were in health
when be sailed for the Mediterranean and as there is no Person in
these States authorized to manage the property, bequeathed to him
so as to render it productive during his Captivity, I feel assured that
you will have the goodness to place it in a Channel to reach him as
speedily as possible". I request your particular attention to the forwarding of this Letter
by the first opportunity. INDA. OSW, Vol. 6, 1802-1805.1
Extract from journal of William Eaton, U. S. Navy Agent for the Barbary Regencies,
Tuesday, 2 April 1805

3 oclock p.m. The Bashaw returned accompanied by the Shieks
Mahomet and others who seperated themselves from us on the 3Ot+
ult. whom he had overtaken on their rout to the province of Behara
two hours march Eastward of the castle Massouah, the ground of
our encampment from the 15tb to 21Ft ultimo; a distance of fifty nine
miles. He rode a11 night of t,he 31" and succeeding day in an uncomfortable fall of rain and chilly winds, and subsisted his party
durin the expedition on milk and dat,es which were occasionally
broug t him by the desert Arabs. At 7 in the evenin a meeting of the Bashaw and all the shieks at
my tent. I exhorte them, as on other instances of disagreements,
to union and perserverance, as the only m m s of insuring success to
the im ortant enterprise in which they were engaged; to which they
gave pf'edges of faith and honor; - and orders were accordingIy given
to resume the line of march a t reveillee beating tomorrow. We have now between six & seven hundred fighting men on the
ground, exclusive of followers of the camp m d Beduoin families, who
~nclusivelymake rt body of about twelve hundred people.

%

%

[H. E.Huntington L&AG, EA 206.1
To Secretary of the Navy from Midahiprnsn Edph Izard, Jr., U. S. Navy

SIR,I have the honor to inform you of my having taken command
of Gun Boat NQ2. -

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

479

I have consulted with practical gentlemen with respect to her rigging & the opinion is that her rigging cannot be altered for the better
m any respect. The Bowsprit is as well secured as possible. Caulkers are now employed on board & I am in hopes to report her ready
for sea in a few days.
I shall feel the want of a midshipman to whom I may confide in
the room of Mr Miller, whom I found in confinement by Lieut.
Murdochs order.
[NDA. Misc. LB, Vol. 2,1805.1
To Lieutenant Colonel Commandant Franklin Wharton, U. S. Marine Corps,
from Secretary of the Navy

NAVYDEPMT.
- Q April 1805. Michael Connor and Charles Young Privates in your Corps have
distinguished themselves by acts of valor against the Enemy off
Tripoli and having sustained severe wounds it behoves us to render
to them some suitable compensation as a testimony of the regard in
which the Government holds men of their description. You will
therefore, Sir, consider yourself authorized to promote both of these
men to the station of Sergeants and to retain them a t the Barracks
here. [NDA. USMC, LB, 1804-1820.1
To Captain Samuel Barron, U. S. Navy, from Secretary of the Navy

NAVD E PQ~April 1805.
I have understood that Col? Lear has procured 2 remarkably fine
Arabian Horses the Breed of which i t is desireable to introduce into
this Country.
Should Cole Lear ask permission to send these Horses to this
Country in one of the Frigates returning from the Mediterranean,
you will grant such permission. [NDA.

OSW, Vol. 6, 1802-1805.1

Presumably to Captain James Barron, U. S. Navy, from Master Commandant
Thomas Robinson, Jr., U. S. N a v
V E N I CQfl
E April 1806

Dr SIR I wrote you by rt Bark on Sunday and now repeat by first
Mail since my arrival.
Mortars cannot be obtained in any other way than application to
Vienna, Boats 8: Bombards can be fitted out w ~ t hfacility, I've seen
two 24 Pounders & one 36 and anumber of elegant brass cannon that
would suit us the latter belonging to Government and can on1 be
obtained by Orders from Vienna, the former I can have when I pYease
they are in private hands: - there is nothing material except the
mortars that we cannot obtain and as the* is an unexpected rebuff in
the latter you had better come over here mmediately, you will then
have a falr View of matters ln ln all who can serve us & Judge
accordingly
The Schooner will be in her Element on Sunday I am preparing for
a heavy Gun, and in such a way that the arrangement will Answer

480

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 180L TO 1805

---

-

for any other Deck & shall carry all in the Hold to the place of action Come to Venice, Pours &c"
(Sign'd) T ROBINSON
[NDA.

Captain's LB, Vol. 1,1805.]

Extract from journal of U. S. Frigate Corufifution. Captain John Rodgers, U. S. Navy,
commanding, Wednesday, 3 April 1805

[Malta] At 7 [A.M.] unmoord ship a t )4 past 9 Weighed and warped
down The Harbour a t 10 made sail And stood out of the harbour
[USNA.]
Extract from journal of William Eaton, U. S. Navy Agent for the Barbary Regencies,
Wednesday, 3 April 1805

Marched a t six a. m. Advanced only ten miles in front, when the
Arabs pitched their camp, and insisted on remaining here until they
could send a caravan five days march into the interior of the desert
to a place called Seewauh [Siwah] to procure dates. We were in a
valley upon the centre of a vast elevated plain, and haveexcellent
cistern water. - I urged the march ahead. - The Arabs positively
refused to proceed. - They were short of provisions, and had no
other resort. I said their wants would be supplied a t Bomba. They replied that this depended on contingency; we could not command the sea. - I threatened to take off the Christians. They
intreated I would halt till the next morning. - To this I consented,
on condition that they would solemnly promise to throw no more
impediments in the way of our progress to Bomba, and that they
would hereafter yield implicit obedience to my orders; threating a t
the same time to embark with the Bashaw and suit a t that place,
and proceed directly to Tripoli, leaving them to contend for the
provinces of Derne and Bengazi alone in case of any infraction of
these conditions. They pledged themselves; and we encamped. Their caravan went off for Seeu-auh, to join us again a t Bomba. The Arabs say that at that placc is a fountain, or lake of fresh water,
of three leagues circumference, which supplies a considerable territory
of good land by small rivulets descending from the mountains. I t
does not appear that this lake has any issue to the sea: but the truth
of its existence is supportcd by the excellent dates brought thence to
the castles on the seaboard for sale; a fruit only found on low, wellwatered ground.
[H. E. Huntington L&AG, EA 206.1
Extract from journal of U. S. Frigate Conrlilufion. Captain John Rodgers, U. S. Navy,
commanding, Thursday, 4 April 1805

At j4 past Meredian the Ketch Came a long side from Malta Bound
to Tripoli with cloathing For the prisoners - took hir in Tow, bore
up and made sail a t 1 sent down the royal yards & Sky sail masts.
At Sunset the North point of Gozo. Bore N E B E distance 3
leagues
Latitude Observed 35' 32' N.
[USNA.]

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

481

Extract from journal of William Eaton, U. S. Navy Agent for the Barbary Regencies,
Thursday, 4 April 1805

Marched a t 6, A. M. Halted a t four afternoon. Gained eighteen
miles. This day Capt. Selem Comb chased down a wild cat with his
grey hound: height two feet; length from extremities five feet; color
sable, brindled about the body; black ears and nose, and dark brindled
tail: it was cooked, and i t eat very well. An Arab, soon after, brought
me a couple of her young; but they were not old enough to be raised.
At this camping ground are two remarkable wells, between &ety
five and a hundred feet deep, sunk through solid rock, except about
four feet a t the surface. The surrounding plains are a bed of marl0
and sand; and have unequivocal evidence of ancient cultivation.
Vast ruins of masonry scattered in different directions: the superstructures totally effaced by time.
[NR&L. No. 9217, Bml E 14.1
Extract from letter of an offlcer of the U. S. Squadron at Malta

April 5th, 1806
"In my last I believe I informed you that capt. Eaton had gone to
Alexandria in Egypt to meet the cidevant Bashaw of Tripoli, brother
to the reigning Bashaw, since which the Argus has returned, and
brings letters from Eaton. He was received with much attention,
and appointed generallissimo by the Bashaw; he is now a t the head
of about six thousand men on his march for Tripoli, a distance of
1000 miles, he is supposed by this time to be a t Derne, a province of
Tripoli, about half way from Alexandria.
"The Argus has again been dispatched to Derne with provisions,
and the commodore has sent to Messina to purchase field pieces, &c.
Great hopes are entertained from this expedition. The reigning
Bashaw is much alarmed, and has put himself a t the head of his army
to oppose them.
"Commodore Barron continues very ill yet. The Constitution,
Constellation, and brig Vixen are now off Tripoli, from which he had
just returned; the Essex and Enterprise a t Venice and Trieste, expected
here daily-the Congress and Nautilus a t Syracuse or on their passage
to this place-the Syren cruismg off Tangier.
[LC. National Intelligencer, 5 Aug. 1805.1
To Captain Hugh G. Campbell, U. S. Navy, commanding U. S. Frigate Comtellntion.
from Captain John Rodgers, U. S. Navy

U. STATES
SHIP Constitution
of Tripoli Apt 5 . 1806
SIR I n conformity with the Instructions of Cornmo: Barron; I
have to desire that you return Into Port without delay. Your Crew
having had the Small Pox lately induces me to suggest that it is not
likely you will obtain Prattique a t Malta; I therefore advise that
you proceed to Syracuse, taking Malta in.your course, a t which place
you will send a Boat on shore to asscertaln if Commo: Barron is still
there, and if he is, to inform yourself of his intentions relative to
your further destination & pro~eedings.The Vixen's Water & provisions being nearly expended; you will
be pleased to inform Commodore Barron, that so soon as the Nautilus

482

N A V A L OPERATIONS FROM 1804 TO 1805

joins me I shall send the Vixen into Port (Malta) with orders in her
return, to look into Susa & Tunis Bay, in observance of Mr Davis's
Letter to him of the 8th Ult?, Enclosed in his Letter of instructions
to me of the 2" Inst The season is advancing fast which will authorise and require
offensive and active opperations against this hell born place! You
therefore will excuse my suggestin to you the necessity of our
etting your ship in the best possib e order for hard Service! 8ood
$owder 6: plenty of Shot will in all robability, be es necessary to
ensure success as good supply of Bee and Bread to give us strength
& Spirits to use it.
P. S. I n case the Winds serve, I would advise your looking into
Susa, provided it does not considerably retard your getting into
Port. -

k

P

J. R

[LC. JRP.

Letters & Orders, Book A, 18041805.]

TO Master Commandant John Shaw, U. 6. Navy, Baltimore, Md., from Secretary

of the Navy

NAVDEP;5 April 1805.
You will immediately proceed to New York and take the command
of the Frigate John Adams. Report to me prior to your leaving
Bait9 the number of men you map have entered, that I may take
orders for sending them to New York. The John Adams has now
I presume between 3 and 400 Men on board and for the residue of
her Crew we may safely depend on Phila & New York. Leave the
men in Baltimore, under the Care of Lieu! Cox to whom you will
transfer your recruiting Instructions.
[NDA. OSW, Vol. 6, 1802-1805.1
Extract from journal of William Eaton, U. S. Navy Agent for the Barbary Regencies,
Friday, 5 April 1805

Marched 12 miles: cam ed seven lea ues distant from the sea
board. Here is a remarkab e apcient cast e of hewn stone, and r e p lady built, one hundred and elghty feet square, the walls eighteen
high and five thick, with bastions at each angle, and battlements on
the curtain constructed for archers. In the centre is a well, descending to an immense cistern, cut in solid rock, extending to another
well without walls, a dlstance of one hundred and twenty feet. This
vast cistern must have been supplied by rain water conveyed into
it from the terraces of bulldmgs, as its depth is but about t,hirty feet,
and the depth of the only well of water in the vicinity is one hundred
and fifty: the water of which is sulphurous and saline. The cistern
is dry. Around the castle are many ruins of ancient buildings, of
apparently excellent masonry; the cement of which resembles exactly
that in the ruins of Cartha e. Time in many places has consumed
the freestone of the walls, eaving the cement perfectly entire, and
honey combed.
Scattered among these ruins are numerous graves of pilgrims with
Turkish and Arabic inscriptions of modern date, expressive of little
else than an ejaculation. The surrounding country, as far as eye
can ken, exhibits little more than a barren desert, seemingly never

P

f

f

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

483

to have been cultivated, yet every where interspersed with ruins of
masonry. One of my foreign officers found here, and presented me,
two copper coins with Greek inscriptions but so effaced as not to be
intelligible. On the west of this port is a mountain of great height,
forming a steep bl18 on its eastern abutment, extending in a circular
direction south easterly as far as the eye can pursue it. The Arabs
tell. me this mountain preserves the same appearance quite to the
rovince of Fiaurne, and is called m their language Auk bet Sdaum.
fts rite is s vast plain, rocky and barren, gradually inclined to the
westward. Our guides fix this port one hundred and fifty miles from
Derne.
[h'R&L. No. 921'7, Bm1 E 14.1
Extract from journal of Heaekiah Loomis, Steward, U. S. Navy, in U. 6. Brig
Vixen, Master Commandant John Smith, U. S. ETuvy, commanding, Friday,
6 April 1806

OffTripoli. This day commences with fresh gales and flying
clouds. A6 7 o'clock A. M. saw two sail. We made sail and stood
for them. The Constellation also did the same. At 8 o'clock A. N.
came up with them and found to be the Constitution commanded by
Capt. Ro[d]gers and a Ketch which he had in tow. Signals were
made on board the Constellation and answered by the Constitation.
We all stood in for the land which we discovered at 1 o'clock P. M.
Stood on then until we made the Town, then put about and stood
off shore, blowing very fresh and a heavy sea rising.
[L. F. Middlebrook. NDA copy.]
To Secretary of the Navy from Lieutenant Nathaniel Fanning, IT. S. Navy

CHARLESTON,
S. C. April the 6* I806
SIR I have the honor to acquaint you, that the outfits of the new
Gun Boat, progresses fast, and am persuaded that we shall have her
in readiness for Sea in Ten days. (If no bad weather should prevent
it). We h&ve had some difficulty in procuring here all the Articles

which was wanted for her, and was obliged at length to accept of
some of an inferior kind because no better was to be had, I have
iven to the plan (sent to your department (for Rigging a Gun Boat)
Commodore Prebble and Cap$Tingey) all the consideration which
it meritted, and beg leave to give my opinion that it ought to be
adopted, with only one or two alterations which I think those Gentlemen will approve of and which I think will be an improvement
upon their Plan. It is this; instead of the Mast being placed in the
Center, let it be stepped N i n e or, T e n feet from the Center, towards
the advancing End of the Boat; - This will give her more after
Sail and She mill the more readily go in Stays. But If the Mast is in
the Center I think riggd as those Gentlemen propose She will work
heavily and will be liable to miss Stavs. If this suggestion of mine
should be approved of, I think it would be best to have the Shrouds
(except the forward one in the centre). abaft the Mast to prevent the
principal yards chafing of them. subnutting these suggestions to your
better Judgment

fy

INDA.

bfise. LB, Vol. 2, 1805.1

484

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1804 TO 1803'

To Secretary of the Kavy from Eon. Samuel White, Senator from Delaware

WILMINGTON
Ap! 6 t U 8 0 5

DEARSIR I received, a few days since, a letter from MT A Laws,
a young Friend of mine, a midshipman on board the Constitufion
Frigate, then a t Syracuse - his situation as it regards his rank is
certainly a delicate one, and will no doubt meet the attention of the
Sec? of the navy - h4.T Laws was first appointed in the navy on the
15@ of May 1800 as his warrant will shew - a t the time the naval
esthblishment was reduced, Geni Smith who then acted as the Sec'
in his selection of officers, which generally speaking was certainly a
very judicious one, omitted through mistake or for the want of proper
information this young Gentleman, who was then a t Pittsburg, with
his Friends, on leave of absence, and who was not acquainted with
this circumstance for months afterward; but was then waiting orders The winter following, I believe, or as soon a s i t was found that M'
Laws had been left out -I applied at his instance to Mr Rob? Smith
the Secu, to have him reenstaled in the navy, and I shortly afterwards
found him in service - but i t seems unfortunately, for the young
Gentleman, a new warrant was then issued to him, which places him
in date of warrant far behind those a-bo aciually entered the service
long after him - This as the See? will at once see, especially in the
day of promotion, must be an extremely mortifying circumstance to a
young man of great ambition &- high spirit, and altho' I well know that
the path he is at present pursuing to fame, is the pride of his soul,
may, I fear, unless some remedy can be provided for it, occasion his
leaving the service - I believe there is no man more sincerely attached
to the navy than myself, and I am well convinced that no sing10
circumstance can induce so much to its respectability, as the encouragement of young men of education, character & family to enter & continue in the service - hfr Laws has the support of these recommendations in a high degree and such are his easy circumstances in pecuniary
respects, that none but motives the most honorable could possibly
have influenced him in entering the navy - He went out the last
time with Commodore Prebble, was with Decatur a t the burning of
and has taken a gallant part in all the very distinthe Philad"
guished & honorable exploits of our brave Fellows in the Mediterranean - This information, or the latter part of it, I give froin some
of those officers who have returned - I had hoped that the midshipmen who were engaged in the burning of the Philad" would have
been promoted to Lieutenants - this would have relieved M' Laws,
I presume, from his difficulties as to the date of his warrant - should
this not be the fact I must beg you Sir to attend to the case & complaint of this young Gentleman - I hazard nothing in assuring
you that you have no Gentleman under your command more worthy
of your Patronage -

SAMUEL
WHITE

[NDA. iblisc. LB, Vol. 2, 1805.1
To Purser Abraham Cordrey, U. S. Navy, Charleston, S. C., from Secretary of the

Navy

NAVD E P MApril
~
6,1805. I have recd your letter of the 26@ ult? and now enclose. you your
warrant as a Purser in the Navy.

-

486

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1804 TO 1805

pressed & the principles laid down with respect to the plan in question
will meet your entire approbation - From the concurring information I have recently received from persons well acquainted with the
Bashaw of his Character & Conduct, I confess that my hopes from a
Cooperation with hi are less sanguine than they were -perhaps however I may shortly have reasons to raise my expectations to their former Standard, but until something occurs to 'ustif the belief that he
possesses more Courage, Energy and Talents t an t ose who appear to
know him well, give him Credit for, it wou'd be reprehensible to flatter
myself or the Government with prospects which the event may
diiappoin t
I am equally a t a loss to calculate the effects of this cooperation
with his Brother upon the mind of the reigning Bashaw - a short
time will throw light upon this interesting point; in the mean while,
I cannot conceal from you my candid opinion that from the obstinacy
hitherto evinced by Caromauli Bashaw and the pertinacity of his
Character not unmixed with bravery and other qualities belonging to
a Soldier, added to the natural advantages of his situation, the Contest promises to be more arduous than was at k t anticipated Our co-operation with Hamet may and in all probability will induce
him either to offer terms to us at once, or finding his Dominions menaced and his life endangered to put every thing to the hazard of War.
In the latter case we may naturally conclude that his resistance will
be not only obstinate but desperate. - I look with anxiety for the
Return of the vessel which sailed a few days for Tripoli with Supplies
for the prisoners - She will undoubtedly bring important intelligence The Ex Bashaws Secretary of State, whom you will find mention'd
in M' Eaton's Correspondence return'd in the Argus to join his Master - He appeared to be a sensible discreet old Man - He brought
me a Letter from the Bashaw a translation of which with a Copy of
my Answer is attached to the accompanyin papers. With constant sentiments of Respect & onsideration, I have the
Honor to remain,

b E

e

[NA. Sen. 9 B-B 6, Pres. Message, Jan. 1806.1
To Captain Samuel Banon, U. S. Navy, Commodore U. S. Squadron in the
Mediterranean, from Captain John Bodgers, U. 6. Navy

U: STATESSHIPConstitution

o$ Tripoli. A p d 6.1805
SIR I have to acquaint you that I arrived on the coast & fell in
with the Constellation & Vixen esterday, but falling in rather to the
Eastward & the Wind sudde y shifting to the NW. and blowing
fresh prevented the Ketch's getting in - The Wind is now from
S W. and so soon as it changes she will go in The Vixen's Water being nearly expended, she will be obliged to
return into Port soon - For particulars I refer you to Cap! Campbell

J

[LC. JRP, Letters & Orders, Book A, 1804-1805.1
To Secretary of the Navy from Degen, Purviance & Co., U. 6. Navy Agents, Leghorn

LEGHORN
6tQA p d 1805.
SIR The foregoing is duplicate of what we had the honor of addressing you on the 25th Ultimo, via Philadelphia. We are still in anxious

W B S WITH BARBARY POWERS

487

expectation of receiving further intelligence of the Two Tripolitan
Corsairs as said to be out on a cruize. Another Letter of the 1 2 s past from M' Dyson at Syracuse, received
yesterday, gives us the pleasing information of the safe return of the
Argus Brig at that place from Egypt leaving behind Mr Eaton, in
greathopes, as we are told, of accomplishing theobject of hisvoyage.We presume however the enclosed Letter from the former Gentleman,
will afford more particulars. We regret to notice that Commodore Barron, continued still unwell,
(at the date of M' Dyson's Letter,) and very weak, tho' great hopes
were entertained of his recovery. We have also a Letter in date of 26@ March from Captain Robinson, Commanding the Enterprize Schooner, who was then at Venice,
under repairs, advising his having drawn on us P6000, say Six Thousand Pezzers, which have been duly accepted, and will be extinguished
at maturity [ms mutilated] the Debit of the Navy Department, and
the Bills forwarded with some others, to the Accountant Mc Turner,
which we lately paid - Captain Robinson adds that the Essex
Frigate was then laying at Trieste. [NDA. Mkc. LB, Vol. 1, 1805.1

--

Extract from journal of William Eaton, U.S. Navy Agent for the Barbary Regencies
6 April 1806

Last night a party of wild Arabs stole into the vicinity of our camp
and took off nine of the Bashaw's horses. A detachment was sent
this morning in search of them, which returned at twelve and reported
that they fell upon the trail of fifty horses, supposed to be mounted
by the thieves, which shaped a rapid course towards the interior of
the desert. The detachment was reenforced and returned on the
pursuit.
This morning died the saddle beast of one of my servants.
12 oclock at noon. After six hours march came to a well seventy
feet deep below which a large cistern of bad water, foeted and saline.
Our horses had not drunk during forty two hours - and the people
with much difficulty procured a little very nausious water from the
deep well near the castle last night. Every body pressed near the
well, the horses and people crouding upon each other for drink. In
the struggle the horse of my other servant was forced backwards
from the croud, and, the ground descending to the well, slipped and
went down with two cloaks, and perished in the fall. Continued our
march 17 miles, but advanced very little in front, having kept under
the side of the mountain to gain the seaboard. - Halted a t 3 p.m.
within four miles of the sea shore. I walked with Mr Farquhar and
a servant to the water side. - A very handsome bay formed by the
mountain which extends into the sea a league and an half, and terminates in a high cape. The Arabs call the port Salaum; I t is marked
on the French chart Cape Luco: They say it is remarkable for having been a shelter for the Malteese
cruisers. - Ninety miles from Bombay by calculation. We find no
water this night.
m.E.Huntington L&AG, EA 206.1

NAVAL OPERATIONS FRO211 1804 TO 1805

488

Extract from journal of U. S. Frigate Condilution. Captain John Rodgers, U. S. Navy.
commanding, Sunday, 7 April 1805

[Off Tripoli] At 6 [P.M.] saw the town of Tripoli Bearing W B S.
Made and took in sail as Occasion required
At Midnight fresh breezes and Clear weather. At jh past 5 the
Ketch left us For Tripoli
Latitude Observed 33' 9' N.
[USNA.]
Extract from journal of Surgeon Jonathan Cowdery, U. S. Navy, 7 April 1805

One of our cruisers appeared. A large gunboat was launched,
which was built by redegado West, who was one of our crew, and
turned Turk.
[LC. Rare Books, American Captives i n Tripolr or Dr. Cowdery's Journal,
Boston, 1806.1
Extract from journal of William Eaton, U. S. Navy Agent for the Barbary Regencies,
Sunday, 7 April 1806

Marched a t 6. a. m. ascended the mountain, and marched on its
summit eighteen miles in front. - At four afternoon halted in a
valley where we found excellent feed for our horses, but no water. [H. E. Huntington L & ~ G EA
, 206.1

Extract from journal of Hezekiah Loomis, Steward, U. S. Navy. in U. S. Brig
Vixen. Master Commandant John Smith, U. S. Navy, commanding, Sunday,
7 April 1805

This morning commences pleasant, the land in sight. Saw nothing of the 2 Frigates nor Ketch. At 11 o'clock A. M. saw the Ketch
standing for the town. We then being abrest of the Town we put
about and stood to the eastward. VCTe saw the Ketch go into the
harbour of Tripoli and come to anchor. At 3 o'clock P. M. saw a
large sail which we took to be the Constitution. At half past 4 wore
ship and stood to the westward, the Frigate standing down to us.
[L. F. Middlebrook. NDA copy.]
To Secretary of the Navy from Colonel Jacob Crowninshield

SALEM
8 t b April 1805
Monday even'g

DEARSIR: Come Preble called on me to day, and it afforded me
real pleasure t,o converse with that intelligent officer on the various
subjects connected with his late instructions from the Navy Department, and in relation to our affairs in the Medetera. If a doubt ever
rested on the mind of any man (but none ever did on mine) of our
being able to dictate a peace to Tripoli, that doubt would be done
away upon hearing Come P. explain the situation of the place, the
inferiority of its force, & the impression that his bombardments made
on its government. Sure I am the American squadron now going
against it, aided with the gun boats & other force of that description
which will soon be on the spot, will be able to reduce it, & oblige it
to submit to whatever conditions you may chuse to impose & instead
of our paying them tribute it will be in our power to lay their city &

W M S WITH BARBARY POWERS

489

people under contribution, if the attack is made & supported with that
bravery & judgment which has hitherto distinguished us in our
operations against the place. Corn".
having informed me that he found all the carpenters in
Boston engaged, so far that none of them would promise to undertake
to build the bomb-vessels immediately, and to complete them in 40
or 50 days, the time within which i t would be necessary for them to
sail for Tripoli, I went with him to one of our principal ship builders
in this town, to see if he wouid agree to build one of the boats in the
limitted time, and we found it could not be done, they can be built
in Boston, Salem, Newburyport, Portsmouth, Portland or at any of
our seaport towns, but not quite so soon as they are wanted, owing
to the greater part of the carpenters being engaged, still I am confident
men can be found who will finish the work in much less time than 3
months, because in that time an Indiaman could be built & put to
sea. Come P. will hurry the business all in his power, but we have
thought i t would aid the object in view if he was permitted to buy
two large sloops or Schooners (for whether they have one or two masts
is of no consequence) as he might happen to find suitable vessels, and
fix them up as bomb-vessels, they might be from 100 to 120 or 130
tons burden, rather over the size of the Sloops I recommended in my
last letter for gun boats, they can be bolt a t any hour in Boston or
the neighbouring towns, & can be readily fitted to receive mortars
or any heav cannon wanted for the service, it will be necessary to
lay them as ore, to double plank them outside, & strengthen them
inside with timber & plank, & to bolt & rivet the work together sufficiently secure to bear the shock of continued discharges from the
mortars, which can all be done, & the vessels certainly depart in a
month or 40 days a t most from the time they are purchased, I would
strongly advise to this plan, because they can be on the ground &
assist in the reduction of Tripoli this season, while the new bombvessels might not be completed so as to make it certain of being there
a t the attack, but the purchase of these boats, (for they are only
boats after all) need not prevent your building the bomb-vessels,
which may be still much wanted. my object in suggesting this plan
to you, is to be sure of having force enough off Tripoli before the
first of July. The gun boats from this Country will be excellent,
but you may want a greater force, especially of that description, to
throw heavy bombs, shells &?into the town & among the shipping. I mentioned to Come P that the New York North river sloops wG
make good gun boats, & I found he agreed with me most completely,
any vessels drawing little water & built after their model are fit for
gun boats, they only require to be fixed to receive the camon on deck,
& perhaps to be strengthened round the bows. At any rate I a~d
recommend you to send out from 4 to 6 of them in aid of the gun
boats, you may rely upon it they will be useful in the attack if you
order them prepared to receive a heavy cannon, & as I have previously observed this need not interfere the least with the gun boats
going out, for with 8 or 10 of these, & 3 or 4 sloops properly fixed,
& the two others fitted up for Mortar or Bomb-vesscls, you will have
a powerful force, & coo erating with the squadron it must be the
fault of the officers sole y if Tripoli is not completely humbled; &
even made to "pay tribute" to the U S should it be thought necessary

i'

P

490

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1804 TO 1806

to proceed to extremities with a power governed only by the dictates
of an insatiable avarice in its transactions with all the civilized
not to delay contracting for the two
nations, I have advised Corn".
bomb-vessels agreeable to your instructions, but I am sure (as a
month has already passed away since we mentioned this business in
Washinoton) they can not be built in season to calculate on their
arrival gefore Tripoli at the time when it is contemplated to make
the attack, but if you allow him to buy the vessels I propose you will
be certain of having your object completely answered. Should you
approve of it you had better address your instructions immediately
to him in Boston, and a duplicate to Portland, as he said he should be
in Boston in about a fortnight hence.
If you allow 60 days for a passage to Tripoli, & Comv Barrons Squadron were over that time last year, tho' it ought to be done in less, the
vessels will have no time to spare, sail when they will, May & June
are pleasant months to cross the Atlantic & I have known very fine
weather as early as April. As to the gun boats I can not upon honor
suppose the risk worth 5 Pr Ct, to insure them safe to their destined
port, & underwriters wd ask you nearly that for the sea risk on Mercht
vessels.
Pray excuse this hasty & incorrect letter, & believe me with great
Sincerity your obliged and humble Servt
JACOB
CROWNINSHIELD.
P S. I t is with much pain I inform you that Mg C's indisposition
continues, she is confined to her chamber & to her bed the greater
part of the time, & I can not flatter myself with her speedy recovery,
indeed on this head I must not allow myself to express all my fears. [NDA. Misc. LB, Vol. 2, 1805.1
Extract from journal of William Eaton, U.6.Navy Agent for the Barbary Begenciee,
Monday, 8 April 1805

Marched a[t] 6. a.m. Descended the western declivity of the
mountain. At nine called a halt near a cistern of excellent rain
water, excavated in a solid rock, at the bottom of a deep ravine,
by the torrents of water and small stones which rush down the mountain by this avenue during the rainy season. This was a precious
repast to our thirsty pilgrims. I went with a small party to survey
the seacoast and reconnoitre the country, intending to ursue the
! lves. But,
march as soon as the army should have refreshed themse
during my absence, the Bashaw ordered the camp pitched. - On
my return I demanded his reason for so doing. - He answered
that the exhausted situation of the troops and people required a t
least one day's repose. 1 discovered however that his real Intention
was to remain on this ground until a courier should return, which
he was about to dispatch to Bomba in quest of our vessels. We had
only six days rations of rice; no bread nor meat and no small rations.
I ur ed this circumstance as an impulsive reason why the march
shoufd continue. - He said the Arab chiefs were resolved to proceed no further till the camp shall have recruited themselves by a
little repose. I told him if they preferred famine to fatigue they
might have the choice; and ordered their ration stopped. The day
passed confusedly among them.

WARS ~ ' I T HBARBARY POWERS

491

At 3 p.m. the Bashaw, compelled by his Arab host, struck his
tent ordered his baggage packed, mounted, and took up a march for
Fiaume by the mountain. - I waited without emotion the result
of this movement; not chusing to betray a concern for ourselves. Discovering however an intention in the Arabs to sieze our provisions, I beat to arms. - My Christians formed a line in front of
the Magazine tent. Each party held an opposite position the space
of an hour. The Bashaw prevailed on the Arabs to return; they
dismounted; and he pitched his tent. Supposing the tumult tranquilized, I ordered the troops to pass the manual exercise, according
to our daily practice. I n an instant the Arabs took an alarm: remounted, - and exclaimed, "The Christians are preparing to f i e
on us!" The Bashaw mounted and put himself at their head, apparently impressed with the same apprehension. A body of about two
hundred advanced in full charge upon our people, who stood their
ground motionless. The enemy withdrew a t a small distance, singled out the officers,
Some of the Bashaw's offiand, with deliberate aim, cried -$re!
cers, exclaimed "For God's sake do not fire! The Christians are our
friends". Mr O'Bannon, Mr Peck and young Farquhar stood firmly
by me. Selim Aga (Caps of Cannoniers) his lieutenants and the two
greek officers remained stedfast a t their posts. - The others were
agitated, and in fact abandoned us. I advanced towards the Bashaw
and cautioned him against giving countenance to a desperate act.
At onco a column of muskets were aimed at my breast. - The
Bashaw was distracted. A universal clamor drowned my voice. I waved my hand as a signal for attention. ,4t this critical moment
some of the Bashaw's officers and sundry Arab chiefs rode between
us with drawn sabres and repelled the mutineers. - I reproached
the Bashaw for his rashness or rather weakness. His Casnadar
asked him if he was in his senses. - The Bashaw struck him with
his naked sabre. The fracas had nearly resumed its rage, when I
took the Bashaw by the arm; led him from the croud, and asked him
if he knew his own interests and his friends? He relented: - called
me his friend & protector: - said he was too soon heated: - and
followed me to my tent, giving orders at the same time to his Arabs
to disperse. After a moment's breath, he said if I would give orders
to issue rice it would quiet every thing. This I would do on no
other condition than his promise to march tomorrow morning a t
reveillee beating. - He promised, and provisions were issued. Confessions of obligation and professions of attachment were repeated
as usual on the part of the Bashaw and his officers; - and the camp
again resumed its tranquility. The fkm and decided conduct of
Mr O'Bannon, as on all other occasions, did much to deter the violence
of the savages by whom we were surrounded, as well as to support
our own dignity of character. After the affair was over the Bashaw
embraced him with an enthusiasm of respect, calling him The Brave
American. The Chevalier Davico, my Aid de camp, acted a part
which I would rather attribute to an amiable disposition than to
weakness of nerve. My Doctor behaved decidedly like a coward,
and a base one. Mr Farquhar conducted with manly firmness. One
of the Arabs, during the agitation, snapped a pistol at his breast.
Happily it missed h e : - had it been otherwise the fire would most
probably have become general and the result serious. -

492

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 180.4 TO IS05

We find it almost impossible to inspire these wild bigots with
confidence in us or to persuade them that, being Christians, we can
be otherwise than enemies to Mussulmen. We have a di%cult undertaking!
[H. E. Huntington L&AG, E A 206.1
Extract from journal of Midshipman Charles Morris, Jr., U. S. Navy, on board
U. S. Prigate Prufdent. Haster Commandant George Gox, U. S. Navy, commanding, Monday, 8 April 1805

7 A. M. unmoored ship - 10. Weighed and stood out of the
harbour - 11 hove to for the boats to come out Noon Valette bore 3 miles distant.
[Mw.C.E.Fax original, NDA photostat.]
To Secretary of the Navg from Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Navy

BOSTON
April Qth 1805
SIR I find all the ship yards in this place, and a t Salem occupied,
and the Carpenters generally engaged; it is therefore my opinion,
that I shall not be able to have the Bomb Vessels built in season to
reach the Squadron in the Mediterranean, before the last of August.
Mr Crowninshield, agrees with me in this point.
I beg leave to suggest an opinion, that two sloops or schooners of
about 80 or 90 Tons, may be purchased here; and by double planking,
and securely bolting, be rendered suiEciently strong for the resistance required in the use of 13 Inch Mortars: they may be got ready
to sail in a month from the time I receive your orders, if you should
approve the plan. They should be Ketch ngged - will be able to go
out, and return a t any season, and will transport all the military stores
for their use, with six months provison for the crew. They will cost
about four, or five thousand dollars, exclusive of the additional expence
of strengthening. Most of the articles for that purpose, I presume
can be procured a t the Navg Yard if you think proper. I should
advise not to copper them.
I shall leave this for Portland on thursday morning, and shall contract at Newbury Port, Portsmouth, or Portland for the building of
the two Bomb Vessels, and two Gun Boats, and transmit drawings
of the same, as soon as the contracts are made.
Should you adopt the plan of purchasing the two sloops or schooners,
as temporary Bomb Vessels to reach the Squadron in time for the
operations of this year, the Mortars coming round from Kew York,
can be taken for them, and two others of Brass can be cast here for
the use of the Bomb Vessels to be built b me.
Should you wish to send out immediate p more Gun Boats than are
built, I should recommend the purchase of some of the small North
River coasters a t New York, and some of the Hingham Packets a t
this place; they will answer extremely well for that purpose, and will
not I believe cost more than 2500 Dollars compleated for Sea, exclusive of their Military Stores. I believe three or four might be fitted
from here, in three weeks; but it would be necessa t,o send the Guns
(32 pounders) and shot &c"rom Washington or ew Pork.
PS. I shall return to this place by the time a n answer can arrive
from you.

9

9

[R-DA. Captain's LB, Vol. 1, 1805.1

LIEUTENANT

PKESLEYNEVILLEO'BANNON.U . S. I d . C

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

493

To Lieutenant Peter 6. Ogilvie, U. S. Navy, at New Pork, from Secretary of the
Navy

A Commission as a Lieut'enant in the Nav will be iss;ed for you and
sent to the Commodore of the American quadron in the Mediterranean, to be delivered to you after you shall have passed the usual
examinations. You will take the Command of gunboat N" and receive from
Lieu$ Leonard the Instructions sent to him relatively to her E q u i p
ment which you will consider as directed to yourself and execute
accordingly. -

6

[NDA. Off .Comg.Gunboata, 1803-1808.1
To Secretorp of the Navy from Midshipman P. Cornelius deKrafft, U. S. Navy
*

SIR, I t is now two weeks since I had the pleasure of seeing you after
the unfortunate circumstance of W+ Nicholson & myself, Your answer was that I should hear from you in a few days, I have been
waiting anxiously for the desition of my fate, my present situation
of suspence is very disagreeable, if you would take into consideration
& have it desided I should esteem it a particular favour.
I beg you will excuse this letter & make allowances for my situation; since my absence the death of m father has made considerable

E

alterations, some of his business sti remains undesided & must
remain in that state untill my fate is desided.
[NDA. Misc. LB, Vol. 2, 1805.1
Ciculer letter to Commanders of Gunboats, from Secretary of the Navy

NAVYD E P9~April
1806. Circular
if she should not alread have a false Keel
SIR, Gunboat N?must have one put on, and on her passage to the i editerrmean, it is
my intention that the guns shall be safely stowed in the Hold as
Ballast, to be mounted on her arrival a t Gibraltar.
I shall order all the Boats to sail on or before the la?May next.
You will therefore be prepared to receive your orders.

K

[NDA. OE. Comg. Gunboats, 1803-1808.1
To William Eeton, U. S. Navy Agent for the Barbary Regencies, from Master
Commandant Isaac Hull,U. S. Navy

UNITED
STATES
BRIGArgw
Bomba 9 t U p r i Z 1805. DEARSIR, YOUwill be ihformed by this, that I arrived on this coast
on the 2""nst, but the weather being very bad, could not come near
enough to be discovered from shore until the 4 t h when we passed within
a Fery few miles of Derne, but could not see anything, that had the
appearsnce of your being there, I then run to the Eastward and on
the 5'h in the morning passed very close to Cape Razatin, but could
not see an body there, I then beat into the Bay of Bomba, and came
to an Ancflor, to endeavour if possible to gain some intelligence from

494

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1804 TO 1805

you On the 6tP the weather being good, sent a Boat on shore with
Orders to use every means possible to hear from you, or find out
whether you had passed on your way to Derne, in the Evening the
Officer returned without being able to learn any thin - they could
not find a single Arab, or the appearance of there aving been any
there lately, except a t one place, about eight miles in the Country,
where there had been an encampment some time past, I had some
hope of its being your route, but from his discription, I found the tracks
too few for the number of men I suppose you must have with you,
there being no hopes of finding you at Bomba, I sailed next morning
to try if possible to find the Port of Trabucha, but meeting some difficulty in finding it I determined to try to send a Boat on shore at Cape
Razatin, On the 9th in the morning sent a Boat on shore at Cape
Razatin, the OBicer soon returned with an Arab, who informed me
that you had arrived in the neighbourhood of Trabca, and that an express had come from you to Derne, As this mans information appeared correct I determined to send him off express to you, which he
very readily consented to, but wished first to see his family, I sent
him on shore immediately to make his visit and return as soon as
possible, soon after the Boat landed, three men came down on Horse
back, who said they had orders from Hamet Bashaw to furnish us
with Beef &g if we came on this Coast, but I took them to be spies
sent from the Bey of Derne to see what we were about in this Bay,
after a little conversation with the Servant of the Minister, they rode
off sayin they would see us tomorrow. At sundown the Arab came
ofT and f l e f t the Cape for Bomba - should the Arab h d you, I
hope you will loose no time in inform. me of your situation, and
what time you will be at Bonrbay, tha?fmay meet you, as I do not
think the Bay safe to lay at Anchor in long, for fear of Gales Wind,
I shall stand out to sea, and call in every two or three days, and see
if you are there - when you arrive on the Coast, it will be well for
ou t o make fires, or some Signal that we may find you, the place of
Lnding a t Bornba is quite a t the Bottom of the Bay, a long distance
from where we lay Anchor, so that if some Signal is not made we shall
h d difficulty in finding you, I have a Sloop loaded with Bread,
flour, Rice &P and tl sum of money on board the Argus at your disposal,
the Frigate Congress is hourly expected on the Coast with the field
Pieces, so that I have no doubt but you will soon be in possession of
Derne - I have Letters for ou, which I hope to have the pleasure
of delivering you soon at Bom a. - Should you send the Arab back
with letters, I wish you to direct him to come to the bottom of the
Bay of Bomba, and should the Argus not be there, to remain until
she comes, as he will be sure of seeing us very soon, and you will please
follow the same steps should you arrive there yourself. - As I hope
soon to have the pleasure of seeing you, I shall say nothing of our
affairs by letter, for fear of their not reaching you, consequently have
nothing to add, but my best wishes for your success and honor. You will please make my best respects to your party, and believe
me. [NDA. Isaac Hull LB,1803-1806.1

g

g

495

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

To Secretary of the Navy from Captain William Bainbridge, U. S. l ~ a v g

TRIPOLI
BARBARY
gth April 1805
SIR, I am this day honored with your letter of the 2"g of June,
informing me that you had given orders to the Commodore of Squadron, in the Mediterranean, to institute a Court of inquiery on my
conduct in the loss of the frigate Philadelphia.
I tender you, Sir, my thanks for your ready compliance to my
request, and take the liberty to observe that I feel confident that your
hope will not be disappointed.
Respecting our situations here, I refer you to my frequent communications made to Corn. Barron.
[NDA. Captain's LB, Vol. 1, 1805.1
To Secretary of State from John Gavino, U. 6. Consul, Gibraltar

N9 3
GIBRALTAR
gt@
April 1805
SIR On the 6 t h Instant I had the honor of addressing you N Q2,
$ Continue without the pleasure of hearing from you, I then inclosed
a dispatch from Malta I have now to inform you that an Algerean frigate & Xabe ue have
been off Cadiz (the former is the Shore w@ they Captured rom the
Portuguese) it is sayd that they have Captured some small Vessels,
and sent them to Larach on the Coast of SalB; & made a Landing on
the Coast of Algarve, from whence they took some Men -

9

Cap-tewart
in the Syren Proceeded yesterday for Tanger. We
Continue well here - Just now a fleet of 11 sail - the Line, 2
frigates & 7 other Sail have appeard in the Gutt from the East,
they are french & no doubt the Toulon fleet going to join the Spanish
ships at C.a d'12 [NA. SDA. CL, Gibraltar, Vol. 3, 1805-1829.1
Extract from journal of William Eaton, U.S. Navy Agent for the Barbary Begencies,
Tuesday, 9 April 1805

Marched a t X past 5. a. m. Advanced t,en mileg and halted at a
water cistern. - Good feed for our horses. Here are considerable
ancient ruins of houses and partition walls, but almost entirely
effaced. In this cistern we found two dead men; - probably pilgrims murdered by the Arabs. - We were obliged nevertheless to use the water.
[H. E. Huntington L&AG, EA 206.1
Extract from journal of Midshipman Charles Morris, Jr., U. S. Navy, on board
U. S. Frigate Pruidenl, Master Commandant George Cox, U. S. Navy, commanding, Tuesday, 9 April 1805
5 [A. 11.1Cape Passero bore N N W 5 leagues -

11 $ came to anchor in the harbour of Siracuse

[Mrs. C. E. Fox origind, NDA photostat.]

496

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1804 TO 1805
To Secretary of the Navy from Captain Edward Preble, U. 6. Navy

BOSTON
April loth 1806
SIR Previous to my leaving Malta, I heard Sir Alexander Ball
the Governor express a desire to obtain a couple of Fishing-smacks
or well Boats from this Country. The friendly attentions of that
gentleman to the Squadron I have the honor to command, induces
me to wish he may receive them a t the original cost here; this can be
done if you should think proper to order them to be purchased and
sent out loaded with Provisions and Stores for the Squadron. They
can be navigated by young Masters of Merchant Vessels, and Men
shipped, to be turned over to our Men of War on that station. The
Masters can serve as Mates on board the Gun Boats, or some other
TTesselsof the Squadron for the season, and return home in whatever
vessels may return in the Autumn. Thus shall we be able to oblige
the Governor (to whom we are under obligations) and supply our
Squadron with a quantity of Provisions, stores, and men free of
expence. Should this meet your approbation, I can procure two that
will answer the purpose, and do credit to the Carpenter's work of
this Country for about fifteen hundred Dollars each and the earlier
the Agent here has directions to pap for such as may be selected,
the greater will be the facility in sending them out.
P. S. The amount of the two Vessels being paid to the Agent a t
Malta or the Commander of the Squadron will be a remittance which
will save the difference of Exchange between Cash and Bills.
[NDA. Captain's LB, Vol. 1, 1805.1
To Secretary of the Navy from Midshipmen James T. Leonard, U. S. Navy

NEWYORKApr: 10tW805
SIR I have the honor to inform you that Gun boat N" is completely rigged & sails bent, and will be in readiness to receive her
stores in three days.
N V will be completed in her rigging this day, has had her keel
put on, and will be shortly in readiness.
The crew shall be entered in conformity to our orders, as early as
possible, when their desertion can be effectua y prevented.
[NDA. Officers LB, 1802-1805.1

-

9

To Eon. Samuel White, United States Senate, from Delaware, from Secretary
of the Navy

NAVD E PAp!
~ lot@1805
Your letter of the 6th ins! relatively to Mr [Alexander] Laws has
been received.
The Character which this young Gentleman has sustained, since
he has been in the Navy Service justifies expectations of his becoming
an Officer of distinction & excites the most favorable dispositions
He doubtless will be advanced as early as he contowards him
sistently can be - Midshipmen are not promoted by seniority excepting in cases where the Senior midshipman is equal or superior in merit
to his junior brother Officers - In judging of the qualifications of
Gentlemen in the Navy we are guided by the reports of their Commanding Officers who being eye witnesses of their conduct can in most

-

E7ARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

497

respects form a more correct Opinion of their merits than we can The Commanding Officer sometimes appoints acting Lieutenants from
the Corps of midshipmen without reference to any other Conr;lderation than that of their respective merit and the Government but
Seldom declines confirming such appointments Prom this View of the subject you will perceive Sir that although
Mr Laws is young on the roll of midshipmen, yet by very distinguished
conduct he might be preferred to a Lieutenancy before any of them
who may not have been equally distinguished with such encoura*g
prospects before him he ought not to permit himself to be persuaded
by any consideration to abandon a profession, in which he may acquire
great character and render essential Service to his Country.
[NDA. GLB,Vol. 7, 1803-1805.1
To Lieutenant Amasa Lincoln, U. S. Navy, New Pork, N. Y., from Secretary
of the Navy

NAVY D E P10
~ Apm'l1805. Khen you xere appointed second officer of a gunboat it was not
contemplated that the boats would be sent out of this Country. It
has since been determined to send them all to the Mediterranean.
Your continuance on board of the gunboat where you mould have to
act with the Xa-q Officers generally, and many of whom from your
appointment would be junior to you in rank altho' senior to you in
service, would most probably produce unpleasant consequences, I
cannot therefore continue you on board of the gunboat, and as we
have no further occasion for your services, you will consider yourself
no longer an officer of the Navy. [NDA. OSK, Vol. 6, 1502-1805.1
To Secretary of State from Anthony Terry, U. S. Vice Consul, Cadiz, Spain

AMERICAN
CONSULATE
Cadiz 10'h April 1805.
HONOURED
SIR. Referring to what I had the pleasure of addressing
you p' duplicate on the 3 d instant; the object of the present is to
advise you, that yesterday appear'd off this Port the Toulon Fleet
composed of Eleven Ships, Six Frigates & two Brigs with Six thousand
Troops on board, and this morning the Spanish Fleet sailed from this
Bay
of S
i
x Ships & a Frigate with two thousand five hundred
men, in company of a French 74. a Frigate & a Corvette, their destination unknown.
The English that was cruising off this Port composed of Five Ships
a Frigate and a Brig were at Anchor receiving Provisions, but were
lucky enough to receive intelligence about two hours before the
French appeared & in c o n s e q c ~ a d Sail
e immediately.
[NA. SDA. CL, Cadiz, Vol. 1, 1791-1805.1
To Secretarg of the Navy from Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Navy
BOSTON
Ap! l o t h 1805

SIR Khile a t Philadelphia the Agent of the Syren informs' me
that all the papers capt'urC in the Scourge (late the Transfer) were
deposited in t,be Navy Office at RTashington.

498

NAVAL OPERATIONS

FROM 1804 TO 1805

If you should think proper to send them down to Norfolk in order
to obtain her condemnation, and an officer present a t the capture
should be necessary to attend the trial, Lt Maxwell can inform you
what officers of the S y ~ e nbesides himself are now in this Country.
I presume it would be a desirable event that her condemnation
should take place, as early as possible, as she could be sold for more
money at present than she may probably bring some time hence,
the particular circumstances of her capture I have long since detailQ
to you.
[NDA.

Captain's LB, VoL 1, 1805.1

To Captain Samuel Barron, U. S. Navy, from Captain Hugh G. Campbell, U. S. Navy

U S SHIPConstellation
Malta Harbor lot@April 1805
SIR I parted with Capt-odgers
on Friday evening off Tripoli,
having in charge a Ketch for that place
My intention was to have recoinoitered Luza & Cape Bon but
the appearance of many Vessels about Linosa & Lampedusa deprived
me of that Satisfaction; all of which proved to be from different
parts of Barbary & Constantinople; the last of them forc'd me to
chace, within forty miles of this Island which circumstance aided by
unsettled Weather, short allowance of Water & an idea that you
were anxious to hear from me, are causes of my returning so soon;
In addition to Captn Rodgers information, I beg leave to remark,
that the Bashaw has two Vessels on the Stocks, one rigged a Ketch,
the other appears to be intended for a Gun Boat, Likewise by a
Vessel that left Tunis on Sunday Morn, I learn that a Tripolitan
Corsair was in that road, the same that was there when the Nautilus
left it; - Our Crew thank God, have recovered from the small Pox,
with the loss of one Man only; yet still require a few days Attendance,
and care; - The Consiellation makes much Water in bad Weather;
the Brass Pipe in her side is very troublesome, & in bIowing weather
she malres so much water about the Bows and very low down, which
has occasion'd one foot water in our cole hold, likewise Storerooms
Platforms, & Birth deck very wet
During my stay at Syracuse I wish much to remedy that defect
if Possible by lightning the Ship; for which place by your permission
I will sail the day after tomorrow provided Mr Higgins can supply
us with with sundry articles, that cannot be procured at that place;
If you are able to ride out I shall be happy to confer with you a t
quarantine tomorrow [Mrs. James S. Barron original.]
Extract from journal of William Eaton, U. 6. Navy Agent for the Barbary Regencies,
Wednesday, 10 April 1806

Marched ten miles, and at twelve oclock camped in a beautiful
valley between two ridges of desert mountain of calcarious rock and
flint stone; - upon one of which we found an excellent cistern of
rain water; and in the valley good feed for our horses. The detachment joined us which went off the sixth; but without recovering the
horses or overtaking the theives. - Nothing but rice and water
for subsistence and that a t half rations. - No intelligence from

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

499

Bomba by the courier dispatched thither. - An idea has been
insinuated into the mind of the Bashaw that we aim only to use him
for the purpose of obtaining a peace with his brother, and that the
manner is indifferent with us. He gives place to this apprehension
because He has twice been deceived by C h r i ~ t i a npowers; and because
the English have deceived El$ Bey, as he says. - And he permits
himself so far to be carried away by the phantom as to fear least we
should give him up to the enemy. 3 oclock p.m. A general councel of war. - An insurmountable
reluctance on the part of the Arabs and some of the Bashaw's people
to proceed further without intelligence of our vessels induced me
to agree to halt and wait for intelligence after two d q s more march
in front. The Bashaw fears desertions in case of approaching Derne
without provisions. We have only three days half rations of rice
and no other supplies whatever: - and, what renders our situation
truly alarming, we can get no information of any ressels having
appeared off the coast; as we now plainly percieve their arrival alone
will prevent a revolt among our Arabs, who will undoubtedly take
any side which will give them the best fare. 7 o'clock. p.m. An officer came to my tent and informed me that
a mutiny was organized in the company of canoniers, & that they
were about to i m b ~ d yand demand their full ration of provisions
before this tent. - I told him to endeavor by geatle means to
suppress the mutiny; - and, if he found this method impossible, to
caution them on paln of death, not to appear in arms to make any
remonstrances with me. ,4t the same time sent for the issuing cornmissary to be informed of the exact quantity of rice on hand. - 1
mentioned this disagreeable situation of affairs to no one but Mr
OBannon.
Before any thing serious took place, about half past seTen in the
evening, the courier which had been dispatched to Bomba arrived
wit11 intelligence of our vessels being off that place and Derne. I n an instant the face of everything changed from pensive gloom
to inthusiastic gladness. - Nothing more heard of the mutiny. The Arabs resumed confidence: - and the Bashaw promised to force
the residue of our march to Bomba. 9 in the evening. - The Bashaw attacked by spazms and vomiting; continued the greater part of the night.
[H. E. Huntington L&SG, EA 206.1
Extract from journal of Hezekiah Loomis, Steward, U. S. Navy, in U. S. Brig
Vixen, Master Commandant John Smith, U. S. Navy, commanding, Wednesday,
10 April 1805

Off Tripoli. This day commences with fresh gales. We stood off
shore as did likewise the Constitution. At half past 3 o'clock P. M.
saw a sail to the leeward. We made a signal to the Commodore and
then both put about and went in chase. As soon as we came up with
her we found her to be an English Brig who escaped the French fleet
which she informed was cruising then in those parts.
[L. F. Middlebrook. R-DB copy.]

500

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1804 TO 1805

To Sailing Master Humphrey Magrath, U. S. Navy, Charleston, 6. C., from Secretary
of the Navy

NAVY
D E P~ 11 April 1805. I have received your letter of the 20th ult? Although it was the opinion of some practical gentlemen that
gunboat NO 1 might cross the Atlantic, I had my doubts on the Subect, and therefore committed it to your discretion whether to take
er to the Mediterranean or not, only governing your determination
by your own judgemnt of her fitness for such service. To do you justice by giving you an equal opportunity with others
to acquire distinction, I have this day orderedLieut Fanning to take the
command of gun boat N? 1, so that you can still go to the Mediterranean if Lieut Fanning should not have left Charleston. Should he
still be a t Charleston, you will deliver up to him gun boat N? 1 and all the Instructions heretofore given to you relative to her employment on the Coast. Bnd if you should have an opportunity of proceeding to New York so as to arrive there by the la! of May next,
you may, unless you should prefer going to the Mediterranean in
N? 9, proceed to that place & report yourself to the Commanding
Officer of the frigate John Adams - But if you should not have
time to get to New York by the first May, you must then go out in
N? 9. On your arrival in the Mediterranean you will report yourself
t o the Commodore to whom I have sent a Commission for you and
who will deliver it to you upon your passing the usual examination. -

h

[NDA. Off. Comg. Gunboats, 1803-1 808.1
To Lieutenant Nathaniel Fanning, U. S. Navy, Charleston, S. C., from Secretary
of the Navy

NAVY
D E P11
~ April 1805. Gunboat Ng 1 - has been reported to me as unfit to cross the
Ocean. We shall therefore detain her in this country to perform
services similar to those in which she has heretofore been engaged.
You will take the command of her and receive from L i e u t w a g r a t h
the instructions in relation to her services in this Country given to
him, and consider them as directed to yourself and execute them
accordingly. [NDA. Off. Comg. Gunboats, 1805-1808.1
To Lieutenant Nathaniel Fanning, U. 6. Navy, Charleston, S. C., from Secretary
of the Navy

NAVYD E P~ 11 April 1805.
From your rigging gunboat N? 9 as a Ketch I am fearful that you
have only put 1 gun on board of her, otherwise will not the mizen Mast
be in the way of the after gun? [NDA. Off. Comg. Gunboats, 1803-1808.1
To Tobias Lear, U. S. Consul General, Algiers, at Malta, from Captain William
Bainbridge, U. S. Navy

BARBARY
TRIPOLI
11 tQ April 1806

Red 2.4 Apt 1805

MY DEARSIR I was much disappointed on the late arrival from
Malta (which brought cloathing for our Seamen) not to receive a

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

501

line from you, and more particularly so, as I have not had that pleasure
since yours of the 2St+ of August last, and the elapse of which period
I have written to you many letters - I have assured you, and trust
that you believed me sincere, that it would always afford me and my
unfortunate companions much pleasure in hearing from you - I do
not my dear ColQntertain an idea of neglect, we have already experienced too much of your attention - ever to be ungrateful - but I
mention it to assure you our anxiety to hear from you. I am sensible
that there are many causes, which may operate against our receiving
that pleasure, I am not unmindful that the miscarriage of letters
may frequently occur, and for that reason I never omit a single
opportunity in writing to you, altho my letters are a repetition of the
very fully of our situsame thing - I have written Commr"arron
ation &c. which, no doubt, he will shew to you and which I wish you
to see
I assure you that prisoners never bore there fate with more fortitude
than we do - Altho my letters are not interesting, I hope that you
read them through
My officers joins in sincere respect & best wishes to Mr"ear
and
yourself
Believe me to be with unfeigned esteem
[W7rittenin lime juice (invisible ink).]
DEARCOLQ I mote to you last month on the subject of negotiation
and by this present conveyance I write very fully to Commodore
Barron which you no doubt will be made acquainted with
I have only to assure you that I think the present moment very
favorable for negotiation and I have no doubt of the practibility of
effecting peace for 120/h/I dollars. I refer you for the particulars on
the Subject to my letter to Com B and belive me that I have not formed
too credulous opinion on the ofl'er
I need not say how happy I shall be to meet you
WB
[Stephen Decatur Col.]
To Tobias Lear, U. S. Consul General, Algiers, at Malta, from Captain William
Bainbridge, U. S. Navy

BARBARY
TRIPOLI11tQ A p d 1805
Recq 24 Ap! 1805
MY DEARSIR Since writing and forwarding a letter to you this
morning, I have received your much esteemed favor of the 25th of
March last and noticed its contents. I merely scroll these lines to
acknowledge the receipt of it, and to tender you my thanks, for the
good wishes, which, you have expresed therein for myself and unfortunate companions
I assure you my dear Col? that every Officer under my command
bears his fate with the fortitude of an American, asld we shall manly
face the worse of vicissitudes
I am requested by my Officers to present their grateful remembrance
to you, and their sincere respects to hfr?Lear, to whch, I most cordially
join my own

[Writtenin lime juice (invisihle ink).).I
Your secret communication of the 2 5 * b f March I have received and
am happy to find that you are ready to meet proper overtures from t,he
Bashaw They have already been forwarded to Corn B and the Triplicates goes by this conveyance. I have not the Ienst doubt but that
peace can be effected for 12O/M thousand dollars This sum I hope is
within the limits of your instructions and when considered paid for
the liberty of 200 Citizens in the hands of a Barbary power I trust
mill not be considered extravagant
Tripoli mill not consider one. sous of it as purchcsing peace and it
will be a long uhile cre she agaln goes to war with the U, S, This day
t-he Beshaw has heard the news of the rtrrivnl of his Brother in h/lalta
he is greatly enraged ~ n so
d is all his people. I am certain tmheevent
will prove what I have already said that anj- connection with him --ill
Ile against our Countrys interest in the arrangment of this affair with
this Regency. As the present Basllaw in m y opinion u-ill rule in spite
of his brother
I refer you to my letter written Corn Barron
[Stephen Decatur Col.]

To Secretary of the Xavy from Captain Eugh G. Campbell, U. 5. Navy, commanding
U. S. Frigate Consfellafion

HARBOR
OF MALTA
11 tQ April 1805
SIR hIy last respects to you, were from this place, in October last,
in which I advised you, of all that concern'd the Constdk~tion;I
have only to add that since that period, our chief e m p l o ~ e has
~t
been the Blocliade of Tripoli, from which place I arrired here yesterday, after a cruize of seven R-eeks, relieved by the Constitution ; during
that time Re experienced much bad weather; which has discovered
defects in the Constellation of a serious nature, nor can they be remedied u-it,hout heaving down or docking; the latter is prefernbl~if tlir
service would admit of it; but the Serriccs of this Ship cannot be dis; leaks have increased to a very considerable degree,
pensed ~ 3 t hher
they are principaIIp about the stem and very low down, ititled by tl:c
Pipe in her Bilge, that has become very troublesone, R- indcpendnnt of
the loss of Copper from her bottom that esposcs the Seams, in ~vllich
I presume, the oakum is not r e r p sound, her upper r ~ o r k map
s
answer.
until she returns to America, but her bottom should be ell secured,
rior to her leaving these Seas; It is not my duty t o give you rr pnrticuFar detail of our political affair here, nor do I presume you a oold thinii
me correct in so doing; I shall only observe that our Commodore is
y e t very un~l-ell,and unable to take that active part, which Inclination & duty require of him; To that Gentleman I refer you, for particulars, respectins our intended hlotions this Summer; a t present
1 see no prospect of the desired succcss against Tripoli, nor have I
since the aid of Gun Boats, were refused, by the Court of Naples;
which has left us the only alternative of Battering their Walls, until
our Shot & Powder are expended; ct then resume our former Station;
this you may say is an unfortanate mode of arguing, but this you
will find to be the fact; The Town cannot be conquered, u-ithout a
number of small Vessels, mounting h e a w cannon; Instance the
French and English Gun Brigs, carrying Six R- Eight,, eighteen &

WARS WITH BARBARY POJVERS

503

twenty four pounders, capable of navigating independant of aid from
other Vessels; 4
, few of theseBrigs and a couple of Bombs, accompanied
by two or three Frigates, would enable us to enter the Harbor at.
pleasure, & lay the T o m under contribution in one hour: - Poir will
doubtless be informed of Eatons peregrination, from Egypt, through
Barbary; so do I espect to lzear, that himself and follolr-ers are all
made Prisoners; unless our Vessels arrive a t Darne, in time to render
him some assistance; should he be so fortunate as to reachthatplnce. Intrigue has conquered Italy, Naples is intirely directed by French
influence, in so much as to leave the King with little more than a
name; and obliged many of its Inhnbitants: like tile Birds in A u t ~ m n ,
to rove in search of milder climes. - Kor shall I be surprized if the
Furopean TlTars continue much longer, to find ourselves debarr'd the
Privilege of refitting our Squadron in their Ports; 1sail tomorrow for
Syracuse, when the Ship will undergo a small outfit, thence I presume
we shall proceed for Tripoli once more.
NB. Mr Dcnnison was removed from the C o n s f ~ l l u t i o nto the
President in December last a t the request of Commodore Barron.
IND.4. Captain's LB, Vol. 1, 1805.3

Form of Oath of Allegiance

[ll April. 18051

~ E T VYORE;
ss:
CITYOF KEW PORK

STATEO F

I , Wolcott Chauncey a ~ p o i n t e da hIidshipman on board the United
States Frigate John Adurns do solemnly swear to bear true allegiance to
the L-nded States of America, and t o serve them honestly and faithfully
against all their enemies or opposers zchomsoez?er; and to obserzye and obey
the orders of the President of t?w United States qf America, and the o r d e ~ s
of Ih oBcers appointed over me, and in dl things to confor~nmysL7Ef to
the rules and regulations which now are or herea-fter may be directed, and
to the articles of war zithich ?nay be enacted by Co?zgress, .for the better
gouernn~entof the navy qf the LTnifed States, and that I t~UiI1suppori the
constitution of the LTnited States.
SWORN BEFORE Y E , the l l t e day ~ f A p ? % l l 8 O j .
JOHN MULLIGAN
ATot P u b I

iND.4.

WOLCOTT
CHAUNCEY

Misc. LB. Vol. 2, 1805.1

Extract from journal of William Eaton, U. S. Bavy Agent for the Barbary Eegencies,
Thursday, 11 Aprii 1805

Marched a t 6. a. m. gained five miles a lle~cland camped. The
Bashaw's indisposition rendered a halt indispensable. S o water.
Discovered a singular commerce between our soldiers and the Arab
uromen. They exchanged their buttons, n-hidl they cut from their
clothes, for dates. The women ,strung them as ornaments about
their necks.
6.p.m. The Bashnts. recovers.
[H. E. Huntington L&AG, Etl206.1

504

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1804 TO 1805

Extract from journal of Midshipman Charles Morris, Jr., U. S. Navy, on board
U. s . Frigate President, Master Commandant George Cox, U. S. Navy, commanding,
Thursday, 11 April 1805

11. Weighed and stood out of the Harbour [of Syracuse]-[Mrs.C.E.Fox original, NDA photostat.]
To Secretary of the Navy from Master Commandant Isaac Chauncey, U. S. Navy

NEWYORK
l Z t @April 1805
SIR Since I wrote you last I have been honored with your Letters

of the 5th and gt@Inst. We have received from Philadelphia 14 Men in addition to those
that we received on the 4 t b and also received 130 Barrels of Beef 506
Barrl"read
and 1000 Twenty four Pound Shot by the Sloop President from Washington; Mf Beakman also informed me this Day that
the Pork had arrived and should be sent alongside immediately.
We progress slowly in recruiting; Good Seamen are difficult to procure and even when entered they give us much trouble in getting and
securing them on board.
There has joined the Ship within these few Days Lieut Marsline,
Messr"earney
Iceene and Chauncey Midshipmen and Doc: M'Allister as Surgeon's Mate; there has no Carpenter as yet arrived to
join the Ship; we are much in T a n t of one to take Charge of and
receipt for Stores in that Department.
Commodore Preble told me verbally that I might Order the Turkish Prisoners now on board of the John Adams some Cloaths (15-hich
they stand much in need of) but having received no Instructions
from you on that Subject I am at a Loss how to act, and shall wait
your Orders
[NDA. MC LB, 1804-5.1
To Midshipman F. Cornelius deKraEt, U. 6. Navy, Washington, D. C., from Secretary of the Navy

RAVDEP! April 12,1805 You have permission to make a voyage to Europe. You will
inform me when you sail from the United States and will report yourself to this office immediately on your return. You will be on half
pay into [until] called into actual service. [NDA. OSW, Vol. 6, 1802-1805.1
To Sailing l a s t e r Nathaniel Haraden, U. S. Navy, commanding Gunboat No. 8
from Secretary of the Navy

NAVYD E P 12
~ April 1806.
I have rec* your letter of the 2nd instant. Fix the Rudder as you please but be careful that you don't fix it
so as to unship too easily. If the guriboat should ever touch, the

effect of dropping the Rudder 2 feet below the Keel, inevitably must
be, that it will be unshipped and probably materially injured. It
may possibly answer a good purpose while you are crossing the Ocean
to fix the Rudder as you propose, but it would not answer before
Tripoli. You probably can have it b e d so as to admit of its being
raised or lowered at pleasure.

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

505

What can be the reason that the gunboat at Boston is so far behind
every other? Let double - or if possible quadru le the number of
workmen be employed - She must sail by the l i ay. Should you find it impracticable to enter the men on the terms prescribed in my letter of Recruiting Instructions, you may encrease the
bounty to any sum not exceeding 20 Dollars each man. -

d'

[NDA.

Off.Comg.Gunboats, 1803-1808.1

To Captain Samuel Barron, U. S. Maw, from Captain William Bainbridge, U. S.
Navy

B A R B ~ THIPOLI
RF
124 A$). f 805.
COPY
DEARSIR, I enclose you an extract of a letter which I have this
day received from Sidi hlehomet Dhguis Minister of Foreign Affairs
to His Excellency the Bashaw of Tripoli.
Extract
"The Bashaw is informed by a Courier that arrived yesterday from Tunis,
"that his brother Sidi Hamed is with the American Squadron, in come"quence thereof, he hns manifested his particular resentment"
"The Bashaw his said, that as long as the war was a war between America
"and him, it was a war of interest, that easily might be brought to a con"clusion by a lesser or greater sacrifice upon one side or the other, but now
"it was a war directed against his personal safety, the view of which was
"his dethronation. He wg therefore act in a manner that the feelines of
"the U. States shi be hurt in the most tender part, it was in his pow& to
"hurt them (meaning the prisoners)"
"The Minister desires you to mention these things t o the Commodore,
"and particularly t o represent to him the difficulties which attend any
"negociations when Sidi Hammed is interested." -

The foregoing, Dear Sir, is an exact extract, and it is unnecessary
for one to make any remarks, as your own mind u-ill make every
reflection which it vv$ be proper for me to suggest.
If you sh'J answer the letters which you will receive from hence on
a certain subject, I wish you not to mention the subject on which they
treat
(Signed) VFm BAINBRIDGE
IStephen Decatur Col.]
Extract from journal of Surgeon Jonathan Cowdery, U. S. Navy, 12 April 1806

The Bashaw received an unfavourable letter from his agent at
Malta, concerning the armament of the Americans. The Spanish consul presented the Bashaw three hundred stand of arms and a number
of pistols, and, it is said, advised him to keep up the war, and force
the Americans to pay his demand. I t was wncluded that the Bashaw's
women and children should stay at the castle during the summer.
They said that if they must be taken, they would rather fall into the
hands of the Smericans than the Arabs.
[LC. Rare Books, American Captives in Tripoli or Dr. Cowdery's J o u t d ,
Boston, 1806.1
Extract from journal of William Eaton, U. 6. Navy Agent for the Barbary Regencies,
Friday, 12 April 1805

Marched twenty fire miles; the first part of the day in the continuation of the valley mentioned the tenth; -but camped on an eminence

506

NAVAL O P E R A T I O N S F R O M 1804 T O 1805

where there was neither water nor fuel. The residue of our rice issued
today; but the troops were obliged to eat it wit.hout cooking. -- Such
of the Arab tribes as moved with their families camped five miles in
the rear; being unable to come up, exhausted by fatigue and hunger.
[H. E. Huntington LkAG, EA 206.1
Extract from journal of Midshipman Charles Morris, Jr., U. S. Navy, on board
U. S. Frigate President, Master Commandant George Cox, U.S. Navy, commanding,
Friday, 12 Apri! 1805

6. A. hi Cape Porcase bore N W B IC' and Mount Etna North
[Mrs. C. E. Fox original, NDA photostat.]
To Secretary of the Navy fron John KcCauley, Philadelphia, Pa.
p ~ 1 L . April
4 ~ ~ ISth1806
SIR I n order to support the claim of the Captors against the Brig
Transfer it will be necessary to have the evidence of Lt J o V . Maxwell
Prize Master & now on duty at New York on Board the Adams
Frigat - & this cannot be had without your permission - I should
be glad to know wether he may or cannot attend the Trial - If he
cannot: any proceeding on my part will be usless J o s MFCAULEY
~
Agtjor the Captors.
P, S. - The papers have been r e d belonging & taken on Board the
Transfer -

[NDA. Officers LB, 1802-1605.1
Genere1 Orders issued by Ceptain Samuel Barron, U. S. Navy

MALTA13 April 1805
General Orders to the Ofieers Commg the seceral T'essels of W a r of the
Squadron of the U. States of America
Whenever you arrive within riew of the Signal Towcr upon the Palace in the Harbour of Vallette in the Island of Malta, you are directed
to hoist a, chequered Gag a t the Main or where it will appear most
conspicuous, which will be answered by a red flag with a white Cross You will then hoist your distinguishing number and Keep it flying for
a few Minutes. Sigd SAM!
BARRON
[LC. JRP. Letters & Orders, Book A, 1804-1805.3
To Captain Samuel Barron, U. S. Navy, Malta, from George Davis, U. S. Charge
d'Affaires, Tunis

N? 8
TUNISApril l g t h1805
DE~R
SIR I had t,his honor, on the lgth Lqt: (which was forwarded, by the U: S: Schooner ATaut.iEus) since when all has remained
as silent as the grave - nothing from Tripoli except one letter for
yourself which I have now the pleasure to enclose you on the 17th Ult: an attempt was made to assasinate the Dey of
Algiers, the particulars of which, and whatever else can interest you

507

WARS B71TH BARBARY P0E7ERS

relative to that Regency; I presume are detailed to Col. Lear, in the
letter which I this day forward him from that quarter Several sail of Men of IVar are now in sight; Supposed to be the
Neapolitan Squadron - I leave this letter open to add, m-hatever
may occur -

A p d 16tb

34r Dennison"avour of the 2gth Ult: accuring the receipt of my
last, has this moment been handed me -the Squadron which anchored
on the evening of the 13t@under english colours proves to be the Neapolitans, they shew,d their flag yesterday morning; - two Frigates
were under way almost all the day, (without attempting any thing)
the Ship of the line remained a t anchor, and a small Galleot, has been
sounding the harbour - the Squadron are aU a t anchor to day,
(except the Galleote which stood out of the Bay yesterday) to wit,
one Ship of the line, two Frigates and a Corvette - there object is
unknown; report says, an additional force is hourly expected, and
there intention is to attach the Goeletta; preparations have been made
for a vigorous defence - as the Vessel by which this communication,
is forwarded. gets under way immediately, I am compell'd to close
my letter without adding, any t h but my best wishes for your
speedy recoveq [Mrs- James S. Barron original.]
To Captain Samuel Barron, U. S. Navy, from Master Commandant Thomas
Robinson, Jr., U. S. Navy

VENICEApril

I S , 180s'

SIR On Sunday last the Schooner mas launch'd in very great stile
indeed, they are certainly compleat here at the business of hauling
up 8- launching. I shall be ready to execute Capt. Banons Orders on the first of
May & sooner if urg'd by him. - I have almost cornpleated the
Machinery for a 24 Pounder on the Schooners Deck, ha-ring experienced the inactive situation this description of Vessel1 was in last
Summer, I calculated her Hatches and Beems arnidship for this mode
of armament, the Idachenery is all carried in the Hold & if when you
see the Enterprize if you do not aprove of her carrying a h e a ~ gpiece,
its easily applied to another Vessel that- you may judge better caleulated, I wou'd not make it a fixture without your approbation, but
I am certain she can carry i t in almost an Sea, & if so what a nice
ticlder she will be for night,work on Tripo y, 8t altho ller seranades
ma not be so apeable as from the Guitar to a Turk,they no doubt
wil generally have as respectable an audience. Cap. Barron has been riding out continual Gales of Kind, eyer
since his Arrival a t Trieste, he has wrote you no doubt, which makes
it unnecessary, (& perhaps improper) for me to sa-j- a word on the
suhject of his Visit here - I have seen him a t Trieste, & since that
wrote him, he means to be orer here when the weather settles
V&at a pitty I did not know a few things earlyer. I cou'd have
paved the u7ayfor the completion of all your u7ants, yet vith management, every thing can he obtain'd but AT?& they might if time wou'd
allow. - a Tripoline Ambasador has arriaed since the Schooner, to
the Emperial Court. With sincere wishes for a restoration of your health -

9

P

[Mrs. James S. Barron Col.]

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 180.4 TO 1806

508

To Captain James Barron, U. S. Navy, commanding U. S. S. LSU,
from Master
Commandant Thomas Robinson, Jr., U. S. Navy, commanding U. S. Schooner
Enkpriae

COPY
VENICEISt@April 1805
Dr SIR I wrote to you twice since my return to this place, no answer,
you certainly got one, and why not answer? I am doing nothin but
at the Schooner - she was launched in qery handsome sty e on
I wish to God you would either come here or give
Sunda last.me or ers, say the word one way or the other - very fine Articles in
Venice for carrying Stores to the Squadron, and plenty of Stores they
can be put in order at a small expence & with expedition.
[NDA. Captain's LB, Vol. 1, 1805.1

f

2'

[13 April 18051
To Captain Samuel Barron, U. S. Navy, from Midshipman Charles L. Ridgely,
U. S. Navy

SIR From the information received this evening from C a p t W e n t
that you are only waitin for a demand from the Neapolitan government for me and then d l give me up is the cause of my now writing
you.
Had I supposed that the business would have been carried so far I
should not have hesitated in giving myself up but thought I would
wait your opinion on my arrival at Syracuse from Messina relying on
your judgment and not wishing to be too premature if you had then
told me the propriety of giving myself up I certainly should have
done it but on the contrary your not thinking it proper at that time
led me to suppose that by my returning to America the thing would
have been entirely hushed up As the business has gone so far as to
place you in disagreable circumstances I am very willing to
myself up for trial at Messina, (provided you think proper) fee ing
perfectly conscious that I never committed a Crime in my life that
could cause me the least uneasiness that I am innocent of the death of
that man I am convinced within myself and hope to be able to conperson so, but allowing that I was the cause, from having
vince gent emen to dine with me I drank too freely of wines and corsome
dials as to make me in an entire state of iniebriety And never did I
know that I had injured the man in the least until1 I was informed
his informing me that the man was
of it next morning by Capt-ent
stabbed by an American officer. Mr Reed and myself being together
that ni ht on shore and his not having side arms with him made me
conclu e if he was injured by one of us it must been me. I be leave
to mention to you that spirituous liquors I scarcely ever drin& have
been intoxicated but seldom during my life and then being in a party
of young men where I was necessitated
Mr Reed who was with me all the evening, and was with me when
the accident happened did not himself know I had injured him, untill
he was informed of it the next morning and he says he recollects
every thing that took place that evening
As for myself I feel not the least fear from any punishment they
they can i d i c t my Conscience being perfectly easy that I am innocent
of any thing criminal. but my Mother My Brothers and Sisters and
my relations in general tis for them I feel knowing what great distress
it will cause them when they hear what has happened me, but Sir

Pe

eve7'

B

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

509

as the business has gone so far I am ve willing to come forward for
trial to re-establish my character (as am now convinced that i t
must be injured from the cause of my accusation) and hope Sir you
will make use of every influence in your power in my behalf.
When I saw the man that evening he was surrounded by ten or
twelve Men two of whom had him by the Collar and seeing him in s
mob and hearing him speak English led me to suppose (as I remarked to
Mr Reed) that he either was an American or an Englishman in a
s c d e with those Sicilians and went up for the purpose of rescuing
him which I did and then let him go after talking with the man at
least ten minutes arid so far from supposing that I injured him thought
on the contrary I had been of service to him in getting h m out of
the hands of those fellows but next morning was informed the man
was dead and those very fellows who I drove from him had taken their
oaths that I killed him.
I have stated to you Sir every thing that happened and wait
entirely your commands
I have the honor to be with deference Your Obedt Servt

7'

CHA?L RIDGELY
S A ~ ~ ~BARRON
U E L Esq?
Mdta A p d i S t Q1805
[Midshipman Ridgely first appeared in Iiavy records ss Charles Ridgely
Goodwin, then as Charles Goodwin Ridgely and finally signed himself as Chsrles
L. Ridgely.]
[Mrs. James S. Barron CoI.]
Extract from journal of Surgeon Jonathan Cowdery, U.S. Navy, from 13 to 16 April
1805

The Bashaw declared, that if the Americans drove him to extrernities, or attacked his town, he would put every American prisoner to
death.
[LC. Rare Books, American Captives in Tripoli or Dt. Cou)dery's Jourrml,
Boston, 1806.1
Extract from journal of William Eaton, U. S. Navy Agent for the Barbary Begencies,
Saturday, 13 April 1805

Marched seven and a half miles. - Hunger and fatigue rendered
the foot soldiers and Bedouin families unable to pursue the march.
The Bashaw killed and issued one of his camels of burthen and exchanged another with the Arabs for sheep; which, together gave a full
ration to our troops, but they were without bread or salt.
[H. E. Huntington L&AG, EA 206.1

Extract from journal of William Eaton, U. S. Navy Agent for the Barbary Regencies,
Sunday, 14 April 1805

Marched fifteen miles. - Camped in a pleasant valley of rich.
strong land, but totally uncultivated. Good and abundance of feed
for our horses, and sundry cisterns exca~atedin the ridges on the
borders of the valley contained excellent rain water; but we were totally destitute of provisions. - Near these cisterns and in the valleys

510

NAVAL OPERATIONS FRO114 1804 TO 1805

are ruins of ancient architecture and visible marks of former cultivation; but nois- %all is waste.
[II. E. Huntington L&AG, EA 206.1
Extract from journal of Niidshipm~nCharles Xorris, Jr., U. S. Navy, on board
U. S,Frigate Presidenf, Master Commandant George Cox, U. S. Navy, commanding,
Sunday, 14 April 1805

1 Came to acclior in the harbor of Ynlettc in 9 fathoms IVater.
4. Warped the Ship up the harbour nnd Moored wish half a Cable
each 11-ay10 Men unfit for duty. [Mrs. C. E. Fox original, I D A photostat.]

To John Gavino, U. S. Consul, Gibraltar, from Secretary of the Navy

KAVDEP+A p ! 16. 1805
You wiU by the Bill of lading of the Cargo of the ship ,4nn perceive
that the amount of the Freight is to be paid a t the place \$--here the
cargo shaU be landed
If therefore the Cargo of the Ann should be landed a t Gibraltar you
t ill pay the Freight either by drau-kg on Messr"a? LfKenzie (g,T 21.
Glennie London, or Messr* Degen c4: Purviance Leghorn, determining
by the rate of Exchange tile place on u-hich you shall draw so as to
make the negotiation the most fororable to the United States
I endose a letter to Messr? James IliIqlCenzie S: A Glennie - also a
letter to l\lessT! Degen & Purviance, requesting them to honor your
draft for the freight of the Ann -you will forward or destroy one or
both of these letters according to the arrangements you may make
relatively to the freight of the Ann should hcr Cargo be landed a t
Gibraltar
IKDA. GLB, Val. 7, 1803-1805.1
To Captain John Rodgers, U. S. B a q , carcmand~ngU. S Frigate Constiiution, from
Captain S s r n ~ e Btirrcu.
l
U. 8. Navy

MALTA15 April 1805
SIR,I have directed Cap! George Cos to proceed with the U. States
Ship President under his command to tlle Coast of Tripoli, and on
falling in with the con-stitufion to place hinlself in all respects under
your command You d l please to furnish him with pour Instructions for his
Cruze - Captn Smith in the Vixen mill come into Port whenever
you think proper to give him your Orders to that effect I n regard to the term of your own Crujze, I leave it. as well as the
general Dispositions on the Station entirely to your Discretion, obserping only that in consequence of some recent occurrences here,
which Capt Cox can explain, it will be advisable for you to remain
outside of this Harbour provided the Weather be favourable and to
send a Boat to the Qu@ Ground for Instructions. In the event of
my leaving this Island for Sicily previous t o your return of which I
ha-oe some expectation, a Letter will be left for you ~viththe Consul f had the pleasure to receire your favour of the 6 Ins! by the Constellation - That Vessel is gone t o Syracuse for the purpose of

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

511

placing some of her sick in the Hospital, & examining into the state
of the Leak - As soon as she is again ready for Sea, she will be dispatched to strengthen the blockading force. - Since your departure
I have received no advices from the Barbary Coast - A Letter
from Consul Simpson at Tangier dated 30 March, mentions that
affairs with h4orocco remain in the same situation as at the date of
his former Comml~CThe Powder is just arrived from Gibraltar - the quantity 86 Bls
I h a m made arrangements for procuring a further supply. Should Cap$ Swith not have left the Station, you mill please to
furnish him with a Copy of the enclosed General Orders [See 13 April
18051. [LC.

JRP.

Letters & Orders, Book A, 180&1805.]
-

-

-

To Master Commandant John H. Dent,U. S. Navy, from Captain SarnueI Barron,
U. S. Navy

MALTA16 April 1805.
SIR! The U. S. schooner under your Command having been
reported to me in readiness for Sea, IOU are hereby dirccted to proceed
immediately for Derne, &endeavor to ascertain whether the Ex-Bashaw
and his Army have obtain'd possession of that place; if they have yoil
will I conceive find no difficu1t;v in establishing an immediate intercourse with them - In the contrary case you will shape your Course
(keeping as close to the Shore as may be consistent nith safety) for
Bomba, where according to
Eaton's calculations, I think it most
probable that you mill obtain information of him - As soon as you
have established a safe & certain Communication, You will deliver
to hl: Eaton the t o Field pieces which you have on b o ~ r dwith the
powder & Ammunition, taking his Receipts for the same. ,Is I do
not anticipate any thing which nil1 require your remaining on the
Coast after having delivcred these Stores, you are directed to return
to this place with all possible Expedition, bringing with you the most
particular information you can collect from 11: Eaton with regard to
his actual Situation & prospects - I think it proper to suggest the
necessity of your being on Four guard against any false display of
Amity on the Coast, c! not to confide in appearances until you are well
convinced of their fidelity [NA. Sen. 9 B-B 6, Pres. RIessage, Jan. 1806.1
To Wiliiam Eaton, U. S. Navy Agent for the Barbary Regencies, from Captain
Samuel Barron, U. S. Navy

USLTA
15. April 1805
SIR,I bad the honor of addressing you very fully on the 22g ultimo
by Captain Hull, since when I hare received no advices from the
Barbary Coast - I t was not till the 12t@instant that the Congress
arrived here from h4essina with the field artilery which Capt: Decatur
experienced considerable delay and difiiculty in procuring - I t was
my intention to have sent that frigate to the coast, but from making
particular enquiry of a Pilot well acquainted in that quarter I h d
that the impracticability of approaching the shore with heavy ships
renders the communicat~jonextremely uncertain and difficult, I hare

therefore thought it prudent to wave my original intention and to
dispatch the Nautilus Schooner whose light draft of water will enable
her to approach the coast with greater safety and advantage Captain Dent shapes his course for Bomba where I calculate on his
finding you with the Bashaw and his army, and where I hope he will
meet with little difficulty in establishing an intercourse - He has on
board his schooner two brass field pieces with trains, powder, shot kc
complete, which he is directed tmodeliver into your possession. I
hope they will reach you safe and have no doubt but they d be
extremely serviceable in the progress of your operations Kothing material has occurred since Capt: Hull's Departure The President frigate sailed this day to reinforce the ships off Tripoli,
which harbor remains closely blocliaded - Captain Dent is instructed
after delivering the artilery and stores to return immediately to this
port with dispatches from you - You myill readiiy imagine my
anxiety and impatience to hear of your proceedings and prospects [KA. Sen. 9 B-B 6, Pres. Message, Jan. 1806.1
Extract from journal of William Eaton. U. S. Navy Agent for the Barbary Regencies,
15 to 22 Aprll 1805

,4pril 15. Marched at 7 in the morning. - Our people this day
scattered throuhout all the plains in search of roots and vegitable
substances to appease the cravings of hunger. - A species of wild
fennel and sorrel which we found in the small ravines contributed
something to our support - At four oclock p. m. we reached
Bomba. - Rut what u-as my astonishment to find at this celebrated
port not the foot trace of a human being, nor a drop of water. And what my mortification to find no ~esselshere. - We had this
day taken up three Arabs who gave me positive declarations that
they had seen two vessels in the Bay a few days before, and very
well described the brig Argus, C a p t H H I ; but they were gone, and
I concluded had left the coast in despair of our arrival. - Nothing
could prevail on our Arabs to believe that any had been there. They
abused us as imposters and infidels; - and said we had drawn them
into that situation with treacherous views. - A11 began now to
think of the means of individual safety: - and the Srabs came to a
resolution to separate from us the next morning. - I recommended
an attempt to get into Derne. - This was thought impractible.
I went oft'with my Christians and kept up fires upon a high mountain
in our rear all night. - At eight the next morning, a t the instant
when our camp was about breaking up, the Bashaw's casnadar,
Zaid, who had ascended the mountain for a last look out, discovered
a sad! It was the Argus. - Captain Hull had seen our smokes,
and stood in. - Language is too poor to paint the joy and exultation which this messenger of life excited in every breast. - I
went on board at twelve oclock; - the camp in the mean time
moved five or six miles round the bay to a cistern of water, and at
six in the afternoon provisions were sent off to them. I remained
.on board all night.
On the l Y t h eleven in the morning the sloop Hornet arrived, laden
with provisions. - The quarter of the bay where the vessels fell in
with us being inconvenient for landing; - On the 1BtQ & lgth I
continued the march round the bay, twenty two miles, here we

WARS WITH BABBARY POWERS

513

found an inexhaustable cistern of water and a good harbour and
landing. The 20tQ21 & 22d we remained on this ground: -refreshed our
famished army; - and took out of the Hornet the necessary provisions to carry us to Derne.

m. E. Huntington L&AG.]

Extract from journal of Hezekiah Loomis, Steward, U. S. Navy, in U. 6. Brig
Vixen, Master Commandant John Smith, U. S. Navy, commanding, Monday, 16
April 1805

[Tripoli] This day commences pleasant with a fresh breeze the
wind being off shore, we beat toward the land until 5 o'clock P. M.
when we saw a small sail. We gave chase, and at half past 5 sent
our boat with Lt. Crane and 6 hands to board her, which they did
and brought her alongside, and sent her Captain on board and 4 men
which was all their crew. They said they were Tunisians and had
a letter to the commanding officer of the Blockade. Capt. Ro[d]gers
sent for Capt. Smith and the Turkish captain on board the Constitution where they remained till late in the evening. Ke kept- their
boat in tow all night.
[L. F. Rliddlebrook. NDA copy.]
-

--

To Master Commandant Isaac Chauncey, U. S. Navy, commanding U. 6. 6.
john Adorns. New York, N. Y., from Secretary of the Navy

NAVDEP?16 A p d 1805.

I have recd your letter of the 12*c inst - You d l appoint a
Carpenter and if worthy give me his name and I will send you a
warrant for him.
Your letter contained the first information I have recg relative to
the wants of the Prisoners - They must not suffer; have them
therefore supplied with such necessary Cloth. as they may need. If Cap-haw should have relieved you in"g
t e command of the J.
Adums, you may transfer this Letter to him which he wiU thenconsider as directed to himself, and act accordingly.
P.S. I presume the Prisoners will be sent back to the Mediterranean - though this point is not yet determined. They ought in
the mean time to be kept on board of the Ship. [NDA. OSW, Vol. 6 , 1802-1805.1
To Secretary of the Navy from Master Commandant Isaac Chsuncey, E. S. Navy

NEWYOREl B t h April 1806
SIR Captain Shaw arrived here Yesterday and assumes the Command of the John Adams, this Day a t 12 ?Clock.
I will forward to you as soon as they can be copied a Muster Roll
of the People as mustered to Day, and Copies of the Indents
together with Captain Shaw's receipts
[KDA. MC LB, 18065.1

514

hTAVAL OPERATIO-VS FROM 1804 TO 1805
To Captain Samuel Btcrron, U. S. Navy, from Secretary of the Navy

NAVD E P16
~ April 1805.
You will receive herewith duplicates of my letters to you of the
27th ultc and 3rd Instant. Upon enquiry it has been found that Gunboat N V cannot safely
cross the ocean - you 11-ill not therefore expect her. The other gunboats will sail about the time mentioned to you in my letter of the T t h
ult"he
John Adams will sail early in hfay next. It is probable
that each of the gun boats will carry out 15 able seamen instead of 10
as mentiorlcd in my lctter to you of the 27th ~ l t ? By the John
Adams you may calculate on receiving 500 Men. Lieu$ Leonard has resigned. You will therefore destroy the Commission given to you for him. Lieu: Bardin has also resigned; a
Commission will not therefore be sent to you for him. This letter will be delivered to you by Cap; Smith of the Provision
Ship The Ann. The Provision Ship from this place will sail about
the 1" May next, or very soon after and among other things will bring
you 100 barrels of powder. G y the Ann Capt Smith from Balto [SDS. LB, 1799-1807.1

To Captain Stephen Decatur, Jr., U. S. Navy, commanding U. S. Frigate Congress.
from Captaln Samuel Barron, U. S. Navy

MALTA
16thApril 1805
SIR AS soon as the United States Frigate under your command is
ready for sea, you are directed to proceed to hlessina on the particular
Service which has been fully explained to you and which as we are
perfectly understood, it is not necessary to detail here, having put
that business in a proper train and given me the requisite information
you will prosecute your Voyage with all due expedition to Leghorn, The endosed letter to our Kary Agents MessrWegen and Purviance
at that place which is left open for your pcrsual, will acquaint you with
the several objects of your Misslon which u-ith the assistance and
co-operation of those Gentlemen will I trust be accomplished without
difEiculty or delay, - As soon as you have completed this service
you will return to Syracuse where a Letter of instructions will meet
you, in case any thing should occur to prevent my executing my
present intention of going to Sicily towards the close of this month, Messr? Degen & Purviance are instructed to require Of you the
necessary Receipts & vouchers for such advances as they may make
on account of the Navy department of the United States which you
are hereby authorized & directed to give, - as we have every reason
to suppose that two of the enemys Corsairs are out you are enjoined
to bring to and strictly to examine all suspicious vessels you may meet
on your Voyage, - Should you be so fortunate as to fall in with the
Tripolines, you will not be at a loss in what manner to proceed, but
I recommend your being extremely guarded with respect to Keutrals
& by no means to detain any Vessels of this description unless there
shall appear upon strict examination of papers and circumstances to
be very strong and substantial grounds for suspicion m e n opportunity offers I beg to be informed of your movements & with my best
wishes for your safety subscribe my self most Sincerely IHS of Pa.]

W B S ?PVITNBARBARY POWERS

515

To Captain Samnel Barron, U. S. Navy, from Captain John Rodgers, U. S. Navy

U. STATESFRIGATEConstitution

03Tripoli Ap! 16 [possibly 181. 1805

SIR The Enclosed Letters from Cap; Bainbridge and Mr Nissen,
Danish Consul (which I hope I have not acted incorrectly in opening,

& extracting the invisible substance of those of that class) I rec'd on
the 16'h Ins! by an express boat from Je[r]bi by orders of Ben Unis
hadge Unis, the Bey of Tunis's commercial Agent; for the particulars
of which I refer you to Cap! Smith; who in consequence of hisprocisions & Water being nearly expended; I have sent into port - By
the dlspatch Boat I find that the 12 Gun cruizer that was so long in
Tunis Bay, & mentioned in Mr Davis's Letter to you of the stQ Ult?$
as then fitting out, arrived about the 27tQ of last month a t Jerbi,
where she was Immediately dismantled & her crew sent to Tripoli The Ins? the President joined me I dispatched the Vixen into port;
but her nTater & provisions being nearly expended, The information
I received of the 12 Gun TripoIine Cruizers being dismantled a t Jerbi,
and the probable importance of your receiving the enclosed Letters
early; Induced me to send her direct to Malta - nothing has transpired worth committillg to paper, since I last left Malta, farther
than what Captc Smith will be able to acquaint you of - The Ketch
Elim is still a t Tripoli [LC. JRP, Letters & Orders, Book A, 1804-1805.1
To Captain Samuel Barron, U. S. Kavy, from Master Commandant John H. Dent,
U. S, Navy

~VautilusApril 16 tQ 1805
SIR The enclosed is the original Demand from the Govenor of
Messina - I am extremely sorry I could not git away last evening,
the pilot that I engay~dcould not be found untill Sun Set, and then
it was impossible he could go until1 this morning, the necessity of my
having a pilot for the coast I am going on induced me to wait untill
morning [Mrs. James S.Barron Col.1
Extract from journal of Midshipman Charles Morris, Jr., U. S. Navy, on board
U. S. Frigate President. Master Commandant George Cox, U. S. Navy, commanding,
Tuesday, 16 April 1805

4 Unmoored Ship-6% Weighed and sailed-10 The light house
bore W S W 2 leagues
Midnight --Hazy with li h t airs.
8. The South End of Ma ta bore IT B S. 5 or 6 Leagues distant 9.
Carried au-ay the Main top mast Tressel trees. Sent down the Royals
Masts & yards and hiI? Top Gallant hlasts &
Noon the N E. point of Malta bore N ?4 My.22 miles the S W point
N TT % %' and the Island of Folsonn. N W.
Lfititude Observed 35' 40' N.

P;

[Mrs. C. E, FOXoriginaI, NDA photostat.]

516

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1804 TO 1806

Extract from journal of Hezekiah Loomis, Steward, U. S. Navy, in U. S. Brig
Vixen, Master Commandant John Smith, U. S. Navy, commanding, Tuesday,
16 April 1806

Off Tripoli. A t 4 o'clock P. 31. We cast off the Turkish boat.
She steered for Tunis.
[L. F. Middlebrook. NDA copy.]
TO

George Harrison, Navy Agent and Superintendent of Navy Yards, Philadelphia
Pa., from Secretary of the Navy

NAVD E P17
~ April 1805. I have this day sent to the Complander of gunboat N? 3 - his

sailing instructions. He is directed if you should so instruct him, to
proceed first to New York there to join gunboats NQ6 & 7 -thence
t,o proceed to sea. But if you should not instruct him to go to NYsrk he is to proceed immediately to Boston to join N ? 8. To enable yon to determine whether i t will be in the power of gunboat N? 3 to reach X York before gun boats N? 6 and 7--shall have
sailed, I have directed the Navy Agent a t New York to write to you
4 days before they shall be ready to sail, and also the moment they
shall weigh Anchor. If gun boat K?3 - can reach New York in time to join N ? 6 and
7 - at that place, you will order the Commander of N Q3 - to proceed thither immediately and send me a copy of such order; but if she
shall not be able to join them in time, then her Commander must,
agreeably to his Instructions, proceed with her immediately to Boston
to join N? 8. [NDA. Off.Comg.Gunboats, 1803-1808.1
To Lieutenant Joseph J. Maxwell, U. S. Navy, commanding Gunboat No. 3, from
Secretary of the Navy

NAV:D E P17
~ April 180fi. As soon as gunboat Nq 3 shall be prepared for sea you will proceed
if directed by George Harrison esqc Kavy Agent a t Philaqo Kew York
and there join gunboats No 5 Pi 7 - with which boats you are to proceed to Sea. But if George Harrison esqr should not direct you to
roceed to New York, or if after his directing you to proceed to New
Fork you should proceed to that place and find that unboats K?6
& 7 have sailed, you uill then proceed to Boston and t ence in company with gunboat N? 8 to Gibraltar; and if on your arrival a t Boston
you should find that gunboat KT 8 has sailed, you will then proceed
alone to Gibraltar, and on your arrival a t Gibraltar you will lose no
time in mounting your guns and as soon as they shall be mounted you
will proceed aloft and report yourself to the Commodore of the
American Squadron in the Mediterranean. I enclose you instructions authorizing & directing you to subdue,
seize, and make prize of all vessels, goods, and effects belonging to
the Bashaw of Tripoli or to his subjects and to bring or send the same
into Port to be proceeded against & distributed according to Law.
These Instructions you will deliver up to the Commodore as soon as
you shall join him. It is all important that the gunboats shall join the Squadron in the
Mediterranean as soon as possible. Lose therefore not a moment.

Fh

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

517

I persuade myself that trifling difEculties will not suhdue your zeal or
create any delay. [KDA. Off.Cong.Gunboats, 1803-1808.1

--

To Midshipman Ralph Izard Jr., and Lieutenant Samuel Elbert, U. 6. Navg, from
Secretary of the Navy

NAVYD E P17
~ April 1805. Lieu: IZAED
- of NQ2 . &
Lieu! ELBERT
- NO 9
Charleston S. C.
To Sail in Company.,4s soon as gunboat No - shall be prepared for sea you -4ll proceed to Gibraltar in company with gunboat No- . On your arrival
at Gibraltar you will lose no time in mounting your gum, and as soon
as they shall be mounted you u411 proceed aloft and report yourself
to the Com~nodoreof the American Squadron in the Mediterranean. -

I enclose instructions authorizing & directing you to subdue, seize,
and make prize of all cessels, goods and effects belonging to the Bashaw
of Tripoli or to his subjects, and to bring or send the same into port
to be proceeded against and distribut,ed according to Law. These
Instructions you u-ill deliver up to the Commodore as soon as you
shall join him.
It is all important that the gunboats shall join the Squadron in the
Mediterranean as soon as possible. Lose therefore not a moment.
I persuade myself that trifling difficulties will not subdue your Zeal
or create any delay.

ISimilar letters dated 17 April. 1805 were sent to:
Lieutenant J. D. Henley of Gunboat KO. 4 (Xorfolk) to sail in company
with 30s. 5 (Lt. Harrison) and 10 (Lt. Cartee).
Lieutenant James Lawrence N;. 6 to sail in
Lieutenant Peter S. Ogilvie
7)
Lieutenant N. Uariden S o . 8 in company with No 3.1
JNDA. Off. Comg. Gunboats, 1803-1808.1
To Master Commandant John Shaw, U. S. Navy, U,6. S. John A d m , from Secretary
of the Navy

NAVD E P17~ A p d 1805. You may give Dr Pascalis a passage to the Mediterranean on board
of the Frigate John Adams. He will lay in his own stores. He has
made an offer of his professional services on the passage as a compensation for this pridege, but I cannot allow you to touch at any
port for his accommodation, not mentioned in your instructions. iND.4.

O S T , Vol. 6, 1B02-1805.1

To Samuel Brown, Navy Agent, Boston, Mass., from Secretary of the Xavy

NAVD E P17'.
~ Ap! 1805
Sir Alexr Ball Governor of Malta having manifested the most
friendly dispositions towards us by numerous acts which have rnaterially facilitated the operations of our Squadron in the MediterraneanI have a t the Suggestion of Cornr"reble
authorised him to purchase two fishing smacks, to be sent out. to Malta -with provisions for
our Squadron, & there delivered up to Sir Alex: Ball a t their Original

518

ATATiAL OPERATIONS FROM 1804 TO 1805

Cost in this Country a measure which I understand will be very acceptable to Sir Alex: Ball Comr"reble
has stated their probable cost a t $3000, which sum I
t.& day remit to you for the purpose of paying for tlle~n- I also
send you the further Sum of $2000 to be applied upon the requisition
of Commodore Preble to the Outfits of the SmacGs 7You will furnish
all the articles which Commodore Preble may require of you - We
ha-re a large Quantity of Eeef at Hartford Connecticut to which
place the Smacks are to proceed for their Cargoes - but the necessary
Stores for the consnmption of the Crews you will furnish [NDA. GLB, Vol. 7, 1803-1805.1
To Tobias Lear, U. S. Consul General, Algiers, from Captain John Rodgers,
U. S. Navy

U. S. FRIGATE
Con~titution

o$ Tripoli April 17tQ 1805

DEARSIR By the Ti'xen I have sent Commodore Barron Letters
(which I received via Jerbi) from Capt-ainbridge
and M: Nissen,

Danish Consul, (of a late date) on the subject of peace! And altho i t
evidently appears, by S i d ~hlahamed the Bashaws minister's Apogogicd language, that the Bashaw is desirous of a conciliation; - yet
I do not believe he will accede to what you will consider equal Terms,
until he is more sensible of our Force, and demonstrativel~convinc'd
of our capacity to use it - Not knowing what communications you
h still at Tripoli; I have been
may receive by the Ketch ( ~ ~ h i caltho
expectkg out every Day, for these ten days past); permit me to say
to you, that I cannot discover their strength is in anF way augmented,
since I was here last; and that I feel morc than ever ConJident, our
present force, with an addition of two Mortars &; two Gun Boats,
u-ill enable us to give you the opportunity of negotiating a Peace
perfectly to your 'A-ishes If the attack is made within Six Weeks, under proper regulations;
I will pledge all that's sacred and dear to me in this TTorld! That
we succeed in the most perfect, handsome &. honorable manner. Pray present my most respectful compliments to Mrp Lear and
believe I am with unalterable regard & Esteem
[LC. JRP, Letters I% Orders, Book A, 1801-1805.1
To Captain Samuel Barron, U. S. Navy, from Richard Farquhar

SYRACUSE
A p r i l 17' [I8105
MAY IT PLEABE
YOUREXCELLENCY,
I saild from Alexandria on
the 13 March but having had bad wether we was obliged to put into
Candia & the Norea also Catrone in Cczlabria & the Vessel is not in
a Condition to go to hlalta or I would have gone with the Dispatches,
as the Bashaw wishes much to hear from your Excellency and that I
should go to Bengazi with the Answer when I shall remain with the
Bashaw I have it in Command from the Bashaw to thank Your Excellency for Sending the Brig Argus to Alexandria and to beg the favor of
an Answer to the Letters which I now forward Should you wish to
give any of your Officers that is in Malta or hear the Honor of Takin
Bengazi before M' Eaton arrives I will go with them to assist an
one of the Principal Officers of the Bashaw came with me from Alex-

8

RT&S WITH BARBARY POWERS

519

andria now he is to be Bey of Derna or Bengazi, I also brought a
Young man who was Interpreter to Mr Eaton he was also Interpreter
to the English general Stewart also to a french general he Speaks
English French Italian Turldsh & S r a b Languages if Your Excellency
wish to have him please let me know as there is many gentlemen will
be glad of him I also brought some Seamen as I knew Some of the
Ships is in want of them I got mony for Commodore Preble last
Summer Eaton to
I hope Your Excellency will give me a n order to
Settle Account with me as I have incurred his displeasure in taking
part with you which I have proof ofl and could give your Excellency
rnuch more Information but as the Dispatches will go for hIalta now
I have no time and I understand rou are Expected hear every day
[Mrs. Janiee S. Earrcn Col.1

To master Commandant Isaac Hull, U. S. Navy. from Wiiliam Eaton, U. S. Xavy
Agent for the Barbary Regencies

CAMPI7 tQ April 180.5
SIR, RTe have thought best to move the Camp tomorrow morning,
and take Post on the Sea Coast near where, the Basllaws Secretary
tells rne .;ou anchored two nights and sent your Boat on shore, M'
Farquhar informs me that we shall there find good water and a sufficient quantity to supply yom Vessels - The distance from this Port is
ca1culatc.d at about twelve lfiles by Land, further by Sea, if you make
a nlorcment correspondent ~ i t ours,
h
u-e will endeavor by signal, of
fire, to shew our place of Encampment - this is a small deviation
from the Arrangement made on board today, our object is to gain
ground, and to find good and Grazin~..-- 347 Peck with lfr Farquhar
are charged to rornmunicate this adrice. [KD.4.

Isaac Hull LR, 1803-1806.1

To Master Commandant John Shaw, U. S. Navy, from Lieutenant John Spriggs,
U.S. Navy

I n the service of the U. S.
NEWYORHaprd l g t Q1805
SIR I received your yesterdny, ordering me to repair on board the
C . S. Frigat John Adanzs under your Command. I beg leave to ncquaint you it its my firm intention not to Join her to act in a subbordinatc station snd I have wrote to the execatioe of the K a t y department on that head and ware I t,o put my foot on Board of her tc-ith s
pendent over me. I sllonld then acknowledge of accepting the
appointment. Assign me 39 year servitude in a Military line at sea
has tought me to be respectfull to the formes & etiquett of the sewice
and be obedient to my superiors and I have the E. S. Service a t heart
but in this case my feelings is so sencil.de hurt that it, its impossible
for me to comply with your order. - I hare executed the orders of
Secretary in reporting myself to the CommE officer of the John Adams do not harbour a thought I tratc your orders with contempt. far from
it as Commander of the John Adams it does not behove me to point
out to you whnt steps you are now to pursue - I b ~ leave
g
to inform
you. I entered iiltue the.scrvice of the U. S I+-ithn full determination
not t.o serve in u suhordlnnte stntion. I excepted the superintending

NAT7AL OPERATIONS FROM 1804 TO 1805

520

the building of Gun Boat N? S with a Rank as Commander my Commission was to be forwarder me in due season and my Rank then fully
&ed Sorry to say am much disapointed and now ordered to act in a
I have but little
subordinate station in the Ship under
measure been
more to say that is my apointment
Militory by the rank and pay
a Commission under the Seal of U. S. nor the honour of hoisting a
pendent to subject me to a Military Tribunal for disobediance of orders
if you take that of yours not being obliged by me - I am with all
due respect to your merit as an officer in the Navy Most respectfully
A true Copy
[KDA. M C LB, 1804-5.1
-

-

To Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Navy from Secretary of the Navy

NAVYD E P18
~ April 1805. -

I have received your letter of the 9th Ins - Your idea of purchasing 2 Sloops or Schooners to be fitted out as Bomb-Vessels is
approved. Purchase them therefore immediately &- on the best terms
in your. power. Inform Mr Brown of the Cost and he will make a
requisition upon me for the amount. You must be sensible that we have no time to lose in fitting them.
Let me ask therefore that you will exercise your usual energy & activity to have them fitted in all respects for the service for which they are
intended, with every practicable dispatch.
Make your requisitions for the necessary monies upon Samuel
Brown esq:
[NDA. OSW, Vol. 6, 3802-180E.l
Samuel Brown, Navq Agent, Boston, Mass., from Secretary of the Navy

NAVD E PAp!
~ l S t h 1805
I have authorized Commodore Preble to purchase two Schooners or
Sloops to be fitted out as Bomb Vessels - He will inform you of

the cost for which you will immediately make a requisition ou me Yo11 will also make a requisition for the monies that may be necessary
to fit them out [NDA.

GLB, Vol. 7, 1803-1805.j

To Captain Samuel Barron, U. S. Navy, from John Stlicker, Navy Agent, Baltimore

BALTIMORE
April 18th 1805
SIR I n pursuance of orders from the Honble Robert Smith Secretary of the Navy, I have the honour to hand you Invoice & bill of
lading of the Cargo of the American Ship Ann, Sylvanus Smith
Comdr laden with Stores $ 9 consigned to the address & subject to
the orders of John Gavino Esqr a t Gibraltar and for use of the squadron
Serving under your orders By the charter party, a Copy of which is also handed you, you will
perceive that Twenty three run'ing days only are allowed for stop'ing
at Gibrapltar, and for discharging the Cargo a t Syracuse or Malta It would have been desirable to have obtained more time for
performing this Service, but as this could not be done without an

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

521

augmentation of freight, I prefered incurring the risk of demurage,
in hopes that if despatch was used that none would accrue You will find Cap@Smith, attentive & accomodating, and as such
I beg leave to recommend him to you for alI the dispatches in your
honour
[LC. JRP, Vol. 1, Series Two,Feb. 1775-May 1805.1
To Secretary of the Navy from James MacEenzie and A. Glennie, London, England

LONDOE.18 April 1806
SIR We did ourselves the Honor of writing to you 13th instant
We beg Leave to correct an Error in that Letter stating that the drafts
drawn by Cap? James Barron St £1547.7.4 - were for the use of the
squadron generally under a Misconception C a p m a n o n in his Letter
no 1 expressing those drafts to have been for the use of his own individual Ship or any ship by Name. We beg Pardon for this Inaccuracy.
We have this day receiv'd a Letter from Commodore Samuel Barron,
dated La Vallette (Malta) 2 d Ultimo - acquainting us of his having
directed Cap; James Barron, commanding the United States Frigate
Essex to proceed up the Adriatic on particular Service, & as he would
have occasion for Funds to meet the contingent object of his ship, &
for other objects of national Concern: he had given him a credit on us
for an indefinite Sum - authorizin him to draw on Us: therefor
for whatever he may want, or for jo%leveer he may huve occasion qf,
for any purpose, We shall in Consequence duly honor his Draft
accordingly. We very respectfully remain
Sir Your most obedient & very Hble servants,
JA"~ACKENZIE
& A GLENNIE
[NDA.

Misc. LB,Vol. 2, 1805.3

To Master Commandant John Smith, U. S. Navy, commanding U. 15. Brig Vixen.
from Captain John Rodgers, U. S. Nsvy

U . STATESSHIPComtitution
off Tripoli April 18Q1805
SIR The Provisions & Water of the U. S. Brig Vixen under your
command being nearly expended, you mill proceed into Port (Malta)
without delay: - On your arrival at Malta you will without loss

of time report your arrival to Commodore Barron, and as early as
possible furnish with yr requisitions for such Stores, as the V k n may
require for this Summers Expedition [LC. JRP, Letters & Orders, Book A, 1804-1805.1

Extract Rom journal of Hezekiah Loomis, Steward, U. £3. Navy, in U. S. Brig Vixen,
Master Commandant John Smith, U. S. Navy, commanding, Thursday, 18
April 1805

Off Tripoli. This day pleasant with a stiff breeze. At sun rising
we were stfinding in for the land. At 12 put about and stood off shore.
At half past one o'clock P. M. the frigate espied a sail. She made a
signal and then we both went in chase. At 3 o'clock came up with
her and found her to be the President commanded b Capt. Coxe.
The Constitution made a signal and Capt. Coxe an Capt. Smith
went on board the Cmtitution, At 6 o'clock Capf. Smith came on
board and we made sail for Malta or Syracuse.

B

[I,. F. Middlebrook. N D A copy.]

522

NAVAI; OPERATIOArS FRO34 1804 TO 1806
To Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Navy, from Secretary of the Nan'

KAVD E P19
~ Apd 1805. I have received your Letter of the l o t h Ins; this day, stating that
Sir Alexander Ball had expressed to you a desire of obtaining 2 Fishing Smacks; and recommending the purchase of them, to be sent t o
hlaIta with provisions and there delivered to Sir Alex7 Ball a t the
ori,ginal Cost in this country. From your frequent communications to
me, Sir Alexr Ball has acted towards our Squadron in the most friendlv
manner and we have experienced from his friendship facilities which
have materially aided our operations against the Enemy. These
friendly attentions demand some return, and I cordinllv acquiesce in
pour proposal to make the purchase of 2 Fishing Smacks, to be sent
to Slr Alex' Ball. Purchase them therefore on the best terms in your power: appoint
to each vessel a Commander with the Rank & pay of a Sailing Master in
the Xavy ;appoint also another officer as Master's Mate, and empower
him to enter as many men as wi11 be sufficient to navigate the vessel
in safety. I have ordered Mids-lifton,
Blount, Ja? &M"Iauhon,
Turner MgGlauhon, and Carter, all from Iiorth Carolina, to report'
themselves t o you a t Boston. They are all inexperienced. You will
dispose of them either on board of the Fishing Smacks, or the Bomb
Vessels. The crews of the Smaclis may be entered to serve 2 years.
Able Seamen may be allowed $12 pr month - 4 months paid in advance upon good $ sufficient security to reimburse the government
in the event of desertion, 6t if they cannot be obtained without a
premium, you may allow to each able seaman (and I presume you
enter none but able Seamen) any sum as a premium not esceeding 20 Dry The Officers and Men are to be turned over to the Squadron after the Smacks shall be delivered up to Sir Alexander Ball.
I have this day sent to Samuel Brown esq' the sum of $3000 to pay
for the Smaclxs, & I have also sent llim the further sum of $2000 to
be advanced to the Seamen & Officers and to purchase pro~isions&$
for the voyage to Malta. He will apply the monies upon your
requisitions. When the Smacks shall be ready for sea, you will send them to Hartford Connecticut to receive their Cargoes of Daniel Olcott esqf giving them orders on M' Olcott for as much beef as they will carry:
their cargoes will consist entirely of beef. I shall m i t e to M r Olcott
directing the de1iyer-y of the Beef upon your orders. You rr-ill w ~ i t e
to me when the Smacks shall be ready to leave Boston. I shall send
their Sailing Instructions to meet them a t Hartford. Inform me of
the names of the persons you map appoint as the Commanders and
the names of the Smacks, and of all the arrangements you may make
in pursuance of these Instructions. [XDA. OST, Val. O, 1802-1805.1
To Secretary of the Navy from Naster Commandant John Shaw, U. S. Xavy

XEWPORE
a p d 1 g t Q 1805
SIR I have received your letters of 16t@. Last tucsdcy Cap3

Chauncey gave me up the Command of the John A d a m and since
that time I have been makiig every exertion in getting the Ship
watered and all her heavy stores on board, which I think will be cornpleated to day. And to morrow I unmoore md proceed to Staten

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

523

Island. Liut Sp[r]iggs has been here some time and on his reponrting himself to me I ordered him on Board which he has positively
declined by letter. in consequence this da I place him under an
arest for disobediance of orders m-hich you wi 1be pleased to deside on.
Last Kight and this Morning we had arivals. from Charleston and
Philad Liut h5urdock brought on 43 Seamen and 13 Marins and 15
arived this Morning from Phdq The S oa t presant on Board all
hands included is 490 and our Rendezvouse is stdl open. I t will be
necessary that a Lieu$should be ordered on. in the room of M' SpriggsPour letter of 11tQ has been strictly complied with and the Gentlemen
mentioned is all under furlow - The John Adams heretofore has been
very short of Officers and my attention towards her has been the
ocation of no regular coresponclince. with the N. Office. but be
asured Sir in future this neglect will be corrected. When we take
charge of Ships Stored $c we have to inspect every thing relative to
her internal regulation this in some Measure created a delay in my
not writing. Liu? Oglivee arived this Morning and your letter I have
handed to him. If Lieu: Cox has entered any Men in BaitQhe[yl can be sent round and if the weather continue fa~ourableI will be ready for Sea 25*Q
Inst

9

[NDA. hlC LB, 1804-5.1
Extract from journal of Surgeon Jonathan Cowdery, U. S. Navy, 19 April 1805

The Bashaw interrogated me concerning the force of my country;
he asked me how many marines the United States kept in pay. h/Iy
answer, for good reasons, was, ten thousand! How many troops?
he asked.- Eighty thousand, said I, are in readiness to march to
defend the country, at any moment; and one million of militia are
also reacty to fight for the liberty and rights of their countrymen!
At this, his highness assumed a very serious look, and I returned
to mv room.
[LC. Rare Rooks, An~crican Captives in Tripoli or Dr. Cowdery's Journal,
Boston, 1306.1
Extract from journal of Midshipman Charles Morris, Jr., U. S. Navy, on board
U. S. Frigate President, l a s t e r Cnmmandant George Cox, U. S. Navy, commanding.
Friday, 19 April 1805

7 [A. M.] the Town of Tripoli bore S X E 5 lea,gues distant. 45
fathoms water coarse sand with red specks
Noon the t o m of Tripoli bore S. W. 3 leagues distant.
Latitude Observed 33" N.

-

IhTrs. C. E. Fox original, TDA phot,ostat.]
To Secretary of the Navy from Master Commandant John Shaw,U.S. Navy

NEWYORKapril ,20tQ1806
SIR I shall make every exertion to unmore Ship to day and proceed to Sltlaten Island and in few days more I shall be ready for
sea. I am much at a loss for a purser as M' C a n bas not
yet
arived from Charleston although he sailed 2 days before Liut Murdoclr we will be bacliward in his department. I handed Liut Oglivee
his Order for Gun Boat N? 7. If it would meet your aprobation Nq

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1804 TO 1805

524

6. & 7 might be placed under my protection for the Mediteranean and

I am of an opinnion that the Gun Boats being in Company with me
would affect my passage out but a very few days.

Prior to my sail-

ing you will please give the Necessary Orders about the Turkish

on boaxd or if it is your wish to have clothes Ishued to them
Lieu! J . Spriggs being under an arest for disobediance of orders,
I inclose a Copy of his letter [I8 April] for your Consideration I feel highly gratified in my Command of the Frigat John Adam.
and I hope the Hen'' Secretary of the Na
will confirm my appointment before I sail. I t w i l l be disagreeab e to me after getting my
Ship in good order to have to resi-gn my Command to a senior officer
in the Mediteranean you may be asured that a single moment of
delay mill not take place in getting the Ship ready for Sea. and that
everv exertion in my power %-illbe used in making a quick passage We have on Board 490 Men including Officers and Marines
[NDS. MC LB, 1804-5.1
prisoners

4

To Tobias Lear, U. S. Consul General, Algiers, from Secretary of State
DEPARTMENT
OF STATE

Aprl120tQI805
SIR,I have received your several letters of the 7t@May 16t!' July
and 3c NOT: last with their inclosures. Several points which they
present for consideration in relation to the routine of affairs at Algiers,
are passed over for the present as they are unconnected with the
Mission in which you are engaged, and may be conveniently taken
up hereafter.
Upon reviewing the instructions transmitted to you dated 6 t h June
last, nothing in the state and prospect of things which dictated them
appears to be changed by subsequent events; unless indeed the possibility of any considerable sacrifices being necessal-g should be considered as diminished by the spirited attacks made on the enemy
by Commodore Preble and the comparison which will naturally be
made of their effect with what may be expected from a repetition
of them when the season opens, with equal animation on a much
larger scale. Besides the force we have in the Mediterranean, the
President has directed the following reinforcements which will
appear at the rendezvous at or not long after your receipt of this
communication, viz
The frigate John Adams with 32 Guns (all on board but not
mounted) 600 men, Will sail early in may. Gun Boats No%. 3. 4.
5. 6 . 7. 8. 9. 10.
N9 2 will have 1. long 32 pound Cannon.
3 . . . . 2 .
24
[fp
4 . . . . 2 .
32
I ,
5 . . . . 2.
32
1L
6 . . . . 2 .
32
'6
7 . . . . 2.
32
I1
8 . . . . 2 .
32
II
9 . . . . 2 .
32
66
10
. . 2.
32

.

.

Each Gun boat will have about 20 men on board, and will sail by
the la$May.
Two Bomb vessels to be fitted out a t Boston with 13 inch Mortars
and will probably sail about the 1%June.

WARS WITH BARBARY POT4TERS

525

Thp Ceres, a p r o ~ s i o nship, has lately sai!ed from Baltimore with
provisions and military stores for the Squadron. The Ann another
provision ship is now on the eve of sailing from Baltimore. She also
has provisions and military stores on board for the squadron. A v e 5
sel from ll ~shingtonwill sail in all may, with spars, beef, Sread, powder &c &c for the squadron.
The difficulhes attending a manufacture so little practised in the
United States as that of large brass ordinance and other more pressing
engagements, in the public service, of the contractor, have hitherto
retarded the finishing of the guns for klgiers, but the delay itself will
ultimately prove beneficial; as it has affordedan opportunity of making such preparatory experiments as will enhance their q u a h t ~ I t
may also be stated, with strict truth, if an unpatience should be expressed a t their not arriving, that the ext'raordinary exertions of the
artists usually employed for such purposes, occasioned by dispatching
our naval force against Tripoli have not been the most inconsiderable
cause of the delay; whence the Dey may be led to feel a participation
in the inconvenience resulting from the obstinacy and injustice which
characterize the war as waged by the Bashax. The contractor however promises that without unforseen accidents, the Guns, shall be
finished in two months or at furthest in three.
Arrangements for repeating the Sally's cargo with the additions
intimated in my letter of the 6tQ of June were soon afterwards made
by the Kavy Department, but as the timber was not collected before
the frost set in, it could not be carried to the sea board until the spring.
I t is expected that it must be now ready for shipment, which will be
accelerated as much as possible.
The Bills you drew on the Navy Agents a t Leghorn negotiable a t
London were carried into the Market there and would have occasioned
a considerable loss, but for the judicious measure of purchasing them
on the public account adopted by Messr"AIonroe and Erving.
The hesitation you e-qressed whether the letter written by the Dey
of Algiers with a view to influence the Bashaw of Tripoli to accept
the terms of peace me maF offer should be used is justsed by important considerations. Our force in that sea being, we hope, adequate
to every necessary coercion, there is the less reason for contracting an
obligation of this sort to the Dey, who, as on former occasions, would
seek his reward in pecunimy demands. The interposition of Algiers
in procuring the original peace we made with Tripoli it is also understood was a secret motive with the latter for departin from it.
hfessrWathcart & OBrien have arrived with their amilies.

f

[NA.

SDA. Despatches to Consuls, Val. 1, 1800-1817.1

To Captain Samuel Barron, U. S. Navy, from Captain John Rodgers, U. S. Navy
C. STATES
FRIGATE
Constitution

03Tripoli April 2 0 t h 1805. SIR The Ketch B i z a has a t last been permitted to return. I
suppose you will recieve considerable News by her. - I have nothing
worth communicating I think it would be well to employ Savario Satarean the Maltiese,
who is passen er in the Ketch; - he appears to possess considerable
b.9 information the Battery's

OF

[Mrs. James S. Barron Col.]

526

XAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1804 TO 1805

To Master Commandant George Cox, U. S. Nt~vy,commanding U. S. S. President
from Captain John Rodgers, U. S. Navy

U . S. S H I PConstitution

off Tripoli A p ! 2 0 t h 1805 SIR By the Icetch I am informed that a Latteen Tripoline Boat,
mounting 4 small Carriage Guns and 25 Men, is expected from the
Eastward in a Day or two - you will therefore, for the present, preserve your station about 7 L e q u e s to the Eastward of the Town,
as close to the Land, particularly in the Day time, if the weather 1s
good, as to enable you to see anp thing that may be passing in shore Your ship being heavy, it would be adrisable to have tu-o of your best
Boats (which are sufficient t'o take her without any risque) in readiness x i t h their Sails &p - The Constitution will remain abreast of
the Town $ you will exchange Signsls n i t h her a t least once in every
24 hours. - I t being difficult to distinguish Flags at a distance, the
Constitution will be known to you by her Fore Topgallant Sail being
set alone. Signal &. Answer to be t'he same thing -

+

[LC. JRP, Letters &- Orders, Book -4, 1804-1805.1
To Captain Samuel Barron, U. S. Navy, from James Simpson, U. S. Consul,
Tangier, Y orocco

TSXGIER
2Oth April 1805 DEARSIR Captain Stewart delivered me the Sth Inst your favour
of the 6t@LLt? - I sincerely hope this u-illfind your health perfectly
restored, which I will be happy to hear is the case. I could not hesitate at sap111g to Captain Stewart i t was my decided
oppinion this station should not be left without one or more Vessels
of K a r of the United States a t this time, which I now repeat to you. I fully persuade m-self I shall very soon sre a reinforcement from the
United States, and that I will equaly receive the sentinlents of Government on the measures of precaution I have found necessary to
recommend, which ~ ~ finally
4 1 decide on the p r ~ p r i e t ~ofy a Naval
force being kept constantly near Gibraltar. - The Emperour is a t
Morocco. - I continue without any communication whatever either
from him or his Mjnisters.
11: Jarvis writes me under the 30 I l t o that His Majestys Ship and
Brig at Lisbon '(had got their Masts on end and Rigging in complete
order for bending their sails" - but add that the Hull of the former
would not be finished under ten days. I wait with anxiety your determination on liberating or not, the
Emperours subject I have before written you about. [Mrs. James S. Barron original.!

TO Master Commandant Thomas Robinson, Jr., U. S. Navy, commanding

'13. S.
Schooner Enferprize, from Captain James Barron, U. S. Navy, commanding
U. 6. 6. &ex

VEXICEA p d 20th I805

DEAESIR,I n consequence of authority vestmodin me by Comnlodore

Barron I have concluded to request that you TX-ill
through the rnedium
of I / l r Heinzleman purchase two vessels proper for the purpose of
being converted into Gun Boats, R- that you will avail yourself of the
advantages in fitting t,hose vessels u~hicbhave been so kindly offerg

R7ARS WITH BARBABY POWERS

527

by Count Lespine. the amount of their expences will be furnished by
our Consul Llr Riggins who v4l lodge Credit in the hands of M r
EXeinzlemnn Subject to your Order. I t is not possible for me to say
more on the necessity of dispatch than you must feel at this adVancd
Period of the Season.
I likewise presume you have anticipated my ideas from the conversation that has passed between us on the occasion.
I shall therefore leave you with my best wishes for your Success
I pray you to write the Commodore by every post as 1am sure his
anvicty is now very great.
[KDA.

Captain's LB, Vo!. 1, 1805.1

Extract from journal of Midshipman Charles Morris, Jr., U. S. Navy, on board
U. S. Frigate Prcszdent, &lasterCommandant George Cox, U. S. Nary, commanding,
Sunday, 20 April 1805

2%[P. 31.1 the Constitution made Signal X?266. Made all sail by
tlie wind. 3%Shortened sail - 4 Tacked and hove to. the Constitution and Strange sail (a Ketch from Tripoli) in Company The
T o m bearing - S )<JT 5 leagues distant Midnight light airs and clear the Cbnsfitut?:onin Company 9 The Constitution made fi signal to Speak us, made all sail. 11.
The Constitution sent a boat on board. 11%Capt Cox went on board
the Constitution
10 hlen Sick
Latitude Observed 33' 9' X.
[>lrs. C. E. Fox ori~inal,XDA photostat.]
To Easter Commandant Isasc Hull, U. S. Navy, from William Eaton, U. S. Mavy
Agent for the Barbary Regencies

BOMBA
21" April 1806
SIR, From the most correct information I am able to obtain from
Derne, I am apprehensive we shall meet opposition st that place, a
rumour came to our camp yesterday with intelligence of a re-inforcement having arrived from Tripoli for the defence of that town and
Prorince, but did not state the exact Number, I had him under examination, from what I can learn from him, am persuaded this force does
not exceed five Hundred, to encounter it, we have great need of field
Artilery, besides the terror that Cannon impress on the undeciplined
Savages we have to dispute with, they will be our best resort against the
'CTalls of Derne, and surety in case of reverse - I t is unfavourable
to our expedition that the Congress has not arrived with artilery, if
you can spare from the Argus two of your 24lb Carronades with fixed
Amunition, and if we can find means of carrying them forward they
muy answer our purpose in advancing though they would be dead
weight in a retrogade movement, we have need also of four Barrels,
at least; of Musquet Powder, Balls & flints proportionate, and as
many h4usquets as can be spared, sufficient prorisions were landed
yesterday from the Hornet to carry us to Derne, for which Post we
shall move tomorrow if circumstances permit. - Should we advance
successfullv within attacking distance of the place, it is hoped you
will be able to bring the Guns of your detachment to hear on the
Enemjs Batteries; which being badly built; of bad materials, will not
be able tro resist you. - I have no reason to alter the opinion long

528

NAVAL OPERATIOATS FROM 1804 TO 1805

since adopted, of the importance to our affairs which the possession
of Derne mill have, cons'der'd either as it respects our Military or
Political operations, and hitherto nothing has appeared to discourage
our calculations of success from the Co-opperation formed with Hamet
Bashaw, thus far I have found the Arabs attached to his interest,
because undoubtedy they find an interrst in that attachment notwithstanding their religious scruples and aversions, I find them like
the rest of mankind, moved by a present good, Cash will carry them,
with this the Gates of Tripoli may be opened, but we must use to the
best adrantage the means we have. - If in addition to the supplies of Provisions already received you can add the Arms & Amunition I now ask we will endeavour to seize the Post in view
I hope you will be as near us as the safety of your Vessels will
allow.
Of the effects I leave on board you, in case I see you no
more, I beg you will accept my cloak, and small sword, as marks of
my attachment, the Damascus, Sabre, which you will find in my chest,
please give to Cap: James Barron, it is due to his goodness and valor,
I owe i t to the Independant integrity of his heart, my Gold watch and
chain give to Danilson every thing else please deliver over to hl'
Charles Wadsmorth my Executor. - I request you will permit M'
Mann one of Your Officers to join me in place of lLl: Peck who returns
on board. P.S. Conformably to the direction of Comdr Barron, Expressed
in his Letter to me of 22a March, I have to request Cap$ Hull will
permit the Officers & Men detached from his ship a t Alex%o remain
on shore, as I consider them important to the success of the Expedition
in which we are engaged.

-

-

[NDA. Isaac Hull L 3 , 1803-1806.1
To Master Commandant Isaac H5l1, U. S. Navy, from First Lieutensnt P. N.
O'Bannon, U. S. Bdarine Corps

CAMP2IB5April 1806
SIR,Unwilling to abandon an Expedition, this far conducted, I
have to request your permission to continue with Mr Eaton during
his stay on land, or, a t least untill we arrive a t Derne. [NDA. Jsaac Hull LB, 1503-1806.1
To Master Commandant Isaac Hull, U. S. Navy, from Hidshipman George Mann,

U. S. Navy

U. S. BRIGArgus 2iBfAp! 1805
SIR, Being solicited by Mr Eaton to join him in the present Expedition against Derne, I am induced to apply to you for permission to
Ieave the Brig, - In expressing a wish on this subject, I beg leat-e
to observe that I am not actuated by any motives of dissatisfaction
with my present situation, but by a wish to contribute generally by
my services to the Interest of my Country. I am aware that objections may be made from sentiments genera.lly
entertained as to the issue of the expedition, but should I succeed to
your approbation I shall feel no hesitation in Risquing the event. [KDA. Isaac Hull LB, 1803-1806.1

WARS WITH BARBARY P0R7ERS

529

A Receipt issued to Captain Isaac Hull,U. S. Navy, and signed by William Eaton,
U. S. Navy Agent for the Barbary Regencies

DESERT
OF LYBIA
BOMBA
A p ! 21.1806
Received from Isaac Hull Esqr Commander of the U. S. brig Argus
for the service of the United States Seven thousand spanish dollars
for which I have signed duplicate receipts (Signed) WILLIAM
EATON
ILC. JR,P, Vol. 1, Series Two, Feb. 1775-May 180E.j
Extract from journal of U. S. Frigate Comtitution. Captain John Rodgers, U. 6.
Navy, commanding, Sunday, 2 1 April 1805

[Off Tripoli since 7 April 1805.1 At 2 [P. M.] discoverd a Sail in
shore made Sail and gave chace, a t 4 Spoke The Ketch from Tripoli
recd From hir 2 bullocks.
Latitude Observed 33' 00' N.
[USNA.]
Extract from journal of Hezelriah Loomis, Steward, U. S. Navy, in U. S. Brig Vixen,
Kaster Commandant John Smith, U. 6. Navy, commanding, Sunday, 21 April
1805

Went into the harbour of Malta and came to anchor a t 9 o'clock
A. M. Saw 2 American brigs laying there. We were quarantined.
The Capt. got some stores off from the quarantine ground. At 2
o'clock P. M. got under way for Syracuse. At 6 o'clock saw the
Island of Sicily - wind coming rat.her ahead.
[L. F. Midd!ebrook. NDA copy.]
To Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Navy, from Master Commandant John Shaw,
U. S. Navy

KEWYORKa p d 22°C 1805
SIR Pennit me to make Known to you of my recearing the Command of the John Adams on the lBtQInst and by the 1" of next M?
a t furdest. I will be ready for sea If you have any Commands to the
Mediteranean of any decription, by informing me you may be asured,
Sir of the strickest attention being paid to your orders. f proceed to
Staten Island the fist wind which may offer with 490 Men on board
With respect to Mr' Preble and family
[LC.

EPP, Vol. 14, 1804-1805.1

To Captain Samuel Barron, U. S. Navy, Malta, from l a s t e r Commandant I s m
Bull, U, S. Navy

UNITED
STATES
BRIGA T ~ ~ M
At Sea 22d April 1806. SIR,I have the honor to inform you, that whilst laying a t Anchor
in the Bay of Bomba this morning, a Lrttteen Vessel made her appearance off, but on seei us, she made all sail, and stood out to aea I immediately got un er way yith a very light breeze to go in chace
of her, the Breeze continued ,hght, until 12 O.Clock, which gave the
chace an oppertunity of gettlng nearly out of sight, before we could
beat out of the Bay, the Breeze however freshening, and by carrying
a press of Sail, we got up w i t h Gun shot by 3 O.Clock, and brought

2

530

IVAVAL OPERATIOLVSFROM 1804 TO 1805

her too, she prosed to be a Latteen Boat of about Thirty tons under
Ottaman Colours from Alexandria, bound to Bengaize with a few
Goods, and a number of Tripolitan Passengers, among them a Captain
of R Gun Boat belonging to Tripoli, the remainder Sons of the first
People of Bengaize, which determined me to send her into Port, as
they aclinowledge both the Passengers and property were Tripolitan,
a part of which is said to be Powder, it remains a doubt with me whether
you consider this part of the Coast in a state of Blockade, as I have
not heard your opinion on the subject, if not I may have done wrong
in sending her into Port, unless she has Goods on board Contriband of
war, wlLich however I believe is the case, but the Weather has been so
bad that I ha-ve not been able to examine strictly. [XA. TD.4. Isaac Hull's LB, 1805-1806.1
Extract from journal of Hezekiah Loomis, Steward, U. S. Navy, in U. S. Brig
Vixen, Master Commandant John Smith, U. S. Navy, commanding, Monday,
22 April 1805

This day commences with a very s t 8 breeze off the land. We
arrived at Syracuse and came to anchor about 1 o'clock P. M. Found
there the Constellafion. The Congress went out a little before we
went into the harbour. V e received product [pratique] in one hours
time and almost all the officers went on shore this evening.
[L. F. hTiddlcbrook. K D A copy.]
To Joshua Wingate, Jr., Portland, Me., from Secretary of the Navy

NAVDEP?2Srd April 1805
I have been waiting some time in the expectation of hearing from
you on the subject of the Tinlber for Algiers. It is necessary that i t
should be sent out without delay.
Let me know what has been done by you in this business.
[KD.4.

Barbary Pomers LB, 1803-1808.1

To Master Commandant Thomas Robinson, Jr., U. S. Navy, commanding U. S.
Schooner Enterprize, Venice, from Captain James Barron, U. S. Navy, commanding
U. S. S. Essex

TRIESTAp! 2Sd IS06

DEARSIR I find on my arrival here that there is not one of the
Tortonois riggd vessels to be had; of course I shall purchase the Tribarcolas as Substitutes.
I t is possible the same difficulties may arrise with you; if they do I
would advise your adopting the same plan - & I must acknowledge
my partiality for the latter as I am convincd that our people wdl
manage them better than they can those long latteen Yards.
Will it not be advisable to stop those Vessels at Piran in preference
to bringing them here. - it will prevent any enquiry $c%c?
With respect to the crews which may be employd - perhaps i t will
be the most' advisable mode of employing them to deliver those Vessels
at Piran subject to Mr Riggin's order.
[KDA.

Captain's LB, Vol. 1, 1805.1

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

531

Presumably to Master Commandant Thomas Robinson Jr., U. S. Navy, commanding U. S. Schooner Enfcrprirc, from Captain James Barron, U. 6, Navy,
commanding U. S. 6. Essu

TRIEST
April 23'c 1805
DEARSIR I have this day been led into a secret which may be
proper to communicate to you, without loss of time. - Agreeable
to my last letter I had purchase a Tribarcola and was about to send
her from this place but some busy body, gave information to the Governor & the owner was instantly taken up 8t put in the castle & I
suppose the Vessel would have been stopped, as she might have been
in the act of departing, for we now hear that a Law exists in this countrv which prevents any subject from selling his Vessel without permission from the Government how this may d e c t you, I am a t a
loss to account but suppose the utmost caution necessary, and of
course should you obtain Vessels, you w 3 l carefully avoid allowing
them to come to this place, perhaps they had better not come so high
up as Piran,
I t is not possible to use too much caution on this occasion, & if you
find it likely to prove a serious thmg, deliver up the Vessels to their
former owners, in the event of your havmg purchasd them, and make
the best of your way to Syracuse, after touching here for the Settlement
of your Accounts. & c ~
I t is possible no such difficulties may occur with you, however I
have thought it advisable to give you this information for your guide.
[ S D A . Captain's LB, Vol. I , 1805.1
To Captain James Barron, U. 6. Navy, commanding U. S. 5. ESSU,Trieste, from
Master Commandant Thomas Robinson, Jr., U. S. Navy, commanding U. 6.
Schooner Edcrprize

VENICEAp! 2srC1805
SIR The night of the day you left this I wrote the Commodore

-

I had but half an hour to do it in (not knowing till 11 O'clock at night
that the Italian Post went off a t 12.) I just gave him the outlines of
your Arrangements - but shall be very particular in my next by which
time I shall be enabled to say something more to the purpose.
To morrow I believe Te shall conclude the purchase of two Vessels I shall write you by the ne-xt mail - let me hear from you before you
sail & when you intend belug off.
I saw this morning two tremendious Mortars (Iron) they take a shell
of eighteen inches. I shall not touch them without Orders they are
dangerous [NDA. Captain's LB, Vol. 1, 1805.1
To Secretary of the Navy from Master Commandant Thomas Robinson, Jr.,
U. S. Navy

VEXICEApril 2 9 1806
SIR The Enterprize was returnd to her Ellement in the same handsome stile & masterly manner with which she was drew from its
embrace. I ha.ve now the pleasure to inform you she is rigg'd & almost ready
for Sea, & I believe one of the finest Vessels in the World of her class. I have fitted machenery for a 24 pounder, to be applied to her Deek
if approv'd by the Comma$if not its SO calculated that tJwiUserve for

532

N A V A L OPERATIONS FROM 1804 TO 1805

any other. I carry all in the Hold to the place of Action, I was
induced to this from having experienced the inactive situation this
Class of Vessel was necessarily keept in during our attacks last summer
for want of a heavy piece
Cap. Barron is a t Trieste. he left here last saturday & orders with
me to purchase & fit two Boats to carry ea. one or two heavy Cannon
I have nearly concluded the purchase & shall use every exertion
to join the Commodore with them, Cap. Barron has Bought the
Brig Franklin that was the first American prize to the Turks, she is
sound & will carry a heavy Mortar. or two 32e-he means to take
down with him two Boats, which will make. the Brig & four Gun
Boats in addition to the squadron now in the Mediteranean. The
Vessels we take up here will bring first cost when the summers work
is got out of them. - if its thought proper to sell. - Never were
Men better disposed towards our afairs than both here & at Trieste,
Cap B. is much pleas'd with the reception he has met & I suppose
writes you fully. Tripoly certainly gets a severe dressing next summer. Please forward the inclosures & I beg you to make comfortable
MrOR during our distressing seperation
[NDA. hlC LB, 1804-5.1
To Captain Samuel Barron, U. S. Navy, from Secretary of the Navy

NAVD E P23
~ April 1805 Herewith you will receive a copy of my letter to you of the 1 6 t h
Tnst --This letter will be handed to you by Cap; Shaw commanding the
Frigate John Adams. She has on board a number of men which you
will distribute among the Vessels of the Squadron as may appear to
you the most expedient. She has also on board some Canvas and Shot.
We shall keep this Vessel plying between this country and the Mediterranean to furnish the Squadron in that sea with such succours of
provisions and Men as may from time to time be required. It is
therefore intended that she shall after delivering the men & q return
to the &Branch without delay. I deem it however, proper to invest
you with the power and you will consider yourself hereby invested
with the pourer of employing the John Adams in your operations against
the enemy should any special occasion or occasions arise which in
your opinion may render her services essentially necessary. But if
no such occasion should arise, you will order the John Adams immediately to the Eastern Branch directing that she shall touch on her
way out a t the principal ports in the Mediterranean frequented by
American Merchantmen to afford Convoy. I have ordered Cap: Stewart to proceed aloft with the Siren to
join the squadron. I give this order from the persuasion that there
can be no good reason assigned for keeping the Siren in the Neighbourhood of Morocco. Surely the Emperor of Morocco will not have
the temerity to attack our Commerce when we have such a powerful
force in the Mediterranean, and should he attempt such a proceeding
you can punish him effectually with the force committed to your
direction. The gun boats are now all under sailing orders excepting K Q 1 which as I have informed you by my letter of the 16th inst has been

WARS WITH BARBARY POWE'RS

533

found unfit for crossing the Atlantic. You will officer, man, and
employ those that may join you in such manner as may appear to
you most expedient. Should you not have forwarded my letter to Capt Bainbridge you
will not forward it. You will consider my order to you of the 31
May 1804 directing the call of a Court of Enquiry upon the conduct of
Cap: Bainbridge as hereby revoked. I enclose 2 Commissions for Masters Commandant and a Commission for a Surgeon which you will deliver. 1also enclose 38 Commissions for Lieutenants to be delivered under the regulations prescribed in my letter to you of the 1 June 1804. [NDA. LB, 1799-1807.1
To Secretary of the Navy from Xaster Commandant John Shaw, U. S. Navy

EEWYORKa p d 2Srd1805
SIR Yours of 1 7 t h I h a ~ ree d granting passage to Doc$Pascalis The John Adam is moored at Staten Island and I am making every
exertion in my power to get her Stores of every department on board
which I expect, to complate in 3 day. The only detention we will
meet will be on the part of the Purcer who has not as yet Joined me I have been compelled to detain Liut Maxwell in the recrufilting
Service until1 the ISt? in consequence of having but a Liut to do duty.
The Commander of S" 6 7 is on thek] are Makeing every dispatch
with these Boats. I expect by Sunday a t furdest to have every
article on board and will wait u-ith impatience for my Sailing orders.
I hope prior to sailing to be confirmed in my Command, but if it
is decreed otherwise you will give order to my Commanding the fleet
of Gun Boats on tihe Coast of Tripoly. this service will accord with
my wishes and I hope will meet your aprobation [SD..l. 3IC LB, 1YO4-5.1
Extract from journal of William Eaton, O. S. Navy Agent for the Barbary Regencies,
Tuesday, 23 April 1805

Cold, high winds with rain. Marched ten miles over a mountainous rocky country, - and camped in a ravine, within a mile from a
natural source of water, springing from tlit top of a moun.tain of freestone, near Cape Kazat.ine. This is the f i s t natural spring u7ehave
found since leaving Egypt. We are approaching cultivated fields. A herald cries through the camp - "He who fears God and feels
attachment to Hamet Bashaw uill be careful to destroy nothing.
Let no one touch the growing harvest. IZe who transgresses this
injunction shall lose his right hand! "

[a.E. Huntington L&AG, EA 206.1
U, S. Navy, from Ebenezer Stockey
NEWBURY
PORTApril 2.4 1805
DEARSIR I believe the two Vessels can be built on our River &
Iaunched from the 1 5 t h July to la!AugGne or two Builders that have
been consulted. mention $30 pr Ton. they observe at same time their
incapacity to fix on a just price at the instant, & that they should be
willing to contract on same terms as M' Hart is paid - Mc Coffin
is of opinion that one in Newbuly & one in Salisbury may be comTo Captain Edward Preble,

NAVAL OPERATIOATS FROM 1804 TO 1805

534

pleated with greater expedition, by the day, he would draft & overlook
them - Capn?wages are 1.50 to $2 p' day & at these prices he says
they will not cost the price above - 331 plank that are seasoned cannot be procured, - 3 Inch are plenty with good W,O, suitable
timber - Mc Cofhn & the Carpenters wish to be adrised of your
conclusion as soon as convenient, tlre Rirer being now high, the
timber &c could be procured EPP, Vol. 14, 1804-1805.1

ILC.

To Secretary of the Navy from Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Navy

--

BOSTON
Ap! .24t@1805
SIR I am honc with your letters of the 1 8 t h & 1gt$ Ins:. the Vessels
for the Mortars will be immediately purchss'd and fitted in t,heshortest
possible time, I suppose they will be ready to sail by the last of May.
The Smacks shall be purchasd as early as possible and el-erg part
of your instructions properly attended to.
Gun Boat K ? 8 was this day launch'd and will be ready to sail by
the 1": &lay. M' Harraden deserves credit for his attention. I
shall in a few days make contracts for building the two Bomb Vessels
& Gun Boats which I am authorized to build; but they wid not be
compleated, before Sept I t will be well to have the thirteen Inch
Mortars here as soon as possible from Xew-lTork.
[KDA.

Captain's LB, Vol. 1 , 1605.1

To Lieutenants James Lawrence & Peter S. Ogilvie, U. S, Navy, from Secretary
of the Navy

XAVD E P24
~ Aprd 1805
Lieut J A LAWRCXCE
~
Commdg gun boat i
W 6Lieu! P. S.Ogilvie
Commdg gun boat N? 7 - hTew York. Cap: Shaw has suggested the propriety of taking gun boats N? 6
and 7 - in company with the John A d u r s to the Mediterranean.
I have approved the idea and directed Cap! Shaw to give you the
necessary instructions. [KD4. Off. Comg. Gunboats, 1503-1808.1
To Secretary of the Navy from Lieutenant Nathaniel Fanning,U. 6. Navy

CHARLESTON
S. C.
April the 2 d t h 1805
SIR Your TWOLetters under date of the l l t h Instant came to
Hand this day; the contenbs of both I have duly considered. I n
answer to what you say in relation t o Gun Boat N? 9 - I reply,
that no Guns as yet have been put on Board of Her, - "That we
shall put them on Board Tomorrow7' and that She is intended to
mount Two h n s , agreeable to What I mote you some time ago;
her being Ketch Rigged, her Mizen Mast will not interfere or be
any obstruction to her Gun aloft. She is caIculated to Mount both
Thirty two Pounders sent on for her. and she is sufficiently Burthensome, strong, cY- Buoyant to carry them; & I beg leave to say that I
quit her with much regret, when I must submit to command Gun Boat

WARS IVITH BARBARY POWERS

535

No 1 so much her inferior - After so much time and care in superintending the Building of Gun Boat Ns 9 ("and the promise of being
continued in the Command of her after She should be put into service")
it is with reluctance that I quit so fine a Vessel, to command one
such as I am appointed to. But as Subordination must be kept up, I
with perfect submission obey your orders. conchding with this sentiment; "that every subordinate officer ought a.lways to obey the orders
of his Superiors".
[NDA.

Misc. LB, Vol. 2, 1805.1

To Master Commandant Charles Stewart, U. S. Navy, commanding U. 6. Brig
Siren, Gibraltar, from Secretary of the Navy

NAVD E P24
~ April 1805
You will proceed immediately aIoft and report yourself to the Commodore of the Squadron. Allow no suggestions of hostility on the
part of the Emperor of Morocco to detain you. [NDA. LR, 179%1807.]
To George Davis, U. S. Charge d'Affalres, Tunis, from Tobias Lear, U. 1, Consul
General, Algiers

MALTA,April 2dtQ1805.
SIR I have to acknou~ledgethe recei t of your Several Letters of
the 1i t P of Febr, the 8", 119'%nd 30t@of &arch and 13Q' of the present
Month, together with their respective enclosures
Your drafts for two thousand dollars have been duly honored,
whch together with the bills remitted to you from this place, I find
has fully covered all your expenditures &:-up to the l o t $ of April,
according to your account and left a balance in your hands of
$627 52/100

I have not given tho usual formality of approbation to the last
account, as I wish to have some explanation of certain items before I
can feel myself justsed in gi~<nga full approbation - Viz! the
Charge of a loss of 116 doll? on a blll of P' 1101.9. of 8/m. under date
of Sept. 1gt@1804 - ditto of 20 doll' on a bill of 500 P' of 8/r on the
4'5 Decr 1804 - ditto of 15 doll? on a bill of P
C 333.11.11. of 8/r on
7 Jan?' 1805 - ditto of 15 dol1"oss on the Exchange of Spanish
Dollars 13 te FebY 1805. - ditto of 308 dollars for barley and straw
for the public Horse and hlule, dated 28 Febr 1805 - and of the Necessity of a Second Drogerman whose wages are charged. - The amount
of repairs for the Consular House appears to me very high, particularly as the rent is certainly ver great. The charge for Stationary,
and several other items which I ave never charged myself in Algiers
to t-heGovernment of the United States, I forebear to comment upon;
because I do not wish to place any restrictions, where the same Charges
may have been allowed heretofore
I long since informed Capt? Bainbridge, and I think I must have
mentioned it in one of my letters to you; that the funds necessary for
the support of our unfortunate Countrymen in Tripoli would be
furnished by the Commoder of our Squadron in these Seas; and that.
I could only furnish them in Cases of emergencies; or when there
might not be an opportunity of his recelvlng them from that quarter. The ill Health of Commodore Barron, has I presume prevented his
having notsed the thing to Cap? B. and taking measures to have

I

536

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1804 TO 1805

him seasonabl Supplied. I trust however, that the Clothin

T

%

&9

which he has ately received, as well as other funds, besides t ose
furnished through you, will answer all their purposes for some time to
come; and in the mean time arrangements will be made to supply
them in future, if i t should be necessary from the proper source.
and I beg you will inform Captc B. of this. I cannot help expressing my surprize a t the loss on bills drawn by
you upon me a t this place, as the large Quantities of Wheat purchased here has caused a great demand of money from Tunis on
Malta, and I had reason to think there wd rather have been a premium than a discount on bills for this place.
I thank you for the information contained in your several Letters,
and am pleased to find that every thing relating to our affairs still
remains quiet with you. - If His Excellency the Bey of Tunis is
really disposed and determined to go to war with us he will not fail
to take occasion therefor from the conduct which our Squadron will
be obli ed to pursue during the Blockade of Tripoli; but I hope he
knows is own interest too well to attempt breaking with us while
we have such a force in his neighbourhood; for sltho' we should fear
the ultimate issue of a war with him, yet it would be a great deran ement of our Operations against Tripoli should he break out a t t is
moment.
The Ketch which was sent to tripoli with Clothing &$ for our
Countrymen there, returned this day. By her I have received letters from Captg Bainbridge, and from the French & Spanish Consuls.
The latter has written me by Order of His Excellency the Bashsw,
to state the grounds on which he is will5 to open a negotiation for
peace - Vizt 200,000 dolls for peace & Ransom, and the deliver?. of
all his Subjects in our possession, with their property. - These
terms are inadmissable, as we shall never pay a Cent for peace, and
if ransom should be paid it must only be for such a number of Bmericans as may exceed the ru'umber of Tripolines in our power. The
Consul, however, adds, that altho' these are stated by His Excellency the Bashaw as the Grounds for Negotiation, yet he is well
assured that there might be a Change. All our accounts from the
same quarter state also the strong desire for peace which prevails a t
Tripoli, so that 1 have good hopes that by the time we are ready to
commence our Operations the Bashaw may be brot to such terms
as we can with propriety agree to. - Altho' the operations by
Land I have always been opposed to them in the way they have
been undertaken, and believe that they will ultimately be productive
of no good to our Cause. - VJe are yet without any accounts from
hlr Eaton since he left E pt. The Commodore's h e a B is mending slowly; but I think there
is no prospect of his being able to take an active Part in any operations this Season. - The Physicians urge the necessity for a Change
of Climate as soon as possible.
I am glad to learn by my letters from Algiers that our affairs in
that quarter still stand well, and that the report of an Insurre[c]tion
&? was without foundation.
The particulars of the attack made on
the De you have undoubtedly received
Our $essels arc all absent from this port a t present; but we expect
the return of some very soon, when one will probably be sent to
Tunis, by which you will receive all the news from this Quarter, and

-

fl

fl

WARS WITH BARBARY POm7ERS

537

I shall reserve this letter for that conveyance, unless a very good
opportunity should offer sooner
[Stephen Decatur Col. NDA photostat, Book A.]
To Captain Samuel Barron, U. S. Navy, from Secretary of the Navy

NAVD E P24
~ A p d 1805.
Lieu$ Murdock who goes out in the J.Adams as First Lieutenant
entered the ser~dcesoon after the Navy was established and served
with reputation till the year 1801, when in consequence of the Peace
Establishment Law, it was found that he could not be consistently
retained in the service and he was permitted to retire under that act.
Necessity has compelled me to introduce this officer again in the Navy.
He holds his original Commission, though still his Rank in the Navy
is as yet undetermined. I n forming a determination upon this point,
numerous difficulties have presented themselves. I am told that he
is an excellent officer, and a gentleman of extensive experience in his
profession. These considerations dispose me to give him a higher
Rank than his late appointment in August last, but on the other hand
there is a number of young genblemen of very distinguished merit
who might feel themselves dishonored by Lieu! 'hfurdock's be
placed over them. Probably however when they become scquainte
with him, they may acquiesce. - You are personally acquainted
with the o5cers and you can readily ascertain what their feelings may
be in this case. If LieuWurdock can be placed in a situation on
board of one of the frigates which may be agreeable to himself and
not offensive to other Lieutenants, I should be pleased with such an
arrangement. See if this can be done. If it can without giving umbrage to other worthy Lieutenants, you may do it; if it cannot, Lieu!
Murdock must return in the J. Adams.
By the J. Adams.

7

[NDA.

LB, 1799-1807.1

To Master Commandant John Shaw, U. S. Navy, commanding U. S. S. John Adunu,
New York, N. Y., from Secretary of the Navy

-

NAVD E P24
~ April 1805.
Herewith you will receive your authority to subdue, seize, and make
rize of all vessels, goods, and effects belonging to the Bashaw of
Fripoli or to his Subjects and also the statute upon which that authority is founded. As soon as you shall be ready for sea, you w-ill weigh anchor and
proceed in company with gun boats N"
6 7 and also N Q 3 if she
should join you in season, to the Mediterranean, touching a t Gibraltar
for information which if material you mill communicate to the Commodore. - From Gibraltar you u d l proceed aloft and report yourself to Cornre Barron or the Commanding Officer on the station. you
will allow no suggestions of hostility on the part of the Emporer of
Morocco, to detain either the John Adams or the gun boats at Gibraltar, but whatever may be the reports on the subject, proceed immediately aloft with the J Adams and the gun boats that may accompany
you out. On your joining the Commodore he will give you his .orders which
you are to execute. Deliver to him the accompanying Package.
Should you see Cap: Stewart deliver to him the enclosed letter directed

538

NAVAL OPERATIONS

FROM

1804 TO 1805

to him; if you should not see him, deliver i t to John Gavino esquire
to be conveyed to Cap-tewart.
[NDA. LB, 1799-1807.1
To Colonel Jacob Crowninshield, Salem, Mass., from Captain Edwarc! Preble,
U. 6. Navy
3OSTON Apt 24 tb 1806

SIR Agreable to your advice, M' Smith has authorised me to
purchase two vessels to be fitted for t,he reception of 13 Inch R5ortars.
I have accordingly this day purchas'd a Schoo: of 102 and a Sloop of
92 Tons, Connecticut built one eleven months & the other 2 years
old, tomorrow they are to be delivered a t the Navy Pard and I hope
to have them ready by the last of May - I shalt in the mean time be
building the other Vessels for which I have r e d orders.[LC. EPP, Vol. 14, 1804-1805.1

E P.

Extract from journal of U. S. Frigate Gtulffution.Captain John Bodgers, U. S. Navy,
commanding, Wednesday, 24 April 1805

[Off Tripoli] At j4 past 5 [A. M.] discoverd 3 Strange Sail t,o the
Westward. Made sail in Chace,
A t 11 shorten,d sail and spoke The Vessels they proved to be
Tunecians Bound to Tripoh
Latitude Observed 33' 4' N.
[USNA.]
Extract from journal of William Eaton, U. S. Navy Agent for the Barbary Regencies,

Wednesday, 24 April 1806

Marched fifteen miles over mountainous and broken ground, covered with herbage and very large and beautiful red ceders: - the first
resemblance of a forest tree we have seen during a march of nearly
six hundred miles. - Camped in a pleasant valey, by a natural rivulet bordered with delightsome verdure and fields of barley, about five
hours march from Derne. Certain information came to us here that
the Governor of the country had fortified him self and was determined
to defend the city against our approach. - The same courier confirmed the intelligence which had freequently before been stated to us
that the Army of Joseph Bashaw, whch he had sent out for the defence of the province, were near Derne, and would probably, by a
forced march arrive before us; especially if we waited the return of
our vessels to the coast, which had been blown off in the gale of the
23(' - Alarm and consternation siezed the Arab chiefs, and tlespondency the Bashaw. - The night was passed in consdtations among
them a t which I was not admitted.
[H.E. Huntington L$AG.]
To Secretary of the Mavy from Captain Edward PrebIe, U. 6. Navy

BOSTON
Ap! 26tQ1805

SIB I have this evening purchas'd two suitable Vessels to be pre-

pared for the rece t,ion of the 13 Inch Mortars, they are both Connecticut built - a most new, one is a schooner of 102, and the other a
sloop of 92 Tons; they are to be delivered a t the Navy Yaxd tomorrow,
and shall be closely attended to. the two Vessels cost 7000 doll9

f

WDA. Captain's LB,Vol. 1, 1805.1

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

539

125 April 18051
To George W. E h g , U. S. Consul, London, England, from Secretary of State of His
Britsnnic Majesty

COPY
Circular
The Undersigned Secretary of State of His Britannic Majesty has
received His Majesty's Commands to acquaint Mr Erving that the
King has judged it expedient for the Protection of His Subjects and
the annoyance of His Enemies to establish the most rigorous blockade
a t the Entrances of the Ports of Cadiz and St Lucar and to maintain
and enforce the same in the strictest Manner - according to the
Usages of War aclmomledged and observed in similar Cases. Mr
Erving is therefore requested to apprize the American Consuls and
Merchants residing in England that the entrances of the abovementioned Ports are, and must be considered as being in a State of Blockade and that from this Time all the Measures authorized by the Law
of Nat,ions and the respective Treaties between His Majesty and the
di8erent Neutral Powers will be adopted and Executed with respect
to Vessels attempting to violate the said Blockade after this Notice.
The Undersigned takes this opportunity of renewing to Mr Erving
the assurances of His high Consideration (Signed) MULGRAVE
DONNING
STREET
April 25th 1806
[NA.

SDA. CL, London, Vol. 9, Jan. 1804-July 1812.1

To Captain Samuel Barron, U. S. Navy, from Captain John Rodgers, U. 6. Navy

O. STATESSHIPConstdutwn
03Tripoli A p d 266h1805
SIR I have to make known to you that on the 24t@Ins?, Tripoli
bearing S E b S. distant 5 or 6 Miles, I fell in with a Private Armed
Xebeck of 8 Guns, with two Neapolitan Ships, Prizes, bound direct
into Tripoli. My reasons for sending these Vessels into port for Examination are
two obvious to require commentations of me - farther than what
circumstances and their papas will explain. [Mrs. James S. Bzrron Col.]
To Master Commandant George Cox, U. S. Navy, commanding U. S. S. President,
from Captain J o b Rodgers, U. S. Navy

U. STATESSHIPConsstduti01t

03Tripoli Apl 2St@1806
SIR, YOUwill proceed off Malta with the Xebec & her two prizes;
hand Commo: Barron my Letter, & recieve his orders respecting them.
If Commodore Barron is not at Malta you will proceed to Syracuse.
Circumstances will so point out to you the necessity of executing the
Instructions with which you are charged, with all possible dispatch, as
to prevent the necessity of my saying any thing further on the subject.
[LC. JRP, Letters & Orders, Book A, 1804-1805.1

3 0

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1804 TO 1806

To Captain Samuel Barron, U. S. Navy, from Captain John Rodgers, U. S. Navy

U. STATESSHIPConstitution

03 Tripoli Aprd 25@ I805
SIR, The Constitution has now only five weeks Provision on Board;
and in order that she may not be detained in Port, on that acct when
she returns, I have thought it advisable t,o Enclose you an Indent for
Two Months complete. [LC. JRP, Letters & Orders, Book A, 1804-1805.1
To Master Commandant John H. Dent, U. 6. Navy, commanding U. 6 . Schooner
Nautilus, from IKaster Commandant Isoac Hull, U. 6. Navy

FORT
ENTERPRIZE
Derne L 5 t U p r i l 1805
SIR Inclos'd you have signals established with hlr Eaton. I t is
my wish you stand very close in with Cape Razatin and send a boat
on Shore to see if he is there; Should he not be there, and you can prevail on an Arab to take a letter from you to him, informing him of your
Arrival on the Coast you had better do it, but if you cannot find any
Arab that will take charge of a letter, or go to him, you will make all
possible dispatch along Shore towards Derne, keepin as near as possible, and should you see Signals corresponding with t ose established,
you will send a Boat on shore if the Weather will permit, and communicate with Mt Eaton, taking care that the Officer that goes in the
Boat ascertains clearly that he is safe in landing
You are aware of the necessity there is of h4: Eatons having the
field pieces, and I am sure you will use every means in your power to
fall in with him

f

[NDA. Captain's LB, Vol. 2, 1805.1
Extract from journal of U. S. Frigate Conttilufion, Captain John Rodgers, U. 6. Navy,
commanding, Thursday, 25 April 1805

[Off Tripoli] At 4 [P.M.] the town of Tripoli bore S S W distance 4
leagues, at 6 made The Signal N Q l to the PresidenfAt Midnight Moderate breezes and Pleasant mTeather,
At 10 Cap5 Cox came on board At 1 1 he returnd to the President
& Took charge of the strange sails And stood to the North+
Latitude Observed 33' 21' 1CI.
[USKA.]
Extract from journal of William Eaton, U. 6. Navy Agent for the Barbary Regencies,
Thursday, 25 April 1805

At six in the morning beat the general and gave orders for marching. - The Arabs mutinized. - The Shieks il Taiib and Mahomet
a t the head of the Arab cavalry took up a retrograde march, and the
Bedouins refused to strike their tents. - After much persuasion,
some reproach, and a promise of two thousand dollars to be shared
among the chiefs, they were prevailed on to advance: - and at two
oclock p. m. we camped on an eminence which overlooks Derne, and
reconnoitred the place. - Discovered that the Governor's defence
consisted of a water battery of eight nine pounders - Towards the
N. E. some temporary breast works and walls of old buildings to the
S. E. and along the front of the bay a department of the city of about

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

541

one third the whole number of inhabitants, who were in the interest
of Joseph Bashaw, had provided their terraces and walls of their
houses with loopholes. - The Governor had also a ten inch howitzer mounted on the terrace of his palace. - Sundry Shieks came
out this evening to meet the Bashaw, who assured him of the loyalty
and attachment of the other two departments of the city; but stated
that the Governor could bring eight hundred men into battle, and as
he possessed all the batteries, breast worlcs, and seaboard, we should
find it difEicult to dislod e him. - Besides Joseph Bashaw's army
was just at hand. - I t ought the Bashaw wished himself back to
Egypt. - No vessels in sight today. -

Eh

[H. E. Huntington L&AG.]
Extract from journal of Hidshipman Charles Morris, Jr., U. 6. Navy, on board
U.S. Frigate Pruidenf, Xaster Commandant George Cox, U. 6. Navy, commanding,
Thursday, 25 April 1805

Day light saw the Constitution and three other vessels with her
8 Spoke the Constitution Capt Cox went on board. 10 Capt Cox
returned
All hands employed preparing to take the three Vessels in tow.
They being suspected for Tripolines tho under Tunisian Colours
Latitude Observed 33' 25' N.
[Mrs. C. E. Fox original, NDA photostat.]
-

To Secretary of the Navy from Master Commandant John Shaw, U. S. Navy

NEW PORK April 26'h 1805
SIR I have receav~dyour letter of 22"g with an enclosed for Liu'
Spriggs which shall be duly delivered. M' Carr (Purcer) arived on
24thbe is making every exertion to promote dispatch inlis department.
I expect on Saturday to have on board the Stores of every department
and by Monday to be ready for sea. Gun Boat K?7 will drop down
to Staten Island on Monday and N ? 6 on Wednesday I shall place men
on board them to compleat them for Sea. - Liu Wglivee finds much
difficulty in getting Men for the Gun Boats the fact is this port a t
preasant have but few Seaman to dispose of. I am apprehensive the
G. Boats will hare to be supplied from the John Adams. but your
aprobation will be necessary, MTefind some trouble in procuring G.
Powder Genr Stevens has 15.000 'pa in Keeping of excellant proof m
Copper hooped barrels. it belongs to the state department a transfer
no doubt could be procured of art of it. to Supply me. Liut Edwd N.
Cox. has reported himself, he eft Baltq on 24th for K. York
Be so good to designate the rank of my Liur in order to rectify any
dispute which per chance might take place between them -

P

[NDA.

MC LB, 1804-5.1

To John Beekman, Navy Agent, New York, N. Y., from Captain Edward Preble,
U. S. Navy

BOSTON
Ap! 26.1805
SIR It is requisite that the two 13 Inch Mortars, shells &c Cc be
sent here as soon as possible & without loss of time, as the Bomb
Vessels are in considerable forwardness and will be detained for want
of them if they do not arrive soon, I should advise you to send them by

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1804 TO 1805

542

a Vessell taken up for the purpose, or by one of the regular Packets, as
the Coasters belonging to the Vineyard Nantki or Cape Cod, generally
stop by the way.
[LC.

EPP, Vol. 14, 1804-1805.1

To the Governor of Derne, from William Eaton, U.S. Navy Agent for the Barbary
Agencies

(Note 1 in letter of April 29)

ENVIRONS
OF DERNE
April 26. [I8051
SIR, I want no territory. With me is advancing the legitimate
Give us a passage through your city;
Sovreign of your country
and for the supplies of which we shall have need you shall receive
fair compensation - Let no differences of religion induce us to shed
the blood of harmless men who think little & know nothing. - If
you are a man of liberal mind ou will not balance on the propositions
I offer. - Hamet Bashaw p edges himself to me that you shall be
established in your government. - I shall see you to morrow in a
way of your choice. -

-

p

EATON

ihteweP-

SftffteQftb

W M - 7

4+4k&sR

[H. E. Huntington L&AG. EA 272.1
To William Eaton, U. S. Navy Agent for the Barbary Regencies, from Master
Commandant John H. Dent, U. S. Navy

US S C HNautilus
~
April 96tb 1805

Dr SIR After considerable Difficulty and very contrary winds I[tj
gives me great pleasure to have reached you before you made the
attack as I am fully sensible you must have suffered for the want of
the field pieces - I have two on board comple[te] except gen for
the horses - I have made two hundred bags of musket balls for
grape fillerd [?I & 150 round shot - 9 Barrels of powder - & a quantity
of Musket Balls & Lead which I am runing daily for your use - I
have on board a quantity of Small Stores for you and which I am sure
must be acceptable - I anchored in Bomba the day after you marched
& left the Brig Argus & Sloop yesterday evening off Cape Razatin on
this way here - you udl please send a large party down early in the
Morning for the field pieces & ammunition - which I am affraid you
will find some difficulty in getting the hill I sent an arab from Cape
Razitin yesterday with a Letter to you, informing you of my being on
the coast - I likewise sent you a Letter from the Com. & two packages
from the US - you will please let me h o w in the morning what you
want & any thing I have on board you shall freely have - Make my
respects to OBannon & all your Brave followers & wishing you all the
Success you so fully deserve
When you make the attack I shall render you all the assistance by
Sea the Schooner is capable of
IHS of Pa. Gratz Col.]

543

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

Extract from Memorandum Book of Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Navy, Friday,
26 April 1805

[At Boston] Purchased a schooner of 102 tons 11 mo. old for 4,000
Dollars and a sloop 92 tons 2 years old for 3,000 dollars to be fitted ae
Bomb ketches. Sent them over to Navy Yard, Charlesto[w]n.
[LC original.]
Extract from journal of William Eaton, U.S. Navy Agent for the Barbary Regencies,
Friday, 26 April 1805

Eight a. m. made signals by smoke upon the highest point of the
mountain At 2. p. m. the A'uutilus hove in sight: - exchanged signals: - and a t slx we spoke - I expressed my determination to
attack the town tomorrow if the other vessels came in seasonably. [H. E. Huntington L&.4G.]
Extract from journal of Midshipman Charles Morris, Jr., U. S. Navy, on board
U. 5. Frigate Presided,Master Commandant George Cox, U.6. Navy,commanding,
Friday, 26 Aplii 1805

Sent an Officer and 7 Men to each prize and took them in tow,
4 lost Sight of the Constitution.
Latitude Observed 35" 30' N.
[Mrs. C. E. For original, NDA photostat.]
To Lieutenant Colonel Commandant Franklin Wharton, U. S. Marine Corps, from
First Lieutenant John Howard, U. S. Marine Corps, U. S. Brig Siren

MALAGA
April 2YtQ1806
I wrote you December last Indosed you, the state of the Detach-

ment, at that time. Inclos'd now five Enlistments their Size Roll,
Cloathing returns & Pay Roll to April Is& 1804 [?I I expect to come
across those left at Hospatal @ Sirucuse, & them Turnd over to
The DrumBrig Scovrg~,and fetch them up to la?Jan? 1804 I?!.
mer, I have Enlist is a good one, Graham, & He, practise every Day.We left the Squadron at Malta October 7 ' U d been Stationed
here. I have been inform'd of the Change of Marine Officers Ls
Johnson to a Frigate & I was not there at the Change, And as long
as we stay on the lower Station, I shall be contented, but should
we be orderd up, I shall, should an Opportunity offer, Make Application, to return to America.
The few Ifen I have are Young, Healthy an clean Men, our being
often in Port requires them to be so they are in New Uniform, and
Pride themselves on it. Kot haveing Sup lies; I am Obli e to purchase Hatts, Shirts, Shoes, Overalls, kc. &m Cooper, & T 0s Reveness, Deserted I expended a goodeal of time & Money after them
I caut Cooper at St RIaries he has deserted the second time. We have nothing new from our Squardren off Tripoli, we understand the Commodore cant get the King of Pr'aples Gun Boats as the
French has got posession of Kaples, the Kin has fled to Mesina in
Sicisly. - The French Fleet pased us ~ ~ 1ltQ
r whilst
f
we la at
Tanger, consisting of 19 Sail they appeard off Cadiz at 4 OC ock
the same Day, and gave a Signal for the Spanish, & French fleets to
come out in 6 Hours; consisting five Ships of the Line, & Six F'ri ates,
with 3000 Troops the City was much in confution all the C priB
was takeing out of goals Workhouses &c to Make up the compliment

8,

9
3

544

NAVAL OPERATIOATS FROI14 1804 TO 1805

was Put on Board in the Time Mentioned Sir Jno Ord formed a
line with his Squadron when the French hove in site Kight comeing
on the french not wanting to come to Action made their best way
on Sir Jno Ord disappeard Supposing I-Ie wilI not loose Sight of
the French no one at Gibralter, Cadiz or Here, has auy Idier where
they are agoing. There is report Kelson went to Malta to repair
his fleet and Died there His Fleet is not yet come Down Please give lily respects to Marine Officer at Barracks
[USIMC.

TAR, 1805.1

To Captain John Bodgers, U. S. Navy, from Charles Biddle

PHILADELPHIA
April 27. 1806.
SIR. YOUhave enclosed a letter from our friend Corn. Truxtun
who has this day moved from Amboy to Philadelphia - You will obfidge me very much by any service you may render
James.
I understood from Commodore Preble, that he wodd have made
a Deace with T r i ~ o l ifi the John Adarns had arrived a dav later than
sh; did: and woGld have done it after her Arrival. if he hid not been
inform& by Lieutenant Chauncey, that it was thk expectation of the
Government and people here, that the prisoners mould be obtained
without ransom; in this he was certainly mistaken. The trifling sum
of 150,000Dollars or much more would have been paid with pleasure I sincerely hope you will soon conclude an honorable peace ulth
Tripoli and restore the Prissoners to their Country
ILC. JRP, Vol. 1, Series Two, Feb. 1775-%Yay 1805.1
To Secretary of the Navy from Lieutenant Nathaniel Fanning, U. 6. Navy

CHARLESTON
S. C.
April the 27 t@ 1805
SIR I have enclosed you a rough sketch of the new Goat [Gun]
Boat KW, which I have delivered up the charge, or Command of, to
Lieu: Elbert ;after ha*
put the two Guns on Board of her, originally
intended for Her; and I have the honour to say that She has sufficient
room at each End for mounting them both, and I cannot help again
repeating that I quit her wit.h regret, believing her to be the largest,
most Burthensome, and will Sail the fastest of any Boat, or Vessel
belonging to our Navy. I believe that Three Days more will be
sufficient to finish her equipment and makc her ready for Sea.
[NDA. Misc. LB, Vol. 2, 1805.1
To Captain James Barron, U. 8. Navy, commanding U. S. S. Esscx. from Master
Commandant Thomas Robinson Jr., U. S. Now, commanding U. 6. Schooner
Enterprfze.

VENICEA p d 27 th 1805
DEARSIR Yours of the 234 is before me & your observations and
dif6culties have met mine exactly, we had almost arrangd for two
before your letter arrived and shall conclude immediately. - I have
every thing atanto and ready to come out of the Arsenal. But I
am advised (by you know who) not to move until matters are prepared
for [spa.ce]. then to take in the schooner such articles as cannot go
out otherwise. I shall be prepared for every accident - and in case

545

WARS WITH BARBARY POUTERS

of one. -4ncona is my port for a finish, or rather to pick upthe [space]
I shall be r e d y for sea in seven or eight days, finished in toto and if
anything occurs Sooner - had you not better wait a little time I shall want hands, recollect 5. havc but thirty & can make but a
weak defence when divided if by accident I should meet an enemy:
think of this and the property I shall have in charge; it's worth
attention - a few Days wilI make but little difference & surely we
are early enough. 7 write me very particularly & every post let me
know your determination. I shall attend to your observations, and
if things go on Smooth (and no obstacles in the way) certainly shall
follow them in either point I am safe. I must go m company (that's
certain) with the little ones With compliments to our friends and sincere respect & friendship
for you
KB Mr Henzleman heard this day by a Barque that you have had
dBculties - if so tell me: we have none but Ha fears are dive from
it is a
the report - write me particulars - think of Ancona
Roman Port a t War with the Turks & the kind of boats wanted are
built there -we .have bought one with Roman Papers or is Roman
Property a t least.
I can meet you at Ancona (if you please) in a very short time.

-

[KDA. Captain's LR, Vol. 1, 1805.1

127 April 18051
Resolution concerning Reward for March to and Capture of Derne
IN SENATEOF THE UNITEDSTATES.

March 18, 1606.
The following resolutions were submitted for consideration, and
read.

RESOLUTIOKS.

RESOLVED,
by the Senate and House of Representatives of the
United States of America in Congress assembled, That Congress
entertain an high sense of the patriotism, intrepidity, and valor of
William Eaton, late general in chief of the army of the ex-Bashaw of
Tripoli, and of Priestly N. O'_Samon, and George Washington Mann;
three American officers, who with a small number of American marines
and the forces of the ex-Bashaw composed of Greek8 and Arabs,
courageously marched through the Llbyan desert, defeated the
Tripolitan army near Derne, and took that city on the twenty seventh
day of April, eighteen hundred and five, and for the first time spread
the American eagle in Africa, on the ramparts of a Tripolitan fort, and
thereby contributed to release three hundred American prisoners from
bondage in Tripoli.
Resolved, As a further testimony of the gratitude of their country,
the President of the United States be requested to cause to be surreyed
within the limits of the public Imds of the United States now open
for sale, as the said William Eaton shall elect, a township of sir; miles
square to be called Derne, as a. memorial of the conquest of that city
forever; and to cause to be laid out, surveyed, and granted, to the
said William Eaton in one entire tract within said township [space]
thousand acres, and to Priestly N. OIBannon, and George Wash'mg ton
Mann, each [space] thousand acres, and to Arthur Campbell, Bernard

546

NAVAL OPEBATIONS FROM 1804 TO I806

O'Brian, David Thomas, and James Owen, the only surviving marines
who served as volunteers in that expedition, three hundred and twenty
acres each; to be granted to them respectively, their heirs and assigns
forever.
[See letters of 28 and 29 April 1805.1

[LC. EPP, Vol. 17, Jan.-June 1806.1
Extract from journal of William Eaton, U. S. Navy Agent for the Barbary Regencies,
Saturday, 27 April 1806

At K past five in the morning the Argus and Hornet appeared in
sight.
(See my dispatches to Commodore Barron of April 29.)
[H. E. Huntington L&AG, EA 206.1
Extract from journal of Midshipman Charles Morris, Jr., U. S. Navy, on board
U. S. Frigate President, Master Commandant George Cox, U. S. Navy, commanding,
Saturday, 27 Apnl 1805
1 [A. M.]. Cast off the Vessels in tow.
9. Sent the pinnance into the harbour of Malta Latitude Observed 35' 59' N.
[Mrs. C. E. FOXoriginal, S D A photostat.]
To Sir Alexander John Ball, Governor of Malta, from Captain Edward Preble
U. S. Navy

BOSTON
Ap! 28 tQ 1805
DEARSIR I have the honor to acquaint you of my arrival in the

U States and to repeat to you my thanks for your very friendly and
polite attentions while at Malta.
The last letter with which you honored me previous to my leaving
the station was dated the 20tQSept 1804, in answer t o mine enclosing
you a copy of the official letter from my Government notifying me of
my superceedure in the Command of our Squadron; the two letters
I recg from you previous to that were marked Private, and considered
as such by me, but that of the lot@bein in answer t>oa communication of a public nature and not rnark'd $rim& I took the liberty to
permit a friend in our service to peruse, and by his earnest request, to
extract from it for the sattisfaction of a friend of his in Congress a
paragraph considered highly honorable to me, as it was expressive of
your approbation of my Conduct, I however enjoin'd i t upon him to
not allow it go any farther than I s friend, I was therefore astonished
on m arrival to find published in one of our News Papers something
like t e Paragraph in question altho not literally the same, it is true
that your Name is not mentiond as the writer, but in a Marginal note
you are supposed to have been, indeed your character is so deIineated
in the paragraph itself as to justify the supposition.
I am extremely sorry that an extract from any letter with ~c-hich
you hon* me, should have been published without your consent and
without my consent or knowledge, be assured it has given me much
uneasiness. I do not however consider that it can in any way be injurious to you, altho conjecture has made you the author, and shall be
extreme] grieved should it in any way interrupt the harmony and
good un erstanding heretofore subsisting between us.

E

1

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

547

I shall agreable to your wish send out two fishing smacks, they will
be loaded with provisions for our S uadron & will sad in about a month
for Malta, our agent will have or em to discharge and deliver them
to your ExcellCYat the original cost here. I shall again write you by
them.
I enclose you a paper containing the extract in question, and repeat
my regret at its publication.
I beg you to present my respects to Lady Ball,

3

[LC.

EPP, Vol. 14, 1804-1805.1

To Captain Samuel Barron, U. 6. Navy, Malta, from Master Commandant Isaac
Hull, U. 6.Navy

UNITEDSTATES
BRIGA~gus
DERNE28t+April 1805
SIR, I have the honor to inform you, that at 9 0-Clock in the
morning of the 27Q being about 10 Miles to the Eastward of the Town
of Derne, with the Hornet in Company, we discovered the NautiEu~
at Anchor very close to the shore, which led us to suppose that Cap'
Dent had fallen in with M' Eatons Army, as he had been sent in shore
for that purpose the day before. - We made all sail for the ~Vautilus,
and at 3 past 10 spoke her, and was informed by Cap! Dent that he
had, had communication with M' Eaton the night before, and that
he wished to have the field Pieces landed as soon as possible, and
that MI' Eaton intended to make an attack upon Derne as soon as
he could get possession of them, being then about two and a half
miles from the Town, and the Enemy having sent him a chdenge,
hoisted out our Boat to send the field Pieces on shore with such supplies as hfr Eaton was in want of, but on approaching the shore we
found that it was impossible to land the Guns without hauling them
up an almost perpendicular rock Twenty feet above the Boat. But
with the perseverence of the Officer and men sent on this service,
they effected the landing one of them, by hauling them up the steep
Rock. M': Eaton finding that we should loose time in landing the
other, sent it off again informing me that he should march for the
Town as soon as he could possibly mount the field Piece that he had
on shore. gave Lieutenant Evans Orders to stand close in shore, and
cover the Army while they were preparing to march, in case the
Enemy should come out against them, as they had already made
their appearance in large numbers outside of the Town, gave Orders
for the necessary preparations to be made for the attack by Sea upon
the Town and Batteries, and stood down very close to the Town. At 2 P. M. Mr Eaton began the attack by Land, a t same time the
Hornet Lieup Evans Anchored with Springs on his Cables, within
One hundred Yards of the Battery of eight Guns, and commenced a
heavy fire upon it,
The 2\'autilus took her station to the Eastward of the Hornet, a t
K a miles distance from shore, and opened upon the Town $ Battery
The Argus Anchored without, and a little to the Eastward of the
Nautilus, and began firing on the Town and Battery - The fort
kept up a heavy fire for about an hour, after w-hich the shot flying so
thick about them, they abandoned it, and run into the Town and
Gardens back - The Guns of the Vessels were turned on the Beach,
and kept a heavy fire upon the Enemy to clear the way for the few

548

hTATiAL OPERATIOOYSFROM 180-4 TO 1805

.

brave Christians M' Eaton had with him, to enter the fort as they
were gaining ground very fast though a heavy fire of hlusquetry
was constantly kept upon them from behind the Houses and old
Walls near the shore. At about a half past 3 we had the satisfaction
to see Lieu: O.Bannon, and Mr Mann Midshipman of the Argus,
with a few brave fellows with them, enter the fort, h a d down the
Enemys flag, and plant the American Ensign on the Walls of the
Battery, and on turning the Guns of the Battery upon the Town,
they found that thc Enemy bad left then1 in great haste, as they were
found primed and loaded at their hand. TThilst our men mere turning the Guns of the Battery upon the
Town, Hamet Bashaw had taken possission of the back part of it,
which brought the Enemy between two fires, which soon silenced
them, and about four in the Afternoon we had complete possession of
the Town and Fort, sent all our Boats on shore, for the purpose of
carrying Amunition to the Fort, and to bring off the wounded men,
as soon as possible, that they might be dressed. - Mr Eaton gave
the necessary Orders at the Fort, and went into the Town to see
every thing quiet, and to make arrangements for the Towns being
well guarded during the night. At a half past five, he returned 0x1
board to get his mound dressed, having received a hlusquet Ball thro'
his left wrist. - On collecting our men we found one killed and
Thirteen Wounded, a list of which I have the honor to send you.-

HULL
(Signed) ISAAC
John Wilton. a Marine- - _ - - - - - _ - - - _ - - - - - - - - -.- - - - - - - - - - --------Killed
Wiliiam Eaton Esq?- - - - - - - - - - ..----.- - - - - - - .. - - - - - - - - -----------Wounded
.
David Thorns, Marine- - - - - _ _
. - _ _ - - - - ----.
---- --.d?Bernard 0.Brian d ~ - - - - - - - - - - - - - - ~ - . - - - - - - - - -dp
George Emanuel (Greek)- - - - _ - . - - . . _ - . ----------.- - - - - - - - - - - - - - .do
.
Spedo Levedo-----d?-_--------------------------.--.--.-----d?
Bernrtrdo Jamase- - d o - - - - . . - - - - - - - - . - _ . - _ . . . do
Nicholo George---- d?- -._ _.
- - - - - - - - -.- - . - - - - . - - - - . - - - - - - . - - do
George Goree - - - - - d9 - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -dQ- . . .
Cap!
do
Kames unknon-n 3 d?- - - - _ - - _ - _ _
- -- -- -_
- - --.
__-----.
dQ
Angelo Fermoso-Maltee - _ - - - - - - - - - - - -.- - -.
-.
--- --------- -----do
[NDA. Isaac Hull LB, 1803-1806.1
Extract from journal of Midshipman Charles Morris, Jr., U. S. Navy, on board
U. S. Frigate Pnsident, l a s t e r Commandant George Cox, U.S. Navy, commanding,
Sundaq, 28 April 1805

6 [P. M.] Came to anchor in the harbor of Valette in 10 fathoms
water The Prizes anchored in the Quarantine harbour, to the North
of Valette.
[Mrs. C. 33. Fox original, NDA photostat.)
Extractfrom journalof Hezekiah Loomis, Steward, U. S. Navy, in U. S. Brig Vixen,
Master Commandant John Smith, U. S. Navy, commanding, Sunday, 28
April 1805

[Syracuse]Received 119 lbs Fresh Beef. Pleasant weather. I went
this day into the Country, the first thing (except a pleasant country)
worthy of notice is Dionisius's Cave. You ascend upon top of the
ruins. From thence you are, by the help of a rope, lowered down
into the "Cav" (as the Sicilians call it) from thence 150 feet in the

- -

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

549

dark and gloomy cave where the least whisper is heard as distinctly
as though your voice was raised to its common pitch. After satisfying my curiosity in this dreary mansion I departed further t,owards
where the ancients had their theatres and ampitheatres. I here discovered the appearance of a great building, even some of their seats
in the circus are still remainin to this day. I then proceeded to the
catacombs where I was strucpk with wonder and surprise, to enter
under large masses of stone and ruined buildings with streets and
alleys almost as perfect as before it was sunk. After having traveled
about 3 miles under ground we returned. My guide informed me
that he could pass 30 miles in the same passage. How far it extends
toward Etna I could not fine out, but sufficient reason to suppose it
extends very near to the foot of the mountain.
[L. F. Middlebrook.

S D A copy.]

Certificate concerning Isaac Eyre, shipbuilder

PHILADELPHIA
April agthI805
We the Subscribers Ship Carpenters and Master Builders in the
City of Philadelphia being personally acquainted with the Bearrer
Isaac Eyre Jun' who proposess to follow his trade on the Ohio and is
now engaged to build gun boats there for the government do certify
that he Served a regular apprentiship in Philadelphia to John Wilson
and that he is well acquainted with his trade and may be considered
as a master builder having done Business on his own accourit a t
Chester for Some time past witness our hands

A true Copy of the Origonal

JOSEPH
GRICE
JOHNR'ILSON
ISAAC
WHITE
FRAKKLIN
EYRE
GEORGE
EYRE

witness, presant

\VM CONDON
CONDON
JUN~

I am now at Philadelphia on my way to Cumberland river and mean
to Start on tuesday the 3Ot@instant for Pittsburg: from yours &c Is-sxc EYRE
JUN:
mTm OneaI
Sir please to give my respects to
[NDA. hlisc. LB, Vol. 2, 1805.1
To Captain Samuel Barron, U. S. Navy, from Csptain Stephen Decatur, Jr., U. S.
Navy

U. S. SHIP Congress MESSINA
April 20 t* I 806
SIR I arrived here on the 24@ after touching a t Syracuse for the
purpose of obtaini practique
I am happy to in orm you there is no doubt but Mr Ridgley w i l l be
acquitted of the charge-he is still on board the Congress where
the Governor has been good enou h to permit him to remain until the
ship is about departing, when f e will be comfortably lodged in
the Citadel. Mr Broadbents inhence with the Government as well as with the

Ki

550

ATAT7ALOPERATIOLVSFROM 1804 TO 1805

English Consul & merchants here is great, all of which he has exerted
on the present occasion. - from what I have observed I feel i t a
duty to state to you Commodore that had not Mr Broadbent interested himself in the manner he has the decision of the Tribunal would
have been widely different from what t'here is no doubt it will now
be. I have been waiting for a wind to carry me through the straits two
da.ys the moment it comes I shall depart. [Mrs. James S. Banon Col.]
To Captain Samuel Barron, U, S. Navy, from William Eaton, U. S. Navy Agent
for the Barbaq Regencies

DERNEApril 2929th 1805
SIR The information I have the honor to forward of this date,
stating in abstract occurrencies since my last, will not disappoint the
expectations my Calculations then may have formed.
Certain periods of your letter of 22"g TTlto. require a seperate and
distinct answer, This I shall do with candor.
It was understood when Governme[n]t same to a determination to
try the effect of a Co-operatmionwith Hamet Bashaw, against the Enemy, that provision would be made adequate to the experiment Six
field pieces, a thousand stand of Arms with suitable amunition and
Eighty thousand Dollars were asked for by Hrtmet Bashaw while yet
in possession of this province and gaining ground against the Wsurper - the Secretary of the Kavy inform'd me, that the Arms Amunition, & fifty Thousand Dollars would be furnish'd; and they were to
have been put on board at Hampton Roads. White the Squadron
were getting ready for sea, information arrived of the Bashaw having
been driven from his post and retired to Eygpt, I n consequence of
which it is to be presumed, the supplies getting in readiness were u-itlield as the success of the experiment then appeard very doubtfull.
The tu-enty thousand Dollars deposited u-ith the Consul General a t
Algiers, to be applied to this service, cannot be supposed adequate
to the purpose, of bringing the Bashaw- from his exile in Egypt, plating him in a situation to act against a rival possessed of all the resources
of his Kingdom, and of carrying his plan of opperations into Effect,
Whatever may have been the disposition of the people towards him,
the twenty thousand Dollars therefore could have been meant, only
to assist the research of the Bashaw, and the reviral of his affairs, in
case our plan should be thought feasible, Hence I think it is not presuming too far to conclude, that the unlimited discretion vested in
the Commander in Chief, in regard to all the exigencies of the IT-ar,
and particularly as it relates to the object in view, extends to every
matter necessary to its accomplishment. The instructions of the Secretary of the Navy, certainly cannot mean to tie him down to any
limited application, The advantages calculated to result from the
Success of this measure, have been heretofore stated; and thus far,
the experiment has not disappointed those calculations We are in
possession of the most raluable province of Tripoli The high estimation the enemy places on this department of the Kingdom is evidenced by the extraordinary efforts he has used to defend it, and by
the menaces to which he has resorted to deter us from the operations
here; his Camp was only fourteen hours march from the place when

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

551

we seized it by assault. I am this evening inform'd they are retrograding, and only regret that we have not the means of pursuing them.
The expences already incurred in this expedition %dl amount to
nearly thirty thousand Dollars, for thirteen thousand of which we are
indebted to Mess'c Briggs, Brothers, of Alexandria, Eleven thousrtnd
have been received through the hands of Cap. Hull, including his advances and drafts in Egypt - I have disbursed nearly two thousand and
for the residue shall be indebted to individuals. This expence will not
appear extravagant, when i t is consider'd, that it covers all our expenditures in Egypt, where many sacrifices were necessary to pass the
barriers of Turkish jealousy, and avidity in getting the Bashaw through
that Country, of furnishing horses, tents, arms, and amunition, prepatory to our entering the desert - of provisioning a thousand two
hundred souls, and about two hundred horses, in that barren desert
upwards of forty Days, a distance of nearly five hundred miles, and
of Caritvans for transporting those provisions the whole distance from
Alexandria; and also the unavoidable expenditures in presents to
chiefs, and payments to troops in order to gain the one and avail
ourselves of the services of the other MAY lat

The situation in which i t is known Hamet Bashaw was found
in Upper Egypt must of itself suggest the idea, that he must be
destitute of all means of mooving a Military expedition except the
attachment of his subjects. The possession of this Province does not
materially alter that situation. The general failure of the Harvest,
which the whole coast of barbary experienced last Season, together
with the exbraordinary tributes which Jussuf Bashaw has exacted to
support the War, has render'd not only this, but every other part of
Tripoli, poor & oppress'd; wholly destitute of contributing any thing,
very considerable to either of the rival Brothers. This is acircumstance favorable to our measures, if we will go to the expence of
profiting of it - No Chief: whatever may be the attachment of his
followe~,
.can long support Military opperations, without t.he means
of subslsbing and paying his troops, The observation is peculiarly
applicable to the temper and Circumstances of the Arabs of this
Country, who in fact form, its real strength, who are poor, yet avaricious, and who being accustom'd to despotism, are generally !ndiiTerent about the name or person of their despot, provided he imposes
no new burthens, Stronger proof of this cannot be brought, than the
d a c u l t y Jusuf Bashaws Camp has found in recruiting in its progress
from Tripoli. it left there long since with about two hundred Men,
I have this morning intercepted six letters from that Camp, dated
only four days since, sign'd by the Commander in Chief, the Governor
of Bengazi, and an Aid de Camp address'd to the Governor of Derne,
& to several Chiefs or Shieks encouraging them to hope & perseverance & stating that their delay has only been occasioned by e-xpectations of receiving reinforcements from the Arab Tribes. They have
increased their number only three hundred 'bho they have pass'd
through that part of the Country nearest, and most nearly attached
to the Enemy. Hamet Bashaw brought two thousand Arabs into the
field on the 27@ This serves to shew the weight of money with these
eople, and as a pretty good criterion of the ballance of influence
getween the two Bashnws. With the aids contemplated by Govemment to have been furnished Harnet Bashaw, when in the possition

552

ATAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1804

TO

1806

he now holds. I have no doubt, but he may proceed to the Walls of
Tripoli. But while I offer this Opinion, I cannot conceal my apprehensions, grounded on experience, that when arrived there he would
effect little, without more military talent $ firmness, than exists
either in himself or the hordes of Arabs who attach themselves to
him; They are exactly what Volney describes of the Camps of the
Egyptian Beys, rather a rabble than an Army, & in our affair here,
they held safe positions to catch fugitives, until1 the doors of the
Enemy were open'd for plunder, when they became a t once brave,
& impetuous. If therefore the co-operation is to be pursued wit,h him
and 'its direction is to be confided to me, it must be on condition that
detachments of regulars may be occasionally debark'd from the Squadron, or procured elsewhere, to aid and give effect to such operations
as require energy. With the supplies asked for, provisions for our
Christians, and with the firm front of our regular regiment, I belieye
it would not be presuming too far to engage, in conjunction with the
Squadron, to force the enemy to take refugue in a Sanctuary; But
I confess, Sir, there is one discouraging circumstance resulting fron
the declared views, in affording auxiliaries to Hamet Basliau-. These
aids are to withdrawn at any period, when the Enemy shall propose terms of peace, which may be accepted by the Agent of Government on the spot. If Hamet Bashaw is to be used solely as an
instniment, to the attainment of an Object, exclusively to the advantage of the United States, witbout any consideration to his future
emtence and well being. I cannot persuade myself that any bonds
of patriotism dictate to me the duty of having a Chief Agency, nor
indeed any, in so extraordina~a Sacrifice. Certainly the Enemy will
propose terms of Peace with us, the moment he entertains serious
apprehensions of his Brother. This may happen a t any stage of the
War, most likely to rid him of so dangerous a rival, and not only only
Hamet Basbaw, but every one acting with him, must inevitably fall
victims to our economy, If we proceed no farther, it wou'd seem
incumbent on the honor of Government in the event of Peace, at,
least to place Hamet Bashan-, in a situation as ellegible as that from
which he has been drawn; out of the power of an ineens'd and vindictive enemy - Probably Jusuf Bashaw would agree to establish him
in the Government of this province and Bengaza, and to restore to him
his family He may perhaps be made satisfied with such an Accomodation, & the United States experience from it, many of the advantages calculated to result from carrying the original plan into execution, and consistently with both our honor and interest, At all events
I am deeply impress'd with the opinion, that the post we have secured
here, should not be abandoned, nor terms of peace precipitately embraced; Indeed it were to be wished that the effect of the success of
Co-operation might be tried - I t would very probably be a death
blow to the Barbarg System. Any accomodation savoring of relaxness would as probably be death to the Navy, and a wound to the
National honor. If it is determined to proceed, or hold a position
here, further supplies of cash & provisions, must immediately be sent
to the Coast, for reasons which will suggest themselves, from preceeding observations, I t would not be good polic in Hamet Bashaw,
to levy Contributions during the Contest with $is brother, least it
should alineate his friends. On the contrary, he ought to be enabled
to move with a liberal hand. Cash will do much with the inhabitants

WARS TVITIJ BARBARY POWEBS

553

of this Country; even those whom it will not engage to fight, will by
it be engaged not to fight: With it we can pass generally. But if we
here & there find a waU1d town, or a garrison.impert-ious to its influence, cannon balls 8: bayonets come in as irresistable Agents.
The Convention I have enterld into with Hamet Bashaw, may be
usefull, in case he succeeds in getting repossession of his Government;
otherwise it can do no mischief, eTen if ratified, as will appear, by the
precaution in the second article. 1 enclose a copy
It is with much pain I keep a sedentary position to write, this
circumstance with the indulgence I allow myself to expect from your
goodness, will I am persuaded; furnish me an apology for omissions
and inacuracies
It has been deemed expedient by Cap. Hull & the other Commanders
whom I have consulted, and m;).self, that the Argus & L!VautiEusshould
remain here, untiIl these dispatches can receive answers, on account of
the Enemy's Camp being in the Vicinity - I am confident it will
not approach us, but disperse if it bas not already, Should it perceived howe~er,that the coast is to be abandon'd, it would encourage
an effort in the Commanders to gain their post of destination
I have not language to express my sense of gratitude and obligation,
for your exertions in forwarding us supplies; without them we must
haye perished. - With my most cordial wishes for the speedy and
perfect re-establishment of your health, and with the Assurance of
my sincere respect and attachment, I have the honor to be
[NDA. Captain's LB, Vol. 3, 1805.1

(Signed) Wm EATON
-

To Captain Samuel Barron, U. S, Navy, from William Eaton, U. S. l a v y Agent for
the Barbary Regencies

D ERXE A p d 2gt@1805
SIR Oweing to impediments too tedious to detail, but chiefly to
delinquency in our Quarter Masters department, which I had confided
to Richard Farquhar. I did not l e a ~ eAlexandria, 'till the third of
last Month - The host of Arabs w-ho accompanied the Bashaw from
that place, and joined him on the rout, mooring chiefly with their
families & flocks, render'd our progress through the desert slow &
painfull, add to this the ungovernable temper of this maurauding
Malitia, and the frequent fits of despondency, amounting sometimes
to mutiny, occasion'd by information almost erery day meeting us
of formidable re-enforcements from the Enemy, for the defence of this
place, and it will not seem unaccountable, that it was not 'till the
fifteenth instant we arrived a t Bomba, TTe had now been twenty f i ~ e
days without meat, and fifteen without bread, subsisting on Rice Happily the next morning, discover'd the Argus, to urhom I made
Signals by Smoke,which were disco~erdand answered - The Hornet
soon after appeared, Cap. Hull sent off a Boat. I went on board, &
had the honor and inexpressible satisfaction of receiving your communications of 22°C L?to.- The timely supplies that came forward in
these Vessels gave animation to our half famished people; and no time
was lost in moving forward on the morning of the 25th We took post
on an emminence in the rear of Derne, Several chiefs came o u t to meet
the Bashaw with assurances of fealty and attachment; By them I
learn'd, that the City was divided into three departments, two of
which were in the interest of the Basbaw and one in opposition

-

554

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1804 TO 1805

This department 'tho fewest in numbers, was strongest in position &
resources, being defended by a Battery of eight guns - the blind
walls of the houses, which are provided in all directions with loop holes
for Musketry, and b temporary parapets thrown up in several
positions, not covered
the Battery, this department is nearest the
Sea and the residence of the Bey.
On the morning of the 26th terms of Amity were offered the Bey on
condition of allegiance and fidelity, The flag of Truce was sent back to
me with this laconic answer "my head or yours!" At 2 P M discover'd
the Nautilus & spoke her at six, in the morning of the 27tWhe Argus
& Hornet appear'd & stood in. I immediately put the Army in motion
and advanced towards the City, A favorable land breeze enabled the
Nautilus & Hornet, to approach the shore, which is a steep & rugged
declivity of rocks With much d%culty we landed and drew up the
precipice one of the field pieces, both were sent in the boat for the
purpose, but the apprehension of loosing this favorable moment of
attack, induced me to leave one on board. We advanced to our
position, Lieu: Evans stood in and anchoring within one hundred
yards of the battery, opened a well directed fire Lieu$Dent dropped in
and anchor'd in a position to bring his guns to bear upon the Battery
& City, Cap. Commandant Hull brought the Argus to anchor a little
South of the Nautilus so near as to throw her 24 PC Shot quite into the
Town - A detachment of six American Marines, a company of 24
Cannoniers and another of 26 Greeks including their proper Officers,
all under the immediate Command of Lieu! OBannon, together with
a few Arabs on foot, had a position on an emrninence opposite to rt
considerable party of the enemy, who had taken post behind their
temporary parapets and in a ravine a t the S E quarter of the town The Bashaw seized an old Castle which overlook'd the town on the
S. S. W. disposing his Cavalry on the plains in the rear, A little before
2 P M the fire became General in all quarters where Tripolitans and
Americans were opposed to each other, In three quarters of an hour
the Battery was silenced but not abandoned, 'tho most of the enemy
withdrew precipitately from that quarter, and join'd the party opposed
to the handful of Christians with me, which ap eared our most vulnerable point, Unfortunately the fire of our fie d piece was relaxed,
by the rammer being shot away
The fire of the enemy's Musketry became to warm, and continually
augmenting, Our troops were thrown into confusion, and undiciplined as they were, it was impossible to reduce them to order, I
perceived a charge - our dernier and only resort, We rushed forward
against a host of Savages, more than ten to our one. They fled from
their Coverts, irregularly, firing in retreat from every Palm tree, and
partition wall in their way, At this moment I recd a Ball through my
left wrist, which deprived me of the use of the hand and of course of
my Rifle, - Mr OBannon, accompanied by M' Mann of Annopolis
urged forward with his Marines, Greeks, and such of the cannoniers
as were not necessary to the management of the field Piece, pass'd
through a shower of Musketry from the Walls of houses, took possession of the Battery, planted the American Flag upon 'its ramparts,
and turn'd 'its guns upon the Enemy, who being now driven from
their Out Posts fired only from their houses, from which they were
soon dislodged by the whole fire of the Vessels, which was suspended
during the charge being directed into them, the [Hamet] Bashaw soon

gY

P

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

555
-

got possession of the Bey's Pallace; his Cavalry flank'd the flying
enemy, and a little after four OClock, we had compleat possession
of the Town The Action lasted about two hours & a half The Bey
took refuge, first in a Mosque & then in a Hiram the most sacred of
Sanctuaries, among the Turks, and is still there, But we shall find
means to draw him thence - As he is the third man in Rank in the
Kingdom, he may perhaps be used in exchange for Captain Bainbridge. I have fixed my post in the Battery, raised parapets and mounted
Guns towards the Country, to be prepar'd against all events, 'tho I
have no serious apprehensions of a Counter revolution, The moment
of gaining Derne has been peculiarly fortunate, as the Camp, which
long since left Tripolifor 'its defence were within two days, fourteen
hours march, the day of our Attack; of which we had information in
the morning and from which circumstance, it was with much dSculty
I could prevail on the Bashaws Army to advance to the City, & to
obey my dispositions - The Camp will probably take up a retrograde march Of the few Christians who fought on shore I lost fourteen Killed and
Wounded, three of whom are Marines, one dead and another dying,
the rest chiefly Greeks, who, in this little affair well supported their
ancient character
I t would be going out of my sphere to comment on the conduct of
Naval Commanders, yet I should do violence to my own sense of duty
& obligations were I not to observe, they coul'd not have taken better
positions for their Vessels nor managed their fire with more skill and
advantage.
The detail I have given of M' OBannons conduct, needs no enconiurn,
and it is believed the disposition our Government has always discover'd
to encourage merit, will be extended to this intrepid, judicious and
enterprising Officer M' Manns conduct is equally meritorius.
I am bound also by a sense of well merited esteem, to mention to
your particular patronage, a young English GentIeman, Mr. Farquhar,
who has Volunteer'd in our expedition through the desert, and has
in all cases of di£Eculty, exhibited a firmness and attachment, well
deserving my Gratitude, If compatible with our Establishments, I
request you will ensure him a Lieutenancy in the Marine Corps
EATON
(Signed) WILLIAM
[NDA.

Captain's LB, Vol. 3, 1805.1

To Captain Samuel Barron, U. S. Navy, from Master Commandant Isaac Hull,
U. S. Navy

UNITEDSTATES
BRIGArgus
DERKE29'h April 1806
SIR, From the best information I can gain since having possession
of this place, I find that the former Bey of Derne, has yet a party in
the Town of about one third of the inhabitants, many of which, are
men of influence, which makes it necessary to keep a good look out for
them - Consequently have thought proper to detain the Nautilus
a few days lon er, and send the Hornet into Port, her Guns being disabled by the P ank Shears giving way, and being aware of your intention of fitting her for a Bomb Vessel this Summer, lead me to believe
that you are anxious for her arrival, to commence her repairs. - Cap$

f!

556

NAVAX OPERATIONS FROM 1804 TO 1805

Dent has from three to four weeks Provision on board, and theArgus
has Provision for about the same time, which I hope will enable us to
keep the Station until I hear from you, as I think it will not 'be safe
to leave this place in the hands of the few Christians that we have
with us, Yet I should be under no apprehensions for them if the
meather will allow us to keep in sight of the land & call into the harbour every two or three days, as they are very much affraid of M'
Eatons great Guns, which are pointed on the Town, and are well
convinced, what ours from Sea can do, by the sample they received
on the 27t@Should you think proper to keep possession of this place, until
you are made acquainted with the effect that our having it will have
on the Bashaw of Tripoli, it may be easily donewith supplies sufficient
for the support of the few Christians that have the fort, and a Vessel
kept cruizing off the Town, but I am clearly of opinion that three or
four hundred Christians, with additional supplies will be necessary to
pursue the expedit'ion to Bengaze and Tripoli - I presume Mr
Eaton will write you fully on this subject, and inform you what provisions are necessary for the expedition - Should you think proper to
have it pursued - I send you a copy of the principal occurrencieu,
and remarlcs, that has happened since we left Malta, by which you
will be informed of the many difficulties we have been obliged to
encounter in search of the Army, and in following them to this place. Your Letter to Messr@Briggs I have opened to take a copy of to
forward to them, in hopes that an oppertunity would offer, from this
place, but have not as yet been able to send it forward - I have
not seen Mr Eatons communications to you, but presume that he has
informed you of the sum they are in advance for the United States,
which I h d to be much more than when I left Alexandria. (Signed) ISAAC
HULL
[WDA. Isaac Hull LB, 1803-1806.1
To Captain Samuel Barron. U. S. Navy, from Secretary of the Navy

-

NAVD E P90
~ April 1805.
Two Bomb Vessels now equipping under the direction of Commr"
Preble at Boston will leave this Country about the 1 June next and
join you as early as may be practicable. (By the J. Adams. Copy by gun boat N? 4 -)
[NDA. LB, 1794-1807.)
To Secretary of the Navy from Lieutenant Samuel Elbert, U. S. Navy

CHARLESTON
April SOt@1805

SIR I received yours of the 17 Instant and be assured that no
tine shall be lost in getting the Boat ready for sea. I have already
entered ten Seaman - If I cannot enter more before the first of May,
tomorrow, I shall take three Men out of N Q1 - which will be enough
whith the ten I have got to work her across the Atlantic
Lieut. Fanning gave me up the Command Yesterda . - I shall

get my provission on Board tomorrow Morning 61 s a J i n the afternoon if the Weather is favourable [NDA. Misc. LB, Vol. 2, 1805.1

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

557

To Lieutenant Samuel Evans, U. S. Navy, U. S. Sloop Hornet, from Master Commandant Isaac Hull,U. S. Navy

UNITED
STATES
BRIGArgus
DERNE
SOt@April 1805
SIR, On receipt of this you will get under way with the United
States Sloop Hornet under your command, and proceed with all
possible expedition to hfalta, and report yourself to the Commodore You will take with you the Tripolitnns Prisoners taken in the Latteen Boat bound to Bengaize, and deliver them to the Commodores
Order, should he be at Malta, but should he have left there, you
will inform yourself where he is, and loose no time in communicating
to him, your arrival, and give him every informatlon in your power
of our affairs in this place. - Your departure from this being so
sudden, prevents my writing so fully to him as I could have wished,
but the perfect knowledge you have of every transaction, since we
left Malta will enable you to give him correct information concerning our operations on this coast and of our present situation here. [NDA. Isaac Hull LB, 1803-1806.1

-

To Timothy Mountford, Algiers, from Tobias Lear, U. S. Consul General, Algiers

MALTAApril SOt@ 1805
MY DEAR SIR I have now before me your several letters of the
24th of October and 16 of December 1804, and of the l l t @
of Feb?
and 15th & 23d of March, and assure you that I feel the highest
satisfaction at the full information contained in them
My absence from Algiers has been very far beyond any thing I
could have calculated upon when I left that place, and not a single
direct opportunity of writing to you has offered untill the present. I am much pleased to find the Continuance of a good disposition
towards the U. S. in the Dey and Govt of Algiers I was fully impressed
with the good grounds on which we stood when I left that place,
and had the best Confidence in a Continuance of their friendship;
in which I am happy in not finding myself disappointed. - The
Expressions of regard and friendship expressed by His Excellency
and the Great Officers, must be reciprocated with Cordiality - The
Conduct of Segnor Juan has surprized me and mortified me hluch,
as I had conceived u high opinion of his correctness of conduct and
beleived that the treatment which he had experienced from me would
have restrained him from doing any thing which might be likely to
bring me into difficulty. - The attachment of the Drogerman &
Sidi Alli, and their attentive Conduct will not be fergotten on my
return; and those of the Servants who Continue to behave well will
find their reward. - I am pleased to learn that B & B [Bacri and
Rusnah?], continue their attentions, and I am fully convinced they
will find it their interest to pursue the same line of conduct. The
arrival of the Regalia Ship, William & Mary, must shew the Dey
that we are attentive to our engagements; altho the Cargo was not
exactly such as might have been wanting. - Your answe1 to the
request for building a 74 Gun Ship was highl? prudent and proper. I approve very much of your conduct towards Capt? Keets and those
with him, when they came to settle their affairs with the Regency. I have received a letter from Lord Nelson expressive of his sense
of such Conduct, and his particular thanks ttoyou. - I shall enclose

558

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1804 TO 1805

you a Certificate to act as a Charge d'Affaires of the U. S. during my
absence, and send the Consular Seal, in the fullest confidence, of the
Prudence and propriety of your Conduct during my absence. - I
am exceedingly sorry that any disagreement has taken Place between
yourself and the Sweedish Consul; but shall forbear any animadversion
on the subject untill I have the pleasure of seeing you. - You will
be pleased to make my best respects and Congratulations to His
Excellency the Dey on his escape from the late outrageous and
wicked attack made on him. Tell him I pray God to preserve him
many years. - Having now adverted to the several subjects mentioned in your letters, I have to inform you that you receive this
letter by the Imperial Polacre ship Premura, Capt? Bartolomew
Smucheriech, which I have chartered and loaded with Wheat for
Algiers, as you will see by the enclosed, Charter Party, Invoice and
Bills of Lading. - There are on board this Ship fourteen hundred
salms of wheat, each Salm making eight bushels & more of English
measure; besides two Bales of Mocho coffee of 300 and odd pounds
english each and 3 barrels of loaf Sugar, Containing 500 IbF together &
50 stone flower pots with some other small articles which will be
mentioned in the Poscript of this letter or in another.
I have made this Shipment in consequence of your advice in your
letter of the 15th of March, that wheat was @ 6 dollars per measure,
in Order to place a sum of Money in Algiers, on account of the United
States, to pay our annuity in Cash, if it can be done, up to the 25*
of March 1805, which was the day on which our annuity became due
from our last settlement. - The advantages of making a payment
in Cash are to obvious to need a comment, and altho' our annuity
by Treaty is Stated at 21,600 dollars or 12,000 Sequins et by sending
stores it amounts to more than double that Sum; anc r if we can by
paying 30,000 dollars in cash, settle an Annuity we must be great
gainers. - This Cargo Costs here upwards of 34 dollars, with
Charges; as you will see by the Invoice &p - The Scudo of Malta
being 21 - and the dollar 5,' - You will have enclosed a letter to
Messr@Bacri & Busnach consigning this Cargo at least the Wheat, to
them, if they should stand on the high ground which I presume they
do from your letters, and from the Situation in which I left them. The Sugar & Coffee, together with that sent from Gibraltar, will put
a large [supply?]in your hands. Some of it must be used occasionally
to keep up a good understanding with certain persons, and I trust
to your Prudence and good judgement to have such distributions as
are necessary made with Proper economy, at the same time that they
ma be Serviceable to our Country.
l s this Cargo is very valuable I have judged it proper to send a
Supercargo with it, to attend to the delivery, the same person who
has seen it put on board. His Name is Luigi Paduani and is reccomended to me by M: Higgens (who you will see has procured and
ships the Cargo for me) as a very honest, sober, and intelligent man.
You will see by a translation of the agreement with him, enclosed,
that he will live at my house untill an opportv may offer for him to
return to this place, and I hope you will find him an agreeable inmate. I have a double view in sending this Cargo of Wheat to Algiers,
The first is to place money there to pay an annuity, if it can be done
in Cash, and to convince the Dey of our readiness to meet our engagements punctually; and the Other, that as wheat is so necessary an

WARS WITH BARBRRY POWERS

559

Article, and so very scarce it might have a good effect to shew that
we are attentive to give that facility to such indispensible wants, as
will prove our Friendship in a double Point of view; at the same time
there is no doubt of its making R, handsome Profit, as it is of a very
Superior Quality, and in the Very best order. Let these impressions
be made in the fullest manner. There are two Packages of letters & Papers for the British Consul,
put into my hands by Sir Alexander Ball, which I beg you will deliver
to him, with my best Compliments, and expressions of the pleasure
which Mr? Lear & m self promise ourselves from having him in our
neighbourhood. - $here is also a Package for Ma Norderling of some
things which she requested Mr? Lear to purchase for her here, and a
letter for her enclosed. The amount of the Articles [ space ] dollars
MImear has sent to her, which you may receive, if offered, but do
not wish to demand it, as it may stand till we return.
I shall give you a short history of our Voyage &: and a Statement
of our situation with respect to Tripoli. - We had a pleasant passage from Algiers to the Coast of Tripoli, where we first heared of the
Attacks made by Commodore Preble, who had then left that Station
with the force under his Command, We found there the U.S. Frigate
President Commodore Sam! Barron, and the Constellation CaptQ
Campbell. As the Operations, against Tripoli for this season were
given up, and no prospect of opening an immediate Negotiation, we
went on board the Commodore, who was going to Syracuse, and sailed
for that place, where we remained about ten days and then came over
here, where we have been stationary ever since, excepting a short trip
which I made to Syracuse in Jan? last to see Commodore Barron who
was very ill, and who returned hither with me. - we have met with
every attention here that we could wish, and have passed our time
very agreeably; but my anxiety to return to Algiers, and for the ill
Health of Commodore B. ever Since we first met him has been great.
But I did not think it proper for me to return to Algiers untill I should
have been able to effect the Object of my mission; or put it beyond
an expectation of doing so. Thus has the Winter passed on without
effecting anything, as the Communications from Tripoli, Gave no
hope of a d'esprit on the part of the Bashaw to make peace on admissable terms. Lately there seems to be a Change in his Sentiments,
as he finds the Season for Active Operations Approaching, and knows
our force to be considerable, and our determination Strong to act on
the Offensive against him; I am therefore in hopes that a few weeks
will decide the matter, whether we shall settle our differences by negotiation; or try the effect of our Cannon. I n either case, I presume I
shall be able to depart for Algiers in the course of two months. I n the
mean time, I trust that every thing will remain quiet and friendly in
that uarter; and especially as i t is possible we may have a rupture
with unis, the Bey of which has been long Speaking in a threatening
sent in here a few days ago a Cruizer of
tone, and as Capt-odgers
eight guns who calls himself a Tunesian, and was going with two Italian Vessels, his prizes, into Tripoli, then blockaded by our Ships. If
the Bey is serious in his tjhlreats, he will not fail to put them now in
execution, unless he is deterred by the Napoletan Squadron, which is
said to be in his Bay, This information i s for yourself alone.
As your commumcation is again open with Europe, I presume it is
unnecessary to say that the French Fleet have got out of Toulon, and

8

560

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 180.4 TO 1805

passed the Straits, followed by Lord Nelson, of whom they had the
advantage of 3 or 4 days. Their destination & object is unknown here
You will observe that the Capt? of the Polacre has 35 running days
to take in and deliver his Cargo, after which he allows ten days demurage at 10 dolls per day. The time of his delay here will be noted on
the back of the Charter party, which I presume will not exceed 10. or
i 2 , which will allow him 23 or 25 for discharging without encroaching
upon his ten days of demurage. - The ship will not return here as
she is chartered for another Voyage, as the Capt? can shew by his
Charter party
I have not received a line from the U. S. since I left Algiers, neither
has the Commodore had any official advices from thence. Mp Lear has but indifferent health since she has been here; but I
flatter myself that the settled weather which we may now expect, and
the sea air, will restore to her again that invaluable blessing, She sends
her best regards to you, and says.it is unnecessary to desire you to
take care of all our things, as she IS sure it will be done, and that an
attention to airing such as may be injured by laying will not be omitted. - Mr Henly is in good health, and desired his best regards, when
we last saw him. - He is now on the Coast of Tripoli in the Frigate
Constitution, CaptWodgers, of which ship he is second Lieu! and bids
fair to be an honor to his Country & friends as an attentive Active, and
enterprizing Officer. - Capt: S. Decateur Commands the Congress.Our Small Vessels are now all out; but as soon as one can be spared,
I shall request her to be sent to Algiers to see how matters stand there,
and bring letters from you & $ I shall write a few lines to the Sweedish Consul if I have time, if
not present my best regards &F to him as also to the French, Spanish,
Danish and Dutch Consuls and their respective families in which &I*
Lear unites with me, also to M &- Mce Ferarea to D' R,lartiningo, to
Mess'".
& B. say all Complaisant things. To the Drogennan, Sidi
,Ui, Francisco and all the Others of our family let us be remembered.I must impress upon you the necessii y of great caution & .circumspection in all your Conduct, which I am persuaded I shall have cause
to approve
Wishing you the enjoyment of health and every Blessing

-

[Stephen Decatur Col. NDA photostat, Book A.]
[Enclosure]

130 April 18051
To all whom it may Concern
WHEREAS
my Absence from the Regency of Algiers, On the business
of the United States of America, may make it necessary to have some
person there Charged with the Affairs of those States, I do hereby
Authorize and appoint Timothy Mountford, my Secretary in Algiers,
Charg6 dlAffairs of the United States of America in the said Regency
of Algiers, during my absence from thence; or untill this said power
may be revoked or otherwise annulled
Given under my hand & seal at the City of La Valetta
(SEAL) in the Island of Malta this thirtieth day of April, one
thousand eight hundred & five (Signed) TOBIAS
LEAR,
Consul Gen! of the U States
of America at Algiers &F

-

[Stephen Decatur Col. NDA photostat, Book A.]

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

561

To Bacri & Busnah, Algiers, from Tobias Lear, U. S. Consul General, Algiers

MALTA,
April SOt@1805
GENTLEMENI have sent to Algiers the Imperial Polacre Ship

Premura, Capt? Bartolomeo Smucheriech, with a Cargo of the best
hard wheat, consisting of fourteen hundred Salms of hlalta, which
I have Consigned to your address, to be sold to the best advantage. The Charter Party, Invoice and Bills of Lading, you will receive from
hiIr Mountford. Having heared that Wheat was very scarce at Algiers I have been
induced to send this Cargo, in Order to place there a Sum of Money
to pay one years Annuity from the United States of America to His
Excellency the Dey and the Regency of Algiers if he should be disposed to receive an Annuity in Cash to the Amount of 30,000 dollars. I send Tilrheath in preference to money, to Shew our disposition
to supply that necessary Article where it is so much wanted. - I
hope it will turn to good Account - Our Annuity was settled up to
the 25 day of March 1804, and we have sent one Cargo since, the
amount of which I do not yet know. If the balance up to March
1805, can be paid in Cash I shall be much pleased, as it will convince
the Dey of our wish to be punctual in our payments, when the distance from our Country is so great as to make the Arrival of Cargoes
from thence very uncertain.- If a payment can be made in Cash you
will hold the balance of the proceeds of this Cargo subject,to my orders.
If Cash will not be received, you will be pleased to hold the whole of
the proceeds, after paying the freight, subject to like Orders. There
is a Supercargo named Luigi Paduanai who goes in this Vessel. He
saw the Cargo put on board, and will attend to its delivery I have been much longer from Algiers than I expected, as I did not
find an opportunity of negotiating with the Bashaw of Tripoli upon
terms which were likely to bring about a peace. -The[rej is now a
prospect of coming to terms, which if effected, will enable me to return
very soon to Algiers, where I wish much to be.
I have heared of the attack made on the life of his Excellency the
Dey of Algiers, which I am happy to find did not take the effect
intended. - I salute him on his escape and wish him many happy
years. [Stephen Decatur Col. ?IDA photostat, Book A,.]

TOthe Swedish Consul, Algiers, from Tobias Leor, U. 8. Consul General, Algiers

MALTA,A p d SOtQ1805
The Honb'Wonsul NORDERLING
DEARSIR This is the first direct Opportunity which I have had
of Writing to Algiers since I left that place, and I do not fail of embracing it to inform you of the Welfare of M r G e a r and myself, and to
express our wishes that you, your good Lady and Children may enjoy
every blessing. Our passage from Algiers to Sicily and this place was very pleasant
and we have had every reason to be pleased with our residence here,
and the attention which we have received. - Notwithstanding
which, we still wish to be again a t Algiers, considering that as our
home for some time at least. - we have been absent much longer
than we expected, as no occasion has yet offered of terminating the

