NAVAL OPERATIONS
FROM MAY 1805 THROUGH 1807

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS
To Captain John Bodgera, U. 6. Navy, commanding U. 6. m a t e Com~tulimfrom
Tobias Lear, U. S. Consul General, Algiers
MALTAMay Irt 1806
DEARSIR On the 219' Ultmo, I had the pleasure of recieving your acceptable
favour of the 184 by the U. S. Brig Siren. - The Letter from M? Nissen to Commodore Barron was indicative of the wish for Peace on the part of the Bashaw of
Tripoli; but did not convey an intimation of any terms which we could admit.
Since that I have received b the Ketch, a letter from the Spanish Consul written
a t the espress desire of the Sashaw, saying that he proposed sa the Ground Work
of a negociation, that we should pay him 200,000 dollars for peace and ransom,
and give up all his subjects in our hands, gratis, with all their property. - This
is the first direct overture which has been officially made, & altho much less
extravagant than I should have expected; yet is totally inadmissable - The
Spanish Consul observes that these propositions are mentioned merely to begin
a negociation, and he has no doubt but if I would go over to Tripoli there would
be such modifications and facilities as would secure a Peace &Q - The ground
work however must be very different from this, before I can think of raising a
superstructure; unless imperious necessity should compel an acquiesciance, which
I pray God may not be the caae I am perfectly convinced that they wish a peace, and nothing but the example
it would set to other Nations tributary to them, prevents their comeing forward
with terms which we could admit.
I see no prospect of all our force being concentrated and ready to act against
Tripoli sooner than the begining or middle of June; so that I must regret that you
will not have your just and sanguine wishes accomplished of seeing us ready to
make an attack before that time. - The Congress has gone to Messina, and from
thence to Leghorn, from whence, in all probability, she will not return before the
Latter part of this Month. - The Constellation & Vizen are a t Syracuse, but
expected here daily - The Essez was a t Triest on the 16tb Ulto, and may be
expected here, with the Schooner Enterprize in ten Days; but that is uncertain;
and the prospect of Gun Boats or Bomb Vessels from that quarter very slight
indeed. - The Commodores health is nearly the same as when you left us, and
there does not a pear any pros ct of his being able to take an active part in the
Cam aign. - %he Argus & 8%ilw, with the Sloop Hornet are aloft. We have
hear$ from MI Eaton by a Man of the name of Faquier, who i t seems went with
him, from this place, and who has returned to Syracuse, having quarrelled with
Mr Eaton, and left him. He writes to the Commodore, that Mf E. is a madman that he has quarrelled with the Ex-Bashaw &p $ 9 &?, we are in daily expectation
of more authentic accounts from that quarter; but I make no calculation in our
favour from that source. The Cruizer which you sent in here with her prizes still remain here, and I do
not know what will be the determination r
cting them. I presume the Commodore will m i t e to you on the subject. - T t h e Beg of T u m ia determined to
break with us he may make this a pretext. But while he must be made to know
that we will not permit his Vessels to violate the Blockade of Tripoli with i r n p e t y ;
yet we must temporize with him, a t least until we can guard our Commerce agcunst
his numerous Cruizers, and make some arrangement for checking him, without
lnterupting our intended operations against Tripoli. Mp Lear mnds you four Shirts which have been made since you left this; and

1

2

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1806 TO 1807

desires her best regards to be given you. - I hope soon to have the pleasure of
seeing you here, and pray that all happiness and prosperity may attend you.
P. S. I am just informed of the Congress being about to Sail which prevents
my taking a Copy of the foregoing. A Letter of the 21et Apl has this moment
been put into my hands from M. Davis, who says it is reported that Acmet
Bashaw has taken possession of Derna. [LC. JRP, Letters & Orders, Book A, 1804-1805.1

-

To Captain John Rodgers, U. S. Navy, commanding U. S. Frigate Conslitulion, from
Captain Samuel Barron, U. S. Navy
MALTAl ? C Afay 1805.
SIR By the President which w i v e d here with the three Prizes on the Evening
of the 27th ult?, I had the honor to receive your Letter dated 24% informing me
of the detention of those Vessels in an attempt to enter Tripoli - They are
not in the 409 Harbour, and t.he people on shore a t the Lazaretto - The Ries
who commanded the Corsair has been recognized here as a Tunisian subject, but
the two setts of Papers neither of ~ h i c his accurate in describing the Vessel,
added to other circumstances, create a strong suspicion that she is in fact a T r i p
oline - Steps will be taken to investigate the matter, but a t any rate so
palpable an attempt to violate the blockade cannot be overlooked and has determined me to detain them for adjudication - I have directed Captw Cox to
proceed off the Harbour of Tripoli & on falling in -4th the Constitution to place
himself under your Orders - I look hourly for the Consteuation 8: Vixen, which
on their arrival I shall immediately dispatch to the Station - On both or either
of them joining the Blockade you will please give the necessary dispositions to the
Senior officer and return to this Harbour, as I am desirous of some personal communication with you - hly health I am happy to say has greatly improved
within a few days - My strength begins to return & I have sanguine hopes that I
shall be able to appear personally before Tripoli as soon as the season is suEciently
advanced for entering uppon offensive Operation. Yesterday I had the satisfaction to receive a Letter from Capts James Barron
dated at Trieste where he arrived in safety in 15 Days - 1 have reason to
expect either the
or Enterprize, in the course of a DTeek or ten Days Capts Barron was in treaty for some Craft which he says nil1 answer very well for
for Gun Boats. [LC. JRP, Letters & Orders, Book A, 1804-1805.1
To Captain James Barron, U. S. Kavy, commanding 0.6. S. &a, Trieste, from
Master Commandant Thomas Robinson, Jr., U. S. Ravy, commanding U. 6.
Schooner Ednprfze.
VENICEMay 1" 1805
DfSIR Yours of the 24 is before me, I am sorrv for the [space] you have met
with, but it will be for the best if you receive m i letter of the 28t4 U l t ~which
advises Ancona, I have since then had some serious talk with our friend the Mayor
he knows Ancona well 8: candidly says that it is the place for our business; and
further that we can get what Boats we want there & them Completely fitted for
our purpose it is their and in that neighbourhood those Boats are built; and he
says that if the place is as it was two years ago, we will be pleased with the Wood
& Work. He has a friend there whom he says that he can recommend, and that we
can get every kind of timber there we want and see the Work done to our minds
above board. M? Heinzleman has bought one Barque, and was just on the close
of another when your letter came to hand - we have stopped until next Post;
however, it certainly will be improper to stop for this vessel and all the prepara
tions I have made for two will be a loss to the United States. I take this on board
the Schooner to morrow, come out of the Arsenal on Sunday, and as soon as the
Barque business is arranged; am off for Tried & do not mean to drive a nail in
the Barques here - i t is too great a risque, when it can be done so well and easy
a t Ancona, The Mayor advises this, therefore let Mr Riggens order Mr Henzleman
to send those vessels ta a friend a t Ancona, there to receive the orders of MT
Riggins and then Mr Riggins to send me orders to receive them there, or rather
to be delivered to my order as I shall in this case send an officer to take charge of
them. This mode
Henzleman thinks will keep all parties out of a scrape

-

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

3

Don't let the small difEculties we have met with discourage you; we must have
boats; therefore let us persevere in obtaining them i t is easily done by the mode
prescribed: we did not come here to Convoy a more important cause for our
Country, and the reputation of your good Brother arrest our time - only reflect
one moment on the Consequences attending an inactive Summer, and how are
we to be active with a probability of success without some Boats, Ancona, (the
Mayor says) is a very fine harbour, of easy access, and safe for the largest Ships,every thing plenty we want and but a few hours run from [space] and you
can, without being shy, attain all you want. Don't, for God's sake,
without Boats, let us take a little terrible fleet with us. i t will give life r z z r
to all our opperations. And on the Contrary, if you do not, your purposes here
are defeated, and dejection & discontent are the natural consequences. Thiik
for a moment the effect it will have on the Commodore if you succeed - it will
enliven him; if you do not there is no doubt but i t will have a serious effect on
his present state of health.
Please to excuse my presuming to dictate it is owing to the ever anxiety I have
for the success of our enterprises the ensuing Summer & having made enquiries of
eeveral Gentlemen of information I have obtained, with respect to Ancona all
that you have read.
[NDA. Captain's LB, Vol. 1, 1805.1
To Master Commandant Charles Stewart, U. S. Navy, from William Jarvis, U. S.
Consul, Lisbon, Portugal
COPY
LISBONIs( May 1806
SIR About ten days since the Moorish Admiral's ship was Compleated for
Sea - The Brig is likewise ready and both only waiting for Orders - Some dispute however exists between the Admiral and this Government in Consequence
of the former refusing to give up Five Algerine slaves that ranaway from the
Arsenal and got onboard, untill he receives orders from the Emperor It is doubtfull however whether the Vessel would be detained on this account had the
Amiral orders to proceed to Sea
As far as any opinion can be formed from appearances or from any facts that
have come to my Knowledge, I cannot believe that these people have any idea a t
present of a War with the United States or as formerly observed, that there will
be any danger from them untill they make a peace with the Prussians, if then, for
in justice to our Marine I must observe that I really believe that they stand
more in dread of us than of any other Maritime power except Great Britain and
if a great stroke is struck this Season I think it will will Secure to us a permanent
Peace with the Barbary Powers; but for the present Prudence may dictate that
some Watch may be kept on their Motions The Prussian Charge des Affaires does not know of any propositions of Peace
being yet made between his Court and the Emperor's Commissioners Captain Sterrett sailed from here (where he arrived after being taken off the
wreck of the Canton) for the United States about three weeks since - No News
yet as to the probable destination of the Toulon & Cadiz Squadrons
P. S. This is a Copy of a letter I have written this Day to the Commodore,
which containing all the information in my possession, I took the Liberty to give
it in the same words [LC. JRP, Vol. 1, March 1791-Dec. 1814.1
To Sailing Master Alexander C. Harrison, U. 6.Navy, commanding Gunboat No. 5,
from Secretary of the Navy
NAV D E P ~1 May 1806. Gun boat NP 10 Commanded by Lieut S[eth]. Cartee sailed yesterday evcning for Norfolk to join Lieul Henley who is waiting for him a t that place. I flatter myself that you may have sailed before this reaches you, if not you
will make every possible exertion to join N P4 and 10 in time to sail together as
they are directed not to wait for you more than 48 hours. [NDA. Off. Comg. Gunboats, 1803-1808.1

NAVAI, OPEBATI0VS FROM 1805 TO 1807
[l May 18051
List of Cannoniers presumably attached to Expedition of William Eaton, U. a.
Bavy Agent for the Barbary Regencies
Stato Cannonieri
I

Kome - Cognomc

Selim SMr Capno
Maumet &IS [?] 1 Tent?
Rocco Mr [?I 2 Tente
4 Antonio Barloti6 SIB
5 Magnan Sargente
6 Giorgio Caroffalla Sargle
7 Giuseppe Galeazzi
8 Giacomo Vale
9 Anzolo Farmosa
10 Vincenzo Stenix
11 Bortolo Bianchi
12 Picola DardelIi
13 Pietro Robert
14 Antonofi Stratti
15 Bernardo Somarilli
16 Angelo Arcavani
17 Unscilli Panagiotti
18 Francesco Bisson
19 Giovanni Bosbor
20 Lucca Malencig
21 Giorgio Gogs
22 Spiro Voeovix
23 Michele Cheles
24 Bsttista German
25 Nicola Aidomi
26 Andre Coff
27 Giovanni Rsguseo
Giorgio Marisna
[H. E. Huntington U A G . EA 304.1

1
2
3

Carry him to the Greeks

I
I

Extract from journal of William Eaton, U.S. Navy Agent for the Barbary Regencies,
Wednesday, 1 May 1805
h dispatches [Derne] The sloop Hornet went off ~ 3 those
[H. E. Huntington U A G . 1
To Captain Samuel Barron, U. 6. Ravy, from Brigge Brothers, Alexandria, Egypt
EGYPT,
ALEXANDRIA
2 May 1805
SIR! We have the honor to transmit you s Copy of the Letter we had the
pleasure to address you on the 11 March. We have had no American Vessel
here since the Argus Ieft us, - but are in daily expectation of One, with the
Funds we advanced t o Mr Eaton for tlhe service of the United States. We have
not heard from that gent^ since the 19 March, when he was about 4 days distance from Bomba, and where we have no doubt he will have found a Division
of your Naval Force to cooperate with him. With our best wishes for the successful termination of the War with Tripoiy, we remain most respectfully Sir
[Mrs. James S. Barron Cot. NDA photostat.]
Extract from journal of William Eaton, U. 6. Navy Agent for the Barbary Regencies,
Thureday, 2 May 1805
IDerne] Examined the different sites in the vicinity of the town. Used
exertions to draw the Governor from his sanctuary. - The Hiram in which he

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

5

had taken asylum appertained to a Shiek of Mesreat, one of the departments of
the city in the interest of The Bashaw. - Neither persuasion, bribes nor m e m e ,
could prevail on this venerable aged chief to permit the hospitality of his house
to be violated. - He urged that whatever may be the weakness or even the
crimes of the Arabs there was never an instance known among them of giving
up a fugitive to whom they had once accorded their protection; - and should
he suffer him self to transgress that sacred principle, the vengeance of God and
the odium of all mankind would justly fix on him and his posterity.
[H. E. Huntington MAG.]
Extract from journal of Midshipman Charles Morris, Jr., U. 6. Navy, on board
U. S. Frigate Presided. Master Commandant George Cox, U. S. Bavy, commanding,
Thursday, 2 May 1806
Malta] 2. Sent. the Tunisians which were taken in the prizes to the h s a retto. and brought our men from the prizes relieved the officers on board them
by sending others in their stead - hlr Smith, Geddes, & LeCraft Mid? joined
the Ship 18 Men unfit for duty [Mrs. C. E. For original, NDA photostat.]
Extract from journal of Surgeon Jonathan Cowdery, U. 6. Navy, 3 May 1805
[Tripoli] The Bashaw and suit went very early this morning to the great
Marabewt, of whom some particulars have been before mentioned. He was to
continue with the Bashaw during the contention with the Americans. He now
assured the Bashaw that the American frigates would be destroyed; and that
the gunpowder of the whole squadron u-ould be so damaged, that the Americans
would not be able to fire a gun. He agreed to attend the Bashaw, to keep the
balls and shells from hurting him. He receives large sums of money from the
Bashaw.
[LC. Rare Books, American Captives in Tripoli or Dr. Cowdery's Journal,
Boston, 1806.1
Extract from journal of William Eaton, U. 6. Navy Agent for the Barbary Regencies,
Friday, 3 May 1805
[Derne] Information that the enemy are advancing. Set myself to fortifying
our post.
[II. E. Huntington MAG.]
Extract from journal of Midshipman Charles Morris, Jr., U. S. Bavy, on board
U. S. Frigate President, Master Commandant George Cox, U. S. Navy, commanding,
Friday, 3, May 1805
[Malta] 5 [A. M.1 hoisted out all boats.
6 got underway and towed out of the Harbour.
11 Sent the black cutter and pinnace in after the Kedge and Hawser.
Noon Valette lighthouse bore W S W. 4 miles
Latitude Observed 36O N.
[Mrs. C. E. Fox original, NDA photostat.]
To Captain Samuel Barron, U. S. Navy, from Frederick Degen, U. S. Navy Agent,
Naples
COPY
NAPLES
4% May 1806.
SIR!I have the honor to acknowledge your esseemed favors of the 12th & 13tP,
and have in their answr to inform you that Gun powder is not allowed to be exported from this Country without permission of the Goverment; therefore I made
i t a point to call immediately upon the Minister of War General Forteguerri, who
after having proposed your demand to the King, received Orders to ac uaint you
that His Sicilian Majesty cannot a t present diminish the quantity of Bowder in
his kingdoms, which communication I received yesterday in an official Letter
dated the 1.1 Inst.

hTAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1806 TO 1807
It is probable that owing to the Criticle Situation of this Country I could not
succeed in this instance to execute your Orders, but I can confirm to you that i t
is the wish of this Goverment to assist this Squadron under your Command on
every occasion provided it lays in its power. I am extremely glad t o find your health reestablished and should be happy to see
you during the summer a t Naples, which might perhaps be usefull for your future
operations in these parts.
[NDA. Misc. LB, Vol. 2, 1805.1
14 May 18051
To Secretary of the Navy from Purser Nathan Baker, U. S. Navy
SIB Permit me to lay before you the enclosed Receipt for the payment of my
passage from Cadis to New York
Conceiving it proper that I should state
the cause which prevented me from availing myself of a passage in the Frigate
John Adams or Brig Scourge, i t is as follows Vizt When the three Frigates, viz - the President Constellation & Congress arrived
a t Malta late in August, the Siren was off Tripoli
which station she left about
the l a + Sepr with three Gun Boats a stern for Syracuse, in the mean time those
Frigates had proceeded off Tripoli - where I suppose Mr Harris who was on board
one of them expected to join the Siren - After our arrival a t Syracuse, we lay
having taken on board Provisions for Sixty days there untill the 28 Septr
We then sailed for Malta. - On the 8*b or St@of October the Constellation
arrived with Mr H a m s on board, who joind the Siren I think the 10th - &z on the
12% commenced to act in my stead, on this same day we saild from Malta for
Gibralter of course I was under the necessity of continuing in the Siren - as it
was utterly impossible to adjust the accounts of the Brig, & make the necessary
transfer to my successor Mr Harris, in the course of two days - After the Siren
left Malta I had no oppertunity of procuring a passage in either the John Adams
or Scourge Washington 4 May 1805
[NDA. Misc. LB, Vol. 2, 1805.1

-

-

-

Extract from journal of Midshipman Charles Morris, Jr., U. 6. Navy, on board
U.6. Frigate President. Master Commandant George Cox, U. S. Navy, commanding,
Saturday, 4 May 1805
3 [P.M.] The Boats returned hoisted them in and made sail
Latitude Observed 34'32' N
[Mrs. C. E. Fox original, NDA photostat.]
Extract from journal of Fdidshipman Charles Moms, Jr., U. S. Navy, on board
U. S. Frigate President, Master Commandant George Cox, U.S. Navy, commanding,
Monday, 6 May 1805
3%[P. M.] Shortened sail and Spoke the U. S. Frigate Constitution. Capt Cox
went on board.
5 The Town of Tripoli bore S '/z W. 3 leagues
7% Capt Cox returned.
[Mrs. C. E. Fox original, NDA photostat.]
Extract from journal of William Eaton, U. 6. Navy Agent for the Barbary Regencies,
Wednesday, 8 May 1805
[Derne] These five days have been employed in putting our selves in &s good
a state of defence as the means we possess will admit. - The enemy have advanced by a circuitous rout and planted their camp on the ground we occupied
the 25. and 26. ult. The inhabitants of the town in a atate of consternation. It seems yet a matter of uncertainty with them which is the strongest party, a
defeat to Hamet Bashaw would be slaughter to his adherents. - Apprehending a
counter revolution through the intrigue of Mustapha Bey, the late Governor, I
again demanded him of his host, threatning to cannonade his department.
He
aaid he would submit to the chastisement of God; but would not consent to violate
his ordinances.
[H. E. Huntington LBAG.]

-

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

?

Extract from journal of Herekiah Loomis, Steward, U. S. Bavy, U. 6. Brig Vixen,
Master Commandant John Smith, U. 6. Navy, commanding, Wednesday, 8 May
1805
[Syracuse] Pleasant weather. At 10 o'clock unmoored, and a t half past 2
got under way and sailed round in the harbour to exercise the people. At 6
o'clock came to anchor near the Constellation.
[L. F. Middlebrook. NDA copy.]
To Captain Samuel Barron, U. S. Navy, Malta, from George Davis, U. 6. Charge
d'bffaires, Tnnie
TUNISMay 9tP 1806
Nq 9
SIR I have the honor to inform you that as complaint was made to his Excellency the Bey on the 4th Iust of the Capture of a Tunisien Xebec between Jerbes
& Sphax by a U. States Brig of War - you will have the goodness to give me
whatever information you possess on the Subject in order that a Justification
may be offer,d to the Bey I have also the honor to enclose for Your information; a copy of a letter addressed to Coll b a r , and to which I beg your early Attention - aa it Contains
all that I could have detailed t o you ina-Seperat&Communication,
A true Copy
Esq
By order of S. BARRON
ROBERTDENIBON,Secr?
[LC. JRP, Vol. 1, Series Two, Feb. 1775-May 1805.1
To Tobias Lear, U. 6. Consul General, Algiers, (at Ilbalta), from George Davis,
U. 6. Charge d'hffaires, Tunis
Np 27 (Copy)
TUNISMay 9'4 1806
SIR Since my last respects under date of the 13tb April, we have had several
Couriers from Tripoli, but which brought me no letters except a few lines from
Mr Nissen of the 124 Ult: and which refers me to other communications, not yet
All combine in the opinion that the Bashaw, would accede to
come to hand
a Peace on very favourable terms; and which opinion is wholly confirmed, by the
measures, which this Gov%have taken, and to which, I beg your prompt, and
early attention On the 24 Inst: recl a message from the Sapatapa, through the Commercial
Agent, requesting my presence a t the Palace; he informed me that the Sapatapa
had talked with him much about the actual position of Tripoli; and that the
object of my visit was to devise some means of aranging our existing difficulties,
with that Regency - on the 34 gave me a private audience - when he stated
that his Master, had resolved to interest himself in the immediate accomodation
of our Affairs with the Bashaw Jussuph; that in doing which he pledged himself
that on whatever terms we might a reel they should be immediately accepted,
by the Bashaw, Bon'gre, MaEgre pu' fl en ait - That altho his master had long
since determined not to meddle in any way with our affairs there; he now found
himself compel1,d to do it, ss the only means of securing the Peace existing between us - (& whispered that for this service he the Sapatapa expected a very
handsome Regalia) two hours were spent in discussing the advantages accruing
to either party &* &Q &F (in which continual references'were made to the Sums
offered last year for Peace & Ransom) and which was thus concluded Altho I have no power to interfere directly or indirectly with the Affairs
of Tripoli in relation to a peace, that being the particular commission of the
Consul General for Algiers, still the friendly interference of the Bey, is such as
merits the thanks of my Govt: and the early attention of the proper character
to whom such matters should be referred - that I was satisfied, we would conclude the Peace tomorrow on just and honorable terms, (and the friendship of the
Sapatspa & Bey duly recompensed) to wit, the mutual exchange of Prisoners,
with a Consular Regalia - but that we certainly at this moment, would not acquiesce to any annuity; or any Sum for the purchase 04 the Prisoners - he
requested me to reflect three days on the subject; a t the expiration of which time
I a w n presented myself - our conversation was renewed as before; when the
Sapatspa, informed me his Master, would not accede to the terms suggested by
me; and which he could not suppose, had ever entered into the minds of the

-

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1806 TO 1807

8

Comodore or yourself, unless you participated in the extravagant idea of annihibF111g the Govt:, and to which, if there was a shadow of probability; he should
feel himself bound, (not only from personal safety) but by every law civil or divine,
to oppose with force of Arms
he added that his Master would send a Courier
express to Tripoli, and an answer might be expected in twenty days
that as
I did not feel myself authorised, to enter any farther into the Negotiation; an
express should be sent t o the Comodore & yourself, to learn your intentions
relative to the conclusion of the Peace, and to what terms, you would acquiesce,
or what would be more agreable inviting you here, to discuss with greater freedom,
the subject in question - he added that we might be assured the terms should
be more honourable & advantageous than if effected a t Tripoli
The actual situation of the Enemy is too well known to admiz of any detail on
my part
and it is accorded, that the only incitives to "friendly actiomr", with
these States, are Interest and Fear - but still we should remember, that it hss
been considered by many able Generals, as soundest policy, to seek Peace, a t the
moment when complete success, would attend their Arms; rather than risk the
Chances of War, which might materially effect if nob wholly change the posture
of affairs the Bashaw is reduced to the last extremity
but much of the evil
let us accord to our Campaign, all the success,
is certainly in anticipation
which human force equal to ours, aided by every circumstance, that can give
weight to the enterprize may effect; the blow once given, half the evil is removed Fear may be changed into ferocious despair - or a forced Insolefice arising from
fallacious hopes may be the result; and co~itinueso until1 another year shall
present the same Scourge My opinion relative to the Beye interference, has already been expressed, in
my correspondence with the Depart: of State uader date Sept: 26tP 1804,and of
which I had the honor to forward you a copy
i t only rests for me to sollieit an
immediate answer by an express
or if the proposition should meet your full
app~obation,your early presetce; where such a reception shall be given you; ss
unfeigned regard for your private character, and highest respect for your public
situation can offer
[Mrs. James S. Barron Col.]

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

To Secretary of the navy from Lieutenant Peter 8. Ogilvie, U. 8. Bevy
NEW YORKMay 9 t b 1806
SIR As Mr Mitchell has not yet joined N? 7, I have, with the approbation of
C a p t ~Shaw appointed Midshipman Brooks as my second Officer, he being the
most experienced of the Mids? on board the Jn9 Adams & having the character
of a steady clever young man I have to inform you of an alteration I have made in No 7, which, from the
necessity of the case, & the short time I had to do it in, together with the opinions
of Captains Shaw & Chauncey & the Navy Agent respecting its utility, I hope
will justify my making i t before I consulted you on the subject - The alteration
is this -a few days since on my making a trial of the aailing of the Gun Boat, I
found that in consequence of the Mast being placed in the centre of the Vessel
the sails had not their desired effect, & the Rudder almost useless she carried
her helm hard up, with the main sheet eased off so much as to render the Mainsail of little effect in giving her head way; & in the next place she would not veer
a t all
I have therefore moved the Msst about 9% feet farther forward, & given it a
rake of 4 feet -the expences are trifling, as a new boom & altering the Foresail &
Mainsail are all that is material I hope Sir you will approve of what I have done, as I considered i t necessary to
the safety of the Vessel, as she would have been unmanageable in a heavy Sea
[NDA. Officers LB, 18021805.1

-

-

-

Rxtract from jotltnal of U. S. Frigate Consfifuffon,Captain John Bodgers, U. S. Navy,
commanding, Thursday, 9 Mag 1806
[OffTripoli since 25 April 1805.1 At 10 [A. M.] Discoverd 18 Gun boats under
Way in the harbour of Tripoli
Latitude Observed 33'4
N.

[USNA.]

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS
Extract from journal of Hezekiah Loomis, Steward, U. 6. Ravy, U. S. Brig VLrm,
Master Commandant John Smith, U. S. Bavy, commanding, Thursday, 9 Yay
1805

[Syracuse] Received from Mr. Dyson 108 lbs mutton and 24 lbs Beef, snd
13 casks bread from U. S. Frigate Essex. The Essez came in and came to anchor
a t half past 9 o'clock A. M.
[L. F. Middlebrook. NDA copy.]
To Secretary of the Navy from James Mackenzie and A. Glennie, London, England
LONDON
l O t b May 1806
SIR We had the pleasure of addressing you on the 3* Instt, since which we
have none of your esteemed favours, nor any remittance on account of the Navy
Department of the United States We have now to advise you that Comodore Samuel Barron has drawn upon ua
from Malta in Twelve bills of £500 each dated 7 March last a t 30 dayslsight is
66000 St* some of which have appeared and been duly honoured, the whole will
probably come in to day
These bills in addition to what we have previously advised you increace the
Debit side of our account with the Navy Departmt of the United States
to the sum o f - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - £21255.10.4
And the Credit side amounts to
3132.- ----------------------,--

Sterling

f18123.10.4

which brings us under an advance of above Eighteen thousand pounds the whole
of which we must pay in thirty three days from this date and by advises from
Comodore Barron we may daily expect to be drawn upon from the Adriatic for a
considerable amount in addition to the above
We did not contemplate so heavy an Advance as this, and we are perfectly
convinced that it never was your intention that we should be in advance a t all
or at most not more thao E4000 or £ 5000 -which is no object to us, we therefore
must impute the present to your want of regular advices -from the Squadron of
their necessary demands on us, which however the Comodore should be particular
in giving you, whenever he can foresee he wants funds. The Agents of the British Government never accept bills or pay money without
funds in hand
[NDA. Misc. LB, Vol. 2, 1805.1
Extract from journal of U. S. Frigate Constitution, Captain John Rodgers, U. 8. Navy,
commanding, Friday, 10 May 1805
[Off Tripoli] At 6 [P. M.] the town of Tripoli bore S S E Distance 6 miles
Made sail in chace a t 11 fired a
At j/a past 8 discoverd a sail to the East+
gun Brought too a Ketch from Tripoli tookfifty one turks out of hir and sent
Lt Allen Mr Coale Midshn and 12 Seamen On board of hir
[USNA.]
Extract from journal of Eezekiah Loomis, Steward, U. 8. Bavy, U. S. Brig Vixen,
Master Commandant John Smith, U. 8. Navy, commanding, Friday, 10 May 1806
All hands employed preparing for sea. At 3 o'clock P. M. the Constellation got
underway bound for Malta. I went on shore and brought off 50 pair show. At
half past 8 o'clock we got underway for Malta.
[L. F. Middlebrook. NDA copy.]
To Captain Samuel Barron, U. S. Navy, from Master Commandant ThornRobinson, Jr., U. 8. Navy
VENICEMay 11. 1806
SIE,The Enterprize is ready for Sea & 8s soon 8s I see clear of this Port two
Barks I have purchased by order of Cap. Barron I shall follow them to Ancona. After the difficulties Cap B[arron]. met a t Trieste there was a good deal of noise

10

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1806 TO 1807

made here out of Doors yet matters were 60 aranged between the Commodore &
me that the bustle went no further, but I thought it prudent not t o proceede to
fitting out & therefore judged it prudent to send these Vessels to Ancona &there
pick them np. - I am astonish'd that when Cap. B. was unsuccessfulI a t Trieste
he did not think of Ancona, its a Papal Port & natural Enemies to all Turks. I
shall feel their pulse & if favorable shall consider it my duty to execute Cap. B?
part (ss aranged between him & I) of your Orders to him, a Coppy of Which I
have - therefore you may calculate to a certainty on two Boats that will carry
2 twenty fours, $ more if my exertions can obtain them in t i e for your opperations
I am well aprised of the difficulties you'll labour under in wanting Gun
Boats & this will stimulate me to grest exertions Rest asured that I will be with you in good time for Tripoli or any other attack
you may judge proper - these Boats will carry besides Guns an emence quantity
of Stores - they are 80 Tons burthen Sail well & draw but 5 feet Water in fact
they are the very dandy
[LC. JRP, Vol. 1, March 1791-Dec. 1814.1

-

To Secretary of the Navy from Eidshipman John D. Henley, 0.S. Navy
GUNBOATN P4 Hamptm Roads May 1 1 t h 1806
SIR. I have the honour to inform you, that three days ago we dropt down to
Hampton Roads, and are ready to proceed t o Sea, with the fist fair Wind. Since
Mr Fox's arrival in Norfolk, I have had close Hatches made, which he informed
me, he was authorised to do. I have also had a new Bowsprit made.
Be m u r e d Sir, that no exertions shall be left untried to join the Squadron in
the Mediterranean as soon as possible.
[NDA. MLc. LB, Vol. 2, 1805.1

Extract from journal of U. 6. Frigate Constitulion, Captain John Bodgera, U. 6. Navy,
commanding, Saturday, 11 Hay 1806
[Off Tripoli] At % past 2 [P. M.] Sent the crew of the Ketch on board & our
officers and men returned they made sail and stood to the Esstw? At 5 fresh
breezes and hazey took 2 reefs in the top sails. spoke the President
At 9 C a p t ~Cox came on board
Latitude Observed 33' 11' N.
[USNA.]
Extract from journal of Eidshipman Charles Morris, Jr., U. S. B ~ Q , on board
U.S.Frigate Presided l a s t e r Commandant George Cox, U.S. Navy, commanding,
Saturday, 11 May 1805
3 [P. M.] the Town of Tripoli bore S W by W 7 or 8 leagues
4 Saw a Sail in company with the Constitution bearing N. N . W. made sail.
5% Spoke the Constilution Capt Rodgers, who informed us that the strange sail
was a Tunisian Cruiser from Tripoli.
8 [A. M.] Capt. Cox went on board the Constitution
Latitude Observed 33'11' N.
Longitude Observed 13'22' E.
[Mrs. C. E. Fox original, NDA photostat.]
Extract from journal of Hezekiah Loomis, Steward, U. S. Navy, U. S. Brig Vixm,
Haater Commandant John Smith, U. 6. Navy, commanding, Saturday, 11 Hay
1805

This day we had a fine breeze. Arrived a t Malta and came to anchor a t 3
o'clock P. M. Found there the Frigate Corntellation. Quarantined for 10 hours.
[L. F. Middlebrook. KDA copy.]

Extract from journal of William Eaton, U. S. Navy Agent for the Barbary Begenciea,
Sunday, 12 May 1805
{Derne] The enemy have been these four days endeavouring to corrupt and
bring over the people of the town.The late Governor acting from his sanctuary

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

11

must be considered as an active enemy, entitled to no privileges of hospitality The Shiek remained immovable in his resolution not to give him up. I resolved
to try an experiment of com lling him; accordingly marched into the quarter
near him a t the head of fifty Gristians with bayonets, andfdeclared my intention
to wrest the Bey from his sanctuary. A general alarm spread through the department "The Christians no longer respect the customs of our fathers and our laws
of hospitality!" I urged that the Bey was an outlaw; - he had forfeited his title
to protection. He had in the first instance rejected terms of amity; - had in an
insolent manner challenged me to combat; had been beaten from his post; was still
in a conquered town; & was by all the laws of war my prisoner.
But if he sought
refuge under the banners of religion to deserve ita protection he should conform
himself to its injunctions and remain peaceable. - But he was actually carrying
on war against me even in his recluse - by doing which he had forfieted also the
lenity due to a prisoner. I would therefore have him dead or alive. - The
Shiek remained idexible. The department got
- in motion to defend their religion
and customs.
The Bashaw Hamet apprehensive of an insurrection, became deeply agitated.
He begged that I would suspend the execution of my attempt till tomorrow,
promising in the mean time to use his exertions to draw the Bey from the protection of the Shiek by gentle means. - I countermarched. - This night the
Shiek aided the Bey to escape to the enemy's camp with fifteen or sixteen Turks
in his train. [H. E. Huntington LBtAG.1

-

Extract from journal of Heaekiah Loomis, Steward, U. S. Navy, U. S. Brig V i m
Master Commandant John Smith, U. S. Navy, commanding, Sunday, 12 May
1805
Malta Harbour. This morning received product [pratique]
Arrived the U. S. F. Essex. She was quarantined.
In the afternoon I went on shore to walk.
[L. F. Middlebrook. NDA copy.]
---

-

To Captain Samuel Barron, U.S. Navy, from Master Commandant Charles Stewart,
U. S. Navy
U. S. BRIGSerin [Siren] GIBRALTAR
BAY
duplicate
May 1 3 t h 1806
SIR I had the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your favour of the 6tP March on
the lmt U l t ~
since when nothing of importance has transpired in this Quarter
I
was at Tangier a few days past, but M? Simpson remains of the opinion that this
station ought not be left without one or more Vessels of war of the United States,
altho' no appearance of hostility on the part of the Emperor has manifested itself
The Emperor's Frigate & Brig still remain a t Lisbon and have made no movements whatever; the other Vessels of the Emperor are laid up in the different
Ports - I cannot but lament the inactive situation a continuance on this station
places us in while there remains anything to be done off Tripoli; however I trust
we shall yet receive your orders in time to join the Squadron for effective service
against the Enemy
Yesterday arrived the Ship Cetes from Baltimore with
Provisions and stores for the Squadron and as another will shortly follow her I
have advised her being forwarded to Malta without delay Accounts from Algiers state that the Dey has been assaulted in his Palace and
received Fourteen different wounds with poignards of which he is since dead Admiral Nelson left this a few days past in pursuit of the Toulon fleet which
passed the Streights about a Month since and was joined off Cadis by Several
Sail of the line - 6 of which were Spanish bound to America - All the papers I
possess are enclosed but no doubt you will receive much later information from
the Packages which the Store Ship brings
P. S.. Arrived here this Morning three Sail of the line and a number of TransPorts wlth 6000 troops on board, said to be destined for Italy [LC. JRP, Let. & Doc., Ac. 3647, 1799-1848.1

-

-

-

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1805 TO 1807
To Secretary of the Bavy from Master Commandant John Shew, U. S. navy
U S FRIGATEJohn Adam8
Sandy Hook May 15'4 1806
SIR These few days back I have been anxiously waiting a wind to proceed to
Sea with & aa I am now favored with a westerly Breeze & the Gun Boats under
my lee I hope in a few Hours to clear the land
Midshipman Hannah with 9 Men I have been compelled to place in the Hospital a t Staten Island they are all very bad cases of the pluricj- & it was the desided
opinion of the Surgeons that they must all die if I proceeded with them to sea.
I find the Gun Boats sail very well in coming down. I am of opinion they will
subject me to very little detention, I have supplied them with the Necessary
crews which they wanted from my ship & I hope to arrive at Gibralter in 35 days
st furthest
I Transfer the bluster roll quarter Bill and watch List of my Crew and a t all
opportunities I shall communicate the state of my ship to the Navy Office with
the movement of our enemy abroad
[XDA. MC LB, 1804-5.1
To Master Commandant Isaac Hull,lJ. S. Bavy, from William Eaton, U. 8. Navy
Agent for the Barbary Regencies
FORTENTERPRIZE
l g t h M a y 1806 DERNE
SIR, The Enemys Camp advanced yesterday, today we expect them on the
rear of the Town - They seem determined to try the issue of a Battle, a display
of more force on shore mould be useful to us, in order to intimidate the Arabs,
who will be sure generally to attach themselves to the strongest, side
if it can
possibly be done, I wish you would Iet our plan of a debarkation and a parade
have effect this day, send all the Marines and as many of the People as can be
spared to the Number at least one hundred, if the Schooner can come near it will
We want. Musquet Powder, Musquet Balls, Flints and
favor our Measures.
The Cask sent off was
Cartridge Paper, We are destitute of Spirits and Wine.
something more than two thirds gone, either by leakage or by theft.
Make an Exertion I pray you to send off the Parade,requested they shall return
a t your motion, let me repeat they will be incalculably servicable. Jesup Ghi Riit
[or' Jusuff Gheriat
Ergeb il Sirah
Ergil il Lizeh
Fornee Isgeribe
Tenus is Gerbe
Ih. hag. Cm eifa
Th hag bssgirfa
Ibraim ben Assin
Ibraim bin Hail
Haviede il Gibreni
Havedi il Gilrini
Misbid abd il Danie
Mesgud abd il Daim]
The above names comprise all the Hostages on board, except the old Cheik with
equivocal Eyes, who is to be held, the rest I request you will permit to be sent on
shore. The Enemy are shamefully flogged, we have collected twenty of their heads
besides those you killed, which are said to be an equal if not a greater number,
the Doctor remains till the return of the Boat to dress a few wounded among the
Bashaws People, who has behaved well.
I hope the Weather will permit an interview tomorrow morning.
[NDA. Isaac Hull LB, 1803-1806.1

-

-

-

-

-

-

Extract from journal of William Eaton, U. 8. Wsvy Agent for the Barbruy Regencies,
Monday, 15 May 1805
See my dispatch of 15. to Commodore Barron.
(Derne] It is worthy of remark that the same Shiek of Mesreat, who had given
refuge to and aided the escape of Mustapha Bey fought him the next day, and
brought sll his people into the engagement against the enemy in favor of Hamet
Beshaw. After the battle was gained he presented himself a t the Bashaw'a palace,
kissed his hand, and, seating himeelf before him ss a subject in manner of the east,
reproached him in these manly and expressive terms. "I have this day given you, I t m t , an unequivocal demonstration of my
personal attachment and fidelity.
I ought to say to you that you have not
merited it.
You would have yielded to the instances of the C h t i a n Gemrd
in violating the hospitality of my house, and of degrading the honor of my name.

-

-

-

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

13

You should have recollected, that, not quite two years ago, you were ssved in
this same asylum, and secured in your escape by the same hospitality, from the
ven eance of this very m e Bey. - Had the fortune of this day gone against
y o u l should have suppressed thesesentimentsof reproach: asit is I haveacquitted
myself to my God and my conscience."
He then renewed his oath of allegiance t o the Bashaw.
[H. E. Huntington L&AG, E A 206.1
T o William Higgine, 0.6. Navy Agent, Malta, from Secretary of the Navy
NAVD E P 14
~ May 1806
The Provision Ship Huntress Captain John Sthaon having on board Stores and
provisions for the use of our Squadron in the mediterranean agreeably t o invoice
and bill of lading which will be transmitted to you by cap^ Thomss Tingey hae
been Ordered to proceed immediately to Malta and take your &rections as to the
disposition of her Cargo - Your knowledge of the Situation of the Squadron &
your correspondence with the Commodore, will enable you to determine whether
it will be most adviseable to land the Cargo or a part of it a t Malta or t o send the
Whole to Syracuse or lanaing a part a t m d t a to proceed with the residue to
Sq~aouse- and you will act accordingly
You will perceive by the bill of l d i n g that about ?i
of the freight amounting
to $2000 is to be paid a t the port of her last delivery - I n case she ehould
deliver the whole of her Cargo a t malta pou will pay the amount of Freight
expressed in the BiU of Lading by drawing a Bill or Bills on either Mesas Ja? MFKenzie & A. Glennie London, Mesas Degen Purviance & CQLeghorn or Frederick
Degen Esq Naples Draw upon whichever place exchange may be the most favorable, and give me a particular account of each draft I enclose letters to JBQ MqKenzie & A Glennie London, Mess.. Degen Purviance
& CQLeghorn & Frederick Degen Esq Naples. One of which you will forward
(the one addressed t o the place upon which you may draw the Other two destroy Should you have occasion to forward neither destroy the Whole [Similar letter sent to George Dyson, Syracuse.]
fNDA. GLB, Vol. 7, 1803-1805.1
To Secretary of the Navy from Lieutenant Seth Cartee, U. 6. Navy
GUNBOATNQ 10, May 14,1805
RON.SIB Permit me to state t o you my present situation and the cause of my
detention. Finding that the bowsprit first made for this vessel wss too short,
I was compelled to have a new one made, which is but just fitted in, and we are
now ready for sea, and under weigh beating out. The men which Lieut. Henley
shipped for me as able seamen were sent on board the 10% of this month ten in
number, all but three of whom have declared to me that they shipped ss ordinary
seamen anc are unable to do the duty of seamen, and but two can take the helm.
M y Bostswnin who wss shipped by Mr Henley is no seaman, and is not capable
of taking char e of the deck a t any time, but notwithstsnding I anticipate a aafe
arrival in the hediterranean.
D. Bedinger, Esqr. will inform you more particularly concerning the bowsprit
and gib, and my misfortunes since I arrived in Norfolk. I am obliged to go to
sea with many of my sweaps rough and unfinished, but I regret most the want
of a good Boatswain, which time will not permit me to obtain.
I am, sir, your obt. humble servt.

[NDA. Misc. LB, Vol. 3,1805.]

SETH CABWE

[14 May 18051
To Pedro Porrd, empowered to act as U. S. Navy Agent, Algeciras, from Master
Commandant Charles Stewart, U. 6.Navy
COPY
SIRYou are hereby directed and empower'd to act ss Navy Agent for the
Un~tedStates a t the Port of Algesiras - You will therefore on ev'ry occasion
Ileflder Such Service ss the Commandem of the Veaeels of War and others of the
Umted States may require of you and in such manner as I trust d p v e general
Satiafection

-

14

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1800' TO 1807
--

This authority will be in force untill the pleasure of the Commander in Chief of
the Squadron in the Mediterranean is known Done onboard the United States Brig of War Spin on the fourteenth day of
May and in the Year One thousand, Eight hundred and Five
[LC. JRP, Vol. 1, March 1791-Dec. 1814.1
Extract from journal of Surgeon Jonathan Cowdery, U. S. Navy, 14 May 1805
[Tripoli] I received a note from capt. Bainbridge, stating the inconvenience
which the officers laboured under by being in close confinement and by breathing
unwholsome air. I spoke to the Bashaw on the subject, and humbly solicited
that our officers might be removed to the American house. The Bashaw replied,
that the war between him and my country at first was about money; but now i t
was whether him or his brother should be the Bashaw; and that the Americans
had bound themselves to his brother in such a manner that it was not in their
power to make peace with him. But that his brother and the Americans were
determined to take Tripoli and take off his head. He swore by the prophet of
Mecca, that if the Americans brought his brother against him, he would burn to
death all the American prisoners except me; that my life should be spared, because
I saved the life of his child when very sick. He went off in a great passion, and
mounted his horse. His nlamelukes and guard, to the number of about forty,
attended him, and they took a ride to his country palace. They returned about
sun set, and the minister of exteriour relations and the Bashaw were in private
confereace.
[LC. Rare Books, American Captives in Tripoli or Dr. Cowdery's Journal,
Boston, 1806.1
To Captain Samuel Barron, U. S. Navy, from William Eaton, U. S. Navy Agent for
the Barbary Regencies
DERNE,KINGDOM
OF TRIPOLI,
May 15t4 1806
SIR Since my dispatches of 29th ult. and 1 s t instant we have been occupied
with the movements of the Enemy's troops; who, contrsry to my expectations,
advanced and gave us battle on the 1 3 t h The preceding night the late Bey of
Derne, whom, I found inaccessible in his sacred asylum, escaped to their camp;
and, having gained very correct information of our number of christians, & carrying with him the confidence of assurance, that the inhabitants of the place would
abandon Hamet Bashaw on the approach of Joseph's forces, gave hope and
motion to the latter. About five in the morning they shewed themselves on the
high grounds in our rear; displayed five standards; reconnoitred us a while, and
moved down in a body, and attacked a detachment of about one hundred of
Hamets Cavalry, who were posted in ehe rout about a mile from the town. These,
though they disputed the ground very bravely, were obliged to give way to
superiority of numbers. The enemy pursued iiito the city, under a steady fire
from the Argus, and Nautilus, and the guns from our battery and field peices, and
proceeded through an irregular fire of small arms from ambuscades quite to the
Bashaws Palace. Here they met a warm reception from the musketry of the
people who were near him, and of the inhabitants who fired from their blind walls
of their houses; but they seemed resolute to get possession of the Bashaw. The
weakness of our post would not justify a sortie to his relief: and, apprehending
from the scattered, and relaxed fire of the musketry, that the day was lost to us,
I turned our guns upon the town. Very fortunately a shot from one of our nine
pounders killed two of the enemy from their horses in the court yard of the
Palace. They instantly sounded a retreat, and abandoning the town a t all
quarters, were every where pursued by hamets cavalry untill they were chased
under the shot of the vessells, which galled them sorely in their flight. A little
before three p. m. every thing in the city was reduced to tranquility, and the
enemy were seen only from their heights. I am happy that this occurrence
enables nle to correct an opinion I had formed from the affair of the 27th ult.
that the Bashaws people calculated too much on saving themselves: They certainly left the burthen of that day entirely to us, with which I could not
forbear reproaching their cheif; in this engagement they exhibited intrepidity
and good conduct - By an Italian slave who escaped the enemy the succeeding
evening, and by deserters who have come in from them since, we have pretty
certain information that they lost twenty eight men killed, and fifty six wounded,

WARS WITH BAIZBARY POWERS
eleven of whom are since dead. The Bashaw lost, twelve or fourteen, killed and
wounded. The enemy are wain appearing on the heights; and by what we can
learn are making arrangements for another assault. As a species of defence,
they are endeavoring to collect Camels to sec~iretheir front and flanks. These
travelling breastworks, it is presumed, may be worked both ways. and may,
perhaps, he rendered useful in the transportation of our Baggage to Bengaei.
So soon a s the issue of the next recontre is decided which will probably happen
within two or three days if a t all, the Schooner will go of[f] with dispatches.
May 16 Last evening two officers deserted to us from the enemy, Chieks from Cape
Mensurat, who assure us that the camp are in great discen[s]ion. The Beys,
stung with disappointment and shame, and their Tripolitan troops, are for
hazarding another attempt on Derne. The Brabs recruited on the march are
The number of Tripolitans is three hundred and fifty, well
opposed to it
of Arabs on horseback between two and three hundred, and about
mounted
three hundred bedouins, or desert Arabs, on foot. The horsemen only came into
action on the 13th In this permiscuous army are included two or three hundred
fugitives from this place who fought us on the 27. ult & who now pass for Tripolitans & Arabs
May 17
The Enemy have thrown up parapets of loose stone wall, with loop holes,
around their Camp, which is planted about three miles distant and seperated
from us by a chain of mountains, and are employed in plundering corn and forage
for their own, and the subsistance of their horses
By fugitives come in this
morning, we learn that the arabs obstinately refuse to advance again within
reach of our Cannon, or to suffer their Camels to be used as breastworks
The
Beys are embarrassed. They must make a desparate push, or a retrograde march.
Never were an enemy in so favorabIe a position to be attacked by a coup de main.
I can not prevail on the Bashaw's forces to attempt it: they never fight by night.
We are really too weak to force their Lines alone, and the state of the vessel doea
not admit of DebarkationsI t is enough to state these facts, n-ithout a comment,
to give you a sympathy in the pain we suffer under these mortifying circumstances. The Nautilw sails to night with this letter, and duplicates of my last.
I beg leave to refer you to Cap? Dent, whose intelligence, collected on the spot,
and whose correct judgment %-ill enable him t o supply, circumstantially, such
information of our actual position, and future prospects, as may not be gathered
from my communications.
f f e shall endeavour to hold this Post untiIl his return, which I request you
will permit, though I ought not to conceal my apprehensions that it will be very
difEcult many &ys without supplies: The enemy on our rear cut off, a t present,
all provisions which we might othervise draw from the country.
coffee and
N. B. Bread and rice are essential articles of subsistence to us
sugar necessary - some salt provisions and small rations - Amunition above
all things [Mrs. James S. Barron CoI.]

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

To Master Commandant Isaac Hull, U. 8. Navy, from William Eaton, U. S. Navy
Agent for the Barbary Regencies
FORTEKTERPRIZE
[DERNE]
15'b ,?.lay 1805
SIR, The article^ of Prize Goods sent off this morn* have been sold for Three
Hundred Thirty Three dollars 50/100 1have ordered payment to Hamet Bashaw,
if the others which remain on board C8n be sold as well, I think the total avails
will considerably exceed your calculations, and will be a great relief in our present
necessities - We are destitute of Meat and Cash, if it were possible to spare
one Barrel of Beef, and another of Pork for imediate consumption, m-e will
endeavour as soon as the Keather permitg to furnish fresh Provisions to the
Vessels, by the best information I can get from the Enemy fhey are in ft state of
great hesitation whether to risque another Battle - a fugxt~vejust arr~vedfrom
their Camp who says Twenty Seven of them are dead, and about fifty Six or
Sixty badly wounded, I place more faith in circmtances than in staFments, a
very favorable one is, that the Arabs who were N e d r a l before the actlon of the
1 4 q are coming over in great Numbers to the Bashaw, and the General confidence, the People of the City have in their own osition persuades me, that our
affairs
on a pretty strong footing - If theEnemy attack again, they rill
take care to do it when your Guns are out of annoying distance,

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1806 TO 1807
Thank you for the shot, we were very much in want of them. - I know i t
is needless to suggest t o you the effect your Vicinity to us has, both on our Enemy
and friends - I can only hope the Weather will not force you to Sea, but should
i t so happen and the Enemy advance, we shall attempt a t least to resist them. This instant a Courier comes from the Enemy, stating that they are mak* arrangements to attack us tomorrow, and they are collecting Cammels to keep in
front and flank as a species of defence. - The Musquets of the Prize, and the
Locks for Musquets, =-ill be good articles on shore [NDA. Isaac Hull LB, 1803-1806.1

-

To George Davis, U. 6 . Charge d'dffaires, Tunis, from Tobias Lear, U. 6. Consul
General, Algiers
(COPY)
MALTAMag 16* 1806.SIR Since I had the honor of writing to you on the 24tP Ultimo, I have received
your letter of the 21.1 of April, in which you mention the report of Acmet Bashaw
having taken possession of Derne bs* This is very likely to be true; but as we
have no direct accounts from that quarter - - On the 27tP Ultimo arrived here a Xebeck of 8 Guns and 38 Men, with two
Neapoliton Vessels her prizes, all of which had been detained and sent here by
our Ships blockading Tripoli, as they were attempting to enter that port, and
persisted in their attempts, with a declaration that they would not be prevented
therefrom.
The Rais says his Vessel and Crew are Tunesians, and he produces the Consular
Passports of the several Consuls in Tunis for a Xebeck of 10 Guns & 50 Men
which bear date in March 1804, more than 14 Month? ago, without any note of
renewal on said Passports, and only the heads or Tops of the American, Meditteranian Passports accompanying your Consular pass ort - There are no heads
or tops accompanying the passports of the other 8onsuls and the Rais says he
has none of that description. He had also with him the Tunesian Consular
passports for a Cruizer of 18 Guns 8: 80 Men dated in .May 1803. From these suspicious circumstances & the Irregularity of h ~ papers
s
the Commodore is of opinion that his Vessel is one of the Tripolitan Cruizers which had
lately been in one of the Ports of Tunis, and had gone out -4th these irregular
papers in order to get into Tripoli; or to Cruize as a Tunesean Or if she is really
a Tunisian that she wished to get into Tripoli to give her passports &v* to some
one of their Cruizers there, where they might be furnished with the Tops or
Heads of the other Meditteranian Passports, excepting the American which they
had; and waiting an Opportunity to get out, might cruize as a Tunesian. - Upon
this ground alone there would have been good cause for detaining & examining
said Cruizer, had she been met a t sea; but, added to this, her attempts with her
two prizes to go into Tripoli in sight of our Ships, and when the rais acknowledged
that he well knew of the Blockade, puts beyond a doubt the line of Conduct which
our Commanders ought to pursue. Upon this Subject and its propable consequences, Commodore Barron and
myself have duly reflected; and this is the result; that allowing the Vessel to be a
Tunesian, she could not be permitted to enter Tripoli, even should war with
Tunis be the certain and immediate consequence of detaining her; but as a War
with that Power would be peculiarly unfortunate a t this moment on account of
the effect which it must have on our operations against Tripoli (altho' we should
not fear the issue of a war with Tunis) and knowing that it is the wish of our
Government to preserve peace with the Barbary Powers, now a t Peace with us,
if i t can be done without an improper sacrifice, We think it best to say to His
Excellency the Bey, that the repeated assurances which have been given him of
the impossibility of his Vessels being permitted to enter the Port of Tripoli, while
blockaded by us, ,gives reason to believe that this rais had acted contrary to his
orders or Wishes in making the attempt to enter that port, and he may be given
to understand, if this should be the case, that i t is possible the Vessels may be
again restored, especially if His Excellency the Bey should seem disposed to
prevent in future, so far as may lie in his power, a repitition of attempts on the part
of his Subjects to Violate the Blockade. But if, on the other hand, he should justify the attempt to enter Tripoli &
persist in his right of so doing, he must not expect a restoration of this, or any
other of his Vessels taken under like circumstances.
We wish, as I before observed, to avoid a rupture with Tunis, if i t can be done
on justifiable ground, and I think we have, given repeated proofs of this t o His

-

W a s WITH BARBARY POWERS

Excellency the Bey; but we had better encounter the evil a t once, if he ia determined to drive us into it, than to permit a line of Conduct to be pursued by his
Subjecta which would effectually destroy the object of our Blockade - I n short
1 believe, if he is desirous of and determined upon going to war with us, he niU
not fail to make this a Plea; but if he does not wish to enter into it, he will be
satisfied with the reasonable, and indeed generous conduct we are willing to pursue
towards him. The irregularity of the Passports of this Rak in not Corresponding with the
Number of Guns or men mentioned therein - their old date, without any note
of having been since renewed - the want of the Tops or Testa of all meditteranian
passports, excepting the American and his having two setts of said passports,
are, as I observed before, causes of themselves sufficiently strong to warrant
detention, and may be used as a plea therefor, in addittion to the attempt to enter
a blockaded Port. - I n Algiers we uniformly give either a New Consular psssport, or renew the old one every Cruize and I presume the same Conduct is
observed by the Consuls in the other Regencies. The Testa or tops of the
Meditteranian passports of all Nations who give such passports, are indispensaLIP. I was informed that the Tunesian Consul a t this place sent an Express boat to
Tunis two days after these Vessels were brought in here, with letters from himself
& the rais; but I did not know of the circumstance 'till after she had sailed; or I
should have written to you on the occasion. I suppose their accounts must be
given with every exageration and with many addittions, and, as usual, declarations
of thefts and bad usage.
The %is declared to the Commodore & myself on
his arrival here, that he had been very well treated by the Frigate which took
him, and that his great Coat having been stolen by one of our Sailors, it m-ss restored to him on C a p t ~Rodgers being informed of it, and the Sailor severely
punished - At their own request they were put into the Lazaretto, and their
quaranteen expired yesterday. - Was it determined to keep the Vessels, a t
all events, they would be sent ovel to Tunis in the Constellation, but as it is possible
we may find it expedient to restore them, in the way beforementioned it is thought
best for the people to remain here to carry them over in that case Capt? Campbell will be so well enabled to detail to you every thing relating to
our affairs in this Quarter, that it is unneccessary for me to touch upon that Subject
a t present. The U. S. Brig V4i.m accompany's him to return immediately with
the result of this Business, and I am sure you will know so well our anxiety to
hear from you, that she will not be a moment unnecessarily delayed
Should this affair terminate so unfortunately as [to] oblige you to leave Tunis
I need not say how glad I shall be to see you here where you will find a room for
you in our quarters, which are very excellent. But 1 assure you I should be much
happier to meet you a t Tunis, than to see you here
I wrote to you
No opportunity having oBered of forwarding the %i&%hich
on the 24*4 ultimo, I end it a t this time. - Commodore Barron writes to you
fully on the Subject of these VesseLq, by which you will know hi Sentiments. [NA. SDA. Algiers, Vol. 7, Part 1, 1804-1805.1

-

[15 May 180511
To the Bashaw of Tripoli from the Dey of Algiers
[Translation1
Mustapha Bsshaw of Algiers writes to the Bashaw Yusuf of Tripoli, under date
of the 15th of the month Gummet, 1219, Arabian style. ['I
In the name of the one and only God The Bashaw of Algiers writes to the Baahaw of Tripoli: our American Consul
in Algiers will arrive and present himself to you for the purpose of discussing the
Peace; 1am sending him to you myself; you know that the Peace you made first
was effected through my mediation; therefore since the Peace first made has
ended, you are now going to discuss the Peace with this Consul Lear once more;
Please d~scussthe new Peace with him for my sake, because I shall not fail, for
my part, to satisfy all his demands, and I hope that you will do the same, for my
sake, since it is a matter of our being like faithful brothers, conforming to our
Ancient Word, which is known to none but the one God, so I pray that as soon as
the Consul presents himself to you, you will renew the Peace with him, and in
making such peace, make it not onlv with them, but also as though you were
making it with me, and I hope that o i his arrival you will regard him with an eye
of good will and great friendsbip, and deal with this matter as if it were something

18

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1806 TO 1807

commanded by God, as it will be a blessing t o you, since the Consul Lear is a
mann of great erudition and knows how things go; hence I beg you not to let him
return without satisfying him in respect to all that I have asked, because i t is a
matter depending on you, as you do not need t o be told further.
P. S . We are persuaded that the Consul will not return to Algiers unless the
matter is concluded, so I have told the Consul to discuss the matter with you with
all moderation.
[Vnmslator's note: Qummd may be intended for the flfth month, known in modern Italian as
dumaW

[Stephen Deratur Col.1
To Secretary of State from John Gavino, U. S. Consul, Gibraltar
GIBRALTAR15th May 1805
SIR I had this honor of adressing you down t o 29th Ultq pr N Q6, & N Q7 under
l e t Inst since then Lord R'elsons Beet of 11 sail the Line, one frigate & some smaller
Vessels reach this Bay, but only taried a few hours, when proceeded to the Westward
I have now before me the honor of your favour 11'4 March Iast acceding to my
request for leave of absence for a few Months and for which am thankfull, but it
may now be some time before I avail myself thereof
Two days ago arrived admiral Night from England (who remains here ELS Port
admiral) with 3 sail the Line, some Gun Biiggs &ca and 6000 Troops under Command of Sir James Craig, among them there is some Csvaldry, on a secret Expedition in the Mediterranean, they n~i!l proceed this day or Tomorrow with ad! Sir
Richard Bickerton for their destination.
The Brig Siren Caps Stuart was lately here, & went yesterday for Tanger & a
Cruise
You have herewith a Dispatch from Consul Simpson of Tanger and I have
the honor to be with respect
The 2 Gun Briggs from England are to remain on this station
[NA. SDA. CL, Gibraltar, Vol. 3, 1805-1829.3

No 8

-

-

To Captain John Stinson, commabding the Provision Ship Hunims, from Eecretary
of the Navy
As soon as the Ship Huntress shall be ready to sail you will weigh anchor and
proceed direct t o Malta. On your arrival a t Malta you will wait on William
Higgins Esq navy agent at that place deliver to him the enclosed letter addressed
t o him and take his directions as t o the disposition of your Cargo
Should he direct you t o Proceed to Syracuse n-ith a part or the whole of your
cargo you will then weigh anchor and proceed immediately to that place and on
your arrival there wait on George Dyson Escl navy agent deliver t o him the
enclosed letter addressed to him and land your Cargo under his directions. Should
3.011 land the whole of your Cargo a t Malta you will in that case deliver to William
Higains Esq the letter addressed to Geo Dyson Esq as well as the oke addressed
t o Emself
I enclose passports from the President of the United States and the ministers
of Great Britain & France [See 18 May 18051
[NDA. GLB, Vol. 7, 1803-1805.1

-

To Secretary of the Navy from Xidshiprnan John D. Benley, U. S. Navy
GVN BOATNP4
Cape Henry May 15 1805
SIR I am soray to inform you that, we have been detained here sorrie days by
Easterly Winds. We are now under a-ay & expect ip a few hours to take our
departure from Cape Henry. I am happy to inform you that the change I have
made in our Jib makes a great alteration in NP 4 sailing. She now sails extremely
well on a wind, and very well by the wind.
[NDA. Misc. LB, Vol. 3, 1805.1

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

19

[16 Mag 18051
To James L. Cathcart, Washington, D. C., from Captain Edward h e b l e , U. S. Navy
Dr SIR Your letter dated Leghorn Decr 31. 1804 - came to hand but a few
days since I am somewhat mtonish'd that none of my letters reach'd you between
the dates of July 5'4 & 15 Decr as I wrote you several.
I congratulate you on your safe arrival with your family in the U S and can
assure you it w i l l a t any time afford me pleasure to have it in my power, to render
you acceptable services.
I regret that the Forces under Commodore Barron did not arrive in season to
close the war with Tripoly last year It icr however to be presumed that with the
six Frigates & other forces he will have this gear every thing -dbe
l done that can
be wished for the honor of our Country & humiliation of the Barbarians [LC. EPP, Vol. 14, 1804-1805.1
To Haster Commandant Isaac Hull, U. S. Navy, from William Eaton, U. S. Navy
Agent for the Barbary Regencies
[FORTENTERPRISE,
DERNE]
May 164 1805 SIR, The Enenly we are informed intend an attack tomorrow, on the rear of the
City, I doubt their resolution, but good reasons dictate to be ready to receive them,
their arab auxiliaries refuse to advance. of course we shall have only to contend
with something less than four hundred Tripolitan Cavalry, in case they advance,
and we route them we shall feel quite secure, either in our Post or advancing proper
reinforcements. I beg you will recollect to send us the flannel Cartridges, Rammer and Spunge
for a four Pounder and match Rope. [NDA. Isaac Hull LB, 1803-1806.1
Extract from journal kept on board U. S. Brig Argus, Master Commandant Isaac
Hull, U. S. Navy, commanding, 16 May 1805
[Derne] Commences with fresh breazes from the KorthQ At single anchor the
h'aulilis standing off and on A t 2 hl?Eaton went on shore A number of the Enemy made their appearanc on the hill - fired a gun and hoisted a red flag a t the
fore the Nautiles in the offing - At sundown the launch came onboard bringing
an arab that Hamed Bashaa- supposed intended to go over to the Enemy breazes during the night kept a light burning for the Nautilea all
. Moderate
night A t 11 in the Evening heared the report of a number of Musqueta supposed that
the Enemy had made an attack fired a gun and made the Nautileses signel sent the
Launch on shore to the fort, to see what the fireing was - At $$ pas 12 launch
returned with inforniation that a Scouting- Party of Hamed Bashaw had raised a
fals alarm At daylight Nautiles in sight in the offing Sent the launch watering a t 10 she
returned with Mr Eaton was informed that one Hundred arabs Had Joined the
Bashaw
[NYHS. Naval History Sec., Argus.]
To Lieutenant Samuel Evans, U. S. Navy, from Captain Samuel Barron, U. S. Navy
MALTA17 May 1806
SIR, With the U States Sloop (10 Guns] Hornet under your Command, you are
directed to proceed with all possible expedition to Derna and on falling in, with
the Argus Brig to deliver the accompan[y]ing Letters to Capt* Hull from whom
ou will receive directions respecting the Stores & provisions under your charge.
case any thing shered have intervented to prevent your meeting with the Argua
you will address yourself in all respects to Capt,* Dent of the Nautilus, and in the
event of both vessels having left the Coast, you will be governed by the tenor of
my instructions to C a p t ~Hull (of which a Copy is inclosed) & by your own discretion
I have directed M Higgens the Navy Agent to send on board the HOW to
your char e, the sum of two thousand Spanish Dollars in Silver for the service of
the unite8 States, which you will deliver to Capto Hull or Mr Eaton ae circumstances & convenience may point out -

%

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1806 TO 1807
I recommend your being cautious in communications with the shore and not to
trust to any displays of Amity till you are well assured of their fidelity [NA Sen. 9 B - B 6, Pres. Message, Jan. 1806.1
To Master Commandant Isaac Bull, U. S. Navy, from William Eaton, U. S. Navy
Agent for the Barbary Regencies
FORTENTERPRIZE
[DERNE]l7* Mag 1806
Sir, My dispatches to the Commodore pass open to your hands for yours and
the inspection of Capt Dent - please to seal them. - The alarm today was
occasioned by the descent of some Arabs on foot from the Enemys Camp down the
ravine near the old Castle with a view of plunder, their number is stated to have
been two or three hundred, they retreated precipitately on meeting and receiving
the fire of a party of the Bashaws people stationed a t that post - a report is current, that had they succeeded, to draw the force of the Town to defence of their
flocks in the rear, the Enemys Cavalry would have entered by the route they
passed the 13th I think the display of the Bashaws forces on this occurrence, in
view of the Enemy may have a good effect. - Weak as we now are on shore, I
candidly confess, I wish they may be detered from attacking us until1 Capt Dents
return. [NDA. Isaac Hull LB, 1803-1806.1
To Captain Samuel Barron, U. S. Navy, from Master Commandant Isaac Hull,
U. S. Navy
UNITEDSTATESBRIOArgus
Derne 17th M a y 1806
SIR, Enclosed are duplicates of my Letters to you by the Hornet under date of
the 29tP April, and the principal transactions from that date up to the present
time
nothing of consequence transpired from the date of her leaving this until
9 in the morning of the 13th when the Enemy made their appearance in great
Numbers on an eminence back of the Town with the Flags of four Beys flying and
appear'd determined to attack the Town - Hamet Bashaw having discovered
them, marched out about three hundred Men to meet them as they came down the
Hill. At % past 9 the parties met, and began a brisk fire, which lasted about
fifteen minutes - Hamet Bashaws Troops finding the Enemy too strong for them,
retreated into the Town, where they were pursued by an equal number of the
Enemys Horsemen, after gaining the Town the Bashaw was joined by the inhabitants, who fell upon the Enemy, and forced them to retreat, killing numbers of
them from loop holes in their Houses, and from the old Walls of the Gardens, as
they came out a t the Eastern part of the Town, the Argus, Nautilus and Battery
began a fire upon them, which killed and wounded several, and forced such as
were able to return, on to the side of the Hill, quite out of the reach of our Guns
At about 11 they gave the day up as lost, and began their march for the top of the
Hill, where they are yet encamped, threatning every day a second attack, but it is
to be hoped the severe manner in which they have been handled will prevent it,
a t all events we are prepared for them, the Enemy consists of about Seven hundred Horse men and three hundred foot, about four hundred of which are Tripolitans, the remainder Arabs, the latter we are informed refuse to join them, in a
second attack, their object being plunder, which they find harder to be come a t
than they expected.
It is unfortunate that circumstances oblige me to send off the Nautilus before
some other Vessel arrived to relieve her, but I hope when you are made acquainted
with our situation you will approve of the arrangement. As I did not determine to send her off until this Evening, prevents my writing
to you so fully as I could wish, consequently must beg leave to refer to Captain
Dent for the particulars of our situation on this coast & what our future prospects are. [NDA. Isaac Hull LB, 1803-1806.1

-

-

-

Extract from journal kept on board U. 8. Brig Argu~. Master Commandant 18-0
Hull, U. 8. Navy, commanding, 17 May 1806
Commences with pleasant weather At anchor off Dern in Company with the

Nautiku

-

-

At past 2 a party of the Enemies hors made their a pearance on the Hill
fked n gun and hoisted a red flag a t the fore - ~ a u n c gon shore watering At

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

21

sundown moderate some of the Enemy in sight on the Hill - from Sundown to
day light Moderate breazes from South4 At day light sent the Launch on shore
watering - Hove up the anchor and droped off shore about one Cable length At 11 sent the launch to water the Nautiles - Mr Eaton came onboard [NYES. Naval History Sec., Argus.]
Extract from journal of Hezekiah Loomis, Steward, U. S. Navy, U. 8. Brig Vkm.
Master Commandant John Smith,0 . 6 . Navy, commanding, Friday, 17 May 1806
[Malta] At 5 o'clock P. M. weighed anchor and the wind ahead for Tunis where
we are bound. The Constellation went out before us.
[L. F. Middlebrook. NDA copy.]
118 May 180.51
To all whom it may concern from President Thomas Jefferson
THOMAS
JEFFERSON,
President of the U:States of Arne*.
To all whom it may concern.
Know ye that the American Ship Huntress, whereof is Master John Stinson, a
Citizen of the United States, is bound from the River Potomac for Malta 8: Syracuse, with a Car o of Naval & Military Stores & provisions, for the use of the
Squadron of the bnited States now in the Mediterranean: WHEREFORE I request
ali whom i t may concern not to give or suffer to be given to her any hindrance or
molestation, but on the contrary to afford her every aid & facility she may need
in
rosec cut ion of her Vovaee.
.
.
. the
.
In f d t h whereof, I have h6re;nto set my hand and caused the Seal of the United
(L.S) S t a h to be hereunto affixed.
Done a t the City of Washington, the 18*b day of May A, D, 1805. and of
the Inde~endenceof the United States of America, the Twentv ninth.
TH: JEFFERSON.
By the President
Secsetary of State.
JAMESMADISON,
[NA. SDA. Dom. L., Vol. 14, May 1802-May 1805.1
To Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Navy, Boston, Mass., from Secretary of the Navy
NAVD E P 18
~ Mag 1806. I have ordered Lieutt M~Neillto take the command of the Bomb V e ~ ~the
el
Spitfire and Mr Lewis to take the Command of the Vengeance. Should there
be any ditFerence in the two, call the most complete one, the Spitfire. L, McNeill
is the Senior Officer, therefore ought
to have the best Vessel. The other call
the Vengeance.
These gentlemen will receive their Sailing orders by the same mail that will
convey this letter to you. They are ordered to join the Commodore, and will
be disposed of after they shall join him as he shall judge most expedient.
I beg that you will contribute every exertion in your power for the &patch
of these Vessels and let them not be detained. You can scarcely hear from me
again in answer to any letter you may write after receiving this before they will
sail-at least I hope so.
Send on ss so011 as may be in your power the drafts of the gun boats.
[NDA. OSW, Vol. 6, 1802-1805.1
To Captain Samuel Barron, U. 6. Navy, from Secretary of the Navy
NAVDEPT.18 May 1806.
I have this day received your dispatches dated 9 March last.
Before you receive this letter which will be handed to you by Lieutt MvNeill,
you will I hope have been joined by the John Adam, & gun boats N* d S 4
6 - 6 - 7 - 8 - 9 & 10 which will have relieved our apprehensions as to not
obtainin seasonably a com tent number of amall ?esaels.
re and Lieu%
Lieu* % p ~ e i l l c o m m a n E g the Bomb Vessel called the 8
Lewis Commanding the Bomb Vessel called the Vengeance,are o ered to report
themselves to you. They have been put on board of these Ve88eIs merely for

-

- - -

9

NAVAL OPERATIOATS FROM 1806 TO 1807
the purpose of navigating them t o you. After they shall join you, you will
dispose of them as may appear to you the most judicious.
I informed you by my letter of the 16th u l t ~that Lieu$ Leonard had resigned.
This arose from misapprehension and he is &ill an officer in the Navy, though
too unwell to join you. By Ketch Spitfire Lieu+ M~NeillJune 1805.
[NDA. LB, 1799-1807.1
To Tobias Lear, U. S. Consul General, Algiers, from Captain Samuel Barron, U. 6.
Navy
h l . 4 ~ ~ May
~
1805
( R e d 18 May 9 oclk PM. And May 19th d noon)
SIR The debilitated and declining state of my Health, consequent, on the long
and severe illness I have suffered, and from which notwithstanding the hopes
wherewith from day to day I have been flattered, there is now but a very faint
prospect of speedy Recovery, giving me serious apprehensions, that I shall be
under the painful necessaty of relinquishing the Command of the U States Navy
forces in these seas to the Officer next in seniority, I conceive it my duty in
contemplation of such a change t o acquaint you with the Actual state of the
Squadron and t o submit to your consideration my opinion on certain points of
importance in our affairs You are already apprized of the disappointment which was experienced in
the application to the Neapolitan Government for the Loan of Bombards and
Gunboats to cooperate in our meditated attack upon Tripoli, as also of the steps
which were taken to remedy this disappointment, by a similiar application a t
Venice the failure of which has Extinguished all hope of obtaining for this season
a t least, that description of force which I cannot but consider as essential to
ensure the complete success of offensive operations
The term of service
of the Men composing the Crews of that part of the Squadron lately commanded
by Commodore Preble will expire early in the Autumn. an important period in
our Arrangements and after this event we cannot prudently calculate upon
their services The recent Dispatches from Mr. Eaton have been communicated to you from their tenor and the knowledge, I have within a short time obtained of
certain features in the character of Sidi Hamet Bashaw, I must candidly own
that I have no longer the same expectations which I once entertained of the
result of the Cooperation with him This want of energy and Military talents his total deprivation of means and
resources the great Expence already incurred and the large sum which would
be required according to Mr Eatons Statement for pursuing the object-a Sum
far exceeding both the resources placed a t my disposal and the powers Vested
in me by my Instructions compel me to relinquish the plan, Indeed on mature
reflection I am of opinion, that if the Ex Bashaw, having received the first impulse from our strength and being put in possession of Dern, the province where
his interest is supposed to be the strongest has not in himself sufficient energy
address & Courage, and cannot command sufficient means to move on with firm
steps towards the Usurper's Residence whilst we second his operations by sea.
He must be considered as no longer a fit subject for our support and Cooperation-I am preparing to send provisions to the coast for the subsistance of the crews
of the Argus Brig & Nautilus Schooner which Remain there a t Mr Eaton's request, and by the Sloop Hornet that conveys them. I shaU send such Instructions to that Gentleman and the Officers with him as further reflexion. and the
nature of your determination on this Letter may dictate-whatever
may be
the final result of this Cooperation I cannot reject the beleif that it has had a
powerful effect upon the reigning Bashaw, and it may be fairly presumed, that
the gallant conduct of our friends in the &flaira t Dern, a.nd the capture of that
place will have its influence and dispose him to moderate his pretensions and t o
think seriously of PeaceThe complaining condition of some of the ships of our Squadron is not among
the least important considerations of the resent moment, three of the Frigates
are in such a state as in my opinion a n f in that of the Commanders renders
them unfit to encounter the severity of another Winter's Blockade without
considerable repairs.
These facts and considerations Sir for the due apj~reciationof which you are
fitted by your talents and the length and particular line of your experience seem

-

23

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

to point out the present as auspicious beyond any former occasion, and indeed as
the very moment for attempting a Negotiation especially when we combine with
these Reflexions the certainty that our force respectable aa i t is is yet r t l y
exaggerated a t Tripoli, & Consider the effect which such a view of his nemy
added to the movements of his Brother, must have on the mind of Joussuf BashawStrongly
rsuaded that your conclusions upon these points have anticipated
my own, !?am induced to state to you my earnest wish that you may deem it
expedient to meet the Overture lately made by His Excellency. thro' the Spanish Consul so far as to found on it the Commencement of a Negotiation - I
cannot entirely suppress another motive which I confess weighs painfully on my
mind. I trust that I feel as becomes an American, and that I know what an
American ought to suffer when the Interests & honor of his Country call on his
fortitude, were I deficient in these respects or misled by unreflecting compassion,
I am well assured that Captain Bainbridge and his unfortunate comrades would
be first in deprecating this deficiency - But I &ow the Value of such a man
as Captain Bainbridge and of his Officers and I am persuaded that I speak the
language of our Country, when I declare that as they lost their liberty in its defence and its service no reasonable & honorable occasion should be neglected
which affords a prospect of releasing them from the bondage of a bigotted &
Unfeeling Tyrent - In communicating these sentiments, you Sir will do me
the justice to beleive that I discard every Idea of any real point of national Honor
or advantage being sacrificed to the attainment of their emancipation weighing
that Honor & advantage by the practice of powerful Nations but I must contend
that the liberty and perhaps the lives of so many valuable & estimable Americans
should the
ought not to be sacrificed to points of honor, taken in the abstract
event justify my hopes and expectations of your coincidence with me on this
interesting subject and you determine on going to Tripoli, Cap$ Barron commr
the ESSQ Frigate who is under sailing orders for the Blockade, will be instructed
to wait your arrangements & convey you thither
I beg leave to add my assurances that in case you determine on this step,
Sanguine as my expectations will be of the issue I shall not relax in the smallest
degree from hostile preparations, well aware that the best assistant which an able
Negotiator can have, is an energetic display of force & means a t the very time
as if Peace were despaired of
I entreat the favour of your early Reply
[NA. Senate Files. 10th Congress and Stephen Decatur Col.]

-

-

To Master Commandant Isaac Hull,U. S. Navy, from William Eaton, U. S. Navy
Agent for the Barbary Begencies
[DERNE]May 18tb 1805
I assumed the Debt of Ahmet for twenty Dollars, borrowed of Shiek Mahomet,
The Creditor has been to me this Morning for the Cash, did Ahmet send it aboard
the Argus.
Has Capt. Dent left Eighteen Dollars for me? I have promised payment this
Afternoon, but have not cash.-A deserter from the Enemy this morning states,
that last evening our Arabs, in the rear, fell upon a Caravan of Camels, laden'd
with Wheat & Barley and took Seventy One of them
[NDA. Captain's LB, Vol. 3, 1805.1
Extract from journal kept on board U. S. Brig Argus, Master Commandant Isaac
Bull, U. S. Navy, commanding, 18 Hay 1805
[Derne] Commences with fresh breazes from the South$ and East - Mr
Eaton and Capt Dent onboard findeing the Enemy dare not attack us and our
provisions giting short I determined to send off thc Nautiles for Malta as soon
as possable for supplyes. Capt Dent went onboard to prepair for sailing - At
Sundown Moderate Launch on shore for water and wood - at 8 Launch came
off - At 10 sent her on shore for Mr Eatons despatches a t 1 AM she came off
sent them with my letters onboard the Nautiles - At 3 light winds from the
West4 Nautiles got underway for Malta At day light Nautiles out of sight
sent the Launch on shore to carry a barrel of Powder and to assist in building a
wharf At 12 moderate. Launch returned
[NYHS. Naval History Sec., Argus.]

24

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1<06 TO 1807

Extract from journal of William Eaton, U.6. Navy Agent for the Barbary Regencies,
Saturday, 18 May 1806
[Derne] 3 a. m. The Nautilus sailed with dispatches to Malta.
At 9 in the morning the enemy advanced in order of battle to the declivity of
the mountain, but could not bring themselves to a resolution to meet the vast
numbers who showed themselves with Hamet Bashaw; and retired in about an
hour: they had daily showed themselves since the 13th but not so conspicuously.
[H. E. Huntington L&AG.]
To Captain Samuel Barron, U. 6, Navy, from Tobias Lear, U. 6. Consul General,
Algiers
MALTA, May 19'4 1806.
SIE,I had the honor, last evening, to receive your letter of yesterday, on the
subject of opening a negociation with the Baahaw of Tripoli.
Most sincerely do I lament the long and severe illness which you have suffered,
and under the effects of which you still labour; and I am fully persuaded that no
consideration would lead you to relinquish the Command vested in you by the
Government of our Country, but a thorough conviction that your retaining it,
when unable to perform the duties inseperable from the station, would be injurious
to the Cause in which we are engaged; and I am also persuaded, that when such
conviction arises; all personal considerations will yield to your patriotism.
I have maturely considered the several points mentioned in your letter relative
to a negociation with the Bashaw of Tripoli; and upon a view of my Instructions
from the Government of the United States on that subject, I conceive it my duty
to endeavour to Open and bring to a happy issue, a negociation for peace, consistent
with the tenor of those Instructions, whenever the Commander of our Forces in
this Sea shall judge that the occasion is proper and favourable; as it is presumed
that the Bashaw will be impressed by the Aspect or Operations of that Force. And as this is, in your Opinion, a proper occasion, I shall hold myself in readiness
to proceed in a few days, on that business, with Captain Barron in the U. S.
Frigate Essex,which you are so good as to say will wait my arrangements.
I presume, as Captain Rodgers, who is your second in Command, and who will,
of course, take the Command of the Squadron if your health, as you apprehend,
ehould compel you to relinquish it, is now off Tripoli, and may be possessed of
some information relative to our affairs with that Regency, which has not yet
reached you, that he will be fully advised of the motives which have induced
this meesure, and instructed to give it all the facility which his judgment may
suggest.
Altho' I cannot, Sir, agree with you in Opinion, that any impression favourable
to us hae been made on the mind of the Bashaw from our co-operation with his
brother thus far, excepting what map arise from the undaunted Bravery and
perseverence of the few of our Countrymen a t Derne, which will be to him a
furfher proof of what we can do alone against him; Yet I am of opinion, that, as
he has discovered a disposition to Open a negociation, we should embrace it, in
order to see if such terms can be made as are admissable on our part, and to releive
our unfortunate Countrymen out of his power, whose fate ought not to depend on
small punctilios.
[Mm.James S. Barron Col.]
To Master Commandant Isaac Hull, U. S. Navy, from Captain Samuel Barron,
U. S. Navy

MALTA
1gt4 May 1806
SIB,Your several communications were received by the [Sloop, 10 Guns]

Hornet, which did not arrive here 'till the 16t4 having met with head winds, and
heavy gales, your various informations are under my part~cularattention, the
state of my health and my anxiety to dispatch the Sloop without loss of time does
not allow me to enter into lengthy observations, nor is it indeed necessarv, the
letter I have written to Mr Eaton by this conveyance and which he will comkunicate to you, will no doubt determine him and the Officers to leave the Coast, as a
measure rendered necessary by existing circumstances, and es ecially by the
intention of the Consul General to open a negociation with Jbussef reigning
Bsehaw of Tripoli, You will therefore as soon as the re uisite arrangements are
made return with the Vessels under your command to Jyracraouse, to which place
it is contemplated to transfer headquarters in the course of a few days.-

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

25

Lieutenant Evans is directed t o deliver the Stores which have been laden in
the Sloop t o you, t o be distributed a t your discretion, you will understand that
these stores are intended for the use of the crews of the United States Vwels,
and the Christ'ins under the command of Mr Eaton. - Nothing material baa
occured in our a t f a d since your departure. Mr Evans will be able to inform you
of every thing w&hg of notice. - I have likewise sent with Lieutenant Evans
Two Thousand Spanish Dollars in specie, which will serve to extinguish any in&vidual engagements that you or Mr Eaton may have contracted a t Derne. I look anxously for further ktelligence from Derne, and with my best wishes
to yourself and those under your command Enclosed ia a copy of my letter to Mr Eaton for your informstion Lieutenant
Evans has under his charge the following private Stores. Vzt - Six dozen of Porter
a Bag of Coffee
a Cask of B r o w Sugar
Six Pounds of Tea
One Qr Cask Mercella
For the use of Mr Eaton and Officers, Captain Dent and yourself.
R. D.
presents his best respects.
[NDA. Isaac Hull LB, 1803-1806.1

-

To William Eaton,

U. 6. ITavy Agent for the Barbary ILegencies, from Captain
Samuel Berron, U. S. Navy

MALTA,19 May, 1806.

SIB!By the Hornet Sloop [lo Guns], which arrived in this Harbor on the 16

Inst (having had a tedious passage,) 1had the honor to receive your Dispatches
of 29 ultv & 1 Ins*, acnouncing the Capture of Derne, after a Contest, in which,
permit me to observe, that your conduct & that of your Companions in Arms will
not discredit the character which our Countrymen have established among the
Nations of Barbary.
I have perused with deserved attention the arguments & reasons adduced in
vour Letter of the 1.t on the subject of pursuing the Cooperation with Sidi Hamet
Bashaw. Being myself still too weak for the exertion of Letter Writing and my
secretary writing with difficulzy, owing to an inflamation in his eyes, i t is impossible for me to enter into a lengthy Reply; hOr does it indeed appear necesssrq-;
the business is now arrived a t that point where if the Ex Bashaw, after being put
in possession of Derne, his former Government & the District in which his Interest
is said to be the most powerful has not in himself energy & talent, & is so destitute
of means & resources, as not to be able to move on with successful progrees,
seconded by our Naval force acting on the Coast, he must be held as unworthy of
fulther Support and the Cooperation as a measure too expensive & burthensome
& too little pre ant with Rope or advantage t o justify its further prosecution;
for, whatever,
may have been once the intentions of Government on this
subject, & whatever your ideas touching those intentions, I feel that I have
already gone to the full extent of my authority. - My Instructions from the
Navy Department on this particular point with which you are not unacquainted,
fall very short of that u n l i i t e d discretion and power of application as relatea t o
funds insisted on in your Communications, and are totally silent with regard to
the quantity and description of Stores & Supplies which you mentioned to have
been in the contemplation of Government to furnish to the Bashaw; hence you
will be sensible that without taking a latitude that must involve me in a sum of
responsability, which it were the extreme of imprudence & rashness to encounter,
I cannot proceed further. - Independent of this consideration it may not be
impro r to state that I have not a t my Disposal funds sufficient to meet the
large E m s which according to your odculatiom would be required to pursue the
plan with effect
With respect to any Engagements to Sidi Hamet, 1 cannot consider them as
definite or s cific. - By our resources and by your Enterprize & valor we
have placed E m a t the post from a-hence he was driven when first he solicited
the aid & Support of our Arms, and in "the most valuable province of Tripoli"
in performing which, 1 conceive we have fulfilled every pledge, & that He can
neither charge us with bad faith in our Engagements or with injustice towards
himself. - His want of those qualities so essential in the Character of a Commander, $ especially to s Prince, contending for his Throne, is a serious obstacle
to the advancement of hia cause; - not to be surmounted even by the eglstence

-

E,

-

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1605 TO 1807
and manly exertion of them in those about his person. -but i t is certainly
what we had no right to anticipate and still less to suppose, that when Master
of the fineat Province in his Kingdon, where his influence is greatest & his adherents most numerous, "his Situation would not be materially altered", and himself as destitute of means to carry on the Contest as when brought from his
Exile in Egypt. - In short, Sir, the matter reduces itself to this:- We are
ready & willing t o support the Bashaw by an union of operatiom on the Coast
SO long as the War with Tripoli continues, but His Excellency must be explicitly
informed that our Supplies of Money arms and provisions are a t an end & that
he must now depend upon his own resources B: exertions. - This determination
will suggest to you & your Comrades that line of Conduct most prudent to be
ado ted in the present posture of A i r s .
1gave lost no time in dispatching the Hornet with a Supply of provisions for
the Crews of the Argus and Nautilwr, & the Christians under your Command,
& I hope she will arrive in time to prevent your suffering from want. I have now to acquaint you with an occurrence in our affairs interesting in
itself & momentous as relates to your Situation. - I n consequence of recent
advjces from Tripoli, I have thought it my duty to state to the Consul General
Colq Lear (now a t this place) my candid opinion that the present is a moment
highly favorable to treat for peace, L a Communication has just been handed me
from that Gentleman expressing his determination to meet the overture lately
made by the reigning Bashaw, so far as to found on it the colnmenceme~itof a
Negotiation, & to proceed to Tripoli in the Essez E'rigate, in the course of this
Week. - From a variety of concurring Circumstances the present period appears propitious to such a step, and I cannot help indulging sanguine hopes that
a very short time will restore Captain Bainbridge & his unfortunate Comrades
to freedom & their Country. - I t wou'd be needless for me to say anything
on the effect which this measure must needs have on your situation & determinations: - it is a measure which was anticipated in my Letter to you by Captain
HuIl & as such the intelligence of it will not I presume reach you unprepared. The interests of Sidi Hamet will not be overloolred: - it is with Colonel Lear's
express sanction that I mention his intention to endeavor a t stipulating some
Conditions for the unfortunate Exile, provided this can be done without giving
up points that are essential, & without any considerable sacrifice of National
advantage on our art. I have sent by Eeut: Evans 2000 Spanish Dollars which he k directed to
deliver to you or to Capt Hull, This sum will serve to extinguish any little engagemts you may hsve contracted a t Derne. I am extremely anxious for further intelligence from you and remain R-ith
Much Respect and Consideration
[H. E. Huntington U A G . HR 25.1

To George Davis, U. 6. Char& d'Affaires, Tunis, from Tobias Lear, U. S. Consul
General, AIgiers
MALTAAlay 19'4 1806
(COPY)
SIR I am happy to avail myself of the present opportunity offered by R f r
Oglander H. B. M. Consul for Tunis to inform you, that Commodore Harron
considering the present moment favourable for opening a negociation with the
Beshaw of Tri oli, hss requested me to go over there for that purpose, and I
shall according&, in a few days take my Passage to that place on board the U. S.
Frigate Essez Capts Barron.
I think i t highly probable that the Commodore will, by this opportunity send
orders for the U. S. Brig Vken to come over here, by the y a y of Tripoli, to give
us information of the sipation of our affairs with you, which we shall be anxious
to hear Since Capts Campbell left us on the 17tb for Tunis nothing new has occurred
excepting what is here stated. JNA. SDA. Algiers, Vol. 7, Part 1, 1804-1805.1
To Captein Hugh Gi. Campbell, U. 6. Navy, from Charles Biddle
PHILAD)
M a y 19. I806
DEAR
SIR We were much &a pointed in not having our Pressoners a t Tripoli
rsnsomed last year - I think d m : Preble should hsve concluded a Treaty on
the Terms offerd. he told me he would have done it, if the John Adams had

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS
arrived one day later than she did. 8: then, if Lt Chauncy had not told him i t was
the expectation of the Goverment and peple here that he would get the Prissoners without ransom, in this Chauncy was mistaken, no one here expected they
would be released without ransom - we are now in hopes ou will go off Tripoli
make every preparation for an attack & then ransom the Lissoners on the best
terms you can. this is the wish and expectation of every man of worth in the
U States It can be of no advantage to us, to destroy the houses in Tripoli or
kill thousands of the Tripolitans. nor is it necessary there should be any more
fighting to establish the Character of our Naval OEcers Your friend Jones sailed for Canton this Spring on C. Truxtuns receiving a
letter from Washington he wrote requesting me to pay the amount of the prize
money due you and your Crew to Mess9 Jones & Clark. but it appears they had
no power to receive i t
I t will give me pleasure to hear from you and to render you any services in
my power
When you see Lieutt Weyes [?I please to give my Compliments to him
[NDA. Area 7.1
Extract from journal kept on board U. S. Brig Argus, Master Commandant Isaac
Hull, U. S. Navy, commanding, 19 May 1805
[Derne] Commences with light breazes from the Northd And westward. At
anchor off Derne - Launch employed watering and building a wharf near the
battery At 4 a signal was made a t the fort for a bote Sent the Launch on shore At
sundown Mr Eaton Came onboard a t 8 he went onshor again was informed by
Mr E that the Enemy were Trying to Pursuade the People of Dern to turn their
arms against the Christians and distroy them - that the Bashaw was very much
in want of Cash to make presents to the arab chiefs that were daily coming over
to his side was requested by Mr Eaton to spair some of the prize goods for that
purpose as he could not raise any money for the Bashaw At sun down Pleasant -mind from South4 from sundoun to day light moderate
Saw during the Kight a number of Musquets fired on the borders of the Town At day light sent the Iaunch on shore with a Party of Men to assist Mr Eaton
in diging a ditch around the wall of the fort and to make Prepairations for his
defence against the Town in case they should accept of the Enemyes Proposals hove up the Larboard anchor found the stock broke and lost - Let go the
Starboard anchor a t 12 Very Pleasant light winds from Kd & 15-d several of our
officers from shore Came onboard to dine [NYHS. Navd History Sec., Argus.]
Extract from journal of Surgeon Jonathan Cowdery, U. S. Navy, 19 May 1805
[Tripoli] A spy employed by the Bashaw, arrived from RIdta and Syracuse.
IIe brought news +.hat the American squadron sailed for Alexandria in Egypt
about twenty days before; that it consisted of 4 frigates, 3 brigs, 3 schrs. 24 gun
boats, 6 bomb ketches, and several transports; that they were to take on board the
former, or Ex-Bwhaw, and to proceed along the coast of Tripoli, and take the
principal towns; and then to attack and take the town of Tripoli, and put i t in
possession of the Es-Bashew. The Bashaw and his people seemed much agitated
at this news.
[LC. Rare Books, Americnr~ Capt;ves in Tripoli or Dr. Cowdcry's Journal,
Boston, 1806.1
Extract from journal of Hezekiah Loomis, Steward, U. S. Navy, U. S. Brig Vircn,
Master Commandant John Smith, U.S. Navy, commanding, Sunday, 19 May 1805
This day fair wind at. 1 o'clock P. M. Saw the Island of Pantalara. At 2 the
Frigate made a signal for us to chase, and a t 6 o'clock came up with a Brig pierced
for 16 guns, mounting 4. She was from Tunis bound to Palermo. Stood for
Tunis. Nothing Kew.
[L. F. Middlebrook. KDA copy.]
Extract from journal kept on board U. S. Brig Argus, Master Commandant Isaac
Hull, U, S. Navy, commanding, 20 May 1805
[Derne] fine Pleasant Weather Wind from North4 At 1 the Bashaw [Hamet
Caramanli] and Mr Eaton, Came on board -found that the object of the Bashaws

28

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1806 TO 1807

Visit was to Try if Possable to raise by some means a little money. that he was
Very much in want of three hundred dollars for the urpose of quieting a number
of the arab chiefs who threatned to go over to the Enemy if they were not Paid
for their fighting for the Bashaw in the last action - the bashaw appeared Very
much distresed when I informed him that it was out of my power to furnish him
with Cash - that I had none onboard that he must have Patience for a few days
that until1 a Vessel arrived with supplies he replyed that he did not think himself
safe in his own hous without the means of satisfying those arabs about him I told him to give the people of Dern to understand if they were faithfull to him
they should be satisfyed otherwise we shod turn the guns of the fort and ships on
the Town and destroy every house in i t
At past 1 the Bashaw and MI Eaton went on shore the Bashaw in very low
spirits he could Eat no dinner - on his Leaving the brig I promised to send on
shore a few of the prize good to satisfy his Present demands - which were sent
to Mr E
At Sundown Pleasant weather Launch returned from shore with the men that
were sent to dig the ditch around the wall of the fort from sundown to day light Pleasant weather wind from South4 At clay light sent a party on shore to work a t the Entrenchment and to finish
the wharf At past 9 the Launch returned discovered a party of the Enemy
on the hill back of the Town - hoisted a red flag a t the fore and fired a gun.
Mr Eaton made a signal that all was well. the Bashaws Troops Came out to
meet a Party of Men that were Comeing towards the Town they prooved to be a
party of arabs - his friends who had beenout for the purpose of Robing the Enemy.
they had Taken two horses and kiled two of the Enemy - At 12 Every Thing
quiet in Town the Enemy haveing gone back of the Hill [NYHS. Naval History Sec., Argus.]
Receipt to Master Commandant Isaac Hull, U. S. Navy, for sundry articles of prize
goods, for the use of Hamet Bashaw
OF TRIPOLI
DERNE,KINGDOM
May 20th. 1806.
Received of Captain Isaac Hull, commanding in the naval de&hment of the
United States squadron before Derne, sundry articles of merchandise, agreeably
t o the foregoing list, amounting in value as per sale a t this place to one thousand
nine hundred and seventy four dollars - the avails of which have been delivered
to Hamet Bashaw to meet emergencies of the present moment, and the property
of which is vested in said Commander & the officers and crew of the United
as captors.
States Brig ATQUS
WILLIAMEATON
$1974.
I certify that the avails of the sale of the articles of prize goods alluded to in the
above receipt, have been applied as therein expressed Fort Enterprize, Derne, May 20. 1805
P N OBannon
[H. E. Huntington MAG. EA 274.1
[20 May 18051

To William Eaton, U. 8. Navy Agent for the Barbary Regencies, from O5cers of the
Expedition to Derne
[Translation]

SIR, In view of the desire and the courage which animates us all to participate
in the glory of an expedition which is worthy of such a warlike nation, we are
coming today to offer you again the zeal which we have to take part in it. We
could not serve a better chief. The heroic ardor and the talents with which you
are endowed can only insure the happiness of your subjects. We offer our services
in the campaign, to strictly carry out your orders, to exact respect for the honorable
flag of the United States of America, and to encounter the enemy wherever he
may be.
Everything assures us of a complete victory under your command. We are
only waiting for the moment to win this glory, and to fall on the enemy.
We believe you are assured in advance of the sentiments which we are pro-

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS
claiming. Yes! We swear that we shall follow you and that we shall fight unto
death.
To Mr. William Eaton, Agent of the United States of America for dl the Barbary
Regencies and General Commander in Chief of the allied land forces against
Tripoli.
Filippo Gilio
Chev [?I Davies Major
PN O'Bannon Lt. Marines
George Mann
George Farquhar
Engineering Inspector [?I
May [?I CornAt the Camp of Derna 20 May 1805.
E. Huntington L&AG. EA 186.1

m.

Extract from journal of Wiiam Eaton, U.S,Navy Agent for the Barbary Regencies,
Monday, 20 May 1805
[Derne] Eight oclock a. m. The enemy appear in all their force - and seem
resolute for a display of gallantry. - At 10 they disappeared. - At 6 p, m.
a woman from their camp states that it wss the intention uf the Beys to have
attacked our works this morning; but the Arabs refused to advance to the charge.
The Beys attempted to compel them. - They said they had not only the preservation of their own lives but the existence of their families to keep in view.
Hamet Baahaw had possession of the town and the Christians of the batteries;
these, with the great guns of the shipping, would destroy every thing that approached them. - They would remain with the camp till reenforcements came from
Joseph Bashaw, and would then fight the Christians. The Beys then demanded
their camels to be moved as covers to their front and flanks: - This they
refused. - The Beys were obliged to give up the project of a victory to day.
The flocks of the Beduoin Arabs have been under the protection of our guns
since the morning of the 13tb There has hitherto been no instance of this
confidence being deceived. - Their women bring us mutton, milk, eggs, and
t r a a c with our soldiers without any apprehensions of violence or fraud. We
have several days been reduced to the necessity of bartering prize goods of the
Argus for meat for the garrison. A humiliating traffic: but we have no cash.
[H. E. Huntington L&AG.]
Extract from journal kept on board U. S. Brig Argus, Master Commandant Isaac
Bull, U. S. Navy, commanding, 21 May 1806
[Derne] Commences with strong breazes from S S E to S S W Comeing off the
Land in Very warm flows. the Launch on shore to assist diging an entrenchment
round the fort - At 3 fresh breazes made signel for the Launch - At M past
3 Launch Came off - At 5 discovered the sand riseing in and about the Town
which had Very much the appearance of a whirlwind it Extended three or four
Carrying with it a n Emenc body of sand which
miles from North to South
appeard mooveing towards us. ordered all Clear for veering Cables. At % Past
5 the Wind shifted from S E to S W by W and blew Very heavy for hslf an hour
Veerd a whole Cable and which brought her up - the wind came off the land in
very warm flows our riging and spars were coverd with sand and with difficulty
we could look to windward without geting our Eyes put out with dust
At Sundown moderate sent the Launch on shore to see if Mr Eaton was in want
of ally thing hove in slack cable At 7 hove up the Larboard anchor to ee if we
had not gone round it - found it clear Let it go again - At 8 Launch returned with fresh Provisions for ship's Company At 12 a t night a fresh brease
from North$ and west4 Veered sixty fathom Cable At 2 Strong gales gave her
the whole Cable and put ship buoys on ready for sliping hoisted in launch -and
made every thing ready for sea At 4 strong gales and heavy sea ship Pitching very heavy expecting every
moment the Cable would part from day light to 12 hard gales and heavy eea from the NorthQ and West*
every thing in readiness for Sea Carpenters Employed repairing the Launch. the sea runing so high found i t impowable to send a bote on shore this day
[NYHS. Naval History Sec., Argus.]

-

-

-

30

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1806 TO 1807

Extract from journal of William Eaton, U. S. Navy Agent for the Barbary Regencies,
Tuesday, 21 May 1805
[Derne] A woman from the enemy's camp states that a re-enforcement joined
them yesterday of 150 cavalry; that they expect another to day or tomorrow, when
they calculate on taking the town and beseiging the Christian post.
[H. E. Huntington L&AG.]
--

Extract from journal of Midshipman Charles Morris, Jr., U. S. Navy, on board
U. S. Frigate President, Easter Commandant George Cox, U. S. Navy, commending,
Tuesday, 21 May 1803
1. The Constitution's boat came along side for provisions, which we supplied
her with
7 the Town of Tripoli bore S S E. Capt Cox returned.
Latitude Observed 33" 14' N.
[Mrs. C. E. Fox original, NDA photostat.]
Extract from journal of Hezekiah Loomis, Steward, U. S, h'avy, U. S. Brig Vixen.
Master Commandant John Smith, U. S. Navy, commanding, Tuesday, 21 May
1805.
This morning found ourselves away to the leeward of the Cape [Bon], the wind
fresh ahead. At 8 o'clock the wind hauled and got into the bay and in sight of
Tunis a t 1 o'clock P. M. At 4 o'clock the Frigate came to anchor and Capt.
Smith went on board. He soon returned and we stood in under the fort to bring
out one boat which was sent from the Constellation. We went in very near the
shippings, took the boat in tow and stood off for the Frigate. We came to ancpor
a t 6 o'clock P. M.
[L. F. Middlebrook. NDA copy.]
[22 May 18051
The relative Force of the four Squadrons sent to the Mediterranean
The First Squadron, Under Dale.

--

President, (flagship,) - - - - - - - - Philadelphia,-_ - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - Essez,---- - - - - - - - - ----- - Enterprise ------ -------- --- -- --

cost.

(fund

44- -James Barron, - - - - - - - - - - - $220,910
38--Samuel Banon,- .-- - - - 179,349
32_-William Bainbridge,- - - --- 139,362
12.. ,.Andrew Sterrett,- ------ - 16,240
1 2 6 _ _ . . _ _ - - - - _ _ - - - - - - - - - - - - - -$555,862

-

-

-

08
00
50
52
10

The Second Squadron, under Morris.

-

Chesapeake, (flagship,) ----- - - - - - 38- -Isaac Chauncey,_..- - - - - - - - $220,677
ConsteUation,--- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 38- -Alexander Murray, - - - - - 314,212
36--James Barren,- - - - - - - - - - - 159,639
New York,-------------------dJohn Adams , - ~ - - - - _ _ - . . - - -28--John
- - - - - - Rod ers,------------ 113,505
Adams,.. . - - - - - - - - - 28--Hugh G. 8ampbel1,----.-76,622
Enterprise,--------------------12--Andrew Sterrett ,--------- 16,240

-

--

.----------180
-

80
15
60
72
27
52
$900,898 06

The Third Squadron, under Preble.
Constitution, (flagship,)- - - - - - - - - - 44- -Edward Preble ,..-- - - - - - - - $302,718
Philadelphia,---- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 38- -William Bainbridge, - - - - _ - 179,349
Argus,-- - . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16--Stephen Decatur ,-----,--- 37,428
Siren,------------------------16--Charles Stewart,- - - - - - - - 32,521
Nautilus , - - - - - - - - - _ - - - - -12--Richard
- - - - - - - Somem,---------- 18,763
Vizen,------------------------la-- John Smith,-------------20,872
Enterprise,--------------------12--Laac Hull,- - - - - - - - - - - - - 16,240

-

-

150
-

84
00
29
77
51
73
52

$607,894 66

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

31

The Fourth Squadron, under Samuel Bamon.

.----

Gum

Cbst.

Constitution,- - - -- - - - - - - ___ - - - ---- 44--John Rod em,- - - - -- - - - - _ $302,718 84
President
_ - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 4L-IGeorge ??ox,- - - - - - - - - - - - 220,910 08
Constellation,--- - .- - - - - - - - - - - - - 38- -*ugh
Campbell
- -- - 311,212 16
Congress,- - - - - - - --- -- ---- -- - - -- 38--Stephen Decatur ,--------197,246 81
Bssec,-- - - - - - - - - - - -- - - - - -- - -- - - 32-- Jarnee Barren,- - - - - - - - - - - 139,362 50
John Adams
----- - --- --- - 28--1aaac Chauncey ,------ - - - 113,505 72
Siren,-- _ - - - -- - ----- - -- - -- - -- - - 16- -Charles Stewr)rt,- - - - - - - - 32,521 77
Argus,- -,
- - --- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 16--Isaac IluH,, ---- - - - - - - - - - 37,428 29
Vixen,------ - - _ - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 12- -John Smith,- - - - - - - _ - _ - - 20, 872 73
Nautilus ,---- - - - - - -- - - - - - - - - --- 12-_John E. Dent,- - ---- --- - 18,763 51
Enterprise
12--[Thomas] Robinson, [Jr.]-_
16,240 52
Hornet , - - - - - - - - - - - - _ _ - - -[lo]-.[Samuel]
- - - - - - - Evans - - - - . - - _ -(unknown.)
--

d.

.---

302

2 Bomb-vessels , - - - - - - - -- -- -- -- -- -- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

10 G u n b o a t s , - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -

35,751 07
122,127 02

To Captain James Barron, U. S. Navy, from Captain Samuel Barron, U. 8. Navy
MALTA28 May 1805.
SIR With the U. S. Frigate under your Command, you are directed t o roceed
off the Harbor of Tripoli, and on falling in with the Constitution, deliver to 8aptain
John Rodgers the accornp? Letters with the Contents of which you have been
made acquainted. I n consequence of my Resignation of the Command of
the Squadron t o that OEcer, communicated to him in said Letter, you will
place yourself in all respects under his Orders, and receive his Instruct~ons.You will take on board your Ship the Consul General, Col: Tobias h r , with
whose intentions in going to Tripoli you are also acquainted - You will please
detail to Captain Rodgers every material Occurrence in our affairs since iris departure from hence, & the present state and destribution of the Squadron, which
want of time prevents my giving to him in writing - I have expressed my
wishes with regard to the Essex, in a private Letter to Captain Rodgers & have
no doubt he will acquiesce in them. [NA. Sen. 9 B - 3 6, Pres. Message, Jan. 1806.1
To Captain John Bodgers, U. S. Navy, commanding U. S. Frigate Constitution from
Captain Samuel Banon, U. 8. Navy
MALTAZdnQ May 1805
SIR, Since I had the pleasure of Writing to you by the Resident Frigate, I
have not had any intelligence from the Barbary Coast - Cap* J. Barron commanding the Esscx has rec'd orderu t o proceed oE Tripoli for the purpose of
conveying the Consul General who will communicate to you his intentions which
will be further explained by the accompanying Copies of my late correspondwce
with him.
Altho I have never disguised from myself that my powers of attention have
been weakened by the effecLs of my 1oi.g and distressful Indisposition, almost
equally with my strength and bodily actirity, I have nevertheless been dram
on from Week t o Week by the hopes of a speedy recovery - hopes which the
unsteady Character of the Disorder itself rendered plausable, & which I was
even authorised t o cheerish by the corresponding expectations of my Medical
Attendanta - Gentlemen of high ck merited rank in their profession, connected
with me no further than as my situation reqdired their assistance, and only so
Long as my reeidence in Malta gives them the opportunity of affording it, and
who therefore could have no otber possible Interest in inspiring groundless hopes
with no other possible effect than t o exssperate the final Disappointment. - But
Sir!, though I feel myself to have been perfectly justified in forming these hopes
of recovery, I am sensible that the moment is arrived when I can no longer justifiably persevere in acting upon them.
The Season for decisive measures h m
overtaken me and I am a t length forced to percieve thet my unceasing and most

-

-

32

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1805 TO 1807

anxious impatience for the return of Hedth, from the deep wish of discharging
the important functions entrusted to me has continually retarded that return, &
that this inevitable solicitude which whilst I retain the command, it is impomible
that any state of Health should obliterate or even suspend, must not only defeat
its own immediate object, but greatly diminish & perhaps preclude the probability
of my serving my Country a t any future Day; To relinquish my Command
therefore, is I conceive a duty which I owe to our Country and to the service
in general, but more particularly to the present Squadron.
An act of Justice,
which the skill, courage and general merits of the Officers, and the ardor and discipline of the Crews a t once enfo~ceand embitter. For, you Sir need not be
informed that this decision could not be made without a long and painful Struggle,
aa well as mature deliberation; but it is made, and accordingly I do hereby resign
my Command of the Naval forces of the United States in these Seas, & by thjs
Letter communicate officially my Resignation to you on whom the Command
devolves by the Law of Seniority, reserving to myself however the right of reassuming it, in case the War should be protracted beyond my Hopes & Expectations & my Health be fully restored
On this point I have only to add that the
pain inseparable from this act of Duty is greatly alleviated by two reflexionsfirst that in having you S
i
r for my Senior Captain I am enabled to resign my
Station to an Officer who dready in a high degree enjoys the confidence of our
Government, and secondly, that, previous to my resignatiol~,the Consul General
has express'd his coincidence with the opinion which I officially communicated
to him respecting the propriety & policy of meeting the recent overture of the
Bashaw of Tripoli so far as to open a negociabion for which I am persuaded, that
the present moment is eminently favorable, & of the Success of nrhich, I entertain
sanguine expecta~ions,conducted as it will be by a Gentleman of such abilitv
experience & moderation as ColoneI Lear, with the ready assistance and Cdopperation which I doubt not he will find in your activity and zeal - I cannot
suppress the feeling that if any thing could restore me to Health as by a Charm,
i t would be the sight of Capt: Bainbridge and his fellow-sufferers restored a t
length to freedom on terms of Peace; a t once honorable and advantageous t o
our Common Country, such terms as I am convinced, notwithstanding all their
privations and sufTerings would alone make them desire their freedom or look
back with pleasure on its attainment.
Should these Hopes however b e
baffled by the extravagant demands or the infatuation of the Enemy, I can only
express my earnest wish that the valor and exertions of the Squadron may soon
create another opportunity, and that to their Honor they may succeed in inspiring addicional Respect for the American name, and a pacific policy in the whole
of the Barbary Goverments & thus realize an object which must be deep in
the hearts of our Countrymen and for the accomplishment of which I should have
considered no personal sacrifice too important.
I beg leave to refer you to Capt. J. Barron for full particulars of Occurrences
since your departure and for the present distribution of the Squadron, and I
beg leave also to assure you that my anticipation of the success of Colonel Lears
Visit to Tripoli will not diminish in the smallest degree the preprvrations for offensive measures and that so far as my Strength will permit I shall proceed with
every necessary arrangement till we meet.
It is not in my power at this moment to transmit you all the Papers & 1)ocuments the transfers of which become requisite by my Resignation; I have however directed my Secretary to prepare them and they will be deBvered to you
on your Arrival here.
[LC. JRP, Letters & Orders, Book A, 1804-1805.1

-

-

-

-

-

-

To Captain John Bodgers, U. 8. Ravy, commanding U. S. Frigate Conrgiulu[ion,from
Captain Samuel Barron, U. 8. Ravy
MALTA,22.e May 1806
DEARSIR, A6 YOU will be sensible how deeply I am interested in the present
important C r i m of our Maire notwithstanding the arrangement communicated
in my official Letter of this Date, and will be disposed to make allowances for the
impatience natural to a state of Sickness, I am Induced to request should it not
interfere materially with your dispositions, that you a-ill send the Es~seez34th
Cap* Barron to this place w soon as i t is determined what turn the negotiation k
i
likely to take
If things can be so arranged I am desirous that she should not be
subjected to a long Quarantine as i t wilI be important to me to have my Br3ther
with me for a few Days preparatory to my remow1 from this place.-[LC. JRP. Letters $ Orders, Book A, 1804-1805.1

-

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

33

To Secretary of the Navy from Robert Deniaon, Secretary of Captain Samuel
Barron, U. 6. Navy
Duplicate
M a m a 82m4May 1806.
SIR! The health of the Commander in chief being such as to render hiln incapable of writing, He has directed me to give you a brief account of the proceedings of the Squadron since his last Dispatches and of its present distribulion The.blockade of the Enemy's Harbor hss been kept up closely & without interrnlsslon - so as almost to preclude the possibility of his receiving any sort of
Supplies and there is every reason to believe that great distress is felt by the
Inhabitants - The President Frigate arrived here on the 27P d t with
~ three
vessels detained by Captain Rodgers within six Miles of Tripoli and in the act of
steering direct for the Port; the President sailed again on the 3rd to join the Constitution - The Congress sailed on the 181h of last Month for Leghorn, for the
purpose of procuring a quantity of Powder Shot &ca. to be in readiness for
oEensive operations - Commodore Barron considered this arrangement as
absolutely necessary from the strong probability of disappointment in this appli&ion for similar supplies a t Naples and the event has fully justified his calculations as you will perceive by the inclosed Copy of a Letter just received from our
Navy Agent a t that place - Captain Decatur having been enjoined to use all
poss~bledispatch, he may be expected to return early in next Month The Essez arrived a t this place from the Adriatic on the 12Pb Instant - Owing
to causes which were anticipated in a former Communication to the Department,
Captain [James] Barron did not succeed with the Imperial Goverment in the object
of his Mission - he made arrangements however with Captain Robinson and
the Consul a t Trie[s]te Mr Wm Riggins for procuring in the Roman State some
vessels to serve aa Gun Boats, the arrival of which w e look for daily - Captain
Barron having mentioned to me that he wrote to you very fully from Trieste, it is
unnecessary for me to enter into further particulars on this head The ComtelEation and Vizen sailed for Tunis Bay on the Evening of the 17th I have the honor to inclose the Copy of a Letter from Commodore Barron to Mr
Davis which will acquaint you fully with the important nature of the businas on
which they have been Pent - The Commodore is anxiously waiting for the
h
return of the Brig ~ 7 t ~ntelligenee
The Argrur and Nautilus are on the Coast of Derne - The Hornet [Sloop]
arrived here on the 1 6 r b with Dispatches from Mr Eaton announcing the Ca ture
of Derne by assault on the 2 7 t h u l t ~by the Army of Sidi Hamet under his 8ommand - I send herewith a continuation of Commodore B&ronJs Correspondence
with that Gentleman and with Captain Hull, from w-hich you will derive the most
accurate & satisfactory information respecting the progress of the Cooperation
with the Ex Bashaw and the actual position of affairs on the Coast, I shall therefore offer no remarks on the subject - The Hornet sailed again on the 20th The Brig S y e n is still on the Gibraltar Station, where hl? Simpson conceives i t
prudent t o keep her as there is yet something equivocal and Mysterious hanging
about the movements of the Moors - He seems to expect that the Emporer
will renew his demand of sending Wheat to his friend the Bashaw of Tripoli as
soon crs the vessels fitting a t Lisbon are in readiness The vessel which went with Cloathing and supplies for our unfortunate Countrymen ia Tripoli returned on the 2 5 t h u l t ~and her return did not disappoint the
expectations we had formed of some interesting intelligence from that quarter
which expectations were expressed in the Commodores last Diepatches to the
Department - I t a pears by a variety of Letters which have been received that
the Bashaw is s e r i o d disposed and earnestly desirous for Peace with the United
Btates, and what o o n f i m this idea beyond all doubt is the receipt by Colonel
Lear of a Letter written a t the express soIicitation of the Bey by the 8panbh
Consul with overtures for o ning B Negotiation & accompanying a Teschera or
passport under the Bey's E l guaranteeing the inviolability of any person or
ons sent to Tri oli to treat of Peace - These direct evidences of a pacific
osition in the 8ashaw were a few days before prefaced by a Communication
to & m o d o r e Barron from Mr N k e n the Danish Consul, written a t the desire
of the Minister Sidi Mahomet Doghies expressing the Minister's sincere and
earnest wjsh for the reestablishment of Peace and recommendin that a person
should be sent over immediately to commence a Xegotiation 7 %n consequence
of these repeated and unequivocal Manifestations of a disposit~onon the part
the Enemy to accomodate differences, the Commander in chief considered it IS
duty, oficislly to commu~icateto the Coned-general his opinion that the present
moment is favorable for opening a Negotiation, and the latter having ex re&sep
hh coincidanae therewith the measure has been agreed upon and Colonel %auIS

F

of

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1805 TO 1807
making arrangements t o proceed on board the Essez frigate t o the Coast of Tripoli
in the course of two or three days - Commodore Barron entertains the most
sanguine hopes of the happy issue of this measure and anticipate with not less
confidence than pleasure the speedy emancipation of Captain Bainbridge and his
suffering Companions - I think i t is not hazarding too much to say there is
scarsely a doubt but the business will be honorably and satisfactorily terminated
in less than a fortnight.
I t is with feelings of deep regret that I comply with the Commodores directions
of acquainting you that the apprehensions expressed in his last Dispatches on the
subject of his health have been but too certainly verified, and that in consequence
of his debilitated & precarious Situation and the entire disappointment of all the
hopes of a perfect Recovery with which he has been flattered & bueyed up from
Week to Week and from Month to Month, he feels it a duty oming to himself and
his Country as well as an act of justice to the Squadron to relinquish the Command
t o Captain Jnq Rodgers - He has accordingly authorized me to announce this
change to you - The Commodores reasons for adopting this Step - which
i t is scarsely necessary t o assure you Sir was not resolved upon without a severe
Struggle - in the midst of the most flattering prospect of a speedy 8: honorable
termination of the War, mill be too obvious to you to require any comment from
me [1\;.4. Sen. 9 B - B 6, Pres. Message, Jan. 180G.l
To Tobias Lear, U. S. Consul General, Algiers, from Captain Samuel Barron, U. S.
Xavy
MALTA
22 A I a y 1805.
r e d 224 May - AnsQ same day SIR I have receiv'd the Letter which you did me the honor of addressing to me
on the 19 Inst., stating your intention of going to Tripoli in the Essex frigate for
the purpose of opening a Negotiation with the Bashan. I have now to acquaint you that for the reasons mentioned in my Communication of the 18th, which every day's experience fatally strengthens, I have conceived
it a duty owing to our Country as well as an act of Justice to the Squadron to relinquish a station which the languors of Sickness & consequent mental as well as
bodily Inactivity prevent me from filling any longer with approbation to myself
or with advantage to the Service I have accordingly written by the Essez to Capt:
t seniority (now off Tripoli in the Constztution)
John Rodgers the Officer n e ~ in
officially resigning t o him the Command of the Piaval forces of the U. states in
this Sea, & I have a t the same time espressed my ardent desire that He should
give every facility to the important measure ahich has been agreed upon &
support the Iiegotiation R-ithall his zeal and activity. - I beg leave to mention
that the Essez is completely ready for Sen. Captain Rodgers has now been 50
days on the station and I feel the importance of his being made acquainted with
my determination without delay. I have sent Orders to Captain Campbell to despatch the Vzxen to the Station off
Tripoli with intelligence of the situation of affairs with Tunis, and have every
reason to believe that they will reach him before the Birg leaves the Bay. [NA. Senate Files. 10th Congress.]

To Captain Samuel Barron, U. S. Navy, from Tobias Lear, U. 6. Consul General,
Algiers
MALTA22 May 1800'.
SIR. I have received the Letter which you have done me the Honor of writing
to me this day, and I can assure you that I regret nith the most heartfelt sensibility the cause which deprives our Country of your valuable services, and yourself
of one of the &st enjoyments of our existence. However painful it must be t o
you to relinquish a Command in which I know you felt your whole soul engaged
t o promote the Honor & Interest of our Country; yet you will have the Satisfaction of knom-ing that when your ill health has depriv d you of the power of esercising that Command for the service of your Country, you have not hesitated t o
I most sincerely pray that you
sacrifice to patriotism your personal feelingsmay soon experience a return of that invaluable blessing, Health, which I am
persuaded your Physicians I%friends believe could not have been restored, while
ou retain d a charge too great for your enfeebled & critical state to bear. the great anxiety you express, that Captain Rodgers, the next Officer in

gram

WARS WITH BRRBARY POWERS
seniority, should be early informed of .our having resigned the Command of the
Naval forces of the U. States in this dea to him, I will be ready t o embark Tomorrow Evening on board the Essez frigate to go t o Tripoli, where Captain
Rodgers is now cruizing. I pray you to accept the assurances of high Respect & sincere Regard.
[NA. Sen. 9 B - B 6, Pres. Message, Jan. 1806.1

To U. S. Navy Agents and Consuls from Captain Samuel Barron, U. S. Navy
MALTAd B May 1806
SIR, The object of the present is to acquaint you that the declining state of my
Health occasioned by the long & severe illness u-hich I have suffered has compelled me t o relinquish the command of the Kaval forces of the U. States of
America in this Sea to the Officernext in seniority to myself: I therefore hereby
make Known to you Officially my resignation and that the command of the
Squadron has this Day devolved to Captain John Rodgers, who in consequence
becomes invested with all the powers BT authority of Commander in Chief.
I beg leave to express my ackno~vledgementsfor the polite, friendlv & useful
attentions which I have derived from your Correspondance while in the command,
8 t o assure you of the sentiments of respect & consideration, * * *
SIGNQSAM.BARRON
Copy To
Robert Montgomery Esqr American Consul Allicant,
" John Broadbent
E:92 American Navy Agent Messina
" Frederick Degen
Do
Do
Kaples
"
John Mathew
"
Do
Consul
h'aples
"
Degen &- Purviance
Do
Navy Agents Leghorn
"
Thomas Appleton
Do Consul
Leghorn
"
Killiam Kirkpatrrck
Do
Consul
Malaga
" John Gavino
Do Consul
Gibraltar
" James Simpson
"
DO Consul
Tangier
"
Joseph Y znardi
"
DO Consul
Cadiz
"
William Jarvis
' L
DO Consul
Lisbon
"
Ja? M~Kenzie& 8. Glennie
Do
Navy Agents London
[LC. JRP, LB B, May 1805-July 1806.1

::
::

122 May 18051

U. S. Squadron in the Mediterranean
R6sumCs presumably prepared in Navy Department about 1806 or 1807,
concerning the C . S. Squadron jn the Mediterranean

T H E SQUADRON
OF COMAIODORE
JOHNRODGERS:

* * * the Frigate President, Cap? Ja: Rarron, having Com!~Barron on
board sailed for the United States and the Remainder of the Squadron in the
Begr of July Rendezvoused a t Syracuse under the command of C o m r ~John
Iiodgers, consisting of the Frigate Constitution Corn'? Rod ers, Constellation,
Campbelli Congress, Decatur; Emm. Stewart; John Adarns, 8hrw; Brig Argus.
Hull; & Szren, Smith; Schooner T'izen, Dent; Nautilus, COX;Enterprize, Robinson;
Hornet, (bomb) Evans; and Gun Boats, NQ2 , 3, 4, 5 , 6 , 8,9, 10. - ispitfire and
Vengeance]
During the continuance of Hostilities with Tripoli, the Bey of Tunis had
frequently evinced hostile dispositions towards the United States, and repeatedly
threatened War unless his Vessels were permitted to enter Tripoli or other demands
equally inadmissible, were granted. A Tunisian Cruiser with her two Prizes,
carrying Articles contraband of War, having been captuned in attempting to
enter Tripoli, were demanded by the Bey, and war again threaten'd in case of
refusal. The demand wm refused by C o n ~ pBarron, & Comw Rodgen thinking
that the termination of hostilities with Tripoli afforded a favorable moment for
explanation or compulsion, prepared t o go off Tunis for this purpose, hating on
board Col? Lear, the Consul General. on the 13 July the Squadron left Syracuse
for Malta: on 234 left Malta & on 3l.t anchored in Tunis Bay. At this time the
Argus had sailed for Alexandria in Eqypt with money for Messs Briggs & Brothers,
& the Hornet for Syracuse to obtain Inventories of the public property. Prior
to the sailing of the Squadron for Tunis, George Davis esqr the Charge d'affaires

36

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1806 TO 1807

had informed the C o m r ~that Consul Lear would not be accredited, and that
should the U: S. Squadron appear in force before Tunis, i t w4 be considered as the
commencement of hostilities, and that no explanation would be begun until the
Tunisian Vessels were restored. of these threats the Commodore on his arrival
demanded an explanation, informing the Bey a t the same time that if they were
adhered to, he sh? commence hostilities in 36 hours, To this the Bey replied to
Mq Davis that he
respect the Treaty, but yt if the Commodore attacked or
det4 any of his vessels or Merchantmen, he w4 imm? haul down the Consular
Flag. The Corn?? insisted that this declaration of respect to the Treaty sh4 be
given before the British & French Consuls. This was refused, & the Comrs now
ordQ Mr Davis on b? the Cons? lConstitution] unless the declaration was given
in the form prescribed. This was again [refused], tho the Bey now offered to
give such declaration under his Seal. A Brig at this time getting under way from
the Goletta was fired at by the Constitution & driven back, the Vizen, Nautilus,
& Enterprize were ord? to cruise a t the entrance of the Bay and intercept all
Vessels coming out, & if armed to send them back. This conduct produced a
letter from the Bey to C o l ~Lear, acknowledging him in his official character,
disavowing all hostile intentions on his part, & offering to send an Ambassador
to the U. States to explain & accommodate every thing. This explanation and
offer were accepted & the American Cruisers called in accordingly. On the lStP
August, Dr Dodge of the Navy was received by the Bey as the United States
Charge d'affaires in the place of Mr Davis. The Ambassador Sidi Soliman Melli
Melley took passage in the Congress for the U: States where he arrived in Novr The Congress was followed by the Constellation, & John Adams, & all arrived in
the Eastern Branch the latter part of 'Piovr 1805. - [See Commodore Barron's
Squadron under date of 10 September 1804, with accompanying documents givin
operations of the ships which also cornprized Commodore Rodger's squadron7
U. S. Frigate Constitution, Flagship of Commodore John Rodgers, 9 November
1804 to 21 April 1805
Cspk John Rodgers took Command on 9 Kov? 1804, and sailed for Lisbon to
recruit'Novr Arrived 28 Decr. Left Lisbon 10 Febr 1805. Arrived a t Gibraltar
15th - Sailed for Syracuse 17th - Off the Harbour of Tripoli March - Malta
1 April. Off Tripoli middle April & 214 with the President. [Note added in
different writing: "See Goldsborough's Naval Chronicle Vol 1 - where the dates
are supposed to be corrected."]
U. S. Frigate Congress, Captain Stephen Decatur, Jr., U. S. Navy, commanding;
9 November 1804 to 29 November 1805
Taken Command of by Capt Decatur 9 Novr 1804. Off Tripoli. Returned
to Syracuse abt 21.t Jan?' 1805 to repair her Rudder. Sailed March l O t P - Malta
1 1 1 Sailed 18th - Messina 29th - Sailed 6 April. Syracuse 7th - Sailed 8th
- Syracuse 9th - Malta 10tP - Sailed 18tP - Syracuse 21.t - Sailed 234 Measina 24th - Sailed 6 May - Leghorn roads 12t4 - Sailed 29th - Syracuse
June 12%- Sailed July 34 - Tunis Bay 11th - Sailed 18th - Returned 19th Sailed 234 - Off Malta 29th - Tunis Bay August 1-t - sailed 210, - During
this interval the Bey of Tunis was brought to terms and agreed to send an Ambassador to U States. - Tunis Bay 24'h - The Tunisian Ambassador came on
hoard Septr 2nd - Sailed 5th - Bay of Alicant 12th - Sailed 13th - Gibraltar
Bay 15* - Sailed 21.t - Tangier Bay 22nd. Sailed 25Q - Hampton Roads
5 Novr - Beating up the Chesapeake to the 12th - Hampton Roads 13 came
back - Under way 234 Novr Mouth of Potomac 2 5 1 - Greenleaf's Point 29tb
[November 18051 aground.
Laid up in Ordinary.
U. S. Frigate Esaez, Captain Hugh G. Campbell, U. S. Navy, commanding,
22 August 1805 to 28 July 1806
On Augt 224 1805 Capt Campbell rec? command from M. C. Stewart.
Sailed from Tunis Sepr 5. - a t Gibraltar 15. Tangier 26Q - Gibraltar 3 0 1
Octr 10. Off Algesirm, Malaga 18th - Sailed Decr 4th - Cadiz 14th - Gibraltar
J a n ~1 2 4 1806. & Algesiraa 28'4 - Malaga Febr 1st
Algesiraa 27'4 - Cadiz
Mar. 5th - Sailed 9th - Gibraltar 14Q - Off Tangier & Algesiras to April 24Q
then a t Cadiz. Sailed 16'4 - On May 30th Cap$ Campbell exchanged Ships with

-

-

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS
Com. Rodgers of the Constitution. Sailed from Gibraltar for United States June
4th 1806. Off the Capes July 25%
At Wmhington 28'h
1806.
Laid up in Ordinary. U. S. Frigate John Adams, Master Commandant John Shaw, U. S. Navy, commanding; 26 February 1805 to 3 December 1805
Arrived from Mediterranean a t New York 26 Febr 1805
& ordg to be got
ready. S a i l e d - - - - - - - - - - - - - _ - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 1 4 May 1805.
Arrived a t Gibraltar- - - - - - - - - - ---------- 14 June " Sailed up 19*@ in
Sailed 14'h- Malta 16%
company with NQ?10. 6 8. Syracuse July
Peace with Tripoli had taken place before this Frigate arrived on the station.
Sailed from Malta 24'4 - Tunis Bay 316t to Augt 224 -during this period. The
Bey of Tunis consented to send an Ambassador to U
States to adjust all differences, being compelled to this measure by the American Squadron which Isy
across the Bay. Sailed from Tunis Bay 23P August. - Syracuse 25%- Sailed
Sepr 34 - Gibraltar Bay 224 - Sailed 27th - Tetuan Bay 28 & 29 - Sailed 30t@Put into Madeira 8th Octr - Sailed 12 - Within sight of Land November 17Q
in - Hampton roads Arrived a t Washington Kavy Yard, Decr 3: 1805. Laid up in Ordinary.
The Brig Argus,
22 May 1805 to 13 July 1806
May 22, 1805 - one of Com. Rodgers's Squadron. From 23Q.Juneto 5 July in
Syracuse Harbour. Malta 6th to 12th - off Derne 28th - M d t a Augl 5th
Sailed 9th - on 14th off Cape Carthage with Constitution, Congress, Essez, Constellation, J[ohn] Adams, Siren, Vixen, F~*anklin,& 7 Gunboats, blocking up the
Harbour of Tunis. Off Tunis till 1 Sept when the Bey having consented to send an
Ambassador to the U. States, the Argus sQ & arrived a t Syracuse 4 Sepr Sailed
Octr 8th - Palermo 10tb - Sailed 21nt - Syracuse 29th with the G. Boats. Sailed
Dec? 19'5
Naples 21.r Sailed Jan? 20th [1806j Syracuse 22d - Sailed F e b 7th~
Syracuse 14th
S4 March 10th - Malta 12th - Sailed 16th
Tunis Bay
Cruising between Capes Carthage and Bon to Apl 4. Land of Sardinia
24tb
5th
Plane Island 6th - 7th - C . Bon 8th - Tunis Bay 11th
sailed 13th
Malta 224 Sailed 28th with the Squadron - Arrived in Gibraltar Bay May 21.
Sailed with the Siren for the U . States 28th Off the Capes July 7. Arrived
in E. Branch 13 July 1806. Laid up in Ordinary.

-.

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-.

-

--.

-

-

-

Commission and warrant oficeis
station

SF. Master.
Surgeon
Purser
Btswn
Gunner
Carptr.
SI Maker

j

Names
Isaac Hull
Theodore Hunt (To Ketch Spitfire)
Hethcote J. Reed
Svbrant Vanschaick
Edward Trenchard
Wp. P. Smith
Sam1 B. Brooke. Acting
Joseph G. T. Hunt Robt. W. Goldsborough
William Brown - ~ & i n g
Robert Huntress
William Wise
Acting
'6
Charles Smith
Richard B. Jones
John Pettigrew
John Nevitt (To Siren)
Eli E. Danielson
James Wilson
JnQ. R. Sherwood
Presley N. OBannon

-

-

N A V A L OPERATIOATS FROM 1806 TO 1807
U. S. Brig Siren, 22 May 1805 to 1 August 1806
May 226 1805 one of Com. Rodgers's Scluadron. Gibraltar Bay. Sailed June
Syracuse 29th - On July 26 M. C. Stew-art gave up Com5. - Malta 20th
mand of the Siren t o M. Cmdt John Smith. Sailed 14: Malta 22. s4 23.
Tunis Bay w-ith the Squadron Augt 2d t o Sepr 2 when affalrs being adjusted the
Siren sailed. Syracuse 9. Messina 14. Na les 30th - Sd Octr 7. Leghorn 11.
Sd 27 - Genoab9. Sd Novr 2. Naples 9. E d Dect 27 Syracuse Janu 3. 1806.
~ a SQMarch 12.
Malta 22d S6 28. At sea to Febv 22 then Gibraltar - ~ a l a 27.
Syracuse 20. S* 29. Malta 30. S d Ap! 18. Algiers 25. S* 26. Tunis Bay
May 5. a t Sea t o 22d then Gibraltar Bay. Algesiras 24. Gibraltar 28. Sailed
for U: S: 28 May 1806. Off the Capes July 25. At Navy Yard Washington abt
Augt 1. 1806.
Laid up in Ordinary. -

-.

Commission and warrant ojicers. Station.

Kames

John Smith
Humphrey Magrath (To hTo. 3)
Octavus A. Page
Lewis Warrington
Thomas Macdonough
Bernard Henry - Acting
George Parker. Acting
S?. Master
John Kevitt
John Lyon Acting as Purser
Jacob Hite
Henry E. Ballard
Jaquelin B. Harvie
Andrew Stuart [from Gun Boat No. 61
U. S. Brig Vixen, 22 May 1805 to 3 August 1806
May 224 1805 one of Com. Rodgers's Squadron, off Malta 26th - Off Tripoli
29th Syracuse June 21. Sailed July 34 on which day M. Cdt Smith gave up the
V i z e n to M . Ct Cox. Syracuse 8th Sd 11th Tunis Bay 19. and along the coast
u p to 31. - Tunis Bay 1 Augl Occasionally off Cape Carthage, Bon, &c until
4 Sept when affairs being terminated n-ith Tunis, sailed. With the Essez along
Spanish Coast Gibraltar Bay 19 Sepr sailed 30th G. Bay Oct 4. Algesiras 13'P
Sailed 26th Malaga 29. sailed Novr 5. Gibraltar Bay 8th - Malaga 18Q Sailed Janu 7. 1806. Algesiras 9th Sailed 24th Gibraltar Bay 29% - Sailed
Febv 11th Algesiras 13th Cruising along the Spanish Coast a t times anchoring
in G[ibraltar] & Algesiras Bays to March 20. hlalaga mole to Ap! 1, then sailed.
Cadiz 5, Sd 14. Algesiras Bay sd day. Cruizing along the Spanish Coast
anchoring somet,imes in Gibraltar & sometimes in Algesiras Bay till June 3d then
sailed from Gibraltar for U: S. Charleston S C. July 20. Sailed 28th - Navy
Yard, Washington Augt 3. 1806.
Laid u p in Ordinary. Commission and warrant oficers Station

Names.

SP Master

George Cox
Christopher Gadsdcn
Samuel-Angus
Bernard Henry [from Tripoli]

Surgeon
Purser

Gwinn Harris
Jesse D. Elliott
Henry Ballard
Hamlet Neale

WARS WITH BARBABY POWERS

39

U. S. Gunboat No. 9, 1 August 1804 t o 14 July 1806
Ordered t o be built a t Hampton-- _ - - - - - _ _ _ - - - - - - - - - - -21 Decr 1803. Launched------------------ab!------------------1 August1804.Sailed for Medv - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 8 May 1805.
Arrived at Gibraltar 5 June.
Arrived at Syracuse between 8th & gt!3 July.
Off Tunis with the Squadron Augt 1805.
Returned t o Syracuse and there wintered.
Returned home & arrived a t Charleston S. C. July 14. 1806. Laid up in Ordinary under charge of Lieu* C. Gadsden. -

-

Commission & warrant oflcers. -

I
I

station
Commdr
1. Officer
2@Officer

1

Names
Ralph Izard. George S. Hackley (Died in Mediterranean)
William M~Intosh.
Josb H. Barryrnore. Acting.

-

U. S. Gunboat h70.3, 3 December 1801 to 19 July 1806
Contracted t o be built a t Phila*. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

31 Jut? 1804
Launched . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3 Decr.
"
Sailed for New York - - - - - . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
May 1 1805.
Went t o Sea 14 May 1805
Arrived a t Gibraltar.. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14 June
Arrived a t Syracuse between 8 & 9 July With the Squadron Off Tunis Augl 1805.
Returned t o Syracuse and wintered there.
Returned t o United States B arrived a t Charleston S. C 19 July 1806.
Laid u p in Ordinary under charge of Lieutt C. Gsdsden. Commissioned & warrant oficers. -

Comrndr

I

Sarnes

i
Lt JOSJ hIaxwell (Died in the .Mediterranean)
H. Magrath. Samuel Woodhouse.
Tho? C. bfagruder.
n'm B. Thompson Acting
Elliot Smith
do

Comm?
2QOfficer
Boats4
Gunner

G. S. Gunboat Xo. 4.5 March 1805 to 1 A u y s t 1806
Ordered t.o be built a t Washington_-- - - - _ - - - - - - - - - - - - - 28 June 1804
Launched-----_-------------------------5 March 1805.
Sailed for Hamyton roads
Arrived 23e April.
Wentto
15 May 1805.
Arrived a t Gibraltar . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21 June
"
Arrived a t Syracuse between 8th & St4 - - - - - - - - - - - _ - _ _ - -July With the Squadron Off Tunis August 1805.
Returned t o Syracuse & wintered there.
Returned t o U. States and arrived a t Charleston S. C. Juljr 19. 1806.
Arrived at Xorfolk Aug* 1. 1806. Laid u p in Ordinary under charge of Lieu* A. Sinclair. Conlmission and warrant oficers. antion

1

Commdr
24

Officer

Mids~

,

.

Names

John Wenley Lieu$
Winlock Clarke. - (To the Constiluiion.)
Jnv R. Leaycraft. -

40

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1805 TO 1807

U. S. Gunboat No. 6, 1 September 1804 to 30 July 1806
Contracted to be built a t B a l t .~. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1 Sept? 1804.

Launched
Sailed for Hampton Roads . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1 May 1805 - Arrived
Wentto S e a _ - - - - - - - - - - - - - - _ - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 15 "
.Arrived a t Gibraltar- - . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14 June . Arrived a t Syracuse between 8tb & 9 July. With the Squadron before Tunis Augt 1805.
Returned to Syracuse & wintered there.
Returned to U. States, and arrived a t Charleston 8. C July 21. 1806. Arrived a t Gosport abt July 30. 1806.
Laid up in Ordinary under charge of Lieu$ A. Sinclair. -

Commission and warrant oficers.
I

Station
Commdr.

24 Officer

Mids~

Kames
Lieu+Alex? C. Harrison
John M~Lean M. Mate (27 Apl 1805)
Andrew Stuart (To the Siren)
Jacob Hite

U. S. Gunboat No. 6, Lieutenant James Lawrence, U. S. n'avy, commanding;
3 February 1805 to 20 August 1806
Contracted for a t n'ew York- - - - - - _ - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 11 Augt 1804
hunched-------------------------------..
3 Febr 1805.
Sailed for Mediterranean.. - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - _ - _ - - - - - _
_ ._ _ - - 14 May 1805.
Arrived Gibraltar. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14 June Arrived a t Syracuse between 8'4- & 9 t h July. With the Squadron before Tunis Augt 1805.
Returned to Syracuse and wintered there.
Returned to U. S. and arrived a t Charleston S. C. July 16, 1806.
Arrived a t New York August 34 1806.
Ordered to be kept ready to receive Her Crew Augt 20. 1806. under charge of Lieutt Jon* Thorn. -

.

U. S. Gunboat N Q 7. -

Contracted for a t New York - _ _ _ _ - - _ _ - _ - _ - _ - - - 11
- - -Augt
1804.
Launched. - - - - - - - - - - _ - _ - - _ _ _ _ -8 -Febv
--.
1805
----------Sailed for Mediterranean- - . - - - - - - - - - - - -14
-May
--1805;
----on the 20tP sprung the mast
30 " "
Returned back to N. York . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Sailed again . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . - - - - - - - - - - - - - 20 June "
Never heard of afterwards: Supposed to have foundered.

Commission and warrant oflcers.
Station.

Names
-

Commdr
24 Officer.

Lieu$ Peter S. Ogilvie.
Philip H Brooke Midsn

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

41

U. S. Gunboat No. 8, 24 April 1805 to 20 A u y s t 1806
Contracted for a t Boston .........................
1 Septz 1804
h u n c h e d- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 24 April 1805.
Sailed for the Mediterranean . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4 May < ' .
Arrived a t Gibraltar 5th June .
Arrived a t Syracuse between 8th & 9th July. With the Squadron before Tunis Augt 1805.
Returned to Syracuse & wintered there. Returned to U. States & arrived a t Charleston S. C. July 16. 1806.
Arrived a t New York August 2. 1806.
Ordered to be ke t read t o receive a Crew Augi 20. 1806.
Uoder charge of Eieutt An* Thorn. Commission & warrant oficers. -

Station
Commdr

Names
Lieut Nathl Harnden

U. S. Gunboat Aro. 9, 4 March 1805 to 22 July 1806

Contracted to be built a t Charleston, S. C .--------------7 Augt 1804.
L a u n c h e d . - - - - - - - - - _ - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 4 March 1805.
"
Sailed for the Mediterranean - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 8 May
Arrived at Gibraltar . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7 June
''
Arrived a t Syracuse between 8*h 8: 9th July. With the Squadron before Tunis Augt 1806. Returned to Syracuse and wintered there.
Returned to U. States & arrived a t Charleston S. C July 22. 1806.
Laid up in Ordinary under charge of Lieutr C. Gabden.
Commission and warrant oficers.

Station

Names
Lieut Samuel Elbert.
Lt Magrath passenger
Walter Boyd (came home under arrest)
Joseph Schoolfield.

Commdr
2 d Officer
S. Mate

U. S. Gunboat No. 10, 8 April 1805 to 2 August 1806
Ordered to be built a t Navy Yard- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 28 June 1804. L a u n c h e d . - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 8 April1805.
Sailed for Hampton Roads . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Arrived
Wentto S e a - - - - - - - - - - - - - _ _ _ - . - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 15 May 1805.Arrived a t Gibraltar - - - - - - - - - - - - . . - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -16
- -June. Amved a t Syracuse between 8'h & 9 July. With the Squadron before Tunis Augt 1805. Wintered a t Syracuse Returned to U. S. & arrived a t Charleston S. C, July 24. 1806.
Arrived st Norfolk Aug* 2. 1806.
Laid up in Ordinary, under charge of Lieutt A. Sinclair. -

Commission and loarrant o&cem
Station

!

Names
Lieu$ Seth Cartee.

Lieu$A. Sinclair.

(Died in Mediterranean.)

42

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1805 TO 1807

The U. S. Bomb Ketch the Spitfire, 25 April 1805 t o 3 August 1806
Purchased by Comrq Preble a t Boston & put in Commission April 25. 1805 Sailed from Boston June 236 1805. Arrived a t Syracuse
ArrS a t Hampton 3d Aug 118106
Commission and warrant oficers.I

Kames
Daniel MvNeill jr - (Returned home in a
Merchant Vessel.)
Theodore Hunt
Ja? McGlauhon
Turner MoGlauhon The U. S. Bomb Ketch The Vengeance, 25 April 1805 to 20 August 1806
Purchased by Cornre Preble & put in Commission Boston April 25, 1805. Sailed from Boston, June 19 - 1805.
Arrived a t [Charleston] S. C July 19 [I8106
Kew Yk
Augt 4 118106
Ordd t o be kept ready for a Crew 20 Augt 118106
Under charge of Lt Jon* Thorn
Commission and warrant oficers. -

-

Names

tW Lewis
Benjamin Smith
Gervas Clifton
William Carter jr
Simon Smith (Died on homeward passage.)
U. S. Schooner Nautilus, 22 May 1805 to 3 September 1805
May 22. 1805, One of Com. Rodgers's Squadron. Malta from Coast of Derne
May 25. Tripoli 31. - Sailed June 3d Malta 5. Sailed 11th - Messina 14:
Sailed July 14: Malta 15. Sd 23d Tunis Bay Augt 1. t o Sepr 34 when affairs
being adjusted with Tunis, the Nautilus sailed.
Commission and warrant oficers
Station

Sr Master
Surgeon
Purser
Btswn
Gunner
Carptr
St Maker.

1

Names
Samuel Evans esqr [from the Hornet]
Oliver H. Perry [to the Essez]
John Shattuck
William Duncanson
William Miller
Gersham R. Jacques
James R. Wilson [from the Constitution]
John Mitchell Acting
James Pinkerton
Peter Holt
John B. Cheshire [from the John Adamsl
Horatio S. Sprigg

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

43

[It is assumed that the person or persons who prepared the foregoing compilations had access t o the records of the Navy Department, and that, therefore,
their inclusion in this volume of ATaval Documents is justified. However, i t is
known that there are many discrepancies and inaccuracies contained in them,
and it is suggested that they be used more as guides to document,^ or data, than
as statements of authenticated facts.]
[NDA. Ships' Service 1801-1809.1
Extract from journel kept on board U. S. Brig Argus, Master Commandant Isaac
Hull,U.S. Navy, commanding, 22 May 1805
[Derne] Commences a-ith strong gales and heavy sea from Korth? and West4
wriding a t single anchor with a whole cable out Pitching very heavy - At 4
hard gales and a heavy sea At Sundown a little more moderate ordered the Topsails and fore Topmast stay
sail handed with Yarns Partly cut to be ready for Looseing instantly in case the
Cable should part - Kept hands in the Tops ready to make sail being Very near
the shore and but very little room in case she Took the rong way in Parting
A t 12 hard gales and Clear weather
At Sunrise rather more moderate but too much wind and sea to send abote on
shore ship roleing Very heavy thesea Comeing More t o the North? than the
wind Se nothing of the Enemy this day nor have I been able to hear from Lfr Eaton At 12 strong gales and Clear the sea not so High as in the morning [NYHS. Naval History Sec., Argus.]

-

--

Extract from journal of Surgeon Jonathan Cowdery, U. S. Navy, 22 l a y 1805
[Tripoli] I was informed, that, in a letter which the Bashaw received the
evening before, i t was stated that Hassan Bey and his army m-ere taken in Derne,
by the Americans and Sadi Hamet, the Ex-Bashaw. I was desired not to mention
it, because i t was a great secret; and the Rashaw did not wish to let his people
know it. I was also informed that the Bashaw called a council of his chiefs, and
proposed to put all the American prisoners to death, but it was agreed to postpone
this measure for that time.
[LC. Rare Books, American Captives in Tripoli or Dr. Cowdery's J o u r d ,
Boston, 1806.1
Extract from journal of William Eaton, U. S. Navy Agent for the Barbary Regencies,
Wednesday, 22 May 1805
[Derne] An Arab chief who had been chained as a hostage with the enemy to
insure the fidelitj- of his troops escaped to us. - Says the Arabs absolutely refuse
t o risk another assault on the town. - He promises t o bring his people t o the
number of eighty over t o the Bashaw. We want nothing but cash to break up our eneltry's camp m'thout $ring another
shot -I
[H. E. H u n t i n g t p L&AG.]
To Captain Samuel Berron, U. S. Nary, from Captain Hugb G. Campbell, U. 6.
Navy
TUNISBAY
89P N a y 1806
SIR I have to inform you that I anchor'd here the 2 1 s t a t 3 P. RI. the Vken in
Company,and a t 2 P. M. the following day had an intrerviewnithhlr Davis on board
the Constellation, who informd me that the Bashan- continues friendly, though
comp1ain:d of outra es committed by our Squadron, the recent Captures made
by the Blockading $us&on OR. Tripoli has not been mentioned by the Bey:
which silence on his part afford strong grounds for beleiving them to be Tripolines,
however tho affair is in a proper train and will undergo a fair and canded Investigation in the course of three days, I much regret this unavoidable delay the
Weather being Such aa to prevent Mc Davis leaving the Ship untill this moment
fa past 12 P. M. tomorrow being Friday 8: their Sunday Nothing can be done, on

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1806 TO 1807
Saturday M\.lrDavis expects t o have audience & on Sunday a full explanation of
the Affair, which will prevent my leaving this place ere Monday Morning Mr
Davis having prepar? Dispatches for yourself & Col? Lear, & chartered a Vessel
for the purpose of carrying them t o Malta. I have thought proper to dispatch
the V u e n With them it being the opinion of Mr Davis & myself that they merit
some consideration - A war I do not apprehend nor do I beleive he wishes i t
his cruisers are all hau1l.d up and not one to be seen a t Anchor The late visit of the Neapolitan Squadron 1 am informed is the came of this
great precaution [LC. JRP, Vol. 1, hfarch, 1791-Dec. 1814.1
To Captain Samuel Bsrron, U. S. Navy, Malta, from George Davis, U. 6. Charge
d'Affaires, Tunis
ON BOARDTHE U: S: BRIO Vizen
(Under way in) Tunis Bay May 234 1806
SIR by the return of the U: S: Brig Vizen C a p 0 Smith, (whom Capt Campbell
has advised to depart immediately with my dispatches of the 9'4 Inst:) I have the
honor to accuse [sic] the reciept of your favours of the 30th April & 13% of May
wholly ignorant as I presume the Bey is, of the capture of these Vessels, I am
unable to offer an opinion a t this moment on the probable issue an extension of our Clemency to this Regency would be construed into pussilanimity; and any hopes which we might give the Bey, of a restoration of the captured
Vessels, would not only destroy the effect of a Blockade, in setting such an unhappy precedent; but would involve us materially with all Neutrals, who have
sustained any losses by us, under similar circumstances -in a word we have more to
hope from this Regency, by a firm and decisive conduct, than in an extension of
our Generosity - I shall enter fully into your views, and endeavour to act with
as much dzscretion and Firmness, as if yourself were present I need not add any thing, on the happy opening that now presents itself for the
final arangement of our affairs with these States; nor add how essentially necessary it is to receive a speedy answer, particularly in my present position - Could
the Brig return return with your advises on this subject, it would aid me much
in the final arangement of the points in question P: S: should any thing of moment transpire, the Constellation will depart
immediately. [Mrs. James S. Barron Col. NDA photostat.]

-

To Tobias Lear, U. 8. Consul General, Algiers, from George Davis, U. 6. ChargB
d'Affaires, Tunis
ON BOARD
THE U: S: BRIG Vuen
(COPY)
Tunis Bay May E S Q 1806
red 6th June 1806.SIR - I had the pleasure to receive last Evening from Capt. Campbell your
polite favours of the 24th April & 15th May to which I shall reply fully by the return
of the Constellation. I wss not only ignorant of the Capture of the Vessels, mentioned in your last communication, but from his Excellency's s p n c e on the Subject,
must suppose that it has never been committed to him. The Blockade o j Tripoli,
has never been recognised by the Bey of Tunis, as you will observe from a recurrence
to my former letters. I hope that these difficulties may be twanged, without an
immediate rupture; but I am certainly of the opinion, that the Vessels, should not
be returned; nor any hopes of the kind offer'd to the Bey
the conduct of this
Govl towards us, our national honor, dignity, and good faith, with other nations,
demand that this point should be firmly established - whatevcr may be the issue,
my conduct shall be as conformable to your advice, as circumstances will permit. - The Vessel which waa to have taken my dispatches of the 9tC has twice
s rung a Leak Capt. Campbell has recommended the immediate departure of the
rig with
. them - if she could return with some answer, it would aid me much in
the final discussion of the affair in question
should you resolve to accept the
invitation to a Negociation here (which I promise you will be more favorable than
you can have anticipated) Derne if in our possession ought certainly to be held a
few weeks.
[NA. SDA. Algiers, Vol. 7, Part 1, 18041805.1

-

d'.

-

-

45

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

Extract from journal kept on board U. S. Brig Argus, Master Commendant Isaac
Hull, U. 8. Navy, commanding, 23 May 1805
[Derne] Commences with fresh gales and a heavy Sea seting on shore
At 4 more moderate the wind Veering more to the Westward At 6 more moderttte a signel was made a t the fort for Provisions answered the
signel, but fearing the surf run to high to Land without being in danger of Looseing
the bote did not think proper to send her At 12 a t night Pleasant weather the se geting smooath Very fast - At day
light hoisted out the Launch and sent her onshore with Provisions hove in slack
Cable found it Very badly Chafed about forty fathoms from the anchor - At 7
the Launch returned At ?-$ Past 7 a signel was made a t the fort for the men t o
assist in djging the entrenchment sent men on shore - At 9 Launch returned
bringing Mr Eaton was informed by him that all was quiet on shore
that the
Enemy had determind to attack the town this morning but the arabs would not
come forward to assist them - At 12 Moderate -several men on shore a t work
[NYHS. Naval History Sec., Argus.]

-

-

-

Extract from journal of Surgeon Jonathan Cowdery, U. S. Navy, 25 May 1805
[Tripoli] Twenty five of our men were sent with a cart for timber into the
country. The wind from tho desart was very heavy and hot. The men almost
perished in the sand, which flew and drifted like a snow storm in our country.
They stopped through fatigue, and asked their driver, who was a Turk, for liberty
to drink a t a well which was near them. The Turk replied, that they were Romo
kelps, Christian dogs, and said they should have no water. He gave them all a
severe beating with a large club, which he always carried with him to drive them
with, and made them go on with the cart, which the poor fellows had to drag,
loaded with timber, through the burning sand. They returned towards night
almost perished.
[LC. Rare Books, American Captives i n Tripoli or Dr. Cowdo-g'a Journal,
Boston, 1806.1
Extract from journal of William Eaton, U. S. navy Agent for the Barbary
Regencies, 23 May 1805
Hassien Bey, the Commander in chief of the enemys forces, has, offered by
private insinuation for my head Six thousand dollars, and double the sum for me
a prisoner; 8: 30 pr head for Christians Why don't he come and take it?
5 oclock p.m. Overwhelmed with the scirroc, or hot wind of the Desert.
It came in a hurricane and brought with it a column of heated dust, which resembled the smoke of a conflagration, and turned the sun in appearance t o
melted copper; - swept every thing to the ground that had life; - and filled every
thing with a hot, subtile sand, or rather powder. - We were distressed for
breath: - the lungs contracted: - blood heated like a fever:
and a relaxing
perspiration covered the surface of the body. I t lasted S/4 of an hour. [H. E. Huntington L&AG, EA 206.1

-

Extract from journal of Hezekiah Loomis, Steward, U. 6. Navy, U. S. Brig Viren,
Master Commandant John Smith, U. S. Navy, commanding, Thursday, 25 May
1806
This morning pleasant, we weighed one of our anchors and at half past nine
o'clock weighed the other and sailed around in the Bay. Consul Davis and C a p
tain Camel came on board and we then steered in nearer the Town. We stood
off and on until 3 o'clock P. M.,when Capt. Smlth and Consul Davis went on
shore. Capt. Smith immediately returned on board and had the company of
Capt. Camel to dine with him. After dinner about 4 o'clock P. M. Capt, Camel
went on board his own ship and we steered for t o find the Commodore with
dispatches to him. Fair wind for Syracuse or Malta. Served Butter, Cheese,
Molasses for Friday, 10 of our cheeses weigh 30 Ibs nearly.
[L. F. Middlebrook. NDA copy.]

46

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1806 TO 1807

To Captain Edward Preble, U. 6. Navy, from John Beekman, Navy Agent, New
York, N. Y.
NEW YORK24th Alay 1805 SIR, I am favored with your letters of the 16th & 19% Inst? the 13 Inch Shells
I have written for t o Major Flemming of West Point by the request of Genl
Stepens who supposes he has them, I have requested him to let me know by the
return of Mail. - I have Seen Mr Sheffield, he can git the two Fishing Smacks
if you let me know in time, they will want a tite Bottom & some other work
done and some Small Rigging.
they are about 30 tons each[LC. EPP, Vol. 14, 1804-1805.1

-

Extract from journal kept on board U. S. Brig Argus, Master Commandant Isaac
Hull,U. S. Navy, commanding, 24 May 1805
[Derne] Commences light winds from the Northd and East@and pleasant
weather - At 1 sent 16 men on shore to assist in diging the Intrenchment At 3 M r Eaton went on shore - Kept the Launch Constantly going off and
on with a number of men in her to make the Enemy believe that we were Landing a run [?] for the battery At Sundown light airs Launch Came off leaveing
Mr Peck and Mr Doneldson [Danielson] on shore was informed that they had
gone out on a scouting Party with Mr Eaton t o se how the Enemies Camps were
situated - Sent Jolly bote on shore for them with orders t o bring them off
Immedeately - At 8 Jolly bote returned with Mr Peck and MI: Doneldson was informed by them that they had been in sight of the Enimyes Camp that
they were about three mils back of the hill
At 12 a t night moderate and Clear- At 1 a fresh gale off the Land At 2 a heavy gale Round yards t o the wind and Veered Cable - a t 3 Let go
starboard anchor At day light hard gales off the land and with Very warm flows and large quantyes
of dust blown onboard - At 10 hard gales Veered twenty fathoms of both
Cables hoisted in the Launch At 12 a hard gale of wind off the Land with Very warm flows and large Quantyes
they
of dust blowing onboard Carpenters Employed in Caulking water ways
being very [sic] [NYHS. Naval History Sec., Argus.]

-

Extract from journal of Surgeon Jonathan Cowdery, U. S. Navy, 24 May 1806
[Tripoli] At night the Bashaw dispatched a boat with powder, musket balls
and money for his troops, who were collecting to oppose the approach of his
brother Hamet, the Ex-Bashaw. The eldest son of Hamet, was confined in the
castle by order of the present Bashaw. The Bashaw was so much agitated a t
the news of the approach of his brother, that he this day declared, that if it was
in his power now to make peace and give up the American prisoners, he would gladly
do it, without the consideration of money. His funds were so low, that his
steward run in debt for the supply of the kitchen. He gave his mamelukes
and domesticks, and myself, but one meal per day. - The rich Turks in town
took turns in supplying his few troops. He heartily repented for not accepting
the terms of peace last offered by our country.
[LC. Rare Books, American Captives in Tripoli or Dr. Cowdery's Journal,
Boston, 1806.1
To Captain John Rodgers, U. S. Navy, from Captain Samuel Barron, U. 6. Navy
MALTA85 May 1805.
SIR! The V k e n came in here about an hour since from Tunis. The importance
of the Communications which she brings induces me t o dispatch her for the
Coast of Tripoli immediately. I inclose you Copy of the Copy of a very interesting communication to Colo: Lear from Mr Davis, the original of which is in
the hands of Captain Smith.
The Essez sailed yesterday Morning for the
station with a Letter resigning t o you the Command of the Squadron, & conveying
the Consul General, who I hope 'ere this has communicated his intentions t o
you; the substance of this da '8 intelligence will prove highly propitious to the
great object of his Visit, angindeed every circumstance seems to conspire to
make the present moment favorable for the attainment of an honorable advantageous & durable peace. - I beg leave to add my sincere Wishes for your

-

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

47

success, & to assure you that as far as my debilitated state will permit I shall continue to watch over such of our Concerns as may require prompt attention until
we meet.
Inclosed is a Letter for M? Davis which after perusal be pleased to seal. [ S A . Sen. 9 B - B 6, Pres. Message, Jan. 1806.1
To Master Commandant John Smith, U. S. Navy, from Captain Samuel Bsrron,
U. S. Navy
MALTA2s May 1805.
SIR YOUare hereby directed t o proceed immediately with the U. S. Brig Vizen
under your Command, to the station off Tripoli and deliver the accompanying
Letters to Capt: John Rodgers of the Constitution frigate whose Orders you will
in future receive and obey as Commander in chief of the Squadron of the U. States
in consequence of my resignation. In case of not falling in with the Conslitution,
you will deliver said Letters to the senior Officer on the Station, & receive his
Instructions. The importance of the Service which is known to you, will point out sufficiently
the necessity for Dispatch [NA. Sen. 9 B - B 6, Pres. Message, Jan. 1806.1
To Master Commandant John H. Dent, U. S. Navy, U. S. Schooner Naufilw, from
Captain Samuel Banon, IT. S. Navg
MALTA25'9 May 1806.
SIR After sending your Indents on shore you are directed to proceed immediately for Syracuse and there place pour sick and wounded in the Hospital provided
you obtain pratique if not you will endeavour with the assistance of M r Dyson to
charter some Vessel for their reception - This being done you will return t o
this Island and as your return as speedily as possible is a matter of great importance
I am persuaded you will avoid all unnecessary delay
[NHF. Dent's LB, 1803-1810.1
Extract from journal kept on board U. S. Brig Argrts, Master Commandant Isaac
Hull,U. S. Navy, commanding, 25 May 1805
[Derne] Commences with hard gales off the Land At 4 More Moderate the
wind Veering to the Weststd A t 5 the n-ind shifted in a Squall from S mi to W N W
blowing Very heavy Veered on the starboard Cable and hove in the Larboard
on[e] At
Past 5 nearly Calm Sent the Jolly bote on shore to se if Mr Eaton
had any thing new from the Enemy. hove up the larbd Anchor found the stock
Very much bent ordered the forge up to straighten it At Sundonm I see about an
hundred of the Enemy on the Hill back of the Town - the Jolly bote returned
nothing new from hlr Eaton At 8 Light airs Armourers straightening the anchor stock
At 9 a strong breaze off the Land veered 70 fathoms Cable fresh breazes
off the Land At Past 2 Am the wind shifted Very sudden from Southd t o N W
and blew hard Veered out the remainder of the Cable and Made the Ende fast
to the Capstern on Deck A put on slip Buoys & got ready for sliping At day light more moderate
At M Pat 8 a signel was made st the fort for
Men to assist di 'ng the entrenchment and building walls Sent a botes &ew on shore - At 12 light breazes from the West4
[KYRS. Naval History Sec., Argua.]

-

-

Extract from journal of W i i a m Eaton, U.S. Navy Agent for the Barbary Regencies,
Saturday, 25 May 1805
[Derne] The Scirroc %?nd blew in a gale from the south west all day. - So
piercing was the heat that the white pine boards of our folding table and book
coverings in our tents warped as if before a close fire. - The heated dust penetrated every thing through our garments; - and indeed seemed t o choak the
It had a singular effect on my wound, giving it the painful
pores of the skin.
sensations of a fresh burn.
The skin, after perspiration became dry and
Water standing in tumblers
parched and the lungs compressed and inflamed.
in a few minutes became heated to such a degree as not to be borne in the hand -

-

-

-

NAVRL OPERATIONS FROM 1805 TO 1807
and even stones, naturally cold, were so hot that the soldiers were obliged to
suspend labor a t the trenches.
[H. E. Huntington M A G , EA 206.1
Extract from journal of Eezekiah Loomis, Steward, U. 6. Navy, U. S. Brig Vixen.
Master Commandant John Smith, U. S. Navy, commanding, Saturday, 25 May
1805
This day a t 8 o'clock A. M. we anchored in Malta harbour and quarantined for
2 days, Capt. Smith on shore a t the quarantine ground and received dispatches
and then returned on board. We fired a gun and loosed sails, weighed anchorand
got under way, the wind blowing fresh into the harbour. Saw a schooner which
we took to be an American. We then put about and stood in and came to anchor.
We made a signal which was answered and found her to be the U. S. S. Nautilus.
Capt. Smith and Capt. Dent went on shore a t the quarantine ground, and Capt.
Smith sent off word to be ready for weighing anchor as soon as he should come on
board. Capt. Smith came on board soon after and Capt. Dent, who dined on
board. The messenger put below. I sent on board the Nautilus 4 bbls Beef, 4
bbls Pork, 500 Ibs Bread in 8 bags, and 1 Firkin Butter. At 12 o'clock a t night
9
for Syracuse, and we
we got underway and likewise the Nautilzls who m - ~ bound
were bound t o Tripoli with dispatches to Commodore Ro[d]gers.
[LF. Middlebrook. NDA copy.]
To Captain Samuel Barron, U. S. Navy, and Tobias Lear, U. S. Consul General,
Algiers, from George Davis, U. S. Charge d'Affaires, Tunis
TUNIS&lay 2Fth 1805 SIR I had the honor to accuse \sic] on the 234 Instant the receipt of your dispatches by the U States Frigate Constellation and offered my opinion on the
position we should take, & hold at all hazards - relative to the Vessels detaind
by the Constitution - On a recurrence to your communications, I found how
much stress you justly laid on the preservation of the Peace, and particularly of
what moment i t was t o avoid a rupture a t this instant, when all our forces should
be otherwise occupied - Two difficulties equally formidable presented themselves - Should the Vessel captured prove to be a Tunisian, notwithstanding
the irregularity of her papers, the attempt to violate the blockade &$ &P, she still
would be reclaimed by the Bey; and consequently the communication of having
captured his vessels, would come particularly awkward from me, unless it was t o
offer an Apology for the same, should she be a Tripolina, with a Tunisian Rais,
and we express any doubts of the facts, (as was implied in permitting the Crew to
remain a t the Lazaretto) an arrangement could readily have been made between
the Vikil of Tripoli & Bey, and the vessel in such case, would be a9 strenuously
defended ss if really Tunisian property - (witness, the conduct of the Dey of
Algiers t o all the Christian Powers, during the Venetian War with Tunis) the
difficulty was not in the defence of act, but in the manner in which it should be
communicated
It wss to support the right of Capture, make Known the firm
intentions of the Commodore, demand that the blockade should be recognised and avoid a t the same time any language which might tend to produce immediate
hostilities On my amval a t Tunis from on board the Frigate (the evening of the 23G)
was made relative to the vessel which took the passport for March 1804 enqui?;
I foun that she had returnd from her Cruize sometime in May of the same yearThat the Rais Ali Ben Amour, had left her, and the Command since given
t o the Rais Hassien Bon Ali
that she saild from Monaster some time during
the last Month with my Pasport bearing date April 6% 1805 (to wit for a Hebec
of 10 Guns, 50 Men, Rais EIassien Bon Ali owned by Sidi Hadga Hassien Norra)
and also, that the Tripoline Cruizer which was in Sousa in March last, corresponds
exactly with the Vessel captured in regard to her construction, number of Guns,
& Men
so that there was every reason t o believe, your suspicions were well

-

-

-

.-..---On the 24Q sent a message to the Sapatapa, informing that I should wait on

fn~mrlorl

him a t 9 OClock. as I had something of moment to Communicate ( I t being fridav.
the day on which public business isvnot generally transacted) He receivgd me in
his own apartment; and after conversing sufficiently on indifferent subjects, I
thus addressed him -

*

*

*

*

*

*

*

A recent act of outrage and Insolence on the part of a Tunisian Rais, has
produced those Consequences, which call for a final decision of the points in

49

WtiRS WITH BARBARY POW%RS

question, It has forced us to take those vigorous measures, which might have
been avoided - but once taken we are never to recede from them
A
Tunisian Rais, commanding a Hebec, with my Pasport having two Prizera,
attempted to enter the Port of Tripoli on the 24 Ulq [April], acknowledged
that he khew the Port to be blockaded; but that our force would not prevent
him from making the attempt - The Hebec was in consequence taken, and
with her Prizes sent to Malta for adjudication, on examination she proves to
be the Tripolitan Corsair that was a t Sousa; as the Hebec for which his
Passport was iven saild from this place on the 13t4 Ul? Commanded by the
Rais ~ a n s i e n s e nAli The circumstance to be particularly noticed is, that
she was Captured as a Tunisian from the daring & Insolent attempt to
violate the blockade, & had she have proved to be unequivocally Tunisian
property, i t was equally the fixed intention of the Commodore not to release
her, without express orders to that effect, from his Goverment - Such a
circumstance, could not have faild to produce the warmest reproaches from
the Bey, & possibly a Declaration of War; but still these are evils that must
enevitably arrive, unless the blockade be recognized by the Bey, & strict
orders given to his Subjects to respect i t - i t only rests for me to add, that
His Excellency the Beys recent menaces, have excited a just coldness in the
breast of the Commodore, & a consequent discontent with me - If His
Excell? haa causes of Complaint against my Goverment or pretentions on it,
let them be stated, with a request that a decisive answer may be immediately
given - or if those Complaints arise from any discontent with me, His
Excellency has only t o mske i t Known, & a speedy remedy will be found Sapatapa "I have listend with attention to all you have said, and acknowledge that most of your remarks are just, particularly those which relate to a
reconcilement - You shall see, whether I will give to them, that force you
*
*
*
*
*
*
request"

-

(Here follows a voluminous account of Mr. Davis' diplomatic conversations and negotiations.]

[LC. JRP, L Bk B, May 1805-July 1806.1
To Captain Samuel Barron, U. 8. Navy, from Midshipman Charles L. Bidgely,
U. S. Navy
CITADELMES~INA
26 May 1805.
SIR! The Congress frigate Captain Decatur sailed from this place on the 6 of
the present Month on which day I left the frigate & n-as confined in the Citadel
of Messina; my confinement is not very close, having permission to walk thro'
the Citadel two or three hours every day - The Governor had written to
Palermo, to know what Tribunal was to take Cognizance of my Offence; (there
bein two Tribunals, the one civil, the other military) from Palermo they referred
to P$sples, & receivd an Answer Today, that the military Court will decide the
affair. - Mr Broadbent intends Waiting on the Judge today, to know whether
he w i l l admit me to bail, & to expedite the business as much as possible. - I
shall make use of everything in my power to get the affair settled as expeditiously
as possible, but it is impossible to say when i t will be settled, these Sicilians having
a great deal of form in all their transactions. - Kith pleasure I inform you of the
active part Ms Broadbent has taken in my affair, & it is to him I am indebted for
the lenity I receive in my Confinement. I Em in hopes to be able to leave Messina In the course of t ~ oro three Weeks,
& will make all haste to put myself once more under your Command, and shall
endeavor to make my Conduct for the future deserving of your Approbation. [NDA. Captain's LB, Vo1. 2, 1805.1
To Captain John Bodgers, U. 6. Navy, from Captain Samuel Barron, U. S. Navy
MALTASunday Evening
May 86, 1806, 8 oClock P. M.
Sir A few hours after the Departure of the Brig Vixen for the station off Tripoli,
the Ceres Store Ship arriv9dhere fm America. the importance of the Intelligence
which she brings determines me to send a Sperronar express to the Squadron with
Copies of the Dispatches from the Navy Department
I also transmit the
Copy of a Letter from Cons4 Simpson a t Tangier, which will inform you of the
situation of our affairs with Morocco. - I have directed Mr Rodgers Midship
man, to proceed with these Letters and to use all possible Dispatch.
[NA. Sen. 9 B B 6, Pres. Message, Jan. 1806.1

-

-

NAl7A.L OPERATIONS FROM 1805 TO 1807
Extract from journal kept on board U. 6. Brig Argus, Master Commandant Isaac
Hull, U. S. Navy, commanding, 26 May 1805
[Derne] Commences with moderate breazes from the W N W and Pleasant
weather At % Past 12 MI Eaton Came off in the Launch - At 3 Past 1 sent the Launch
on shore with 16 Men t o work a t the fort At 2 fresh breezes sent the Jolly bote
on shore with hfr Eaton At sundown Launch bore off with the Men sent on shore to work - At 7
fresh breazes hoisted in the Launch At 12 a t night fresh breazes and Clear At daylight strong gales from the West4 Could not send a bote on shore - At
% Past 11 more moderate hoisted out the launch and sent her on shore - At
12 fresh gales launch on shore
[NYHS. Naval History Sec., Argus.]
Extract from journal of U. S. Frigate Constitution, Captain John Rodgers, U. S. Navy,
commanding, Sunday, 26 May 1805
[Off Tripoli since 11 May 1805.1 At % past 5 [A. M.] discoverd a sail to the
Southward, Made sail in chace
At 8 Made the signal of the day to the Strange Sail a t % past 8 spoke the
Essez. Consul Leer and Cap$. Barron came on board.
The President and Essez in company
At Meredian fresh breezes and pleasant Weather, Capt Rogers Colonel Lear &
C a ~ Barron
r
Left the s h i ~and went on board the Essex the town of Tripoli
beiring south 5 miles
Latitude Observed 33'00' N.
[USNA.]
Extract from journal of Surgeon Jonathan Cowdery, U. S. Navy, 26 May 1805
[Tripoli] Three frigates in sight. At about 11, A. M. the smallest came near
in, and hoisted the banners of peace. The Bashaw asked his head men of the
town, who were with him in his gallery, whether it m7a.3 best to hoist his white
flag. All except one, the charge de affairs for Algiers, declared in favour of it,
and of making peace if possible. They expressed great contempt towards the
Algerine consul for his advice, and said that whoever would advise the Bashaw
not t o hoist the white flag a t such a critical moment must be his foe and not his
friend. The Algerine soon disappeared and left the castle. The Spanish consul
soon after came to the castle; and the Bashaw sent him in one of his handsome
boats, with Shous Hammad to the frigate. They returned a t evening with the
joyful news of a prospect of peace. There was a visible change, from gloominess
to joy, in the countenance of all the Turks.
[LC. Rare Books, American Captives i n Tripoli or Dr. Cowdery's Journal,
Boston, 1806.1
Extract from journal of Midshipman Charles Morris, Jr., U. 6. Navy, on board
U.S. Frigate President, Master Commandant George Cox, U.S. Navy, commanding,
Sunday, 26 May 1805
6 Saw a Sail bearing. S. W.
7 Saw a Strange Sail W f/2 S. made all sail in chase.
8 Shortened Sail and hove too under the lea of the Constitution the U. S. Frigate
Essez being in Company.
10 Made sail to keep company.
Tripoli S +4 E. 4 leagues.
Latitude Observed 33'1' N.
[Mrs. C. E. Fox original, NDA photostat.]
To Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Navy, from Sailing Master Nathaniel Haraden,
U. S. Navy
GUNBOATNO.8, at sea, lat. 57, N . lon, 16, 20, w.
May 27, 1806.
SIR - The day I sailed from Boston, (4th May) we had strong S. W. winds.
In crossing the Gulph Stream, the wind blew hard from the N. N. W. - we did
not, however, ship much water. On the 13th and 14th inst we experienced a

R'ARS W T H BARBARY POWERS

-

51

very heavy gale of wind from the ?K N W towards the close of which we had s
succession of as heavy squalls as I have experienced for many years. Severd
times we bore up and scudded before the st,orm; the boat behaved m-ell, and I
pronounce her perfectly safe to cross the Atlantic. While scudding in the height
in the gale, a sea struck and broached us to, owing to the carelessness of the man
at helm. Our storm square sail was spljt, and blown to a t o m , and our top sail
yard, which we lashed on deck, was by the force of the sea broken into three
pieces; we then set the storm foresail and made very good weather. With the
w-ind a little free, we sail 8 miles per hour. I am with the greatest respect, your
humble servant,
[NDA. Captain's LB, Vol. 2, 1805.1

[27 May 18051
Certificate regarding Bernardo Somerville of Genoa
I certify that Bernardo Somerville native of Genoa a Private in Capt Selims
compr of Artu, was sent to the U. 8. Hospital a t t.his place, May 27th 1805, with
a Gun hot wound in the Calf of his leg, which will render him incapable of getting
his living by labour for some months.
E. CUTBUSH
Surg: Hospl
SYRACUSEAugust 6th 1805.
E. Huntington L&AG. EA184.1

m.

Extract from journal kept on board U. S. Brig Argus, Master Commandant Isaac
Hull, U. S. Navy, commanding, 27 May 1805
[Derne] Commences with moderate breazes and Clear Launch on shore with
men to work a t fort At sundown Pleasant
At 9 fired a gun for the Launch t o come of[f] she haveing stayed longer than
was Expected At 10 fort made a signel that they were apprehensive of an attack sent the
Launch on shore to se what the alarm was - At 11 the Launch returned the
officer was informed by Mr Eaton that they had received information from the
Camp - that thev were determined to attack the Town that Evening-Knowing
that the guns of ihe Brig could do them no I n j u r y i n the night as we could not
se the Enimy Consequently would be as likely to fire upon our friends as them
At 12 all quiet e x c e ~ the
t
fireing of the guards in town fired a 12 Pounder t o
alarm the Enemy should they be near At day light sent the Launch on shore with men to work - from day light till
12 moderate breazes botes employed Carrying on shore Provisions for the fort
and men to assist them i n ditching At 12 Jolly bote Came off bringing an arab
that the guard had detected in Bringina a quantity of Silver Earings and other
ornaments from the Enemy to be distzbuted amongst t.he srab women of the
Town To Try to gain them over to their Party
[KYHS. Naval History Sec., Argus.]

-

-

Extract from journal of U. S. Frigate Constitution, Captain John Rodgers, U. S. Navy,
commanding, Monday, 27 May 1805
[Off Tripoli] At 1 1P.M.Jthe Essez hoisted a flag of Truise And fired 2 guns,
which mas answerd from the Bashaws Castle.
At 2 discovcrd a TripoIitan boat A long side the Essez.
The Essex and President in company.
Latitude Observed 34'2' K.

[USNA.]
Exhtact from journal of Surgeon Jonathan Cowdery, U. S. Navy, 27 May 1805
{Tripoli] Both Turks and Christians mere all anxiously looking out for the
frigates. I t was said that col. Lear had promised to come on shore this morning
and that the Spanish consul was preparing a dinner for the gentlemen who were
expected to come with him. We were all agitated alt.ernstely by hope and
despair. The terraces and every eminence in town, were covered with people

52

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1805 TO 1807

of all classes and ages, who were looking for the wished for peace-maker. But
not a frigate nor a sail hove in sight during the day.
[LC. Rare Books, American Captives in TLipoli or Dr. Cowdery's Journal,
Boston, 1806.1
Extract from jonrnai of Midshipman Charles Morris, Jr., U. 6. Navy, on board
U. 6. Prigate President, Master Commandant George Cox, U. 6. Navy, commanding,
Monday, 27 May 1806
1. the Constitution made the signal t o speak us Wore round and spoke her.
Hove too. The Essez stood in towards the Town and hoisted a flag of Truce.
Latitude Observed 33'35' Xorth. Longitude Observed 14"S' E.
[Mrs. C. E. Fox original, NDA photostat.]
--

-

To Captain Samuel Barron, U. S. Navy, from Captain Iohn Rodgers, U. S. Navy,
Commodore of U. S. squadron in Mediterranean
Cowlitution off TRIPOLIM a y 28 1805
(Received at Malta 2 June.)SIR: On the 26 instant by the Essez Captain Ja9 Barron, I had the Honor to
receive your Letter bearing date 226 Ins: with the accompanying Letters resigning the Command of the U. States Squadron in these Seas into my hands - The
task which your unavoidable Indisposition has consequently imposed on me is
a Commission which I accept with a diffidence no less conspicuous than its consequence is repugnant to your Zeal 6: patriotism, and Sir while I commisserate
your truly unpleasant situation, be assured that nothing will afford me more
real satisfaction, than such restoration of your Health as will authorize your
reassuming a Command which devolved on me by mere accident.
A few hours after the Arrival of the Essm here, she stretched close in shore
and made the Signal indicative of her Rfission, which Tas immediately answered
by the Bashaw on his Castle in a manner expressive of his unfeigned approbation,
8: in an hour after the Spanish Consul came on board by the Bashaw's order t o
make the suitable arrangements with Colo: Lear, previous to the opening of the
Negotiation, & to his going on shore, when from the favorable represenbation by
the Spanish Consul of the Bashaw's propitious disposition to Peace, Colo: Lear
resolved & had made arrangements for waiting on the Bashaw to commence his
functions the next Mornr, but the Weather has been so unsettled as to prevent
further intercourse until this day MAY 29, 1805 - The arrival of the Vixen yesterday d o r d s me the honor
of acknowledging the receipt of your Letter of the 25 instant with the accompanying Communications from M? Eaton, Mr Davis & Captain Hull, $ happily
before Colo: Lear had landed or touched even on the Negotiation. hlr Davis'
Communq contain information of importance & their timely Arrival will I sauguinely flatter myseIf, enabIe Colo: Lear (on whose Judgment I have the fullest
Confidence) to assume an independence in the Kegotiation which it is equally
his own & his Country's honor Bi Interest to observe. From the relation by
Captain Barron, & Coi: Lear of your last In~tructionsto Mr Eaton, I conceive
it unnecessary for me to say anything further on that subject, as he has no doubt
evacuated Derne, & now on his Return in the Argus to Syracuse or Malta, & as
Colo: Lear is of opinion nrith myself that Mf Davis' Communications do not
require an immediate Answer, particularly as the Kegotiatiou is already opened
with Tripoli & personally with the Bashaw, so soon as the event, whatever it
may be is known, I shall dispatch t.he Vizen to Malta to give you the Intelligence
and if unfavorable, to Captain Barron to prepare our forces, to compel the
Monster to a sense of reason-Although
it is evident that the Bey of Tunis is
afraid of the consequences of a Q-ar with the U. States, yet at this critical moment,
I conceive it necessary that he should not be neglected, therefore as soon as
one of the Vessels from this can be spared, I shall send her with advices to Xr
Davis, corroborating & seconding the steps you have already taken with that
Regency - As it is my determination to respect the lawful rights of that
Gentleman, with as much delicacy, as I am resolved to pursue pacific measures
no further than his Conduct will authorize. - A peace with this Regency will
enable ua to represent to him our opinion of his treachery in such langufige as
fie best understan&.
MAY30 - 1805. Yesterday the Spanish Comul returned on board again
empowered by the Bashaw to negotiate a Peace, & altho' it appeared by his

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

53

Credentials that he was completely authorized t o conclude a final Settlement of
Differences with Cob Lear previous to his going on shore, yet he did not think
Colq Lear's propositions admissible, & in consequence returned on shore last
Evening to consult the Bashaw further on the business.
The Spanish Consul has this moment (10 A.M) return'd on board again, &
says that the Bashaw is not satisfied with the propositions that have been made. How things will turn out, is yet uncertain. - Captain Barron will be able
to give you the particulars. [NA. Sen. 9 B-B 6, Pres. Message, Jan. 1806.1
To William Higgins, U. S. Navy Agent, Malta, from Captain John Bodgers, U. S.
Navy
U. STATESSHIP Constitution
Off Tripoli May 28* 1806
SIR, The command of the U. States squadron in the Medeterranian having
devolved on me, in consequence of the Indisposition of Commodore Barron, I
have to request that in case any of the U. States Vessels arrive a t your port,
previous to my return, that you direct their Commanders to Provision their
Vessels for a Ten Weeks cruize & proceed to Syracuse, at which place they will
wait my further orders, - such Provisions a s are not in the Public Stores a t
Syracuse & Malta, you will be pleased to purchase; so as not to detain the Vessels
one hour on that account. - The provisions of my own Ship being Entirely
Expended, and as I shall not be admissable to Prattiqiie a t Malta, I have to desire
that you have such articles of the Enclosed requisition, in readiness to put on
board by my return; which I am in hopes will not be longer than five or Six Days
after this reaches you [LC. JRP, Letters & Orders, Book A, 1804-1805.1
[28 May 18051
To Captain Samuel Barron, U. S. Navy, from Hamuda, Bey of Tunis
BASHAWBEY OF TUNIS
BARRON,
Commodore of the Nayal forces of the United States of
To Sr SAMUEL
America in the Mediterranean SIR I take occation to write the present to inform you, that on Friday last
the 24th May Currt, arrived here express, the Frigate of your Nation, called the
Constellation, Commanded by Capt Campbell together with a Bri of War of the
same Nation, the Charge d'affairs for your Republic Mr George Savis, resident
here gives me this information accompanied by complaints in your name That one of your Frigates Cruizing on the Seas before Tripolie, twice fell in
with a Cruizing Hebec with two Neapolitan Prizes, taken by said Hebec, who
pretented to be a Tunisian, but believing him to be a Tripolean, the Commander
of said Frigate thought proper to take him-Consequently demands in pour name,
that effectual measures may be taken by me, to prevent in future such disorder,
and to chastise the Authors of this Deceit, in granting illegal passports-Hearing
such account I immediately gave for answer to the Charges d'sffairs, that under
such circumstances I highly disapprove of the conduct of a Tripolean attempting
to cover himself under the name of Tunisean wit,h a view to save himself, and not
having succeeded I would not give ear to any instance that might be laid before
me, nor claim them in any way from you - In the afternoon of the same day
(Friday) I received letters from Malta, I understand & doubt not that the Hebec
is truly a Tunisean, was fit.ted out a t Monastiers by the Caido or Governor Haggi
Hassen h'ocera, and saild from thence in the begining of April, commanded by a
Rais Hassen Bn Aly Having still taken more exact & accurate Information, & convinced of the fact
as above stat,ed, I immediately sent for the said Charge dl&airs Davis, who I
inform'd of all the particulars, I had learnd, respecting the privateer, and advised
him to write you instantly every circumstance, and inform you of the mistake, the
Capt of the Frigate was under who took her - and that he would request you in
my name to release immediately & send here, the Cruizer and the two Prizes, with
the P e o ~ l emv Subiects. for in this state of Peace in which we are, it is not tolerable
that ydu should keepras Prisonem hostages or Slaves, Tunisian Subjects, my
Vassals, who if they had committed any improprieties or Fault, i t is to me alone
I am their Prince & their Sovereign, it belongs to me to Judge and Chastize them
in case of Default & improper conduct and t o no other - With the utmost

54

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1805 TO 1807

surprize I then heard myself answerd, in a tone of hauteur by your Charge; that
he was sent express by your order to signify to me, that you had every reason to
consider the Cruiser, and her two Prizes, as good Prizes, and whether Tunisians
or Tripolians they would not be given up, that if I did not desist, from this claim,
and did not make known to my Subjects the Blockade of Tripoli & its Coast, he
should immediately take his departure - Not knowing any urgent motives for
coming to so precipitate & violent an extremity, not being informd of the unlimited power, you may have from your Goverment, with whom I Stipulated
and made our Treaty, and who I can only know in difficulties that may unfortunately take place between the Two Nations, wishing on my part to maintain
the undisturbed Peace which happily exists between us, not fearing a War whether
it comes by Caprice or some pretext - but before permitting your Charge to take
such a step, I thought proper to write you this letter, to advise you of my sentiments, and make known to you my disposition, and how far I am from infringing,
and to regulate my self according to your
or violating the faith of your Treaty
prompt answer which I expect, in case you are not persuaded of my Just reasons I have often made known to my Subjects the Blockade you kept a t Tripoli, and
have again lately orderd them to respect it, and doubt not to be obey'd
notwithstanding it behoves me to inform you that my Kingdom & my Limits to
those of Tripoli extend as far as Goara, and that my Cruisers ought be exempted
from the rigour of the Blockade, since you ought not to fear, that they carry
either provisions or amunition, they do not approach that place but by strcss of
weather, want of Sails, Masts, Stores, or in pursuit of an enemy, or short of
Provisions, a t least in all such cases rather than let them enter Tripoli, would
you not prefer assisting &- providing them with such necessaries thus shewing
you, as I have always done how sincerely I am estranged, from that idea of
Coolness towards your Nation which you have unjustly conceived - I now
wait from you, the immediate expedition of the People you have Kept, whom I
assure you, are my Subjects, and the Cruizer & the two Prizes, to be by me
adjudged, and punished for their improper Conduct as also the fitter out - as all
will be circumstantially explaind to you by your Charge, in whose presence I will
administed Justice - Waiting your immediate answer, wishing you happiness
with esteem I salute you
HAMUDAbass^ BEY
Prince of the Ptinces of Tunis
the City well Guarded the abode
of happiness
BRADADI TUNIS
28th May 1805 Year 1.220
[P. S.] further to prove to you that the Hebec in question is truly a Tunisian
& that seems the dispute, escept the difference in the quantity of Guns, occationd
by the Person who arm'd Her, but notwithstanding (evidence just received) I
shall know how to inflict proper justice, here are the same Passports of tile resident
Consuls which were intended for her, and being on Shore a t Caasa, their happend
a dispute among the Crew, which obligd the Rais to take a hasty departure from
Monastiere & leave behind him the Passports, which were on the road from
Tunis to donaskiere [LC. JRP,Let. Bk B, May 1805-July 1806.1

-

-

-

To Master Commandant John H. Dent, U. S. Navy, U. S. Schooner Nautilus, from
Captain Samuel Barron, U. S. Navy
MALTA
d8tb May 1806
SIB You are hereb directed to proceed with the U. S. Schooner Nautilus to
the Coast of Tripoli on falling in with the Constitution deliver the accompany5
Dispatches to Capt Rodgers, whose orders you will in future receive and Obey,
the Command of the Squadron having devolved on that Officer in consequence of
my resignation - I n case of your not falling in with the Constitution you will
deliver the Dispatches to the Senior Officer on the Station & receive his instructions
[NHF. Dent's LB, 1803-1810.1

--

Extract from journal kept on board U. S. Brig A r g u Master Commandant Isaac
Hull, U, S. navy, commanding, 28 May 1806
[Derne] Commences with light breazes from the North? & EP Launch with
s Crew on shore a t work
Every thing quiet on shore se nothing of the
Enemy -

-

WARS WITU BARBABY POWERS
Sent the Jolly bote along the shore to the Westward to sound to se how near we
could go with safety in case the Enemy should attack us At sundown moderate all botes onboard Midnight light airs from the South?
& Ed At day light moderate sent men on shore to work a t the battery At 5
Past 5 A M Some person was heard hailing the Brig t o the East4 but could se
nothing that had the appearance of a man on shore on looking along the water
I discovered a man swiming for us - Sent the Jolly bote To take him up -on his
comeing onboard we found him to be a Neapolitan who had run from the Camp
a companion of this one that Come to our Camp some days Past by him we
gained information that the Camp had received a reinforcement of a n Hundred
men from Bengasa but the whole camp was destitute of powder and they were
determined to hold them fast until supplies could arrive from Tripoly - At 6
hove up the Starboard anchor and let go the Larboard one
At 10 Mr Eaton Came onboard bringing with him several of the Bashaws
People At 12 fresh breazes from South@& Ed with clear weather [NYHS. Naval History Sec., Argus.]

-

Extract from journaI of U.S. Frigate Conslilufion, Captain John Rodgers, U.S. Navy,
commanding, Tuesday, 28 Nay 1805
[Off Tripoli] At 5 [P. M.] Cap$ Rodgers came on board
Latitude Observed 33'25' N.
[USNA.]
Extract from journal of Surgeon Jonathan Cowdery, U. S. Navy, 28 Nay 1805
[Tripoli] All looking out again for our squadron. A brig hove in sight in the
mornirlg, which we all a t first thought was the flag ship. On discovering it was
a brig, a gloominess again appeared on every countenance. The Turks began to
think that the frigate had golie to fetch the whole fleet, which they heard consisted
of sixty sail of different sizes. They thought that the flag of truce was only a
plan of the Americans, to find out the force of Tripoli, &c. But a t sun set three
frigates and a brig appeared, which revived our hopes. The Bashaw shewed the
greatest anxiety for peace. He was sensible of the danger he was in from the
lowness of his funds and the disaffection of his people.
[LC. Rare Books, American Captives i n Tripoli or Dr. Cowdery's Journal,
Boston, 1806.1
Extract from journal of RTiliiamEaton, U.S. Navy Agent for the Barbary Regencies,
28 May 1805
[Dernej I attacked and defeated a detached party of the enemy, of about
sixty foot and a troop of horse, with only thirty five Americans and Greeks,
including Officers. - Mr OBannon, Mann and Farquhar, and Cap. Constant,ino,
were with me.
[H. E. Huntington L&AG.]

-

Extract from journal of Hezekiah Loomis, Steward, U. S. Navy, U. S. Brig Vixen.
Master Commandant John Smith, U. S. Navy, commanding, Tuesday, 28 Nay
1805

[Off Tripoli] This day a fine breeze - we saw the land and ran close in along
the land towards the Town. We made the land to the westward of the Town.
At 1 o'clock P. M. saw 3 large sail which we soon came up with and found t.o be
the Frigates Constitution, Essez and President. Capt. Smith went on board the
Constitution and gave his dispatches to Capt. Ro[d]gers who was as I was informed,
then Commodore. Lay under easy sail all night.
[L. F. Middlebrook. NDA copy.]
To Captain Jam6s Barron, U.S. Navy, in U.S. S. Essm ordered to U. S. Frigate
President, from Captain John Rodgers, U.S. Navy
U. STATESSHIPConstitution
08Tripoli May 29t4 1806
SIR Owing t o the arrangcments which have lately taken place in consequence
of the truly painfui indisposition of Commodore Barron, I have to desire that

.

56

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1805 TO 1807

assume the Command of the U. States Frigate President, now before this
ort, giving Captv Cox the Command of the Essez, a t present under your Command; and proceed to Syracuse wit.h all practicable dispatch, a t which place
you will remain until my return, unless a refractory conduct of the Bey of Tunis
previous t o my being able t o reach Malta, may make your appearance in that
quarter necessary. - In which case you will act as your prudence will suggest,
in protecting the honor and Commerce of our Country until I join you. As the result of the negotiation with Tripoli is yet uncertain, on meeting
with the Congress, Argus, Nautilus, Enterprize or Hornet; you will be pleased to
direct their commanders to water & Provision their Vessels ready for a Ten
Weeks Cruize. - As I am ignorant of the Spicies and quantity of Provisions in
Store a t Syracuse & Malt,a, you will direct them to complete their requisitions
between the two places and proceed with all practicable dispatch to the former
and wait my further Orders.
As soon as the completion of our affairs here are clearly asscertained, I shall
dispatch the Vixen to you with instructions relative to the Equipment of the
Gun Boats, Brig Franklin &q & $ On your arrival a t Syracuse you will Provision and prepare the President in all
respects as soon as possible for a Ten Weeks Cruize, to facilitate which, on your
passage thence you will call a t hlalta and take in such articles of Provision to
complete your requisition as are there in store. Commodore Barrons state of
Health I have reason to expect, ma induce him to change the c1imat.e of Malta
for that of Scicily: In which case, ;have t o request that your attentions t o his
convenience, not only as his Brother, but as a duty from me be such in every
respect as the nature of his unpleasant situation & delicate health demands. [LC. JRP, Letters & Orders, Book A, 1804-1805.1
To Captain Samuel Barron, U. S. Navy, Malta, from Captain John Rodgers, U. S.
Navp
U. STATESSHIP Constitution
o f f Tripoli May 2gtP 1805
SIR, The arrival of the T'izen yesterday affords me the honor of acknowledging
the receipt of your Letter of the 25'P Ins' with the accompanying communications
from Mr Eaton, Mr Davis, & C a p t f l u l l ; and happily before Coll~Lear had
landed or even touched on the negotiation. htr Davis'e Communications contain information of Importance, and their
timely arrival will I sanguinely flatter myself, Enable Collq Lear (on whose
judgement - I have the most perfect confidence) to assume an Independence
in the negotiation, which it is equally his own and his Countrys honor & Interest
to observe. From the relation by Cap! Barron & Collq Lear of your last Instructions to
Eaton, I concieve it unnecessary for me to say any thing farther on the subject, as he no doubt has evacuated Derne and now on his return, in the Argus,
t o Syracuse or Malta; and as Coll? Lear is of opinion with myself, that Mr Davis's
communications do not require an Immediate answer, particularly as the negotiation is already opened with Tripoli, & personally with the Bashaw, - So
soon as the Event, what ever it may be is known, I shall dispatch the Vizen to
Malta to give you the Intelligence, and if unfavourable, to Cap$ Barron, to prepare
our Forces to compel the monster to a sense of reason. Altho it is evident that the Bey of Tunis is afraid of the consequences of a
War with the U. States, Yet at this critical moment, I concieve it necessary that
he should not be neglected; therefore so soon as one of the Vessels from this,
can be spared, I shall send her with advises to Mt Davis corroberating & seconding
the steps you have already taken with that Regency: as it it is my determination
to respect the Lawful rights of that Gentleman with as much delicacy, as I am
resolved t o pursue pacific measures no further than his conduct will authorise. A peace with this regency will enable us t o represent t o him our opinion of his
treachery in such Language as he best understands.
[LC. JRP, Letters & Orders, Book A, 1804r1805.1

T o Captain Samuel Barron, U. S. Navy, Malta, from George Davis, U. 6. Charg6
d'Affaires, Tunis

TUNISMay 90,1806
SIB I have now the h o n ~ tro transmit you (herewith enclpsed) 126 May 18051
the result of m Conferences With the Beya M i m t e r relat~veto the Captured
v-k
before &ipoli -

WARS WITH BARBABY POWERS
His Excellency the Bey has never ceased to mention, and directs me, now to
state, the indispensable necessity their is to accord Passports to Ambaseadores
or Officers of the Grand Signior passing to Tripoli on public &airs, and ss a
Copici Bashaw, will shortly pass from Algiers to Tunis & hence to Tripoli, he
begs that my Passport may be respected, in this, and all like instances, he charges
me to add, that a refusal, would force him into a War with his Master the Sublime
Porte, or us - I have the honor to enclose you a letter from his Excellency
the Bey, and wait with greatest impatience an answer to the dispatches forwarded by the U S Brig Vizen
Be pleased to accept the assurances of the highest respect and consideration
with which I have the honor to be
P S You will have the goodness to avoid mentioning my name in your answer
to the Bey [LC. JRP, Let. Bk B, May 1805-July 1806.1

-

To Captain Samuel Barron, U. S. Navy, from Degen, Purvisnce & Company, U. 6.
Navy Agents, Leghorn
LEGHORN
2gth May 1806
Sir We had the honor of addressing you on the 13th Inst informing you of the
arrival in our Roads of the U. States Ship Congress, Stephen Decatur jun? Esqr
Commander, & that every exertion would be made to procure the articles required.
We hinted to you that the Commission for Gun Powder being rather of a delicate
nature in the actual political state of this Country, some management would be
necessary, to get it executed without drawing the attention of Goverment or
rather of the Powers which influences & in a manner directs its measures.
we
therefore sent a confidential person to Portfenry's [or Portferry's] in the Island of
Elba; the Garrisons of which are to our Knowledge well supplied with this ammunition, and by interest made with the heads of department have obtained permission to Ship nearly if not the entire quantity wanted, & Capt: Decatur proceeds
thither in the course of the Day to take it on board. - For the reasons above
mentioned it was impossible to compleat the business more expeditiously, nor
would it have done for the Congress to go there till the negotiation was finally
concluded. We have done every thing in our power for the service and hope, Sir,
for your approbation. Capt. Decatur will inform you verbally that from the
resources of the place we can furnish you with every thing that may be required for
the use of the Squadron, but in the case of provisions, Naval Stores or Ammunition being wanted, we should request you to favour us with your Orders a Month
before the departure of the Vessel destinated to take them, we may then have
every thing in a state of preparation & thus avoid delay.
For the repairs of any Vessels of the Squadron we have ample accomodations,
& we believe they can be effected in a more workmanlike manner, more expeditiously & on more reasonable terms than in any port in the Mediterranean.
From the large exportation of Dollars by the American trade to the East Indies,
this specie has become very scarce & high, and is with difficulty procured - under
these circumstances Capt: Decatur did not esteem it advisable to have any
purchased.
The Schooner Enterprize, Lt Robinson has we understand, undergone a through
repair a t Venice; We have already paid his dfts on account of this object for fourteen
thousand Pezzas; we expect by first post the bills for the remaining expenditure,
which the agent informs us will amount all together to twenty four thousand
Pezzas
By the Brig Two Brothers which arrived to our address a few days since from
B a l t i m o r e , ~ ehave Papers to the 28Q March, some of which Capt: Decatur will
hand over to you: - We are happy to learn from them that the Secretary of the
Navy had given orders for the immediate equipment of Ten Gun boats which
were to come out with the John Adams to reinforce the Squadron under your
command, so as to arrive at Malta by the let July: - We therefore presume they
ma make their appearance soon after receipt of this.
B e beg you to accept our Cordial & sincere wishes for a brilliant & succearful
carnpalgn.
[LC. JRP, Letters & Orders, Book A, 1804-1805.1

-

-

-

-

-

58

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1805 TO 1807

To Captain Samuel Barron, U.S. Navy, from Master Commandant Charles Stewart,
U. S. Navy
U. S. BRIGSiren GIBRALTAR
BAY
M a y 29th 1805
SIRInclosed you will receive a Copy of a Letter from Mr Jarvis a t Lisbon informing me the Moorish Corsairs were in a state of readiness On receipt of which I
proceeded immediately to the Westward and Cruised a few days off Larach with a
view of exercising my Crew and shewing the Siren in that Quarter - I observed
Two Frigates a t that Port in an Ordinary State with Nothing but the lower Masts
standing - Off Cape Trafalgar I boarded an American Ship (a short passage from
Salem) from whom I learned the Frigate John Adams and Ten Gunboats were to
leave the ChesApeak immediately to join the Squadron under your Command, I
therefore after remaining a few days a t Tangier, thought proper to come to this
place and wait their Arrival - Since when the Ship Ann with stores for the
Squadron has arrived and Confirms the information - I perceive with pleasure
(by your letter to Mr Garino) the recruited State of your Health & Spirit; I
hope it will continue to do so that you may be enabled to meet with Vlgour, the
exertions which will be shortly required of you in the brilliant and (I trust) successfull operations you are about to commence - I do not yet despair that we Shall
be allowed to join you in time t o add the Mite of exertion and ability we are
capable of contributing (however small i t may be) to the honor and Glory of our
Country On my arrival last Fall on this Station owing to the Fever in the surrounding
ports and a t this place I was under the necessity of resorting to Alqesiras for our
necessary supplies, where, from the want of a Consul or Agent, we where subject to
various impositions and many letters in the Course of my Communications and
necessary Correspondence were Suppressed, mislaid and lost (the Renewal of the
war between Great Britain and Spain, which makes it highly Politic and necessary
we should have an Agent of some kind a t that place to facilitate and secure our
correspondence, as well as to furnish the necessary Supplies to our Vessels of
War with facility and without Imposition) has induced me to appoint an Acting
Navy Agent a t that Place; accordingly I have appointed bf? Porral, who was
strongly recommended by hfr Gavino, after making an acquaintance and in some
degree experiencing his fitness; he is an elderly (but active) Gentleman, bears a
good character, is I believe unconnected with the Privateersmer: and is Master
of the English and Spanish languages - This Appointment which I have taken
the Liberty to make Pro-Tern - you will be pleased to Confirm or annul as to
you may seem proper - Inclosed you will receive Copies of the Authority given
him also a return of the State and condition of the Brig Siren which I have the
Honor to command
I n a letter from Mr Meade a t Cadiz dated the 24 of May he observes, "Our
ministers are still a t Madrid & nothing further has been done in the American
affairs with this court".
[LC. JRP, Vol. 1, hlarch 1791-Dec. 1814.1
To Captain Samuel Barron, U. S. Navy, from William Eaton, U. S. Navy Agent for
the Barbary Regencies
DERNE29tb May 1805
[Thru 11 June 18051
SIR,Since the departure of the Nautilus with my dispatches of the 17th the
enemy have daily shewed themselves in a menacing posture near us but have not
come to genera1 action - Yesterday a detachment of about fifty or sixty of their
foot, covered by a troop of horse, discended the mountain by a ravine, fell upon
some of our arab families who were camped in the rear of the town, and drove off
several cattle and camels - The Bashaw's people pursued and attacked them
under the mountain, killed and wounded three of them and recovered their
cattle - 1 marched out with Lieut OBannon, Mr Mann and Farquhar, and
thirty rank and file, Americans and greeks, from the garrison, and took a ravine
on the left with n view of cutting off their retreat - We fell in with them soon
after ascending the mountain - They opposed to us a short resistance, but fled
before a charge of bayonet
We pursued them within a short distance of their
camp; killed their captain and five men; wounded a number and took two prisoners without receiving any injury ourselves - The camp beat to arms; mounted
and moved towards us in a body; but did not come within musket shot - They
could not ascertain our number, and apprehending that we were an advanced

-

WARS WITH BARBARY POW%RS
party aiming t o draw them into an ambuscade on disadvantageous ground,
formed in order of battle and kept their post, while we retired down the mountain
The enemy swore vengeance, and resolved to execute it today - About
nine in the morning they advanced their whole force and posted themselves on
an eminence in fair view - Proper stations were taken on our part to receive
them
They reconnoitred us a while; but, when orders were given to attack,
their arabs mutinized and retrograded; and the Beys were compelled to follow
with their Tripolitans JUXE 2@
T o day the enemy brought themselves to a resolution to attack - They had
previously forced the arabs into oaths of fidelity by seizing and chaining hostages
from their most considerable families; but their movements this day terminated
exactly as on the 2gt%- The Beys attempted to force the Arabs forward They resisted; and alledged, as on other similar occasions, that they were willing
t o fight an enemy of their own mode of warfare; but they could not resist the
Americans, who fired enormous balls that carried away a man and his camel a t
once, or rushed on them with bayonets without giving them time to load their
muskets Last evening I had the honor to receive your letter of the 19th ultimo, by which
I learn that The Reigning Bashaw of Tripoli has lately made overtures of peace,
which the Consul General, C o l ~Lear, has determined lo meet, viewing the present
moment propitious to such a step
I n consequence of which i t seems contemplated that we should with-draw ourselves from this coast It was an event anticipated, in my letter of the first ultimo, that the reigning
Bashaw would seize the moment, when he should apprehend himself seriously in
danger from his brother, to rid himself of this rival by detaching from him our
succour through overtures of peace: Facts establish the correctness of this conjecture. That the inhabitants of Tripoli are weary of the war is well ascertained:
that they secretly desire the restoration of their legimate sovereign, because they
believe him peaceably inclined, transpires through various indubitable channels:
and that the Moors and Arabs of the Kingdom, who form its intire population,
are generally in a revolutionary state is equally true - Joseph Bashaw is not
ignorant of these dispositions. As early as the month of January last he was,
according to the Danish Consul, Very attentive upon our transactions with his
brother i n Alexandria - On the lgth ultimo late overtures had intimated to the
Consul General his inclination towards a pacification - We had then been
seventy six days from Alexandria - thirty five as far forward as Bomba, and
twenty one in possession of this place. Of these movements and operations, intercepted letters by may of Mensurat and Bengazi prove to us, the enemy was not
uninformed - It is now nineteen days since his forces were beaten on this gound;
and since that detached parties supprized and routed: These are also events
which cannot be e=ily concealed - I t does not appear that the season has
hitherto permitted any formidable display of our naval force before Tripoli It cannot be unfair therefore to infer, that the pacific overtures of the reigning
Bashaw are influenced in a great measure by apprehensions of his brother's
approach - Yet it seems not to be admitted that we have any obligations
towards Hamet Bashaw
But if such is the effect of the enemy's apprehensions from this quarter, who certainly linows how to compare the relative influence
of the parties, the calculations we have formed of the ultimate result of an
effectual co-operation should no longer seem visionary - I do believe it was in
the contemplation of Government to have profited of this advantageous circumstance as instrumental to chastise a perfidious foe rather than t,o sacrifice a credulous friend. I know it was in the general wish, and indeed the expectation of
our Country, that the enemy should be chastised. How far this wish and expectation will be satisfied from the arrangements now in operation time and events
must determine - But I cannot, from any shape in which the subject can be
viewed be persuaded that the manner of serving ourselves of IIamet Bashaw, and
abandoning him, can be reconciled to those principles of honor and justice which,
I know, actuate the national breast It seems enough to cancel every pledge that we have brought him back to the
port from which he had been driven - I t ought to be taken into consideration
that this is no other than the port from whence he has alxays asked supplies; and
that, consequently, setting him down here, just as he was, can render him no
essential service; but that, to abandon here under actual circumstances where
famine and the ravages of the enemy's forces have exhausted the resources of the
province, and while those forces are still in our vicinity, cannot but leave him in a
more hopless situation than he left the place: -4nd here is additional reason why

-

-

-

-

0

60

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1806 TO 18m

his means are not materially altered for the better - H e was driven away on
account of his intercourse with the enemies of his rival - He has been induced
to return under an expectation of receiving aids from US. to prosecute h b views
I thought myself authorized, from the assurances
of recovering his throne
given me by the Secretary of the Navy, to encourage him with the prospect of
and frequent expressions of your resolution to make an
receiving those aids
example of Tripoli the ensuing summer fortified me in the confidence that the
exercise of my discretion here in the manner I have done, would eventually, if not
directly assist the accomplishment of those objects
The resistance we met a t
this place is said to have discouraged the expectation formed of the co-operation
in vicw - This resistance would undoubtedly have been less obstinate had not
the vicinity of the enemy's camp in some memure inspired, or a t least encouraged
it
But it might have been expected that the Governor of Joseph Bashaw, who
twenty months ago with forces from Tripoli drove Ramet Bashaw from the port
and ~ h still
o held possession, would oppose his return by all the means in his
Dower.
Want o j qualitie, essential i n the Character of a commander and a Prince is stated
as a serious obstacle fo the advancemend of his muse - We do not hitherto find
that the enemy possesses those qualities in so eminent a degree as to justify a comparison to the prejudice of his rival
I t must be admitted that the latter
possesses the capacity of commanding respect and conciliating atfection among
his s u b j e c t s And I have lately had good reasons to correct the udavorable
opinion a t one time entertained of his military enterprize; yet he is not a general:
I never knew but one Turk who, I thought, deserved that character
I am not
nlone in the opinion, it is general among the gentlemen who hsve acted with me
that Hamet Bashaw possesses talents sufficientto our purpose - As evidence of
this every one of them is not only willing but solicitous to pursue the expedition
With such aids as I have mentioned to be thought requisite we could a t once
break up the enemy's camp in our front, and open our wag, without further
considerable impediments, to the gates of Tripoli - The enemy is aware of
His camp is abroad; of course
this, and is endeavoring to out-general us
his defence is weakened a t the capital. The total defeat of his forces here would be
a fatal blow to his interests - TOrecal them would be to abandon the provinces
of Derne and Bengazi - But to remove the enemy near him by pacification he
may safely turn all his resources against his rival: and, when once relieved from
this danger, we shall again undoubtedly hsve experience of his respect lo treaty 1 am suspicious that the Spanish Consul has an influence in Joseph Bashaw's
If my recollection serves me, he was accused by our late Consul,
measures
Mr Cathcart, of advising the war - I recollect perfectly well hearing him assert,
at Tunis, in December 1801, that The Americans miscalculated if they thought oj
forcing a peace without paying for it. National shame, perhaps interest, and
individual pride engaged him to favor such an issue of the war: he is said to be the
confidential man of the Bashaw I am affraid one important consideration has been overlooked in the arrangements lately adopted by Mr Lear - the danger of falling back to an irrecoverable
distance in case of the failure of the negociation commenced by him, and a t the
same time the abandonment of the advantageous grounds we hold here - it
would certainly have a tendency to unite the kingdom of Tripoli against w,and
possibly to encourage the whole coast of Barbary to aggression. Or should it
transpire that the evacuation of this port had been recommended it would certainly have an unfavorable influence on the pending negociation Another consideration is involved which cannot but wound the pride of military
principles. We must strike the flag of our Country here in presence of an enemy
who have not merited the triumph, and yield to them the honor of a victory
which no encounter hitherto has given them a right to claim nor reason to expect;
certainly they, and perhaps the world, will place an iojust construction on this
and a retreat of Americans! If individual
retreat: a t any rate it is a retreat
feeling were alone to be consulted in this situation it would prefer a manly defeat
t o this mode of safety: the consequences to the national character wodd be
more honorable
The burthen of expence, which must accrue from pursuing the co-operation,
seems an insurmountable obstacle
I am apprehensive that the ultimate
expence of maintaining a peace with Joseph Bashaw will be more burthensome to
the United States than that accruing from this co-operation: besides it is calculated
that this expense will be re-embursed
I t is insinuated that the Consul General ie opposed to this measure
It is
possible that he may have better informstion from whence to form an opinion of

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

61

its issue than we who have thus far accompanied the expedition; but it is not
probable: has he any Agency in the War?
I cannot but indulge the hope that additional instructions from Government
will arrive in season to enable you to furnish the means of prosecuting the co-operation t o effect, of chastising the temerity of our Enemy, and of preventing the
melancholy and disagreeable events which present appearances threaten You would weep, Sir, were you on the spot, to witness the unbounded confidence
placed in the American character here, and to reflect that this confidence must
shortly sink into contempt and immortal hatred; you would feel that this confidence
at any price, should be carried through the Barbary regencies, a t least to Tripoli,
by the same means that it has been inspired here- But if no further aids come
to our assistance and we are compelled to leave the place under its actual circumstances, humanity itself must weep: The whole city of Derne, together with
numerous families of Arabs who attached themselves to Hamet Bashaw and who
resisted Joseph's troops in expectation of succour from us, must be abandoned to
their fate - havoc & slaughter will be the inevitable consequence - not a soul
of them can escape the savage vengeance of the enemy. In proceeding therefore
thus far and no farther, instead of lending aids to the unfortunate people, who we
use as allies and of whose situation we are actually profitting to our own exclusive
benefit, we involve them in destruction - Could I have apprehended this result
of my exertions, certainly no consideration would have prevailed on me t o have
taken an agency in a tragedy so manifestly fraught with intrigue, so wounding to
humane feelings, and, as I must view it, so degrading to our national honor I t is impossible, though enjoined on me, to say any thing farther of the Squadron
co-operating with Hamet Bashaw after having been officially informed that a
nepociation is opened with his brother without so far having considered his situation as to have agreed on a cessation of arms - The delusion is already carried
too far - If it had not been our intention to support him or a t least to save
him, both honor and religion should have forbidden any encouragement to or
use of him I t is said some provisions will be attempted in his favor in our peace stipulation:
this is however to be left to convenience - But before this provision be definitely
arranged, if a t all, and information of it received here, no armistice being agreed
on, both himself and adherents may be cut in pieces by the enemy's army here,
and by such of his own party as disappointment and rage will carry over to them
Viewing the present posture of affairs therefore either as relative to our national
honor and interests, or the situation of the Bashaw and people here, I consider
it due to the confidence of Government and a bond imposed by all the injunctions
of humanity to endeavor to hold this port till the last moment in hopes that some
happy occurrence may take place to secure our own and a t the same time to
assist the interests of our friends - And I most devoutly pray Heaven that the
blood of innocence may not stain the footsteps of us who have aimed only to fight
the enemies of our Country JUNE 3d
The enemy feinted another attack to day by sending a detachment on the back
of the town, which WFS repelled with loss - Their object seemed to aim a t
ascertaining the disposition of the inhabitants of the place: These turned out to a
man in view of them. Their main body halted a t a safe distance; and, after some
manoeuvring, retired to their camp - During the alarm a detachment from the
garrison under command of Lieul OBannon passed through town: Every body,
age & childhood, even women from their recluses, shouted - "Live the Americans-!
Long live our friends & protectors!"
Hapless beings! If they could
descry the reverse that probably awaits them how justly would their acclamations
of confidence be turned to execrations!

-

-

JUNE

5'4

This morning a spy, a religious Chief, whom I had employed t o watch the
enemy's motions, and who last night slept in their camp, reports that a courior
arrived yesterday, eleven days from Tripoli, with dispatches from the reigning
Bashaw to his Commander in Chief in this vicinity, stating his intentions of concluding a Peace with the United States, which he was resolved to carry into effect
even if he sold his ward-robe - after which he should know how to dispose of his
internal enemies - He enjoined it on his commander to hold his position before
this town if possible till the issue of this roject of peace should be known - The
Mirabout chief added that the Beys ha: it in contemplation to propose an armistice t o me: I shall meet such an overture, if it should be offered, until I receive
further advice from Headquartem

-

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1806 TO 1807
Eleven oclock. A. M. This morning came in two deserters from the enemy's
camp, both levant Turks, Ismien & hfahamet, a choux and a cheriff, corresponding
with the rank of Aid du camp & Ensign, who confirm the information before
stated; and add that the Beys cannot prevail on their troops to attack this place
under our batteries and guns of the shipping; but that they calculate on sacking
the city the moment we evacuate our posts - These officers put themselves
under the protection of the American flag, giving this reason for their preference
that "They wished to get out of the kingdom of Tripoli, and thought this a favorable occasion -"
They say Joseph Bashaw has about two hundred soldiers in
Tripoli in whom he can place confidence, and three or four hundred others who
are undisciplined and suspected - They declare that the people in general of
the kingdom expect with solicitude and impatience the approach of
Hamet Bashaw, as they think him a good man and are weary of the madness and
violence of his brother
5 Oclock P. hI. This afternoon an Arabic Chief, Ab'd'el Selim, with a party
of warriors came over t o us - He brings a message from the principal Arab
Chief a t camp, that he will come over to the Bashaw with his cavalry, amounting
t o about one hundred and fifty, if he can have assurances that the Americans will
not abandon him, in which case Jose h Bashaw would devour his family and
lands - This Chief asserts that the %ey of Bengazi, who is with the camp, is
well disposed towards us; & only waits the arrival of our supplies to declare himself - Be assured, Sir, we only want cash and a few marines to proceed t o
Tripoli, $ to meet you in the citadel of that piratical kennel for the liberation of
our captives - It would only occasion a delay of their release a few months Their triumph will amply compensate this delay I t is thought proper to dispatch the Hornet with these communications, and
hold ground here until your answer can be received

-

-

JUNE g t h

Day before yesterday Hadge Ismein Bey, the second in command of the enemy's
army here, deserted with a fen- attendants and camels - took off the military
chest - and entered the desert for upper Egypt - This defection is said to
have been caused by his being charged with bad generalship in the affair of the
13ch u l t ~
- He commanded the cavalry

-

JCSE

llth

Yesterday morning the enemy, having received fresh re-enforcements of arabs,
appeared in great numbers on the heights which overlook the town, and moved
along the site of the mountain for the space of two or three miles apparently in
search of some avenue to descend without being exposed to our cannon; but
seemed irresolute: an accident brought on an engagement - The declivity of
the mountain is a steep and uneven ledge of rocks with only one pass where
cavalry can m o w down, and this about two miles and a half from the town - The
plain below, bordering on the sea about one mile in depth, is calcareous rock and
red earth, very broken; in many places of which the brig's brass twelres could take
effect, in others impeded by ridges near the shoreAbout half way between the
town and the pass of the mountain the Bashaw had posted a few cavalry to serve
as videts - A detachment of the enemy of superior numbers descended the pass
with a v i ~ wof cutting off this post: but they were manfully resisted and repelledReenforcements of small parties joined and continued to join on one side and the
other until about 2 Oclock when the action became general - We were little
more than spectators of the scene - The Argus, as often as the enemy were uncovered from the ridges, galled them with her shot from her long twelves (the 24 lb
carronades could not reach) And we occasionally brought one of our field pieces
to bear on them from our advanced battery
But the fire of the Hornet was
lost by reason of her being too near the shore, the high bluff of which covered the
enemy - Captain Hull, who had the fairest opportunity of ascertaining it,
judges there were five thousand men on the field - The engagement lasted four
hours - Though freequently charged, the Bashaw lost not an inch of ground At length the enemy ave way and were pursued quite to the pass of the mountain,
where a regard to safgety compelIed many of them to quit their horses, which fell
into the hands of our friends This action, though fought in the barbary manner, was conducted judiciously
on the part of the Bashaw, and the victory was decidedly his - The number of
his killed and wounded is between fifty and sixty; among the latter four of his
principal officers
Some Arab women who came in from the enemy's camp
this morning, say the Beys lost between forty and fifty killed and upwards of
seventy wounded - If we could have furnished but two hundred bayonets to

-

-

63

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

-

assist a charge and cut the pass of the mountain, not a horse should have escaped
M' OBannon was impatient to lead his marines and Greeks (about thirty in
number) to the scene of action - This could not be done without leaving o w
post too defenseless in case of a reverse: besides, I confess, I had doubts whether
the measures lately adopted by our commissioner of peace would justify me in
acting offensively any longer in this quarter. Had the aids come forward seasonably which we hoped to receive here we might now have been a t cape Memurat
and in fifteen days more a t Tripoli Head winds have detained the Hornet
&: a gale last night took the Argus
to sea: as soon as she returns Captain Evans will be dispatched to Headquarters I have communicated, some days since, such parts of the contents of your letter
of the nineteenth ulto as concern him to Hamet Bashaw - He answers, that,
even with supplies, it would be fruitless for him to attempt to prosecute the war
with his brother after you shall have withdrawn your Squadron from the coast But without supplies he must be left in a most forlorn situation for he can command no resources here, nor can he place any faith in provisions which may be
~Cipulatedwith his brother in his favor, except guaranteed by the United States He emphatically says that T o abandon him here i s not to cooperate with him,
but with his rival! He wishes us to take him off in case of a peace
I am extremely anxious to learn the issue of the negotiation l$'illiam Eaton
Sen.
9B-B6,
Pres.
Message,
Jan.
1806.1
[NA.

-

-

To Master Commandant Isaac Hull, U. S. Navy, and William Eaton, from Hamet
Caramanli, Rightful Bashaw of Tripoli
FORT
ENTERPRIZE
[DERPI'E]
29 &lay 1805
Hamet Caramanlg Bashaw's compliments, to Cap%Hull & Gen! Eaton, humbly
praying that it may be convenient, to them Q to their interest, to send the two
Rlen on shore, that was last sent on board, - In earnest of which, he has hereunto affixed his Seal of Bashawship. [F. D. Roosevelt Col.]
Extract from journal kept on board U. S. Brig Argus. Master Commandant Isaac
Hull, U. S. Navy, commanding, 29 May 1805
Commences with fresh gales from the Southd At 112 Past MD fort made a
signel that the Enemy were advanceing Mr Eaton went on shore At 112 Past 1 launch returned was informd that the alarm arose from a small
party of the Enemy haveing Come down the hill to plunder the arabs but that
they were best off uvithout geting any thing At Sundown fresh breazes from Southd Midnight light airs from Southd & E d
At day light fresh gales from South+ At 10 sent the Launch onshore with men
to work a t fort At 12 Moderate breazes from the South4 RIen on shore at work
[NYHS. Naval History Sec., Argus.]

-

Extract from journal of U. S. Frigate Con:litution, Captain John Rodgers, U. S. Navy,
commanding, Wednesday, 29 May 1805
past 4 [P.M.] colonel Lear came on board. 112 past 6 the
[Off Tripoli]
town of Tripoli bore S W 112 S. 1/2 past 7 Colonel Lear left the ship
At Midnight calm and pleasant weather At 114 past S the Essex hasted a Bag
of truce and stood in for the town of Tripoli soon after it was answerd on shore
114 past 11the Spanish Consul came on board from Tripoli 112 past 11the Spanish
Consul Left the ship
Latitude Observed 32O56' N.
[USNA.]
Extract from journrrl of Surgeon Jonathan Cowdery, U. S. Navy, 29 May 1805
[Tripoli] Three frigates and a brig bore down upon the town and displayed
the easi ns and signals of peace, which were immediately answered from the
the Jew and s e v e d Turka
castle. %he Spanish consul, Fafah [Leon Farf~~g]

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1806 TO 1807
went on board, and did not return until late a t night, when it was reported that
negociations for peace were going on rapidly.
[LC. Rare Books, American Captives in Tripoli or Dr. Cowdery's Journal,
Boston, 1806.1
Extract from journal of William Eaton, U. S. Navy Agent for the Barbary Regencies,
Wednesday, 29 l a y 1805
6 oclock p. m. A Mirabout (saint) who had experienced some charities from
me - now from the enemy, states that two women, one a t camp and the other
in town, have engaged to take me off by poison - and that the commander in
chief of the enemy hm already made them large presents, among other things a
diamond ring, brilliant solitaire, in anticipation of this Service. The Saint cautioned me against accepting any presents of pastry cooking, preserves, or fruit,
from any persons of the town.
[H. E. Huntington L&AG.]
Extracts from journal of Midshipman Charles Morris, Jr., U. S. Navy, on board
U.6.Frigate President. Master Commandant George Cox, U. S. Navy, commanding,
Wednesday, 29 May 1805
1 The Constitution made Signal 254
A Strange sail W N W. which proved to be the U S. Brig Vizen
8 [A.M.] the U S Frigate Essez with Commodore Rodgers & C o l ~Lear on board
stood in for the town and hoisted the white flag
" which was immediatelv answered
by the Bashaur.
Noon The Town of Tripoli bore S E 112 E. 2 leagues distant
Latitude Observed 32'59' N.
[Mrs. C. E. Fox original, NDA photostat.]
Extract from journal of Hezekiah Loomis, Steward, U. S. Navy, U. 8. Brig Vixen.
Master Commandant John Smith, U. S. Navy, commanding, Wednesday, 29
May 1805
[Tripoli] This morning stood close in and the Essez fired 2 guns and hoisted
a flag of Truce. They did the same a t the Bashaw's castle and immediately sent
a boat off to the Essez. She stayed along side the Essex about 2 hours and then
went alongside the Constitution, a t which time Commodore Ro[d]gers hoisted his
broad pendant. The boat remained astern of him all day which made us all
suspect that they were negotiating a Peace or laying the foundation for one. We
did not arrive abreast of the Town until after sun setting. This day Capt. Barron
and Capt. Coxe exchanged ships-Capt. Barron on board the President and Capt.
Coxe on board the Essez.
K. F. Middlebrook. NDA copy.]
To Captain Samuel Barron, U. S. Navy, from Captain John Eodgers, U. S. Navy
U. STATESSHIPConstitution
08 Tripoli &fay SOth 1806
SIR, Yesterday the Spanish Consul returned on board again Empower'd by
the Bashaw, to negotiate a Peace; and altho it appeared by his Credentials that
he was completely authorised to conclude a final settlement of the differences,
with Cole Lear previous to his going on shore, yet he did not think Col? Lears
propositions admissable & in consequence returned on shore last Evening to consult the Bashsw further on the Business The Sp ish Consul has this moment (10 AM.) returned on board again &
says that 8 e Bashaw is not satisfied with the propositions that have been made how things will turn out is yet uncertain - Cap$Barron will be able to give you
the particulars. [Mrs. James S. Barron Col.]
To Captain Samuel Barron, U. 6. Navy, from Tobias Lear, U. S. Consul General,
Algiers
ON BOARDTHE U. S. Ft Constitution
08 Tripoli May 30th 1806
SIB As C a p t ~Rodgers writes to you fully by this opportunity, and Cspto
[Jamea] Barron will be able to give you further details, it is only necessary for me

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

65

to say, that on my first interview with the Spanish Consul, on behalf of
the Bashaw, I told him that the Propositions of the Bashaw contained in his (the
Sp Consul's) letter to me, were totally inadmissable, and if he intended to adhere
to any thing like them, the Business must end here. He assured me that they
would not be adhered to, and that he would come on board again the next day
when I could go on shore with him, to which I consented. The weather prevented
further communication till yesterday Mornr, when he came on board with a
formal power from the Bashaw to make with me all the outlines of the arrangement on board; but we differed very much in our opinions on the Subject, and I
finally gave him the enclosed proposal, with which he went on shore, assuring
him that I should not deviate from what I had then Written. - He has now
returned on board saying that the Sum was not enough; but I have silenced him
on that head by saying that no alteration could be made, and every thing now
lay with the Bashaw. Finding I wm not to be moved he requested that he might
send the boat on which he came on board, on Shore with a letter from him, while
he remained on board, which has been granted, and this evening I presume the
business will be determined.
I hope your health is mending and I flatter myself that the termination of the
Business here will be of more service by ReIeiveing your mind from anxiety, than
all the Medicine of the Phisicians.
[Stephen Decatur Col. NDA photostat, Book A.]
[30 May 18051
To Tobias L e u , U. S. Consul General, blg~ers,from Leon Farfara, Tripoli
EXCELLENCY
- Being disturbed yesterday by the sea, I was unable to have the
honor of a conference with Your Excellency, and fearing lest the same thing
happen to-day by going on board, I again find, to my regret, that I am deprived
of that pleasure. I have, however, communicated to Cavaliere de Souza all that
I have been able to find out.
I can assure you that no more favorable occasion than this could be found for
ending the disputes, in view of the inclination shown by His Highness the Bashaw
to terminate them under conditions agreeable to both parties.
I hope, therefore, that kindness will lead you to do everything in your power
to confer freedom upon your compatriots.
I n the meantime, I have the honor to subscribe myself, with the greatest
respect,
TRIPOLI,30 May 1806
[Stephen Decatur Col.]
To Captain Samuel Barron, U. S. Navy, from John Gavino, U. S. Consul, Gibraltar
GIBRALTAR
3 O t P &fay 1805
DEARSIR I wrote the 13*PInst by the Victualling ship Ceres, & the 14tP & 224
D? PI an Engb Convoy for Malta when arriv'd RecQ of yours l l t P & 21a*ult?
since when have none of yours. - On the 21"t arrived the Ann store ship from
Baltimore with Provisions &c* for your squadron I have taken out of the former
pr note a t t foot for the Siren, as had none in store, or could be just now p u r c h e d
so that the Ann Cap. Sil* Smith takes up the remainder as pr Inv09 & Bill Lading
with Charterparty sent you by Honl Secv of the Navy, and as I am informed that
Cyracuse is the place of Rondevouse for your Preparations against Tripoly, have
order'd Cap: Smith to proceed there to the adress of our Navy Agent. The U. S. Brig Siren Capn Stewart has been sevral times a t Alguesirm and I
am sorry to find no proper Person is appointed there to assist our state Vessels
or others, altho I have represented it to Consul Isnardy of Cadiz being in his
Jurisdiction. I gave Cap* Stewart a Letter of entroduction to my friend there
Mr Peter Porrall, who speaks, Reads & writes English, and Capn Stewart findin.g
him a fitt and intelligent Person for transacting our business, besides a Person EI
much wanted there to receive and forward our letters in those times as they
frequently come from the U. S. by the way of Cadiz, we have now an Instance of
the necessit , the Ship President having gone past for Cadiz without calling here
with your 6 o r containing Dispatches for Govl & Letters for Coapul S i q s o a
Cap9 Steward as well as myself wherefore Cape Stewart has appornted m d Mr
Porrall to act as our Navy Agent a t Alguesiras untill have your approbation,
which doubt not you will confirm and see [ I ] same to hand i t to Mr Porrall. Our

2LTAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1806 TO 1807
Commq of Merchant Vessels that are detaind come over often to me to call for
assistance, as no fitt Person is there to defend and attend them. - I have wrote
Mr Meade of Cadiz to demand the Box of Letters on board the President & requested him to open same and forward your Dispatches to the Honl SecT of the
Navy with all others for the U. S. those for Consul Simpson Capa Stewart & mine
t o be sent meI have now before me your favr of 30th ulto with Duplicates of 10th & 210t d~
the accompanying ones for the Honq Secy of the Navy will be forwarded by first
Conveyance observing they are duplicates of those pr the President not yet come
t o hand. I note what you say of the two Tripolin Cruisers wh got out. Your
Letter for Cap9 Stewart is Delivrd being now in Port for supplys.

*

*

*

*

*

[LC. JRP, Vol. 2, Series Two, May-Oct. 1805.1
To Jacob Crowninshield from George W. Erving, U. S. Consul, London, England
LONDON
May 30th 1806
SIR Referring to my letter of April y? 2Sth to hlr Smith accompanying two
Swords purchased here by order of the Government, as Presents from Congress
to Lieut Sterritt, and Captain Decateur, which were sent under the care of Mr
Ryland Randolph of Virginia, I have now the honor to incluse to you the receipt
of the manufacturer for 87.3.0 Sterling being the amount of the Bill transmitted
in the Letter referred to. [NDA. Misc. LB, Vol. 3, 1805.1
To John Stricker, Navy Agent, Baltimore, Md., from Secretary of the Navy
K A V D E P 90
~ nIay 1805
The Brig building under your agency is called the Hornet
[?\IDA. GLB, Vol. 7, 1803-1805.1
To Captain Thomas Tingey, U. S. Navy, from Secretary of the Navy
NAVD E P30
~ May 1806
The Brig now Building a t the Kavy Yard Washington is called the Wasp.
XDA. GLB, Vol. 7, 1803-1805.1
To Secretary of the Navy from Lieutenant Peter S. Ogilvie, U. S. Navy
U. S. GCN BOATNP 7 New York May 30th 1806
Sir, I have the honor to transmit for your information, the following account
of my transactions since the 14th Inst:On that day I got under way in company with the U. S. Ship J ~Adams
Q &
Gun Boats NQV
3 & 6 to proceed to the Mediterranean-we kept in company that
day & the next, but on the 16th it came on to blow very fresh in the evening, from
E. N. E. - sent down topsail & lower yards, but carrying all other sail to keep
up with the Frigate - a t 11 we lost sight of the Frigate & Gun Boats owing to its
being excessively thick & foggy - next morning (& for three days afterwards)
the fog continued - no sail in sight & a high sea running - We now discovered
that in consequence of our carrying a press of sail to keep up with the ship, we
had sprung our Mast, & found it split from the heel to the partners - I immediately had two strong wouldings clapped on below, & an Iron band above the
partners, hoping it would be su5cient t o prevent its going farther - but on the
21.9 in Lat: 37'17' Long: 65 - I found the Mast to be so weak, & work'd so
much, (the split having now got five feet above the Deck) I was induced t o believe
that should we get into a heavy sea, we would inevitably lose it
my only
alternative now, was to return, as I thought the consequences might be much
worse, were we to be dismasted in the middle of the Ocean
I cannot express to you Sir, my mortification a t the unfortunate accident, which
has thus, in some measure, defeated your, & I assure you my wish to join the
Squadron as early as possible, but I trust I shall yet be there in time to participate
in the glory which I am confident our little Navy will acquire this summer against
its enemies - I assure you nothing shall be wanting on my part to forward her

-

-

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS
refitting; & by the time I can have the honor of hearing from you, I shall be again
ready for Sea NO 7 is a very fine Vessel, & capable of going to any part of the world, she sails
well, holds a good wind, is very s t 8 & an excellent Sea Boat The other Gun Boats I have reason to believe were separated a t the same time
with myself, as they were still farther from the Ship when I lost sight of her, but
there is no doubt of their making their way across in safety From the time I determined to return, we experienced nothing but head winds
& calms, & from the weakness of the Mast, we were obliged to be very tender in
carrying sail - indeed, had not the Mast been made of a piece of sorrJT white
Pine, it never would have been sprung with the sail we were then carrying on it [NDA. Officers LB, 1802-1805.1
Extract from journal kept on board U. S. Brig Argus, Master Commandant Isaac
Hull, U. S. Navy, commanding, 30 May 1805
[Derne] Commences with light winds and Vary able Sixteen men onshore a t
work a t the fort - At 2 P M sighted larboard anchor found the stock broke run
in shore about one Cables length and let go starboard anchor At 3 M: Eaton Came onboard a t 4 he went onshore At 112 Past 4 P M the wind shifted suden from S W to N W and blew very
fresh At sundown fresh breazes from MTestdMidnight moderate and clear weather At day light sent the launch on shore to Carry the Provisions to the fort At 8 sent 18 men on shore to work - At 112 Past 10 saw a sail in the offing
which we soon discoverd to be the U S sloop Hornet fired a gun as a signel to
the fort for Discovering her Sent the launch on shore to bring off bfr E. on the People of the towns di5covering the Sloop they Came down to the fort to se Mr E where they remained untill
she anchored constantly fireing their muskets and wriding about which is customary with the arabs when they hear good neurs or any thing happens Pleasing to
them At 12 moderate wind from Korthd Hornet in sight
[NYHS. Naval History Sec., Argus.]
Extract from journal of U. S. Frigate Constitution. Captain John Rodgers, U. S. Wavy,
commanding, Thursday, 30 May 1805
[OffTripoli] . At 8 [A. Al.] the T,'ixen hoisted a flag of truce and stood in for the
town of Tripoli
At 112 past 9 the town of Tripoli bore South distance mile.
Latitude Observed 32'56' N.

Extract from journal of Kidshipman Charles Morris, Jr., U. S. Navy, on board
U.S. Frigate President, Master Commandant George Cox, U.S. Navy, commanding,
Thursday, 30 May 1805
4 PM Capt Barron came on board and took charge of the Ship Capt Cox
went t,o the Essex.
7 C a ~ Barron
t
went on board the Constitution
10-c&pt Barron returned 11 Constztution made signal to speak us Capt Bftrron went on board.
Latitude Observed 33'00'.
[Mrs. C. E. Fox original, NDA photostat.]
Extract from journal of Hezekiah Loomis, Steward, U. S. Navy, in U. S. Brig Vixen.
Master Commandant John Smith, 0.S. Navy, commanding, Thursday, SO May
1805
Off Tripoli. This morning we went within half pistol shot of their batteries
and hove to, having our white flag hoisted. The Bashaw had his also hoisted
on hie castle. We lay there until the Spanish Consul came off in his boat attended by a number of Turkish Chiefs with a present of fruit for Commodore
Ro[d]gers. They remained on board the Constitution all day and night, the wind

68

NAT7AI, OPERATIONS FROM 1806 TO 1807

blowing too fresh to go on shore in an open boat.
gone in port.
[L. F. Middlebrook. NDA copy.]

Peace expected.

The Resident

To Captain John Rodgers, U. S. Navy, from Captain Samuel Barron, U. S. Navy
MALTA91 May 1806
SIR: Pursuant to what is stated in my Letter of 22 ins*, officially communicating my resignation of the Command of the U. S. Squadron into your hands, I
have the Honor t o hand you herewith, Copies of all my Instructions, Orders &
authorities from the Navy Department, agreeably to the subjoined list - You
will have the goodness t o acknowledge their Receipt specifically - Should you
require any further explanation, or any extracts from my Correspondence that
may throw light upon subjects connected with the important trust which has
devolved on you, I beg leave to mention that they will be furnished with cheerfulness & alacrity, and to assure you that as far as my debilitated state will permit, you may count on my ready assistance & Cooperation, in completing every
necessary arrangement. [NA. Sen 9 B - B 6, Pres. Message, Jan. 1806.1
[31 May 18051
Negotiation concerning exchange of Prisoners
If his Excellency the Bashaw of Tripoli will send within two days from the
date hereof on board the Squadron of the United States now laying off the
harbour of Tripoli All the Citizens of the United States in his power, I engage,
on behalf of the said United States, to give him the sum of sixty thousand dollars,
and to have delivered up t o him all the Subjects of Tripoli now in the possession
of the United States, and to enter into a treaty with him founded upon principles
mutually beneficial to both nations Given under my hand on board the United States Frigate Constitution near
the harbour of Tripoli this thirty first day of May 1805
TOBIASLEAR.
Commissioner jor negociating a treaty of peace Between
the U. S . and the Bashaw of Tripoli To His Excellency
DON GERANDO
JOSEPH
DE SOUZA
Consul of Spain &
Commissioner on behalf of
His Ezcellency the Bashaw of Tripoli I n confirmation of the within proposition I again declare that when all the
Americans now in the power of His Excellency the Bwhaw of Tripoli, shall be
sent on board the American Squadron now off Tripoli, the within shall be fully
complied with, provided said Americans be sent on board said squadron before
Sun set tomorrow, if the weather permits of their being sent off Given under my hand on board the U. S. Frigate Constitution off Tripoli this
thirty first day of May 1805
TOBIASLEAR.
Commissioner on behalf of the U. S. jor negociating a eace
with His Excellency the Bashaw of &ipoli [Stephen Decatur Col.]
[31 May 18051
To Master Commandant Charles Stewart, U. 6. Navy, commanding U. S. Brig
Siren, from R. W. Meade, Cadiz, Spain
Dr SIB I wrote you the other day under cover of our Consul Kirkpatrick, since
when I have received your esteemed favor of the 15th Inst via Algeziras - I now
hand you several lettem for you whiph came inclosed in a Box directed for Mr
Gavino, and which I opened by his directions. I hope they may contain pleasing
intelligence from your friends, tho' I fear they are a little ancient from the rout
they have taken - I hand you annexed copy of a Private and Confidential letier
I received yesterday from the Minister a t Madrid, by which you will percieve
the state of things between our Countries, nothing however hostile will be openly

committed untill Congress are Called together by the President, when I aupposc
we may really expect something will be done The Privateers both here and a t Algeziraa have commenced their system of
Capturin and I believe attempt to take every American bound for Gibraltar How far Eommodore Barron may conceive himself authorized to spare a ship for
this station I cannot say, but I really think we ought to have two Ships here,
one off Algeziras and one off this Port - I t would effectually check the rascals I shall be happy a t all times to hear of your Welfare and to be advised of what
is going on CADIZ.$1'4 May 1806
[LC. JRP, Vol. 2, Series Two, May-Oct. 1805.1
Extract from journal kept on board U. S. Brig Argus, Master Commandant Isaac
Hull,U. 6. Navy, commanding, 31 May 1805
[Derne] Commences with moderate breazes from West4 Mr Eston Came
onboard - At 1 P M Lieu+ Evens Came onboard by whome I received dispatches from the Commodore
At 6 in the Evening sent the launch on shore with Mr Eaton At Sundown moderate gave orders to Mr Evens to have every thing in readiness to deliver some of the Provisions At day light in the morning - from
sundown to day light moderate breazes from the North4 but two much sea to take
Provisions out of the Hornet
At day light sent the launch for Provisions At 8 AM a signel was made a t
the for[t] that the Enemy were advanceing - got under way and run close in
with the fort to be in readiness for them the Hornet got under way and stood
c[l]ose in with the shore to the East4 of the fort at
Past 8 bote Came from shore by which I was informd that the Enemy
had retreated sent the launch for Provisions Kept her Constantly going for Provisions from sloop and water from shore
Every bodys Employed in makeing Prepairations to Carry into Effect the Commodores orders - 12 mod^ fine weather, Wind from the N
[NYHS. R'aval History Sec., Argus.]

-

Extract from journal of U. S. Frigate Comlilulion, Captain John Rodgers, U. 6. Navy,
commanding, Friday, 31 May 1805
[Off Tripoli] At 5 [P. M.] the Spanish Consul came on board At 7 close reeft
the to sails the town of Tripoli bearing S B E % E distance 1 Mile
At bidnight Light breezes and pleasant weather. At 7 turn,d the reefs out
of the top sails.
past 7 the Spanish Consul Left the ship At 8 sent up the
skysail mast At 9 discoverd a sail of[f] the Lee beam Made the signal to the
Essez to chace W S W. the strange sail proved to bee the Nautilus The President
Essex V k e n and Nautilus in company.
Latitude Observed 32'50'N.
[USNA.]
Extract from journal of Surgeon Jonathan Cowdery, U. S. Navy, 31 May 1805
[Tripoli] The Spanish consul and Shous Hammad went on board the commodore, and returned a t night. The Bashaw sent me to inform captain Bainbridge,
that peace was agreed on, which I did to the great joy of the officers.
[LC. Rare Books, American Capfives i n Tripoli or Dr. Cowdew's Journal,
Boston, 1806.1
Extract from journal of Midshipman Charles Morris, Jr., U. S. Navy, on b o d
U. S. Frigate Presided, Captain James Barron, U. S. Navy, commanding, Friday,
31 May 1805
2 Capt Barron came on board, Tripoli bearing S B E M E. 6 Miles, parted
company with the Squadron Latitude Observed 33'40' N. Longitude Observed 12'59' E.
[Mrs. C. E. FOXoriginal, NDA photostat.]

NAVAL OPERATIOATS FROM 1806 TO 1807
Extract from journal of Hezekiah Loomis, Steward, U. 6 . Navy, U. 6 . Brig Vixen.
Master Commandant John Smith, U.S. Navy, commanding, Friday, 31 May 1806
[Tripoli] This day pleasant with light winds. About 8 this morning the
boat came from the Constitution with the Spanish Consul. Commodore Ro[d]gers
spoke Capt. Smith and desired he would take the boat in tow and take her in
and wait until she was ready to come out, and then tow her out to him, observing
a t the same time that this time going in wonld decide the business. Arrived
on our cruising ground this morning the U. S. Sch. Nautilus from Malta. The
boat came again with the Spanish Consul a t 1 o'clock P. M. We then made
sail and stood off to the Constitution. When we came up with her Capt. Smith
went on board with the Spanish Consul and remained until after sun set.
[L. F. Middlebrook. NDA copy.]

To George Harrison, Navy Agent, Philadelphia, Pa., from Captain Edward Preble,
U. 6. Navy
BOSTON
June 1805
Dr SIR I send you three sketches of attacks on Tripoly by our Squadron in
August last, perhaps they may be of some service to the person who cuts the
medal.
Please to inform me when it is probable the medal will be finished and what
will be the expence of striking a few in Copper,
I have a painting of the first attack six feet long by 4 wide it is the only one
I have a t present, but it shall be sent to you if the engraver wishes it. I however
presume the sketches will answer his purpose.
[LC. EPP, Vol. 15, June-Aug. 1805.1
[June 18051
To Brigadier General Henry Dearborn, U. S. Army, Collector of the Port of Boston,
Mass. from Captain William Bainbridge, U. S. Navy
NOVEMBER
22, 1822.
DEARGENERAL,
- I n overhauling my Books and Papers I cannot find the
Journal I kept in Prison a t Tripoli. I am under the impression that you returned
it to me - and that I leant it to someone t o read but I have so faint a recollection of it that I cannot be positive, or to whom - if you should not have it - I
hope you'll do me the favor to enquire of David Forhan and l l r Jas Tilon (1) [Haverford College.]
[ l June 18051
To Minister of Foreign Affairs to Bashaw of Tripoli, from Tobias Lear, U. S.
Consul General, Algiers
Whereas Captain Bainbridge, late of the U. S. Frigate Philadelphia, has been
permitted by the Bashaw of Tripoli, t o come on board the United States Frigate
Constitution now off Tripoli, and has given information to me that the Bashaw
is desireous of a peace with the United States of America; and willing to release
the Americans now in his power upon the terms mentioned in my proposal of
the 30tb of May; yet he is desireous of having a treaty of peace between the said
United States and himself made and agreed upon by the parties, before he
delivers said Americans on board the Squadron now off Tripoli, and said Captain
Bainbridge declaring that the Americans will not be given up before such treaty
be made, I agree t o make such treaty on behalf of the said United States, provided the said Bashaw shall send on board the United States Frigate Constitution
a proper Character, duly authorized on his part, for negociating said treaty,
upon the completion of which and its acceptance by both parties, All the Americans now in the possession of the Bashaw of Tripoli shall be delivered up, agreeably to my proposition on the 30tb of May Aforesaid. Given under my hand on board the U. States Frigate Constitution off Tripoli,
this first day of June 1805
TOBIASLEAR.Commissioner on behalf qf the U. States for
negodating a peace with the Bashaw of !l'ripoli
TO SIDI MUHAMED
DGHIES
Minister of Foreign affairs
to His Excellency the Bashaw of Tripoli
[Stephen Decatur Col.]

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

71

[ l June 180511
To Nicholas C. Nissen, Danish Consul, Tripoli, from Sidi Yusuf Caramanli, Bashaw
of Tripoli
TRANSLATION OF THE TESQUERI

PRAISEBE TO GOD.
To our Friend, in whom we have full confidence, Nissen, Danish Consul,
residing in our Town, whom we have authorized to conclude Peace between us
and the Americans and given full authority in consequence to speak of everything that concerns our advantage and in our name, having renounced the other
Mediator in whom we have found some faults.
At Tripoli, the 3rd [illegible] (1 June 1805?] 1220
By order SIDI YUSOUF
CARAMANLI.
[Translator's Note. The phrase: "iu whome we have full wnfidenw" is arenderingof a somewhat obscure
French translation of some Arabic meaning. It could also he rendered: "devoted to us in the opinion of
all", which would bo more literal, if that 1s wllnt the Arable intended to convey. Due to the uncertain
meaning df the words, the translator is unable to certtfy that the above rcuderings are correct or approximately so. The French reads: attache A nous de tout jugement.]

IStephen Decatur Col.]
[ l June 18051
To Tobias Lear, U. S. Consul General, Algiers, on board U. S. Frigate Corulifufion.
from Captain William Bainbridge, U. S. Navy
DEARSIR This will be handed you by Nicholas, C, Nissen Esqr, His Danish
Majestys Consul, who in conformity to yours and my own wishes goes on board
the Constitution on the buisimess depending - I recommend Consul Nissen to
you, as my perticular friend and the freind of the American Citizens prisoners
here - I shall only add that we prisoners hopes through you to obtain a speedy
liberation
Saturday night 12 OClock
[Stephen Decatur Col.]
To Captain Samuel Barron, U. S. Navy, from Master Commandant Thomas
Robinson, Jr., U. S. Navy
ANCONA
June la$
1805
DEARSIR, I arrived here the 30th Ult? from Venice. I immediately waited on
the Governor opend my business met a friendly reception & put the two Barks
in the Carpenters hands to fortify for heav Guns, this compleately aranged & not
finding boats to purchase here to my mind shoved off for Senegala a place twenty
Miles from here & were they are built of every discription. I met Success put four
in hands & return'd this evening. - to Ancona, its now 12 0 Clock. I shall go on
board, get under way for Trieste settle my accounts there, take under convoy a
Brig belonging to Philad! call a t this place, pick up the Boats & on the Wings of
Anxiety and dispatch 0y to you. - I cou'd line the Coast of Tripoli with Gun
Boats from this place & I have the satisfaction t o say I meet warm friends in
every port the Governer here is very clever & gives me full author~tyto proceed
The little fleet from here will consist of 5 Boats of one 24 ea. - &
as I please.2 of 4-24 ea and all to be prepar'd for to receive the Guns by this Day Week. I am well aware that I am late, but this is not my fault, if Cap. B had come over
here. (& I am astonish'd he did not think of it) he might have done what he
pleased. - I hope my proceeding will meet your approbation
[LC. JRP, Vol. 1, March 1791-Dec. 1814.1

Y

To James Simpson, U. S. Consul, Tangier, Morocco, from Master Commandant
Charles Stewart, U. S. Navy
U. S. Bma Siren June Iat 1806
COPY
DEARSIR Since m last respects t o you the American Ship Ann has arrived
from Baltimore, with 8rovisians, Amunition and Stores for the use of the Squadron,
under the Command of Commodore Barron - By the last advices from Commodore Barron, there appears t o be considerable risque in American vessels passing
up the Mediterranean without being protected by some armed force in Conse-

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1806 TO 1807
of two of the Enemy's Corsairs having eluded the Blockade of Tripoli
uring the bad weather - Considering the great importance the Amunition and
other Articles Contained in the Store Ship, will be to the Squadron in our operations against Tripoli and the evil arising to the United States, should the Ann
unfortunately fall into the Enemy's hands, I have in consequence thereof, thought
proper to Come to Tangier, for the purpose of knowing whether the situation of
our Affairs will admit of the Siren's proceeding with the Ann as Convoy and if
you coincide with me in opinion, that it is of importance she should be protected
to Malta under the existing Circumstances and think the Siren can be spared for
that purpose without great injury to our &airs in this Quarter Commodore Barron writes me under date of the 30th April (he not having
received any of our letters) that he is apprehensive our AfTairs in this Quarter
are not all right by my remaining on this Station and, observes "his wishes r e
specting the Siren were fully express'd in his letter of the 6'h March"
He is
recovering his Health and Strength fast and writes in good Spirits[NDA. MC LB, 1804-5.1

-

[l June 18051
To Captain Edward Preble, U. 6. Navy, from John Stinson, Master of American
ship Huntrcu
LONDON
August 20th 1805
SIR on my arrival a t Liverpool, I wrote for the information of government,
giving a Statement of the capture of the Ship huntress (laden with government
Stores) on my arrival here, Mr Lyman inform'd me he had not wrote induc'd me
to forward this least the first should miscarry. On June the first LatQ 36.20 K.
Longd 74.50 I was brought too by a Spanish Schooner Privateer call'd La maria
Comand'd by Antonio Lobo from Porto Rico. (the reason, Lobo gave for detaining the Ship was her being bound for a British port and not having a Spanish
passport) After robing the Ship of ten barrels bread, One barrel tar and Sundry
other articles Took all my crew out except the cabin boy, put a Prize master and
eleven Spaniards on board and ordered the Ship for Porto Rico - on June 9th
in Sight of Bermudas was retaken by two English Guineamen after taking the
Spaniards out Put a prize master and crew on board and order'd the Ship for
Liverpool Where She arriv'd 16'h ult much darnag'd. [NDA. Misc. LB, Vol. 4, 1805.1
[ l June 18053

To Caesar A. Bodney, Attorney General of the United States from Secretary of the
Navy

NAVYDEPAR?
7 March 1808.
On the 18 da of May 1805 the Department chartered the Ship Huntress to
proceed with a 8argo of naval Stores from this plsce to Malta & SyracuseShe
soon after proceeded to Sea on this voyage - was captured on the l e t June by a
Spanish armed Vessel, recaptured on the 9th by a British armed Vessel & sent to
Liverpool where she arrived on the 16th July 1805. - She was there libelled
in the high Court of Admiralty by the recaptors for salvage, & decreed to he
restored upon payment of the recaptors costs, 12 Sept? 1805 - Her Cargo was
then landed in England in consequence of the unauthorized interposition of the
American Consul a t London.
By the Charterparty you will perceive that 28 lay days exclusive of Sundays
were allowed the Department a t Malta & Syracuse.
The freight in this case, had the cargo have been delivered a t Malta & Syracuse
agreeably to the Charterparty would have amounted to $8472:95
The owners of the Huntress received a t this place on account of the freight prior
----to the Sailing of the Vessel - - - , - , - - - - - - - - - - -6472:95
and our Consul a t London paid without
Depacment
any authority from?!t
on their account
2444. 44

-.

So that the owners have received
$8917.39
which is $444:44: more than they would have been entitled to receive t a d the
cargo have been landed agreeably t o the Charterparty a t Malta or Syracwe.

- - - - - - - , - - - _ _ - _ - -

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

73

The owners however allege that the original capture of the Huntress proceeded
from the neglect of the Government t o furnish the Vessel with proper Documents for the voyage, & that therefore their claim for detention &c of the Vessel is
reasonable & ought to be allowed - The proper Documents referred to in their
petition mean, it appears by the petition; "a Certificate from the Spanish Consul"
The Huntress was furnished with a Certificate from the President of the United
States, stating that the Cargo was the property of the United States, intended for
the use of their Squadron in the Mediterranean. Similar Certificates from the
British & French Ministers were furnished. There was no Certificate from the
Spanish Minister furnished, and it is not alleged that there was any other p a p r
wanting. At the time the Huntress sailed there was no official communication
between this Government & the Spanish Minister. There was no Stipulation in
the Charterparty to furnish any of these Certificates.
The accompanying papers will afford you every other information necessary to
enable you to form an opinion upon the case. I ask the favor of your opinion
upon this claim, as early as you can conveniently transmit it to me.
[NDA. GLB, Vol. 9, 1807-1809.1
[Enclosure]

[18 May 18051
Charter of American Ship Hunfrms
This Charter Party made and concluded upon this eighteenth day of May
One thousand eight hundred and Five, between IVilliam Hodgson of Alexandria
in the District of Columbia merchant as Agent for Robert Ellwell of Wiscasset, in
the District of Maine, Owner of the Ship Huntress of the Burthen of Two hundred
and Sixty nine Tons or thereabouts, of the one part & Thomas Tingey Esq?
Agent of the United States of America of the other part-Witnesseth that the said
William Hodgson as Agent aforesaid charters to the said Thomas Tingey, Agent
as aforesaid the said Ship Huntress whereof John Stenson is a t present Master
now laying a t the port of Washington and having on board a Cargo of Govemment Stores as per bill of Lading hereunto annexed, on a Voyage from the City
of Washington to hialta and thence to Syracuse, if so directed by the navy agent
a t Malta where the Voyage is to cease & determine. The said William Hodgson
as Agent aforesaid agrees and engages that the said Ship shall be properly manned
and victualled for the Voyage and that she shall proceed with all dispatch on her
Voyage, and further agrees to allow the said Thomas Tingey twenty eight working
lay days (each day being considered so with the exception of Sundays) a t Malta and
Syracuse-calculating as Lay Days the number of days (Sundays excepted) the
said Vessel shall be detained a t Malta and Syracuse, after she shall arrive a t
those Ports and be ready to deliveer her Cargo until1 she shall have delivered her
Cargo, & the said William Hodgson further agrees; that should there be any Lett
or hinderance on the part of the Owner or Captain of the said Vessel, which shall
prevent her proceeding on her Voyage, that then and in that Case, he will return
to the said Thomas Timgey, or to any other Person authorized by the Secretary
of the Navy to receive it, the whole Amount of Freight advanced to him the said
Thomaq Tingey with legal Interest thereon from the Date hereof-In
Consideration whereof the said Thomas Tingey Agent as aforesaid has loaded the
said Ship Huntress with a Cargo of Government Stores & engages to receive the
same a t the Port of Discharge from alongside, and to pay or cause to be paid a t
and after the ratc of three Dollars money of the United States, per Barrel, for
each and every Barrel of Flour & Bread shipp'd on board and other articles after
the same Rate for equivalent Measurement the whole amount of Freight excepting the Sum of Two thousand Dollars to be paid by him or s' ning Bills of Lading,
& the remaining Two Thousand Dollars to be paid a t the?ort of Discharge on
Delivery of the Cargo in Specie. And the said Wm Hodgson further agrees that
there shall be no private Shipment (excepting the necessary Stores for the Use
of the Ship) nor any other than Property of the United States, shipp'd on board
the said Ship-It is further agreed between the Parties aforesaid, that should
the said ship be detained a t the Ports of Malta and Syracuse longer than the lay
Days before mentioned the said Thomas Tingey shall cause to be paid to the said
Wiiliam Hodgson or to his assigns, the Sum of Fifty Dollars money of the United
States, for each day so detained day by day as the m e shall become due--In

74

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1805 TO 1807

Witness whercof the Parties aforesaid have hereunto set their hands and Seals
the Day and Year first above written
signed Wm HODGSON
(Seal)
for ROBELLSWELL
signd THOPTINGEY(Seal)
Signed Sealed and delivered
in presence of
signed C H AGOLDSBOROUGH
~
dv J K SMITH

*

[NDA.

*

*

*

*

*

*

Misc. LB, Vol. 5, 1806.1

Extract from journal of Surgeon Jonathan Cowdery, U. S. Navy, 1 June 1805
[Tripoli] The truce continued. Bainbridge went on board the commodore
and returned a t night. Our men were still drove to hard labour, and our officers
kept confined.
[LC. Rare Books, American Captitles in Tripoli or Dr. Cowdery's Journal,
Boston, 1806.1
Extract from journal kept on board U. S. Brig Argus. Master Commandant Isaac
Hull,U. S. Navy, commanding, 1 June 1805
[Derne] Commences with moderate breazes from h-orth.! Mr Evens came
onboard - Launch Employed waterin and bring Provisions from the Sloop
[Hmnet] At 5 Past 3 Hamed Bashaw a n f his Minister Came onboard
At 4
he went on shore - At Sundown Moderate At 12 Moderste and clear weather
At day light moderate sent the Launch for water
At 41 Past 10 the weather appearing Very dirty with thunder and rain wind on
shore did get underway and beat off - about 1 j/z mils and anchored in thirteen
fathoms water At Mer? wind Very Varyable with Thunder and showers of
Rain with a Sea from N. E
[NYHS. Naval History Sec., Argwr.]

-

-

Extract from journal of Hezekiah Loomis, Steward, U. S. Navy, U. S. Brig Vixen,
Master Commandant John Smith, U. S. Navy, commanding, Saturday, 1 June
1805

Off Tripoli. This day pleasant with light winds. We stood in under the
batteries and lay to for the boat which we momentarily expected. At 12 o'clock
the boat came off, and to our joy Captain Bainbridge was in it. He came on board
and exhibited a spirit of joy and gladness, mixed with humiliation which I never
saw before in all my life time. His first entrance on board was truly a speciman
of joy to excess, but his pale meagre countenance showed how the confines of
Barbary fiends would dilate the whole system of a Christian. As soon as we came
up with the Constitution, Capt. Smith and Capt. Bainbridge went on board and
remained there until 6 o'clock P. &I. Then coming on board we gave them a tow
near in and cmt them off and Capt. Bainbridge once more went to his dark cell.
F. F. Middlebrook. NDA copy.]
To William Biggins, U. S. Navy Agent, Malta, from Captain John Rodgers, U. S.
Navy
U. STATESSHIP Constifution
Syracuse June [July] BQ 1806
Sir T h i ~Morning I had the honor of receiving your favour of the 2gth Ult?,
and thank you for the accompanying News Papers, as also your informing me
that my friends in America are wellThe Stores of the John Adams you will
be pleased to have stored a t Malta, and should any of the Gun Boats arrive there,
you will direct them t o take on board Provisions for a t least three Months, provided they can carry it; t o have all their Water filled up, and wait a t Malta my
further orders. -

WARS WITH BRRBARY POWERS
The Brig Argus I have directed to be got ready to proceed to Alexandria with
the Money Indebted to Mr Briggs, she will be with you in four or five Days a t
farthest - I have not had a Vessel to spare for this purpose before [LC. JRP, L Bk B, May 1805-July 1806.1
To Captain James Barron, U. S. Navy, commanding U. S. Frigate Pruident. Halta,
from Captain John Rodgers, U. S. Navy
U. STATES
SEIPConstitution
Off Tn'poli June 2 d 1806
SIR, Nothing has transpired since you left here worth communicating further
than what Lieutt Dent will be able to inform you of. - In case there is any
certainty of the British taking possession of Sicily, in the course of a few Weeks,
I shall prefer the Provisions that are coming out being landed a t Malta, & the
as the British
Squadron Rendezvousing a t that place, instead of Syracuse.
having possession of Sicily, will give us more difficulties to contend with a t the
latter place: a t least for some months after they take possession. - If the
Business here 1s settled I intend going to Tunis so soon as the Squadron is collected;
you will therefore desire the Commanders, a3 you meet them to Provision their
Vessels for Ten Weeks
I expect to be with you in 4 or 5 Days. [LC. JRP, Letters & Orders, Book A, 1804-1805.1

-

-

To Master Comms~dantJohn E. Dent, U. S. Navy, commanding U. S. Schooner
Nautilus, from Ceptain John Rodgers, U. S. Navy
U. S. S a r ~Constitution
OffTripolz June RQ 1806.SIR You will proceed t o Malta without loss of time, hand Commo: Barron mv
Letters and requlre of hfr Higgins 14000 Spanish Dollars, proceed direct to Ale;andria, pap the same into the hands of Messr? Briggs of that place, take the
necessary Receipts and return as soon as possible to Syracuse - As the h'azdilua
wants some repairs the Enterprize, provided She is a t Malta, will perform this
service, In which case you will transfer these Orders to Lieut. Robison for his
Government, and after taking in provisions for ten weeks Cruize, proceed to
Syracuse where you will wait my further Orders. [NHF. Dent's LB, 1803-1810.1
To Captain Samu el Barron, U.S. Navy, Malta, from Captain John Rodgers, U. S.
Navy
C. S . SHIP Constitution
off Tnpoli June 24 1805
SIR, I have sent the Nautilus, Lieutt Dent, to Malta for the purpose of conveying the 14,000 Spanish Dollars to Messq Briggs of that place, [Alexandria]
and perfectly coincide with you in opinion "That this Money ought to be fornrarded Immediately", I would thank you Sir to desire Mr Higgins not to detain
the Schooner longer than he can avoid, - If the Enterprzze is a t Malta, f would
prefer her performing this Service as the Naulzlus wmts some repairs
[on the back of the Letter]
If neither Commo: Barron or Capt Barron be a t Malta, M,i. Higgins will please
communicate the contents of this Letter to the commander of the Enterprize,
provided she is a t Malta. P C . JRP, Letters & Orders Book A, 1804-1805.1

-

12 June 18051
A Neapolitan befriended by U. S. prisoners in Tripoli

PERTE-AMBOY,
1st Aug. 1806.
SIR, You will oblige me by giving in your paper a place to the enclosed letters.
The person whom the crew of the Philadelphia released from bondage was a Nea-

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1805 TO 1807
politan, and one of the drivers over them; and who no doubt would have remained
forever a captive, had it not been for the generosity of the American Tars.
I am respectfully,
Your obedient servant,
hlaj. J ~ c ~ s oPhiladelphia.
a,
WM.BAINBB~GE.
[Enclosm]

TRIPOLI,4th June, 1806.
SIR, I enclose you a letter received from the crew of the U. States' late frigate
Philadelphia, you are directed to comply with their very laudable request, and
make the charges respectively against them.
Youm,

WM.BAINBBIDGE,

KEITJJSPENCE,
Esq. Purser.

PRISON,TRIPOLI,June 2.
Sla, A twelvemonth ago, a number of the ship's company proposed a plan for
the relief of one of the Neapolitans, who, as far as was in his power, showed our
people many kindnesses, it was dropped for that. time; our emancipation not
admitting of a doubt, we have again resumed the same laudable undertaking,
and find the majority of the ship's company happy to have it in their power to
contribute so essentially to the happiness of a fellow creature; upwards of 300
dollars have been subscribed for that purpose, and i t now, sir, rests with you,
whether the business shall be completed or not, by advancing the money; each
subscriber is willing to give all the security requisite for the reimbursement of the
cash-aa the time is short, you will oblige us by sending an answer as soon as
possible, we earnestly hope that it may be favorable, rtnd that our poor fellow
sufferer shall not be Ieft to suffer the bitter pangs of disappointment.
With our best wishes for your health and happiness, we remain your's, &c.
STEPHEN
HOWELL,
~~~~~.~~~ in behdj of the subscribers a s p e r list annaed
JOHN
SMITH.
ESq.
TO Capt. Wbl. BAINBRIDGE,
[LC. National Zntelligencer, 9 Oct. 1805.1

I

To Captain Samuel Barron, U. S. Navy, from Captain Eugb G. Campbell, U. 6.
Navy

-

Constellation, VALLETEHARBOUR.
J u w fl 1806
SIR, My Expectation was to have left Tunis on the 27tb Ultimo, as pr advice
by the Vixen, from which I was prevented in consequence of dispatches received
by Ben Tunes from Malta, that brought on a tedious and worn discussion between
Mr Davis, the Bey and Minister, which did not Terminate until1 the Evening
of the 29th for particulars I refer you to Mr Davis'? Dispatches, on the 30tC about
Meredian hfr Davh his Secretary and Drogeman came on board, delivela me his
letters & a t 5 P. M took leave which circumstance Enabled me to sail that Evening - General opinion is that the Recent captures are Tunesian property,
which the Bey says publicly, must be restored, but secreetly thinks they will
not: - however the people should be Immediately sent home in some way or other
and the sooner this is done, the sooner wilI the Bey be made acquainted with your
determination to Retain the vessels in question which he already expects will be
the case - the Tunesian Frigate and four Zebecks are hsuld into the Mold,
and all the smaller Vessels in the Bason, he has 15 Gun boats Equipt for eervice,
and three of his small Corsairs saild on Tuesday Evening, Two Latteeners & one
small Zebeck - The British Consul Landed from the Morgiana on Tuesday morning, since that I am informed, he is engaged in business not less important then
our own [Mm.James 6. Banon original.]

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

77

To Captain Hugh G. Campbell, U. 6. Navy, commanding 0.I.Frigate ~mtdatio&
from Captain Samuel Barron, U. S. Navy
MALTA
June W 1805.
Sir! The importance of the Dispatches from Tunis, brought by the Frigate under
your Command, & the necessity of t.heir being early communicated to Captain
John Rodgers now in the Constitution off Tripoli, to whom the Command of the
U States Squadron hss devolved in consequence of my resignation, induces me to
request that you proceed with all practicable dispatch off that Harbor, & on falling
in with the Constitution to deliver said dispatches to that officer &z receive his
Orders as Commr in chief-In case of Captain Rodgers having left the Coast you
will deliver the said Dispatches to the senior Officer on the Station & follow his
Instructions.[NA. Sen. 9 B-B 6 , Pres. Message, Jan. 1806.1
To Master Commandant Charles Stewart, U. S. Navy, commanding U. I.Brig
Siren, from James Simpson, U. S. Consul, Tangier, Morocco
COPY
TANGIERf?! June 1806
DEAESIR The Necessity of the Store Ship having immediate Convoy is obvious - At this moment there is no absolute necessity for the Siren remaining on
this Station' but from one day to another we may now not onIy expect to see the
Emperor's druisers arrive from Lisbon, but that his other vessels will also be got
ready for Sea For these reasons I fully hope this Station will not be left without one or more
Vessels of War of the United States and that the Siren or some other will be sent
down so soon as the Ann is put in Safety[NDA. MC LB, 1804-5.1
Extract from journal kept on board 0.6. Brig Argus. Master Commandant Isaac
Hull, U. S. Navy, commanding, 2 June 1805
[Derne] Commences with moderate breazes and pleasant Launch employed
bringing Provisions from the [Sloop] HornetAt 4 the fort made a signel for a bote sent the Jolly bote on shore - At 6
Mr Eaton Came onboard - At 9 Mr Eaton went on shore - At 12 fresh gales
from the North? a sea setting on shore At day light fresh gales from the North4 and mTest4 Sent the launch onboard
the Hornet to assist Lieut Evens in warping her further of[f] shore At 9 the Launch returned - At M D fresh breazes from the North4 and a
Sea setting on shore [NYHS. Nbval History Sec., Argus.]
Extract from journal of U. S. Frigate Conslifufion,Captain John Rodgers, U. S. Navy,
commanding, Sunday, 2 June 1805
[Off Tripoli] At 1 [P. M.] Cap$ Bairlbridge came on board from Tripoli
5/, past 1 discoverd a saq to.the W S W. % paat 6 cap$ Bainbridge left the ship
At Sunset the town of Trlpoll bore E B S distance 4 Miles
At 10 [A. M.] the Deanish Consul came along side from Tripoli.
[USNA.]
Extract from journal of Surgeon Jonathan Cowdery, U. S. Navy, 2 June 1805
I received a letter from captain Bainbridge, stating that the terms of peace
were agreed on, and that we should soon go on board the squadron. I immediately
read this letter t o our crew, who were so overjoyed that many of them shed tears,
They were still drove to hard work, and many of them flogged.
[LC. Rare Books, American Captwes in E p o l i or Dr. Cowdery's Journal,
Boston, 1806.1

NAt.?AI, OPERATIOATSFROM 1806 TO 1807
Extract from journal of Midshipman Charles Morris, Jr., U. 6. Navy, on board
0.6. Frigate Presided. Captain James Banon, U. S. Navy, commanding, Sunday,
2 June 1805
4 Saw a strange sail to the NQ & 334
6 Saw the Isle of Malta. N E B N 15 leagues. (doubtful.)
Latitude Observed 3j038' North
[Mrs. C. E. Fox original, NDA photostat.]
Extract from journal of Hezekiah Loomis, Steward, U. S. Navy, U. 8. Brig Vixen,
Master Commandant John Smith, U. S. Navy, commanding, S u ~ d a y2, Jcne 1806
[Tripoli] This day pleasant. The Danish Consul came off and business wore
a very favorable prospect. Arrived the Frigate Constellation from Malta,
[L. F. Middlebrook. PU'DA copy.]
To Captain Samuel Barron, U. S. Navy, Malta, from Captain John Rodgers, U. S.
Navy
Constitution O F F TRIPOLI
June $4 1805
SIR By the Sperronara you dispatched from Mslta, I have this instant received
Duplicates of the Government Dispatches you forwarded by the Nautilus, with
Mr Simpson's representations relative to our affairs wjth Morocco.
1shall be
a t hlalta in the course of three or four days after this reaches you, & in time
I hope to send a force to hforocco to meet Mr Simpson's TVishea. - The business
is so far finished that a flag-Staff is making on board the Conlrtitution to disphy
the American flag on the Consular House.
[NA. Sen. 9 B-B 6, Pres. Message, Jan. 1806.

-

To Captain Samuel Barron, U. S. Navy, Malta, from Captain John Bodgers, U. S.
Navy
Constitution OFF TRIPOLI
June 34 1805
Private
DEARSIR I have this moment rec'd your Esteemed favour of the 26tb Ultv
The Nadilua was just on the eve of departure for hlalta, when the Sparnaro
arrived
Our business here k so far finishedas not to leave me a hope of receiving a Button for my services, much more a Medal, I have this very Instant received
a line from Bainbridge who again desires to be remembered to you atfectionately nothing on the score of Peace, remains now to be done, farther than the discussion
of some trivial matters
[LC. JRP, Letters d: Orders, Book A, 1804-1805.1

-

-

-

To Captain Semuel Barron, U. 6. Navy, Malta, from Captain John Rodgers, U. S,
Navy
U, S FRIGATEconstitution
o ~ 7Tripoli June 8'4 1805
SIR In all probability Peace will be concluded wit.h Tripoli tomorrou~: In which
case it is likely the prisoners will be on board the Squadron tomorrow morning
COUPLear, who has not yet been on shore, goes tomorrow for the purpose of
concluding matters Capt Bainbridge, on parole, was on board the Constztuticm
yesterday: he desires to be affectionately remember'd to you & your Brother
The Bashaw is much humiliated which he even hamseZj confesses; and I think
1can venture to say that jt is the last War the Regency will ever wage against
None of the Philadelphia's Officers have died
they are all
the U States
well
this will be pleasing news t o their friends
[Mrs.James S. Barron Col.]

-

-

-

-

*

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS
[3 June 18051
Correspondence concerning Nicholas C. missen, Danish Consul, Tripoli
PERTHAMBOY,
30 Sept. 1805.
SIR, I enclose you copies of letters which I will thank you to publish in your
paper-they
will convey (but feebly) to my countrymen, the obligations
myself and fellow sufferers in captivit,y, were under to Nicholas C. Nissen, Esq.
his Danish Majesty's consul to the Regency of Tripoli, for his humane and
friendly attention. In fact, had we not met with such a character of philanthropy as Mr. Nissen, our situation would have been truly deplorable.
I am, respectfully your obedient servant,

Editor
Major WM, JACKBON,
of the Political Register, Phil}
TRIPOLII N BARBARY
Sd June 1805.
SIR, WE, officers of the U. States' Iate frigate Philadelphia, wrecked on the
coast of Tripoli, to do justice to our feelings, address this letter of thanks to you
for your kind, humane and generous conduct during our captivity in this place.
The philanthropy which you showed to us a t the first moment of our misfortune,
and your unremitted attention t o the end of it, believe us, SIR,is deeply impressed
on our hearts; and we shall never cease to remember it with the warmest gratitude,
and to offer our prayers to that Being who rewards benevolent deeds, for your
health and happiness
KM.BAIKBRIDGE,
Capt.
and
..
. 29
... offirern

To NICHOLAS
C. NIBSEX,Esq,
His Danish Majesty's Comul, Mpoli.)
TRIPOLIIN BAEBARY,
Sd June, 1805.
DEARSIR, I do myself the honor of enclosing you a letter of thanks from the
American Naval officers, lately prisoners in Tripoli, for your humane and friendly
attention to them during their captivity. The sentiments they have expressed,
be assured, are but faint shadows of their feelings:-your
kindness is deeply
registered in the heart of every individual of them, and no time will ever efface
the rememberance of it.
I shall not attempt to convey to you a just idea of my own feelings for your
disinterested friendship, and the risli which you have run to serve myself and fellow
sufferers, as words would be inadequate to the task; but believe me to be t r d p
impressed with the gratitude which such kindness merits, and that it ever will
be one of my greatest pleasures to hear of your happiness.
WM, BAIRBRIDGE.
C. NIBSEN,Esq. Tripoli.
NICHOLAB

U. S. FRIGATE,President,
BAYOF GIBRALTAR,
97 July, 1805.
DEARSIR,The officers of the U. States' late frigate Philadelphia, lately prisoners
in Tripoli, having received from Nicholas C. Nissen, Esq. his Danish malesty's
Consul a t that Regency, the most humane and friendly attention during their
captivity in that place--and
being desirous to express their grateful sense of his
benevolent services, have agreed to'present to him an URN with a proper emblem:
I have, therefore, to request your goodness to take on you the commission of
having a suitable one made in London, and delivered to his Danish majesty's
minister residing a t the Court of St. James, accompanied by the letter herein
enclosed. I feel confident, sir, that you will readily comply with my request;
and also excuse the trouble attending it, particularly as it is to convey to our
friend a mark of gratitude for his attention.
m-M.BAINBRIDGE,
JOHNGAVINOes cons
(or the U:S. B;braZta3

80

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1806 TO 1807

U. 5. SHIP,President
87 July, 1806.
BAYOF GIBRALTAR,
DEARSIR, I n behalf of myself and officers, I have to request your acceptance
of an URN, which accompanies this letter, as a pledge of our grateful sense of your
humane and friendly attention to us while captives in Tripoli (Barbary.)We tender you this pledge, not for the nominal value, but as a lasting monument
of our gratitude for your benevolence, and uith i t our best wishes for your health
and happiness.
WM. BAINBRIDGE.
[LC. National Intelligencer, 9 Oct. 1805.1
[3 June 18051
To Secretary of the Navy from George Harrison, Navy Agent, Philadelphia, Pa.
SIR I am honor'd with your letter of the 30 Ult? - When Commodore Preble
was here I had his profile likeness taken by a portrait painter, & he promised to
send me on a sketch of the action off Tripoli, which he has neglected to do, of
course the design has been suspended PHILADJune 3 4 1806
[NDA. Misc. LB, Vol. 3, 1805.1
--

Extract from journal kept on board U. S. Brig A r f q Master Commandant Isaac
Hull,U. S. Navy, commanding, 3 June 1805
[Derne] Fresh breazes and clear weather - At j/z Past M D fort made a signel
that the Enemy were advanceing - got underway to beat to the West4 to get close
to the fortAt 2 the fort made s signel that all was well At $4 Past 2 came to anchor At
about a miles distance from the fort sent the Launch on shore to se what had
occationed the alarm - At 4 Capt Evens came onboard. At 5 Mr Eaton Came
off was informed by him that the alarm was occasioned by a party of the Enemies
comeing near the Town to Rob the Bedoins of their Cammels and Men [?I but
that they were beat off with the loss of one man At 11 Mr Eaton went on shore & Mr Evens onboard the Sloop At 12 Light airs
from the North4 - At day light sent the launch on shore with a party of men to
work a t the fort and to get a load of water for the Hornet - At 8 Launch returned
with water sent her on shore a t 9 with Provisions for the fort Launch on shore with a party at work At 12 moderate wind from the
[NYHS. Naval History Sec., Argus.]
Extract from journal of U. S. Frigate Comfitufion,Captain John Bodgers, U. 6. Navy,
commanding, Monday, 3 June 1805
P M commences with light breezes and pleasant weather the Deanish Consul
Left the ship. % past 4 the Deanish Consul came a long side from Tripoli. A
Maltes boat came along Side from the Essex. At 6 the town of Tripoli bore S 5
W distance 5 miles 5 past 7 the Deanish Consul left the ship
At midnight Light breezes and pleasant weather
At g past 8 furled Sails and let go the stream anchor in 23f4 fathoms Water
the town of Tripoli bearing S B E. distance-2.g miles At 9 the Deanish consul
came on board
At Meridian Light breezes and pleasant weather
[USNA.]
Extract from journal of Surgeon Jonathan Cowdery, U. 6. Bavy, 3 June 1806
[Tripoli] The articles of peace were signed, and salutes fired from the frigates
and batteries.
[LC. Rare Books, American Captive8 in Tripoli or Dr. Cowdery's Journal,
Boston, 1806.1

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

81

Extract from journal of Midshipman Charles Morris, Jr., U. S. Bavy, on board
U. S. Rigate Prwident. Captain James Barron, U. 6. Navy, commanding, Monday,
3 June 1805
3. The U. S. F Constellation made her private Signal which we answered 5 Came to in the Harbour of Malta in 13 fathoms water, the light N E.
6 Hove up and Warped up to the quarantine place Ran a hauser on shore
and moored the Ship head and Stern
Employed Watering
[Mrs. C. E. Fox original, NDA photostat.]

-

-

Extract from journal of Hezekiah Loomis, Steward, U. S. Bavy, U. S. Brig Vixen
Master Commandant John Smith, U. S. Navy, commanding, Monday, 3 June 1806
Off Tripoli. This day put an end to our Contest. Peace is declared and Royal
Salutes fired from our shipping and from the Tripolitan batteries. Our Consul
Lear went on shore this day and had the American Flag displayed in Tripoli.
[L.F. Middlebrook. NDA copy.]
[4 June 18051

Treaty of Peace and Amity between the United States and Tripoli
[NOTE.-Because this subject is covered so fully in Treaties and other International A& of the United States of America by Hunter Miller, vol. 2, pp. 520 to
556, the treaty is not included in this volume of United States Wars with the
Barbary Poroers.
The treaty was signed a t Tripoli June 4, 1805, the original being in English
and Arabic. I t was submitted to t,he United States Senate December 11, 1805,
was ratified by the United States of America April 17, 1806 and was proclaimed
April 22, 1806. The English t.ext has appended t.o it the receipt for the $60,000
ransom paid on June 19, 1805 for "two hundred americans".
Articles 2 and 3 being particularly applicable to this volume are copied below:

The Bashaw of Tripoli shall deliver up to the American Squadron now off
Tripoli, all the Americans in his poesession. and all the Subjects of the Bashaw
of Tripoli now in the power of the United h a t e s of America shall be delivered
up to him; and as the number of Americans in possession of the Bashaw of
Tripoli amounts to Three Hundred Persons, more or less; and the number of
Tripoline Subjects in the power of the Americans to about, One Hundred
more or less; The Bashaw of Tripoli shall receive from the United States of
America, the sum of Sixty Thousand Dollars, as a payment for the difference
between the Prisoners herein mentioned.
ARTICLE3

All the forces of the United States which have been, or may be in hostility
against the Baahaw of Tripoli, in the Province of Derne, or elsewhere within
the Dominions of the said Bashaw shall be withdrawn therefrom, and no
supplies shall be given by or in behalf of the said United States, during the
continuance of this peace, to any of the Subjects of the said Bashaw, who may
be in hostility against him in any part of his Dominions; And the Americans
will use all means in their power to persuade the Brother of the said Baahaw,
who haa co-operated with them a t Derne &c, to withdraw from the Territory
of the said Bashaw of Tripoli; but they will not use any force or improper
means to effect that object; and in case he should withdraw himself as aforesaid, the Bashaw engages to deliver up to him, his Wife and Children now in
his power.

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1806 TO 1807
A remarkable fact is that Tobias Lear on June 5, 1805 signed, acl Commissioner
of the United States, a so-called secret article modifying Article 3, which remained
entirely unknown to the United States Government until 1807. The text follows: Whereas his Excellency the Bashaw of Tripoli has well grounded reasons
t o believe, if the wife and children of his brother (Hamet) should be delivered
up to him immediately on his leaving his (the Bashaw's) dominions, as expressed in the third article of the treaty of peace and amity concluded between
the United States of America and the Bashaw of Tripoli on the fourth day
of the present month, that he, the said brother, would engage in new operations of hostility against him, t o the disturbance of the.interna1 tranquility
of his dominions -;
And the said United States be~ngwilling to evince
their good disposition t o preserve the said treaty with sincerity, and that
tranquility should be secured in the dominions of the said Bashaw - do
hereby agree to a modification of the said article of the treaty aforesaid, so that
the term of four pears, from the conclusion of ssid treaty, shall be fixed for
the execution of the engagement of the Bashaw t o deliver t o hi brother, his
wife and children; during which time the said brother is t o give evident
proofs of his peaceful disposition towards the Basham, and of his determination not t o disturb the internal tranquility of his dominions.
Given under my hand and seal a t Tripoli in Barbary this fifth day of June
in the year one thousand eight hundred & five.

-

TOBIAS
LEAR

Commissioner of the U. States of America for concluding a peace with
the Bashaw of BPripoli.
Attention is invited t o documents published in Naval Documenfs, United States
Wars with the Barbary Powers dated 23 February 1805 and 13 January 1806.1
[SDA, CL, Tripoli, Vol. 3, 18061811.]
To Captain John Bodgers, U. S. Navy, from Tobias Lear, U. S. Consul General,
Algiers
TRIPOLIJune 4 t h 1806.
DEARSIR The arrangements which have been made seems to have diffused a
general joy here, es sll were undoubtedly tired of the contest, in which they had
nothing to gain.
Our peace will be so unusually honorable, that we must not
expect it will be fully relished by all the Representatives of the European Nations
here, which is already manifested, by the conduct of some which I shall hereafter
relate to you. We forgot to take the Colours out of the Barge yesterday when we came on
shore; I pray you will have the goodness t o send them, a large Ensign, and a
small one for the Boat.
When the American Colours are hoisted on the
Consr House there will be a salute from the Castle &q of 21 Guns, which you will
be so good as to have returned from your Ship, and about 12 O'clk I shall wait
upon the Bashaw, when there will be a Salute of 9 Guns to me, which it is expected
as customary to be returned by the Ship. I have sent my Servt on board for Pome things for me, which he will bring on
shore when you send the Boat, which must be before 12 O'clk. - If you should
think proper to permit 3 or 4 of the Officers of the Squadron to come on Shore to
o with me to the Bashaw on the Audience, it mould give a degree of parade t o the
business, which has a good effect here In that case they must be on shore by
eleven O'clk. The people will not be ready to go off till Afternoon, as the intoxication of Liberty
& Liquor has deranged the faculties as well as dresses of many of the Sailors, and
Captp B. wishes them all on board quite clean and in Order I will $end off a boat
to let you know when it will be best to send for them.
Capts B. & Mr Nyssen desire their best respects to you
Such Supplys as you may want will be procured on knowing the Quantity Am. Flag hoisted & Saluted - KO Vessel t o be molested in entf into or
departing from the Port.
[Stephen Decatur Col. NDA photostat, Book A.]

-

-

-

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

83

To Tobias Lear, U. S. Consul General, Algiers, from Captain John Bodgers, U. S.
Navy
U. STATESSHIP Comtitution
o f f Tripoli June 4t4 1806
SIR It is with much satisfaction I acknowledge the receipt of your favour of
this morning I shall pay due attention to its contents; and agreeable to your
desire have sent a small Ensign, the large one got from the Essez, being sent on
shore by the Turkish Boat last Evening - The Salutes you mention will be
answered agreeable to your desire - Mess* Johnston & Kooper will wait on
you on shore - The Constellation not having arrived yet induces me to suspect
that something has transpired in that quarter of a hostile nature - Do you not
think that i t would be well for the Essez to proceed there Immediately? I shall
wait to hear from you before I send her [LC. JRP, Letters & Orders, Book A, 1804-1805.1
To Captain John Rodgers, U. S. Navy, from Tobias Lear, U. S. Consul General,
Algiers
TRIPOLI.June 4t4 1806
DEARSIR, I have rec@your favour of this morning. - MTehave this moment
ret? from the palace, where we had a most Cordial reception. The Presents of Bullocks $9 are now sent off to you, on the receiption of which
it is cr~stomaryto fire three guns, which will be returned from the shore, and to
give the persons bringing them four Cartridges of powder. There will be two
office[r]s, Chouxes, who go on board with the presents, t o whom a Cup of Coffee
&9 is usually given. P. S. The Sailors who go off sh@not be permitted to come on shore in the boats,
as they have bad places.
[LC. JRP. Let. & Doc., Ac. 3647, 1799-1848.3
To Tobias Lear, U. S. Consul General, Algiers, from Captain John Rodgers, U. S
Navy
Constitution OFF TRIPOLI
June 4 t b 1806. $ past 7 P A1
Dr SIR I have rec'd your Letter, accompanying the Bullocks &Q, and have
complied with its contents - our Salute of 3 Guns has not yet been return'd, but
it is likely this may be owing t.0 the Salute being fired after sun down, the Boat
not arriving along side sooner. [LC. JRP, Letters & Orders, Book A, 1804-1805.1
To Tobias Lear, U. 6. Consul General, Algiers, from Captain John Rodgers, U. S
Navy
Constitution ope TRIPOLI
4* May [June]1806
SIR, SOsoon as the circumstances of your negotiation will admit of the Vuens
departure for Derne, she shall proceed without delay - her early arrival there
may prevent impending mischief - This I am induced to believe owing to what
we heard Captv Dent say "That Mr Eaton informed him he should not evacuate
Derne until he had received an answer from Commo: Barron to his last communications" - To be sure after he has received Commodore Barrons directions to
evacuate Derne, a none compliance will make the responsibility his own: nevertheless the consequence will be his Country's. [LC. JRP, Letters & Orders, Book A, 1804-3805.1
TO Captain John Rodgers, U. 6. Navy, from Tobias Lear, U. 6. Consul General,
Algiers
TBIPOLI
4t4 June 1806.
DEARSIR I have received your favor of this date respecting the sending the
Brig V h e n t o Derne; for which place I presume she may go tomorrow, as we shall

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1806 TO 1807
then have every thing so far fixed as to send regular information by her, which I
would wish to be done in the first moment possible
I am certainly very much engaged; but, my dear Sir, you need not fear to trouble
me with any business which may be usefull to our affairs.
[Stephen Decatur Col. NDA photostat, Book A.]
Circular to the Consuls in Tripoli
TFUPOLIIN BARBARY
June 4 4 1806
SIB I have the honor to announce to ou, that peace and a good understanding
is happily restored between the United itates of America, and his Excellency the
Bashaw of Tripoli
TOBIASLEAR
Commissioner for negociating a
peace between the U States &
His Ezcellency the Bashaw of Tripoli
THE FRENCHCONSUL
Mr BEAUSSIERMember de la Legion d'honneur Chargt!des Affaires de 8. M. I
de France
THE ENGLISH
CONSUL
Mr [WILLIAMWASS]LANQFORD
H.B.M. Consul General
THE SPANISHCONSUL
Mr DE Souza, Chevalier de l'ordre de Christc Commiasaire ordinateur de Guerre
Consul General & Chargt! dlAff. de S.M. C.
THE SWEDISHCONSUL
Mr BURSTBOM
Consul de S.M. Suedoise
THE BATAVIAN
PROCONSUL
.
Mr ANTOINEZUCHETProConsul de la Republique Batatre
[Stephen Decatur Col. NDA photostat, Book A.]
To Monsieur Beanssier, French Charge dtAffaires and Commissary General,
Tripoli, from Tobias Lear, U. 6. Consul General, Algiers
TRIPOLIIN BARBARY
4tP June 1806
A Monsieur BEAUSEIEB
Charge d'Aflairs de France
Membre de la legion d'honneur
SIR In reply to your letter of this date, I have the honor to inform you that
I have never received your letter which you mention to have enclosed in one to
Mr Higgins. The only letter with which I have been honored by you since I left
Algiers, is under date of the 10% of April, and which I had promised myself the
pleasure of acknon-ledging personally
On the Other Subject mentioned in your letter, I can only say, that I regret
exceedingly that any circumstance should deprive me of the pleasure which I had
promised myself in forming your acquaintance.
I pray you to accept the assurance of high esteem & Consideration, nith which
I have the honor to be
[Stephen Decatur Col. NDA photostat, Book A.]
To William Eaton, U. 6. Navy Agent for the Barbary Regencies, from Master
Commandant Isaac E d ,U. 8. Navy
UNITEDSTATESBRIOArgus
Dernc June 4tP 1806
SIR I have the honor to enclose you a copy of my orders, by the Hornet, Lieu*
Evans -from Sam1 Barron esquire, Commander in Chief of the United States
Squadron in the Mediterranean; by which you will be informed, that the U. States
Vessels, under my command are to leave thls Coast for Syracuse, as soon as the
necessary arrangements can be made for that purpose
I have therefore t o inform you that the Argus & Hornet are ready for Sea, and
in readiness to receive you and the men under your command on board, a t any
Moment that you inform me of your intention to abandon your post, and a
favorable opportunity offers to take you off
[NDA. Captain's LB, Vol. 3, 1805.1

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS
To Captain Samuel Barron, U. S. Navy, from John Gavino, U. S. Consul, Gibraltar
GIBRALTAB
4'P June 1805
D SIR I m o t e ou the 30th U l t ~by this Conveyance of the A n n store ship, &
reflecting on the {.formation you gave me under date of the 10th April last of
there being two Tripolin Cruisers out, Cap* Stewart went wth the S y e n to Tanger
to Consult Consul Simpson of the propriety of leting the Ann with the Cargo
she has on board, go for Syracuse - without Convoy, Caps btewart returned
yesterday & it seems i t was determined that the Siren should Convoy her up, &
they will proceed this night. three days ago arrived one of our Mercht Brigs in
15 days from Leghorn, the Comr Cap+ Hollowell told me, that 6 hours after the
Constitution left him he fell in with a Tripolitan Xebeque off the Bay of Corsica,
who fired several shott a t him, but whilst the Cruiser Examind an Imperial Brig
he had the good luck to get off The Ann is dispatched for Syracuse & The EngP Cruisers a t Lisbon are ready
for sea, & only wait the Engh orders
[LC. JRP, Vol. '2, Series Two, May-Oct. 1805.1
To Secretary of the Navy from r a s t e r Commandant Charles Stewart, U. S. Navy
UNITED
STATEB
BRIGSiren
Gibraltar Bay 4th June 1805
SIR I be leave to advise you of my departure from here this evening for
take under my Convoy the Store Ship Ann from Baltimore Malta B~s
recent accounts from up the Mediterranean, we are advised of two of the Enemy
Corsairs being off Corsica, which renders it dangerous for unarmed or unprotected American Vessels to pass - I therefore concieve it not only prudent but
highly proper the Ann should have Convoy - the Amunition and Stores she has
onboard for t h e m e of the Squadron, will be of great importance in our operations
against Tri oli; but should it for the Want of Protection fall into the Enemy's
hands, the &onsequences would be highly injurious to us - I do not take upon
myself to leave this Station without the Concurrence of M? Simpson, the propriety of which waa left with him; I accordingly inclose you Copies of my letter
to him on the Subject and his answer, which will Convey to you a view of the
posture of our affairs with Morocco a t my departure
[NDA. MC LB, 1804-5.1

!

To Captain Edward Preble, U.S. Navy, from Master Commandant Isaac Channcey,
U. 6. Navy
NEW Y O R K ~June
*
1806
Dr SIR I returned from Washington the day before yesterday where I have
been setling my accounts
Your faivours of the 24'h & 28th of april last I received on the eve of my departure for the seat of government and neglected answering them a t that time
Be pleased to accept my sincear thanks and grateful1 acknowledgements for
the very hansom manner that you have been pleased to communicate your
approbation of my conduct while under your emmediate orders and be assured
that if you received pleasure from my companny it was reciprocal. for I received
both pleasure and Instruction, and I reciprocate ood R ishes for your health and
happiness The things belonging to the late 8 a p t a i i Somers and the other
officers that fell off Tripolia, I delivered to Mt Beakman and took his receipt
directing him to forward them to the different Navy agents a t the ports where
they belonged, which I presume he has done
Washington is very dull the only business aparantly doing there is a t the
Navy Pard. The Brig a t Baltimore is in a state of considerable foruwdness
they contemplate Launchin her in all July - Captain Sterrett (who has
arived) is a p ointed to the Eommand of her
Mr Smith fpresume ou know has consented to serve as Secretary of the Navy
four years longer - 6 u n Boat NQ 7 has returned to this port with her mast
badly sprung. She has got a new one in and nearly ready for sea the officer
tells me that she sails fast works well and is an excelent sea boat The season is
so far advanced that I have given up all Idea's of going to China this year and
have some thoughts of relinquishing my furlow and rep~rtingmyself ready for
service -

86

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1806 TO 1807

If you shou'd be ordered to the command of a squadron i t wou'd give me
infinate pleasure to be place'd under the orders of an officer whome I so much
respect and where I would most assuredly acquire reputation
M* Chauncey Joines me in respectful1 compliments to yourself and M s Preble
[LC. EPP, Vol. 14, 1804-1805.1
To Secretary of the Navy from Midshipman Lawrence Keene, U. 6. Navy
June 4tb 1806
PHILADELPHIA
SIR I have the honor to inform You of my arrival here from Lisbon, After being
taken off the Ship Canton of Baltimore at Sea & carried into that port by a Swedish
Vessel from the Isle of France - It is my wish to be immediately Employed in
the Service & shdl therefore remain here for your Orders [NDA. Misc. LB, 1'01. 3, 1805.1
Extract from journal kept on board U. S. Brig Argus, Master Commandant Isaac
Hull, U. S. Navy, commanding, 4 June 1805
merne] Commences with moderate breazes from the Northd and fine Pleasant
Westher
Launch on shore with a number of men to work a t fort At sundown launch came off with Mr Eaton and Mr Evens At 9 sent the launch on shore with Mr E
At 12 at night moderate breazes from the North4 and Westd At day light sent the Launch on shore with men to work a t the fort - sent
Jolly bote onboard the Hornel with a Carpenter to repair her Jolly bote At 12 Pleasant weather Carpenters employd Repairing Hornets Jolly bote Launch on shore working a t fort [NYHS. Naval History Sec., Argus.]
Extract from journal of U. S. Frigate Constitution, Captain John Rodgers, U. S. Navy,
commanding, Tuesday, 4 June 1805
[OffTri oli] At 3 [P. M.] the Deanish consul came on board from Tripoli At
4 colonel L a r consul Purris [I] and the Deanish consul Went on shore a t Tripoli
in the Barge AM. At.% past 8 slipped the stream cable and made sail 4/4 past
10 discoverd the American colours flying at Tripoli ?/z past the Bashaw fired a
salute of 21 Guns which we returnd with the same number
[USNA.]
Extract from journal of Hezekiah Loomis, Steward, U. 6. Navy, U. S. Brig Vixen.
Master Commandant John Smith, U. S. Navy, commanding, Tuesday, 4 June
1805
[Tripoli] This day all the American Prisoners were brought off and Lieut.
Porter with 30 men came on board and one Midshipman. Royal salutes this day.
[L. F. Middlebrook. NDA copy.]
To Captain John Bodgers, U. 6. Navy, from Tobias Lear, U. S. Consul oeneral,
Algiers
TRIPOLI
June 5*P 1806
Dr Sxa I have this morning received your letter of yesterday, informing that
the Bullocks &c were sent on board. Your Salute was returned from the Castle
afteisun set, altho it is not customary to do so.
I find the Constellation has arrived & I feel anxious to know the news she has
brought.
I think the V u e n may be dispatched for Derne this evening Should you agree
with me you will send a letter for her, and the Bashaw will also write by her
Every thing yet seems very fair & Smooth here but it will require two days
from this to have the two Copies of the Treaty Translated & finished. That
being the c a e , would it not be better for the Conetitution to proceed to Malta $ 9
with the People dz the Constdation to remain here for me. This will expedite
the Completion of the Business, ss you can dispatch one of your Vessels imme-

87

WARS WITH BARBARY POR'ERS

diately from Syracuse with the Tripolines and She can take in the money a t Malts
& bring over a t the same time.
I pray you will be so good as to direct the Articles which I left on board the
Essez to be sent on Shore, Lt Sinclair has a list of them & will deliver them, also
the bale of Cloth on board the Constitution & a mahogany ease of mine which
contains some papers &? Wish likeu-ise a Copy of the Preliminary articles which
I left with you, as the rough draught I have of them may not be so correct. I
pray you will charge an Officer with the mahogany box, as it Contains papers
which are Valuable, The Box, addressed to Mr Nissen on board the Constitzttion,
will be sent with my things. 11 OClk A M. I am this moment f a d with your letter of this date, covering
dispatches from MI Davis; as I have a Copy of the Same I will not detain yours,
nor this letter, untill I read mine. Should any thing occur in the perusal to make
a further communication with you necessary I will send it off. I think the Rais & Crew of the Cruizer mav be sent to Tunis &. liberated as vou
suggest. As you have made the arrangement for the ConsteUation to go t o Derne, I
presume you will remain here with the Constitution untill every thing is fixed.
TO me it will be the same thing whether one or the Other ship remains
[Stephen Decatur Col. NDA photostat, Book A.]
~~~

~

- - - -

To Tobias Lear, U. S. Consul General, Algiers, (at Tripoli), from Captain John
Bodgers, U. S. Navy
U. S. SHIP Constitut.ion
June 6th (% past 1 P M)
SIR I have this moment rec'd your favour of this Morning and agreeable to
your desire have sent the Mahogany box containing your Papers, the bale of
Cloth, the box addrees'd to M? Nissin and the articles that were on board the
Essez I could wish to send the Vizen to Derne but her Bowsprit & Mainboom being
s rung, added to her leaking considerably has induced me to prefer sending the
Fbnstrllotion - If the Vixen r i l l answer your purpose here for the present, the
Constitution will proceed to Malta from whence I will send you a larger Vessel
to bring the Money & for you to return in - The Essez s Crew being very
sickly induces me to send her to Syracuse for the purpose of placing her Sick in
the Hospital & from thence go to Malta and take in the Tunetian Rais & His crew
and proceed to Tunis as you mention. Provided there is not a Frigate a t Malta in condition to proceed immediately
with the Money, the Constitution will perform this service without loss of time,
& a t the same time it will afford me an opportunity of issuing directions to our
Vessels a t hlalca relative to their future destination. - Be pleased to let .me
know if this arrangement coincides with your opinion -if not I shall remain with
the Constitution. [LC. JRP, Letters & Orders, Book A, 1804-1805.1
To Captain John Bodgers, U. S. Navy, from Tobias Lear, U. S. Consul General,
Algiers
TRIPOLIIN BARBARY
June 6th 1806.
Sir I have this moment received your favor of this date with the Box &P
I t will be perfectly agreeable to my ideas for the Constitution to go to Malta,
ropose, and return again immediately with the Money g . 9 to take me over
n that case I will prepare my letters &o to go by her in the course of the
day tomorrow, as the arrangements respecting the money will require that time
for me to prepare for it.
I should wish to send to M r Eaton, by the Constellation, a correct account of
our Standing here, which I cannot prepare sooner than in the course of the day
tomorrow, when I will be ready for her.
I presume the Constellation will not be absent more than 8 or 10 days. P. S. The Bashaw wishes to be permitted to send a Pepon to Derne in the
Constellation, mearly to see how things are there. He will not remain, but return
in the Ship wherever She may go to.[Stephen Decatnr Col. NDA photostat, Book A.]

:;2 P

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1805 TO 1807
To Monsieur Beaussier, French Charge dlAffsires and Commissary General,
Tripoli, from Tobias Lear, U. S. Consul General, Algiers
TRIPOLIIN BARBARY
6th June 1806
Sir I have received the letter which you did me the honor of writing this day,
on the Subject of three Sailors belonging to the late U. S. Frigate Philadelphia,
whom you claim as French men, and whose wages you demand. C a p t ~Bainbridge shewed me the letters which you had written to him on that
subject, but as the business was not then brought before me in an Official manner
I did not think i t proper for me to enter into a discussion of it a t that time and
beleiving also that you would upon reflection, have delivered up the Sailors in
question, as the term for which they had engaged in the service of the United
States, was not yet expired, and as you had never claimed them as your Countrymen, during the term of Nineteen Months Slavery, when your claim might have
aided the cause of humanity by releiving them from their unfortunate situation; but as you have been pleased to address me on the Subject of the Wages 6 2 9 due to
these men, I must assure you that I have no power to decide on that point, as the
laws and regulations of the U. States respecting her Navy must determine every
question of this kind. I do not, however, hesitate to say that if it depended upon
me, I would not consent to pay any part of the Wages which might be due to
them until1 they had returned to the Service from whence they expected to draw
~ u c Wages
h
according to their engagement
I am persuaded, Sir, that when you view this matter in the proper light which
your good judgement may dictate, you will return the men and permit them to
enjoy the fruits of their services in the only way in which they can ever receive it. [Stephen Decatur Col. NDA photostat, Book A.]

To Captain John Bodgers, U. S. Navy, from Captain Samuel Barron, U. 6. Navy
MALTA6'h June 1806
DEARSIR I am about to leave this for Syracuse (Otna) in hopes it may contribute to the restoration of My health, Should you determine to remain here with
the Squadron, in preference to coming to Syracuse I beg that M? Denisson may be
permitted to come over in any vessel, that you may dispatch with the information,
as I shall require a few Days assistance from him, toenable me to close my accounts.
&c - before I sett out for America My Principle Object in the present Voyage is to close pnally my &airs with
M: Dyson &c
[LC. JRP, Vol. 2, Series Two, May-Oct. 1805.1
To Captain Samuel Barron, U. 6. Navy, from Sir Alexander John Ball, Governor
of Malta
COPY
MALTA6 June 1806.
SIR I have the honor herewith to transmit you the Copy of a Letter from the
Riis Effendi to Mr Stratton H Britannic Majesty's Resident a t Constantinople,
which has been forwarded to me, respecting some Ottoman Vessels captured by
the American Squadron E C . JRP, Vol. 2, Series Two, May-Oct. 1805.1
To Sir Alexander John Ball, Governor of Malta, from Captain Samuel Barron,
0.S. Navy
MALTA
June 6 Q 1806
SIX! I have had the honor to receive your Excellency's favor of this Morning,
inclosing the Copy of a Letter from Mr Stratton His Britannic Majesty's Residerit
a t Constantinople relative to the claims of the sublime Porte The Command of the United States Squadron in the Mediterranean having in
consequence of the declining State of my health devolved on C a p t ~John Itodgers,
these and all other dependencies come now under his cognizance - I am daily
expectin his arrival in this Harbor when I shall communicate to him your Excellency's fetter, with all the neoesaary information relative to the matters in
question - In the mean time I beg leave to state to your Excellency that I
am yet without any Instructions from my Goverment, either on the eubject of

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

89

the Vessel commanded by Ghiritti [*I Moustaffa or those detained off Tripoli in
Se tr last by the Squadron then under my Command. t o u r Excellency will permit me to express the high sence I have of your friendly
oEces in this instance, and to embrace the present opportunity of assuring you
that I shall ever look back with pleasure & Satisfaction on the man occasions
wherein during my Command in these Seas I have experienced your %cellencyfs
liberal & friendly attentions - attentions estimable in themselves but yet of
higher Consideration, as they have been demo[n]strative of the disposition which
will I trust always mutually actuate our respective Goverments, & as they are
consonant to my own Sentiments towards a Nation with whom we are connected
by so many ties of friendship & Interest. I.Attention is invited to letter from Captain John Rodgers to Rir Alexander Ball, dated 15 July 1805,
wherein he refers to a ketch named f3hrrclti. It is understood that this ketch was once na.med the Afastico
under which name she wss captured taken into the U. 6. service and renamed the Intreprd. The I M r c p d
blew up in the harbor of Tripoli ~e&ernber1804.1

[LC. JRP, Yol. 2, Series Two, May-Oct. 1805.1
To Tobias Lear, U. S. Consul General, Algiers, (at Tripoli), from Captain John
Bodgers, U. 8. Bavy
U. STATESSHIP Constitution
off Tripoli June 5th 1805
Sir, Enclosed I send for your perusal, hl? Davis's statement [26 May 18051 of
his conferences with the Bey of Tunis, relative to the Cruizer & her two prizes
detetained 8: sent into Malta, by the Constitution - as we are now a t Peace mvith
Tripoli, would i t not be well to liberate the Rais Br crew- of the Cruizer, and detain
her & prizes for further Explination? Permit me to require your Opinion as
Commo: Barron has wrote to me on the subject - The Constellation will proceed to Derne instead of the Vizen - The Vizen u-ill proceed to Malta and the
&sex to Tunis - Pray let me hear from you as soon as your other business
will permit. P. S. Mr Eaton has not been heard from since you left Malta - The Argus
& Hornet have not yet returned. - You will please return the Enclosed after
you have perused it. [LC. JRP, Letters & Orders, Book A, 1804-1805.1
To Master Commandant Isaac Hull, U. S. Bavy, U. S. Brig Argus, from William
Eaton, U. S. Navy Agent for the Barbary Regencies
DERXE6 t b June 1806
Sir, I think the tenure of this Post so important to the negociation between
the United States and the Reigning Bashaw- of Tripoli, that I cannot reconcile
it to a sense of duty to evacuate it, except compelled by imperious circumstances
until1 the result of that negociation be knonn, or further adrices received from
the Conlmander in chief of the United States Squadron in the Mediteranian, I
shall therefore wait a reasonable time for the return of the hTautilw, which is
daily expected from head quarters. [NDA. Isaac Hull LB, 1803-1806.1
Extract from journal kept on board U. S. Brig Argus. Master Commandant Isaaa
Hull, U. S. Navy, commanding, 5 June 1805
[Derne] Light airs from the North? and Rest? and a smooath sea - Launch
on shore with Men to work a t fort At sundown Launch Came off with Mr Eaton and Lieut Evens At M Past 10 Mr Eston went on shore
At 12 a t night Light winds from the North4 A t day light sent the launch on shore with men to work a t fort At 9 went on shore with Lieu* Evens to se what state the fort was in and to make
arangements for makeing it more secure At 10 the Bashaw Came to the fort - had some conversation with him and MI
E about sending the Hornet off $ 9 At 12 moderate Came onboard with Lieut Evens - found whilste on shore a
arty of the Enemy made their appearance on the hill the Bashaws Men left the
$own and soon Drove them to then Camp
[NYHS. Naval History Sec., Argw.]

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1805 TO 1807
Extract from journal of U. S. Frigate Conrtilufion, Captain John Rodgers, U. S. Navy,
commanding, Wednesday, 6 June 1805
[Off Tripoli] This day the Officers and crew of the Philaddphia came on board
from Tripoli
Extract from journal of Bezekiah Loomis, Steward, U. S. Navy, U. S. Brig Vixen.
l a s t e r Commandant John Smith, U. S. Navy, commanding, Wednesday, 5 June
1805
[Tripoli] Pleasant weather. A number of the American officers dined on
shore. We received as a present from the Bashaw, bullocks, sheep, vegetables
and fruit in great abundance. Saluting from the Town this day.
[L. F. Middlebrook. NDA copy.]
To Captain John Rodgers, U. 6. Navy, from Tobias Lear, U. S. Consul General,
Algiers
6 June 1806
TRIPOLIIN BARBARY
DEARSIR I have received your favor of this Morning and in reply to its
Contents can say, that as you will return here again, it might then be as well for
you to wait upon the Bashaw, as he has not expressed any expectation of seeing
you, that I know of, before the business shall be fully closed I rec? your's of last evening with the articles; but they came on Shore so late
that they could not be brought up 'till this morning, which Obliged &IT Coals to
stay on Shore I have sent my servant on board for my large Trunk. - There is another of
mine remaining on board in the Cabbin Marked TL NP 6, which I pray you will
have the goodness to permit to remain on board 'till you return here, and let it
be kept Carefully
[Stephen Decatur Col. KDA photostat, Book A.]
To Tobias Lear, U. S. Consul General, Algiers, (at Tripoli), from Captain William
Bainbridge, U. S. Navy
THE UNITEDSTATES
S ~ I Constitution
P
ON BOARD
Off Tripoli 6'P June 1805
DEARSIR I understand that we are not to be Ship mates to Malta, however I
hope that you will soon finish your bussiness here, and that I shall have the pleasure
of seeing you in a Christian land; Beleive me sincere in saying that it will not only
afford me always the greatest pleasure to meet you, but to hear of the happiness
of ourself and Family
&odd His Excellency
my dear C o l ~be disposed to detain you per force,
recollect that I shall feel it my duty to come 8: releive you
Pray Vissit the Gardens and see the Desert before vou leave Tripoli Will you have the goodnes to shake our freind hfr Nissen by the hand for me
and bid him farewell [Stephen Decatur Col.]

-

To Captain Hngh G. Campbell, U. S. Navy, commanding U. S. Frigate Consle!~alion.
from Captain John Rodgers, U. S. Navy
U. STATESSHIP Constitution
off Tripoli June 6'Q 1805
SIR, You will remain before Tripoli with the U. States Frigate Constellation
under your command until you are furnished with Collq Lears dispatches to Mt
Eaton (who it is not improbable may yet be a t Derne) relative to the Evacuation
of Derne by our forces, - Our affairs a t present are such as to prevent my giving
you any positive orders, further than merely to desire that you will comply with
C o l l ~Lears instructions in promoting the Interest of the Service, and return to
Syracuse where you will find me, with all practicable dispatch [LC. JRP, Letters & Orders, Book A, 1804-1805.1

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS
To William Eaton, U. S. Navy Agent for the Barbary Regencies, from Captain
John Rodgers, U. S. Navy
U. STATESSHIP Constitution
off Tripoli June 6th 1806
SIB, Altho I do not expect this will find you a t Derne, concieving you have
evacuated that place agreeable to Commodore Barrons last advices t o you by
the U. States Sloop Hornet, yet as it is not impossible some unforseen circumstance
may have delayed your compliance with his advices, I have thought it advisable
to send the Constellation Captain Hugh G . Campbell t o apprize you of Peace
having been concluded, between the United States and Josuph Bashaw of Tripoli
on the 3Fi Ins', and have to desire that no farther hostilities by the forces of the
U. States be committed against the said Josuph Bashaw, his subjects or dominions,
and that you evacuate and withdraw our forces from Derne, or whatever part
of his Teritory this may find you in, - agreeable to the enclosed articles of
stipulation between Tobias Lear Esqr Consul General, for Algiers and Commissioner of Peace on the part of the United States and the said Josuph Bashaw
of Tripoli. [NDA. Misc. LB, Vol. 3, 1805.1

To Captain John Rodgers, U. 6. Navy, from Tobias Lesr, U. S. Consul General,

Aigiers
TRIPOLIIN BARBARY,
June 6th 1806.
Sir, Enclosed is a letter for Mr Eaton in which I have informed him of the Peace
which has taken place between the U. States and the Bashaw of Tripoli and
particularly of that part which relates to the evacuation of Derne $ 9
I have very little doubt but i\lr Eaton has evacuated that place, or a t least
holds himself in readiness to do so, in Consequence of the letters sent him from
Commodore Barron, by the Sloop Hornet; but a t present it is with yourself, as
Commander of the Forces of the United States in this Sea, to give him instructions on that head according to our engagement with the Bashaw. I mentioned to you yesterday that the Basllaw wished to Send a Choses t o
Derne in the Constellation who would not go on Shore, but send some letters
there, and return in the Frigate t o any Port to which She might be destined.
Informed him that there would be no objection thereto, as I presume i t would
be proper t o give this permission, on every Account. He will not be expected t o
live in the Cabbin; but I am sure he will meet with all proper Civility. - I
shall get my letters &$ for Malta ready this afternoon and send them off. I
expected t o have been able to do it sooner; but the pressure of business upon me
a t this moment prevents. There was oc board the Essex a qr Cask of Madeira Wine belonging t o me,
which has not been sent on Shore There. There n-as a larger Cask addressed to
Mr Nissen-which was sent last evening. Please to present my respects B best wishes to Captn* Campbell & Bainbridge
& beleive me to be
[Stephen Decatur Col. KDA photostat, Book A.]
To Tobias Lear, U. S. Consul General, Algiers, (at Tripoli), from Captain John
Rodgers, U. S. Navy
U. STATESFRIGATEConstitution
Off Tripoli June 6 t h 1805
Sir, I have this moment received your favour of to Day covering a Letter to
Mr Eaton, informing him of Pcace, and the terms relative to the Evacuation
of Derne by our forces: and in answer to your intimations on the subject, permit
me to say that I have given him the necessary instructions: a copy of which I
will furnish you with when we meet again. The Bashaws Chouse ha- been recieved on board the Constillation and no doubt
will be treated, by Captain Campbell with proper attention. I am just informed by Mr Sinclair - "That there is nq wine on board the
Essex other than what was sent on shore last Evening" - the Cash which you
say was for Mr Nissen' [LC. JRP, Letters & Orders, Book A, 1804-1805.1

92

NAVAL OPERATIOiYS FROM 1805 TO 1807

To William Eaton, U. 5.Navy Agent for the Barbary Regencies, from Tobias Lear,
U. 6. Consul General, Algiers
TRIPOLIIN BARBARY,
June 6tb 1805
Sir, I n consequence of a representation made to me by Commodore Barron
that the present was a favorable moment for us to enter into a negociation with
the Bashaw of Tripoli, and my instructions leaving i t to the commander of our
forces in this sea to determine the proper time for such a n attempt, I repaired
off this place on the 26. ultimo in the U. S. F9 Essex, and immediately opened
a communication with the Bashaw - Ris demands were 200,000 dollars for peace
and ransom, and the delivery, on our part, of all the TripoIines in our possession,
and a restoration of all their property - These terms were a t once rejected
in tolo; and, after some dlcussion, I proposed, ss the ultimatum, that a mutual
deIivery of prisoners should take lace, and as he had a balance of more than
two hundred in his favor, I woulfgive him 60,000 dollars for them; but not s
cent for peace, which should be made on terms of the most favored nation with
whom he has a treaty, and a regulation respecting prisoners, if a future war
should take place between our nations - And, in order to prevent any fruitless
altercation, I declared I would not go on shore to complete the business until
these terms were formally acceded to - The weather proving bad, for the
season, obliged our vessels to keep off and prevented a regular communication
with the shore, which prevented the completion of the preliminaries until the
3d instant, when they were sent off to me with the Bashaw's seal - I immediately went on shore, and in 24 hours alI the Officers & crew of the late Frigate
Philadelphia, were sent on board the ships I found that the heroic bravery of our few countrymen a t Derne, and the idea
that we had a large force and immense supplies a t that place, had made a deep
impression on the Bashaw - I kept up that idea, and endeavored, from thence,
to make an arrangement favorable to his brother, who, dtho' not found to be
the man whom many had supposed, was yet entitled to some consideration from
us. But I found that this was impracticable, and that if persisted in, would
drive him to measures which might prove fatal to our countrymen in his power
1 therefore engaged, of course, that on the conclusion of peace, we should withdraw all our forces and supplies from Derne, and other parts of his dominions,
and the Bashaw engages, that if his brother withdraws himself quietly from
his dominions, his wife and family should be restored to him - This is all
that could be done, and I have no doubt but the U. States will, if deserving,
place him in a situation as elegible as that in which he was found I presume that long before this reaches you (if it should find you a t Derne)
you will have received Commodore Barron's letters by the sloop Hornet, which
convey his sentiments and instructions fully on this aubject - In conseqrlence
of a continuance of his ill health, he has resigned the command of our squadron
in this sea to John Rodgers Esquire, the officer next in seniority to himself, who
sends from this place the U. S. F* Conatellation, Cap. Campbell, with his letter
and his dispatches The Bsshaw has requested that a choux may be permitted to go in the frigate
t o Derne, who will not land; but merley send on shore letters from the Bashaw,
and return in the Frigate to the ort to which she may be destined
I pray you will sccept yoursez and present to Mf OBannon, and our brave
Countrymen with you, my sincere congratulations on an event which your
and their heroic bravery has tended to render so honorable to our Country.
[NA. Sen. 9 3-B 6, Pres. Message, Jan. 1806.1

-

To Master Commandant John Smith, U, S. Navy, commanding U. S. Brig Vixen,
from Captain John Rodgers, U. S. Navy
U. STATESSHIPConstitutiun
off Tripoli June 6'b 1806
SIR With the U. States B ~ i gVizen under your command you will remain before
Tripoli until you are relieved by some other Vessel, or until you receive my ordem
t o return into Port - you will communicate with C o l l ~Lear daily during your
continuance on the Coast and afford him all the assistance in your power that can
in any way promote the good of the service in which he is Engaged.
[LC. JRP, Letters & Orders, Book A, 1804-1805.1

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

93

To Surgeon John Ridgely, 0.8. Navy, acting as U. 8. Agent, Tripoli, from
Tobias Lear, U. 8. Consul General, Algiers
TBIPOLI,IN BARBABY
June 6tP 1806
(COPY)
SIR, In conformity with the power vested in me by the Government of the
United States, to appoint an Agent on their behalf to take charge of their Affairs
in Tripoli (provided a peace should be concluded between the U. States and the
Bashaw of Tripoli) until the pleasure of the President of the U. States should be
known; and as peace is now happily concluded between the two Nations, I find it
incumbent upon me to carry into effect the authority so vested in me, and as you
have expressed your willingness to a d as the Agent of the U. States in this
Regency, I have the honor herewith to transmit you a power for that purpose,
and a t the same time to express my satisfaction in your readiness to receive it;
because, besides the qualifications which 1 believe you to possess to execute the
duties of said Agency with honor to yourself and your Country, I am persuaded
that your residence here for nineteen months past, altho' mostly in a &ate of
confinement, has afforded an opportunity of acquiring a knowledge of the Government, Manners & Customs of these people, which wjll be found essentially useful:
and your profession will secure you an influence which cannot always be gained
by a person brought up to other pursuits.
Altho the Salary to be paid and allowance to be made to an Agent is not ~pecifically mentioned to me by my Government; yet I shall feel myself justified in
saying it will be the same as that allowed to a Consul - vizt Two Thousand Dollars per year as Salary - House rent - wages of the Drogerman, Stationary, and
such other expences of a public nature as are necessarily attached to the Office,
and usually paid by other Consuls in this place on account of their Goverr:ments.
"you will receive herewith the Treaty of Peace and Amity between the United
States of America and the Bashaw of Tripoli, in English & Arabic, and executed in
due form on the fourth day of the present month. - This Treaty is considered
as highly favourable to our Country, and you will take care that it be duly
observed. - The circumstances under which it has been made give us the best
ounded reasons to believe that there will be no attempt on the part of the
ashaw or his Subjects to violate it. Should this, however, unfortunately be the
case, your firmness and good judgment will be a security against any evik arising
from a sudden or violent departure from it.
In order that you may see the relation which the Consul of the U. States residing
here, bears to the Consul General residing in Algiers, I take the liberty of quoting
a part of the Instructions given to me by the Secretmy of State of the U. States,
under date of the 14'4 of July 1803. * * *
Our Government has thought it expedient to change the Mediterranean passport
heretofore given to our Merchant Vessels, and our arrallgement for this purpose
has been made with the Emperor of Morocco, & the Regencies of Algiers & Tunis.
Until the first day of July next ensuing, either the new or old passport will be considered as valid for our Merchant Vessels, but after that period the new passport
will be alone available. I have therefore furnished you with twenty tops or tests
of both the old and new passports, one of each you will give to every Cruirer
sailing from Tripoli before the first of July aforesaid; after which time you will
withdraw from them the tops of the old passports, and issue the new only. I
leave with you also 24 forms of Consular passports which were put into my hands
by Mr Cathcat, our late Consul here, to be given to the Tripoline Corsairs. These
pawports must be renewed a t least once a year, and an endorsement made upon
them by you for every cruize which the Corsairs may make within the year,
noting any change which may take place in the Captain, number of Guns &c kc.
Mr Nisson, His Danish Majestys Consul here, will have the goodness to give
any information you may wish respecting the usual forms of Consular b u s i n e ~in~
this Regency, and I am persuaded that his best advice would always be given on
any points of business which might arise here, relative to our Affairs, out of the
usual rotine of Consular duties; but, whenever such may occur you will not fail to
advise me thereof by the first and most direct conveyance, and if any thing should
happen which may threaten to involve the peace of our Country with this Regency, you will be pleased to dispatch information thereof by a special Courier,
either by sea or land, as may be most likely to reach me soonest. To the Department of State, you will also make full communications, agreeably to the Instructions which I have quoted for you in this letter; And in these communications you
will be pleased to detail all the authentic information you can obtain respecting
the political relations and military forces of this Regency, a well as particulars
respecting the productions and Commerce of thc Country.

fi=

94

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1806 TO 1807

I shall leave in your hands one thousand Dollars on Account of your Salary and
to be applied to any necessary expences on account of the United States of America,
and shall place a Credit for you for one thousand Dollars more on William Higgins
Esqr the Navy Agent of the U. States in Malta.
[NA. SDA. Algiers, Vol. 7, Part 1, 1804-1805.1
To Secretary of the Navy from Surgeon John Ridgely, U. 6. Navy
June 6 Q 1806
TRIPOLI, BARBARY
Sir, I have the honor to inform you that I was this day appointed Agent for
the United States of America to the Regency of Tripoli. As I regard this appointment as temporary, I thought i t unnecessary to return my commission as Surgeon
in the Kavy. As soon as I arrive in America you shall be advertised thereof.
[XDA. Officers LE, 1802-1805.1
To Captain John Rodgers, U. S. Navy, from Tobias Lear, U. 6. Consul General,
Algiers
June 6th 1805.
TRIPOLIIN BARBARY
Sir I have the honor to enclose you sundry letters for Malta, among which is
one from Mr Higgens the U. S. Kavy Agent a t that place, whom I have requested
to furnish the Sum of Sixty five thousand dollars for the use of the U. States here.
Sixty thousand for ransom, as agreed upon, & 4 or 5000 more will be wanting to
establish the Consulate &q here. For this sum I enclose you a draft on him, and
have informed him that you will give him any aid, if necessary, on behalf of the
United States, in Obtaining that Sum. - It will probably be partly in gold &
partly in Silver; or perhaps all in the former.
I presume you will touch at Malta, and make make arrangements for the money
to be sent on board, when you return from Syracuse to this place.
All the Tripolines black & white will be brought here; for the former have been
and are an expence to the U. States, and nothing else can be done with them,
with propriety on our part, but to give them up as Tripoline Subjects.
I expect to finish all my business here in 3 or 4 days, and I am sure you will
beleive that I shall wish to remain here as short a time as possible after that. I would return in the l'izen as soon as all should be finished; but I think it would
be better for me to see every thing completed; and besides it is proper, on account
of my public Character that if a Frigate can be Spared for immediate Service
that Such a Compliment Shd be paid. To you, my Dear Sir, on this Subject, I
am sure I need not comment.
I pray you will take measures to let it be generally known in this sea, that our
business is settled here, as it will be best to extend the information as early au
possible, and my time does not allow my doing it a t present. I shall leave Dr Ridgley here charged q l t h our Affairs, as he appears to be a
very proper Character, and will be able to be more useful to us than a person
unaquainted with the people &p [Stephen Decatur Col. NDA. photostat, Book A.]

To Captain Samuel Barron, U. S. Navy, from Tobias Lear, U. S. Consul General,

Algiers
June 6tP 1805
TRIPOLIIN BARBARY,
Sir I have the honor to inform you that our business is Settled here, and peace
made upon terms highly honorable and advantageous to our Country.
Before I landed I give my ultimatum to the Bashaw, which was fir~allgacceded
to, and in 24 hours after I came on Shore all the Officers & Crew of the late U.S.
Frigate Philadelphia were sent on board our Ship. - I have promised to have
delivered all the Tripolines black & White, which Commodore Rodgers will bring
Over here immediately. The former we can do nothing else w ~ t h and
,
they have
already been a great expenre to us. He will also bring over the money which
has been agreed to be given for the balance of the prisoners in favor of the Bashaw
Vizt 60,000, doll$ and five thousand more which may be wanting to estcblish
the Consulate $ 9 - This money I have drawn for on Mr Higgens, who will
procure i t by the time Commodore Rodgers return^ from Syracuse. I would return in the Conslztution; but think it best to remaln here until1 every
thing is compleated. I have appointed Dr Ridgley to take charge of our affairs

-

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

95

here, as he is acquainted with the manners of the people, and otherwise well
qualified. - Had I not found him here and willing to receive the appointment
I should have given it to M? Dennison if he had been legally qualified, as a Citizen
of the U. States of Am. to receive it
Commodore Rodgers will shew you the preliminary Articles, and the terms of
the Treaty will be upon the most favourable footing. - The Constellation hrts
been dispatched to Derne, and I have mitten to Mr Eaton fully on the Subject
of evacuating that place. I hope the Sight of Captn Bainbridge and our Countrymen who have been
liberated, will have a happy effect on your health & Spirits. - Mr Xissen has been
highly friendly 8: Useful to us. For a further detail I must refer you to Commodore Rodgers, untill I have the pleasure of Seeing you, which I hope n~illbe
Very Soon & in much better health than when I left you.
[Stephen Decatur Col. NDA photostat, Book A.]

-

To Robert Denison from Tobias Lear, U. S. Consul General, Algiers
June 6th 1806
TRIPOLIIN BABBARY
DEARSIR I had the pleasure to receive your letter of the 28th Ultimo, and
have now the Satisfaction to inform you, that our Business here is finished in a
manner highly honorable &- advantageous to the United States. As I wish to see every thing completed befor I leave this, I shall remain here
untill the Constitution Returns. From Commodore Rodgers & Others you will
learn the particulars of our proceedings here, which I have not time now to
detail. I found here Dr Ridgleg late of the Philadelphia Frigate. who appears to be well
qualified & Willing to take charge of our affairs, and from his intercourse with
the influential Characters here peculiarly acceptable, I therefore Consider i t
incumbent upon me to appoint him to that charge. Had this not been the case
I should have felt a peculiar satisfaction in making the arrangement u-ith you for
that purpose agreeably to our conversation on the Subject.
I hope soon to have the pleasure of seeing you, and of assuring you of the
esteem & regard
[Stephen Decatur Col. ND.4 photostat, Book 9.1
To William Biggins, U. S. Navy Agent, Malta, from Tobias Lear, U. S. Consul
General, Algiers
June 6 t h 1805
TRIPOLIIN BARBARY
MY DEARSIR, I have the pleasure to acknowledge the receipt of your letters
of the 27th Ultimo and 2s* Inst and thank you for the information contained in
them. I have the satisfaction to inform you that n-e have concluded a peace uith the
Bashaw of Tripoli upon terms favorable and honourable to the United States.
There is a Mutual eschanpe of Prisoners, as far as n-e have men, and for the
balance (more than 200) in his favour, we are to pay him Sixty thousand dollars.
Nothing given for peace and the terms of the treaty, the most favourable that
were ever made by any nation. - Within 24 hours after I landed every officer
& Seamen belonging to the late U. States Frigate Philadelphia, were sent on board
our Ships and the Settlement of the Whole left to my arrangement. I [ilntended to have gone over to Malta in the Constitution but I find that the
translation of the Articles of the Treaty &v into Arabic will cause a delay more
than I expected, Commodore Rodgers will go over & return again for me immeAs I u-ish to receive the money by the Constitution to pay the ransom
diately.
agreed upon and finish the Business before I quit, I must engage your agency in
this Business. - The Bashaw wishes Spanish Dollars; but I have told him they
were not to be procured in Malta; but that I would get what I could there in
Silver, which would be only a small Part, and the rest in Doubloons. I must therefore request of you to procure and send me over by the Constitution
the Sum of Sixty five thousand dollars, as aforesaid, as I may want about 4 or
5000 for Sundry Expences in establishing our Consulate &Q &V- I presume it
is not necessary for me to send my bills on London a t this time, as I do not know
the sums you might w i ~ hto have them in, and as this letter will be a sufficient
Voucher for you, and Commodore Rodgers will give any aid or obligation, if
necessary on the Part of the United States.

-

-

96

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1805 TO 1807

I must refer you to Commodore Rodgers or let you wait till my return t o
Malta to be informed of all particulars respecting this business $ 9 I wrote a few lines by the Nautilus requesting you to Accept MI Davis' bill for
One thousand dollars drawn on me.
rn T
P. S. I have given Commodore Rodgers a draft on you for Sixty five thousand
dollars as the most regular.
f Enclosnre]

TRIPOLIIN BARBARY
June 6th 1806.
COPY
SIR Please to pay to John Rodgers Esquire, Commander of the U. S. Squadron
in the Mediterranean, or Order, Sixty five thousand dollars on Account of the
United States of America and pass the same to my Account in in behalf of said
United States, as per Advice from Your Most Obed* Serv*
[Stephen Decatur Col. NDA photostat, Book A.]
To Secretary of the Navy from Captain Edward Preble, U. 8. Ravy
BOSTON
June 6th 1806
SIR I am this day hond with your letter of the 319' U l t ~ Mr Brown ha4 obtained the loan of 500 - 13 inch shells from this Government and they are now
delivering a t Cambridge from =-hence teams are employ'd in hauling them alongside the Ketches, which I am sorry to say are not yet quite ready for sea, as the
Carpenters & Smiths work is not yet finished. but they shall positively sail some
time next week. The Mortar-beds will not be cornpleated before Tuesday.
The C r e w are all engaged and every thing in readiness the moment the Carpenters finish. I am very much mortified that they have so far exceeded the
time a t first calculated on, altho I cannot accuse any one of want of exertion. I
expect they will prove good sailers, and have no doubt but that they will join the
Squadron by the last of July which I presume will be in time for the General
attack.
Coll Revere is sick which has prevented my sending on the report of survey
of the shells - but shall do i t in a day or two.
[NDA. Captain's LB, Vol. 1, 1805.1
Extract from journal kept on board U. S. Brig Argus, l a s t e r Commandant Ieaac
Hull,U. 8. Navy, commanding, 6 June 1805
[Derne] Light airs from the West4 and fine plesssnt weather Launch on shore
watering and a number of men a t work a t fort At Sundown pleasant Mr Eaton an Lieu, Evens Came onboard Midnight Light breazes from the WesttQ
At day Light moderate breazes from the West4 sent men on shore to work a t
the fort At 12 moderate hear nothing from the Enemy [KYHS. Naval History Sec., Argus.]
Extract from journal of U. S. Frigate Constitution. Captain John Rodgers, U. 8. Navy,
commanding, Thursday, 6 June 1806
[Anchored off Tripoli] P M commences with Light airs leasant weather.
the Lau[n]oh Employ,d Watering st Tripoli Recd from Tripoli 8%ullocks 14 Sheep
and a quantity of Vegitables for the Ships company
At Midnight Moderate Breezes and pleasant weather
the Conslillaiion E88oz & Vken in company
At Meridian Moderate breezes and pleasant weather.
[GSNA.]
Extract from journal of Surgeon Jonathan Cowdery, U. 8, Navy, 6 June 1806
[Tripoli] I bid the Bashaw a final adieu, a t which he seemed much affected.
[LC. Rare Books, American Captwea in Tripoli or Dr. Cowdery'o Journal,
Boston, 1806.1

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

97

Extract from journal of Midshipman Charles Morris, Jr., U. 6. Bavy, on board
U.S. Frigate President. Captain James Barron, U.6. Bavy, commanding, Thursday,
6 June 1805
2 P M. Commodore Barron came on board. 4 Weighed and sailed.
7 the lighthouse bore S W H W. 6 miles.
4 A M. Mount Aetna bore N % E. 3 Men Sick. Cape Passaro. W by S. 4
leagues
Latitude Observed 3 6 O 44' North.
[Mrs. C . E. Fox original, NDA photostat.]
Extract from journal of Hezekiah Loomis, Steward, U. S. Bavy, U. S. Brig Vhn,
Master Commandant John Smith, U. S. Bavy, commanding, Thursday, 6 June
1805

[Tripoli] This day pleasant. Firing from the batteries a t intervals all day.
Officers on shore all day. This evening the Constitution, Constellation and E s s ~
went in to port.
[L. F. Middlebrook. NDA copy.]
To Captain John Bodgers, U. S. Bavy, from Captain William Bainbridge, U. 6.
navy
ON BOARDthe UNITEDSTATESFRIGATE Constitution
7'4 June 1806
SIR, I have the honor to enclose you a Copy of a lett.er from the Honorable
Secretary of the Navy to me, wherein he says that he had given orders to the
Commodore of the Mediterranean station to institute a Court of Inquiry on my
Conduct in the lots of the late frigate Philadelphia. I hope, Sir, that you will
order a Court Martial to investigate the same as soon as it can be conveniently
done.
[LC. JRP, Vol. 2, Series Two, May - Oct. 1805.1
To Secretary of State from James Simpson, U. 8. Consul, Tangier, Morocco
TANGIER7tb June 1806 No 93 duplicate SIR I have the honour to advise that on Wednesday Evening an American
Gun Vessel enterd the Straits and yesterday a second - both proceeded for
Gibraltar. - I have not heard of the arrival of the John Adams Frigate, or of
other of those Vessels. an6aptain Stewart in the Serin Brig came to this Bay on Saturday Evening last,
for purpose of representing to me the advice he had received from Commodore
Barron of two Tripoline Cruizers having eluded the blockading Squadron in the
severe Gales of February. - One had taken refuge in a Port of Tunis, the other
was supposed to be on the Coast of Italy. Under this circumstance i t was considered adviseable that the Serin should give
immediate Convoy to the Ann Storeship from Gibraltar to Malta, in order that
Commodore Barron might get possession of that vessels Cargo the soonest possible.
I trust either the Serin or some other Vessel of War will be speedily returned
to this Station, the necessity of which I did not fail to represent to Captain
Stewart. - On the 234 U l t ~an Express Boat for Algarve carried the Emperours
orders to the Commanding Officer of his two Cruisers a t Lisbon - it is not known
what they were.
No movement has yet been made for fitting out the Ships
a t Larach, but the Galleys a t Tetuan are now Caruning. - On triplicate of
NQ92 I noted the arrival of an Imperial Ambassador, he is still here in consequence
of Muley Soliman having remained a t Morocco to pass the Festival of Milood. [NA. SDA. CL, Tangier, Vol. 2, 1803-1810.1

-

Extract from journal kept on board U. 6. Brig Argus, Master Commandant Isaac
Hull. U. 6. Navy, commanding, 7 June 1806
Moderate
breazes from the North and West4 Launch onshore with
[Derne]
men to work a t fort

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1805 TO 1807
At Sundown pleasant the men came off from shore At 12 a t night moderate and clear weather At day light moderate Sent the
launch on shore with men to work a t the fort At 12 fresh breazes from the West@and a swell seting on shore Veered Cable
hear nothing from the Enemy - #& e m be d e p e d d iqxm
[WyHS. Xaval History Sec., Argus.]
Extract from journal of U. S. Frigate Constitution. Captain John Rodgers, U. S. Navy,
commandmg, Friday, 7 June 1805
At 10 [P. M.], weighd axid made sail for Malta the Essex in company.
Latitude Observed 34"14' N,

[USNA.l
Extract from journal of Midshipman Charles Morris, Jr., U. S. Navy, on board
U. S. Frigate Pruidenf. Captain James Barron, U. S. Navy, commanding, Friday,
7 June 1805
W past 2 Came to anchor in the Harbour of Siracuse in 5 fathoms water.
A M 11 Commodore [Samuel] Barron Capt [James] Barron and Several other
Officers left the Ship for Catania
[Captain Barron and officers returned on 17 June. Commodore Barron returned to the frigate on 20 June and went on shore the following day.]
[Mrs. C. E. Fox original, NDA photostat.]
Extract from journal of Hezekiah Loomis, Steward, U. S. Navy, U. S. Brig Vixen,
Master Commandant John Smith, U. S. Navy, commanding, Friday, 7 June 1806
Off Tripoli. This day Capt. Smith with the Philadelphia's Doctor went on
shore to take a ride in the countrv. This day I began to recover of my illness
which for 6 days before had confined me to my berth. Mr ltidgeley formerly
Surgeon on board the U. S. F. Philadelphia is appointed Consul for the United
States and to reside in Tripoli. This afternoon the wind being fair stood inside
of the Rocks that made their harbour. We came to anchor in 4 fathoms of water
close to the Bashaw's castle. fn the evening about one hour by the sun, the
Bashaw came into town escorted by his Life and Body guards, which consisted
of horsemen. When they arrived on the beach, before entering the gates of the
Town, they went through the exercise, which was by breakng from their ranks
and the horse in full speed, the rider discharges his musket and loads it again
immediately and swings i t to its place, the horse keeps his circular distance in
full speed until he comes to the place he started from, a t which time he instantly
springs into his place with as much order as if he had not been driven out of a
foot walk.
[L. F. Middlebrook. YDA copy.]
To Secretary of the Navy from Captain John Bodgers, U. S. Navy
U. STATESSHIPConstitution
Malta June 8 t h 1806
Sir, I have the honor to inform you that the priliminarys of Peace were sipxed
on the 3rd Inst., between Josuph Bashaw of Tri oli on behalf of himself and SubStates; and Captt Bainbddge,
jects, and Tobias Lear Esqr on behalf of the
Officers & Crew of the late Frigate Philadelphia liberated on the eame Day.The Bashaw feeling too ~ensiblethat by a continuance of obstinacy his Town
,
and acceded to Peace
would fall a sacrifice to our forces this S u m m ~ r proposed
on terms which left us no interest in a refusal of his vlshes - as he acknowledged
that he felt sensible our efforts would be sufficient to reduce his Town and oblige
him to retire to the Mountains - This acknowledgement a t once precluded
the possibility of acquiring any honor by our Arms, but indeed the reverse, as
it would have been persecuting an Enemy who in anticipation of our Vengeance
in this Summers Expedition, by his own acknowledgements felt himself more
than half vanquished, * & who perhaps in his savage purturbation might have
carried his resentment to the eacrifice of 300 of our unfortunate Countrymen
which chance had placed in his power: for your further information on'this subI lam only 38 hours
ject I enclose you a Copy of the Preliminary articles.[t]-

No 1

6.

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS
from Tripoli, whence I left Collv Lear, making the the necessary arrangements for
establishing Dotr Ridgely, late Surgeon of the Frigate Philadelphia, in charge of
our affairs in that Regency - The purport of my returning without C o l l ~Lear
is to carry the Tripoline Prisoners in our possession back to Tripoli, and t o make
arrangements for going with the Squadron to Tunis t o convince the Bey of that
Regency; who owing t o our having detained & sent into hfalta, some of his
Vessels that were going to Tripoli in open violation of the Blockade has shewn
a refractory disposition and tllreatned us u-ith War; that his menaces are more
the production of his ignorance & piratical inclinations than any interest he can
derive by a rupture with the U. States. - This will be a favourable moment t o
oblige this Gentlemn t o relinquish his imprudent and unwarranted demands
against the U. States, and a t the same time convince him that it is as demonstratively his interest to cultivate our friendship as it is ours to avoid a War.
However I feel sensible that he knows his own vulnirability too well ever willingly
to give us decided cause to make him feel our resentment by the exercise of such
a force as we a t present have in the Mediterranean. The Ceres Store Ship from Baltimore arrived here 13 Days ago, but I did not
receive your advices of the 9 t h & 27tb March, until the 374 Instant off Tripoli
neither the John Adams, either of the Gun Boats or the other Store Ship from
Baltimore haa arrived yet.
Commodore Barron having resigned the Command of the Squadron no longer
ago than the 2204 Ult9, my being off Tripoli ever since and the multiplicity of
business I have a t present on hand prevents my ~ r i t i n gyou so fully as I could
wish, particularly as I am this moment getting underneigh for Syracuse t o take
on board the Prisoners to carry them to Tripoli.* I never thought myself that the Lives of the American Prisoners were in any danger.[t Same as articles herein, under 4 June 1805.1
[NDA. Captain's LB, Vol. 1, 1805.1

-

A circular letter from Captain John Rodgers, U. S. Navy
U. STATES
SHIP Constitution
Malta, June 8tb 1805

Circular
SIR I have the honor to make known to you that Peace was concluded between
the U. States of America and His Excellency thc Bashaw of Tripoli by Tobias
Lear Esqr, Commissioner on the part of the United States and the said Bsshaw
of Tripoli in behalf of himself & subjects on the 3rd Inst; On term the most
honorable & advantageous to the U. States. - Our unfortunate Countrymen
Capt Bainbridpe, Officers & Crew of the late Frigate Philadelphia, are again
restored to the Arms of Liberty and their Country, and I beg of you Sir, to give
these communications publicity. [LC. J R P , Letters & Orders, Book A, 1804-1805.1
To Haster Commandant George Cox, U. 6. Navy, commanding U. S. S. Essu, from
from Captain John Rodgers, U. S. Navy
U. STATESSHIP Consfitution
.Malta, June 8tP 1806
SIR YOU will proceed t o Syracuse with all practicable dispatch, place your
Sick in the Hospital, desire of hfr Dyson Favy Agent t o put all the Tripoline
subjects of every description on board your ship without loss of time, and proceed
to Malta as soon as possible - as I have to return to Tripoli again I beg of you
Sir, t o convey the Prisoners to hlalta without delay. LC. JRI', Letters & Orders, Book A, 1804-1805.1

.

To William Higgins, ti. S. Navy Agent, x a l t ~ from
,
Captain John Bodgers, U. S.
Navy
U. S. SHIP Constitution
Malta June 8tb 1806
SIR In case any U. States Yessels should arrive here before my return from
Syracuse, you will be pleased t o direct their Commanders t o remain until my
return.
[LC. JRP, Letters & Orders, Book A, 1804-1805.1

-

100

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1806 TO 1807

To George Dyson, U. 8. Navy Agent, Syracuse, from Captain John Rodgers, U. S.
Nan'
U. S. SHIP Constitution
Malta June 8'P 1806
SIR In consequence of Peace being concluded with Tripoli, on the 4* Ins*, and
stipulated between the parties that all the Tripoline Subjects be restored to the
Bashaw of Tripoli I have to request that you will have all the prisoners in our
possession at Syracuse, Men, Women and Children, put on board the Essm to
proceed Immediately to this place. - as I have to return to Tripoli with the
Constitution to deliver the Prisoners, you therefore will oblige me by not detaining
the Essez, a moment longer than you can avoid - The Eseex has several Sick
on board, which Capt. Cox will place in the Hospital. [LC. JRP, Letters & Orders, Book A, 1804-1805.1
--

To Captain John Rodger~,U. 8. Navy, from George Dyson, U. S. Navy Agent,
Syracuse
SYRACUSE
8 June 1805
SIR a t the request of Sam1 Barron Esqq I have applied to the Senate of this
city to obtain a Convenient place to receive from three to four hundred Men expected from Tripoli, the senate have referr'd the demand to the Baron San Marco,
who gives for answer that being desireous to mentain the good understanding that
has existed between the U S Squadron and the Inhabitants of Syracuse He is
disposed to render every service in his power, &- proposes an extensive piece of
Ground about a mile North of the City where there is an open free air, and an
excellent Spring of water. they can there be supplied with fresh provisions &c
but as there is only one small Building on the premises i t w i l l be necessary to put
up some Kind of Tents for their accomodation; as to the officers I beleive there will
be but little Difficulty in obtaining them Pratique on their arrival and for the
better assurance of the whole I have (at the request of the Senate) dispatch'd a
Courier to Sr John Acton a t Palermo for a positive order on the subject, on his
return, which will be in a few Days, we shaIf be able to act on sure grounds Cap, ex ComQ Barron has written you on this head but no safe opportunity having
offer'd I take the liberty of giving you the substance by this uncertain conveyance
Should Captain Bainbridge be coming over here, it would be well for Him to
come on board some of the Cruizing ships, & in a plain Dress, as Corn? Barron is
anxious to see him a t Catania in Company with your good self as soon as possible;
I left him there yesterday He was much fateigued & could not write you but
requested me to do ~t to that effect. P S By the arrival of a Courier this moment from Palermo in answer to a n application I made by order of ComQ Barron for 24b Shot, I am informd that you can be
accommodated with any quantity that may be wanted on condition of its being
replacd as soon as Convenient G D
[LC. JRP, Vol. 2, Series Two, May-Oct. 1805.1
To Captain John Rodgere, U. S. Navy, from Robert Denison, Secretary of Captain
Samnel Barron, U. 6. Navy
MALTAJune 8 1806.
Sxn I have the honor to enclose a Letter (addresst to C o m m ~Barron) from Mr
C. L. Ridgley a Lieutenant in the Service of the United States, with the circumstances of whose Situation you are acquainted - I t appears that he is waiting his
Trial a t Measina - This being an affair of deep Interest & moment as well to
the Character of the young OEcer himself as to that of the Service and our Country
in general, I make no apology to you Sir who are so eminently fitted to appreciate
what is due to these Considerations, for the liberty I take in suggesting the
propriety of sending the Nautilua to Messina immediately, in order that Captain
Dent may be present a t the investigation & that the Officers may be enabled to
give their testimony which cannot fail to contribute materially in bringing the
affair in question to a happy & honorable issue [LC. JRP, Vol. 2, 8eriea Two, May-Oct. 1805 ]

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

101

To Secretary of the Navy from Lieutenant Samuel Elbert, U. S. Navy
U. S. GUN BOATN Q 9
Gibralter June 8'P 1806
SIR I have the honor to inform you of my arrival here yesterday the 7'4 instt
after twenty seven days passage from Charleston and twelve hours after N Q 2 and one hour after N Q 8 - I parted company with NP 2 - in Longitude 18'
West - N Q 9 is a good sea Boat and sails well. - The Consul b informed me
that two Tripolitan cruisers were out one of ten guns and the other of eight, one
of them chased an American Brig into Corsica, as N Q 8. stands in need of s u p
plies here we have thought proper to wait for her and sail in Company.
[NDA. Misc. LB, Vol. 3, 1805.1
Extract from journal kept on board U. 6. Brig Argus. Master Commandant Isaeo
Bull, U. S. Navy, commanding, 8 June 1805
[Derne] Fresh breazes from the West* and a Sea seting on shore Launch on
shore with Men to work a t the fort At sundown Mr [El Came onboard with Lieut Evens had some conversation
with him concerning his abandoning his post ~ h i c hhe consented to do after
n-aightng a Reasonable Time for the arrive1 of the Nautiles - if she did not come
At 12 Mr Eaton went on shore At 12 Light winds from the West*
At day light moderate sent men on shore to work a t the fort At 12 fresh breazes from the West* and a Sea seting on shore [NYHS. Naval History Sec., Argus.]
Extract from journal of U. S. Frigate Consfifufion, Captain John Rodgers, U. 8.
Navy, commanding, Saturday, 8 June 1805
At 4 [A. M.] the N E point of Rlalta bore II' E B N the West point N N W
5 past 11 sounded in 5% fathoms water hauled of[f] from the land
Discoverd the h7autilus in the harbour of Malta.
[USNA.]
To Captain John Rodgers, U. S. Navy, from Robert Denison, Secretary of Captain
Samuel Barron, U. S. Navy
MALTAJune 9 1806
SIR I have the pleasure to inclose you herewith a Letter addressed to Commod
Barron from the American Consul Levitt Harris Esqr at St Petersburgh, in
answer to a Communication from that Officer, a Copy of which was transmitted
to you amongst the papers relating to the claims made by the A ents of His
Imperial Majesty and of the Sublime Pone for a restitution of the b r n Vessels
detained off Tripoli in Septr last by the Squadron of the U. S. of America.
[LC. JRP, Vol. 2, Series Two, May-Oct. 1805.1
To Captain John Rodgers, U. S. Navy, from Robert Denison, Secretary of Captain
Samuel Barron, U. S. Navy
MALTASunday 9 June [I8061
SIR The Ottoman Consul is desirous that you should have an interview with
the Commander of the Turkish Corvette previous to your Departure - a vessel
is I understand about to sail for Constantinople and the Corvette for Tunis. [LC. JRP, Vol. 2, Series Two, May-Oct. 1805.1
To Robert Denison from Captain John Rodgers, U. S. Navy
Constitution, MALTAJune 9% 1805
SIR I have this moment rec'd your favr of this morning - I am just about
making an attempt t o get out; but if the Ottomon Consul with the Turkish Capt.

102

ATATTALOPERATIOATSFROM 1805 TO 1807

-

As I shall
will meet me a t the Barrier by 12 o'clock, I will come on shore
not understand them I will be much oblieged to you if you will do me the favour
to be there. [LC. JRP, Letters $ Orders, Book A, 1804-1805.1

To Master Commandant John H. Dent, U. S. Navy, commanding U. S. Schooner
NauLiIus, from Captain John Rodger~,U. S. Navy
U. S. SHIP Constitution
Malta June 9 f b 1805.
SIE The particular situation of Lieut. C. C [L]. Ridgelp the circumstances of
which you are acquainted with. It appears that he is waiting his Trial a t Messina - This being an affair deeply interesting B: of great moment as well to the
Character of this Officer as to that of the service and our Country in general,
induces me t o direct that you proceed to Rlessina with the U. States Schooner
Nautilus under your Command, and as some of your Officers are better acquainted
with the incident which produced his Arrest, that them and k'ourself may attend his
trial; that by your evidence you map invalidate an>- disingenuous testimony
which may be offered to his prejudice - The honorable acquital of this young
Man is a matter truely interesting to every Officer in the service, himself, his
relatioris and his Country; and I have no doubt Sir, but that you will afford him
every assistance that honor and justice can suggest. - Immediately on your
arrival a t Messina you will be pleased to call on hl? Broadbent our Navy Agent
and the particular friend of our Country and request of him to assist you in having
the trial brought to an issue as soon as propriety will authorize, as the situation
of this young Man must naturaliy be truely unpleasant - There can be no
greater evidence of hir Ridgely conscious innocence than his voluntarily submitting himself to Trial - After you have performed this service you will
return to Syracuse and Provision and Water pour Vessel for a ten weeks Cruize Please to present my compliments to M FBroadbent and tell him nothing but
extreme hurry prevented my writing him on this unpleasant subject. P. S. In pour way to Messins you are to Convoy the American Store Ship
Cmus, now- in this Port, to Syracuse.[NHF. Dent's LB, 1803-1810.1
To Secretary of State from John Gavino, U. S. Consul, Gibraltar
GIBRALTAR
5th June 1806
SIR I had the honour of adressing You the 15tP Uitq (h'9 8) when advised the
amval of the Expedition from England Consisting of 6000 Troops under the
Command of Sir Jaq Craig, they are still in this Bay waiting orders - I then
inclosed one from Cons111Simpson of Tanger - Since then I received your few
lines of 27tP December last with the Copys of Papers to be made use of in Dernanding the release of Smithcrest from on board the British Sloop of war Sophy, but
as she had gone for England a few days before I forwarded said Papers, & the
Letter, to our Consul Gen! in London, that either he, or Mf Leonox did the needfull therewith On the 4tb Instant our Brig Siren proceeded for Syracuse or Malta wQ the store
ship Ann (with Consul Simpsons Concurrence,) as there were two Tripolin
Cruisers out, it was not deemed prudent to risk her with the useful Cargo she had
on board
On the 6tk Inst arrived our Gun Boats NP 2, 8 & 9 , they have got their water
with other supplys & will proceed for the squadron first fair wind We have heard of 3 Algereen frigates & a Brig being a t Sea, there are 2 Portuguese ships of the Line, a frigate & Brig of War Cruising in the Gutt under the
Command of ad1 Campbell, which suppose will prevent their going to the Westward
I nnderstand an Envoy from the Empr of Jermany has arrived a t Tanger with
Presents for the Empr of Morrocco and to settle a Peace [NA. SDA. CL, Gibrnltar, Vol. 3, 1805-1823.1

NQ5

-

WARS

WITH BARBARY POWERS

103

To Secretary of the Navy from Sailing Master Nathaniel Haraden, U. 15. Navy
GIBRALTAR
[U. S. GUNBOAT
NO.8.1
June the 9th 1806
I arived here on the 5 Instant after a passage of 31 days. my pawage was prolonged nine days by meeting with Either calms or light winds with in a hundred
Leagues of Cape So Vincent. I had a good deal of Rough weather the first part
of My passage on the [ms mutilated] 14 May a compleat N N W gale. I found
here when Scuding whet and uncomfortable We did not think her unsafe. Shee
Lays too Very dry. Eveh when Exposed to a heavy Sea. Number 9 arived only
one hour before me. nun~ber9 two days after. as number 2 and 9 is in Qu[a]rantine the officers from the Shiping and Rock. cant go on Board them. There
is hardely an officer of Rank. Either of the Navy or army but what has been on
Board N. 8 Theay Speak in the highest terms of her and say there own gun Boat
should be burnt after seeing this. f e have now s t r o ~ ~winds
g
from the EastwQ
otherways we three Boat shoul[d] sail to day.
[NDA. Misc. LB, Vol. 3, 1805.1
Extract from journal kept on board U. S. Brig Argus, Master Commandant Isaac
Hull,U. S. Navy, commanding, 9 June 1805
[Derne] Commences with Fresh breazes from the North4 And Pleasant weather
Launch on shore with men to assist working a t the fort At 4 Mr Eaton Came onboard went onshore again a t K Past 5 had some conversation with him about abandoning the fort which he agreed to do the first
good opertunity
At sundown Pleasant weather wind from N o d
Midnight fresh breazes from North? 8: West4
At day light fresh breazes sent men onshore to work - the Bashaw sent a
party of horsemen to the East? of the Town to watch the motions of the Enemy At 10 a party of the Enemy made their appearance on the Top of the hill seing
a small Party of the bashaws men They came doun to indevour to drive them back
to the town - after they had got down the hill the Bashaws men made a signel
for assistance which soon Joined them from the Town - the Enemy findeing the
Bashaws men to strong for them they retreated after exchangeing a few shot At 11 the small party of the Enemy had retreated quite t o the top of the hill
where they were Joined by their whole army and appearrd determined to come
down to attack the town - A signel was made a t the fort a t 5 Past 11 that
the Enemy were advancing which was answered At 12 the Enemies army on the Top of the hill makeing arangements t o come
down - the Bashaws men Came out to receive them and took a stand about
S/4 of a mile from the Town - Mr Eatons men all a t quaters in the fort fresh
breazes from the h'orthd and Rest?
[KYHS. Xaval History Sec., Argus.]
Extract from journal of U. S. Frigate Corutitution. Captain John Rodgers, U. S. Navy,
commanding, Sunday, 9 June 1805
past 1 [P. hI.] shortened sail and came too with the
[Harbour of Malta]
starb4 bower anchor in 13 fathoms Water and furld sails, the South point of the
harbour bearing K E B E E E. the North point N h' E % E.
[USNA.]
Report of Nicholas C. Nissen, Danish Consul, Tripoli
[Tmnslatioil]

Most respectful memorandum.
Dispatched from TRIPOLIJune 10, 1806,
received in Copenhagen
It is hardly possible for me t o fully express here my sense of gratitude in receiving the gracious communication from the high administration, dated the 2nd
of March, in which the high administratio11 has been pleased to advise me of my
recall, most graciously obtained from His Majesty, and of the allowance of 800

104

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1805 TO 1807

Riksdollar most graciously granted me upon my retirement from office in Tripoli,
as well as of the promise to graciously make a plea to His Majesty on my return
for reimbursement of losses entailed on account of inadequacy of salary. The
high administration has been pleased at the same time to offer me so many proofs
of its favor and grace, that they cannot fail to leave an indelible feeling of the
deepest gratitude within me.
M y successor Mr. Meldahl will have less difficulty in finding accomdations
for traveling from Europe to Tripoli than I supposed, when I received the communication from the high administration on the 24th of last month, and he will certainly experience fewer annoyances, I might say, both as a consul and as a private
individual, than it has been my lot to undergo during my sojourn, for the Pasha
has finally concluded peace with North America and thus fulfilled the most ardent
desire of the people here; 60,000 Spanish piasters all told are the terms of peace
and the release of prisoners.
Three North American frigates arrived off Tripoli on the 26th of last month,
one of which approached with a white flag a t the foremast and a Spanish flag
a t the mizzen; therefore the Spanish Consul Mr. d. Souza went on board, although
the French Commissioner Mr. Beausier had hitherto had the mediation of the
North American cause in his hands; but the Pasha did not desire to have him as
mediator, no doubt because of embarassment, and therefor requested Colonel
Lear and Commodore Barron in writing to address themselves to the Spanish
consul. Kegotiations lasted until the first of this month, and peace was considered t o be entirely concluded and everything settled, when Sidi Muhamed
Dghies early in the morning sent for me and, as I was already out, had a search
made for me everywhere. When I came t o him shortly thereafter, he told me
that the negotiations were in a state of confusion (embrouill&es),and that peace
would hardly be effected, as the Korth American Consul Colonel Lear had demanded the surrender of all prisoners as the first condition before any actual
conclusion of peace; this he had, in fact, demanded in writing. Sidi Muhamed
Dghies had the North American Captain Baimbridge, who had been taken
prisoner, summoned a t the same time, and requested our opinion. K e were
agreed that the best means t o eliminate this difficulty or a t least clarify it, especially as the demands appeared unreasonable, would be for the Pasha to let Captain
Bainbridge himself go on board on his word to return. The Pasha was willing,
but the Divan had difficulty in understanding that Captain Bainbridge's word
would bind him to return; but, when Sidi Dghies declared himself to be jointly
respon~iblewith the captured American officers, who promised to submit to
everything, and I also gave my guarantee, he obtained permission to go on board,
and returned in the afternoon, probably not a little to the astonishment of the
Pasha himself. The malter was in part clarified; Colonel Lear had not made
$his demand as an absolutely irrevocable condition and it is to be presumed
that i t was a misunderstanding; nevertheless, the Pasha and especially Sidi
Muhamed Dghies were enraged a t the Spanish Consul, of whom the latter had
various reasons for not liking the said Consul. The consequence was that the
Pasha formally requested me to go on board and in his name seek to bring about
eace; he gave me a power of attorney sealed in his own hand to deliver t o Colonel
f e a r , and, as I did not much desire this commission, the Pasha assured me that
he would consider it as a token of friendship and declared that, if the occasion
should arise, when I might have matters to settle concerning my own nation,
he would show his appreciation. The Pasha gave me four points as preliminary
articles, some of which had already in part been agreed u on.
as Colonel Lear had
The Pasha accepted the offer of 60,OuO piasters fort
shown himself unwilling, and was not to be persuaded, t o increase the amount
in the least. Kothing has really been paid for peace, but for the exchange of
prisoners of war, of whom the Pasha had almost 300 and the North Americans
about 120.
The Pasha demanded two gunboats. These were refused ss articles of the
peace, but he was given to hope, that lie might later be able to obtain the two
which had been seized the previous year.
The last point was to withdraw the support that had been given to his brother
Si& Hamet by the people, t o surrender four guns p.p. [?I, and again evacuate
Deme, for that this city was already in the possession of the North Americana
and of Sidi Hamet the Pasha had known since the 22nd of la& month, when a

[G,

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS
dromedary brought the news, that Sidi Hamet together with the North Americans
with a frigate and a brig on the sea and with four guns and seventy men under
the command of Major Eaton, accompanied by Arabe, had occupied berne where
the North American flag had been planted side by side with that of Sidi kamet.
The Pasha seemed to be very anxious about this point; Colonel Lear demanded
that the Pasha should surrender to him Sidi Hamet's family, when Sidi Hamet
left the Tripolitan area. This demand seemed severe to the Pasha, as he thought
that he would in this way lose the hostages which he held as security against
further hostile attempts on the part of his brother; he even distrusted the North
Americans and feared that they, when they had their prisoners of war, as well
as Sidi Hamet's family, in their power, would perhaps again engage in hostile
acts to the advantage of his brother. I had less difficulty in convincing the
Pasha that this suspicion was unfounded than in convincing his Divan and,
as it appeared that he desired me to do this, I had Captain Bainbridge also
summoned to the Divan, where he listened in silence; finally, most of them were
persuaded to concede this also, and thus the preliminary articles were sealed.
Colonel Lear has since promised me a separate modification of this article, whereby four years will be fixed for the fulfillment of the Pasha's promise, during
which time Sidi Hamet must show himself to be peace-minded and not seek to
incite insurrections. Although this whole matter might, seem of very little importance to our affairs or to me, both as con~uland as a private individual, I
nevertheless desired this modification, in order to show the Pasha and his Divan
that I had not tried to deceive them, and the Pasha will regard i t as a great
service on my part, which he will perhaps repay to my successor, when the
opportunity offers.
The peace was saluted with 21 guns by the Pasha, which were answered.
Colonel Lear then came ashore, where he stayed in my house, together with
most of the North American officers, and I am sending this respectful report
by him to Malta, whence i t will be forwarded to the high administration.
Although the Pasha now sees himself a t peace with a nation which has forced
him to terms of peace which he certainly did not expect to be obliged to accept,
yet I am fairly well convinced, that he will not hastily begin a new war, but I
especially flatter myself that Danish shipping in the Mediterranean will be
safe from molestation. The Pasha has learned that he gains nothing by a war,
that, when a nation considers that its honor and advantage demand the use of
force against him, it will always be to his loss, and that he should seek by negotiations rather than by declarations of war to obtaln the presents which he might
need. His attention has, moreover, been called to his loss, even by a simple
blockade, by which he loses the customs duties annually, often amounting to
60,000 piasters fr. [?] per year. All this gives m e reason to feel a t ease as concerns our shipping in the Mediterranean Sea on this part of the Barbary coast
and to cherish the hope that my successor will find less difficulty in maintaining
good relations with the Pasha of Tripoli.
Most respectfully,
N. C. NIBSEN. m. p.
TRIPOLIIN BARBARY
June 10,1806.
[Translator's Note: In these documents it is presumed that "p. p." means "eto.", but there is no dictionary authority for this interpretation.]

[Originals in Danish Archives, courtesy of Lt. Brewington.]
To Captain John Rodgers, U. S. Navy, from Robert Denison, Secretary of CaptPin
Samuel Barron, U. 8. Navy
MALTAJune 10 1806.
SIR By Order of Commodore S. Barron I transmit you herewith all the papers
found on board the Tunisian Corsair commanded by Riis Ali Ben Amour, and
her two Prizes, detained in April last by the U. S. Squadron for an attempt to
violate the blockade of Tripoli
I have directed the Midshipmen now in charge of mid Veasels to furnish you
with correct Inventories of all the Articles found on board. [LC. JRP, Vol. 2, Series Two, May-Oct. 1805.1

106

NAVA.LOPERATIONSFROMi805TO180?'

T o Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Navy, from William Piggins, U. 8. Navy Agent,
Malta
MALTAthe 10 June 1806.
MY DEARSIR YOUhave enclosed the Copy of My last letter of 21/25 June
We are all inclined
which went to you Via Philadelphia by a Merchantman
to quarrel with you, we find you have not only refused the Secretaryship of the
Navy but the Command of this Squadron also which has been offered you if Comme
Barron's health made his return home necessary. We have further heard by some
of the Gun boats that you had, or meant, to give up the Service altogether, by
which it is universally apprehended the Service will suffer as it would have been
promoted had you undertaken its direction I much fear your friend Commodore Barron will never see home, he is now in a
he1 less state of debility eh! '
John Adams I hear has arrived a t Syracuse but we have not recieved any
letters by her, I entertain great hopes that there is one on board for me from you. The Officers of the President now here have sent over a Speronara to get them
before they sail - There has been a great deal of quarrelling I hear already
among the Squadron and how it will end I can hardly say, most of the Officers I
am told are already a t variance with the Commander in chief by all Accorints his
temper seems to be a most violent one
let all 1 tell you on this head be sacred
between us I have not been able to send your flower Pots, tho' ready, by this oppertunity,
the President being lumbered with such an extraordinary number of Men and
Officers - they shall go to you by some other that will take them - If you
should want any thing else from this Country, you know you have only to command me Coffeesare a t favorable prices, here 70 Dollars Pr Cantar of 175 pounds, English
Sugars are every where dull, the Season for Kankeens is going by,
nigh be got
logwood is a drug in consequence of the large prize sales.
The African Army has returned to Syracuse with the exBasha [Hamet] but I
do not know what is meant to be done with him, Give him some money I conclude
and send him about his business [LC. EPP, Vol. 14, 1804-1805.1

-

-

-

To Secretary of the Navy from Midshipman Ralph Izard, Jr., U. S. Navy
U. 8. GUNBOATh7?2 Gibraltar June 10" 1805
SIR I have the honor to inform you of the safe arrival of NQ2 on the 5 t h Ins$.
I kept compaay with NO 9 as far as the Western Islands, but the weather being
very thick and i t blowing a gale from the Westward I lost sight of her. - AT?8
Commanded by h e u t Handen arrlved on the 6th Instant a t noon having suffcrcd
much in his spars. - At sunset of the 6th A'? 9 anchored. There is a Quarantine
of 15 Dr*to be performed by all vessels from the Southern States, but owing t o the
good health of our Crews, Nv 9 and 2 were admitted l o Pratique yesterday; we
shall sail on the 12th for Syracuse. - Commos Barron in aletter to bfr Cavino
of the 20th of April gives information of two Tripolitan vessels of war having
escaped from Tripoli during the Boisterous weather in Feb? onc of them is a
Xebeque mount5 8 Guns, the other is a Ketch mounting 6 Guns. The station of
one is the Gulf of Genoa, the other is off Susa near Tunis. The Commodore's
health waa almost reestablish'd. He had purchas'd several vessels and had them
cut down for the pu ose of mounting heavy guns upon them.
The Svren. CaDts%ewart sail4 from hence with a Store S h i for
~ Malta on the
night-of "the 4 ' ~ Instant.
Our boats occasion general admiration among the land as well as sea Officers.
They have been visited and very minutely examined by almost all the Officer's of
the ships and Garrison. Enclosed is the muster Roll of No 2.
[NDA. Misc. LB, Vol. 3, 1805.1

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS
- -

--

107

[ l o June 18051
A List of the Commanders and Forces of Yusuf Caramanli, Bashaw of Tripoli,
defeated before Derne, on the loth June

QZ

100

Total Cavalry - - - - - - - - - - - - - Infantry including arabs- - - -- 1250
" refugees from Derne- 350

-

Recruits up to 10. June ------------

945
1600
2545
500.

Total - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 3045
The germ of this army had been five months in the field; had moved through the
greatest extent of the Kingdom; and with every exertion to augment its strength
could only bring this small number to the field - Why? Want of cash on the
part of Joseph Bashaw and want of attachment on the part of his subjects Though we were enough with Hamet Bashaw to defeat this force, we had not the
means of pursuing the advantage - Why?
[NA. Sen. 9 B - B 6, Pres. Message, Jan. 1806.1
Extract from journal kept on board U. S. Brig Argus. Master Commandant Isaac
Hull, U. S. Navy, commanding, 10 June 1805
[Derne] Commences with fresh breazes from the Xorthd and Cloudy At M past 12 sew the Enemy in motion Comeing down the Hill in severel different
places - hove up the anchor to get nearer in At >i
Past 1 anchored with springs
on our cable within half gun shot of the fort. At same time saw the two parties
warmly engaged Iieping up a brisqu[e] fire on both sides - Shifted thc starboard
bow gun over t o the larboard after port and began to fire on the Enemy in the
mean time the Hornet Lieu+ Evens ha[u]led Close in with the beach and began s
brisqu[e] fire on them we continued our fire until1 5 past 4 occasionally as
we could bring our guns to bear a t which time the Enemy retreated in all directions
closely Pursued by the Bashaws anny - who had Kept the ground from the first
of the action - At 5 the Enemy were on the Top of the Hill and the Bashaw in
Possesion of the field in the Course of the action several Charges mere made and a
great number must have been Kiled and wounded but have not as yet heard Sent on shore three casks of powder to the fort to replace what they had fired
[word illegible] Mr Eaton Came off and requested me to sent the doctor on shore
to dress the wounded People belonging to the Bashaw
At sundown MI E went on shore At 8 fresh breazes from North4 and West4 At 12 wind Veered t o the North4
and a sea seting on shore At % Past 3 wind to the North4 and East4 Sea rising At 4 turned the hands up got the Starboard Cable on deck ready for sliping got
slip buys on the Cable and made every thing Ready for sea At 5 Past 4 a Very heavy sea Loosed the Topsails double Reef4 sliped the
Cable and stood off to the East4

108
-

-

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1806 TO 1807

At ?4 Past 5 saw the Hornet underway a t 6 saw her Tack and stand to the
West$ - a t 5 past 6 saw her Lower down her saib and anchor Very near the
shore - as she could not weather off and haveing sliped one of her cables I
wm under very great apprehension for her safety but could not go to her assistance
without indangering the Br[i]g - Continued standing to the East* until1 Past
6 hove too and hoisted in the launch - a Very heavy sea runing which made i t
Very dangerous to haw1 her along side
At 7 Cape Razetun bore S S E dist 5 Leaques At
Past 8 fresh breazes
Reef4 fore & aft Mainsail and Hswled up the square Mainsail At 11 handed fore Topsail a heavy sea and fresh wind At 12 fresh breazes
nder close Reef4 M Topsail and storm SI
[NYHS. Naval History Sec., Argus.]
Extract from journal of U. S. Frigate Constitution. Captain John Bodgers, U. S. Bavy,
commanding, Monday, 10 June 1805
Ji pas 4 [A. M.] weighd and made Sail and stood out of the harbour of Malta
past 7 light sirs from the IYorthQcame too with the starb* bower anchor in 10
fathoms water. the Light house bearing W S W % Mile At 8 carried out a
Kedge anchor hove up the bower and warped out & made sail, sent the boats
A head to tow 3/4 past 11 the boats came along side

[USKA.]
To Tobias Lear, U. 8. Consul General, Algiers, from Captain William Bainbridge,
U. S. Navy
SYMCUSE11Q June 1805
Red 17 June
DEARSIR I have once again landed on a Christian Shore - my feelings you
I
can readily imagine - The Constitution returns this evening to Tri oli
depart to morrow morning for Catana to meet my freind Commodore % a r r i On my return to this place, I hope I shall have the pleasure of seeing you and
Mv Lear
Commodore Rogers will give you all the news from this quarter - Beleive me
my dear Col? to be with sincere regard
[Stephen Decatur Col.]
To Captain Samuel Barron, U. 8. Bavy, from Captain John Bodgers, U, S. Navy
Constitution. SYRACUSE
June 11 1806.
SIR By Captain Bainbridge I do myself the plessure to acquaint you of my
Arrival here last Evening. - I am now taking on board the Tripoline prisoners,
& shall sail for thence this evening to deliver them up to the Bashaw, which will
deprive me of the pleasure of seeing you till my Return. - Fearing that some
unforeseen circumstance may have prevented MI Eaton's evacuating Derne
agreeable to your last advices to him; previous to my leavin Tripoli, I despatched
the Constellation to inform him of Peace, & the terms by %reaty relative to the
Ex Bashaw Sidi Hamet - I have brought the Ceres Store Ship from Malta
hence to deposit her Cargo. The Nautilus is this moment getting under weigh
for Messina, on the business of Mr Ridgley, her officers being better acquainted
with the particulars of his unfortunate Business than any other persons, of course
they will be the principal Evidence on his trial - The Enterprize I hsve left
Orders for, in case she arrivea before m Return, to proceed to Alexandria with
r this service, but the importance of
the Money - I had ordered the ~ a u l i L on
Mr R's Trial induced me to countermand my Orders - The Easm I have ordered
t o Tunis with the Crews of the Xebecque and her two prizes a t Malta, but the
Vessels I have detained for further investigation - I saw a t Malta the Captain
of the Turkish Corvette, sent by the Captain Pacha to claim the Ottoman Vessels,
captured by the Squadron last Summer, & have promised to give him an Answer
on my return from Tripoli - I beg leave to refer you to Captain Bainbridge for
articulars relative t o Tripoli. - Wishing sincerely for a speedy Recovery of
Eealth, d hoping in the course of ten dagg to hsve the pleasure of eeeing you in
person,
[NA. Ben. 9B-B6, P m . M m g e , Jan. 1806.1

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

-

109

-

To oeorge Davis, U. 6. Charge d'dffaires, Tunis, from Captain John Bodgers,
U. S. Navy
U. STATESSHIP Constztution
Syracuse 11 June 1806
SIB, On the 4*4 Inst by the Constellation Capte Campbell via Malta, I had the
honor to receive copies of your communications to Commo: Barron of the 29th Ulto,
accompanyed by a detail of your conferrences with the Bey of Tunis, relative to
the Cruizer and her two prizes, sent into Malta by the Constitution, the Beys Letter
to Commodore Barron on the same, and passports for said Crulzer from yourself,
& the other Consuls residing a t Tunis. As Commo: Barron did write you fully on this subject previous to his having
resigned the Command into my hands, I have only to repeat, that the assurances
he has given you respecting them, will be the tenor of m proceedings, - Peace
having been concluded between the U. States and the sashaw of Tripoli on the
4th Ins!; leaves me no positive cause for detaining the Rais Hassen Ben Aly and
Crew of the Zebec; I have therefore dispatched the Essm Capt* Cox, with them to
Tunis, to be delivered up; and it is of no importance whether they are Tripoline
or Tunetian subjects, as neither can effect the legallity of the Capture of the
Vessels they belonged to, as the positive manner in which they violated the
Blockade, makes them equally as lawful prizes as if they had been i n fact Tripolines;
a t any rate I shall detain them until farther investigation is had on the subject,
for which purpose and to oblige his Excellency the Bey to relinquish his unjust &
imprudent demands of a 36 Gun Frigate, and others equally as intrusive, -ou may
expect in the course of 25 or 30 Days a t farthest to see me in Tunis d a y with
5 Frigates, 2 Brigs, 2 Schooners, 1 Cutter & perhaps 10 or 12 Gun Boats. - This
will be the moment to make impression on the mind of his Excellency, which it is
equally our own and our Countrys honor and, Interest for him to be ma& to feel;
as during my command in the Mediterranean, a t present being a t Peace with all
Nations, I am determined to adhere with as much strict justice to the Treaty
existing between him & the U. States, and not to infringe any perogative
of his, as I am determined not to suffer him to violate with impunity either the
mutual obligatio~isexisting between us, or Laws of Nations, either directly or
indirectly so far as the relate to the U. States.
He has been in the tabit of threatening us with War, without any just cause,
but the moment is now arrived that he must acknowledge we have done him no
wrong; and this too in language such as a t least to produce reason in our minds, to
believe, that unprovoked he never will again renew his threats. - I know that
Peace is the wish of our Country rovided it can be maintained on an honorable
footing, but if he provokes us to ar, he will feel in less than Six Months from its
declaration, that the Wars he has hitherto been engaged in, were on the part of his
Enemys (amounting t o a direct contradiction) lenity & affection. - If your communications by +,he Essex require an early answer, you may may expect to see
another of our Vessels very shortly So soon as I can get the Squadron collected, which I hope will not take longer
than 25 or 30 days, you may calculate on seeing me; in the mean time you may rely
on every assistance in support of the Interest of our common Country, that the
best intentions can devise. - I shall sail tomorrow for Tripoli to convey the
Tripoline Prisoners in our possession back and deliver them up to the Bashaw [NDA. Captain's LB, Vol. 1, 1805.1

@

To Captain Thomas Tingey, U. S. Navy, from Secretary of the Navy
NAVD E P M11~ June 1805.
I have re& your letter of this day's date. Charter a vessel immediately to carry from 1000 to 1500 barrels and load her
with beef, pork, bread, flour, cordage, the powder received from Messr~Riddle &
Bird, and shot; proportioning the quantity of beef, pork, bread, and flour, agreeably to the cargo of the Ship Huntress lately dispatched to the Mediterranean
with provisions for our Squadron in that sea, and proportioning the quantity of
shot to the powder, and the Kind agreeably to the invoice of Shot sent in the
Huntress. Send 6 or 8 tons of assorted Cordage, & 100 bolts of assorted canvas. As soon as you shall have chartered a Vessel, you will inform me of her name and
the name of her Commander.
She must proceed directly to Malta or Syracuse or to both if required.
Let no time be lost in the execution of these orders. FDA. OSW,Vol. 6, 1802-1805.1

110

NAVAL OPERATIONS

FROM

1806

TO

1807

To Secretary of the Navy from Captain Thomas Tingey, U. S. Navy
NAVYYARDWASHINGTON
11 tP June 1806
SIR The Ship mentioned in the enclosed paragraph is reported, and believed to
be the Huntress, with the Stores for the Mediterranean. I therefore haste to
inform you; in expectation you may deem it proper to have a fast sailing small
vessel charter'd without delay, to send out with the Eighty barrels of powder,
(last received from Wilmington) and an assortment of shot.
A vessel of about 1000 Barrels, could be loaded here with Stores on hand, except
Bread-of which if you so direct I will have 400 or 500 barrels baked immediately Should you not deem this measure expedient - I conceive the powder ought
not to remain long in the Magazine here - Experience has shewn us that
damage quickly takes place on the powder deposited in it.
Since writing the foregoing, I thought it proper to wait on the President, with
the information - in order to give you his sentiments thereon.
Mr Madison was with him, having received it by letter also - The President
directed me to make every preparation against receipt of your orders, for the dispatch of such a vessel, as aforemention'd. -4nd that it was his opinion such an
one should sail without delay - I shall of course be preparing to be ready to
execute your directions.
[NDA. Captain's LB, Vol. 1, 1805.1
Extract from journal kept on board U. S. Brig Argus, Master Commandant Isaac
Hull, U. S. Navy,commanding, 11 June 1805
Commences with fresh Gales from the Korthd and a Very heavy sea under
Close Reefd Topsails and storm stay sails At 2 P M wore ship to the Southd - At sundown fresh gales and a heavy sea
At 12 more moderate and less sea At K past 12 Turned one Reef out of the
Topsails At day light fresh breazes Split the Gib Unbent it and bent another
At 5 Cape Razaten bore W S W 3 Leagus At 8 fresh breazes Carrying sail
To beat up for Derna Tacking as necessary
At 12 Cape Razctun bore W by S 5 S dist 4 Leagus - fresh breazes and
Pleasant weather finde a Very strong Current Setirig to the East4
[XYHS. Naval History Sec., Argus.]
To George Dyson, U. S. Navy Agent, Syracuse, from Captain John Rodgers, U. S
Navy
Constitution. SYRACUSE
June 12th 1805
SIR, YOUwill be pleased to furnish William Bainbridge E s ~ Captain
,
in the
U. States Navy, with such Sum of Money as he may require for the use of himself
and Officers and charge the same to acct of the U. States Navy Department. [LC. JRP, Letters & Orders, Book A , 1804-1805.1
To Captain James Barron, U. S. Navy, commanding U. S. Frigate President, at
Catania, from Captain John Rodgers, U. S. Navy
Constitution. SYRACUSE
June Id.1806
SIR I have nothing of importance to communicate further than what Capt:
Bainbridge will be able to acquaint you with & to whom I refer you for particulars
since your departure from Tripoli - In my absence you will be pleased to direct
the Commanders of such of the Squadron as may arrive to Provision and Water
their Vessels for a ten weeks cruize, agreeable to my last instructions and here
wait my arrival. [LC. JRP, Letters & Orders, Book A, 1804-1805.1
To First Lieutenant Thomas W. Hooper, U. 6. Marine Corps, from Captain John
Rodgers, U. 6. Navy
Constitution. SYRACUSE
June 12. 1806
SIR, YOUwill take from the detachment of Marines, of the late Fri ate Philadelphia, a aufiicient number of robust healthy Men, equal to supply t%e place of
those sent to the Hospital. [LC. JRP, Letters & Orders, Book A, 1804-1805.1

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

111

To Lieutenant Jacob Jones, U. S. Navy, from Captain John Bodgers, U. S. Navy
Constitution SYRACUSE
June 16. 1806
SIR, For the accommodat~ion& convenience of yourself and the other Officers
of the late Frigate Philadelphia, I have to desire that you take charge this day
of the U. States Brig Franklin & as you will be held accountable for mid Vessel
and all appurtenances that you take such necessary measures as to exonerate
your self, before you give her present Commanding Officer a receipt for the
delivery of the same.
[LC. J R P , Letters & Orders, Book A, 1804-1805.1
To George Dyson, U. S. Navy Agent, Syracuse, from Captain John Rodgers, U. 6.
Navy
Constitution SYRACUSE
June 12tP 1805
SIR In case any of our public l'essels arriving before my return you will be
pleased to inform their commanding officers that i t is my desire they Provision
their Vessels for a Ten Weeks Cruize and here wait my arrival, except the
Enterprize which I have, in case of her arrival ordered on Service. [LC. JRP, Letters & Orders, Book A, 1804-1805.1
To William Eaton, U. S. Navy Agent for the Barbary Regencies, from Captain
Hugh G. Campbell, U. S. Navy
U S. SHIP Constellation
ofl Derne l2t4 June 1806
SIR The dispatches from Tobias Lear Esq. which I had the honor to send you
yesterday evening, by Lieut Wederstrandt, have no doubt informed you that
peace is concluded between the Bashaw of Tripoli and the United States; likewise
requiring of you to aithdra-u- the American forces from Derne with all possible
dispatch, to effect which more readily the UntQ States ship ConsteUation, under
my command, will remain in the road, for the purpose of assisting your operations - I have only to add that i t rests with you to say in what manner, and when
her services will be required - and when the white flag is to be hoisted on shore I need not say what pleasure it will give me to see you on board the Constellation,
where a cot is provided for you by your very respectful & Obedt Servt
[NA. Sen. 9 B-13 6, Pres. hlessage, Jan. 1806.1
To Captain Hugh G. Campbell, U. S. Navy, from William Eaton, U. S. Navy Agent
for the Barbary Regencies
DERNEJune 12% 1805
SIR I have this moment recd your letter of this morning by Lieu$ Wederstrandt - and shall make arrangements to embark tomorrow
I doubt the propriety of showing a white flag until after this post shall be
evacuated Shall have the honor to wait on you on board immediately to consult on certain
measures too complicated to be comprised in this note Meantime I am with
perfect respect,
[NA. Sen. 9 B-B 6, Pres. hlessage, Jan. 1806.1

To Xaster Commandant Thomas Robinson, Jr., U. S. Navy, commanding U. S.
Schooner Entsrprize, from Captain John Rodgers, U. S. Navy
U. STATESSHIPConstilutim
Syracuse June 1% *b 1805
SIR YOUwill proceed to Malta without loss of time & require of Mr Higgins,
14,000 Spanish Dollars proceed direct to Alexandria, pay the same into the hands
of Mess- Brigs of that place, take the necessary receipts & return as soon aa
possible to Syracuse; where you will wait my further orders [LC. JRP, Letters & Orders, Book A, 1804-1805.1

112

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1805 TO 1807

To Master Commandant George Cox, U. S. Navy, commanding U. 6. 8. h,
from
Captain John Rodgers, U. S. Navy
Constitution SYRA~USE
June 1 8 t h 1806
SIR The Instant the U. States Frigate Essez under your command is ready for
Sea, you will proceed to Malta & take on board the Rais & Crews of the Xebec &
her two prizse, sent into Malta by the U. S. Ship Constitution, and from thence
proceed to Tunis to land them - The Bey of Tunis's conduct for some time
past has been so impregnated with contradiction & impudent threats against the
U. States, as to induce me to wish that you will have an interview with Mr Davis
previous to delivering up the Crews of these three Vessels, as they are not liberated
from any positive Knowledge I have of their being Tunetians, but because our (at
present) being a t Peace with all the Barbary Powers affords me no reason for
detaining them, - of the manner of delivering them up, Mr Davis will be the
best judge. As the purport of your mission to Tunis is merely to deliver up these People,
and to make me acquainted through M? Davis charge 'd'mairs, with the state of
our affairs with that Regency, you will be pleased to return t o this Port, so soon
as you have completed the object of your mission and wait my further orders.
[LC. JRP, Letters & Orders, Book A, 1804-1805.1
To Captain Stephen Decatur, Jr., U. S. Navy, commanding U. S. Frigate Congrws,
from Captain John Rodgers, U. S. Navy
U S SHIP Constitution
Sgramse June 12th 1805
Sra I[n] case of your arrival here before my Return, you mill repare your
Ship, in all respects for a ten months Cruize & waite my further 8rders - If
there should not be sufficient Provisions here to complete your Indent you will
them a t Malta and return here as early as possible I am in hop= my
eturn to this port will not be longer than ten days.
[HS of Pa.]

e;ooure

-

112 June 18051
To Secretary of the Navy from Lieutenant James Lawrence, U. 6. Navy
U. STATESGUN BOAT Nq 6
August 30th 1806.
SIR The return of the Congress to the U States presents an opportunity of
sending the enclosed statement handed to Commodore Rodgers on my arrival in
Syracuse of an outrage comitted on the U S. Gunboat Nv 6 under my command
on the 12th of June last, off Cadiz, by an English squadron commanded by
Admiral Collingswood, I persuade myself that on a perusal of the several depositions herewith annexed, and a momentary recollection of the peculiar disadvantages under which I laboured (to which I particularly request your attention in the statement above mentioned) that so far from attaching any censure
to my proceedings on that occasion, it will meet your approbation [NDA. Officers LB, 1802-1805.1
To Captain John Bodgers, U. 8. Navy, from Lieutenant James Lawrence, U. S.
Navy
U S. GUNBOAT
Nv 6 June 18 [I8061
SIR I take the liberty of enclosing you the particulars of the loss of three of my
crew by the English fleet off Cadiz, I should have made out the statement immediately on my arrival in this port, but have been constantly employed until1 this
moment getting Nv 6 ready for sea
[LC. JRP, Vol. 2, Series Two, May-Oct. 1805.1
@neloerure]

[12 June 18051

A report to Captain John Bodgere, U. 8. Bavg, from Lieutenant James Lawrence,
U. 6. Havy
On the 12'4 of June bein off Cadiz, was brought too by the Enklish Squadron
off that place and boarded %y the Tenon and the Dreadnaught, whle I waa M o w

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS
with the OEcers, three of my men, who had been very unruly during the passage,
finding some of their old shipmates in the boat declared themselves English subjects and demanded protection, one of them acknowledgeing himself a deserter
from the Flora, Frigt, on the Cockswain's informing the officers of it, I immediately went on deck and found the three men to be John Patterson William White
and George Brown, they were demanded by the Officer as English subjects, and
one as a deserter, I refused giving them up, by this time the Tenon's boat had gone
onboard the Admiral with the enteligence, finding i t use less to have any altercation with the Officer, I judged it most prudent to go onboard the Admiral and
make him fully acquainted with the situation of the men, I accordingly went onboard with the Officer, but previous to my leaving the Vessel gave my second
Officer Mr Roach possitive orders, on no account to suffer a man to leave the boat
untill I returned, on getting onboard I had a long conference with Captr Rothcram, to whome I stated that the men were ship'd in New York and had received
four months advance and had taken the oath of Allegiance to the U States, and
that it was more than my Commission was worth to give them up, he observed
that as they had voluntarily come forward and claimed protection as English sibjects, he hoped I would not object to giving them up, if I did he would take
them, he said he had sent for them, and if on examination it should appear that
they were not Englishmen they should be immediately given up I observed they
would not be permited to leave the boat as the commanding Officer had possitive
orders not to suffer a man to leave the Vessel, but on looking out of the Cabin
window I perceived them in the boat, on coming onboard they were examined,,
Patterson produced a discharge from the Hercule, White was known by the name
of Tho9 Rickets to have served his time in Plymouth Dock as a rope maker and
Brown by the name of George Merchant, who acknowledged to have deserted
from the Flora, on Admiral Collingsworth being informed of this, I was sent for,
he observed that aa the men were clearly proved to be English subjects he was
obliged to keep them, I requested him to let the business rest untill I arrived in
Gibraltar where the business could be investigated before Captr Shaw who I made
no doubt would cheerfully give them up on their being proved to be Englishmen,
he answered they were onboard and must stay. I then told him that I received
them onboard as Americans they having taken the oath of allegiance to the U
States, and should consider them as such, that if he was determined to keep the
men I should deliver up the U States Gunboat N Q6 to him and requested him to
send an Officer to take charge of her he refused to have any thing to do with her
or to deliver up the men, thus situated I was under the necessity of leaving the
Dreadnaught a t 8 P M. as there was every appearance of a Gale coming on and
my vessel not calculated to claw off a Lee shore, on getting onboard I found that
as soon as the boat got alongside, Patterson who was a t the Helm left it and jump'd
into the boat and was followed immediately by the other two before Mr Roach
could stop them, who a t any rate could have made very little resistance as the
Guns were below and no catridge filled
[LC. JRP,Vol. 2, Series Two, May-Oct. 1805.1

-

[12 June 18051
Depositions concerning Impressments
Depositions of Evan Jenkyns, Gerard Manning, George Clark and John Joseph.
Evan Jenkyns says that being Boatswain of Gun Boat N P6 on the 12 of June
1805 when Lieut. Law-rence left the Boat to go on board the Dreadnought, he
heard him order Mr Roach the Midshipman to permit no man to leave the Boat
during his absence. after Lieut Lawrence left the boat an Enghsh Oficer came
on board and asked for the men. George Brown being a loft came don- and
said he was one. John Paterson being a t the Helm left it & said he was another
and had belonged to the Hercule, he was immediately followed by John iT-hte.
He heard Mr Roach tell the English Officer he had positive orders from his Commander to suffer no man to leave the Vessel during his absence. on the Men geting
into the boat Mr Roach made no resistance. He told Mr Roach he hoped he
would not suffer the Men to o and said if he was in his place he would not.
there were plenty of Boarding l i k e s and Cutlasses a t hand and could have Kept
the boat of[f] with ease.
Gerrard Manning Guner of NP 6 says he heard Lieu* +wrence give Mr Roach
w i t i v e orders to suffer no Man to leave the Vessel in hls absence snd remated
the orders whed he left the Vessel in presence of the English Officer. after
Lieu$ Lawrence left & got on board the Dteadnoughi a Boat returned and took
the men without any opposition on the part of M: Roach After the men had

114

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 2806 TO 2807

left the boat Mr Roach observed to him he wished he had hauled his colours down.
George Clark Quarter Master of N"
says he heard Lieu5 Lawrence give
pos~tiveorders to Mr Roach to suffer no man to leave the Vessel during his
absence which he repeated several times in presence of the English officer, He
also heard Lieut Lamence order Mr Eoach in case force was used to haul his
colours down. He heard Mr Jenkyns say t o Mr Roach he hoped he would not
suffer the men to go. after the men were gone Mr Roach said he was sorry he
did not haul his colours down.
John Joseph Steward of N P13 says he heard Lieut Lanrence on leaving the boat
order Mr Roach to suffer no man to leave the Vessel in his absence and if force
should be used t o haul his colours d o ~ n .
We the Subscribers do Certify that the forgoing depositions were taken in
our presence
JOHNSHAW
JAPJ'V. MURDOCH
Jos. J. ~ X A X W E L L
U. S. FRIGATE
John Adams
TUNISBAYAu@ 16. 1805
[LC. JRP, Vol. 2, Series Two, May-Oct. 1805.1
[12 June 18061
To Captain John Rodgers, U. S. Navy, from Midshipman James Bcach, U. S. Navy
EXITED
STATESFI:IG~Joltn Adams
itfalta July 1 7 t h 1806
SIR The Affair of my having lost the Men beIonging t o Gun Boat NQ6 Commanded by Lieut J. Lamence off Cadiz, was not from a wish to injure the Reputation of my Country; far! indeed be it: They revolted and Mutinously jumped
into the British Boat which lay longside of the Gun Boat; I made every Exertion
t o prevent it, but I found all was in Vain: They called aloud for his hlajesty's
Protection, had I been armed (but not having it in my Power to find Ammunition)
I should certainly have ended their Career e'en if I had been Punished for i t
after*-ards.
I am a Young Oficer, and not up [on] the Strictness of the British Flag, had no
Idea that the Officer in the Boat would have the Effrontery to take away Men
from an American armed Vessel, after what had passed betwixt Lt L-and the
officer of the Brit4 Boat
It is the First Wish of my Heart to Promote the Interest and Welfare of my
Country, still wishing t o adhere to what our Ancestors have done for us.
I n my then Situation, what could I do?My Officer on board one of the
British Ships, the Men revolting, myself unarmed, Night coming on, left without any Assistance, and my being a Young Officer of Course wanting Experience
in such Cases, I hope you will Consider these Circumstances, and release rue from
the Situation I am now so unhappy in-this Address 1 hope you will excuse and
believe me
[LC. JRP, Vol. 2, Series Two, may-Oct. 1805.1
In?ult to U. S. Flag

12 June 18051

GENERAL ORDERS

An insult offered t o the Flag of the United States of America on the 12th of
June last, near Cadiz by a British Squadron under Command of Admiral Collinsworth, induces me as the Commander in chief of the United States Naval forces
in this Seas t o direct that you do not under any pretence whatever suffer your
Vessel t o be detained or your men taken out of your Vessel without you are compelled so to do by superior force; in which case After having resisted t o the Utmost
of your power,
are directed to surrcndcr your Vessel as you would to any
other common +nemy, but on no Account t o leave her until after you have
struck your Colours; after which if you are not compelled by the Author or
Authors of such Insult and Violence t o quit your Vessel, you are directed b me
so t o do, and on going on board the Enemy t o deliver your Swoard t o the 8ommanding Offjcer of the Enemy's Vessel, and not t o return to your Own again,
unless you are absolutely put on board of her by force On saying that you are
not t o suffer your Vessel t o be detained You are not to consider that it extends t o

y

115

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

the prevention of your giving every satisfaction to the Vessels of War you may
meet on the high Seas, whose Xation we are a t peace with, so far as a friendly
intercourse will justify, or in language more plain you are not to be detained by
force. (Signed) J N RODGERS
~
Commander i n Chief of the U.States Naval .forces i n the Mediterranean
U. S. SHIPConstitution SYRACUSE
18th July 1806. [XHF. Dent's LB, 1803-1810.1
To Secretary of the Navy from Lieutenant Peter S. Ogilvie, U. S. Navy
[U.S. GUNBOAT
NO. 71
New York June 12th 1806
Sir, You urill no doubt be surprised to find I am still here - the cause of it
has been the desertion of my men
a few nights ago, the Centinel who -a-&S put
on duty a t midnight released a man I had confined in double Irons, broke the
chain by which the boat was lock'd, & made their escape - as also the Boatswain,
Gunner, Steward & four seamen I shall sail as soon as I can get eight good hands, which I hope will be in the
course of today or tomorrow [NDA. Officers LB, 1802-1805.1

-

To Secretary of the Navy from Purser Noadiah Morris, U. S. Navy
BOSTON,
lethJune 1805.
SIB, I received your favor of the 3r? granting me a Furlough, and a Freight
of Provissions for the Mediterranean - Be assured, Sir, that I am not insensible to the Obligations I am under to yozc for the many instances of Consideration
that I have received I have consulted M? Brown and others as to the Customary Freight from this
Country to Syracuse or Malta, $ from the information I can get, I am induced
to believe that 3 5 Dollars p? Barrel would be reasonable. If however this should
not meet your approbation, you map signify whatever you may think Just, & I
shall abide by it - Bly Vessel is in complete Order for Sea, and will sail for
Hartford tomorrow where I hope to meet your instructions as to the delivery
&cr of the Cargo I intend going myself, and shall with infinite pleasure take charge of any Commissions you may have in the hIediterranean I calculate on a quick passage, as
my Vessel is well found, and reputed a very fast Sailer.
Commodore Preble informed me that you had offered to Pay me the Freight
in advance; for this favor be pleased to accept my gratefull thanks; it, is of the
greatest consequence to me - I shall leave this for Hartford by Land in about
three days, and should prefer having the money paid by the Agent a t that place
[NDA. Officers LB, 1802-1805.1

-

Extract from journal kept on board U. S. Brig Argm. Master Commandant Isaac
Hull, U. S. Navy, commanding, 12 June 1805
Commences with fresh breazes from the North4 and West+ Carrying a Press
of sail to Beat up for Derna find that we gain Very little haveing a strong
Current against us At 5 split the squair Mainsail onbent it and bent a new
one At % Past 6 saw a Large sail to windward but could not discover what she
was but from her being off Derna supposed her to be an american fri ate
from sundown to day light Pleasant weather Carrying all sail racking as
necessary to work up for Derna At day light stood in for the Land found that we had gained but Very little
to windward owing to a Very strong Current seting to the East4 At 6 AM saw
a Large ship a t anchor off derna but could not se her Colours A t 12 moderate breazes and Pleasant weather under all sail Tacking as
Necessary t o beat to windward - finde a Very strong Eastern Current
ship
in sight from the deck
but could not se her colours [NYHS. NavaI History Sec., Argus.]

-

-

116

NAJ7AL OPERATIONS FROM 1805 TO 1807

Extract from journal of U. S. Frigate Corulitulion, Captain John Bodgers, U. S. Navy,
commanding, Wednesday, 19 June 1805
Standing in for the harbour of Syracuise 5 past 5 [P. M.] Shortened sail and
came too anchor in the harbour. found laying here the U.S. Frigate President and
Essex.
[USNA.]

T o Captain John Bodgers, U. S. Navy, from William Eaton, U. 6. Navy Agent for

the Barbary Regencies
ON BOARDTHE UNITEDSTATESFRIGATE
Constellation, off D m e , June 19* 1805
Sir, At six oclock p. m. of the eleventh instant Captain Campbell anchored
in this road; a t eight sent Lieu$ Wederstrandt with your letter of the sixth and
Cofo Lear's of the fifth announcing the conclusion of peace with Joseph Bashaw
of Tripoli &, consequently, requiring me to evacuate this post
and the next
morning a letter from his own hand advising me that his ship would receive my
garrison - About nine oclock the Captain came on shore, attended by a few
of hie officers, whom I accompanied into town. I now communicated l o the
Bashaw the news of peace on our part with his brother; and the convention that
his family should be restored to him on condition of his quietly withdrawing
himself from the kingdom - He said he had no safety but in leaving the
country with us; and even this would be impossible with him and hazardous to
us if the project should transpire before carried into effect: despair would drive
his adherents to revenge and we must fall victims t o it - I consequently kept
up the idea of an attack on the enemy, an idea which had been excited from a
report that reenforcements had come out in the frigate for this purpose, and accordingly sent amunition and extra rations to be distributed among our rnoorish and
arab troops, and dispatched spies to ascertain the enemy's position - With
the same apparent view I inspected the garrison; ordered them to be divested
of 11 heavy baggage; and to be held a t their posts in readiness to advance a t
the word - At eight in the evening I placed patroles of marines to stop intercourse between the town and our post: this was a usual precaution a t this hour,
with only the diierence that on ordinary occasion8 this duty was done by rotine In the mean time dl the Constellations boats were laid along side our wharf I ordered the Captain of cannoniers to embark his company with the field pieces
and a ten inch howitzer which fell into our hands on the 27" April - and after
them the Greek company - This wrts executed with silence and alacrity; but with
When the boatswere
The marines remained at their postsastonishment
seen returning I sent a messenger to the Bashaw, requesting an interview - Understanding the purport of this message, he immediately repaired to the fort with
his retinue; dismounted, and embarked in the boats. The marines foUowed
with the American Officers
When all were securely off, I stepped into a small
boat I had retained for the purpose, and had just time to save my distance when
the shore, our camp, and the battery were crowded with the distracted soldiery
Some uttering
and populace - Some calling on the Bashaw
some on me
shrieks - some execrations. Finding we were out of reach, they fen upon our
tents and horses, which were left standing; carried t.hem off, and prepared themselves for flight: My garrison, together with the Bashaw and suit, were all on
board the Constellation about two in the morning - Before break of day our
Arabs were all off to the mountains, and with them such of the inhabitants of the
town as had means to fly, taking away with them every living animal fit for subsidence or burthen which belonged to the place - This morning s Choux from
Tripoli, who came out in the frigate, went on shore under a flag of truce and
carried letters of Amnesty from Joseph Bashaw to the people of Derne on condition of their returning to allegiance - He stated, on his return, that nothing
but despair depicted itself in the vi es of the few wretched inhabitants who
remained: that they rejected ~ o s e p haehaws
3
terms of pardon, declaring they
knew his perfidy too well to suffer themselves to be ensnared by it; and that they
were resolved to defend themselves t o the last moment from their terraces and
walls of their houses against his troops
It is to be hoped the position they
have taken m y terminate in an acc6mmodation and save the tragedy that
menthem
It is now twelve oclock, and we see no symptoms of the
enemy's troops advancing towards the town - This however may be accounted
for on other rinciples than those of humanity or arrangemenl - On the
arrival of the &naiWafion the idea impressed itseff on them also that she brought
troops and supplies - In consequence 6f which they decamped disorderly and

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

117

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

retired with precipitation to a post fifteen miles in the rear towards the desert:
it is possible they may not yet have heard of our evacuation - In a few minutes
more we shall loose sight of this devoted city. which has experienced as strange a
reverse in so short a time 8s ever W ~ reco~ded
E
in the disasters of war; thrown
from proud success and elated prospects into an abys of hopeless wretchednesu Six hours ago the enemy were seeking safety from them by flight - this moment
we drop them from ours into the hands of this enemy for no other crime but too
much confidence in us! The man whose fortune we have accompanied thus far
experiences a reverse as striking - He falls from the most flattering prospectr,
of a Kingdom to beggary!
Our peace with Tripoli is certainly more favorable - and, seperately considered, more honorable than any peace obtained by any Christian nation with a
Barbary regency a t any period within a hundred years: but it might have been
more favorable and more honorable. It now remains, however, to dispose of the
instrument we have used in obtaining this peace in such a manner as to acquit our
conscience and honor -: this will require some diplomatic skill.
My dispatches to Commodore Barron of the 15Q ultimo and continued to the
lltQ inst. accompany this to your address as a matter rendered proper by the
transfer of the squadron to your command - Under actual circumstances they
can be of little import: but may nevertheless gratify a curiosity The duties understood to be annexed to my appointment in the Navy Department having ceased with the war, I have no reasons for remaining any longer in
this sea: I request therefore you will have the goodness to allow me a passage in
the first ship of war of your squadron which you may dispatch to the United
States I flatter myself with the gratification of waiting on you a t Syracuse in a few
days
[KA. Sen. 9B-B6, Pres. Message, Jan. 1806.1

-

To William Higgins, U. S. Navy Agent, Malta, from Captain John Bodgers, U. 8.
Navy
U. STATESSHIPConstitution
off Malta 13 June 1806
SIH In case either of the Gun Boats should arrive during my absence, you will be
pleased to direct their commanders to fill up their Water, & furnish each of them
with Provisions equal to ten Weeks consumption, including what they may have
on hand, and in all respects to be ready for Sea
The enclosed Letter contains orders to Lieutt Robinson of the Schooner Enterprize, to proceed to Alexandria on the service which the Nautilus was to have
performed.
[LC. JRP, Letters & Orders, Book A, 1504-1805.1

-

Extract from journal kept on board U. S. Brig Argus. Master Commandant Isaac
Hull, U. 6. Navy, commanding, 13 June 1805
Commences with Light breazes - from the North@and Westd Under d l sail
beating up for Derna - At 4 made the signel of the day to the ship a t anchor
which was not answered
At 6 moderate under all sail finde that we gain Very little to windward the
Current being strong against us Made the signel of the day a second time but
Codd se no answer - At 5 Past 6 the ship a t anchor made the Private Signel
which was answered by us From sundown to day light moderate breazes under all sail Tacking as
necessary to work to windward At day light stood Very close in for the ship a t anchor
found her to be the
U S Frigate ComteUation, Capt Campbel - lored down the Joll bote and sent her
onba the Fregate - a t 5 bote Returned was informed that Mc gaton had left the
fort with the Men under his Command and about one hundred of the Bashaws
h r v * [?I with him and that they were onboard the Constellatwn
stood Close in
shore to look for the anchor & cable that we had sliped [msmutilated] we left the
Bay
but could not se Either of the Buoys - sent the Jolly bote onboard the
Hornet to se if Lieut Evens had seen them after we Left bote returned and informed me that the Hornet had Parted one of the Buov ropes rideing by i t in the
gale and the other in warping off after Takeing off Mr 'Eaton - both buoys being
gone from the anchor and the wind blowng a fresh breeze found that we could not

-

-

-

-

118

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1806 TO 1807

get i t without staying one or two days - to sweap for i t - stood off and went
onboard the ConsteUation At 10 Came onboard and made sail having Received
orders from Capt Campbell to make the best of my way to Syraceus - At 12 fresh
breazes the Constellation astern and Hornet off our lee quater - Derna bearing
S W 4 Leagus [XYHS. h'aval History Sec., Argus.]
Extract from journal of U.S. Frigate Constitution, Captain John Rodgers, U.S. Mavy,
commanding, Thursday, 13 June 1805
5 past Meredian the C.S. ship Congress came in 5 past 2 sent Mr Cannon
Boatsmain to the hospital Recd 80 Tripolitan prisoners from the castle a t
Syracuise
At 4 Joseph Talbot Qr Gunner deserted from the first cutter
At 10 P M weighd made sail and stood out of the harbour

Extract from Nlemorandum Book of Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Navy, 13 June

1805
Launched the Trengeance and Spitfire.
[LC original.]

Faiting for mortar beds.

Extract from journal of Midshipman Chades Morris, Jr., U. S. Navy, on board
U. S. Frigate Pruidcnt. Captain James Barron, U.S. Navy, commanding, Thursday,
13 June 1805
[Syracuse] Sailed the U S. F. Constitution & Esscz and Schooner hTautilus. in
the former all the Tripolitans which have a t eny time been captured by us
embarked for Triploi. a peace haring been concluded between that Regency and
ourselves. on consideration of the U. S. paying them 60.000 dollars as a Ransom
for our risoners The 8 ~ i c e r sand part of the crew of tho Philadelphia arrived yesterday in the
Constitution from Tripoli after a long and tedious imprisonment.
[Mn. C. E. Fox original, XDA photostat.]
Extract from journal of Hezekiah Loomis, Steward, U. S. Navy, U. S. Brig Vixen,
Master Commandant John Smith, U. S. Navy, commanding, Thursday, IS June

1806
[Tripoli] This day came in a ketch and gun boat from sea.
[L. F. Middlebrook. NDA copy.]
To Captain Samuel Barron, U. 8. Mavy, from Captain John Rodgers, U. S. Navy
Constitution OFF MALTA. June 14, 1806.
SIR: I am this very moment setting Sail for Tripoli with the Money for the
ransom of our Prisoners, & the Tripoline Prisoners from Syracuse on board. The
Essez is here and will sail in an hour for Tunis, with the Rais [Ali Ben Amour or
Rais Hassen Ben Alp] & Crews of the Xebecque & her two prizes to deliver them
up. The vessels I shall detain for further investigation. I perfectly coincide with you in the opinion, you directed Mr Denison to express
port last Fall; however I could wish
t o me of the vessels detained 8: sent into t h i ~
to wait the arrival of the John Adams as Government may have said something
on the subject by her. [NA. Sen. 9 E B 6 , Pres. Message, Jan. 1806.1
To John Stricker, navy Agent, Baltimore, Md., fram Secretary of the Navy
NAVDEPJune ldtb 1806
You will be pleased to Charter a Vessel carrying from 8 to 1200 Barrele on the
best t e r n in your power & send her round to this place immediately to take in
a cargo which iE, ready consisting of Powder, Shot Bread Beef &q to proceed direct

U7ARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

119

to Malta or Syracuse - As i t is very desirable that no delay should take lace
you will inform me of the name of the Vessel and Captain Chartered in Brder
that the necessary p ~ w p o r t smay be obtained in time.
[NDA. GLB, Vol. 7, 1803-1805.1
Extract from journal of U. S. Frigate Consfitution, Captain John Rodgers, U. S. Navy,
commanding, Friday, 14 June 1805
P M commences with Light airs and leasant weather ?4 past 3 saw the Island
of Malta bearing W. B. S. At Sunset tpe harbour of Malta bore N W B W.
At Midnight pleasant weather.
At 7 sent the Jolly boat on shore a t Malta. % past 11 RecQfrom Malta 65
thousand dollars
At Meridian made all Sail. the harbour of Malta bearing W
N distance 3
miles
[USNA.]
Extract from journal of Hezekiah Loomis, Steward, U. S. Navy, U. S. Brig Vixen,
Master Commandant John Smith, U. 6. Navy, commanding, Friday, 14 June
1805

Arrived a Ketch from Malta.
[L. F. Middlebrook. NDA copy.]
To Gaetano Andrea Schembri, Tripolitan Agent, Halta, from Robert Denison
Secretary of Captain Samuel Barron, U. 8. Navy
COPY
MALTA15 June 1805
SIR Peace having been concluded betwixt the United States of America and
the Rigincy of Tripoli I hereby annunce to you the liberation of the Six Tripolini
risoners taken on bourd a vessel off Bingazi by a Brig of War of the United
tat= - and they are hereby delivered up to you
[LC. JRP, Vol. 2, Series Two, May-Oct. 1805.1

8

To General Castanio, Algeziras, from Lieutenant Joseph J. Maxwell, U. S. Mavy
U. S. GUN BOATNQ3
(Official) Copy
HARBOUR
OF ALGEZIRAB
15 June 1806
I have the honor to acquaint your Excellency, that I was this morning, brought
too by four armed boats under Spanish Colours, who after exercising the utmost
insolence, & without assigning the smallest reason conducted me to this port.
The orders received from my Goverment were to proceed with all possible
dispatch to the Commander of the American Squadron in the Mediterranean,
the serious consequences attending this unwarrantable detention must be too
obvious to your Excellency to require a remark - I shall only observe that
if your Goverment authorizes indignities of this nature, t o my own, I must
appeal for redress. I am sensible however this cannot be the case, B ersuade
myself that your Excellency r i l l readily redress the iusult ogered the L e r i c a n
Flag, in this instance, & take measures to prevent a repetition [NDA. Captain's LB, Vol. 1. 1805.1
To Secretary of the Navy from Master Commandant John Shaw, U. S. Navy
U. S. FRIGATEJ o h n A d a m
Gibralter 15% June 1805
SIR On the Second day after I sailed from New york I experienced a gale of
Wind East to N E accompanied with a heavy Fog which lasted 3 or 4 Days and
On the IO'P Inst I fell in with N9 10.
seperated me from the Gun Boats
Lieutt Cartey LattQ36'11' N Long 10°15' W all well - NQ3 NQ 6. & 6 I found
a t an anchor here, they got in a few hours before me. N9 2. 8. & 9 ha8 Sailed for
Tripoli yesterday Morning and NQ.G & 7 no doubt will be here very shortly 1 8m employed this Morning in Mounting their Cannon & supplying them with

-

120

NAVAL OPERATIOnTS FROM 1806 TO 1807

every necessary which they are in Want of - I likewise Increase the Crew of
each Boat to 30 Men On my arrival here I communicated to Mr Gaveno my orders to toutch in for
Information and I transmit you a Copy of his Letter to me.
I shall proceed off Tripoli the first wind - which I hope will be this evening
or to morrow Morning a t farthest

-

[NDA.

MC LB, 1804-5.1
[Enclosure]

To Master Commandant John Shaw, U. S. Navy, from John Gavino, U. 6. Consul,
Gibraltar
COPY
GIBRALTER
June 14th 1806
SIR I have the honor of yours of this date & Congratulate you on your arrival.
I have Acck from Commodore Barron to 21at Apl he was well and Anxious to
begin the Champaign - Informs me of two Tripolitan Cruisers havin got out
in bad Weather one of 8 Guns the other of 6. one was Cruising in the %iulph of
Genoa was seen about 3 Weeks ago off Corsica, the other was a t Susa near Tunis.
This induced Capt. Stewart (with Consul Simpsons approbation) to Convoy the
Am* Transport u being loaded with Powder, Anchors, & other Stores unarmed, left this the 4tb &st as did Gun Boats NO9. 8. & 9 yesterday The Emperor of Morocco is making some preparations, but against who i t is
uncertain - the other States have no Kovelty
[NDA. MC LB, 1804-5.1
Extract from a letter from Master Commandant John Shaw, U. 6. Navy,
commending U. 6. 6. John Adam
GIBRALTAR,
June 16,1806.
"With pleasure I inform you of my arrival here (after a assa e of 30 days,)
from Xew-York. The second day after my leaving Sandy d o k , funfortunately
separated from the gun boats in a heavy gale from the K. E. to E. accompanied
with a thick fog, which lasted three or four days. On the 10th inst. I fell in with
No. 10, lieut. Cartey, out from n'orfolk 27 days. He reported, his boat far
exceeded his expectations, and was capable of living in any sea, and that she lap
to remarkably well. I found lying to an anchor here gun boats KO. 3, lieutenant
Maxwell, No. 6, lieutenant Lawrence, and No. 6, lieutenant Harrison, all pefectly
well. These boats all exceeded the expectations of their officers. No. 2, lieutenant Izard, No. 8, lieutenant Harraden, and No. 9, lieutenant Elbert, sailed
from this port for Tripoli yesterday morning.
"Letters from commodore Barron, of the 21st April, make no mention of any
prospects of peace, and state that he was making active preparations for this
summer's siege. He has bought three large schooners, which he has cut down
strengthened and placed bombs on board. The blockade has been kept up the
whole winter very rigidly by our squadron; but the north winds occasionallp
compelled our fleet to weigh and best off the shore. The result is that two small
cruisers have got out. They have been lately spoke off Corsica, which I presume
is their cruising ground.
"Captain Bainbridge, officers, and crew, are all well and not harshly treated.
I flatter myself, that they will be all liberated this summer, as I am sure, every
exertion of our officers will be employed in effecting this.
"I am employed this morning in mounting the cannon on the boats, with my
main yard, and the instant i t is done, if the wind will favor, I shall weigh my
anchor for Tripoli.
"Captain Stewart sailed from hence on the 2d in company with one of our
store ships, for Malta.
"P. S. Commodore Barron's health is perfectly restored."
[LC. National IlbteUigencer, 28 Aug. 1805.1
115 June 18051
To Secretary of the Bevy trom Lieutenant Andrew Sterett, 0.S. Bavy
SIR Col. Stricker has just informed me that I must prepare the Brig building
in this place with all possible dispatch for a cruize Before I enter into this service permit me to request that you will do me the
honor to inform me, whether Mr Decatur is to rank me? Should this be the csse

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS
I cannot Sir reconcile i t to my feelings to enter again into the service - and of
course must be reduced to the necessity of resigning my Commission
BALTIP15 June 1805
[NDA. MC LB, 1804-5.1

-

To Captain Samuel Banon, U. 6. Navy, Malta, from George Davis, U. 6. Charg6
d'dffaires, Tunis
K Q 12
TUNISJune 16 t h , 1806.
SIR I do myself the honor to offer you a line, by this conveyance, merely to
present my respects & repeat my earnest wishes, for the recovery of your health Nothing has occurred relative to our affairs here, since I last addressed you
but
wait with much anxiety, an answer to my letters forwarded by Cap* Campbell &
Smith - Should not Coll Lear meet with that success we have a right to expect
in his negotiation a t Tripoli; no time should be lost in visiting this place
An unusual number of Cruisers, are manning, and which really surprizes us
as they seem to expect with much confidence, the Neapolitan force - If hostilities
should be commenced by the Bey of Tunis against us - I am most confident, i t
will not be in an open declaration of War, and am therefore the more anxious to
see our affairs, finally arranged here, and for which no occasion can be so propitious
as the present P C . JRP, L Bk B, May 1805-July 1806. Also Mrs. James S. Banon Col.]

-

-

-

Extract from Memorandum Book of Captain Edward Preble, U. 6. Navy, 16 June
1805
The Vengeance went into the stream.
P C original.]
To the Hon. Thomas Dwight from William Eaton, U. 6. Navy Agent for the Barbary
Regencies
THE U STATES
FBJGATE
ON BOARD
Constellation, at Sea, June 17* 1806.
SIR, I did myself the honor to write you from Egypt in February last
After a tedious and perplexing march of fifty days through the desert of Lybie
I arrived on the 25. of April and took post, a t the head of Hamet Bashaw's
army, in the rear of Derne. Our movements in Egypt had induced Joseph
Bashaw to send an army to the defence of the Province, which was within fourteen hours march of the place when we arrived. The Governor of Derne was
also ordered, and determined, with a garrison of turkish soldiery and about one
third of the City in hia interest, to resist our approach Commodore Barron had sent to the coast to assist our operations the brig
Argus, the schooner Nautilus, and the sloop Hornet; also two pieces of field artillery.
On the morning of the 26tP I sent a flag to the Governor ~ i t overtures
h
of friendship on condition of nonresistance and allegiance to Hamet Bashaw, which he
sent back with this laconick answer "My head or yours" - The next day we
attacked him by sea and land, and after a sharp contest of two hours and a half
carried the place by charge of Bayonet - The Governor took refuge in a
sanctuary; and most of his adherents fled, and either joined the advancing army
of Joseph Bashaw or took the desart. The few christians I had with me suffered
severly in the action; nearly one third of them were either killed or wounded;
because our arabs not having been accustomed to this kind kind of close decision,
left us the burthen of the day
I had the misfortune to receive a musket ball
through my left wrist, just below the joint, which, I fear, will deprive me of
the use of the hand - I immediately began to fortify myself by reversing the
embrasures of the battery, sinking a line of intrenchments and raising a parapet
without the fort - Hamet Bashaw opened his divan a t the 1at.e Governors
alace in the city; and the inhabitants very universally and with apparent satlsraction recognized him On the 13Q of May the enemy's army advanced and attacked us with all its
force in hopes of recovefing the place. But after an action of four hours, with
various success, they gave way and retreated precipitately to their camp behind
the mountains. We were too weak in our number of christians to pursue this
success; the bashaws people seemed not to have full confidence in themselves;
and our Saracen militla and newly acquired allies a t Derne resolved no longer

-

-

.

122

NAViLI; OPERATIONS FROM 1805 TO 1807

to act oiTensively without a pecuniary consideration; of this we were destitute; -

Each party therefore held our post with small skirmishing till the 28tI when a
party of the enemy of fifty or sixty foot covered by a troo of cavalry, descended
the mount,ain;fell on the right flank of our arab camp and $rove o£Fseveral camells
and cattle. A det,achment of the Bashaws people pursued these marauders;
overtook them a t the foot of the mountain; killed three of them; and recovered
the plunder. Whiie this was transacting I made a sortie with five officers and
thirty rank and file, dmericans and greeks volunteers; took s ravine undiscovercd
and gained the summit of the mountain before the enemy. We received them
on the point of the bayonet. They made a short resistance, and fled. We
pursued within a short distance of the camp; killed their Captain and five m m ,
and wounded 8 greater number: then retired in plain view of the whole army
without receiving the least injury. They appologize for this cowardly inactivity
by choosing to believe we aimed to draw them into an ambuscade on disadvantageous ground - The next day their commander in chief offered, by proclamation, six thousand dollars for my head - double that sum for me a prisoner;
and fifty dollars a head for my christians. This little affair put an end to
skirmishing On the 10th instant the enemy, having received reinforcements, again moved
down and attacked, But after a well fought battle of upwards of four hours they
were put to flight with great loss both in men and horses - On t h k occasion
we calculated t,he numbers actually in the field, of both parties to have been
about five thousand - The Bashaw deserva the merit of this victory - I
had little to do with its arrangment, and could not render him any assistance in
arms but from the fire of a single field piece. The vessels had a better positionand occasjonally galled the enemy with their heavy mettle: but the fact is,
I doubted the propriety of further offensive operatious, having been officially
informed that a negotiation was pending between the United States and Joseph
Bashaw The next day the Constellatzon appeared and came to anchor in the offing No sooner was she seen by the enemy than they decamped irregularly, leaving
most of their heavy baggage, and took up a precipitate retreat towards the desert.
under an apprehension that she brought us reinforcements and supplies - She
brought me a Ietter from our Commissioner of eace; of which the follonring is
a Copy. [See letter of June 6, 1805 to William eaton from Tobias Lear.]

*

*

*

*

This peace, distinctly considered, is honorable; but connected with the instrument we have used to obtain it, not to be boasted of. If the 60.000 [*I dollars
had, in stead of going to Joseph, been sent to Hamet Bashaw a t the moment of
rejoining us a t Bomba on the 1 5 4 of April, and correspondent vigorous
the A ~ g w
operations pursued elsewhere, we should have started the usurper from his Capital
before this date and wrested our captives from his chains - When he made overtures of a pacification to our Commissioner, he was heard to observe as his reason
"When I began this war, I wm fighting for money; but, the question now is,
Who shall be Bashaw?" I fear we have stopped too short: for if such were his
a prehensions while as yet Commodore Barron's squadron had never been before
&ipoli together, and we were still a t a great distance, what would not our
junction have produced! I firmly believe we should have entered Tripoli with
as little trouble as we did Derne. After having been more t.han six months on
the barbarous shore of Africa, my friends may probably think I ought not to
compalin a t having gotten my share of the war off my hands - I ought perhaps,
t o be satisfied; yet, I confess, novel, arduous and hazardous as the enterprize
may have appeared, I hoped to have stood on to see the temerity of Joseph
Bashaw chastized and his perfidy punished. The lesson would have been awful
to Barbary - Perhaps another such occasion will never offer. I shall return to the United States in thc first vessel of war which sails from
the Squadron and shall make it a duty as well as a pleasure t o wait on you in
passing through Springfield I*] Lssr gaTe 65,WO dollars for ransom, and 5 kinpdom for the pace.
E. Huntington LCAG, E A 126.1

m.

To Captain John Bodgers, U. S. Mavy, from Robert Denison, Secretary of Captain
Samuel Barron, U. 8. Mavy
MALTAJune 1 7 tb 1806.
SIR:I received the Letter which you had the politeness to address to me on the
14 Inst - I should have done myself the pleasure of meeting you a t the Barrier

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

123

on that day but was much indisposed with a severe inflammation in my eyes
which as respects business has laid me completely prostrate, & will I fear suspend
my powers of attention for some time - I have the honor to inclose Inventories
of the Articles found on board the two Neapolitan Merchant Vessels, Prizes to the
Tunisian Corsair detained off Tripoli by the Constitu~ion- I am informed
that the Consul of His Sicilian Majest in this Island means to protest against
the restitution of these vessels to the &ashaw of Tunis - It appears to be a
matter worthy of consideration how far after insisting upon our right to make
Prizes of the vessels in question, we can with justice exercise the power of restitution as an act of courtesy, in disregard of the claim of the Neapolitans with whom
the case seems to be a novel one and suceptible of much
we are in Amity
argument on both sides, and the question would probably turn upon the principle
of the "injra prisidia" and its application to the circumstances of this case I have examined the latest Reports of Admiralty decisions but can find no instance
exactly in point - As it is no less the wish of our Goverment than i t is appropriate to its character to act on such occasions with strict regard to the rights
of neutral & friendly Xations, I beg leave Sir to suggest the propriety of consulting
some legal Character on this question, and if the idea meets your approbation
I will submit the case to the consideration of His Majesty's Advocate a t this
place and request his opinion thereon By the papers transmitted to you in my Letter of 6 Inst ou would observe that
the Correspondence relative to the claim of the Ottoman gorte for the surrender
of the Corn vessels has been earrced on thro' the medium of the Governor of this
Island - I inclose a Copy of Commodore Barron's last Letter to His Excellency
on that subject from which you will preceive a t what point the Correspondence
rests [LC. JRP, Col. 2, Series Two, May-Oct. 1805.1

-

To Captain Samuel Barron, U. 8. Navy, from John Broadbent, U. S. Navy Agent,
Messina
MESSIXA17 June 1805.
SIR! Rlt Ridgely's Trial is now in a ver good train & I have not the least doubt
but he will soon be able to return t o the iquadron - It is to be hoped that this
misfortune will be of Service to him for the remainder of his days, & that it will
make some impression also on the minds of other young Men in the Service,
inducing them to guard against the vice of Intoxication, particularly when
they are on shore in foreign Countries. His Sicilian hfajesty has declared himself highly pleased with thee, in recommending the young hlan to present himself in the very honorable m-ay he has done
for Trial, and had the facts & depositions been so strong against him as necessarily to condem him, I am certain that the King wou'd have pardon'd him,
having prohibited the Tribunal from executing any Sentence upon him without
knowing first His Majesty's pleasure. Thy friend
(Sign'd) John Broadbent
[NDA. Captain's LB, Vol. 2, 1805.3
To Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Navy, from John Beekman, Navy Agent, New
York, N. Y.
NEW YOBK17th June 1805
Sir, On Saturday last after a great deal of trouble and dificulty Lieu! Haswell
and myself made a purchase of two fishing smacks, on the best terms we could
get them for, the owners being in the heighth of Business were not very anxious
to part with them even a t the price we gave, one is called the TraveUer of the
Burthen of 36 27/95 Tons & owned by J ~ Mason,
P
which cost $1600, the other
is called the Ranger of the Burthen of 26.56195 Tons and owned by Silas Beebe
which cost $1200 - They sail'd yesterday for Boston in charge of their owners
who are to deliver them there, Lt Haswell took Passage in the Traveller, and
agreeable to your letter of the 30 May last I have drawn on Sam1 Brown esqr a t
sight for the amt of both Vessels payable to Jnv Mason & Silas Beeve. Lt Haswell
has the Bill of Sale for them, and a letter for hlr Brown, who is to pay the Men
for their trouble in taken the Vessels to Boston a t the rate I agreed with them for,
which is mentioned in my letter - I hope they will meet your approbation -the

124

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1806 TO 1807

Carpenters who examined them pronounced them strong Vessels, and all things
taken into consideration not unreasonable
[LC. EPP, Vol. 15, June-Aug. 1805.1
To Secretary of the Navy from George Hamson, Navy Agent, Philadelphia, Pa
PHILADELP*
June 17, 1806
Sir I have rec'd, by this days mail, from Commodore Preble, three sketches
of his actions off Tripoli which I inclose you, with his profile, taken by Mr Rembrandt Peale You will make your selection & determine whether the die shall be executed in
America [ND.4. Misc. LB, Vol. 3, 1805.1
[17 June 18051
To Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Navy, from George Harrison, Navy Agent,
Philadelphia, Pa.
Dr SIR I this moment rec'd your letter covering the Sketches which I shall
without delay transmit to ye Secretary - I have been expecting them from
you these Two months It will require a t least 3 months to execute the Die after the order is given,
which I hope the Secretary will not delay, I will ascertain ye expence of a medal in
Silver, & inform you; it will not exceed, but a mere trifle yq price of the metal I do not expect that y? Drawing you mention will be called for, should it be
requisite I will give you due notice 17 June 1805
[LC. EPP, Vol. 15, June-Aug. 1805.1
Extract from journal of Hezekiah Loomis, Steward, U. S, Navy, U. S. Brig Vixen.
Master Commandant John Smith, U. S. Navy, commanding, Monday, 17 June
1805
At 10 o'clock got under way and went out of the harbour [of Tripolij. At 12
o'clock saw a mil which we gave chace to, and found i t to be the Constitution
Commodore Ro[d]gers. We set sail this evening for Syracuse.
[L. F. Middlebrook. NDA copy.]
To Master Commandant John Shaw, U. S. Navy, commanding U. S. 6. John Admns.
from Captain C. Boyle, B. N.
HIS BRITANIC
MAJESTYS
SHIP
Ampetrite, GIBRALTAR
BAY
18th June 1805
SIR Having received on board his Britanic Majestys Ship under my cornmand
by order of the Governor of Gibraltar Two British Seamen named in the Margin
(John Greary - Jno. Adams F r i ~ a t eMichl Dohmany Nq 10 Gun Boat Both
Natives of Ireland.) late in the service of the U. States of America who have left
their Clothes $ 9 in the Ships against their names expressed, I have sent an Officer
to recieve them & request you will order them to be delivered. [NDA. MC LB, 1804-5.1
TO Captain C. Boyle, B. N., H. B. 1.8. Amphihilc, from Master Commandant John
Shaw, U. 8. Navy
U. S. FRIGATE
John Adams
Gibraltar 18 June 1806
Capts C. BOYLE
of his Britanic Majestys Ship Ampetrife SIR, I have recieved yours of this Date & note it8 contents, the Men you allude
to have belonged to the U. States and have entered themselves as Volunteers in
this service of course have recieved their regular advance (Viz.) John Gresry $26
50/100 and Michael Dohmony of Gun Boat No 10 $42 47%/100 - if you have a

FK4RS WITH BARBARY POU7ERS

125

right to claim these Men I shall expect you to make their accts in this Ships Books
square You, Sir, in return, I have no doubt will deliver to this Ship a Man by the name
of Robert Williams an American Subject, whose protection I have the honor of
enclosing you a copy of - as follows U. S. of America
CO Y
?saxnuel Tredwell Collector of the District of Edenton do hereby certify
that Robert Williams an American Seaman, aged Twenty two years or there
abouts of the height of four feet four and half Inches, Dark Eyes, Dark Hair
& Dark Complexion was born in Edenton KQ Carolina, hath this Day produced to me proof in the manner directed "An Act entitled an Act for the
relief & rotection of American Seamen," & pursuant to the said act I do
hereby &rtify that the said Robert Williams is a Citizen of the U. States of
America - I n Witness whereof I have hereunto set my hand & Seal of
Office this 21 day of September 1804 & of the Independance of the U. States
the 28tb (Signed) SAM^ TREDWELL
COUT
I have no doubt of your wish to agree with my proposal on this head as nothing
would give me more pleasure than a continuance of that harmony which has so
hapiiy subsisted between Great Britain and the U. States, and if you will refer to
the Articles NQ 1 & 23 of this Treaty - in the mean time I shall transfer Copy of
this to the American Consul P. S. The Cloathing which these Men say they have left on board is trifling,
but, what ever they are shall be passed to their credit in this Ships books. [NDA. MC LB, 1804-5. Also LC, John Rodgers Papers.]
To Frederick Degen, U. 6. Bevy Agent, Naples, from Captain John Rodgers,
U. S. Navy

U. S. FRIGATE
Constitution
Maltha 1 8 t h June 1805
SIR I have the Honor to make known to you that Peace was concluded between
U. S. of America & his Excellency the Bashaw of Tripoly, by Tobias Lear Commissioner on the part of the U. S. & the said Bashaw of Tripoly behalf of himself &
subjects on the 3 d ins$ on Terms the most honorable and advantageous to the
U. S. our unfortunate Countrymen; C a p 0 Bainbridge, Officers & Crew of the late
Fregate Philadelphia, are again restored to the arms of liberty and their Country,
& I beg you, Sir to give these comnlunications Publicity.
N. B. the prisoners were hourly expected a t Siracuse further particulars were
also expected. [NDA. Misc. LB, Vol. 4, 1805.1
COPY.

To Secretary of the Navy from Lieutenant James Lawrence, U. 6. Navy
Gux BOATNQ6
Gibraltar, June 18th [I8051
Sir "I have the honour to info- you of my arrival in this place on the evning
elaye fmm +L %& I parted with the
of the 14th i&ee-def
John A d a m in a fog the third d a w a v i n g , the Hook, and arrived in Gibraltar thirty hours before her, I am happy to inform you that NQ6 is an excellent
sea boat, and sails very fast. I should have proceeded aloft immediately on
mounting my Guns; but Capta Shaw judged it most advisable, as there were four
of us, for us all to sail together."
[NDA. Officers LB, 1802-1805.1
Extract from journal of U. 6. Frigate Constitution. Captain John Rodgers, U. S. Navy,
commanding, Tuesday, 18 June 1808
[OffTripoli] At 2 [P. M.] spoke the brig Vizen % past 2 sent the Gig on shore
a t Tr~poli
At sunset the town of Tripoli bore S % W distance 4 Miles
At 9 [A. M.] hoisted out the first & 34 cutters Soon after they left the ship
with the Tripolitan prisoners for Tripoli
[USNA.]

126

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1806 TO 1807

To John Gavino, U. S. Consul, Gibraltar, from Master Commandant John Shaw,
U. S. Navy
U. STATESFRIGATE
John Adama

Gibraltar Bay June 19tb 1806
SIR This moment I have recieved a very extraordinary note of Capt? C. Bayle
of the Frigate Ampetrite demanding the Clothing of John Greary, Seaman, run
from the Frigate John Adams, and John Dolmony from Gun Boat Nq 10 - I
have answered him in as perfect a style as my feelings could comply with - I
transfer you a Copy of Robert Williams's Protection, a Seaman who has been
detained on board said Frigate, which I request you to demand Officially, a copy
of said rotection I shall transfer to the United States by the first opportunity.
The &xtraordinary consequence the British Officers assume is far beyond my
comprehension; but all I will say on this subject, that they will ever meet an equal
retort from me; I wish the British Commanders to observe that our Service is
very Independant, and I hope our Commanders will never let slip any Insult
which they offer to pass with Impunity P. S. hlp present circumstances will not admit of any delay, otherwise my
communication to Capt* Boyle no doubt might meet his Intention. [NDA. MC LB, 1804-5.1
To Captain Samuel Barron, U. S. Navy, from Master Commandant Charles Stewart,
U. S. Navy
U. S. BRIGSiren OFF MALTA
19% June 1805
SIBI beg leave to inform you that I left Gibraltar on the 4tb Inst with the Store
Ship Ann under my Convoy - The inclosed copies of Letters will explain to you
the Reasons for and Mr Simpson's consent to my leaving that station, they will
explain to you also the state of our affairs in that Quarter a t the time - I inclose for your information a private letter from Mr Meade a t Cadiz Covering the
Copy of a Confidential letter from Mr Pinckney our Representative a t the Court
of Madrid, which will explain to you the failure of the Negociations that were
carrying on between our respective Governments - The Ann is order'd t o Syracuse, but I shall detain her off this Port untill your pleasure is known (the Charter
Party allows her to enter but one Port) - I send you all the letters &o to the
Care of Mr Higgins Navy Agent, also the last Gibraltar Chronicle & have the
Honor to be
[LC. JRP,Vol. 1, March 1791-Dec. 1814.1
To Lieutenant Andrew Sterett, U. S. Navy, Baltimore, Md., from Secretary of the
Naoy
NAVD E P 19
~ June 1806. I have recd your letter of the 15 ins. Mr Decatur was, on the 22nQ May 1804 promoted to the station of Captain in
the Navy of the United States, in consideration of his having under circumstances
of great and extraordinary peril; destroyed the Frigate Philadelphia while lying
in the harbour of Tripoli. The President made this promotion to testify the
high aense he entertained of the brilliant act achieved by M: Decatur, that other
officers in the Navv mieht. bv the vrosvect of such honorable reward, be stimulated to deeds of equal Galour: At ?he time the promotion was made it was confidently believed that this principle would he clearly understood by the officers
of the Navy and would be very acceptable to them. I t was thought it would
gratify the ambition of the aspiring Officer. We were far from thinking that you
would consider yourself dishonored by this romotion since the very same principle might ultimately raise you to the higb)est & most honorable Command in
the Navy, in preference to Gentlemen senior to you in original appointment.You will I hope reconsider the subject as I should be sorry to lose so valuable
an officer, yet should be forced to submit to that rather than give up a principle
believed essential to the good of the service, reflecting on no one in particular
because forming the law for all, and holding out to all equally the means of
obtaining ita benefits. [NDA. OSW, Vol. 6, 1802-1805.1

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS
To Lieutenant Nathaniel Fanning, U. 8. Navy, U.S. Gunboat No. I . Charleston, 25. C.,
from Secretary of the Xavy
XAVDEPT.19 June 1806.
I have received your letter of the 6th inst in which you state that i t is impossible
t o procure a Crew on the terms prescribed in my letter t o you of the 21st u l t ~You may offer a premium of not exceeding 20$ to each man - probably 10 or
15$ given m a premium will induce them to enter. Should you find i t impracticable, after a fair trial, to procure men on these terms, you may offer able
Seamen 14$ pr month & ordinary seamen 10%- & give the bounty besides.
You whole crew must consist of besides officers and Marines, not exceeding 10
able Seamen $ 16 ordinary seamen. I presume you will not want this number
of able and ordinary seamen, but if you should, you may enter them. Pray
use your best exertions to sail without delay.
[RDA. Off. Comg, Gunboats, 1803-1808.1
To Captain Samuel Barron, U. S. Hsvy, from Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Navy
COPY
BOSTON,
June 19th 1805
DEARSIR,This will be handed you by Lieut Daniel M~R'iel,Commander of the
U States Bomb Ketch, Spitjire The Vengeance Mr Lewis Sailed yesterday - it
has not been possible to send them to sea sooner. I hope a Short passage will
enable them to join you by the 1.1 August and wish they may be of service to
you in your opperations against our Enemies. I have full coddence in their
Strength, but do not expect they will prove fast Sailers - The Hinges are on
board for the Waiste, which is to fall down outside as far aft as the after part of
Mortar Hatchway, your Carpenters can in a few minutes put them on and saw
the Timbers off above the plank Sheer, we have endeavoured to collect and Send
out all the Apparatus for the use of the Mortars, if any Small articles have been
neglected I presume you can readily procure them a t Malta or Mesina without
difficulty - all the filled fuses that we have here amounting to 268 have been
divided between the two Vessels & I have Sent out 200 empty fuse cases, which
will be Sufficiently Seasoned to fill by the time they reach you, the cornposition
for filling then1 is on board I have Sent out but one chain Stay, the others I suppose can be furnished from the Squadron Please to accept the Kews papers, with my best wishes for your Success and
happiness, I was happy to hear by a l e t h r received from Washington that you
were fast recovering your health when they last heard from you. I hare written
Several times to you and to Several of the OEicers of the Squadron but have not
received one letter from you or them in return Mr Morris, late Purser of the Constitution,Sails with a cargo of Provisions for
you in a few days, I beg lesve to recommend him to you for employment if you
Should want the Services of his vessel
[KoTE.-The dimensions of the masts and spars of the U. S. ketches Vengeance
and Spitfrre as recorded by William and J. Harris, mast makers, are included in
the Manuscripts Division, Edward Preble Papers, Vol. 15, document 3343,
Ljbrary of Congress.]
[LC. JRP, Vol. 2, Series TKO,May-Oct. 1805.1

To Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Navy, from WiUiam Tilton
19th JUNE
1805
At 5 A M The Pilot came on board and took charge of the Vengeance. Hove
in the cable to Stay-Peak & then loosed the Topsails, L Main Jibb, hauled out
the Mizen & hoisted Miz. To sail, Mizen and mizen topmsst staysails, % 5.
Under way, with the Mizen, &z, topsail, miz. & miz. top m%Staysails & Main
Jibb. with the wind a t S W & on the larbQtack and t.he anchor cstted & on the
bow. % 5. put the helm down & tryed to stay her.: Missed stsys, put the h e
up & wore round before the ~ i n d
Hoisted the Maln topsail: The pilot steerlng
& keeping before the Wind, telling me he would go through another channel.
About ten minutes after 6. vie were asliore on the point of the flat Pu'orth of Bird's
I. - Took in all sail, and got our small anchor out ahead on the lwbQbow, to
heave her into the channel. But she was fast.
LEWIScorns the Vengeance
WILLIAM
TILTOW
[LC. EPP, Vol. 15, June-Aug. 1805.3

128

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1806 TO 1807

Extract from Memorandum Book of Captain Edward Preble, U. 5. Navy, 19 June
1806

Vengeance sailed Lt. Lewis.
(LC original.]
Extract from journal of U. 6. Frigate Constitution, Captain John Rodgers, U. 6. Navy,
commanding, Wednesday, 19 June 1806
[OffTripoli] At 2 [P. M.] the boats returnd from Tripoli At 3 the third cutter
left the ship with prisoners for Tripoli ?!
past
i 4 the first cutter left with 8 boxes
of money for Tripoli, f: past 5 the bashaws Castle bearing S S WT 5 W. distance
3 Miles observd breakers E S E. distance 4 Miles. 5 past 8 the boats returnd
from Tripoli
A t Midnight light airs and clear 5 past 6 sent up the royal yards At 8 shorten,d
sail and came too with our starb4 bower anchor in 24 fathoms water. the town
of Tripoli bearing S 41 E distance 3 miles, At 10 the Bashaw fired a salute of
21 guns which we answerd $4 past 10 cornmodore Rodgers went on shore in
the barge
[USXA.]
To Citiaen Beaussier, French Charge d'Affaires and Commissary General, Tripoli,
from Captain John Bodgers, U. S. Bavy
U. S. SHIP Comtitution
OffTripoli June 20tb 1805
Sir I am sincerely sorry that any circumstance should have occurred to give
me cause to address you on a subject, the dark features of which preclude the
admissibility of even decent language I charge you Sir with having afforded protection to two Deserters from the
U. States Service, and of the crew of the late Frigate Philadelphaa, in a manner
as equally degrading to yourself, as the tenor of the proceeding is insulting to
me. - Let me ask you if these Men are really your Countrymen, how could
you bear to see them in the capacity of Slaves, for nearly two Years, without
feeling any thing like that resolution, to release them from a situation the most
unhappy? that you have adopted with success; in niaking yourself the entire
instrument of a perjury no less offensive to their God, than its consequence is
di raceful to honor & truth - Perhaps these Men did not tell you that they
ha? Sworn allegiance to the U. States of America; and altho it is my duty to demand that you deliver them up, yet I can assure you that I would rather you
should keep them, after what has pass'd, even if they were native Americans;
as by doing so, you ill rescue them from the Vengeance of Laws which you have
already insulted Altho perhaps I may not have expressed myself sufficiently clear on this subject, yet I hope both for the regard I have for your Country & my own feelings,
that you will not oblige me to say more [LC. JRP, Letters & Orders, Book A, 1804-1805.1
To Captain John Bodgers, U. S. Bavy, from George Davis, U. 6. Charge d'Affairee,
Tunis
TUNISJune 20t4 1806
NP 1 (Copy)
SIR, The Letter you did me the honor to write on the 11th Inst, accusing the
receipt of those, which I had forwarded by the Consle2krtion, was handed me by
the Captn Cox on the 18tP I regret that you have not been more explicit, with respect to your final intentions relative to the captured Vessels; as it would have enabled me, to talk with
more freedom to the Bey, & state precisely all the poasible consequences attendant on this &air - an answer to his letter is lndispensibly necessary; and
will (if I have not misconstrued your opinion) contain a temperate but firm &
unequivocal refusal of indenmification; for the just reasons which I have detailed
in the communication already forwarded.
The Crew of the Corsair, have been delivered to the Minister, who caused the
Rsis to be put in chains before me. - I have communicated to His Excellency
the Bey, the resignation of Commodore Barron; as abo of your being the chief
in command, and offered this circumstance as an apology for not having recieved
an answer to his letter.

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

129

He absolutely insists on the restoration of the Vessels; & charges me to say,
he will never cease from his demands, whatever may be the issue - no discussion was entered into, from the fear of not coinciding exactly in opinion with you.
At all events, 1 trust that the language made use of, as detailed in my Letter
of the 29tb Ultimo, does not meet your disapprobation, as i t leaves wholly to
yourself the power of pursuing such measures, as you may think most advisable
and expedient. Under present circumstances I shall calculate on your full support and wait
with greatest anxiety your arrival in this Bay; as a personal interview, will enable
me to state more clearly, all the circumstances, which can have any weight, in
determining your conduct towards this Re ency.
Enclosed is a copy of my last to Commo. gBarrbn P. S. Your answer to the Bey should be written in Ittalian or French. G.D.
[NDA. Captain's LB, VoI. 1, 1805.1

-

To Purser Noadiah Morris, U. S. Navy, Hartford, Conn., from Secretary of the
Navy

NAV D E P20
~ June 1806.
I enclose herewith an order on Daniel Olcott esqr to deliver to you as much
beef as will fill up your vessel. Presuming that the quantity will be about 600
barrels, I this day send you on account of the freight $1800. Should this s u m be

too small, we will pay you what may remain due, on the return of your vessel
to the U - States, or on receiving satisfactory evidence of the delivery of the
cargo a t the port of its destination. And if this sum should exceed the Amount
of freight, you will place the excess in the hands of Daniel Olcott esqr, advising
me of the circumstance. For all the vessels lately chartered to carry provisions to our squadron, we have
paid three dollars per barrel freight. I cannot therefore allow you more. When your vessel shall have received her Cargo on board, you will make out
an invoice & bill of lading of the cargo & transmit them to me. I wish to have
the Cargo insured. You will receipt to Mr Olcott for the Cargo, and I expect
that you will have your vessel insured, and deposit the Policy with Mr Olcott
with a regular Assignment to the United States, as a Security for the sum advanced to you on account of the freight, that the public may not lose by the
indulgence whether the voyage be performed or not. When you shall be in all respects prepared for sea, you mill weigh anchor &
proceed immediately to hlalta, where you can ascertain from the Agent whether
i t would be better d- more convenient to the squadron to land the cargo a t that
place or proceed with it and land it a t Syracuse, and act according to the advice
you may procure from the Agent. If he should inform you that you had better
land the cargo a t Malta, do so; if he should inform you that you had better land
a part of the Cargo a t Malta, arid proceed to Syracuse with the residue, or, landing none a t Malta, proceed with the whole to Syracuse, you will do so - making
your delivery to the Agent a t the place where you may deliver, whose receipt
must be produced to the Accountant of the Navy, for the purpose of settling ultimately the freight.
Wishing you a prosperous voyage, I am,
[NDA. OSW, Vol. 6, 1802-1805.1
Extract from journal of U. 6. Frigate Conslilulion. Captain John Rodgers, U. S. Bavy,
commanding, Thursday, $20 June 1805
9
[A. M.] Conmiodore Rodgers went on shore At Meridian
At
[Off Tripoli]
light breezes and pleasant weather. The Bsshaw fired a salute of 5 guns which
we answerd
[USNA.]
Extract from journal of Eezekiah Loomis, Steward, U. 6. Navy, U. S. Brig V i m
Master Commandant John Smith, U. 15. Xavy, commanding, Thursday, SO June
1805
This day pleasant. Came to anchor in Syracuse a t half past 8 o'clock. Found
there the President, Congress and one store ahip and bomb vessel. Received
product.
fL. F. Middlebrook. KDA copy.]

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1806 TO 1807

130

To Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Navy, from William Higgina, U. S. Navy Agent,
Malta
MALTA
the 81 June 1805
MY DEARSIR I embrace the first oppertunity from this place direct to impart
to you the conclusion of Peace with Tripoly effected by Col Lear the beginning
of this Month on terms I am happy to say highly honorable to America and

which must give universal satisfaction - Prisoners have been exchanged
Man for Man as far es they went and for the balance (upwards of 200) 60,000
Dollars have been paid nothing has been allowed for the Peace, no tribute of
course, nor even I believe a Consular resent, but as yet I am not acquainted
with the lesser Articles of the treaty E b l Lear not having yet returned to this
I have seen Capt. 13ainbridge and most of his Officers who Do not
placelook to have suffered much in bodily appearance from their long captivity Doctor
Ridgeley is to be left as Charge d'affaires until the pleasure of the Government
be known - 1 assure you the Basha seems to have been completely humbled,
he begged as i t were for Peace through different channels and the business waa
concluded on board the Constitution whose strong arguments last year under your
direction induced him I imagine to think that a repetition of them this Season so
much strengthened would be more than he could answer to.
I have received the highest gratification in observing from the American and
English papers the distinguished manner with which your Country received you
on your return home and that indeed was as honorable to itself as to you Your
exertions gave the first stimulous to a young Xavy stampt it a t once with consideration and respect and impressed those fears on our Enemy which brought
him forward as a suppliant for Peace You will I dare say be glad to learn some of those events which preceded the
Peace. Commodore Barron after remaining with me five Months in ill health
was obliged a t length to relinquish the Com1:iand to the next in command Comme
Rodgers, i t cost him a hard struggle to do so, and indeed it was only a t the joint
and earnest solicitations of all his friends that he was induced to take a step a t a
moment when the interest of his Country wanted his Services and exertions, he
conceived i t was shrinking from his post in the moment of danger, but I am sorry
to say that his mind weakened by his bodily infirmity m m no longer equal to the
heavy and important trust reposed in him and he must have sunk under the great
and increasing cares of his Command the Peace however follom-ed his resignation
within a few days and he is now a t the foot of Mount Etna waiting until one of
the Men of war is ready to carry him home
Mr Eton some Months back went up to Alexandria to confer with the ex
Basha and there collected a parcel of Mamaluks and wild Arabs and Marched
through the Desert to Derne which he took by assault, he was wounded through
the wrist on the occasion, he would no doubt have made further progress had not
his career been stopt by the Peace, the Basha seemed to make but little Account
of his Army and perhaps he counted right - I suspect there will be a good deal
of proing and coning by & by in the Papers as to whether the African Expedition
was of use or not-Col Lear set his face against it from the beginning and I
believe it was carried much further than ever Comme Barron looked for or
intended.

*

*

*

*

*

*

8

I shall write you again by the President & I remain
The 25. June
I have kept my letters open until the last minute for as much as any thing
new might trans ire, it gives me an oppertunity of congratulatin you upon an
elevation from wgich I have derived the sincerest pleasure as will ?am persuaded
t o all the Officers of your late Squadron - We are told from various quarters
that you are appointed Secretary t o the Navy t o the great satisfaction of all your
Countrymen except one who has heard it with an "unwilling ear" * * * By
advices from Syracuse we learn that Commodore Barron lays in a hopelms
stateMI Eton with the exBasha had reached Syracuse but I have not learnt
what is intended to be done with him - Col Lear haa returned and peace is firmly
established - No farther advices from Tunis - The Bey of A1 icrs they say
has been assassinated and begging you will excuse d l my blunders remain very
faithfully as before W H
No appertrsnce of the John Adams
[LC. EPP, Vol. 15, June-Aug. 1805.1

f

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS
To Secretary of the Bavy from Degen, Purviance & Co., U. S. Bevy Agents,
Leghorn, Italy
2l't June 1806.
LEGHORN
SIR We confirm the foregoing copy of what we had the honour to write you on
the 16+ Instant, since then we have no advice of Mr Eaton's movements.
Captain Robinson of the Enterprize has again put into Venice on his way from
Trieste to Ancona with the loss of one of his Masts * * *
[NDA. Misc. LB, Vol. 3, 1805.1
To Secretary of the Navy from Captain Thomas Tingey, U. S. Navy
NAVYYARDWASHINGTON
d l *+ June 1805
SIR I have this day chartered the Brig Washington, James Croudhill master, to
load with ublic stores for Malta and Syracuse - The Brig is owned by Portia
Hodgson, Renry Knox May, and James Croudhill of Alexandria. I presume on
dispatching her from this place in all the ensuing week.
1000%pay1p here
3000$ pay1? a t Port of Delivery of the cargo

-

$4000
[KDA. Captain's LB, 1'01. 1, 1805.1
Extract from journal of U. S. Frigate Conrlitution. Captain John Rodgers, U. S. Bavy,
commanding, Friday, 21 June 1805
past 1 [P. M.] the first cutter came a long side from Tripoli with
[Off Tripoli]
23 sheep and a quantity of Vegitables for the ships company.
At 7 commodore Rodgers returned from Tripoli. hoisted in the boats.
[USKA.]
To Secretary of State from John Gavino, U. S. Consul, Gibraltar
GIBRALTAR22* June 1805
SIR I have not been honourd with any of yours, since my last adresses A'? 9
under 9% Ins$ On the 14tP Inst proceeded to join the Squadron Gun Boats

N Q 10

Nq 2, 8, & 9 -

On the l G t h Insl arrived the frigate John Adams Cap-haw,
as did that & the
following day Gun Boats N Q3, 6, 6 & 10 - they all proceeded the 18%currt with
the John Adams for Malta & the squadron This day arrived Gun Boat N? 4 Lieut Henly, is actually in the Dock making
use of the Shear Hulk to Mount his Guns, & how soon fills his water & gets some
stores will proceed - inlediately for the squadron. Conlmissioner Otway made
an equal tender of His Maj~pshear Hulk to all the Comms of the other Gunn
Boats, but none made use of i t except Lieut Henley Gun Boat ATq 3 Lieut Maxwell was taken to Alguesirm by the S anish Gunn
5 Lieu* garrison was
Boats, but was imediately released & alord to proceed.
brought too by them in the Gutt & made to follow them off Tariffa, & then alowed
to proceed; there were about 50 Gunn Boats, & 2 arrd a t alguesiras but some Divisions of them seem to have quited the station Sir Jaq Craig has this day received Dispatches from EngQ regarding the proceeding of the Expedition under his Command, but the Contents are kept a
secret -Admiral Collingwood with five sail the Line has reasumed the Blockade of Cadiz
& S1 Lucar, i t is also sayd Cartagena is declared under same state, & that adi
Lord Kieth is coming to the Mediterranean
An Imperial Brig of warr lately arrived from Malta, she with another are noF at
anchor in Alguesiras Bay
25%June - ad1 Sir Rich? Bickerton arrived yesterday wQ 4 ships the Line &
proceeded w* the Ex edition to the East sup osed for Malta - A Report
prevails of the Deg of glgiera having Died - 8 u o Boat NI 4 proceeded yest*
day [NA. SDA. CL, Gibraltar, Vol. 3, 1805-1829.3

TRABACCOLOS

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

133

Argus. At 6 the Sloop which was sent to Duras [Derne] - all well in time of
Peace.
[L. F. Middlebrook. NDA copy.]

Extract from Yemorandnm Book of Captain Edward Preble, U. 6. Ravy, 23 June
1805
SpitjEre sailed Lt. McNiel.
Smacks arrived appointed [sic] called the Ranger and !l'raveller and commenced
fitting for sea. Appointed Mr. Allen Master of the Ranger - and 23d got off for
Portland.
[LC original.]
Extract from journal of Midshipman Charles Morris, Jr., U. S. Navy, on board
U. S. Frigate Pruident. Captain James Barron, U. S. Navy, commanding, Sunday,
23 June 1805
[Syracuse] The U S. Frigate Constellation Brig Argus & Sloop Hornet Amved
from Derne. with the ExBashaw of Tripoli and a number of his adherents on
board [Mrs. C . E. Fox original, NDA photostat.]
[24 June to 8 July 18051
To Captain John Bodgers, U. S. Navy, from Master Commandant Thomas
Robinson, Jr., U. S. Navy
REPORTof a Passage made & Transactions on board the United States Schooner
Enterprzze from Ancona to Syracuse by Thomas Robinson Commander. -

-

1805.
June 24'4
In the Harbour of Ancona having in Charge two Trabacolo's & four Gun Boats
all ready for sea provision'd urater'd &q & waiting for a wind, a t 112 past 4 P. hl.
sent Lt* Hi 'nbothom & Macdonough with Six Pvlen each & Signals to take charge
of the two %abacoloes, - hlessr+ Su-earingen & Magruder hiidshipmen, Reuben
James the most trusty Q Master & Cyrel Bailey an esperienced & Trusty seaman
with four men each to take charge of Gun Boats AT?1 . 2 . 3 $4., Lieut Higinbothom
in Trabacole N P 1 to have in charge & to Tow &c Boat h'? 1. Lieu! hlacdonough
Boat NP4 & the Enterprizes Boats -V?I & 3 thus we left Ancona on the evening
of the 24'h of June with a verry light air. - nothing material transpired this
day, all the Boats in Sight, no Occurrence - worthy of Remark took place further
than the Common duty of Keeping the Boats; supplying with different Necessary articles, casting off, & Picking up again as circumstan[c]es might make
Necessary &q untill the [June] 28tb
when two sail were discovered to windward, by nearing them on our proper
course I found them two Cruisers & from their rigg it u-as evident they were
Turks, I cast off the Boats & left them in Charge of the Tarbacolos, hauled the
wind prepared for action and gave chase, the Conlmodore brought too, I spoke
him, he proved to be a Tunisian Xebec of 16 Guns the other a small one of 10
Guns I returned to my charge & proceeded without any particular happening
until the [June] 30*
when we discovered Six sail which was a British Convoy from Trieste bound t o
Malta as proved by the Boat of the Convoying Vessel that come along side the
Enterprize; (the Jealouse) by her I wrote the Commodore. - i t blew verry
fresh on the
July 24
and a verry heavy sea running, I had all the Gun Boats in tow, Nv 1 & 2 broke
a Drift twas, Impossible to pick them up, order'd them to keep close to the
Enterprize, soon after one of the Tarbacoloes row Boats I had towing a stern
arted & went a drift, wore ship & picked her up after much fati e by Mf
Bigginbathorns boat, - wore several times untill this was accomp&d having

134

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1805 TO 1807

two Gun Boats in tow, stood on again it blowing still harder and a verry heavy
Irregular sea running, a t sun set on the
[July] 34
Gun Boat Ng 2 carried away her Rudder, Cape Otranto bearing S. W. by S,
112 S. ordered h793 t o cast off & keep close to us, blowing then a Gale a t N. N. W.
all the Boats in sight, haul'd up for Cape Otranto to make a lee that we might
secure Gun Boat NP9 it being then Impossible to get from the Trabacolo NP 1
a spare rudder, having a t Aricona prepared two for accidents of this Kind, a t
8 P. M. close under Cape Otranto tolerable smooth unbent the small Bower
Cable and ~ e n the
t end on board NP2 & stood on along the land under verry easy
sail, the Gun Boat sheering alternately broad on each Quarter, entirely Unmanageable, but a t the RIercy of every sea - a t 5 AM. the wind abating & the
sea down, sent for a rudder & shipp'd i t we then Proceeded. - Calms, light
airs & variable until the: [July] 5th
when a t Meridian a Breeze sprung up from the Southd & westd
[July] 6th
The breeze freshen'd run down to Trabacolo N? I. whose fore mast was sprung
on the 24 Inst and appeared non- to be in Dificulty running to leeward, we were
now exactly abreast of the Gulph of Tarento, a t 2 P. hl. spoke him found he had
carried away his main yard, and had not a sail to set except the small Jibb, I
sent our fore-Trisail with a Boatswains mate & six seaman to bend and set it,
which was done and we stood on again slowl-y, the wind shifting to tlie Korth? &
Westd, towards midnight i t blew a Gale, the Schooner labouring verry much,
not able to tow a Boat, all adrift anc! not one in sight, but fiupposing the[y] all saw
our light, kept Just sail enough on the Schooner to keep her clear of the sea which
run high & irregular, a t 4 A. M. the Boats in Sight h-9 1 Trabacolo & 2 Gun Boats
just to be seen from the mast head, run down to them. Spoke Mr Higginbothom
who informed me that in consequence of the sea running so high and not being
able to carry sail his bark laboured B: Rolled verry much & that in one of her
heavy rolls Thomas Rosliill a Seaman belonging to the Enterprize was thrown
overboard by the Tiller & lost. - I sent the Carpenter, Sail maker & Six hands
t o make spars and a sail for his main mast & t o have the Trisail set on his fore
mast, this was compleatcd in a short time & again we Proceeded with all in a
tolerable state, the Gun Boats with their storm sails behaved Remarkably well
during the night tho. i t blew a gale and a verry heavy dangerous sea
July 7tb
The sea down and almost calm, a t 112 past 2 took Gun boat n'?2 in tow who
wanted Provisions &F Supplied her, it being a flat calm, a t 4 tlie Boat in tow
distressing us verry much cast him off, a t 5 a light breeze took him Tow Boat
No 1 , sent canvas & twine on board to mend her sails, a t 7 the land plain to be
the Breeze freshened, a t Midnight Sliorten'd
seen bearing N. W. disq 15 Miles
sail seeing but 3 Boats, and continued so until1 day light when to our astonishment
Gun Boat NQ2 - was missing, made Signal to speak the Trabacoloes, order'd
NQ 2 to make a sail to windward & h7?I to leeward, I laying by, a t 8 AM. no Intelligence I order'd the Trabocolos to take each a Boat in tow & follow, Judging
it useless & dangerous to the other Boats to waste time in a search that had no
probability of success, all supposing the Missing Boat was to windward or a head
a s they generally were found in the mornings, we therefore stood on (she had the
most trusty Quarter Master belonging to the Schooner & another good man with
him & provisions for 10 days) - his getting from us is an extraordinary Circumstance, he was Remarked for managing his Boat well & the Ki ht was by
no means unfavorable i t blew fresh for about two hours after hliini ht, but
nothing in Comparison t o the Preceding night, he was seen a t 12: o ~ l o c fon the
Schooners bow t o lee ward and a head with all, hauling his wind, a t about this
time the Moon went down & we lost sight of the three further off, Shewed a light
& shorten'd sail.
[July] 8'5
Strong gales & variable from the Westward these 24 hours the Enterprize under
Gun Boat N9 1 Broke her rudder Iron, sent the other
low sail for the Boats,
spare Rudder on board hove too & Shi 'd it, then stood on again.
nothing
Material Transpiring further than tbe 8ommon occurrences attending Keeping

-

-

-

-

-

135

WARS WITH BARBMY POWERS

together the Boats, Supplying them with provisions &Q for the particulars of the
weather & V&Q I Refer to the Log Book. Onboard the United States Schooner Enterprize Syracuse harbour July 12.1805.

[NDA.

MC LB, 1804-5.1

To 8ecretery of the Navy from Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Navy
June 24,1806
BOSTOK
SIR On the 18th Inst the Vengeance sailed for the Mediterranean but grounded
on the flatts in the lower harbour; which detained her until the next morning when
she went to sea with a fair wind.
The Spitfire drop'd down the 21qt and was detained by a head wind until yesterday when she departed for her destination - they both sail & work remarkably
well and are in all respects very fine Vesseh - each one carries a 13 Inch sea
service Iron Mortar which weighs about 5 Tons without the beds, 2 long Nine
pounders, twenty Muskets, 24 pistols, 6 Blunderbusses, 24 Boarding pikes, 20
Cutlasses, 20 Boarding Axes, and 25 Men including Officers, with three months
full allowance of Provisions & Water, 500 - 13 Inch Shells weighing 170 each
and 76 whole barrels of high proof Powder. The Mortars, Mortar-Beds and
Shells took up 50 much room that it was found not convenient to send out the
carronades & more men (as was a t first intended) without lumbering & making
them too deep for fast sailing.
Owing to various causes much more time has been taken up in fitting them than
was a t first calculated on, we have had several rainy days, and the Carpenters have
taken every advantage of our necessities as they generally do of every person who
employs them by the day, had they faithfully performed their duty by working as
many hours in a day as they ought, and the Mortar beds had proved sound the
Ketches might have sailed two weeks since, and would have cost less money - in
building vessels more a t Ieisuce this imposition mag be avoided. hfr Brown intends selling the Sails, Anchors, Cabooses and other stores which belonged to the
Ketches when we purchas'd them, this will reduce the expence of their equipment
to about the first calculation.
fig

*

*

*

*

*

*

*

I have purchas'd 2 Smacks one called the Traveller of the Burthen of 36 27/95
Tons, and the other is called the Ranger burthen'd 26 56/95 Tons, the first cost
$1500 and the latter Sf200 they are both handsome little vessels and sail very fast
but from the construction of their wells the greatest part of the Hold is taken into
it, of course they will carry very little more than their provisions & water, there are
thirty-three Bcmb Shells, and some provisions & stores which were provided for
the Ketches more than they could carrv and which will be quite sufficient to load
the smallest smack here, they
both be ready to leave this in ten days, but as the
largest will not carry more than 100 barrels I wish they could both sail directly
from this for Malta as they are very small for Atlantic Vessels, and the season w a
be more favorable than it will if they go to Connecticut river for their cargoes,
particularly if they should meet with unfavorable winds on their passage thither.
I shall have time to hear from you before they will be ready to sail from this. MI
John M e n , commands the Ranger, the other has no Master ss yet but I shall engage one a t Portland and send him here immediately, if you could forward the
Instructions and leave his name blank it would save time. I shall sett off this day
for Portland and return in 8 days.
The drafts of the Gun Boats would long since have been sent on, had they been
return'd from Nembury Port and Portland where they were wanted, they are now
copied at those places & shall be forwarded a.s soon rn I arrive there.
[NDA. Captain's LB, Vol. 1, 1805.1
n 7 i I l

To John Stricker, N a v y Agent, Baltimore, Md.,from Secretary of the Navy
KAVD E PJune
~
s$t@1806
The Brig Hornet mu t be built and equipped for Sea with all practicable disg t c h - I have been %isappointed in procuring in Season Carmnadee for her
e must fit her for the Present with long 97 and give her 2 12r as bow Chasers I have accordingly ordered cap^ Tingey to send you 14.9 pounders & 2 12 pounders
The Guns will be mounted so aa
with Carriages and every necessary apparatus

-

-

136

A7AVA.L OPERATIONS FROM 1806 TO 1807

to fit in Port Holes raised 18 inchea above the Gun Deck - the height which Capt
Tin ey suggested while in Baltimore - If this should not be the exact height of
the%ort Holes of the Hornet above the Gun Deck, inform me what the height may
be that we may regulate the height of the Carriage accordingly
I enclose the Dimensions of the masts and Principal Spars of the Brig - if you
require instructions as to the Rigging, which however I presume you will not let
me know immediately & they shall be forwarded
[NDA. GLB, Vol. 7, 1803-1805.1
To Secretary of the Wavy from Purser Woadiah Morris, U. S. Wavy
HARTFORD,
24tb June 1806.
SIR, I was yesterday honored with your letter of Instructions under date 20th
June which shall in all respect4 be punctually attended to.
Mr Olcott is taking measures for the Shipment of 300 Blls of rovision a t this
place, the residue to be ship'd a t h.. London on account of the ihohoalness of the
Water in this river, a t this Season of the year.
With your permission I would ship some Tobacco for the use of the Fleet - I
know that this necessary article was very scarce a t the time I left, and I likewise
know that i t is extremely difficult to procure in the Mediterranean. Whatever
quantity I may carry can be consigned to Comr9 Barron, in which case, it cannot
subject the Vessel or Cargo to any risk - Your advice on this subject will meet
me a t N. London if forwarded soon after the Recl of this [NDA. O5cers LB, 1802-1805.1

To William Smith, Sr., Navy Agent, Charleston, S. C., from Secretary of the Navy
NAVDEP 24 June 1806
I have received your letter without date, post mark l l t P ins! - You ask
whether i t is not the duty of the agent to employ Carpenters and Supply every
thing that may be needful on application of the Commander of a Vessel of War
or whether the Commander has a right to employ whomsoever he pleases a t what
price he pleases, & otherwise to regulate and determine on the propriety of such
accounts. The Commander of a Vessel of War has no right to make any purchase
or Contract whatever on public account, a t any place where there is a navy agent
unless he should be specially instructed to do so by me - nor has he a right to
employ any mechanic, other than those belonging to the Vessel he commands It is the duty of every Commander when he goes into port where there is an
agent to indent for all his public wants and the agent is to make the necessary
purchases or otherwise furnish the necessary supplies and make all necessary
contracts If the Commander should indent for any thing unnecessary or su er
~ U O U Sthe agent may then with propriety decline attending to such indent
i;
proper that the Commander should approve the accounts for Supplies furnished
upon his indents - this is a General rule operating as a check upon the agent
& mential in the Settlement of his Accounts WDA. GLB, Vol. 7, 1803-1805.1

5

Extract from journal of U. S. Frigate Constitution. Captain John Bodgers, U. 8. Navy,
commanding, Monday, 24 June 1806
At 9 fA. M.] shorten,d sail and came to anchor in the harbour of Malta in 14
fathoms water found lyin here the brig Syren.
[On the 25th a t 10 A.
Mm. Lear came on board.]

d.

Extract from jonrnel of Hezekiah Loomis, Steward, U. S. Wavy, U. 8. Brig V&en.
Ylaeter Commandant John Smith, U. S. Navy, commmding, Monday, 24 June
1806
[Syracuse] This day amved the U. 8. F. E8sex from Tunis. Got in our bowsprit.
[L. F. Middlebrook. NDA copy.]

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

137

To Captain Samuel Barron, U. 6. Navy, from Secretary of the Navy
NAV D E P 66
~ June 1805. I n my letter to you of the 27%March, forwarded by the Provision Vessel the
Ceres, Cap$ Brown, from Baltimore, I informed you that 2 other provision ve88eh
would shortly follow the Ceres - the one from Baltimore, the other from this
lace. The Vessel from Balt? the Ann, Cap$ Smith, sailed shortly after the Ceres.
her I wrote to you under date 16 Apl 1805, informing you among other things,
that the provision Vessel from this place would sail about the let May. This
Vessel, the Huntress, Caps John Stinson, did sail from this place about the 14tP
May, loaded wlth provisions, shot, canvas, cordage, &9 &Q. We have however
reason to believe that the Huntress was seized off our Coast by a Spanish Privateer
and carried into some Spanish or French Port for examination. We have no
authentic account of the seizure of this vessel but from the information we have
received, I deem i t p r o r to provide against such probable contingency. I therefore send out the Brig ashington, Cap*James Croudhill, with provisions, powder,
shot, Medicine &q in which vessel thisletter will be conveyed to the Mediterranean.I n the Huntress a quantity of Marine clothing was sent out, which I understand from the Lieutr ColQCommds will be much wanted by the Marines of the
squadron. Should the Huntress not have arrived on your receiving this Letter
& you should not have heard of her being in the Mediterranean on her way to
Malta or Syracuse to de osit her Cargo, you will upon the requisition of the
Commanding Officer of &wines in the squadron, have clothing provided.
Gun boat NQ7, commanded by Mids* Ogilvie as you will doubtleas have been
advised by Cap* Shaw before this, left Kew Pork in company with the John
Adams and gun boats h 6 and 3 - on the 14t4 May last. The gun boat continued
in company, as Mr Ogilvie informs me, till the 16" when she lost si ht of the frigate
and gun boats. Carrying a press of sail to keep up with the 8hip, a high Sea
running, she sprung her Mast, and was on the 2185 lat. 37.17 long. 65, obliged to
return into port. She arrived in the port of New York on the 30th May. I immediately gave orders for her refitment, & directed that she should proceed on her
voyage to the Mediterranean to join you, and I presume she is now on her way.
Comra Preble by letter of 6% Inst informed me that the 2 Bomb Ketches would
sail in the course of the then ensuing week. 1have not yet heard of their having
sailed, but I presume they have.
[NDA. LB, 1799-1807.1

gy

To Master Commandant Charles Stewart, U. S. Navy, commanding U. S. Brig
Siren, (Malta), from Captain John Rodgers, U. S. Navy
U. STATESSHIP C-titution
Malta June 85'P 1806
SIR The U. States Brig Siren under your command being ready for Sea; you
are desired to take the Store Ship Ann now in this Port under your convoy &
proceed to Syracuse; a t which place you will wait my further orders - as the
Ann is on heavy Demurrage, on your arrival a t Syracuse you will direct MT
Dyson Navy Agent to have the Stores discharged without delay.
[LC. JRP, Letters & Orders, Book A. 1804-1805.1
To William Higgins, U. S. Navy Agent, Malta, from Captain John Rodgers, U. 6.
Navy
Conatilution MALTAMtP June 1806
SIR Please advance to Messv Shepherd and Reed (Midshipmen) in charge of
the Tunetian Xebecque & her two prizes, sent into t b s Port by the ConstJutwn,
each with $38 (two months pay) which plesse charge against them, in the settlement of the disbursements of said Vessels. [LC. JRP, Letters & Orders, Book A, 1804-1805.1
To Sir Alexander John Ball, Governor of Malta, from Captain John Rodgers,
U. S. Navy
t'.S. SHIP Constitution
Malta June 86Q 1806
SIR, On the 7'P Inst in this Port. I was called upon by the Ottoman Consul
&the Captain of the Ottoman Corvette then her[e], to require of me my determlnation respecting the Ketuh Gheretti and the two Vessels under Ottoman C010ur8,

138

NAVAL OPERATlONS FROM 1806 TO 1807

loaded with Corn and sent into this Port by the American Squadron, under orders
of my predecessor Commo: Barron, for a violation of the Blockade of Tripoli,
the particulars of which you are acquainted with tlirough the medium of said
officer - I n answer to the Ottoman Consuls request, I informed him that I
momently expected the arrival of a Frigate from the U. States, by which I had no
doubt but that I should receive advices from my Goverment on the question in
dispute, but that if contrary to my expectations, I did not receive their orders on
the subject, within the period of Ten Days, that I would take upon myself to
determine the fate of the Vessels in question and give my answer accordingly;
however I am yet prevented from coming to this conclusion by having this Day
received information from my Goverment, of the sailing of one of our Frigates
for the Mediterranean, and by which I have reaqon to believe that I shall receive
instructions relative to said Vessels. I am extremely sorry that any circumstance should have occurred with us to give your Excellency so much trouble,
and one which I am under the necessity of augmenting by requesting as the same
Corvette is to call here to know the result of my determination, that your Excellency will have the goodness to make known to the Ottoman Goverment the
cause of my not giving a final answer. [NDA. Captain's LB, Vol. 1, 1803.1

To Captain James Croudhill, commanding American Provision Brig Washington,
from Secretary of the Navy
NAVD E PJune
~
26th 1806
As soon as the Brig Trashington shall be ready to sail you will weigh anchor
and Proceed direct to Malta On your arrival a t malta you will wait on f iiliam
Higgins Esq navy agent a t that place deliver to him the enclosed letter addressed
to him and take his directions as to the dispositicn of the Cargo - Should he
direct you to proceed to Syracuse with a part or the Whole of your cargo you will
then Weigh anchor and proceed immediately to that place & on your arrival
there Wait on George Dyson Esq navy agent deliver to him the enclosed letter
addressed to him and land your cargo under his directions Should you land the
Whole of your Cargo at malta you will in that case deliver to IT'v Higgins Esq
the letter addressed to Geo Dyson Esq as well as the One addressed to himself
I enclose passports from the President of the United States & the Ministers of
Great Britain, Fran & Spacein
[KDA. GLB, Vol. 7, 1803-1805.1
w

Extracts ffom journal of Midshipman Charles Morris, Jr., U. S. Navy, on board
U. 6 . Frigate President. Captain James Barron, U. S. Navy, commanding, Tuesday,
25 June 1805
[Syracuse] People employed as yesterday The U S. Frigate Essez, Capt
Cox, from Tunis.
Kine men unfit for duty
[Mrs. C. E. Fox original, NDA photostat.]
To Captain Samuel Barron, U. S. Navy, from Briggs Brothers
ALEXANDBIA
EGYPT26 June 1806.
SIR! We had the honor to address you on the 11 March on thc Subject of our
Disbursements to Mr Eaton, for Account of the United States, amounting to the
sum of Thirteen Thousand Spanish Dollars.
On the 2 May, we transmitted to You a Duplicate of that Letter, by His
Britk Majr Sloop Jalouse, via Malta.
Much to our regret & disappointment, our Disbursement is Still protracted.
We presume, the exigencies of the Service, have rendered it necessary to apply
to other purposes, the fund intended by Mr Eaton for the extinction of our
Claims; - but as we Suffer much inconvenience by this unexpected delay, we
trust that immediate messures will be taken for our repayment.
[LC. JRP, Vol. 2, Series Two, May-Oct. 1805.1

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS
To Secretary of the Navy from JVilliam Kirkpatrick, U. 6. Consul, Halaga, Spain
MALAGA
26th June 1806.
SIR Your respected Letter of the 16* April reached me on the 8'h June, it
inclosed copy of what Mr R. W. Meade of Cadiz had written on the 20th August
last, to John Gavino Esqr of Gibraltar on the subject of Charles Borny Aliaa
Mare Vigna, who had committed a forgery by drawing Bills to a very considerable
amount in the name of Commodore Edward Preble on Messrs Mackenzie &
Glennie of London, who paid them for account of Government, out of monies
deposited in their hands.
I have deferr'd until non7my reply, in expectation of being able to collect some
information about Rlare Vigna, but I am sorry to say no such Person of the description pointed out, has been known here; to a certainty he is not in this City,
and I am apt to believe, if he lately called here, it must have been only for a few
days, none of his Countrymen with whom I have spoken are acquainted with
him; I presume after having recovered the money in Cadiz, that he must have
taken himself off with it to some distant quarter for fear of detection
I shall however, you may depend, continue my inquirias, and should I chance
to find him out, have the man apprehended until proofs can be sent forward from
Gibraltar, Cadiz, or America, for proceeding against him, and endeavour to
of, in such an iniauitous
recover a part, or the whole of the money- he got
- possission
manner
I take the liberty of inclosing an order of Lieut Ralph Izard of the Vnited
States Brig Scourge, dated 16tb december past, in favor of John Vanniman for
$24 which I paid, and have charged the a.mount in my acco! of Expenditures for
account of Government transmitted to our Minister in Madrid.
[NDA. Misc. LB, Vol. 3, 1805.1
a

.

To Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Navy, from Secretary of the Navy
XAVDEP26 J u n e 1805
SIR For your information I enclose a copy of my letter to G. Harrison esq of this
day, upon the subject of the medal voted by Congress for you.
K B. Medals for Crowned Heads never exceed three Inches - R S.
[LC. EPP, Vol. 15, June-Aug. 1805.1
To George Harrison, Navy Agent and Superintendent of Navy Yard, Philadelphia,
Pa., from Secretary of the Navy
NAVD E P June
~
26th 1805
I have receired your letter accompanied by drawings of the Medal for Commodore Preble - h now return you the Conlmodores likeness and one of the
drawings sent to me by you - I approve the drawings excepting as to Size which
appears to me to be too large - I doubt whether any die can be made to impress
so large a Surface - We Should depart too fro111 General Custom by making this
medal so large - The Medal Yoted by the Oid Congress for Gen! Washington was
3 inches diameter - Those for General Greene Gates $9 were 2 3 inches
and
those for Morgan, Wayne $9 were 2 inches - The drawings of the Medal for
Commodore Preble are 4 inches I have no objection to the Medal for Cornre Preble being 2% inches - confer
with artists on this Subject and let me hear from you - I t is my determination to
have it made by Mr Reich and you may so inform him, that he may not engage in
other business to interfere with this [NDA. GLB, Vol. 7, 1803-1805.1

-

Extract from journal of U. S. Frigate Constitution, Captain John Rodgers, U. S. Navy,
commanding, Wednesday, 26 June 1805
[Malta] At 7 [A. M.] the wind hauling to the Eastwd shortend sail and let go the
starbe anchor in 13 fathoms waters. 5; past 8 light airs from the south4 & EastwQ
weighd made sail and stood out of the harbour.

[USNA.]

140

h7AVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1806 TO 1807

To Master Commandant Issac Chauncey, U. S. Bavy, Mew York, 8. Y., from
Becretary of the Bavy
~ June 1805. Nav D E P87
It, is proper to inform you that in a few days you will be called into actual
service. Prepare therefore for orders, I shall probably give you the command of
the Brig H m t now building a t B a l t ~ The Agent has stated that she will be
bunched about the i5* of the ensuing Month. [NDA. OSW, Vol. 6, 1802-1805.1
Extract from journal of U. S. Frigate Comlitufion, Captain John Eodgers, U. 8. Maw,
commanding, Thursday, 27 June 1805
Standing in for Syracuse. At Meridian pleasant wr Shortened sail came too
with the starbd bower anchor in 55 fathoms water. the south oint a t the entrance
found laying here
of the harbour bearing S E % E. the Northern point E B S
the US. Frigates Presidenl Congress Constellation & Easa & brigs Argus and
Vizen. [Word illegible] Hornet.
[On 28 June, a t 8 A. M., the Siren arrived.]

&.

Extracts from journal of ]Ididshipman Charles Morrjs, Jr., U. 6. Navy, on board
U. 6. Frigate Pruident. Captain James Barron, U.S. Navy, commanding, Thursday,
27 Jnne 1805
[Syracuse] The U S. F. Constitution arrived from Tripoli -Col~ Lear & Lady
on board [Mrs. C. E. Fox original, NDA photostat.]
Extract from journal of Herekiah Loomis, Steward, U. S. Navy, U. S. Brig Vixen,
Master Commandant John Smith,U. S. Eavy, commanding, Thursday, 27 Jnne
1805
Got underway and cruised around in the harbour [Syracuse]. At 11 o'clock
arrived U. S. F. Constduiion, Commodore Ro[d]gers. I received from Mr. Dyson
8 b b k bread and was t o have taken a cask of spirits, but our getting underway
prevented.
[L.F. Middlebrook. NDA copy.]
(28 June 18051
To Master Commandant John! H. Dent, U. I. Navy, from Cavaliere Giorgio
Guillichini, Governor of Messina
SIR The Proauditor of war charged by the Government of the kingdom of
SiciIy t o com ile the process against the American Officer named Charles L.
Ridgely who gemg on board the Schooner of war under your command. uaa
imputed guilty of the homicide committed in Messina the evening of the 23. of
Janr 1805. on the person of the mate of an English Transport has sent an Official
letter shewing i t to be indispensable for the compilation of the Process to require
the depositions of the Officer who was on guard, of the subaltern Offjcers who were
on service the above mentioned evening on board the said Schooner, and of the
boy that served the above mentioned Charles L. Ridgely and solicits measures
for the execution thereof
Thus circumstanced I address my self to you, and manifest to you the formal
demand which has been made to me by the Proauditor of war in order that the
execution thereof may serve as a base for the process in question, and accelerate its
conclusion
Assured of your zeal on this occasion I subscribe myself with real esteem
MESSINA28, JUNE1805
[LC. JRP, Vol. 2, Series Two, May-Oct. 1805.1

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

141

TO Cavaliere Giorgio Guillichini, Governor of Messina, from Master Commandsnt
John H. Dent, U. S. Navy
MESSINA28 June 1805.
SIR I am honoured with your letter of this day and a eeable to your request
I shall direct the officer who was on guard on board the
S. Schooner Nautilus
under my command on the evening of the 23. of January to wait upon you tomorrow morning a t 10 0 Clock with the Servant who attended in the Gun Room
in order that the may answer such questions as you may think proper to make
them respecting
Ridgely; but I am sorry that 1 have it not in my oaer to
com ly with the latter part of your request, namely for the non c o d B ~ c e of
r
the Garinea on guard a t the same time, he having been killed in an aotion a t
Derna
[LC. JRP, Vol. 2, Series Two, May-Oct. 1805.1

%.

[28 June 18051
Passport for American Provision Brig Wmhington
THOMAS
JEFFERSOK,
President of the U . S. of America.
To aU whom it may concern.
Know ye that the American Brig Vashinqton whereof is Master James Croudhell,
a Citizen of the U. States is bound from the River Potomac for Malta & Syracuse,
with a Cargo of Naval and Military stores and provisions, for the use of the
Squadron of the United States now in the Mediterranean. Wherefore I request
all whom it may concern not to give or suffer to be given to her any hindrance or
moleatation but on the contrary to afford her every aid & facility she may need
in the prosecution of her voyage.
In faith whereof I have hereunto set my hand & caused the seal of the United
States to be hereunto aExed. Done a t the City of Washington this 28th day of
June A D 1805, and of the Independence of the U. States of America the Twenty
ninth.
TH: JEFFERSON
By the PRESIDENT
JAMESMa~~so~-Secretary
of State.
[NA. SDA. Dom. L, Vol. 15, June 1805-July 1810.1
Extract from journal of Midshipman Charles Morris, Jr., U. S. Navy, on board
U. S. Frigate President. Captain James Barron, U. S. Navy, commanding, Friday,
28 June 1805
[Syracuse] Arrived the U S Brig Syren and a Store Ship [Ann] from Gibraltar
[Mrs. C. E. Fox original, XDA photostat.]
To Captain James Barron, U. S. Navy, commanding U. S. Frigate President, from
Captain John Rodgers, U. S. Navy
U. STATESSHIP Constitution
Syracuse June 89* 1806
SIR I am authorised by the honorable the Secretary of the Navy, to direct
that, on board the U. States Frigate President under your command; you convene
a Court of Enquiery on Captain William Bainbridge, late commander of the U.
Sta* Frigate the Philadelphia, for the loss of said Frigate, and that you report
to jme in proper form the whole extent of the enquierys of said Court, with
ih decided opinion thereon - In order that I may transmit the same to the
Navy Department of the U. States - The Court of enquiery will consist of
three Members, yourself, and Capts Hugh G. Campbell & Stephen Decatur JI
[LC. JRP, Letters & Orders, Book A, 1804-1805.1

'

142

NAVAL OPERATIOATS FROM 1805 TO 1807

To Captain Hugh G. Campbell, U. S. Navy, commanding U. S. Frigate ConslcUalion,
from Captain John Rodgers, U. S. Navy
U. STATESSHIP Constitution
Syracuse June 29tb 1806
SIR, I have in my possession Commissions for the Midshipmen, whose Names
are hereunto subjoined, with orders to deliver them as soon as they shall have
passed an Examination, touching their qualifications as Lieutenants; I have
therefore to request you will convene a Board of Captains & Masters commandant
& commence this examination as soon as convenient Their Commissions are
dated on the same Day & their relative rank is to be established by numbers,
annexed to the Commissions. It will therefore be proper, that in making the
retrnu you affix to each name, the opirlion of the Board, with respect to their
Talents & pretentions to Seniorit,y of Itank.
[LC. JRP, L Bk B, May 1805-July 1896.1
To Captain Hugh G. Campbell, U. S. Navy, commanding U. S. Frigate Constellalion,
from Captain John Rodgers, U. S. Navy
U. STATESSHIP Constitution
Syracuse June 2gtb 1805
SIR Since directing you to convenc the Board of Examination, I have iven
Capt: James Barron an order to assemble a Court of enquiry on Capt: %ainbridge - you therefore will be pleased to defer the examination of these Officers,
until the case of Captain Uainbridge is finished.
[LC. JRP, L Bk B, hlay 1805-July 1806.1
To Captein John Bodgers, U. S. Navy, from Xarcello de Gregorio, Governor of
Syracuse
SYRACUSE
29 June 1806
T o Youa EXCELLT
I a m Just inform'd by sundry inhabitants of this City of a General alarm
existing on account of the great number of Turks landed from the Squadron
under vour Command & who inhabit a house in one of the lalies of sP Citv. I am
implor&!
to grant means of protection & security to them & their famil&who
dread the serious Consequences in this situation for the preservation of Good order & tranquility of said inhabitants I pray your Ex? that the s$ Turks may he rcembark'd, with the
exception of the Bashaw & suit, certain of your concup I am most obsequiously
your obliged & devoted ser
[LC. JRP, L Bk B, May 1805July 1806.1
[29 June 18051
To Captain John Rodgers, U. 6. Mavy, from Xfarcello de Gregorio, Governor of
Syracuse
EXCELLENCY
I have just received m o ~ turgent sollicitations in behalf of the
inhabitants of this city who are terrified by the number of the Turks who have
landed from your squadron and Settled in a certain quarter of this city and these
aforesaid citizens implore me by the careful foresight due them from me to assure
the safety of themselves and their families for they are apprehensive of the
gravest consequences (from the presence of these men).
I n which state of affairs I find myself obliged, in order t o assure the preservation
of good order, and to free the citizens from such alarm as I have described, to
beg your Excellency that the Turks may be again takcn on shipboard, unless i t
be the Pasha F a m e t ] and some one of his suite. Feeling assured that your
Excellency will take pleasure in assisting me t o allay such an alarm, I sign myself,
full of the most unvarying regard and respect.
SYRACUSE
29 JUNE
1805.
[LC. JRP, Vol. 2, Series Two, May-Oct. 1805.1

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS
To Captain Hugh 6. Campbell, U. 6. Bavy, commanding U. S. Frigate CorrjeIIaf~on.
from Captain John Rodgers, U. 6. Bavy
U. States Ship Constitution
Syracuse June 29. 1805
SIR, I have t o desire that you have all the Turks Embarked on board the
Constellation (The Bashaw Hamed & suite Excepted) which were debarked from
that Ship yesterday [LC. JRP, Letters & Orders, Book A, 1804-1805.1

To Captain Hugh G. CampbelI, U. S. Navy, commanding U. S. Frigate Conste~hfion.
from Captain John Rodgers, U. 6. Navy
Constitution. SYRACCSE
June 99. 1806
SIR Agreeable to your wish you are directed to distribute the Turks which
you have onboard; duly apportioned among the different TesseIs of the Squadron
for subsistance, inti1 farther orders. [LC. JILP, Letters & Orders, Book A, 1804-1805.1

To George Davis, U. S. Charge d'Affaires, Tunis, from Captain fohn Rodgers,
U. 8 . Nsvy
U . S . S H I P Constitution
Syracuse June 29t4 1805
SIR,Tour letter of the 20th Instant by the Essez Captp Cox, I have received, &
least you should again meet with embarrassment, by my not being sufficiently
explicit in my communications, I sball in future express myself in such language,
as cannot be misunderstood. "You inform me that liis Excellency the Bey of Tunis, absolutelp insists
on the restoration of the Vessels, (Xebecque and her two prizes sent into
Malta by the Constztution) and charges you t o say that he will never cease
from his demands whatever may be the issue. -"
In ansurer t o His Escellenoy on that particular head; you will be pleased t o
inform him that it is my sincere wish, to see a better understanding between
him & the U. States, than has existed for a considerable time past; but altho as
great BS this desire may be, that, I never will so far neglect my duty as to restore
even the Vessels he requires, m11ch ntore an indemnity for their detention: and I
have only to add that
His Escelleney has been for some time past in the habit
of threatening u s nritll T a r , n-ithout any risible pretest, that I am now determined to know from him in plazn hngzrnge, what is weant by such unpronoked
menace and insult - If \Tar is his objert, 1 shall be obliged to meet it - If
he urishesPeace & good understanding with the G. States, i t is rn? duty to say
that my concurrence will meet his at least half way, in obtainance of two object^
so evidently the Interest of both h-ations. [XDA. Captain's LB, 1-01, 1 , 1805.1
To Captain Samuel Barron, U. S. Navy, from l a s t e r Commandant Thomas
Robinson, Jr,. U. S. Navp
U S SCEOONER
Enterprize
MAFFREDONIA
BEARIXC. l \ ~ B SDIST,11 LEA. - CALM
June 2'9. 1805
DEARSIR,I left Ancona on tile 23 Caln~ssince. I hare astern 4 Gun Boats in
tow & two Trobacalocs conducted by Mess- Rigginbottom 8. 11I$Donougir, a
light hreeee is Springing up from the h'E God Send an increase - I shall go
to Syracuse & then: must leave the Boats for your Orders. I have not hands
enough to venture farther with them - the Jealouse takes this perhaps he
may have a aslant 6 beat me, if so & you are in Malta make some provision for
taking these Boats t o the scene of Action if you p l w e its impossible for me, its
with g ~ a difficulty
t
I get them on [LC. JRP, Vol. 1, March 1791-Dcc. 1814.1

144

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1805 TO 1807

Extract from journal of Midshipman Charles Morris, Jr., U. S. Navy, on board
U.6. Frigate President, Captain James Barron, U. 6. Aavy, commanding, Saturday,
29June 1805
[Syracuse] A Court of Enquiry was held on board, to Enquire into the particulars of the loss of the Philadelphia. The Court consisting of Capt? J. Barmn,
Campbell & Decstur after sitting four hours, unanimously agreed that no blame
could be attached to Capt Bainbridge or hir; Officers for the loss of said ship [Mrs.C.E. Fox original, KDA photostat.]

Extract from journal of Heaekiah Loomis, Steward, U. S. Navy, U. S. Brig Vixen,
Master Commandant John Smith, U. 6. Navy, commanding, Saturday, 29 June
1805
[Syracuse] This day the Captains all had an examination on board the Commodore, Capt. Bainbridge tried and honorably acquitted.
[L. F. Middlebrook. K D A copy.]
To Captain John Rodgers, U. S. Navy, from WilIiam Eaton, U. S. Eavy Agent for
the Barbary Regencies
SYRACUSE
June SOtb 1806 SIR I have been yesterday & today occupied with the proceedings & records
of the Court of enquiry on Captain Bainbridge, which is the reason I did not wait
on you on board Yesterday Morning
Inclos'd is a copy, by translation, of a letter Hamet Bashaw has written me,
date 29'P
This, I think, is enough to do anyay any insinuations, concerning our
intercourse with this Prince, injurious to the honor of the United States.
He tells me he shall write to the same effect, to the President
Tomorrow morning I will do myself the honor to wait on you with a statement
of the pay due the troops who served with me through the Desert and a t nerne
[NDA. Captain's LB, Vol. 3, 1805.1
[Enclosure1

(29June 18051
To William Baton, U. S. Navy Agent for the Barbary Regencies, from Eamet
Caramanli, rightful Bashaw of Tripoli
TBANSLATED COPY O F A LETTER FROM HAMET B A S H A T

HAMET
BASHAW
COROMELLI
to his friend and brother FVILLIAM EATON
late General
& Commander zn chief of our allzed forces In our Kingdom of Tripoli -

Without placing in view the misfortunes which so long pursued me, I cannot
forbear expressing to you, a t this moment of our final seperation, the deep sense
of gratitude I feel for your generous and manly exertions in my behalf. be
assured, that in whatever situation the wil! of God shall place me, I shall always
bear this impression of gratitude on my heart.
On returning to your happy Country, to which I wish you a safe passage, I
request you will express to your Sovereign my cordial thanks for his manifestation
of friendship towards me - Had it been ordained that measures might have
been camed forward to the attainment of my wishes, the restoration of my rightful
Dominions, to me i t would certainly have been cause of eternal gratitude. But
it b true my own means were small. I know indeed they did not answer your
reasonable expectations. And this I am rendy to admit is a good reason whv
you should not chuse to persevere in an enterprize hazardous in itself, and,
perhaps, doubtful in its issue. I ought therefore to say that I am satisfied with
all your Sation has done concerning me - I submit to the will of God; and
thank the King of America and dl his servants for their kind dispositions towards
me - Situated as I a m you must still allow me to ask another expression of
your friendship. You tell me that in your treaty with Joseph Bwhaw, my
perfidious brother, he has promised to restore to me my family. I pray you will
use your infiuence with your admiral to permit one of your vessels to go and a&
for them; and that he will give me the means of repairing, with some small sssiee
ance to enable me to subsist myself & suit, into some Country where I may Lope
t o spend the residue of my Days in Peace. -

WAXS WITH BARBARY POWERS

145

Again I repeat to you my Love and esteem - and I send honor and long Iife to
your Sovereign, which may the merciful God confirm to him.
Done a t Syracuae the 29 day of June 1805

(HAMETS
SEAL)
[NA. Sen. 9B-B6, Pres. Message, Jan. 1806.1

To Captain Isaac Hull, U. 6. Havy, commanding U. S. Brig Argus. from Captain
John Bodgers, 0. 8. Bavy
U. STATES
SHIPCmtduiiO?Z
Syrocuse 90 June 1806
SIR, I have this Day directed Mr Richard Jones, Midshipman of the late U.
States Frigate Phzladelphza, t o report himself to you, ss being ordered to join the
Argus under your command.
[LC. JRP, Letters & Orders, Book A, 1804-1805.1
To Captain James Barron, U. 8. Navy, commanding U. S. Frigate PruiLent, from
Captain John Bodgers, U. S. Navy
G. STATES
SHIPComlitution
Syracuse SO* June 1806
SIR I n consequence of the enclosed representation of Lieut 3. Blake (dtho
pleased with his conduct since he has been attached to this Ship) I am induced
to direct, as due to himself, his friends & the service; that you convene a Court of
Enquire into the merits of the representations with which he alledges that his
character has been aspersed, and report to me the full extent of such Enquiery
with the opinion of the Court thereon, in order that I may adopt such measures
as the nature of the case requires - In order that this unpleasant atlair may be
fairly & fully investigated I have to desire that you inform the commanding
Officers of the respective Vewla of the Squadron, now in this Port, when such
Investigation is to take place; I n order that the circumstance may be publicly
known to all officers, whose situations could have afforded them any Knowledge
of his conduct on the 3'5 of August 1804, the Day in h
i
s Letter to which he
alludes P. S. The Court of Investigation aiU be convened on board the U.S. Frigate
President under your command. - 3 I3
[LC. JRP, Letters $ Orders, Book A, 1804-1805.1

Extract from journal of Eezekiah Loomis, Steward, U. 8. Navy, U. 8. Brig Vixen.
Master Commandant John Smith, U. 6. Navy, commanding, Sunday, SO Sane
1805
blustered the men and informed that Capt. Smith was going on board the
Syren, and if they had a desire to go with them to make i t known t o ~ ~ o r r o w
morning.
[L. F. Middlebrook. K D A copy.]
[June 18051
Memoranda presumably by William Eston, U. 6. Navy Agent for the Barbary
Regencies
1804.
The
President
said
to
me no money would be otfered for the peace
May
or ransom: he believed the energetic messures now arranged would
supercede the necessity - I pledged my life & honor to bring the
enemy to America if the cooperation with the legitimate sovereign
should be properly supported.
6'
(1
The Secretary of the Navy a i d t o me that the coercive measures
uow going into operation against Tripoli were calculated to compel
a peace n~ithoutmoney that The cooperation with Hamet Beshaw
formed a part of the means and that necessary field artiiery, IOOO
stands of arms, with suitable munition, and 40, or 50 thousand
dollars wouid be put on board the squadron at Hampton roads to
aid and ive effect to this measure 11
II
Captain
declared publicly a t the offices that his noma
should be written i n blood on the walls of W p d i before he would con-

%edgers

146

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1805 TO 1807

sent to pay a cent for ransom or tribute - Such were the resolutions formed when I left the seat of Gov. t o embark in the erpedition and subsequent arrangements as well of Government as of the
chief commanders evidence a determination t o persevere in those
resolutions Nov. 1804. The plan of operations the ensuing season was agreed upon by the
Commodores Barron's Preble and myself - I was to go in search
of Hamet Bashaw t o Egypt & sieze the province of Derne, if possible,
on our return - whence we were to pass to Uengazi and t o be
transported across the gulf of Sidra to Cape Mensurat by the
squadron - and thence advance t o the rear of Tripoli - We
were to be supported by debarkations if necessary - Commodore
Preble was to causc a reenforcement of gun boats and ketches t o be
provided and a union of operations was to commence against
Tripoli as soon as the season would permit - Our plans ~ u c ceeded - Derne was captured 8: the enemy's army, sent to the
relief of the province, was defeated - Our march was opened to
Tripoli without opposition - The reenforcements, arrived in
good season - The enemy could not recruit troops for the defence
of his capital - the people of the country being paralized by dread
of the Americans and in a state of General revolt against the usurper
he was totally destitute of funds and provision - and in want of
amunition.
May & June hlr Lear had distinct instructions not to pay money for peace or
ransom except compelled by adverse circumstances in our military
1805.
operations - And, pre\iously to the conclusion of the treaty, the
Commodore had been instructed to suspend his attack on Tripoli,
until the first of July, for the arrival of the reenforcements. When
the negociator appeared off Tripoli Bc displayed the flag of truce.
There was then but one frigate before the place with a brig or
schooner - The Essex, which bore the flag, had not been before
the coast - &, what is very extraordinary, in similar cases arrangements had been mad? a t headquarters to abandon the commanding
grounds we held in the enemy's dominions and to n.itlitlran* the
main body of the squadron a t a farther distance from the coast
before our commissioner of peace departed from [Jlalta?] to enter
upon the negociation [H. E. Huntington L&AG, E A 281.1
To Captain Stephen Decatur, Jr., U. S. Navy, commanding U. S. S. Congress, from
Captain John Rodgers, U. S. Navy
U. 8. SHIPConst~tulzon
Syrnczr.se I n %
J u l y I805 SIR The U. States Frigate Congress under pour command b ~ i n gready for Sea,
I have to desire that you proceed to Tunis with all practicable dispatch and hand
Mr Davis, U. States charge d'affairs, the accompanying Lctter apprehensions of Danger to our Commerce from the Beys cn~izcrs,concieving
that War with the C. States may be his Intention, induces me to direct that you
cruize a t the enterarice of the Bey of Tunis, to prevent any impending danger to
our Trade, which a t a moment when off our guard, he may seize as favourable t o
his piratical Intentions, & do us much injury beforc a force can be sent - to
obviate his dark unmanly design The Vizen I shall dispatch to join you in the course of 3 or 4 Day9 after ynur
departure; and her amval, if you are thoroughly ronvinced that War is not the
Beys Intention, you are desired to return to this Port, leaving the I'zzen on your
Station; In your passage hence calling a t hlalta, a t which place it is not impossible
you may meet me with the rest of the Squadron [LC. JRP, Letters & Orders, Book A, 1804-1805.1
To the Bey of Tunis, from Captain John Rodgers, U. S. Navy
U. S. SHIPConst~tution
Syraczlse July l e t 1806
T o the Most Illustrious & most Magnificent PRINCE
THE BEYOF TUNIS,the abode
of happzness. SIX, I have the honor t o ac uaint your Excellency that the command of the
U- States Naval forces in the %editex~ancan has devolved on me since the 224

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

147

of May last and that the contents of your Letter to Commodore Barron of the
28'4 of the same Month, on the subject of the Xebecque & her two prizes sent into
Malta by the U. States Frigate Constitution for a violation of the Blockade of
You mention that said Xebecque
Tripoli, I have been made acquainted withis Tunetian property, and t b t the Crews of her & her two prizes are Tunetian
property and your vassals; insisting a t the same time, as appears by the complexion
of your language, that you alone have the right to determine what is due to the
U. States of America, in a case wherein your Subjects hare assassinated that
friendship which you profess to feel for said States, by the most glaring insult
and unprovoked ,injury that the nature of their relative situations would admit f n reply to your Excellency on this particular question, permit me to say that it
is not my wish only, but a duty which the President of the U. States has enjoined
on me, to respect your legal rights, & to use all honorable means in my power to
maintain friendship & a good understanding with yourself L your subjects, and
not on any account to give you cause to consider the Goverment or Citizens of
the U. States in any other shape than ss your sincere friends, yet nevertheless
your subjects have so often since we have been a t War with Tripoli, abused that
respect and friendship which I was directed in so particular a manner to observe,
by their so flagrantly and repeatedly adding insult toin jury, that they themselves
appear not to be sensible that any respectful considerations are due from them to
the United States. Wittiout dwelling on a subject which from the duty I am pledged by honor,
Interest & inclination, t o perform in support of the Independence and legal rights
of my Country, I have only to answer your Excellency that a compliance with
your demand8 of the Xebecque and her two prizes is totally inadmissable. I r~everthelessflatter myself that your Excellency on taking a fair and impartial
view of the subject, will percieve that the measure you have coniplained of is
such, as justly authorizes the means I have adopted, to convince you that your
subjects shall no longer infringe our Rights with impunity. fN0.4. Captain's LB, Vol. 1, 1805.1

[I July 18051
Receipt signed by Captain John Rodgers, U. S. Navy
Rec'd Syracuse July Ist 1805, from Mr Robert Dennison, by order of Sam1
Barren Esqr late commander in chief ,of the C . States Squadron in the Mediterranean, nine Sheets of Paper contaming Interrogations relative to the three
Ottoman & Russian Vessels, captured and sent into hlalta in Septemr last;
together R-ithone piece Gold, Two hundred 8 twenty six Ijieces of Silver 8- Sixteen
ieces of Copper, belonging to the Tunitis11 Xebecque, captured and sent hto
L a l t a by the Ccm&tulzon; J s o one Iron Chest [Mrs.James S. Earron Col.]
To William Higgins, TJ. 13. Navy Agent, lalta, from Captain John Rodgera, IJ. S.
Navy
S. S. SEIPConstilution
Syracuse l a g July 1805
SIR Not being able to procure Money st this place in time ta answer some
Immediate purposes, I have directed the Vizen, Cap, Cox, to Malts, with a Draft
on you for $20,000 Spanish Dollars - The Money is required Immediatelv, &
if the whole h'umber of DolIara cannot be procured; rather than detain the
Vessel, you will be pleased to send a part in such Gold, as passes most current in
this Island.
[LC. JRP, L Bk B, &lay 1805-July 1806.1

To Captain John Bodgers, U. 6. Navy, from Captain John Hall, U. S. Marine Corps
U S. FRIGATEBe8ident
Harbour of Syvacvsc la*July 1805

SIR i beg lwve to mention to you the state of the different Detachments in the
I think it will be necessary fo make some little alterations in some
Squadron,
of them

-

148

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1806 TO 1807

From a report made to me b L+ OBannon there is wanted to compleat his
Detachment One Drummer One h e r & Twelve Privates - for the Siren Eight
Privates & for the Vizen six Privates There is now Sir on board of the Essez Twenty two Marines that were on board
the 1ate.U S: Frigate Phila* that might be distributed among those Vessels as Lt
Amory 1s not in want of them [LC. JRP, Vol. 1, March 1791-Dec. 1814.1
To Surgeon Samuel B. Marshall, U. 8. Bavy, from Captain John Rodgers, U. 13.
Navy
U. STATESSHIP C ~ t u ~ t i t ~ t i o n
Syracuse I July 1806
SIB The Surgency on board the U. States Ship President, being vacant, you are
hereby desired to report yourself to Capt: James Barron as belng dlrected to join
said Ship, under his command as Surgeon [LC. JRP, Letters & Orders, Book A, 1804-1805.1
To Lieutenant Jacob Jones, U. S. Navy, from Captain John Bodgere, U. 6. Navy
U. S. SHIP Constitution
Syracuse 1 July 1806
Sir You will please transfer the orders giving you on the 12th of June, to Mr Wfp
Knight Sailing Master of the late Frigate Phzlad*, & give him charge of the
Brig - taking the necessary receipts
[LC. JRP, Letters & Orders, Book A, 1804-1805.1
To Captain Hugh G. Campbell, U. S. Navy, commanding U. S. Frigate Comlellation.
from Captain John Bodgers, U. S. Navy
U. STATESSHIP Cmtittdion
July 1 , 1806. Syacwre.
SIR YOUare desired to adjourn the Board of Examination directed on the 29tP
June, for the Examination of certain Midshipmen, having pretentions to Lieutenancy's, & attend to such Summons as Capt Barron may direct in the case of an
Enquiery on the conduct of Lieutt Blake, of which he is the Senior Officer [LC. J R P , Letters d: Orders, Book A, 1804-1805.1
[l July 18053
To John Broadbent, U. 6. Bavy Agent, lessina, from Cavaliere Qiorgio Quillichini,
Governor of Messina
SIR I n order that the process against the American Officer confined in this
Royal Cittadel may be fornished with the correspondent acts, in conformity with
the laws, i t is necessary that all the subaltern Officers,and Officers of the Schooner
dressed in the eame manner as the said confined Officer should go in to the Cittadel
tomorrow morning a t eight O'clock in order that, being all united, they may be
recognised and it may be seen, if amongst them, the Military individuals who were
on guard the evening of the 23. of last Jan? may know again the two aggrewors
accused of the homicide on the person of the English mate, which happened in
the same evening of the 23. of Janu. I inform you of this in order that you may
be plessed to fix with the Commander of the Schooner that the cited individuals
go to the Cittadel a t eight OIClock.
MBBBINA1st JULY1805.
LC. JRP, Vol. 2, Series Two, May-Oct. 1805.1

To Cavaliere Qiorgio Gnillichini, Qovernor of Messha, from John Broadbent,
U. 8. Bavy Agent, Messina
MEB[BINA].Jdfl the
1806.
SIB. I a m this moment honred with thy letter of this date requesting that all
the O5cera of the United States Schooner Nautilus may preeent themeelvee in

WARS WITH BRRBARY POWERS

149

the Citadel1 of Messina tomorrow morning a t 8 0 Clok in order t o be examined
by the Officer of the Guard an the marine of Messina the evening of the 23d of
January last
I beg leave to observe to thy Excellency that the said Schooner h m now been
in Messina ever since the 14% of last month for the express purpose of giving all
ible satisfaction to the Tribunal appointed by His Sicilian Majesty for trying
r u t e n a n t Charlee L. Ridgelg that all the OBicers of the .nid Schooner, and some
of the men, have appeared before the said Tribunal as often as d i e d upon, that
yesterday morning they were in open Court told that there would be no further
occasion for them, in consequence of which Cap: Dent has come to the resolution
of d i n g to day s t 12. 0 Clock to join the Squadron. I shall not fail to communicate thy requeat to Cap. Dent immediately and, if in time, he will no doubt do
himself the honour of wainting upon thee before h e mls; I find it my duty in
the mean time to say that I have just recd information that the Tribunal has sent
in to arrest several persons who have, or ought in future to give testimony in the
above cause. I am confident that such are illegal, irregular and barbarous a step
can not have been done with thy knowledge and hope that thou wilt immediately
put a stop to such proceedings Remember that the young man is come hither in
order to ive every satisfaction to the persons who take a part in the fate of the
English hate and a t the same time he naturally expects to enjoy the benefit of
a civilized government and the protection of the Laws of civilized nations.
[LC. JRP, Vol. 2, Series Two, May-Oct. 1805.J
To John Broadbent, U. 8. Navy Agent, Messina, from Cavaliere Giorgio Guillicbini,
Governor of Messina
%~ESS:I

REVEREDSIBIf

, July 1806

will be pleased to pay me a visit a t home this afternoon
about 23. O'clock (Italian time) I will explain to you better, what you perhape
m a y not have been able to collect from the note which I sent you this morning.
I[n] the mean time I am with all esteem
[LC. JRP, Vol. 2, Series Two, May-Oct. 1805.1
YOU

To Captain Samuel Barron, U. 6. Navy, from Secretary of the Navy
S a v DJ&~
I July 1806. Commodore Preble having represented to me that Sir Alexander Ball had
expressed to him a great desire to have 2 fishing Smacks, I have, in consideration
of the numerous facilities and acts of friendship experienced by our squadron
from him, caused two to be purchased, vizt The TraveUer'burthen 36 27/95 tons,
& the Ranger burthen 26 56195 tons, and I now send them to you, to be delivered,
after they shall b~ divested of the public Stores on board, t o Sir Alexr Ball who
will pay to you or to your order the amount of their original cost, of which &omPreble will inform you. Should you receive the amount yourself, you will apply i t with all posaible
economy, to the disbr~rsementsof the squadron; if you should not receive i t yourself, you had probably betwr draw on Sir Alert Ball, in favor of Wm Higgins eaqr
for it, directing M IRiggins to receive i t and hold it subject to your order for the
disbursements of the Squadron. The fiavtUer is commanded by Mr Benj. C. Prince, and the Rawer by Mr John
Allen. These Commanders are ordcred to report themselves to you and fn deliver
up to you the Smacks they resgectively command, and the provisions they m y
have on band, and you will dispose of them as may appear to you under d circumstances the best.
Comq Preble will forward to you an Invoice of such things as he may send out.
I have authorized him to send 33 Bomb Shells & some provisions & stores which
were provided for the Bomb Ketches the Vengence & Spdjire, but were left by
them, being so much more than they could receive.
In delivering these Smacks to Sir Alex? B d , you will inform hi the d high
consideration in which we hold his friendly civitities.
I enclose dupiicate of my letter to you of the 25'b ultq
{NDA. LB, 1799-1807.1

-

-

-

150

NAVAL OPEBATIONS FROM 1806 TO 1807

To Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Navy, Boston, Mass., from Secretary of the Navy
Nav DEP*1 July 1806. I have this day rec? your letter of the 24'P ultQand a m much pleased to hear
that the Spitjire and the Vengeance have sailed, and that you have purchased the
2 Smacks,
You will receive herewith a Sailing Master's warrant for the Commander of the
TraveUer; fill up the blank* for the name when you shall select the Commander,
and let me know the name with which you may fill i t up. You will also receive a
similar Warrant for MI John Allen, Commander of the Ranger - letters &9
accompanying these Warrants, and Sailing orders for each Commander, all of
which you will deliver.
For the reasons assigned in your letter, i t will be better that these Smacks
should proceed in Company directly from Boston to the Mediterranean taking on
board the 33 Bomb Shells and the provisions and stores left behind by the Ketches.
The sailing orders have been given accordingly. Instead of sending the Smacks
immediately to Malta, I have as you will perceive by their orders, directed the
Commanders to proceed to the Mediterranean and report themselves to the
Commodore who is to deliver the Smacks to Sir Alexr Ball, after taking out the
public stores on board of them. You will perceive by my letter to Comfe Barron that ou are to send to him an
Invoice of the public stores you may put on board the imacks, and that you are
to inform him of their original cost, which is to be paid by Sir Alerr Ball to him or
to his order. Have the Smacks ensured and add the amount of their ensurance
and the expence of their equipment (not including however any of the provisions
or stores laid in for the Crews) to the original cost and communicate the amount
ta Come Barron.
The name of the Commander of the TraveUer is left blank in the letter to Comre
Barron. Fill up this blank.
The Accountant will transmit to you instr~ict,ionsrelatively to the issuing of
rations &v for the Commanders of the Smacks, which (after filling up the blanks)
you will be pleased to deliver to them respectively.
For the reasons assigned by you I approve of the indulgence granted by you to
Mids"icholson.
Fill up 244 July '05 with the name of Mr BenJ. C. Princa.

[NDA.

OSW, Vol. 6, 1802-1805.1

To Sailing Master John Allen (Ranger) and Benjamin C. Prince (Traocller). U. 9. Navy,
from Secretary of the Navy
Nav DEP) I July 1806
As soon as the Smacks TraveUer & Ranger shall be ready for sea, you will weigh
Anchor and proceed in company to the Mediterranean to join the Commodore of
the American Squadron in that sea, to whom you will deliver up the Smack under
your command, the Crew & all the public provisions & stores on board, and the
enclosed letter addressed to him. After you shall have joined the Commodore, you will receive your further
orders from him.
(Filled up 24 July 1805)
[NDA. OSW, Vol. 6, 1802-1805.1
Extract from journal of Midshipman Charles Moms, Jr., U. 8. Navy, on board
U. 8. Frigate Pruidenf, Captain James Barron, 0.8. Navy, commanding, Monday,
1 July 1805
[Syracuse] Agreeable to orders from Commodore Rodgers a Court of enquiry
consisting of Capt* J Barron, Campbell & Stewart, waa held to enquire into the
Conduct of Lieu* Joshua Blake in the Action with the Tripoline Gun boats. on
the 34 of August last. the Examination of witnesses continued until1 6 Oclock
P M when the court adjourned till 9 A M tomorrow
[Mrs. C. E. Fox original, NDA photostat.]

WAZZS WITH BARBARY POWERS
To Cavaliere Giorgio Guillichini, Governor of Yessina, from John Broadbent, U.6.
Navy Agent, Yessina
TUESDAYthe 6 July 1806.
DEARSIR Should there be no further occasion for the Schooner Nauiilw in the
Cause of Lt Ridgely Cap Dent will go to sea this Evening
[LC. JRP. Vol. 2, Series Two, May-Oct. 1805.1
[Z July 18051
To John Broadbent, U. S. Bavy Agent, Messina, from Cavaliere Giorgio Gnillichini,
Governor of Messina
SIR By your letter of this date a t eight O'clock in the evening I observe the
request whether any thing occurs from the Schooner Nautilus, Cap. Dent havin
the intention to sail this evening, or tomorrorv morning, and in prompt answer
repeat the same sollicitation made by my preceding note to send before his
departure about eight persons of his equipage amongst officers and subaltern
Officers dressed nearly like Mr Ridgeiy in order to take the recognisance requested
by the Tribunal which informs me it is not possible to do on board as was proposed
by Cap. Dent, since it would be illegal, and contrary to the System of the Country
I request then again this measure for want of which it is not possible to continue
the process with that celerity which interests so much Cay. Dent, and without
which i t is not possible to brin the affair to a conclusion
I will assuredly not detain Fap. Dent, but only the Tribunal will be under the
necessity to make known to the Government the motivea which has prevented i t
from legalising the process in order to esculpate itself
MESSXNA
8 July 1806
[LC. JRP, Vol. 2, Series Two, hlsy-Oct. 1805.1

f

To Cavaliere Giorgio Guillichini, Governor of Meesina, from John Broadbent, U. S.
Navy Agent, Hessina
Tuesday Evening 10. 0 Clock
duly the 9 4 1806.
SIR I am this moment honoured with thy letter of this evening signifying to
me the necessity there is, in the opinion of the Tribunal, that Cap* Dent should
send about eight persons to the Citadel1 dressed in the same manner as Lt Ridgely
in order that the Witnesses brought by the Fisco may recognize the person of
Mr Ridgely previous to the departure of the Schooner; 1 shall communicate the
same to Cap. Dent immediately, and, tomorrow morning, shall not fail to inform
thee how far it may be in his power to comply with the demand of the Tribunal.
[LC. JRP, Vol. 2, Series Two. May-Oct. 1805.1

To Cavaliere Giorgio Guillichini, Governor of Messina, from John Broadbent, U.S.
Navy Agent, Messina

MES. July 6 1806.
SIR Havin communjcated to Cap. Dent the contents of the letter which thou
didst me the tonour of writing t o me yesterday he resolved to wait here sn other
day, but he does not think that his conduct would be justifyable were he to deprive
his Ship again of all its officers, after the full examination which they have already
under gone to the entire satisfaction of the Court, for the purpose of being reexamined or recognized: he has no objections however that the tribunal send on
board, a t any appointed hour of this day, such persons of fair Characters as the
Fisco may think proper to call as Kitnesses - blr Ridgely mi ht be sent from the
Citadel, a t the same time and placed among the rest of the dfficers agreeable to
their own plan, but I conceive it my duty here on the part of MI Ridgelg to reject
all those who have been confined, threatened or by any other means ~nfluenced
by the language or gestures of their officers, or any other persons on the part of the
Prosecutor; and I humbly request that this may be conveyed to the Court o r
Tribunal 8s my most solemn protest egainst all such illegal proceeding3
[LC. JRP, Vol. 2, Series Two, May-Oct. 1805.1

152

NATUL OPERATIONS FROM 1806 TO 1807

To Master Commandant Isaac Chauncey, U. S. Bevy, Bew York, N. Y., from
Secretary of the Navy
NAVDEPT.8 July 1805.
You will be pleased to repair immediately to Baltimore and sssume the command
of the Brig Hornet.
[NDA. OSW, Vol. 6, 1802-1805.1
Extract from journal of Midshipman Charles Morris, Jr., U. 6. Navy, on board
U. S. Frigate Pruideni, Captain James Barron, U. 6. Bavy, commanding, Tuesday,
2 July 1805
[Syracuse] The court met agreeable to adjournment and concluded the
examination of Kitnesses. 12 the Court adjourned [Mrs. C. E. Fox original, XDA photostat.]
Extract from jonrnal of Hezekiah Loomis, Steward, U. S. Navy, U. S. Brig Vircn,
Master Commandant George Cox, U. S. Navy, commanding, Tuesday, 2 July
1805

This day Capt. Smith took command of U. S. Brig Syren. Lt. Crane, Warrington, Page, Doctor Graham, Lt. Swan, J . Lyon, J. B. Nevit, Wm. Ballard also
went on board, and F. Grizner, J . Jackson, P. Burgess, C. Corporalo, P. Hardenbrook, J. Brown, T. Lucas, P. Camel, R. Corbet, A. Jacks, J. Eldridge, A. Spooner
went on board and John McFate and Thos. E. Robinson. Capt. George Coxe,
Lt. Gadsen, Lt. Ayers, Doctor Dorsey, Mr. Elliot, Mr. Babbit, Mr. Neal came
aboard, also John Gates, Benj. Cole, Patrick Ho an, William Spinx, John Browning, Henry Young came on board the U. S. Brig $&en, and Wm. Brooks, Michl. D.
Downs and Wm. Hart. Received 1 poncheon spirits from the Constitution said to
contain 160 gallons. It filled 3 fifty gal. casks and no more.
[L. F. Middlebrook. NDA copy.]
[3 July 18051
Extract from letter to Stephen Pynchon, Brimfield, Mass., from Surgeon's P a t e
John Butler, U. 6.Navy

*

*

*

You will probably have hear'd more conccrning a peace with the Tripolitans
before you receive this, than I am capable of communicating - Whether this
treaty is an honourable one as respects the Americans, under circumstances which
then existed, I will leave to others to determine, a t present - The prisoners were
ransomed for sixty thousand dollars - And whether i t was necessary and consistent with the honour of the American Nation, a t that time, to give that sum,
will be a matter of dispute hereafter - I t is probable enough, that we could not
have injured the walls of Tripoli materially - being ertren~elyhigh and from
fifty to sixty or seventy feet thick - But a t the same time, many of the inhabitants would have fallen, in cause of a Bombardment, by shells and sliot thrown into
the town The prospect afforded by Genl Eaton and his Arme a t that time, was verry
Battering - He had, already advanced as far as durse, one of their most
considerable toms, which he took after a considerable resistance - And was
hastening with all possible speed to Tripoli, which is thought by many, would
have become a n easy conquest - The Bashaw hearing of the ravages by Genl
Eaton, became alarmed, and immediately made overtures for peace; and aU I
have to say, is, that peace was concluded in the course of a few days, a t a time,
when every thing was in readiness for war - How lasting it may be I surpose,
de nds upon the honour of Barbarians.
i t is not my province, in my present situation, to comment on the manner
in which affairs have been conducted - But I will venture to say, that had there
have been no jealousy of honw existing; no envy a t a prospect of future e t n e s s
in others - and had Gen. Eaton, a t the same time, been supported, as I think was
intended by the authority of the United States, the scene would have closed verry
different, much to the honor of America. and to the immortailty of the name of
Eaton
However, if there is any honor attach'd to any one Gen. Eaton claims
it. For, the Bashaw was perfectly easy respecting all the injury that could be
done to him by our Naval force - But sir, notwithstanding, Tripoli ia beating

KR,

-

'

WRRS ?t71T.
BARBARY POW%RS
her slrbres into pruning hooks, yet our battleaxes and boarding pikes must be ke t
for there are Rumours ol ware and even wars anticipated, not onfy
with Spain but with Tunis
The Bey of Tunis swears by the length of his beard that if we want war, we shall
have it. and, under existing circumstan6ea, i t is most probable we shall have i t
It is pretty evident that the Consul at Madrid has left that place by reason of a
disturbance with Spain. The Commodore having receiv d letters to that
im ort 8omr B v m n will return to America in the Frigate Pruidsnt, by mmon of serry
bad health - Capt. Rodgers succeeds him in office Geni Eaton will return in the Corqress, which will probably sail in eight or ten
weeks and arrive a t America in the month of Octuber Doct? Babbit is anxious to return and k n o w soliciting an opportunity to return
in the Resident I should be happy to go to America myself, but there is not the least chance
unless I resign, which I do not wish to do a t present - I have no idea, however,
of continuing long in the Navy, for, I do'nt much like rocking about Mr. Danielson and Mr. Babbit will, probably, return with their fathers
And now, Sir, altho' I have written over so many pages I scarcely know what
they contain; for since I have been writing, I have been continually pe lexed
with the damned Infernal Sailors, some sick, some lame and mme lazy,
upon me for help - Sickness has been so prevalent on board the EMQ, for slx
weeks past, that we bave had from fifty to seventy on our Day List of Sick
principally with fevers - The sickness, however, is now abating I have not to acknowledge the receipt of any favor from Brimfield excepting
yours which I mentioned, and, if after you receive this, you do'nt write me every
month, dam-n my e ea if I do'nt take a double reef in your Top Sails, the first time
t h a t I see you - wiah t o know the News - And if Brother Ichabod should
ask any questions about me, give him sizpence, and teE him I am well
Give my most polite compliments to your wife, and accept of my best wishes
for the prosperity of yourself and family [H. E. Huntington L&AG, E A 39.1
in repsir

-

-

-

-

-

1

-

Report of the Roops from Derne including Hamet Bashaw and
Syracuse, July 3 1805
Hamet Bashaw & suit consisting of - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - _ - Greek company, officers included,- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - General staff of Hamet's Army ------- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - Company of csnnoniera- - - - - - _
_ -.--..-- - - -..- - - - - - _ - - Deduct 5 servcnta & hostlers-..- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -

suite, on shore at

32
6

"

25

5

Intitled to r a t i o n s _ - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -

94
34
69
25
- -

59

40

[H. E. Huntington L&AG, E A 276.1

To Captain John Rodgers, U. 8. Navy, from William Eaton, U. S. Navy Agent for the
Barbary Regencies

SYRACU~E
July 9 1806
SIR,I h d t h e honor to state to you verbdly on the first instant that I should
have occasion for six thousand dollars to settle the payment of the troops who
served with me from E vpt to Derne and a t Derne, and to satisfy some small
claims for cash b o r n e % - a n d applied t o the senrice I will pass my vouchers into your hands to cover this sum or cover i t with my
receipts & hold myself responsible to government, as you may find most convenient; but as there are other accounts srrising out of the same expedition
which ere to be settled at the seat of Government, the latter mode msy be attended with less trouble to yourself
The uncertrunty of the exact period
when the Congrcus will leave the Mediterranean has induced me to engage a pas-

-

154

A7AVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1805 TO 180Y

sage in one of the Store ships except you should have other dispositions which
will sail as soon a3 discharged, take in salt ballast a t Cagliari, and proceed directly
to the United States - Another considerable inducement to this mode of
returning is a hope of recovering a debt due me by count Porcile a t Sardinia
Since the landing of the garrison from Derne Mr Dyson has issued on my request
ninety four rations p': day for their subsistence. I hope this measure may meet
your approbation and that you will be plemed to order a continuation of these
issues until the troops shall [be] paid off and discharged, in the same articles and
quantities as are provided for the regular service [H. E. Huntington L&AG, E.4 275.1
To Captain Samuel Barran, U. S. Navy, from the Commanders in
in the Mediterranean

U. S. Squadron

SYRACUBE
3 JuEv 1805
SIR Before your departure permit us to express the sincere regret we feel a t
the severe & dangerous illness which has compelled you to resign your command,
in the mediterranean B: return to America - Impress'd with s full scnse of
your value as a Commander, we have anxiously awaited the result of ycur illness,
indulging the pleasing hope that Providence would restore your health, & enable
you to continue in command - Kith the deepest concern we see this hope
frustrated, & our solicitude for your life prompts us to urge your departure from
a climate so unfriendly t o your Constitution. - Our feel~ngsas Officers no less
so than as friends demands thie expression of esteem & of the concern we feel
a t your 10~9
That the Voyage & your native air may perfectly reinstate you in your health,
& be the means of preserving long, a life so dear to your friends, d: so useful t o
vour Country, is the fervent wish of Sir Yr Obt SewM
fMrs. James S. Barron Col.]
To Easter Commandant Isaac Hull, U. S. Navy, commanding U. S. Brig Argus, from
Captain John Rodgers, U. S. Navy
U. S. S H ~ Constitution
P
Syracuse
July 1806
will proceed to hialta without loss of time, & require of R l r IIiagins
SIR
$14,000 Dollars, proceed direct to Akexandria, pay the same into the hands of
Messv Briggs of that place, take the necessary receipts and return as soon as
possible to hlalta where if you should not find me, and nre informed by Rfr Higgins that I have proceded down the Mediterranean, you will follow me to Gibraltar
taking Tunis and Algiers in your way [LC. JRP, Letters & Orders, Book A, 1804-1805.1
To William Eiggins, U. S. Navy Agent, Malta, from Captain John Bodgers, U. S.
Navy
U, S . SHIPConslitution
Syracuae 3* J u l y 1805
SIR,I have sent the Argus Captain Hull to carry the Money to Alexandria,
I will thank you not
due from the U. States to Mess- Briggs of that placeto detain the Brig longer than cant be avoided - You will oblige me by informing those Gentlemen that if they will point out any means by which I can
serve them, it will afford me grcat pleasure - We are certainly under considerable obligations t o them. [LC. JRP, L Bk B, May 1805-July 1806.1
To William Eaton, U. S. Navy Agent for the Barbary Regencies, Syracuse, from
Captain John Bodgers, U. S. Navy
U . S. S H I P Con~titution
Syracuse 3rd July 1805
SIRI have received your favour of this Day on the subject of Money's to answer
such purposes ss staked in your Letter - In answer permit me to acquaint
vnu that. after receiving the Pay fill, with a statement of the contingent 0Xjx3n600

WARS ?VITH BARBARY POWERS
you me?ation, that I shall so soon as the Money arrives, advance you the Amt,
taking your receipts, and holding you accountable to the Xavy Department
for the same. - I t is totally out of my power to order subsistance for Men
that have not been reported to me, agreeable to the regulations prescribed by
our Service - The Governor has this Ins* made a complaint to me of some of
the Greeks, landed here by the Vessels from Deme, having committed various
outrages on the Inhsbitants of the Town - I can only say on this subject
that these people are accountable to the laws of the Land they are in, and that
no interference of mine shall rescue them from such punishment as the Laws of
the Country they are in prescribe.
[LC. JRP, L Bli. B, May 1805-July 1806.1

To His ExceIlency BIarceIlo d e Gregorio, Governor of Syracuse, from Captain John
Rodgers, U. 8. Navy
U. STATESSHIPConstitution
Syracuse 3@July 1805
SIR This moment I have received the Letter which your ExceIlency has done
g me, and I hear with real concern the disorders committed
me the Honor of ~ r i t i n to
by Sailolr and other individuals belonging belonging to the Squadron under my
command - I hasten to pay that particular attention which is due to your Excellency~representations & to assure you that on my side nothing shall be wanting to
prevent the repetition of similar disorders, and that I shall immediately issue the
necessary orders on that head; In the mean time permit me to observe that as it
appertains to your Excellency to Watch over the tranquility and good Order of the
Goverment confided to your Goverment, you can have no need of my sanction
or authority for employing to that end all those means wbich the laws prescribe Assuring your Excellency of my cordial disposition to co-operate with you in all
measures tending to the presenration of public tranquility and the good understanding subsisting between the Inhabitants $ my Squadron.
[LC. JRP,L Bk B, May 1805-July 1806.1

To Cavaliere Giorgio Gnillichini, Governor of Messina, from John Broadbent, U. S.
Navy Agent, Messina

n'ednesday 6 0 CIock July 3@1805.
SIR I am sorry t o be trouble some to any one, particularly so, to those to whom
I profess so many obligations, but I cannot a t present refrain from remonstrating
in the strongest terms that my language possesses against the mysterious proceedings that are daily practised against Lt Ridgely, who I understand has been shut
up in his cell the whole day. Pray Sir are we in the interior parts of Barbary or in
Europe? I hope that, on receipt of this, thou wilt give such effectual orders to
those who have been appointed by Government to act in this business that no one
may have further resson to complain
[LC. JRP, Vol. 2, Series Two, Map-Oct. 1805.1

(3 July 18051
To John Broadbent, U. S. Navy Agent, Messina, from Cavaliere Giorgio Guillichini,
Governor of Messina
SIR From the treatment which the American Officer hlr Ridgel?, rubricated
with an atrocious and barbarous crime of homicide has received in Messina you
ought to be well aware that we are not in Barbary but in an European Couutry
well civilised, in which he is treated with greater complaisance and mildness than
he could expect arnong'st his own fellow citizens in Similar circumstances
The measures and orders given are indispensable and regular, continuing to
allow to him a certain degree of liberty with those precautions that the actual circumstances require
Messina 3 July 1805
[LC. JRP, Vol. 2, Series Two, hfaj--0ct. 1805.1

156

ATAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1806 TO 1807

To Captain John Hall, U. S. Marine Corps, from Captain John Rodgers, U. S. Navy
U. S. S. Constitution
Syacwe F J d y 1806
SIR, From the detachment of Marines of the U. States late Frigate Philadelphia
vou are directed to complete the detachments of the U, States Brigs Argus, Szren,
& Vixen - If any remain over and above the compliment of the Essez, after you
have completed the detachmt of the three Brigs, you will attach them to such
Vessels as most require them; making me a return of the same. [LC. JRP, Letters & Orders, Book A, 1804-1805.1
To Captain William Bainbridge, U. 6.Bavy, Syracuse, from Captain John Rodgers,
U. S. Navy
U. STATESSHIP Constitwtion
S y r a w e fl July 1806
SIR, I have this Insr received your favours of this date, disignating the Officers
of the late Frigate Philadelphia that wish to return to the U. States - their
arrangement is perfectly agreeable to me; & you will make the necessary arrangements with Captain Barron for their accommodation on board the President.
[LC. JRP, L Bk B, May 1805-July 1806.1

To Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Bavy, Boston, Mass., from Secretary of the Navy
Nav D E P QQ
~ July 1806.
Have you any knowledge of the gun carriages of which Mr Samuel Hawkins of
New York is the importer and proprietor, and in which I believe Cap$ Chauncey
has an interest? If you have, state to me your opinion of them, and if superior in
your opinion to the gun Carriages heretofore used in our Kavy, particularize their
advantages.
The prices asked for them appear to me extravagantly high, when compared
with the prices of the common carriages - so high indeed as to forbid my contracting for any unless they should possess very extraordinary advantages. The
prices asked, are,
carriage for a 32 pQ cannon - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - $375.
'
'l
24
-----_-_--------350.
----.---<C
1
18
..............................
340.
41
It
12
" ..............................
320.
'I
9
" .........................
310.
I1
(I
6
"
..............................
300.
The common carriage for a 24 p4 cannon, costs irom 120 to 1303.
I shall be glad to receive your answer as eariy as map be conveilicnt t c you. [NDA. OS?V, Vol. 6, 1802-1805.1

::

CL

To George Harrison, Bavy Agent, Philadelphia, Pa., from Secretary of the Navy
Nav D E P34
~ July 1806
I have received your letter of the 29rh ultq - ag~eeablyto your request I
enclose an Order from the Secretar of State for the use of the machine to strike
the medal for Commodore Preble, for the aid of the mint in preparing the steel
to sink the die on.
[NDA. GLB, Vol. 8, 1805-1807.3

H

To Secretary of State from Secretary of the Navy
hTav DEP3rd July 1806
SIR, Will YOU be pleased to send me an order on the director of the mint, to
permit George flanigon esquire navy agent a t Philadelphia, or an artist under his
direction to use the machine for striking coins - in the case of the medal for
Comrn.9 Preble - & to furnish the necessary aid in preparing the steel to sink the
die on.
[NA. SDA. CL, Misc. Let., Jan.-Dec. 1806.1

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

157

Extract from journal of U.8. -ate
CondituUon, Captain John Bodgers, U. 6. Bevy,
commandmg, wedneeday, S July 1806
[Syracuse] past 4 [P. M.] the U. S. brig Vizen Sailed. At 11 a i l e d the U S
Shlp Congress
WSNA.]
Extract from journal of Midahipman Charles Morris, Jr., U. 6. Bavy, on board
U. 6. Frigate President, Captain James Barron, U. S. Navy, commanding, Wedneaday, S July 1806
[Syracuse] 6 P M. The U S. Brig Vizen Capt Cox Sailed. 10 A M. The U S F.
Congress. aailed John Browning and John Yates deserted from the Ship [Mrs. C. E. Fox original, NDA photostat.]
Extract from journal of Hexekiah Loomis, Steward, U. 6. Ravy, U. 8. Brig Virm
Maeter Commandant George Cox, U. 6. Navy, commanding, Wedneeday, S
July 1805
Weighed anchor and made sail for Malta. Head wind. The Congress came out
soon after us.
[L. F. Middlebrook. NDA copy.]
To William Higgins, U. 6. Navy Agent, Malta, from Tobias Leer, U. S. Consul
General, Algiers
ON BOARDTHE U. S. FC* Constitution
Syacuse harbour, July 4'4 1806
MY DEAR SIR, 1 must apologize for having [been] thus late in acknowledging
the Receipt of your favor of the 25Q Ultimo, with the Rheam of Paper which you
was so good as to send me. The truth, on these occasions, I think is always the
best; and I shall therefore say, that on the morning of our leaving Malta, I was
engaged in many things which put i t out of my mind, and that the V h sailed
yesterday morning much earlier than I expected which prevented my writing by
her. - I now take advantage of the Argus, which goes over to Malta preparatory
to her Sailing for Egypt. I felt very sorry that any misunderstanding sh4 have arisen between ComI hope i t is now doneaway, and that harmony will
modore Rogers and yourself.
prevail in our future intercourse with each Other.
I am persuaded that you
will find d m m o d o r e R. a most correct OEcer in the discharge of his duty, and a
man by no m a n s difficult or unpleasant in transacting business. Any warmth of
temper which he may discover at the moment of initiation, will I beleive, never be
carried into serious discuesion on points of business He felt exceedingly hurt that
the letter which he had Committed to your Charge for the Secretsrv of the Navy,
had not received that particular attention which he expected; but 1 know that i t
did not effect his opinion of your integrity or fidelity. I am happy to inform you that Mq Lear's health has been much better since
she has been on board the Constitution, than i t was in Malta. She has been but
once on Shore since we arrived here, as she finds i t much more pleasant on board
the Ship in this warm Weather. We have not yet been able to go to Catania, as I
wish first to prepare my dis atches for Government. to go by the Besident which
will Sail with Commodore L o n for the U. S- early next week. We shall then
take a short tour. Commodore B. is still very ill, and 1 doubt whether he will
ever reach his Country alive. This being the birth day of our Country i t will be
celebrated by the Officers of the Squadron dining on Shore just out of the town of
Syracuse, and a Ball will be given this evening on board the Constitution, which
ie now very elegantly dressed on the occasion. A Chous who had been sent by the Bashaw of Tripoli to Derne in the ConstelEation & ret4 in her to this place, went over to Malta in the Vdzm, with one or two
other Turks, to get a Passage from thence to Tripoli. Two others will go in the
Argus for the same purpose. If any Vessel Sh4 be bound from Malta to Tripoli,
I wili thank you to let these people know when the opp? offers, and assist them in
getting their paaeage.

-

-

158

NATTAL OPERATIONS FROM 1805 TO 1807

I expect to be in Malta in 10 or 12 days, and in the mean time I presume you
will have the John Adarns and Gun boats with you. hl* Lear desires to be remembered to you and I unite with her in remembrance to all our friends in Malta.
[Stephen Decatur Col. NDA photostat, Book A.]
[4 July 18051
To John Broadbent, U. S. Navy Agent, Yessina, from Cavaliere Giorgio Gnillichini, Governor of Messina
SIR By your letter of this date I understand that Cap Dent Comr of the American Schooner the Nautilus is a t last persuaded to send into the Cittadelsome Individuals of his crew, in order to take the necessary legal recognizance, tauking [sic]
the process of the American Officer Mr Ridgely, and in answer I inform you of my
having immediately made known this resolution of Cap. Dent to the Proauditor of
wsr in order that tomorrow morning a t eight O'Clocli the individuals composing
his court may go to the Cittadel so that the proposed recognizance being taken, the
termination of the Process may be expedited with greatest sollicitude
I therefore beg you to communicate this intelligence to Cap. Dent, and intimate
to him to send the said Individuals into the Cittadel a t the hour fixed upon, and
with real esteem I am
Messina 4, July 1805.
[LC. JRP, Vol. 2, Series Two, May-Oct. 1805.1

To Cavaliere Giorgio Guillichini, Governor of Messina, from John Broadbent, U. S.
Navy Agent, Messina
MESSINAJuly the 4 t 4 1806.
SIR By the letter which thou hast done me-the honour of writing to me the 3*
instant I observe that the demand of the Tribunal is now no longer confined ta
Officers, of which there are not eight on board, but to individuals indiscriminately.
I have to acquaint thee that Cap. Dent is willing to send a sufficient number of
them to the Citadel1 tomorrow morning a t nine 0 Clock, remaining however
always firm my former solemn protest agalnfit the validity of any witness, or witnesses who have been, or my be in future imprisoned, or by any means swerved
from indipendency and truth, or overaw'd by any one but the fear of God
With this intelhgence, please glve such further dlrcctions as my seem unto thee
meet
[LC. JRP, Vol. 2, Series Two, May-Oct. 1805.1
To Cavaliere Giorgio Gnillichini, Governor of Messina, from John Broadbent, U. S.
Navy Agent, M e s s ~ a
R~ESSINA4. J ~ d 1806.
y
SIRI acknowledge that we are in Europe, but I aver that the Procred~ngsof the
Tribunal, in the case of L1 Itidgely, are in direct opposition to the Principles of
European Juris rudence. My geographical Query of yesterday does not certainly
call in doubt, wIether a Nobleman, born in the Centre of Tuscany, or a man in tho
heart of Great Britain be Barbarians, or appertaining to the Civilized nations of
Europe, nor ought it to have given thee any displeasure beyond that of raising in
thee a just indignation against those who are not using, but abusing the Law, and
thereby bringing Odium upon the Government of tlis S~cilian Majesty from
nations most remote.
The honourable character given of Lt Ridgely by the tu o Commodores and Captains in the Squadron of the United States; of hls mzld and anrzable dasposzlion, and
the strong desire he hae shenn to be tried in the Country whose Laws he was accused of having violated certainly do not entitle him, upon a vague deposition on
which he would be admissible to bail both in America and England, to the Epitheta
of A Man rubricated with the Atrocicrus and barbarous crime of homzcide. In direct
opposition to such language allow me to inform thee, that in the Eye of the Law,
every man is presumed to be innocent untll pronounced quilty by a legal adjudication: his fellow Citizens and mine are taught by this Spirit of Jurisprudence of our
countrien to consider all men innocent, and treat them aa such, until they be legelly
convicted of the crime of which they are accmed.
I am exceedingly ~ o r r ythat thou haat by approvin what has been done in the
my.tuious and inquidtorial proceedings against L* ~ i i g evoluntarily
l~
c l d thy

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS
self among those, against whom, I have been under the necessity solemly to
protest, and I add that, however numerous the obligations I am under to thee,
joined to the high esteem and regard I have for thy person, Ofice, and general
conduct I differ widely from thee on the present occasion, and hope that thou wilt
admit, that in the defence of the Young Officer it is my duty to be explicit. If I be
wrong the custom of the Country I belong to and thy good heart will certainly
plead in my favour.
[LC. JRP, Vol. 2, Series Two, May-Oct. I805 ]
To Captain Samuel Barron, U. S. Navy, from John Broadbent, U. S. Navy Agent,
Messina
MESSINAJuly the 4Q 1806
SIR I avail myself of the Departure of an express going to Syracuse of informing
thee that in the affair of Lt Ridpely I have been under the necessity of remonst.rating against the roceedings of the Tribunal but that we are now coming to a better
understanding g y C a p Dent. who will probably sail tomorrow evening I shall
send thee Copies of the Correspondence I have had with the Governor on this
subject but aa i t is not yet terminated I have not time a t present to acquaint thee
with the nature of it
There is not the least apprehention for the fate of Mr Ridgely not the least doubt
but he will shortly be restored to his Country and friends [LC. JRP, Tol. 2, Series Tno, May-Oct. 1805 ]
Extract from journal of U. S. Frigate Comtitufion, Capiein John Rodgers, U. S. Navy,
commanding, Thursday, 4 July 1805
[Syracusel LQ BenjO Smith, & hlidshipnian Simon Sniith Joined this ship And
Lf Blakeley Left this ship and Joined the Preszdent
At Meridian pleasant 'KTfired a salute of 16 guns as did the whole Squadron
[USNA.]
Extract from journal of Midshipman Charles Eorris, Jr., U. 6 . Nsvy, on board
U. 6. Rigate Pruidml, Captain James Barron, U.S. Navy, commanding, Thursday,
4 July 1806
[Syracuse] Noon Each Ship in the Squadron fired a Salute of 15 Guns.
[Mrs.C. E. Fox original, XDA photostat.]
To Secretary of State from Tobias Lear, U. S. Consul General, Algiers
ON BOARD
THE Zj STATES
FRIGATECmtitution
S!yracr~seHarbour J u l ~6'P 1806
SIR Since I had the honor of addressing you under date of the 3Qof November.
I have thought it my duty to remain in the vicinity of Tripoli, that I might be
at hand for entering into a ne ociation with the Bashaw; whenever he shQ give
so on proper terms; and I accordingly took up
evidence of his disposition to
my residence in Malta; being well assured that nothing would occur to make my
presence necessary a t Algiers during the Winter, and knowing that the Dey was
perfectly satisfied 8s to the cause of my extended absence from his dominions.
On the 28'P of Dec? I received a letter from Don Guardo Joseph De Souza, the
Spanish Consul at Tripoli, stating, that on the 17t4 of Decc he had a private
audience with the Bashaw of Tripoli on the business of his Nation, which being
over, the Basham introduced the subject of this v-ar with the U. States, and
expressed his willingness to conclude it, if the Americans were disposed to come
forward on proper grounds The Sp: Consul answered that he presumed they
would have no objections to finish the war upon honorable terms. There, he says,
the subject wa.8 dmped; and he took the liberty of making this communication
t o me, having heard that I was in Malta; adding, as his own opinion, that if I
would come over to Tripoli, in a Flag of Truce, he had no doubt but a peace
mi ht soon be concluded on honorable & satisfactory terms. - As I had reason
to Llieve that this communication was made to me with the knowledge; if not
bylthe express desire of the Bashaw, I felt in no hmte to reply to it, aa I was
m d e d that, if he then discovered a desire to terminate the businem, he would
more anxious to do so when the Season for active operations ah4 approach. -

NQ 10.

80

E

160

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1806 TO 1807

On the 28th of March Commodore Barron sent a small Vessel to Tripoli with
Cloathing $ 9 for our Captive Countrymen, and by that occasion I acknowledged
the receipt of the Sp: Consul's letter; and observed to him that as we had last
year made several overtures to the Bashaw for peace, which had been rejected,
he might be assured that we should never make the first advance again on that
subject. But that, notwithstanding our Force in this sea was very considerable,
and would, a t the proper season, act with decided vigour; yet we shd be ready to
receive and consider any propositions which might come from the Bashaw before
that Season arrived; provided such propositions were cornpatable with the dignity
and rising
- character of our Nation, and tendinn- to an honorable and permanent
peace.
On the 2ls$of Ap! I received by the return of the same Vessel from Tripoli,
another letter from the Sp: Consul, saying that he had communicated to the
Bashaw the contents of my letter of the 28'h of March, who had directed him to
inform me, that to shew his disposition to end the War he would make a proposition
Viz. That the U. S should pay him 200,000 for peace & ransom and deliver up to
him, gratis, all his subjects in their power, and make full restitution of the property
taken from them. - The Sp: Consul added, that he considered the propositions
of the Bashaw rather intended to form the basis for opening a negociation, then
made with an expectation of being granted. - At the same time he mentioned
the mode of communication which might be persued, if I shd think proper to
come off Tripoli with a view to opening a negociation. Thebe propositions were
so completely inadmissable that after communicating them to Commodore
Barron, I thought no more of them, fully expecting further advances either
through the same, or some other channel; as it evidently appeared to be the
wish of the Bashaw to open a negociation.
Between the time last mentioned, and the 1gtk of May, there were intimations
made, in various ways, of the disposition of the Bashaw to treat; but none in a
direct or official manner. - On that day Commodore Barron wrote me the
letter KQ1. to which on the 19th I returned the answer NQ 2. And on the 224 he
informed me he had relinquished the command of the Squadron to Captn Rodgers.
Barron to
On the 24 I embarked on bQ the U. S. Frigate Essez, Capt"ames
proceed to Tripoli. - On the 26'h in the mornr we saw the Town of Tripoli
distant about 10 miles, & a t the same time the U. S. Frigates Constitution &
President - At 10 A M. Capt" Barron & myself went onboard the former
when Captain Rodgers received the letter of Commodore Barron relinquishing to
him the command of the Squadron &r - He returned with us to the Essez,
when we stood in for the Town, and within a short distance from the Battery
hoisted the white flag, which was immediately answered by the same from the
Bashaw's Castle. I n half an hour a boat came off with the Spanish Consul and an
Officer of the Bashaw. - I informed the Sp: Consul that I had, agreeably to the
desire of the Bashaw to treat, come for that purpose; but that the propositions
which had been made through him (the Sp: Consul) were totally out of the
question, and must be relinquished before I wQ consent to move one step in the
business; and that if I had not the most unequivocal evidence that they would be
put a side in toto I would not go on shore, and told him he had better return
with my determination, and come off again the next day, if the Hashaw was
desireous of having peace on terms which we could admit. He left the ship, and
the Wind during the night blew SO heavily on shore that the ships were obliged
to stand off; and were not able to come in near the Town again until1 the 29th
when a t 9 A M the Sp: Consul came on board bringing the Tiscara or Commission
of the Bashaw to treat on his part, on the principal points of accommodations.
We now removed from the Essez to the Constitution. - The Bashaw relinquished
all pretentions to a paymt for peace or any future demand of any nature whatever
but demanded the sum of 130,000 dollars for the ransom of our Countrymen,
and the delivery of his subjects gratis. - To this I objected as strongly as to
the first reposition.; and after some time spent in discussing the subject I told
the Sp: &nsul; that to prevent unnecessary delay & altercation I would ive
him in writing my ultimatum which must be a t once decided upon. Viz: #hat
there should be an exchange of Prisoners, man for man so far as they would go that the Bashaw should send all the Americans in his power on board the Squadron
now off Tripoli - that his subjects should be brought over from Syracuse, and
delivered to him with all convenient speed and 8s he had 300 Americans more or
less - and we 100 Tripolines more or lees, I would engage to give him for th9
balance in hie favour 60,000 Dollars. That a treaty of peace should be made
upon honorable and mutually beneficial terms. With this he went on shore in
the Evening; but apparently without any expectation of its being accepted.
On the 80th. At 11 A. M. the 8p: Consul came again on bQthe Constitution; and

-

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

161

urged me very strongly to go on shore, where every thing, he said, should be satisfactorily arranged, but as I had determined not to deviate from the ground I
had taken, I declined; stating to him that i t now depended on the Bashaw to terminate the business by a single word, and that very little time more would be given
for that purpose.
He requested permission to send a letter on shore, to which
he would await an answer. This was granted; and on receiving an answer to his
letter he again urged my going on shore in the strongest terms. This I steadily
refused to do. The Mind increasing obliged the ship to stand off, and prevented
the Sp: Consul from going on shore this ni ht
At 8 A. M. on the 3la, of May, the Sp. FoisGwent on shore, promisiog to come
off again in a few hours uith the Uashaw's answer. - At noon he came off, and
said that the Bashaa had a t length agreed to the sum of 60,000 dollars for the balance of the prisoners; but that he could not think of delivering rip the Americans
until his Subjects were ready to be delivered to him, and again urging me to go
on shore. I told him, in one word, that the business had already been protracted
beyond what I conceived to be a reasonable time; but as the weather yesterday
would not admit of our Countrymen being sent on board, I would allow the Bashaw
24 hours, from this time, to agree to my proposition in toto, or reject them. He
begged for further time; but without effect; and left the ship a t 5 P. M.
At 11 A. M. dune 1 s t our unfortunate Countryman, Captl? Bainbridge came on
board, who had been permitted to come off, under the guarantee of the Danish
Consul and Sidi Mahomet Dghies, the Minister of foreign affa~rs. He assured me
that the Americans would not be delivered up until a treaty of peace should be
made with the Bashaw, as peace was more his object than the sum he might get
for the Captives; and as it was our intention to conclude a treaty, it would be
cruel to let our Countrymen languish in Captivity merely on the punctillio of
negotiating the treaty before or after their delivery; as a hatever related to them
was already understood. - I informed h ~ m
of all w h ~ c hhad passed between the
Sp. Consul and myself; and told him that as the Sp. Consul had come on board as
the Commissioner of the Bashaw, with his credentials, M hich he had delivered to
me, 1 considered the business as non brought nearly to a close, and that a very
short time remained for the Bashaw to make up his mind. - However, as I
sh4 make no difference in the terms of the treaty, whether it sh4 be draw-n
up before or after the delivery of the Prisoners, I uould enter into an immediate
negociatioxk for that purpose, with any proper character whom the Bashau- mi ht
send on board duly authorized; but I would have nothing more to do with the
Consul. But the Americans should be sent on board without waiting the arrival of
the Tripolines from Syracuse. Capt B. left us in the evening and went on shore.
In the forenoon of the 24 of June, hlr Nissen, His Dan~shhIajesty's Consul a t
Tnpoli, came off to the Constitution, bringing a Commission from the Bashaw to
negoc~atewith me on the articles of the Treaty. - As I had a sketch prepared
I communicated it to iLir Kissen, who observed that there n ere some articles more
favourable to us than were to be found in any treaty which the Bashaw had with
any other nation; - yet he would take them on shore and submit them to the
Bashaw.
He did so,and returned on board again about 4 P. M saying that the
Bashaw had consented to the Articles; but was very desireous of having an article
expressive of our determination to withdraw our forces &Q from Derne, and that
we should endavour to persuade his brother to leave his dominions. To the first
I could have no objection, as it ~vouldbe a natural consequence of peace; but I insisted that if his brother should leave his territory, he should have his nife and
children restored to him. hir Kissen thought this latter clause would meet objection. However he took it on shore.
On the morning of the 3d of June i\frXissen came off again, and declared that the
Bashaw would not agree to deliver the wife and children of his brother. - I adhered to that part of the article, and after some little time he returned on shore
When Mr Nissen had left the ship, 1 told Commodore Rodgers, and CaptvSmith
of the Vizen, who was on board, that if the Bashaw should persist in his opposition
to that article, I would not suffer the business to be broken off, and leave our
Countrymen in slavery; but would, a t all hazards, take a boat and go pn shore, if
the white flag should be haul'd down, which MI 11'. said would be the s~gnal,if the
Bashaw persisted in his determination. - At 4 P. M. Mc Nissen came off again
with the seal of the Bashaw to the preliminary Articles; but with a condition that
time should be allowed for the delivery of the wife and family of his Brother. I consented to it, and we went on board the Vixen to stand in near the harbour.
When we were close to the Town we fired a y n and hauled don n the u-hite flag.
A salute of 21 Guns n-as fired from the Batteries, and ansn-ered by the Constitution.
I went into the harbour in the Constitution's barge with the flag of the United
States display'd, and was reoeived a t the landing place by the American officer

-

Ep.

-

-

who had been in captivity, with a sensibility more easily to be conceived than discribed. An immense concourse of people crowded the shore and filled the streets,
all signifying their pleasure on the conclusion of the peace. This, I beleive, is the first instance where a peace has been concluded by any of
the Barbar States on board a ship of war. - I must here pay a tribute of
Justice to (?ommodore Rodgers, whose conduct, during the negociation on board,
was mixed with that manly firmness and evident wish to contimue the war, if it
could be done with propriety, while he display 'd themagnanimity of an American in
declaring that we fought not for conquest, but to mantain our just rights and
national dignity, as fully convinced the negotiators that we did not ask, but grant
peace. - You will pardon me if I here introduce a circumstance evincive of the
spirit of our Countrymen. - At breakfast this morning, Conlnlodore Rodgers
observed, that if the Bashsw would consent to deliver up our Countrymen, without
making peace, he would engage to give him 200,000 doll3 instead of 60,000, and
raise the difference between the two sums from the Officers of the Kavy, who, he
was perfectly assured, would contribute to it with the highest satisfaction.
In the evening I visited Sidi Mahomet Dghies, whom I found a sensible, liberal
and n-ell informed man. He is a great friend of ours, and has always been opposed
to the war with us.
On the 4th of June, a t 11 A M . the Flag staff was raised on the American House,
and the Flag of the United States display'd, which was immediately saluted with
21 Guns from the Castle and Forts, and was retunled by the Constztutton; and all
our unfortunate Countrymen sent off on board their Ships. - At noon I had an
Audience of the Bashaw, by appointment, and was received with every mark of
respect and attention. He paid me many compliments, and expressed himself on
the peace with much manliness: He is a man of a very good presence, manly &
dignified, and has not in his appearance so much of the Tyrant as he has been
represented to be. - His Court was much more superb than that of Algiers. We spoke but little on the subject of the Treaty &9 - He observed that he had
given stronger evidences of his confidence in us than he had ever before given to
any nation. - He had delivered our people before he had received his own; and
ss to the money he was to receive, i t was merely nominal - the sum was nothing;
but i t was impossible to deliver them without something. - The other articles
of the Treaty I might form as I pleased; being convinced I would not insert
anything which was not just.I returned his Compliments, and assured him he
would find our nation as just as he had found them brave and persevering. On the 6tb of June the Constitution sailed for Malta and Syracuse, to return to
Tripoli with the money and the TripoIine nsoners. - The Constellation sailed
also for Derne, to bring off the few of our Fountrymen r h o might be there.I
remained a t Tripoli 'till the return of the Constitution to establish an Agent and
make a final settlement of our business there. Dr John Ridgely of Maryland, late
Surgeon of the Philadelphia was strongly recommendeed as a proper person to
reside a t Tripoli till the pleasure of the President was known, and I accordingly
appointed him, as will be seen by the inclosed power and letter of instructions. On the 10tb I sent to the Bashaw two Copies of the Treaty, with translations in
the Arabic Iangua e, to be signed by him and his Divan. He requested me to
attend the Divan see the form of business there; and as this was a favour never
before granted to a Christian. he gave i t as an evidence of his respect kc. I accordingly attended and was seated on the same seat with the Bashaw, on his right
hand. Great order and solemnity mere observed. I presented the Treaty to the
Bashaw, who delivered i t to his first Secretary to read article by article. Some
observations and short debates took place on several of the Articles; but the
Baahaw appeered to explain them satisfactorily. After the whole was read, the
form of its presentation and acceptance was written by the Secretary, and the
Seals of the Bashaw and Membcrs of the Divan affixed to the two Copies, one of
which the Bashaw delivered to me in a solemn manner, and with many expressions
of friendship. (He speaks good Italian)
On the 17'4 the Constitution arrived; but the wind was too high to admit of her
landing the Tripolines or Money - On the 18'4 both were sent on shore; but
instead of 100 Tripolines there were only 48, and 41 Blacks. Seven had been
carried to the US. by Commodore Preble, and I could never obtain an accurate
account of the whole number. I had the Bashaw's Tiscara respecting those who
had been taken by Cam9 Dale, which had been left in hands of Mr Niasen, which
I found expressed 21 Tripolines & Turks, for whom, and their goods, 7 Amrricand
were to have been delivered. I was therefore obliged to make it appear that the
Blacks were his Subjects, and were to be included in the exchange. I found no
di5culty in the case, tho' I am sure he was not convinced of the propriety of it.

W B S WITH BARBARY POWERS

163

-

Those in the US. I assured him would be returned by the first opportunity
The 60,000Dollars were paid, and a receipt therefor given on the treaty left with
Dr Ridgely, and a duplicate therefor which is enclosed. - No Consular present

L mentioned in the Treaty; but t h s t i t is understood will be given as is usual with
all Nations when a Consul shall be sent, i t does not exceed 6,000Dollars, and the
particulars I shall send in my next, as I shall also my accounts, which can not yet
be adjusted, as our quarantine a t Malta did not admit of my having that communication with Mr Higgins which was necessary for settling, as I had given him
Rills on the House of Sir Francis Baring & C9 in London for the money sent to
Tripoli kc.
On the 20% Commodore Rodgers came on shore, and had an audience of the
Bashaw, where the assurances of friendship &c were re eated by the Bashaw.
On the 21.1 in the Evening we sailed for Malta an$ Syracuse; arrived a t the
former on the mornina of the 24'h, where we remained two days, and sailed for
this place.
I shall, in a future letter, give a more particular account of Tripoli &c. At present I confine myself to the subject of the negociation & Treatyks I have
always been opposed to the Egyptian & Derne expedition, I shall say nothing on
that subject, especially as I presume there will be full communications respecting
i t from other quarters.
On the 5% of March last we were indebted to Algiers for one years annuity,
deducting the Cargo of Timber &c, which had been sent. I had learned that they
were in great want of wheat a t that place, and it struck me that if a Cargo of t h s t
article was sent to them on account of our Annuity, it would be received with
gratitude, and be a great saving to the US. I therefore purchased a Cargo of
about 12,000bushels a t Malta, which cost, with charges about 32,000Dollars, and
sent it to Algiers with n proper letter on the occasion; And I am happy to inform
you that it arrived in good time, and in fine order, and was more valuable, as i t
relates to the U.F., than a cargo of money would have been a t that time. I t was
received, aa intended, as a proof of friendship, and an evidence of good faith; and
m-ill sott:e our accounts for one year a t least.
As our force in this Sea is now so respectable, Commodore Rodgers has determined to go to Tunis, not to aefy the Bey to War; but to have all differences
with that Regency settled on a basis that will ensulrle us future tranquility from
that power, and place our national honor on a permanent ground. The Bey has
lately been threntning us very hard; but I presume he will now be as submissive
as he has been presumptuous. I shall go with him to t h s t place on my way to
Algiers, and notwithstanding what Mr Davis says of the Bey's resolution not to
discuss the affairs of the V.S. with any other person but himself, I am persuaded
I shall find IIO difficulty in convincing him that the President of the U. S. will
chuse whomsoever he map think proper to settle our Il'ational Affairs, provided
there be no well grounded personal objections to the man. [KA. Sen. 9R-BG, Prcs. Message, Jan. ISM.]

To Lieutenant David Porter, U. S. Navy, from Captain John Rodgers, U. 6. Navy

U STATES
SJTIPConstitution

Syracuse 6 J u l y 1805

SIR You are directed to prepare for Sea without loss of time the two U States
Gun boats now in this port. There will be attach'd to each of them, for the
present, One Midshipman, Four Seamen and four Ordinary Seamen, their Creu-s
will be Victualled by this Ship until further Orders
[LC. JRP, Letters 6 Orders, Book A, 180-1-1805.1
To Master Commandant Charles Stewart, U. 6. Navy, commanding U. S. S. Esscx
from Captain John Rodgers, U. 6. Navy

U S T A T ESHIP
~ Constitution

Syracuse 6 July 1806
SIR I have to desire that you send Fifty of the crew of the late Frigate Philaddphia, now on board the Essex in the character of Supernumeraries, on board the
President Frigate
(LC;. JRP, Letters & Orders, Book A, 1804-1505.1

164

NAVAL OPERATIOMS FROM 1806 TO 1807

To Captain James Barren, U. S. Xavy, commanding U. S. Prigate Prufdatl, from
Ceptnin John Bodgers, U. 8. Bavy

U. STATESSHIP Conutittaioll
Syracuse 6 July 1806

SIREnclosed you will find a report from Dotr Cutbush relative to 14 Men,
whom I have ordered on board the President Frigate under your command, and
request you will give them a passage to the U. States; being improper subjects for
the service PS. John Conway, John Carter, W@Howell, Thomas Rabey, Joeeph Smith
Thew Men belong to the Constitution and their term of Service has expired -J R
[LC. JRP, Letters & Orders, Book A, 1804-1805.1
To Coveliere Giorgio Guillichini, Governor of Messino, presumably from John
Broadbent, U. S. Navy Agent, Meseina
MESSINAJul?, the 5th 1805. 9 P. M .
SIR Cap Dent of the U S. Schooner nihufilu~
having (agreeable to the orders

which thou urast pleased to give by thy letter to me of yesterday) prepared, and
given orders to some of his Officers and Crew to meet the Tribunal in the Citadel
this morning a t 8. O'clock, in order that the Witnesses produced by v9 Prosecution
on the part of the Crown might endeavour to recognize Lt Ridgely desires me now
to express his surprise, that the said Tribunal should not have attended or have
appointed some other hour in the course of the day for performing the businem
aforesaid Should the Tribunal still consider this a necessary act he begs that i t
may be done this afternoon as he is anxious to put to Sea this evening or tomorrow
mormg
KC. JRP, Vol. 2, Series Two, hlay-Oct. 1805.1

To Lieutenant Andrew Sterett, U. S. Navy, Baltimore, Xd., from Secretary of thr
Navy
Nav D E P6~July 1806.
I have rece your letter of the 29'4 u l t ~tendering the resignation of your commiss~on.
Your high re utation as an Officer d: a Seaman and your distinguished energy of
character, mig& and probably would ultimate1 have raised you to the highest
honors in the Navy under the same principle, tKe adoption of which has induced
your resignation. 1 regret therefore much that you have deemed i t proper to
resign but I cannot refuse however painful i t may be to accept your resignation. It has been a subject of great concern to me that the resolution of Congress of the
3rd FebT 1802, voting to you a sword in consideration of your gallant conduct in
the capture of a Tripolitan Corsair, [Tripolz], has not as yet been carried into
execution. I n due time I wrote to Commodore Morris then in the Mediterranean,
to procure and present to you, a suitable Sword, agreeably to the resolution of
Congress. The Commodore on his return to the United States informed me that
i t had not been in his power to procure a suitable one. I therefore wrote to Mr
Munroe, our Minister in London, requesting him to procure one and send i t to me,
and I entertain not a doubt but that he has given the Subject all the attention
which it's delicate nature demands. Accept, I entreat you my cordial wishes for your happniess and prosperity in
private life and believe me to be with the highest personal esteem
[NDA. OSW, Vol. 6, 1802-1805.1

Extract from journal of 0.6.Frigate Constitution. Captain John Rodgers, U. 8. Navy

commanding, Friday, 6 July 1806
[Syracuse] this evening a large company Of the most respectable people Of
Syracuise came on board by invitation of the commodore to a ball, on there leaving
the ship they took with them 6 silver spoons a number of Glass- and Many other
articles too tedious to Mention
Exchanged crew8 with the President.
IUSNA.]

THE HON. ROBERT SMITH. SECRETARY OF T H E N A V Y

165

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

Extract from journal of Hezekiah Loomis, Steward, U. S. Navy. U. S. Brig V U ~ ,
Master Commandant George Cox, U. 6. Havy, commanding, Friday, b July 1806
Saw the harbour of Malta (calm) a t 7 A. M. the wind sprung up fresh off shore.
At half pest 11 came to anchor in Malta. Quarantined. Received specil [sic] on
board. At 3 o'clock weighed anchor but could not get out until sun set, it then
blowing very fresh and heavy sea.
IL.F. Middlebrook. NDA copy.]
To Secretarj of the Navy from William Eaton, U. S. Navy Agent for the Barbary
Regencies
S Y R A ~ UJuly
S E 6 t b 1805
SIR, I have the honor to inclose herewith copies of my communications to the
Commodores since I left Egypt - By the next occasion shall give the correspondence I cannot but think our pacification has been too much precipitated - Was it
contemplated that so [ M s mutilated] should be sent into this IMs mutilated] out
showing [Ms mutilated] enemy's port Such is the fact! - If it had only appeared off the place I have no doubt the eEect would have been a peace with out
money - If it had gone into a vigorous cooperation Joseph Bashaw must have
resigned a t discretion, or saved himself by flight; he was calculating more on t h h
than on defence But we have peace!
The whole expense of my expedition, in cash. amounts to $39.108,58cts payment
of troops included - As soon as I can effect a full settlement my accounts
will be transmitted - I t will be necessary to negotiate b i b on your department,
in order to enable me to do this, to the amount of $7,082.58 cts.
f learn that our Consul a t Gibraltar, Bfr Gavino, intends resigning - George
Dyson Esquire, who was appointed Xavy Agent here by Commodore Preble, and
who has discharged the duties of that Office with activity and truth l a m persusded,
would be glad to transfer his concerns [Ms mutilated] of Government - Perhaps
none has better deserved it - Commodore Preble would, I think, say as much[XA. Sen. SB-BG, Pres. hIessage, Jan. 1806.1
To Secretary of the Navy from Captain John Rodgers, U. 8. Navy
U. STATESSHIP Constifdion
Syracuse 6'Q July 1805
SIR,AS correspondence (Aj contains all the Papers and documents relative to
the Sangular expedition, to which they relate, that has ever come to my hands;
I feel it unnecessary in me to say anything farther on the subject, as no doubt the
Gentlemen to whom they particularly relate will be best able to explain them. B. My orders for the Evacuation of Derne by the United States forces. 16 June i805j
C. Proceedings of a Court of Enquierp, on the conduct of Ca t. Bainbridge in
the loss of the Iinltcd States late t a s t e Philadelphia. (Vol. 11fp. 188, Barbary
Series.]
D. Orders from Commodore Barron to Capt.ain Barron on the subject of Gun
Boats, Amunition &F - [3 March 1805.)
E. Correspondance between Captain Barron and Lieutt Robinson, which will
exvlain in some measure the cause of the E~&lerprize's
not having- -yet joined the
Squadron. There are other Subjects of leas m[ajgnitude; which the hurry of business, incident to organizing a Squadron for Immediate Service, where there has been so
many changes: prevents my Pen, a t present, from enabling me to lay before you
an thing like n detail of past Transactions.
h e Crews of the Constitulion and fiesident have been changed, the term of
service of the former being expired. To Captain Stewart I have given the command of the Essez. T o Captain
Smith the Siren, and to Cox, late Captain to Commodore Barron, the l'iun These are the most material changes that have taken place on board the Vessels
of the Squadron, - So soon as my time will admit, you shall be regularly informed on Subject which has taken place, since my command of the Squadron. [NDA. Captain's LB, Vol. 2, 1805.1
XQ2.

-

-

166

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1806 TO 1807

To Captain James Barron, U. S. Navy, commanding U. 6. Frigate Presided, from
Captain John Rodgers, U. S. Navy
U. 8. SHIP Constitution
Syracuse July 6tP 1806
SIR YOUare directed to proceed to.%he U. States with the Frigate President
under your command, with all practicable dispatch - Subject only to being
detained on the Gibraltar Station, in the event of necessity, after communicating
with hfr Simpson, our Cocsul a t Tangier previous to your jinally leaving the
strieghts. - I t bein presumable that it is the wish of the Goverment for the
President to return to kashington, I have to desire that you proceed as high up the
Potomack, as the Navagation of the River will adrnit with all your Guns & Stores
on board; & from thence inform yourself with certainty of their intentions on that
head. Previous to your leaving the streights you will be pleased to leave a t Gibraltar
a Muster Roll of all the Officers & Men you have recieved from the different Ve5
sels of the Squadron as also from the Hospital, in order that I may have it in my
power to forward by the next opportunity regular returns to the Navy D e p a r t
ment.
T4-ishiig you a pleasant passage & that its effects may restore Commo: Barron
t o perfect health,
[LC. JRP, Letters & Orders, Book A, 1804-1805.1
To Captain John Rodgers, U. S. Navy, from Captain James Barron, U. 6. Navy
U . S . FRIGATE
President
Syracuse Ilarbour July 6Q 1806
SIB, I have the honor to inform you that the U States Frigate President is ready
for Sea and that i t is my intention to depart from this Port in the morning
I trust this notice will not be considered untimely, as I authorised Captain
Bainbridge several days past to inform you that I should be ready about this time
8: Captain Bainbridge returnd for answer that this arrangement met your
approbation
[LC. JRP, Vol. 1, March 1791-Dec. 1814.1
To Master Commandant Charles Stewart, U. 6. Navy, commanding U. S. S. Essu.
from Captain John Bodgers, U. 6. Navy
U STATESSHIPConefilution
Syracuse 6 July 1806
SIRI have this moment received your letter Stating & Complaining of the Insufficiency of the Essex's Gun Carriage8 in their present Station - In consequence you are hereby directed to make the Necessary Alterations, to do which,
ou are desired to procure a necessary number of Carpenters from the different
teasels of the Squadron to effect the same without loss of time
[LC. JRP, Letters & Orders, Book A, 1801-1805.1
To Captain John Rodgers, U. S. Navy, from Captain Hugh G. Campbell, U. S. Navy
U S SHIPConstellation
July 6'5 1806
SIB, The loss of Mr Grenell has left in this ship a vacancy for one Lieutenant,
or person to act as such; if you have not already appointed an Officer to that station, and have hot a commissional oficer to dispose of you will much oblige me by
granting that favor to Mr E. Trenchard whose long services and strict attention to
his duty require of me this mark of attention.
[LC. JRP, Vol. 1, March 1791-Dec. 1814.1
To Lieutenant Theodore Hunt, U. S. Eavy, irom Captain John Rodgers, U. 8. Navy
U STATESSHIPConstilution
Syracuse 6'5 July 1806
Sra You are hereby directed to proceed to Malta by the first opportunity and
in the Event of finding the U States Bng Argus there, report youreelf fo the born-

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

167

manding Officer as being Ordered to Join the Brig under his Command, who will
assign you such station tw Your Rank Entitles you to - If you should not find
the Argus a t Malta you will there wait my further orders.
[LC. JRP, Letters & Ordera, Book A, 1804-1805.1
To Secretary of the Navy from Captain John Rodgers, U. S. Navy
U. STATESSHIPConstitution
Syracuse 6t4 July 1805
NQ3. Duplicate
SIR, I am now making preperations to go to Tunis with the whole Squadron to
settle our affairs with that Regency, %I I hope on a more secure basis than the Beys
conduct has hitherto indicated; who has lately been in the habit of threatning us
with War on all occasions. about three Weeks previous to the Peace with Tripoli
I detained and sent into Malta a Tunetian Cruizer and two Neopolitan Vessels,
her Prizes, for an open & flagrant Violation of the Blockade of Tripoli: which
circumstance I flatter myself will prove favourable to the U. States, and in the
end be productive in establishing our Peace with that Nation on just & equitable
terms - I concieve that the Bey is too well aware of his own Vulnirability to
give us decided cause to expose it to hia Enemys; but if contrary to my expectations he should offer hostilities, I will pledge myself that in less than Six Weeks
from the present date, to make him perfectly sensible of his Error, - this is the
moment to bring him to a sense of reason, and it shall be done - To assist me
in the accomplishment of this object; C o l l ~Lesr in whose judgment I place the
the highest confidence, & from whom every thing on his part may be expected,
will accompany me to Tunis. - Concieving that the services of the Frigate
President can with propriety be spared, and Commo: Barrons delicate health
such as to require his being removed from this climate; I have directed her to
proceed with all practicable dispatch to the U. States, & if our affairs with Tunis
terminate as I a t present expect, the Congress and Nautilus will follow her, after
having shewn the Squadron a t Algiers $ Tangier - The rest of the Vessels I
shall detain in the Mediterranean, until further orders from your Department. The Ann Store Ship arrived a t hlalta in 42 days from Baltimore, her Cargo
ha^ been stored here. I yesterday recieved Intelligence via Malta of three of the
Gun Boats having arrived a t Gibraltar, but have recieved no intelligence yet of
the John Adams, and the rest of the Gun Boats that accompanyed her when she
left the United States. - I shall be ready to Sail for Tunis in the course of 10
days, provided I am not detained by the Gun Boats not arriving here so soon as
I a t present contemplate.
[NDA. Captain's LB, Vol. 2, 1805.)
To Secretary of the Wavy from Captain John Rodgers, U. S. Navy
U. STATESSHIPConstitution
Syracuse 6'4 July 1806
XQ4.

SIR I am much a t a loss to know what Answer to return to the Ottoman &
Russian Goverments, respecting the Ottoman Iietch Gheretle captured by the
Squadron under orders of Commo. Preble, & the three Polacres, loaded with
wheat, & sent into Malta for a Violation of the Blockade of Tripoli, by orders of
Commo: Barron - Since the last advices Commo: Barron gave you on this
subject, an Ottoman Corvette, has been a t Malta, to request that, the Vessels of
their Nation might be delivered up, but I was prevented from giving a decisive
answer, concieving that the arrival of the John A d a m , would afford me instructions respecting them. [NDA. Captain's LB, Vol. 2, 1805.1
To Secretary of the Bavy from Captain John Rodgers, U. S. Navy
U. STATESSHIP Constitution
Syracuse 6Q July 1805
No 6.

SIR, I arrived here on the 27'Q UltQfrom Tripoli bringing with me Collv Lear &
after landing the Tripoline Prisoners which the War with that Regency had

thrown into our hands.

-

168

ATAVAL OPERATIOATSFROM 1805 TO 1807

On m y a m v a l here 1 found t h e Constellation Captain Campbell, who had
reached this place two days before me, having on board Hamet Bashaw, Mr
Eaton and about one hundred Turks, Greeks & others, which had been engaged
in t h a t Ezpedltzon. - Mr Eaton has to Day informed me that he intends taking
his passage t o the U. States, in the .4merican Store Ship Ann, which will sail in
five or six days for Baltimore, and in comformity with your instructions, relative
to him, I have acceded t o his wishes. - R a m e t Bashaw I shall send t o the U.
States, by the next public Vessel t h a t returns, provided he will consent. If not I
shall fix him either a t Malta or Messina, a t the expence of t h e United States, not
exceeding 250 dollars pr month, until the piemilre of Goverment is known
He
is a helpless unfortunate being, and humanity dictates t h a t something ought to be
done for him
The Greeks and others have no claims farther than their pay as
pr contract with hlr Eaton. which I shall give immediate orders t o furnlsh, t h e
amount, not exceeding 6000 dollars
If i t was even double the Sum, policy
dictates t h a t i t should be paid, and this you will no doubt be convinced of after
reading the accompanying correspondance. P.S. At the moment of closing this Letter, Gun boats N? 8 & 9 have arrived
safe in this Port. - The singular phenomenon of such boats crossing the Atlantic,
will greatly astonish all Europe. [NDA. Captain's LB, Vol. 2, 180.5.1

-

-

-

[G July 18051
To Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Navy, from Char!es W. Goldsborough, Chief
Clerk, Navy Department
Dr SIR.Your favor on the subject of Mr Morris, should have been answered
a long time since - but I Anew that i t would be quite as agreeable to you t o see
the officials confirming your wishes on the subject - The Secretary feels every
disposition t o respect your representations - You can therefore, & Indeed you
ought, t o communicate very freely with him upon all professional points I do not know t h a t you entertain a doubt upon this point - but it is so essential
t h a t professional gentlemen should communicate freely, & there are so few t h a t
will do it, & pardon me when I say so few t h a t one a s capable as yourself, t h a t
m y zealous nish t o see the X a l y Establishmrnt upon a footing t h a t will ensure
it's dlirability t ~ ypre~erririgit's popularity, has induced me t o make the Hint
to you - I write t o you as a citizen of the United States, having a t heart the
pros1 erity of an establishment, the most valrlablr because the most honorable
we have - Holding the station I do, 1 can see t h a t there are yet wanting great
restrictions in expenditures - our's is the most extravagant navy upon earth Can not pour experience suggest many salutary rcstrictions? The Head of a
Department can not a t once see all the defects of such a widely extended subject We could not have a better man, or in a n y respect a fitter one, for the Head of
t h e Dep* than MI Smith - I love the man & venerate the Secretary - but he,
as any other person would, requires the aid of professional gcntlemen, who can
go into detail & lop off all exulwrances - I place great strcss upon the espenditures of the navy - because I am persuaded that if ever the n a r y becomes
unpopular, i t mill be becallse of it's excessive espence - and it ought n c t e r to
be forgotten t h a t if i t becomes ~ ~ n p o p u l aitr , must fall - since no establishment
can be su ported againfit the will of the people from whom it virtually emanates.
Rules
regulations have been made, & Statutory Laws have been enacted,
b u t they seem scarcely t o have a n y effect - they must be deficient - such men
as yourself ought t o examine them & point o u t their deficiencies - I wish t o see
t h e solid & substantial systems of experienced gentlemen, substituted in the place
of handsome theories - I wish t o see all public works erected a s if with the view
of teaching our remotest posterity, the state of the arts & the spirit of the times,
Sound economy, in public ~ o r k is,
s magnificence - &
when they were erected
I contend t h a t i t is better economy t o build of solid marble than of briks of clay We ought not t o he so selfish as t o build for ourselves alone - The peasant may
do this &: plead his poverty a s an excuse - but the Republic o ~ l ~ tho t be constantly erecting monumenh of it's grandeur, that hundreds of years hence
posterity may exultingly exclaim behold what our forefathers have done, let us
emulate their example'
What contra^ im ressions would a heap of Ruins
excite? And a r r we not now building a hrap o f ~ u i n for
s theni?
I have thus whiled away a leisure moment, as I should have done had I been
talking to you - You will see t h a t I have taken no pains to connect m y ideas & t h a t I have left the explanation of them t o yournelf

1

-

-

-

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

169

Chauncey is ordQto the brig Hornet, buildr in B a l t ~- will be launched in a few
days - the Adams is repairing for service - the Brig here - the Wasp - is
progressing as are some handsome improvements a t the yard - I apprehend
the Hornet will be ordered to cruize off the coast
Commv Barron is now I suppose before Tripoli - probably in engagement
God grant him success & glory 6 JULY'05
[LC. EPP, Vol. 15, June-Aug. 1805.1

-

Circular from Captain John Rodgers, U. 6. Navy
U. S. SHIP Constitution
Syracuse 7 4 July 1806
SIR YOUare desired to prepare the U. States Frigate ConsteUation for Sea as
soon as possible, taking on board (with what you have on hand) four months
Provision, perishable articles excepted - I t is desirable that you take on board
as much Powder as your Magazine will conveniently stowe - So soon as your
Ship is ready for Sea, you w4.l be pleased to report the same - The Constitutia
I presume will be ready for sea by Thursday Cap$ H. G. Campbell of the ConstcUolion
Capt. Char Stewart of the Essm
each a copy of the above
Cap* Geo: Cox of the Vken
Cap%S. Evans of the Hornet.
[LC. JRP, Letters & Orders, Book A, 1804-1805.1

t

Circular from Captain John Rodgers, U. 6. Navy
U. 5.SHIP Constitution
Syracuse 7 July 1805
SIR Without one moments delay you are desired to repair Gun boat NQ9 for
Sea, taking on board as much Provision as you can conveniently carry Lieu1 Elbert,
Lieu1 X. Harridan NQ 8, Ralph Izard NQ 9, J. J. Maxwell NQ 3, Aleran4 C.
Hamison NV6, James Lawrance NQ 6, Seth Cartee NQ 10, J. Henly NQ 4.
[LC. JRP, Letters & Orders, Book A, 1804-1805.1
To Midshipmen William P. Smith and Brown, U. 6. Navy, from Captain John
Bodgers, U. 6. Navy
Constitution July 7. 1806
SIR YOUwill repair on b'd Gun Boat NQ10, & commence fitting her for Sea,
without one moments delay. - for the present you will recieve your orders from
Lieu+Porter.
W a P. Smith, Mids*
Mr-Brown
-NQII.
J
R
P
,
Letters
& Orders, Book A, 1804-1805.1
[LC.

-

To Sailing Xwter William Knight, U. S. Navy, U. S. Brig F r d l i n . from Captain
John Bodgers, U. 8. Navy
Constaution July 7. 1805
SIR You will commence fitting the Brig Franklin for Sea, & take on board as
much Provision as you csn conveniently stowe. [LC. JRP. Letters & Orders, Book A, 1804-1805.1
To Secretory of the Bavy from Master Commandant Isaac Chauncey, U. S. Bavy
NEW YORK7* July 1806
SIR I have been honored with your's of the 24 Inst. and shall immediately repair
to Baltimore to mume the command of the Hornei aa directed
[NDA. MC LB, 1804-6.1

170

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1806 TO 1807

Extzact from journal of U. S. Frigate Conrtitution. Captain John Bodgers, U. S. Bavy,
commanding, Sunday, 7 July 1805
[Syracuse] 9t 9 [A. M.] arrived gun boats N P 8 and 9. At 11 the US. ship
President.
Extract from journal of Midshipman Charles Morris, Jr., U. 6. Bavy, on board
U. S. Frigate President. Captain James Barron, U. S. Navy, commanding, Sunday,
7 July 1805
5 A hl. hoisted in all boats. 7 A M. arrived from the U S. Gunlboats Nu 8 & 9.
Aleridian Commodore Barron Capt. Bainbridge and most of his officers having
Joined us. we got underway and stood out of the Harbour [of Syracuse].
[Nrs. C. E. Fox original. XDA photostat.]
Extract from journal of Heaekiah Loomis, Steward, U. S. Navy, U. S. Brig Vixen.
Master Commandant George Cox, U. S. Navy, commanding, Sunday, 7 July 1805
Light wind. Saw one American store ship bound out. Saw the town of Syracuse
a t 8 o'clock A. M. At 1 o'cloclr P. 51. off the harbour, passed the U. S. F. President
bound out. Went in and came to anchor a t half past 2 o'clock P. M. Found there
the Constztution, Constellatzon, Essez, Sgren, Franklin and store ship and 3 gun
boats, and a t 6 o'clock, arrived the John Adams.
[L. F. hliddlebrook. KDA copy.]
To Captain John Rodgers, U. S. Navy, from Lieutenant Joseph J. Maxwell, U. 8.
Navy
UNITEDSTATESGUNBOATNP3
Harbour of Syracuae July 8 1806.
SIR. Conformable to my orders from the Secretary of the IYavy, I herewith
enclose you my instructions. on taking charge of AT?.3.
I ha\e to acquaint that on the morning of the 15tb June last Gibraltar bearing
N. E. distant 2 Leagues. I was brought too by four Span~shGun boats, u ho nithout examining a paper or assigning an other reason, than their suspicion of my
being an Englishman. took charge 8; conducted me into Algeziras.
'Tis necessary t o remark that my Gun were a t that time in the hold Immediately on my arrival, I stated officially the circumstance to the General of Marine
which I also enclose for your perusal. The Boat n a s instantly discharged, with
many apologies 8: offers of supplies R- assistance, should I stand in need of them.
I was requested to wait a short time. the General answer I did so 'till 4 P. itl.
apprehensive I might be detained much longer & knowing the importance of the
boat's joining you without the smallest delay, I weigh'd without it & stood over
t o the Rock where for the first time since our sepcration on the 15% ?lay I found
the John Adan~s.
I should have waited on the Gen! hlarine personally but could not procure
pratique I proceeded immidiately to mounting my Guns & mil'd from Gibraltar ThelStb
June.
[LC. JRP, Vol. 2, Series Two, May-Oct. 1805.1
To Master Commandant George Cox, U. 6. Navy, commanding U. S. Brig Vixen,
from Captain John Bodgers, U. 6. Navy
July 8'P 1806
Cm~slilution,SYRACUSE
SIR I have t o desire that you turn over to the U. States Sloop Hornet, eight
Seamen, being part of the crew of the late frigate Philadelphia, now in character of
Supernumerays on hoard your Brig.
[LC. JRP, Letters & Orders, Book A, 1804-1805.1

-

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS
Extract from journal of U. S. Frigate Consfitulion, Captain John Rodgers, U. S. Navy,
commanding, Monday, 8 July 1805
[Syracuse] At 3 [P.M.] the brig Vizen arrived % past 4 arrived Gun boat NQd
At 6 the U. S. S. John Adams arrived
At 3 [A.M.] arrived Gun boat N9 10 W past 3 arrived Gun boats hT93 & 6 At
4 arrived gun boats Nq 6 ?4past 4 arrived N Q4
[USXA.]
Extract from journal of Midshipman Charles Morris, Jr., U. S. Navy, on board
U. S. Frigate Prwident, Captain James Barron, U. S. Navy, commanding, Monday,
8 July 1805
5 Saw two Sail standing for Siracuse which roved t o -be1- the U S. F. John Adams
and Gull Bout N Q8.
8. Cape Porcase bore N W K W. 2 miles distant
5 A M. Cape Passaro bore 1V W by N. 7 le[a]gu[e]s]
Latitude Observed 36'23', N.
[Mrs. C. E. Fox original, XDA photostat.]
To Captain John Rodgers, U. S. Nsvy, from John Broadbent, U. S. Navy Agent,
Messina
MESSIKAJuly the 9th 1805
SIR On the 14th Ultimo I had the honour to receive thy much esteemed letter of
the 8th of the same month conveying the good tidings of Peace concluded with the
Bashaw of Tripoli, which, agreeably to thy orders, I have made publeck in this
place Caps Dent communicated to me thy anxiety respecting the fate of Lmidgely;
permit me to assure thee, that no pains have been spared on my part to conduct
this unfortunate M a i r with all possible precaution, and with as little delay as
possible.
By the inclosed Copies of my Correspondence with the Governor on this subject thou wilt perceive, that I hare been under the necessity of making use of
strong language, and should 1 ever have an oppertunity of converting with thee
on the subject I shall explain to thee fully the motives that induced me so to do,
and I make no doubt but thou wilt approve of what I have done, and support me
in it if necessary - The Government of America is in its infancy and the first
impressions given by it will be lasting, therefore it behoves every one, in whatever
capacity they may serve, to act with consistency and firmness otherwise these
little tyrannical Governments would trample upon us as they do upon those who
have not the means or courage to resist them.
The Process of Lt Ridgely is now in a good train and I hope that in two or three
Days he will be admitted to bail, and in as many w e e k that he will be perfectly
free For any further particulars I beg leave to refer thee to cap^ Dent who is well
informed on the subject - and as soon as any thing Xew transpires of importance
I shall take the liberty of communicating it to thee by express
Always desirous of receiving thy Commands I remain with the sincerest regard
[LC. JRP, Vol. 2, Series Two, Rlsy-Oct. 1805.1

To Master Commandant John H. Dent, U. S. Navy, commanding U. S. Schooner
Nautilus, from Captain John Rodgers, U. S. Navy
Constitution 9* July 1800'
SIR Presuming that your presence is no longer necessary at the Trial of M:
Ridgely, I have t o direct that you proceed t o this Port, without delay - should
you not find me here, you will proceed t o Malta, a t which place if you do not find
me, you will find in the hands of Mr Higgins, Navy Agent, Instructions for your
Goverment.
[LC. JRP, Letters & Orders, Book A, 1804-1805.3

172

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1806 TO 1807

To Captain Anthony Gale, U. S. Marine Corps, from Captain John Rodgers, U. 6 .
Navy
Constitution 9*QJuly 1806
SIR YOU will be pleased to make up the deficiency8 in the detachments of
Marines of the different Vessels of the Squadron, as soon as possible, from the Detachments bearing Supernumeray's and those bearing more than their complement
[LC. JRP, I ~ t t e r s8: Orders, Book A, 1804-1805.1
To Captain Hugh G. Campbell, U. S. Navy, commanding U. S. Frigate Cohttdldon.
from Captain John Bodgers, U. 6. Navy
U. S. SHIP Constitution
Syracuse 9tP July 1805
SIR The field pieces you will have delivered to the U. States Sloop Hornet &
Lieu: S. Erans will give IvIr Eaton a receipt for them; and the Mortar you will have
landed [LC. JRP, Letters & Orders, Book A, 1804-1805.1
To Captain Samuel Barron, U.S. Navy, from James Simpson, U.S. Consul, Tangier,
Morocco
(COPY)
TANGIER
gtP July 1805
SIR On the 20th April, I had the honor of replying to yours of the 6 March delivered me by Captain Stewart, a few days w o , I received by uTay of Cadiz, a
Copy of that lett'er, with your favor of the 8'P April, the Syren left Gibraltar, on
the 4tP June, since that time I have not any tidings of her - On the 13'8 Ultimo,
the Emperors Frigate Maimoni of 36 Guns, and 130 Men, Commanded by Arraiz
Sebiar, obtaind the usual Consular passports, for a Cruize and has saild from
Salle Roads a single Ship-The Brig of War purchased a t Lisbon, together with
the other Mamonz Afirheha & Meshoud.~,are 811 laid up in Larach River, they are
getting ready the two Gallies a t Tetuan where they have lately launch'd a Xebec
pierced for 16 Guns - Some stores, and Six Rrass 4 Pounders, are getting ready
to be sent from hence for her, the Captain who is to command this vessel, told me
this morning, she +ll be a t Sea this Summer which is what no one expected - By
a letter from London, dated the 3d UltQ I learn that the Emperors Agents there
were looking out for armed Ships to purchase, and that they had -offered £4000
St* for one, but my friend adds that he did not know that they had agreed for any,
as their has not been any advice received from those Men since they left Lisbon,
it is supposed here the Maimona may have been sent to England with instructions
respecting them you are poseess'd of my sentiments so fully on the propriety in my
Opinion of one or more vessels of War, being on this Station, it is not necessary
for me to say more, than that they remain perfectly the same as before From Spain you will doubtless have been made acquainted, with the frequency
of their Cruizers carry the vessels of the U States to port under the most frivolous
pretexts - AtlayQHaehhash lately told me, that the former Bashaw of Tripoli
had been brought from Egypt by a Vessel of War of the U States, and landed on
the Coast, but that his Brothers Troops had taken him prisoner - I hope it is
not true. The Peace between Austria and this Country is fully concluded, 8: the
Imperial Ambmsador actually on his return from Court.
[KDA. Captain's LB, Vol. 3, 1805.1
To Captain Alexander Murray, U. 8. Navy, Philadelphia, Pa., from Secretary of
the Navy
KAVDEPT9 July 1806. It has been determined by the President to put in Commission a competent
Squadron for the protection of the Commerce of the United States against the
wanton depredations to which it has been recently exposed. The Command of
this Force will require great vigilance & sound discretion. I have a t this time t o
inform you that it is to be given to you and that you are to hold yourself in readiness to repair to Waehington upon receiving the ordem of this Depm?
Lieu*Stewart has been this day ordered to open Rendezvous and t o use his utmoat
exertions t o enter 100 able Seamen. He is directed to allow $12 per month advancing
2 or 3 Months upon sufficient security, and if he should not be able to procure &he

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS
Men on these terms, he is permitted to offer a Bounty not exceeding $20 to each
man. You will render to Lieutc Stewart every assistance in your power. The Men
are to be entered for the Adama. I rely solely on Phila* for a Crew for this Vessel,
feeling a persuasion that if proper efforts are used, the men may, on such an occasion as the present where resentment for national wrongsmay be wielded as a powerfully operative argument, be procured in a very few days. I have not therefore
ordered any other Rendezvous for the Adama than that a t Phila* nor shall I unless
you should inform me that the Men cannot be obtained a t that place.
I t may be proper to inform you now that you are to have the frigate Adams, and
that Mr Gordon, Mr Lovell, and Mr Patton, will act aa your Lieutenants. Try if
you can procure a Sailing Master in Philadelphia: if you cannot, we shall be a t
a loss for one. [NDA. OSW, Vol. 6, 1802-1805.1
[9 July 1805)
Invoice of Provisions shipped on board American Schooner Molly
Invoice of Seven Hundred Barrels of Mess Beef Shipped by me on board the
Bchooner Molly, Benjamin Shattuck Master, bound for Malta and Syracuse,
there to be discharged for the use of the Squadron of the U States, agreeable to
Orders received by me from the Secretary of the Navy of the Vnited States 700, Barrels Mess Beef @ 14 501100$ pr Bbl- - - - - - - - - - - - - - -$10,150.00
N. ~ ~ O R R I B
New London
July 9t4 1805)
M: Olcott transmitted a Bill of Lading to the Department
[NDA. O5cem LL, 1802-1805.1

Extract from journal of Midshipman Charles Moms, Jr., U. 6. Navy, on board
U. 6. Frigate Pruidenf, Captain James Barron, U. S. Navy, commanding, Tuesday,
9 July 1805
5 Musterd the Ships company
6 A M. The Island of Malta in sight to Windward.
Noon the Harbour of Valette bore R B N W N 4 Leagues.
Latitude Observed 35" 51' N.
[Mrs. C. E. Fox original, NDA photostat.]
To Captain John Rodgers, U. 6. Navy, from William Baton, U. 6. Navy Agent for
the Barbary Regencies
J u l y 10Q 1806
SYRACUSE
SIR, I have been with Hamet Bashaw this morning, and endeavoured to persuade him to go to the United States, but cannot prevail on him - He desires
to remain a t Naples or Malta a while, I believe, in hopes of entering into some
arrangements with the king of the two Sicilies against Jose h Bashaw - As a
dernier retreat he intends returning to upper Egypt - E e is desirous of an
interview with you, and requests me to be informed when and where you will
make it convenient to see him [LC. Personal P. Misc, Eaton Ac No. 2553.1
To Maeter Commandant Oeorge Cox, U. 6. Rsvy, commanding U. S. Brig Vkm,
from Captain John Rodgers, U. 6. Navy
U. S. S. Constitution
Syracuse J u l y 10q 1806
SIR, SOsoon as the U.States Brig Tri2en under your command is ready for Sea,
you are directed to proceed without delay to Malta, send a Boat on shore with the
accompanying Package to Mr Higgins, 8r roceed direat to Tunis Bay without loss
eonaider yourof time; w h m on meeting the U. States Rigate Congrea~,you
self subject to the orders of her Commander - You will inform Capt Decatur
that no circumstance hm occurred to mek-e i t n e v for me to give him any
additional instructions further than to say; I n case of h ~ leaving
s
Tunis, that you

174

IVAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1805 TO 1807

are t o remain on his station until my m i v d with the Squadron - I shall Sail
from hence with the Squadron about Friday next, for Malta, at which place I
shall not remain longer than 48 hours 8: from thence proceed to Tunis - you will
inform Mr Davis that my not writing him, is in expectation of arriving there a t
farthest in five or Six Days after you.
[LC. JRP,Letters & Orders, Book A, 1804-1805.1
To Lieutenant David Porter, U. S. Navy, from Captain William Bainbridge, U. 6.
saw
U. S SHIP President OFF MALTA
l o t @ July 1806
MY DEAR SIR We have this moment arrived off here and shall not remain
longer than one day
The John A d a m went into Syracuse the afternoon that we came out - eve
attempt mas made on the part of Cap Barron to speak her by bearing away w i x
the Ship and also sending a Boat, but the unwillingness of her Commander to a
common accommodation (notwithstanding a signal wyaa flying from a Senior
Officer to speak) has prevented us from receiving our letters which came out by
her - this, you may suppme (after being twelve months without news from my
family) has greatly disappointed me
1 have nothing to inform you, and have only to tender you my best wishes for
glory and happiness to attend you; rest assured of my sincere friendship, and
command my services in the most free manner - I shall Keep you informed of
Kaval affairs at home and shall erpect from you all perticulars or interresting
occurrences of the Squadron - I wish you a seperate command as soon as
possible, for in that station you will be more independant than you can be in your
present one (Capt" of the Flag Ship)
The Morning u-e z ~ i l e dI delivered to Cool Rogers the following message from
Captv Barron - That be had heard that he had spoken in a disrespectfull
manner of his Brother's character, for which aspersion he should call on him to
answer in a proper place and time and that Commodore Barrons illness prevented
him from doing i t immediately - Corn R , replied that he should alwaye be
ready to answer Cap's Barron or his Brother the Commodore, and to inform him
that he should certainly expect to hear from him in America, and if he did not, he,
(Capt Barron) should hear from him - I answered very well the affair is now
understood - Rodgers further added "tell him if I do not hear from him, I shall
impute it to a want in him of - what no Gentleman who wears a uniform should
be deficient in" Presuming that he alluded to courage, I replied that I would not
deliver such a message, and that he had no right to make any assertion of that kind
I have given these particulars in order to govern your opinion if hear any reports
respecting i t - You well know my opinion of and esteem for that good Man
Commodore Barron, whose conduct I am convinced has been correct, and whose
heart is as pure as gold refined a thousand times
Make my respects and best wishes to Capts Sniith and Captu Stewart, to whom
I shall write, the first moment I have any thing interesting to communicate
They are friends whom I sincerely esteem, their rise in the Naval service and their
ha piness will always be interesting to me
$resent my best respects and sincere u7ishes for happiness to hfrl Lear, If I dare
I would m y give my 1- to her, for she is a Lady I much esteem - Be cautious
how you fulfill this par hrap for some peoples feelings might be a little touched
Tell L*Ben Smith i%all erpect frequently to hear from him, he has my best
wishes [for his] prosperity I?] and ha piness
Send me by the Con~rc.saa handsome Sernouse for Mrs B - and draw a me jor
the amount
If you go to Algiers preeent my respects to Monsr Thainville tell him we often
spoke of him in prison - God bless you
[NYHS. Naval History Sec.]

To Secretary of the Navy from Captain Edward Preble, U. 8. Navy
BOSTONJuly lo, 1806
SIR I am hond withyour letter of the l e t Ins* accompanied by the Masters Warrants Sailing Orders & letters for the Smacks, and letters for Comm* Barron, the
blanks shall be filled up, letters for the Commv sealed, Insurance ehall be made,
Invoices forwarded and all your directions correctly attended to.

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS
The Smacks are ready for sea. I have been disap inted in a Master for the
Trat~cllnbut expect one on Monday when they g o p r o c e e dto fulfil their instructions.
[NDA. Capt,ain's LB, Vol. 2, 1805.1
To Secretary of the Bavy from Captain Edward Preble, U. 6. Navy
BOSTON
July 10 1806
SIB I am honQwith your letter of the 26tP Ult? with e copy of your letter to
George Harrison Esqr upon the subject of the Medal.
The drawings I sent you was not intended to govern the size of the Medal but
merely to give the Artist a general Idea of the subject by presenting to him a group
of figures which he might reduce to suit his instructions.
I now enclose you another drawing which I think as correct a view of the commencement of our attack 34 Augt as can well be given in so small a compass, I have
a painting of the subject 6 feet long by 4 wide which I intend to send to the Navy
Office if permited.
[NDA. Captnin's LB, Vol. 2, 1805.3
Extract from journal of U. 6. Frigate Comiitution. Captain John Bodgers, U. S. Bavy,
commanding, Wednesday, 10 July 1805
[Syracuse] Arrived the US schooner Nautilus boats employed bringing provisions from the store ship Ann.
[USNA.]
Extract from journal of Kidshipman Charles Morris, Jr., U. S. Navy, on board
U. 6. Frigate Presided, Captain James Barron, U. S. Navy, commanding, Wednesday, 10 July 1805
5 Came to in the Harbour of Valette with the larboard bower in 12%fathoms
Receiving stores and setting up the Rigging. - 37 hIen Sick.[Mrs. C. E. Fox original, KD.4 photostat.]
To Lieutenant Samuel Evans, U. S. Navy, commanding U. S. Sloop Hornet, 10 Giuns,
from Captain John Rodgers, U. 8. Navy
U. S. SHIP Constitution
Syracuse July 1ltP 1806.
SIR You are desired to remain here not exceeding 24 hours after the Squadron
Sails, to bring with you an Inventory of all the Stores of every description remaining a t this place, in the hands of hlr George D-son our Agent, - the two Gun
boats Spars, blocks, powder, Shot &Q, are to be included - after you have completed this mission you will make the best of your way to Malta to join the
Squadron.
[LC. JRP, Letters 6 Orders, Book A, 1804-1805.1
To Surgeon Edward Cutbush, U.S. Navy, Narine Hospital, Syracuse, from Captain
John Bodgers, U. S. Navy
Constitution SYRACUSE
11 J d y 1805
SIR When patients are in a state to be discharged from the Hospital, you are
desired to send them on bonrd the first U. States lTesselthat arrives, to be born on
her Books as Supernumerarvs until she meets the Vessel to which they belong The Enclosed order to hi? Dyson you will hand him after taking a copy of the
same [LC. J R P , Lettc.rs & Orders, Book A, 1804-1805.1

'

To George Dyson, U. 6. Navy Agent, Syracuse, from Captain John Bodgers,
U. S. Navy
Constitution, SYRACUSE,
July 11,1805
~ I R YOU
,
are desired to furnish to the order of Doctr E. Cutbush of the Marine
Hospital, such articles of cloathing as he may require for the use of said Hospital
during my absence, taking his receipta for the same - The funeral expences on

176

NA'lrA.L OPERATIONS FROM 1805 TO 1807

such Persons as may Die a t the Hospital, must be charged to the Ship to which
they belong; to enable you to do this, Doctr Cutbush will furnish you with the
necessary information. [LC. JRP, Lett,ers & Orders, Book A, 1804-1805.1
To John Broadbent, U. 6. Navy Agent, Messina, from Captain John Rodgers, U. S.
Navy
U. STATESSHIPConstitution
Syracuae 11"P July 1806
SIR Your esteemed favour of the 9tP Inst accompanying a copy of the corresondance between yourself and the Governor of Messina on the subject of Lieu+
&idgely's Trial, 1 have this Ins? received by the U. States Schooner Nautilus. The Interest you have taken in this business demands my warmest thanks, and
I shall not fail be assured Sir, to make mention of i t to our Goverment, in a manner suitable to the respect & attention it justly merits - I am very anxious to
Know the decision of the Court, particularly as I do not feel that confidence
which I otherwise would, where Laws are exercised with more justice - If I had
only 48 Hours to spare (being a t present on the eve of Departure for Tunis) I
would make you a visit with the whole Squadron I do not wish, a t present, to make any comments on the Governors conduct;
but he certainly will do well to be a little more cautious in future - If on meeting an admiral of a certain Nation a t Sea, I was to send him to America aa an
hostage, for the performance of Justice in a certain case, it perhaps might be
thought very extraordinary - No authority whatever shall trifle with the life
of an Officer under my comma~td,or Sully the reputation of the American Flag,
by conduct the most infamous with impunity - my time does not admit of communicating to you my sentiments fully a t present; but you may assure the Governor of Messina that this young Man was delivered up in full confidence only,
that he as the Agent of Justice & representative of his Goverment, would prevent
illegal & unwarrantable proceedings being exercised to his prejudice I shall make you a visit so soon as the nature of our aEairs will admit, I n the
mean time accept my best wishes for your future happiness and believe me to be
with unalterable respect and Esteem,
[LC. JRP, L Bk B, May 1805-July 1806.1
Extract from journal of Midshipman Charles Morris, Jr., U. S. Navy, on board
U. S. m a t e P r u i d d , Captain James Barron, U. S. Navy, commanding, Thursday,
11 July 1805
6 hove up and stood out of t h e hartmur [of F'aletta]
7 Came to in 22 fathoms the light house bearing S UTB S.
league distant Ships draught of Water. 20. feet 9 ir~chesforward and 21. 6 Aft [Mrs. C. E. Fox original, NDA photostat.]
Extract from journal of Hezekiah Loomis, Steward, U. S. Navy, U. S. Brig Vixen.
Master Commandant George Cox, U. S. Navy, commanding, Thursday, 11 July
1605

[Syracuse] Pleasant. Got underway a t 5 o'clock A. M. wind ahead. At 4
o'clock P. M. the wind came astern. I t h t e d about 2 houm and then fell away.
At 8 o'clock spoke an English Frigate. There were two in company. This
completes 2 years service.
[L. F. Middlebrook. NDA copy.]
To Captain Stephen Decatur, Jr., U. S. Navy, from George Davis, U. 8. Charg6
d'bffaires, Tunis
TUNIS Friday evening 7 OClock
12 July [1806]
DEAR SIR I this morning delivered Cornm~ Rodger'e letter to the Bey's
Minister, having previously made known its contents, he still insists on the restitution of the Vessels and gives me to understand, that it will be supported by the
Bey even to a declaration of War, (thie I doubt) the style of the letter, will probably
induce him to decide very soon, -

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS
I have been with the Bey and Ministers from Six until1 nearly four OClock &
almost constantly, a Grand Council is held this evening and am ordered to appear
a t the palace in the morning, - from this state of things, I am entirely a t a loss to
suggest the probable result, arrangements however will be made by me, for leaving
the country. you [will] be constantly Kept informed of every transaction & for
expidition & security must beg you to let your boat come on shore every morning
by ten, never to wait latter than twelve
W S of Pa.]
To Lieutenant James Semphill Higinbothom, U. S. Navy, from Captain John
Bodgers, U. S. Navy
Constitution July lBth 1805
SIR You are directed t o have all the Boats, brought t o this Port by the U.
States Schooner Enterprise, takin to the Arsinal where they are t o laid up &
their Sails unbent, which with every other movable belonging to them you are
to have carefully stored as George Dyson Esqr, Xavy Agent, may direct, taking
his receipt for the same - You are to remain here in charge of thwe as well
as the two Ci d i I'ant Tripoline Boats, all of which, you are directed t o have
Kept in the best possible order, without incurring any expense further than
caulking, in case they map require it, and this is only t o be done by such caulkers
as can be furn~shedyou from time t o time by the Hospital.
I t will be well to have a hlan attach'd t o each boat, t o keep her clean, R + P her
~
Decks night & morning &F & 9 , which Men you are also t o rerieve from the
Hospital, from alnong such recovered Men as Doctr Cutbush may consider the
most proper Persons to furnish you with - T h ~ order
s
to remain in force until
further orders from me.
[LC. JRP, Letters & Orders, Book A, 1804-1805.1
To Captain John Rodgers, U. S. Navy, from Lieutenant George Washington Reed,
U. S. Navy
U SCHOONER
Xaufilt4s
Syracuse J d y l.Pth 1806
SIR Having some time ago applied to Com: Barron for permission to return to
the United States my request was not granted on account of the espected attack
on Tripoli; as that objectioil no longer csists I must again urge mj- request t o
you Sir on the same subject. I have now Sir compleated upwards of two years
in the A7autilus and the situation of officers on board of Schooners is by no means
agreeable. I[n] fact the continuance of officers on board of such vessels for any
length of time is sufficient t o give them a disgust t o the service You no doubt
Sir will acknowledge the justness of my obser\.ations as you are well acquainted
with the nature of these vessels, and of course cannot but confess that my
request is reasonable hiy rank in the servire I should suppose would entitile
me t o a better situation but as that can not be effeoted without importunity on
my part permission t o return home would be grateful1 to my feelings. Should
these obsenations not make that impression on you (which I espect it will)
the business would be better understood by a few minutes conversation with
you a t any time you may be a t leasure.
[LC. JRP, Vol. 2, Series Two, May-Oct. 1802.1
To Captain John Badgers, U. 6. Navy, from Robert Denison, Secretary of Captain
Samuel Barron, U. S. Navy
President O F F MALTAHARBOR
12 July 1805 8 oc. A M
SIR Commodore Barron being too weak t o write himself has directed me t o
state t o you the severe disappointment which he experienced a t not speaking the
John Adorns being within a short distance of her as she entered the Harbor of
Syracuse - The Commodore is utterly a t a loss t o account for the reluctance
which the Officer commanding her displayed t o speak the President &tho' a
Si nal wss made to t h a t effect - As he is exceedingly anxious t o know what
a'ices
she b r i n p from America, and to receive the private Lettem which he
supposes she must have brought for him, he has desired me t o request of you

178

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1805 TO 1807

particularly t o fonrard them by the first opportunity for Gibraltar, where i t is
not impossible that they may overtake us.
Nothing material has occurred since we arrived a t hfalta - Commodore
Barron is still confined t o his bed tho' rather better than when he left Sicily [LC. JRP, Vol. 2, Series Two, May-Oct. 1805.1
To George Dyson, U. S. Navy Agent, Syracuse, from Captain John Rodgers, U. S.
Navy
U. S. SHIPConstitution
(COPY)
Syracuse 12tP July 1806
SIR For the subsistance of Hamet Bashaw you will be pleased t o pay him
Two hundred Spanish Dollars pr Month, on account of the United States, giving
him one Month in advance. This order t o continue in force until the pleasure of the Government of the
United States shall be made known t o you through a regular channel, observing
a t the same time that on his leaving this Island without my consent, that you
are to consider this obligation as no longer obliging you to make him any further
advances on account of the U. States. [NDA. Captain's LB, TTol.2, 1805.1
[I2 July 18053
To Captain John Rodgers, U. S. Navy, from George Dyson, U. S. Navy Agent,
Syracuse
SYRACUSE
lb July 1806
SIR I have waited on the Governor in your name and represented t o him your
intention of leaving Hamet Bashaw in this City till accounts might be receiv'd
from Government respecting Him - (The Governor requests me t o inform you
that being so perfectlr satisfied with the conduct of the American Squadron in
this Port) He will give every protectiox~t o Hamet Bashaw & suit during their
residence here [LC. JRP, Vol. 2, Series Two, May-Oct. 1805.1
[13 July 16051
To Eon. David Thomas, Chairman of Committee upon Hamet Caramanli's Petition,
from William Eaton
SIR: M y statement t o the Speaker of the House of Representatives, Februarv
20, 1804, and to the Secretary of the Kavy of Auqust, 1805, are fair indices to all
our engagements with Hamet Caramalli, ex-Basliaw of Tripoli, and to the result
of the measureR concerted with him, Much document concerning this subject has
been exhibited, both to the committee of the Senate and to that of the House of
Representatives, whc had it under consideration during 1 he first session of the
ninth Congress; to which recurrence may now be had for infornintiori.
The general inatructions from the Secretary of the Kavy of 1804-5 to the commander-in-chief of the ercpedition, Commodore [Sanluel) Rarron, and the instructions of the Secretarv of State of June 6, 1R04, and April 20, 1805, to the commisioner, Mr. Lear, show the views and expectatiorla of G o v e r r ~ m ~both
~ ~ t in
, regard
c
on
to the operations of the force provided for the hlediterranean, and to t l ~ terms
which peace might be concluded. I t will appear, on examination, that in both
Government have been disappointed. To those exhibits, and the comments of
the committee of the Senate thereon, in their report, it seems nothilig need br
added t o enahle your committee t o form a clear oj)inion or1 the subject referred
to them.
The foilowinp copy of an order from Commodore Rodgers, and the statement
annexed, show the provisions passed to the Bashaw sirlc~our having removed him
from the p r o v i ~ ~ cofe Derne, in his kin dom: [See letter of 12 July 1805 from
S. Xavy Agent, Syracuse.]
Commodore Rodgers to George Dyson,
On the within order, hlr. Dyson paid him, u p t o the 12th of May, 1807, $4,400;
and. in the end of May, or begi~~nine;
of June of the same year, the further sum o f
$2,400, agreeably to specla1 appropriation, amounting to $6,800.

%.

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS
The number of the Bashaw's suite, on arrival at Syracuse, was about forty,
attached to his person; that number is reduced, by death or desertion, to about
twelve or fifteen.
The moveable property, consisting of horses, camels, arms, and clothing, which
he abandoned a t Derne, did not exceed $50,000. But when drawn from Upper
Egypt, he was a t the head of the Mameluke Arabs, as General-in-chief, in alliance
with Elfi Bey. He cannot ~ e t u mthither.
The sum of $30,000 or $40,000 might be considered a generous provision for
his future subsistence; but, to enable him to enjoy it, he should be removed to
some part of the Turkish dominions.
[Am. State Papers, For. Rel., Vol. 111, 1807-1815.3
To Ninster Commandant John Shaw, U. S. Navy, commanding U. S. S. J& Ad-,
from Captain John Rodgers, U. S. Navy
(COPY)

U. S. SHIP C ~ t ~ l t i t l d h

Syraczlse July ldtb 1805
SIR YOUare to consider James Roach a Midshipman now on board the Frigate
John Adams under your Command as under an Arrest for Neglect of Duty on the
12'8 June in suffering John Patterson, Will* White and George Brown (Seamen)
belonging to the United States Gun Boat N Q6 being taken from said Gun Boat by
the British Squadron, blockading Cadis under Command of Admiral Collingworth,
contrary t o the Orders of Lieut Lawrence his commanding Officer [NDA. MC LB, 1804-5.1

TO Secretary of the Navy from Captain Edward Preble, U. 6. Navy
BOSTONJuly 1.94 1805
SIR I take the liberty to enclose you a letter I recd from Mr G. Dyson, and a
copy of a letter from him to yourself as it is possible the original may not have
reacned you,
I krlow nothing of the misunderstanding he speaks of more than hie letter explains, but am confident that less than 5 pr Cent on the articles purchased for the
Squadron would not pay the Agents for their trouble; ss the greatest part of the
s~lppliesare sent from this Country on which they charge no Commission, altho
they receive &: deliver the whole out to the ships, if they were allowed a small
commission on the stores sent out, for receiving & delivering them, I presume the
2 pr Ct. would be sufficient on what they actually purchased, but if they are to
receive and deliver the slores sent out from this Cou~ltryand be responsible for
them without any consideration, I do not believe they can afford to make the
purchases they are obliged to for less than 5 pr Cent.
I hope you will pardon the liberty I take in giving my sentiments on this subject
p 8. You will oblige me by returning the letter directed to me.
[KDA. Captai~i'sLB, Vol. 2, 1805.1
Extract from journal of U. 6. Frigate cb~titotion,Captain John Bodgers, U. S. R a w ,
commandmg, -day, 12 July 1805
Arrived
the
U.S. schooner Enterprise With 5 gun boata
[Syracuse]
Anthony Gale Joined us as Cap$ Marlnes
[USXA.]
Extract from journal of Midshipman Charles Morris, Jr., U. S. Navy, on b o d
U. 6. m a t e Pruidenf, Captain James Barron, U. 8. Navy, commanding, Friday,
12 July 1806
% past 6 Weighed and sailed
5 A M sent the plnnace on shore for the purser
8 the pinnace returned Latitude Observed 35'53' N.
[Mrs. C. E. Fox original, NDA photostat.]

180

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1806 TO 1807

To Master Commandant Isaac Hull,U. S. Navy, from William Eaton, U. S. Navy
Agent for the Barbary Regencies
SYRACUSE
1.9'4 July 1806
DEARSIR, The Fleet is under way, I am still a t Moorings, shall see you a t
Malta in twelve days, and take passage in your ship down the coast.
Meantime I am as always
[NDA. Isaac Hull LB, 1803-1806.1
To William Eaton, U. S. Navy Agent for the Barbary Begencies, Syracuse, from
Captain John Bodgers, U. 8. Navy
U. S. SHIP Constitution
Syracuse July IS, 1806
SIR Kot until after the Signal was made for the Squadron to get under weigh,
did I receive your statement, dated yesterday, on the subject of the Invalides you
mention - I informed you yesterday that those Men might be sent on board the
Constitution (the one in the Hos ital excepted, who would receive the benefit of the
Hospital until cured) and that would determine on something to alleviate their
sufferings - I again repeat that this is the utmost I can do for them - I have
never been in the habit of deferring things of even the smallest importance, until
the last moment.
[LC. JRP, L Bk B, May 1805-July 1806.1

fl

Income to be paid Hamet Caramanli
U. S. SHIP Constitution
Syracuse Harbor July 13, 1806
I have ordered George Dyson Esqr the U. States Kavy Agent a t Syracuse to
pay Sidi Hamet, Ex Bashaw of Tripoli, two hundred Dollars per month for the
support of himself and Suit, until the pleasure of the Goverment of the U. States
ahall be Known on the subject, or until I shall see cause to revoke said order Signed JOHN
RODGEES
[LC. J R P , Letters & Orders, Book A, 1804-1805.1
To Captain Stephen Decatur, Jr., U. 6. Navy, from George Davis, U. 8. Charge
d'dffaires, Tunis
TUNISSaturday Night 11 P M
July 13% 1806
DEARSIR My conferences with the Bey, which have been long and frequent,
have not terminated in any decisive reply, other than relates to the Vessels, which
his Excellency insists on having restored, - he complains of the style of the commodores letter, and will I presume write the President on the subject, and which
+I1 close our discussions for the time being, I should like to send a copy of the Letter to the Commodore, but it may be five
or six days before I receive it, - can you detain your Frigate that Length of time
for this object, if not my dispatches shall be closed immediately,
P. S. I go to the Palace in the morning
WS of Pa.]

-

To Captain Stephen Decatur, Sr., Philadelphia, Pa., from Secretary of the Navy
NAVDEPT-- IS July 1806.
Doctor Bullus will deliver to you a letter addressed to your son Capt Stephen
Decatur jr, and a box (of which the enclosed is the Key) containing a Sword, voted
by Congress to your Son, in consideration of his gallant Conduct in the destruction
of a Tripolitan Frigate [Philadelphia] of 44 guns, while lying in the harbour of
Tripoli. I request the favor of you to deliver this letter, the Box and the Key, to
your Son, when you shall see him
I offer you, Sir, my congratulations, on the very distinguished character ecquired by your 80n, and request you t o accept assurances of my respect and
esteem.
[NDA. OSW, VoL 6, 1802-1806.1

-

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS
To Captain Stephen Decatur, Jr., U. S. Navy, from Secretary of the Navy
NAVDEPT19 J d y 1805.
The Sword, which will be delivered to you with this Letter, has been procured
and is now presented to you, agreeably to the Resolution of Congress of the 27
Novr 1804. Receive this Sword, Sir as a testimony of the high sense entertained by your
Country of your gallant donduct in attacking in the Harbour of Tripoli and destroying a Tripolitan Frigate [Philadelphia] of 44 guns, and believe me when I
assure you, that among all my official acts none can afford me greater pleasure
than that of executing the will of our Country on this occasion.
[NDA. OSW,Vol. 6, 1802-1805.1

.

To Andrew Sterett, former Lieutenant, U. S. Navy, Baltimore, I d . , from Secretary
of the Bavy
NAVDEPT 13 J d y 1806.
The Sword which will be delivered to you with this letter has been procured and
is now presented to you agreeably to the Resolution of Congress of the 3rd F e b ~
1802.
-

Receive this Sword, Sir, as a testimony of the high sense entertained by your
Country of your gallant Conduct in the Capture of a Tripolitan Corsair [Tripoli],
and believe me when I assure you that among all my official acts, none can afford
me greater pleaaure than that of executing the will of o m Country on this occssion.
[NDA. OSR, Vol. 6, 1802-1805.)
Extract from journal of U. S. Frigate Constitufion. Captain John Bodgers, U. S. Bavy
commanding, Saturday, 13 July 1805
[Syracuse] % past 10 [A.M.] the brig Syren. schooner Nautilus. and all the
gun boats Got under way and stood out Of the harbour, Arrived here a Rusian
Frigate
[USNA.]
Extract from journal of Henekiah Loomis, Steward, U. S. Navy, U. S. Brig V f n q
l a s t e r Commandant George Cox, U. S. Navy, commanding, Saturday, 15 July
1805

This morning pleasant, fresh breeze. We arrived off the harbour of Malta a t
6 o'clock A. M. Saw a Frigate t o leeward. We made a signal and she answered
it. We bore down upon her and found her to be the U. S. F. President. We gave
her our package of letters which we brought from Syracuse and then she made
sail and stood down the straits. We put about and went into theharbourand came
to anchor a t 8 in the morning, a t which time the &and Seignoto Sloop of War fired
a salute, which was answered by the two Frigates bhat came in with us. We were
quarantined. Rec'd product a t 12 o'clock, Rec'd some rope from shore and one
sack Tobacco.
{L. F. Middlebrook. ND.4 copy ]

To Captain Stephen Decatur, Jr., U. S. Navy, from George Davis, U. S. Ch*
d'Affaires, Tunis
TUNIS Sunday NigU 14* July 1805
DEAESIR My conference with the Bey this mor[n]ing lasted until1 nearly 12
OClock, the result of which is the impoasibility of arranging our Affairs as was
expected, and almost a certainty of a declaration of War "h'othing" but the famine
restrains him" - I t is more than probable that 1shall be compelled to sollicit a
passage on board your Frigate, I doubt whether I shall be able to see the Bey Tommorrow, as he has given me
his whole attention for three days, if not Wednesday morning will bring you a
final answer, [HSof Pa.]

282

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1805 TO 1807

To Secretary of the Navy from Master Commandant Isaac Chauncey, U. 6 . Navy
BALTIMORE
14'h J d y 1805
SIR I srived hear last evening and shall assume the command of t h e [Brig]
Hornet tomorrow a n d report her state s n d condition immediately after
T h e reason of m y not ariving hear sooner was in consequence of m y not feeIing
perfectly well I took passage t)y t h e way of French Town and unfortunately had a
long one.
{NDA. M C LB, 1804-5.1

*
Extract from journal of U ,S. Frigate Comtitufion,Captain John Rodgers, U.id. Navy,
commanding, Sunday, 14 July 1805
past 2 (P. l X . 1 R'eighd Made sail and beat Out of the harttour (of Syracitsej
in company with Constellation Essex nnd John Adams and schooricr E~bterpn'ze.
Latitude Observed 36O06' K.
lUSXA.1
Extract from journal of Hezekiah Loomis, Steward, U.S. Navy, U. S. Brig Vixen,
Master Commandant George Cox, U. S. Navy, commanding, Sunday, 14 July
1805
l;\*lalta] Thks day pleasant. A t 6 o'clorli got underway avd ~ t o o dout of the
harbour and lap t o 11-r-aitinrfor JIr. Hunt t h e Purser. A t 12 o'clock sent our boat on
shore with orders t o bring him off imlnediatrlr. The boat returned in about 2
hours with the Puraer. We then made sall for Tunis. Head wind. N~cholas
Cole sent on shore.
11,. F. Xliddlebrook. S D A copy.]
To Captain John Rodgers, U. S. Navy, from Sir Alexander John Ball, Governor of
Malta
~ I A L T16%
A July 1805
SIR,I have t h e honor t o acquaint you t h a t I have detained here a Turkis!~
Frigate t h a t brought Dlspat,chea for me from Constantinople t o enal~leyou to
send an answer t o t h e requisition made t o j o u by t h e Ottomen Porte.
(SDA. Captain's LB, Vol. 1, 1R0,5.]
To Sir Alexander John Ball, Governor of Malta, from Captain John Rodgers, U. S.
Navy

U S SHIPConstitution
fifalla 15th July 1806
SIR I have this Instant t.he honor t o acknowledge the receipt of your Let,trr of
this date, direct and through t h e hands of my predecessor t.hose of the 19'P March
and 5's of J u n e last, with the accompanying correspondence by hfr Shatton, his
and Rais Effendi, hlinister for
Britanic M a j c ~ t y ' s Minister a t Co~~stantinoplft
Foreign Affairs to his Highness the Grand Signior, on the subject of t h e 1iet.ch
Gheretti captured by the U States Squadron, under Command of Comnlodore
Edu-ard Preble, and the Polacres La hfadona 8 Jebra, under Ottoman Colours,
which were detained and sent into Malta in Sept.: last by the Squadron under
Command of Commodore Samuel Barron, for a Violation of the Blockade of
Tripoli I n the case of the Gherelti, I beg Your Excellency will have Communicated
t o the Ottoman Government, that. owing t o the ol~trapeousinsult and open
hostility committed by her in conjunction with the Tripoline Gun Boats, in the
Capture of the late U States Frigate Philadelphia, as has already been statcd t o
the Ottoman Government by Commodore Barron, through the Medium of your
Excellency, ss a n outrage in its nature, so flagrant,, arid insulting t o the Flag of
the U States; as not to admit of my giving su Answer untill I am speciaily
authorized so t o do, by my Government; further than t o say t h a t the Master,
Mustapha, and Crew of the Gheretti have been liberated, and t h a t the Slaves o r
Tripolne Kegroes found on board of her, a t the time of Capture, have been
delivered t o t h e Bashaw of Tripoli, in conformity with a sti ulation in the Articles
of Peace between t h e U States of America and the %ashaw, in which the
COPY

U7ARS WITH BARBARY POWERS
latter claim'd said Kegroes as his Subjects: of course he L a t present the accountable authority to his Highness the Grand Signior for them -.
The Polacrcs La Madonu & Jebra; the emstence of the cause which produced
their detention having terminated in our contest with Tripoli, and knowing the
strong desire that the Government of the U States, has of maintaining harmony
and good understanding with his highness the Grand Signior; I shall in consequence, for the benefit of the original Owners, take upon myself to restore these
Two Vessels in good order, and have directed to be paid into the hands of the
Ottoman Con~ul,resident here, a Sum in Specie exactly equal to the Amount of
what their Cargoes sold for, subject to their orderI feel concerned that any circumstance should have occurred in our affairs, to
give your Excellency so much trouble, and I shall feel equally concerned if the result, should lessen in the smallest degree, that friendship which has hitherto
existed between his Highness the Grand Signior, and the Government of the C
States of America; feeling sensible at the same time that if he will take a fair and
impartial view of the whole subject, that he will distinctly perceive, that compulsive measures alone in support of our rights, in common with other Kations, was
the sole cause of the Capture of one Vessel, and the detention of the Two others;
and that he will, as he must be sensible of the disinterestedness of our Friendship,
by the restoratio~lof the Tnlo Vessels Q Cargoes in dispute, on a similar occasion
in future enforce the necessapy measures to prevent his Subjects committing similar abuseSo soon as I am informed of the determination of my Government in the case of
the Gheretti, Tour Excellency shall be made acquainted therewith, presuming that
your Excellency will have the goodness to communicate the same to the Ottoman
Government.
[XDA. Captain's LR, Vol. 2, 1805.1
To Secretary of the Navy from Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Navy
B o s ~ o July
s
15th 1805
SIR Mr Benjamin Clark Prince has this day accepted the appointment of Sailing
Master in the Savy, & taken command of the Traveller; he is a yourig man of good
abilities & character. I expect they will sail the day after tomorrow.
-4 vessel arrived here t h ~ sday from Lisbon which spoke ; l l r Harraden in N? 8,
7 days after he left that Port. RIr H reported that N o 8 sailed weU and proved a
good sea Boat. I have no doubt but long before this he is with the squadron.
[ I D A \ .Captain's LB, 1'01. 2, 1805.1
To Master Commandant John Shaw, U. S. Navy, commanding U. S. 6. John A d m ,
from Captain John Bodgers, U. S. Navy
Co~tst~lutton.MALTAJzily 16th 1605
SIN,From the list of Supernumerays on board the U. States Ship John Adams
under your comnia~id,I have to desire that you will turn over to each of thc Gun
Boats, Seven Men.
[LC. JILY, Letters & Orders, Book A, 1804-1805.1
Report of Nicholas C. Nissen, Danish Consul, Tripoli
hIost respectful memorandum.
Dispatched from Tripoli July 16, 1805,
received in Copenhagen October 19. 1605.
I n my report of the 10th of last month I had the honor to express my most
respectful gratitude for the graciouis communication from the high administration,
dated the 2nd of >larch last, and to ~nforlnyo11of the co~~clusiori
of peace betneen
Korth America and the Pasfla.
Consul General I,ear, in order to settle every thing before his departure, remained
in Tripoli until the 21st of last month and dispatched a frigate to Syracuse and
hlalta with the North .4tnerica1iprisiontrs of war who were held here. which thereafter returned on the 17th with 80,000 piasters fort. [?] and about 100 Tripolitans
slid negroes, who had been captured by the h'orth Americans. Another frigate
was dispatched the day after the peace to Derne to transport hiajor Eaton and the

184

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1806 TO 1807

North American troops stationed there, the guns, etc. and to persuade Sidi Hamid
likewise to voluntarily leave the Tripolitan area. In order to be informed about
the present of affairs, the P d h a sent out a Schaus [?] with the frigate, which
has recently returned by way of Malta. Sidi Hamet has left Derne with the
frigate; nevertheless, six corsaira have been equipped here and two Anglo-Maltese
vessels chartered to bring 800 men with ammunition p. p. [?I to Derne, and a
reinforcement is also being sent by land to the troops which are in the neighborhood. The Pasha intends to demand a considerable sum from that part of the
population ahich has shown itself to be loyal to Sidi Hamet, and, as Derne has on
the whole always shown itself rebellious, the Pasha will in all probability try to
assure himself a t this opportunity of their obedience in the future.
Soon after the peace eight corsairs, some small, mere dispatched to the coast of
Sicily and Naples, of which three soon returned with prizes and prisoners; a large
Neapolitan vessel was also brought in, loaded with grain, but, as she was provided
with a Tunisian passport and bound for Tunis, she was soon released. The
Pasha's Admiral hIurad Rais is ready to embark with an eight-gun chebacco, but
will doubtless first follow the expedition t o Derne.
The merchants here now desire entirely neutral vessels to send t o Europe and
the Levant waiting cargoes of zinc, madder, negro slaves, p. p. [?I. Sidi Muhamed
Dghies has on this account requested me to write to Malta and in this connection
has assured me that the treatment of the Danish vessels will be such, that the
masters themselves will now go t o Tripoli. I have therefore mitten to Mr.
Fromcaux at Malta and requested him to communicate this information to the
Danish vessels there which are seeking freight; I am awaiting his reply.
On account of illness Commodore Barron has assigned the command of the
North American squadron in the Mediterranean Sea to Commodore Rodgers, who
is daily expecting a reinforcement of 800 men and 10 gun vessels with 2- to 32caliber guns p. p l?]; and, in spite of the peace with Tripoli, the greatest part of the
squadron and all the gun vessels are remaining here. After hearing Colonel Lear's
assurance, the Congress haa decided to keep a squadron in this harbor a t a!l times,
and i t is intended for this purpose to obtain the harbor of Syracuse by a kind of
property right; this is all the the more probable, since even the proposals which
have been received with respect hereto seem to indicate such a desire on the part of
the government in Nliples, and it would perhaps give to Syracuse an activity and
prosperity which is now sought in vain.
Most respectfully,
N. C. NIBSEN.m.p.
TRIPOLI
IN BARBARY
July 16, 1805.
To The Royal Administration for the African Consulates.
[Original in Danish Archives. Courtesy of Lt. hI. V. Brewington, U.S. N. R.]
To Captain Stephen Decatur, Jr., U. 6. Navy, from George Davis, U. 6. Charge
d 'Affaues, Tunis
TUNISTuesday. 19 OClock
16"P July 1806
DEARSIB I shall take a passage on board your ship, and will be a t the ~ o u l e t t a
on Friday morning by 8 or 9 0 Clock - you will not consideratiorl measure as a
declaration of War, the reasons will be detailed to you in person,
The multiplicity of Affairs which occupy me a t such a moment must plead my apology for
being laconic
I shall continue to advise you every day as usual of all occurrences, until1 I
have the Pleasure of seeing you on board, [HS of Pa.]

-

To Captain commanding B. B. M. 6. Eurydice, from Captain John Bodgers, U.

8,

Navy

U. S. SHIPConstitution
Malta 16') July 1806
SIB It bein represented to me this Day that there is an American Seaman
on board his8ritanic Majestys Ship Eurydics under your command, by the
Name of James Gardiner, who was impressed into your Service; I have t o request
that in case this Mtm is on board, as has been represented; that you will have the

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS
goodness to discharge him from your Service; in order that I may proceed in his
case as the Laws of the United States direct.
Copy of the above in favor of John Kelly & Allan Fish sent to the Commr jofficer]
of his Britanic Majestys Ship Pheobe. - 17th July
[LC. JRP, L Bk B, May 1805-July 1806.1

116 July 18051
Launching of U. 8. @anboatsNos. 4 and 10
Gun Boat NP 4. was launched the 5th of March, and Gun-Boat h'q 10. the 8*
of April. 1805. from the Navy Yard Washington JOSIAHFOX,Navy Constructor
NAVY YARDWASHIN~TTON.
16t4 J d y 1806 [NDA. Misc. LB, Vol. 4, 1805.1
Extract from journal of U. 6. Frigate Consfifuflon, Captain John Rodgers, U. 6. Navy,
commanding, Tuesday, 16 July 1805
+4 past 4 [P. hi.] shortend sail & came to anchor in the harbour of Malta in
13%fathoms water the Pu'orth point a t the entmnce of the harbour Bore Pu' B E
the south point N E 5 E.
The light house N 34 E. 5 past 5 Moor,d ship. came in and Anchord the
US ships Constellation Essez and John Adams brig Syren schooners Nautilus &
Enkrprize, the store brig Franklin and the 8 Gun boats.

117 July 1805]
To President Thomas Jefferson from Hamuda, Bey of Tunis
lTrsnslationl

HAMUDA
BASHAW
BEY,
Prince of Princes of Tunis, the Well Guarded City, the Abode of Felicity.
To Mr. THOMAS
JEFFERSON,
President of the bnited States of America.
MY GREATA N D GOODFRIEND,
The object of the present is t o inform you of
the capture about t,wo months ago, by one of your men-of-war of a Tunisian
corsair with two prizes. You will gather the details pertainin to this capture
from the attached documents and the additional one which your 8harg6 d9Afiaires,
George Davis, will explain in detail to your RIinister, which will inform you that
whatever reasons they mag have had or believed they had, there was none for
holding the said vessels, unless, as I feel from the unbecoming language of your
present Commodore, the latter has resolved to take hostile measures against me
and my subjects. Nevertheless, I am far from supposing that such a thing is
authorized by you, in view of the fact that the good faith in regard to the treaties
and the sincere friendship which I profess for you and your Government, have
always been maintained and observed by me.
The style of the letter from your Commodore would have constrained me t o
take those measures which it is my strong desire to avoid, had you not sssured
me that the rash and precipitous action of an Individual, which would tend t o
en age and plunge us into a state of war, can never be approved by you.
am this same day informin your Commodore of these my genuine sentiment8
through the said Davis, your 8harg6 dlMaires, who with my approval, is going
personally to see him, and make him, in the most solemn manner, responsible for
any unexpected hostile operations prejudicial to the state of amity fortunately
existing between us which he may believe himself authorized to undertake,
before there has been an understanding between you and me, which I ardently
and sincerely desire and hope will occur.
I cherish the hope and expect that the promptest, steps will be taken for the
return of my said vessels, and take this opportunity t o wish you from Heaven,
My Great and Good Friend, the most complete Happiness.
HAMUDA
BASHAW
BEY (SEAL)
19 Rebia Teni, A.H. 1220
At the Bardo of Tunis 17 July 1&5
[NA. SDA. CD,Tunis, Vol. 3, July 1605-Sept 1806.1

f

a

186

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1806 TO 1807

To William Eiggins, U. S. Navy Agent, Malta, from Captain John Rodgers, U. S.
Navy
U. S. SHIPConstitution
Malta 1Y *h July 1805
SIR YOU will oblige me by informing the Ottoman and Russian Consuls
resident here, that in consequence of not hearing from my Goverment on the
subject of the Ottoman and Russian Vessels sent into this Port by the U. States
Squadron under command of Commodore Barron, that I will take upon myself
to restore to their orriginal owners, the Vessels with the amount of what their
Cargoes sold for in this Island, they giving receipts in full of all Damages and
Costs against the United States and Captors - This is the extent of restitution
that I feel myself a t liberty to make, therefore there will be no necessity for any
thing further being said on the subject, than whether this proposition is acceptable
or not; and I will thank you to inform me of their answer as soon as possible. [NDA. Captain's LB, Vol. 1, 1805.1
TO Captain John Rodgers, U. S. Navy, from William Eiggins, U. S. Navy Agent,
Malta
MALTA17'h J U ~ 1805
Y
SIR I am honored with yours of this date, but before I proceed to conimunicate
the instructions you impart t o me to the Ottoman d: Russian Consul, I should
be glad to be informed if you mean to restore the Vessels & Cargoes in question
t o their orriginal Proprietols exempt from the charges which have been incurred
in the repair of the one and sale of the other or if it be only the Nee1 produce you
mean to restore - if it be the Gross amt you restore of course my charges will
come against the C. States Navy Department. [XDA. Captain's LB, Vol. 1, 1805.1
TO William Biggins, U. S. Navy Agent, Malta, from Captain John Bodgers, U. 6 .
Navy
U. S. SHIP Conatitulion
I*IALTA
17th J I L1805
~ ~
SIR, In answer to your favour of this evening permit me to observe that I did
not know of any material repairs being made on the Vessels in question; however
since this has been the case I will deliver them in the condition they now are in,
clear of charges on account of their repairs. - The Conlmissions on the sale of their
Cargoes with all other attendant expences, the orriginal proprietors must pay. [NDA. Captain's LB, Vol. 1, 1805.)
To Captain John Rodgers, U. S. Navy, from Lieutenant James Lawrence, U. S
Navy
U S GUKBOAT
K Q fi July 17 [1X05]
SIR After the misfortune of loosing three of my men 011 my passage out, I am
again under the dissagreeable neccqsity of informing you that, i V m Butler belonging to NQ6 deserted last night M? Chauncey and one of my petty Officers have been
in search of him since 7 OClock but have not yet returned.
[LC. JRP, Vol. 2, Series Two, May-Oct. 1806.]
To George Hay from Secretary of State
DEPARTMENT
OF STATEJuly ITth180.5.
SIR, In the course of the last year one of the Vessels under Commodore I'reble
in the Mediterranean captured the Brigantine Transfer [renamed Scourge] bound
to Tripoi jafter having an estimate madeof her value he took her temporalily into the
public service, and she has since been proceeded against as prize a t Norfolk, where
an interlocutory decree for her sale hss been made and time given till the 13'b day
of the next term of the District Court for claimants to come in. Her late owner
being a resident of Malta, and Mr Merry, the British Envoy, supposing him to be a
British subject, has addressed a letter to me on the subject of this capture, intimating a dissatisfaction that the proeecution should proceed without the presence

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS
of any representative of the owner. As it does not appear that the master or any
of the officers of the Transfer were brought to Xorfolk with her, as she was converted to public use abroad when in strictness she should have been previously
sent home for adjudication, it is thought to be not unreasonable in order to satisfy
forms and repair any irregularity which might have taken place before the judicial
proceedings commenced, that ample time should be given for the owner to make
his claim if he should think proper. You will therefore be pleased to apply to
the Court to prolong the time limited for the claim and to suspend the distriblition
of the proceeds of the sale for six months or such other term as may be sufficient
for notice to reach the Island of Malta.
[NA. SDA. Dom. L, Vol. 15, June 1805-July 1810.1

(17 July 18051
TO Captain John Rodgers, U. S. Navy, from Master Commandant John H. Dent,
U. 6. Navy
SIR Agreeable to your order of yesterday, I have had a muster and a Search, for
those deserters from the Garrison and there is none on board the United States
Schooner Nautilus
THURSDAY
MORNS
[LC. JRP, Vol. I , March 1791-Dec. 1814.1
To Major General La Villette, Malta, from Captain John Rodgers, U. S. Navy
U. S. SHIPCon.9titution
MALTA
July 1805
SIR I have received your Letter of this date on t h e subject of Six Deserters
from the Garrison under your command, & regret that any circumstance should
ever have occurred to give you reason to anticipate, by the arrival of our Ships in
your Port, the loss of your hfen - There is not a Vessel in the Squadron, under
my command, but what at present has more than her compliment of hlen; but if
on the contrary they were deficient be assured Sir, that I shall ever discountenance
such improper means of procuring them - I have ordered a general search
throughout the Squadron and should the 3Ien you mention be found, the3 shall
be returned to you immediately. From the orders I have this moment given, no officer of the Squadron, %-illpresume to take hIcn from this Garrison, out of the Port.
[LC. JRP, L Bli 33, &fay 1805-July 1806.1
To Captain Thomas Bladen Capel, Royal Navy, H. B. M. S. PAoebe, from Captain
John Bodgers, U. S. Navy
U. S. SHIPConstitution
Copy
Malta J u l y 17th 180.5
SIR, It being representchd to me this Day that there are two American Seamen
on board His Britanic hfajestys Ship Phoebe under your command, by the Xames
of John Kelly and Allen Fish, who were impressed into your service; I have to
request, that in case those Men are on board the Phoebe, as has been represented,
that you will have the goodness to discharge them from your service, in order that
I may proceed in their case as the Laws of the U. States direct.
Honb! Capl Ki ple
commg. b i s Britanic hlajestys Ship Phoebe
[NDA. Captain's LB, Vol. 2, 1805.1

-

-

To Captain John Rodgers, U. 6. Navy, from Captain Thomas Bladen Capel, Royal
Navy, H. B. 1 . 6 . Phoc6c
HIS BRITANKICK
R~AJESTYS SHIPPhoebe AT ~ ~ A L T A
the 17'b J u l y 1800'
SIR I have to acknowledge the Receipt of your letter requesting the two Men
im msed by me out of an American Ship a t Sea might be given up
eh!'
Master of the Vessel they were impressed from, only assured me that one
was an American, but as their Certificates were not Regular or Clear I had strong

188

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1806 TO 1807

grounds for Supposing them English Seamen, but upon any assurance from you
that they are really American Subjects I shall immediately give them up; I beg
leave t o acquaint you that I have received a Petition from a Seaman named
Samuel Peacock on board the U S Ship John Adams, claim-the Protection of the
Flag of Great Britain also from Chaq Wilson, Jar Pearson, Steps Kentle, & E d d
Barken, of the U S States Ship Conslitution all of them surrender themselves as
Deserters from His Britannick Majesty's Ship Juno I have therefore t o Request
you will have the goodness to Order them to be delivered up The two Men belonging to the Constitution declare to me that they also are deserters from His Britsnnick hIajestyls Ship Hornet and are British Subjects
I enclose two Petitions above alluded to for your peruseal & have t o beg they
may be Returned
P S. by the Juno's books lodged in the Storekeepers Office the above men appear
to belong t o her.
[LC. J R P , Vol. 1, March 1791-Dec. 1814.1
To Captain Thomas Bladen Capel, Royal Navy, H. B. M. S. Phoebe, from Captain
John Badgers, U. 6. Navy, Commodore of U. 8. Squadron in the Mediterranean

COPY

U. S. SHIP Constitution
Malta 18 July 1806

SIR, I have to acknowledge the reciept of your Letter of this date on a subject
which if impartially dissected will prove that the Flag of the U. States is insulted
by the very language which you offer as an appology for an injury of the first
magnitude. - To wit, on my requesting that you would have the goodness to
discharge two American Seamen which I was informed were on board his Britanic
Majestys Ship under your command, your answer to me is, that, "When you impressed these Men, out of an American Merchant Vessel at Sea, that the Master
of the Vessel they were impressed from, only assured you that one was an American, but as their Certificates were not regular or clear, that you had strong
grounds for supposing them English Seamen" - At the same time you enclose
me two papers from five hlen belonging to different Vessels of the American Squadron, now in this Port, requesting of me to deliver them up as British Deserters,
when a t the same moment, you have two Deserters belonging to the Constitution
under my Command, which you have not even given yourself the trouble to mention, altho they have been demanded. Permit me t o ask you Sir, what Law authorizes your impressing Seamen from
a n American Merchant Veasel a t Sen? Whether it is an acknowledged priviledge
you have exercised over our hlerchant Vessels by Special Covenant existing
between our two Goverments? Whether it is a peculiar privilidge you seperately
enjoy by t,he acknowledged Laws of Sations? or whetl~erit is a Law of of necessity,
prescribed alone by your own ideas of our rights, according to the various exigencps which the necessity of having your Ship well 3Iannc:d may suggest to your
immagination? if the latter, permit one to assure you that such policy you will find
is not your interest, for this very reason; that the effects of the principal would
oblige us in return to adopt the same system; in which case you would loose Ten
Men where you would recieve one in return - this you must be aware of, & on
taking a n impartial view of the subject, percieve that we have avoided giving you
cause t o pursue a measure, which if practiced to that extent which your Letter
bears the marked features of, will unavoidably end in a dispute between two
Nations, whose Interests are connected in such a manner as to be injurious to
both. - you may readily concieve that whenever Men in our Service infrin e
its L a w , M a n extent to merit the severest punishment; that they will readify
avail themselves of any protections; which presents to their view a possibility of
rescuing them from the chastisement which their bad conduct merits. I request again Sir, that ou will have the goodness to deliver the two Mcn I
wrote for yesterday, also John Graves and John Pindar, Deserters from the
U. States Service, now on board the Phoebe; a t the same time permit me to assure
you that I have too much respect for the British Navy ever to detain one of ita
Deserters so long ss the practice of Justice by itrr Officers, in similar cases, will in
a n shape authorize my pursuing a different conduct.
5 w o of the Men you mention in your Lettcr as Deserters, have been on this
Ships Books upwards of Sixteen Months, which will prove to you that they are
not the Characters they wish to make themsclvea appear to be. [NDA. Captain's LB, Vol. 2, 1805.1

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

189

To Secretary of State from George Davis, U. 6. Chargit d'Affaires, Tunis
(COPY)
TUNIS
July 18'P 1806.
SIR, I have the honor to inform you, that the United States Frigate Congress
Capt. Decatur, eight days from Syracuse, anchored in the Road of the Gouletts
on the morning of the 11% Inst. - The same day received a letter from the
Commodore, erlclosing one for His Excellency the Bey of Tunis, Copies of both I
have the honor to transmit you. On the following morning [12th] was a t Bardo, and informed the Sapatapa that
I liad received a letter for his Master, which was written in English; and delivered
it, to him - He spoke much of the detention of the captured Vessels & of the
disagrcable consequences, which would necessarily arise therefrom. - I informed him that the Commodore, with Consul General Lear, would shortly be
here, & endeavour to close all dziculties - he requested to know the object of
their visit - I stated, it was probably for the final arangement of our Affairs, as
well as for making some changes in the Treaty. - He answered, that neither
would be received, untill the captured Vessels, were restored, & that Col. Lear,
would never be acknowledged as one authorized to transact public business with
him - that if he visited him as the Consul of Algiers, i t was well - if he tisited
him aa the Interpreter of the Commodore, well; but never while there was another
acknowledged Representative, could a Consul of Barbary, come to talk with his
Master on public affairs. - The discussion was continued for a long time without
producing any thing decisive. On the 13'8 was a t Bardo - the Bey gave me a rivate audience -he said, that
the letter had been tran~latedwhich 1 deliveref his Minister, & that 1 should
learn hereafter what he thought of its contents; that he only wished to know, why
the Vessels were not restored; if the act would be sanctioned by the Government;
& if he was to consider it, as a declaration of war. - Informed him, that on all
these points, Satisfactory answers should be given, when the Commodore arrived.He said, that the Commo: did not appear to be a man whose presence was
necessary, unless to produce an immediate declaration of war; that he must first
repair the injuries he had done, before he could expect that any negociation
would be entered into - that on this point he should write His Excellcy the
President - that with respect to the Consul of Algiers, he had already said, in
what capacity he should consider him, & how he would be received; that he could
not defend him from visiting his Regency; but that he certainly should decline any
conversation with him relative to our Affairs. - With respect to a change in the
Treaty, that could not be done; hewas satisfiedwithit,as it was, & we hadalready expressed our approbation of it; if we wish to bresk any of the Articles, or make
any new ones, the shortest way was to recall me, commence hostilities; and then
make a new peace; when such a Treaty should be concluded, as we thought proper,
if we paid well for at - In relation to a final arangement on the score of his
pretensions, this depended much on ourselves; that he would be treated as we
treated the Dey of Algiers, to whom he never could feel himself inferior - that
the insignificant offers made him, had, & would be declined. On the morning of the 14% was again a t Bardo - the conversation of the day
before was talked over, when I assured the Sapatapa, that the Vessels could not be
restored; that the Commodore, would unquestionably visit this Bay, with hi
Squadron; and with the expectation of seeing all difficulties sranged before he left
it; & that unpleasant consequences might result from the Bey's refusal to receive
Col. Lear, in the manner, which the President expected - that for the arangement
of our affairs no great sacrifices could ever be made, & that it was the indispensable
duty of the Commodore to know, the Bey's last expectations; always observing,
that nothing would be offered greater than those his Master had rejected the last
year, & which indeed I vim not authorized a t the moment, to repeat, or even
accord, if the Bey would accept. - He assured me, that the final termination of
t h e Affair must be war, unless our mode of negociation was wholly altered - that
the first thing which ought to be done, was the restoration of the Vessels; a concession on our part, indispensabl necessary, previous to his entering into any
negociation with myself, or the $ommodore. -

*

*

[See also 13 July 1806.1

[LC. JRP. Vol. 2, Series Two, May-Oct. 1805.1

*

*

.

190

NAVAL OPERATIOhTS FROM 1805 TO 1807

To Levett Harris, U. S. Consul General, St. Petersburg, Russia, from Captain
John Bodgers, U. S. Navy
COPYA

TXITED
STATESSHIP Consiittdion

Malta
July 1805.
SIR, Your letter of t h e 20tb of March in answer t o Commodore Barron, my late

precedessor's c o m m u n ~ c a t ~ o ndated
s
Syracuse 20th Jan? on the Subject of t h e
Itussian Polacre St Illiguel, [or St. Michael] detained & Sent into hlalta by t h e
C n ~ t e dStates Squadron, for attempting t o enter Tripoli in violation of t h e Blockade by said Squadron; I have this instant before me, & beg leave t o express thc
high Sense I entertain of the interest you have taken in this business.
As t h e object no longer exists which authorised & equally demanded in support
of ourrights in common with other Kations, the Capture of this Vessel, peace
being concluded between t h e Bashaw of Tripoli & t h e U. States of America, on
terms perfectly honorable t o t h e latter, & our captive brethern, which chance hat1
placed in their hands, restored again t o t h e arms of liberty, Br. their Country; I
have in consequence & even at varlnnce, with general custom in similar cases,
taken upon myself t o restore t o t h e Original Owners, the Vessel & amount of t h e
Sales of her cargo in Malta with a belief t h a t t h e Russlan Government will duly
appreciate m y motive, when I assert t h a t t h e high respect & regard, which I
conceive the Government of t h e G. States entertains for t h a t of Russia, is the only
authority I have t o justify m y proceedirlgs in the present case, & one in whirl1 i t
cannot but he clearly perceived by t h e responsibility I have takcn upon mvself,
hon confident I feel t h a t my Government will approve a measure, w h ~ c hif view'd
by t h a t of Itussia in a liberal & j u s t point of View, a ill equally prove t h e independence of t h e United States & t h e u11 uestionable respect, our Governnlerit enttrtains for the commercial rights of thegussian nation. Khenever disputes arise between Governments, t h e primitive cause. either b:
intention or inadvertance is generally on our Side. T o acquit my Country of
either & both these charges, i t is necessary only for me to observe that the restoration of t h e Vessel & Cargo, in question, in the manner as before mentioned, is the
Strongest and most undeniable proof t h a t neither pccuruary ronsiderations in the
officer, commanding t h e Squadron, by which She was detained, or of any construet i o ~ i ,which t h e orders of his Government admitted, would have produced the
mez..sure complain'd of with any Kation, much more t h a t of Itussia, with whoni
we have so long lived in friendship, & reciprocal comrncrcial advantages, but
meerll a compulsive everclse of indespe~isibleduty in S u p ~ ~ oofr tthe I~idepencicnct.,
honor, & interest of his Country's Flag, ahich not only t h e case requiretl, but tlit
established Lan's of Xations authons'd, & it is not too much t o Say, or1 taking a
retrospective View of t h e whole affair, considering t h a t chance had plarcd 300 of
our unfortunate Countrymen in t h e power of Such an enern) as the Bashan o f
Tripoii, t h a t even t h e exercise of more vigorous measures would have t>et.11
just~fiable.Under t h e circumstar~ces,You having already Stated in the Russian Gorrrnment, the possitive and indubitable manner in which this I T c ~ s eattcniptctl
l
to
violate the Blockade, will convince t h a t Govtrnmcr~tof the justice of our proceedirrgs & 1it)erality & p u r ~ t vof our intent~c~ns
in a manner, I f atter n~yself.on
similar occasions in future, t o induce the Russian Govcrnt t o tahe mea\ureb t o
prcvent their Subjects, committing similar abuse.
15.4. SDA. CD, St. Petersburg, Vol. 1, 1794-1809, also Captain's LB, Vol 2,
1805.1

-

To Antonio Beynaud Carcus, Consul to the Emperor of Russia and the Grand
Signior, from William Higgins, U. 6. Navy Agent, Malta
~ ~ A L Tthe
A 18 J d y 18ai
COPY
SIR I a m directed by His Excellency the Commander 111 ctncf of t h r American
Squadron in the Mediterranean t o impart t o you, t h a t hc 11ns received no instrurt i o ~ i srelative t o the Greek & R u s s ~ a nVessels, captured for attemptirig t o violate
t h e 13lockade of Tripoli H e feels howcvcr gcrsuadetl tllat his Goverrrient wlqtlei
t o prcherve and cultivate t h e good understanding a t preserrt subsisting txtwcerr 1 1 .
and his Imperial Xfajcstv t h e Emperor of Itussia, & his Highr~essthe C;ranci
under this impression he authorises me t o say, t h a t he will restore t o
S ~ g n e ur
t h e original Proprietors the above mentioned Vessels i r ~the state they now are;
altho ncarly five thousanti Dollars have been laid out in thcir repairs l o fit them
for a voyage t o America, & he will furthcr give u p the amount of their Chrgoes of
Corn after deducting therefrom, all t h e expences incident t o thcir sale. - He

WARS WITH BARBAR P POWERS

191

expects on the part of the Proprietors that upon such restitution they will give
receipts exonerating the Captors and the United States of America from all
future responsibility and claim whatsoever.
[KDA. Captain's LB, Vol. 1, 1805.1
To Sir Alexander John Ball, H. B. M. Civil Commissioner for the Islands of M d t o
and 0 0 ~ 0from
,
Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Navy
BOSTON J u l y 18 180.5
DI SIR Soon after I returnd to this count^, in a conversation I had with the
Sectv of the Kavy I mention'd that you were desirous of obtaining a couple of
Fishing Smaclis, in consecluence of which he directed me to purcha~eand send
them out t o Commd? Harron who ha5 directions to divest them of the Public stores
on board, and deliver them to you a t the original cost here.
One is called the Travellrr & the other the Ranger - both very fast sailers, I
have had the holes in the Well-room secured with pine plugs, have sheathed the
bottoms of both with half Inch cedar boards and sealed the wells inside with pine
plank to enable them to cross the Atlantic with greater safety.
Should they be made use of for Fishing Smacks the sealing in the well room
which is only tacked with small nails must be taken out and where the plugs now
are, the holes hored through the bottom for the free admission of Water, the m-ell
rooms should be kept very clear and the holes through the bottom clear or the
fish will not l i ~ e . Should you not want t o employ them as Fishing vessels they
n ill in their present state make excellent Packet boats
I entreat you to present my most respecfull compliments to Lady Ball.
P S. Please t o accept the news papers I send you.
(LC. EPP, Yo1 15, June-AII~.180.5 1
Extract from journal of Hezekiah Loomis, Steward, U. S. Navy, U. S. Brig Vum,
Master Commandant George Cox, U. S. Navy, commanding, Thursday, 18 July
1805
This dav variable winds. We came abrest of the harbour or Ray [Tunis],
at 2 o'clock P. &I., coming up with an island off the bay we were fired upon by
a Tunis~angun boat. Having a fresh breezc we choose not t o stop and speak
her, but stood in for the town. shc still pursuing us. In 15 minutes it came calm
and she came up with us very fast with lzer sweeps. Xot knowing what her
intentions were, we got our sweeps out and swept around so as to bring a broadside
to bear upon her. A fresh breeze springing up, me m sweeps and stood in and
left the boat to make the best of a bad wind as she could. We were soon after
met by the Congress \vho put about and stood in with us. We came to'anchor
abreast the Town a t 6 o'clock P. M. There is a t the entrance of the Bay a high
mountain on the starboard hand as you go into the bay on which is a small town
which is a part of the ruins of ancient Carthage which
destroyed by an
earthquake. The land so sunk forms the bay.
[L. F. hliddlebrook. KDA copy.]
To W i i a m Higgins,
U. S. Navy. Agent.
Malta, from Captain John Bodgers, U. 6.
-Navy
U. S. SHIPConstitution
A f a h lgtP July 1805
SIB,For the benefit of the Captors I have to request that you will have the
Ottoman & Russian Vessels, cnptured by the U. States Squadron under command
of Commodore Barron, valued by five respectable and disinterested characters,
previous to their being delivered to their orrigind owners: a certificate of which
with the necessary receipts agreeable to the principal on which they were retained,
I will thank you to h a r e forwarded as soon as possible t o the United States Navy
Department.
[NDA. Captain's LB, Vol. 1, 1805.1
To Captain John Bodgers, U. 6.Navy, from Sir Alexander John Ball, Governor of
Malta
V A L L ~19%
E July 1806
&R, I have the honor t o acknowledge the receipt of your Excellencys Letter
of t h e 15'4 Instant which I deferred answering until I could have a conversation

192

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1805 TO 1807

with the Captain of the Turkish Frigate now here who was commissioned t o
settle the business which your Letter explains - He informs me, that he hm
received a Note from hfr Higgins Agent of the U. States, specifying in precise
terms the conditions on which you could release the Ottoman Vessels that had
violated the Blockade of Tripoli, t o which he has agreed. I have therefore only
to represent the same to the Ottoman Porte, and to offer you my services on any
occasion in which I can be useful [KDA. Captain's LB, Vol. 1, 1805.1
To William Higgins, U. 8. Navy Agent, Malta, from Antonio Beynaud Carcus,
Consul to the Emperor of Russia and the Grand Signior (the Sultan of Turkey),
Malta
[Translation]

MALTAlQ* July 1806

S I ~In
, compliance with the commands of the Sublime Port under date the

27'4 April I accept with the consent of the Illustrious Sigr Saluman Captain

Commanding the Corvette of the before mentioned sublime Port the restitution
of the two Ottoman Vessels ss likewise the neet produce of their Cargoes of
Grain once that His Excellency the Commander in Chief of the Squadron of
the United States has been pleased to restore the same to the respective Owners
& upon which restitution these shalt give receipts exonerating as well the Captors
as the United States of America from every future respollsibility snd claim
whatsoever.
REYNAUD
Caacus
Signed ANTONIO
Ottoman & Russian Consul
[NDA. Captain's LB, Vol. 1, 1805.1
Extract from Memorandum Book of Captain Edward Preble, U. 6. Navy, 19 July
1806

The Traveller Mr. Benj. Prince Master 8 Ranger hfr. John Allen sailed for
Malta.
[LC original.]
To Captain John Bodgers, U. S. Navy, from Master Commandant John Shew,
U. 6. Navy
U. S. FRIGATE
John Adams
Malta July 9Oib 1800'
SIR Yesterday the following Men run away from the Cutter on Ship's Duty
under the care of Midshipman Keen and have not since made their Appearance
on board (Viz) Cha? Barton (Sea) Nathi Stone (Sea) and James MqCann (0sea). I think i t probable they may have taken refuge on board some of the British
Vessels in Port and have ordered an Officer in search of them. [LC. JRP, Vol. 1, March 1791-Dec. 1814.1
To Captain John Eodgers, U. 6. Navy, from Lieutenant James Lawrence,
U. 6. Navy
U. 8. GUNBOAT
NO.8, J d v 80, [1806]
SIB: I am sorry to be sin under the necessity of informing you of the desertion
of two of my crew, (a arine and a boy) lest night while the crew were busily
employed washing cloathes, they took advantage of the moment and swam from
the boat, two of my officers have been in eearch of them since daylight, they
have been heard off, and I make no doubt will be apprehended this evening
since the loss of my other men I have constantly had two sentry on deck, and
eo good a look out kept that i t would have been impossible for them to swim
from the vessel at any other time than they did, as I never suffered a man to be
on deck after 9 o'clock.
[NDA. A-4.J

3

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS
To William Higgins, U. S. Navy Agent, Ildalta, from Captain John Rodgers,
U. 6. Navy
Constitution. MALTA20th July 1805
SIR Fourteen Tripolines (part of the suit of Hamet Bashaw) I have to send
on shore, and re uest that you will have them subsisted a t the expence of one
ahilling each p g a y , until a passage can be procured them to some part of
Egypt.For their passage p u will be pleased to furnish them with such
quantlty of Provision, as you may concieve necessary, which with the amount
of their subsistance during their residence here, you will charge to the Navy
Department of the U. States.
[LC. JRP, Letters & Orders, Book A, 1804-1805.1
To William Higgins, U. S. Navy Agent, Malta, from Captain John Rodgers,
U. 6. Naw
U. S. SHIP C m t i t u t i m
Malta 20th July 1805
SIR, I n case any public Vessels of ours should arrive here within 20 days after
my Departure, you will be pleased to direct their Commanders to proceed to
Gibraltar, looking into Tunis and Algiers Bays; a t one of which plnces i t is
possible they may find me with the Squadron: but should any Vessels arrive
, will direct them to remain here until further
after the expiration of the 20 d y ~you
Orders from me.
[LC. JRP, L Bk B, May 1805-July 1806.1
To Captain Hugh G. Campbell, U. S. Navy, and a copy to each of the commanders
in the squadron, from Captain John Rodgers, U. S. Navy
I;. S. SHIPConstitution
Malta 90th July 1806
SIR, In case of seperation you are to consider Tunis Bay the Rendezvous. [LC. JRP, L Bk B, hfay 1805-July 1806.1
To Secretary of the Navy from Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Navy
BOSTONJuly 80 1805
SIR I recd a letter a few days since from L* Haraden [dated 27 May 18051
of Gun Boat A* 8 which I immediately caused to be published, as it gives additional character to that class of vessels.
The Smacks have sailed for the Mediterranean, each one is navigated by a
Master, hlasters Mate, 3 Seamen, a Cook & Boy. I shall make a return of the
stores on board, and transmit it to the Department as soon as I have copied it
into my Books.
PS. I shall leave this for Portland tomorrow, where I hope to remain for the
summer, exceping an occasional visit to Newbury Port where a bomb & Gun
Vessel is building.
[NDA. Captain's LB, Vol. 2, 1805.1
Extract from journal of U. S. Frigate Conttitution, Captain John Rodgers, U. S. Navy,
commanding, Saturday, 20 July 1805
[Malta] Joined this ship as Master Wp Knight from the brig FranMin. I B.
Turner promoted to Acting L+
[USNA.]
Extract from journal of Hexekiah Loomis, Steward, U. S. Favy, U. S. Brig Vbt.
Master Commandant George Cox, U. S. Navy, commandmg, Saturday, 20 July
1805
[Tunis] This morning a boat came off from shore with Consul (Doct.or Davis)
bro't off some sheep, We received some of them on board the V h . Blowing a
gale of wind.
(L. F. Middlebrook. NDAbpy.1

194

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1805 TO 1807

To Tobias Lear, U. 6. Consul General, Algiers, from George Davis, U. S. Charge
d'dffaires, Tunis

NP34

TUNIS July 9l.t 1806.r e d Augt 34 1806
SIR I had the honor to receive on the 11'4 inst. from Capt: Decatur your
polite favor of the 311'4 of June Be pleased to accept my thanks for your attention in forwarding me a transcript
of the treaty with Tripoli your injunctions relative to it shall be carefully observed
Altho' the Bey declines, receiving you as one, authorized to transact affairs
with him, still i t is possible that the arrival of the Squadron may give an entire
change to his mode of thi~ikingbe that 8s it may, I most earnestly solicit your
presence; as your advice will ever have the greatest weight deciding my public
Conduct on every occasion, but particucar~yat such a moment. As Captq Decatur leaves this immediately, I have not time to transcribe the
letters enclosed to Commodore Rodgers to whom I therefore beg leave to refer
you, for the occurrences of the last Eight days. [NA. SDA. CD, Algiers. Vol. 7, Part 11, Jan. 1806-Sept. 1807.1
To Captain John Bodgers, U. S. Bavy, from George Davis, U. 6. Charge d'Affairer,
Tunis
TUNISJuly %I8*1806.
NQ2
SIR, I am honored with yours of the 29th ultimo, enclosing a letter for His
Excellency the Bey of Tunis, which has been delivered; and for your full inform*
tion, have the honor to transmit a Copy of my present dispatch to the Horlbl~the
Secretary of State - This I had hoped to have handed you in person; but as I
found there was a possibility of my missing you, my departure has been declined;
and the reasons thereof stated to the Bey. Your earlv presence, ia as wer, anxiously look'd for; Satisfied that it is the only
to
means of bringing the Mairs, under my management, to a final conclusion
obtain which, & fulfill the expectations of our Government, on the score of retaining the peace, none will so cheerfully co-operate with you, as myself. By a recurrence to Commodore Barron's letter, you will find that I was authorized, to give the Bey reason to believe the Vessels might be restored, on his making
a proper application to the Commander in Chief; but as I conceived it a point,
which would materially influence the final result of our negociations here, it was
thought important, rather to destroy such a hope, even al the risk of a war; than by
exciting it, t o lay the foundation for extravagant pretensions - In the letter you
honor'd me with on the l l ' b ultimo, you only observe, that your conduct, would
be agreable to the assurances Commodore Barron had given me; It was therefore
most natural for me to ask an explicit answer, as I shall ever avoid committing
myself with my Government, particularly on a point so wholly dependant on
yourself. I have also the honor to enclose you a Copy of the Bey's letter, to His Excellency
the President of the United States; the contents of which, as well as my letter to
the Depart* of State, you will have the goodness to communicate to Col Lear; not
having time to make another Copy [LC. JRP, Vol. 2, Series Two, May - Oct 1805.1

-

To Midshipman John

B. She.mood, U. 6. Bavy, U. 8. Frigate Constd~alion,from
Captam John Bodgers, U. 8. Navy

Comlitution MALTA %letJuly 1806
SIR, YOU are directed to take charge of the Tunetian Xebecque & her two
Prizes sent into this Port by the U States Ship Constitution; Midshipman Reed
now in charge of them is to join the Constellalion in your place, you are therefore
desired to give him the necessary receipts, after which you will be held responsible
for every article belonging to them [LC. JRP, Letters & Orders, Book A, 1804-1805.3

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

195

To Midshipman Oliver Hazard Perry, U. 6. Navy, U. 6. Frigate Cddaiion, from
Captain John Bodgers, U. 8. Navy
Cbnstitution. MALTAd l July [I804
SIR YOUare hereby directed to join the U. States Schooner Nautdwr, aa her
first Lieutenant, & report your self to her commanding Officer Capt. John H. Dent.
[LC. JRP, Letters & Orders, Book A, 1804-1805.1
To Captain John Bodgers, U. 6. Navy, from William Biggins, U. 6. Navy Agent,
Malta
MALTA8.9 July 1806
SIR In Conformity with your orders of yesterdays date I have to inform you
that thier exists in Store the following Public Provisions. 660 Barrels of Beef and Pork
1000 Bags of Malta Biscuit Containing about 120,000 pounds Weight
26 Casks & Butts of Bread, old
3 Tierces Rice
3 Kegs of Butter
6 barrels of Beans
bad
3 barrels of Flour
[NDA. Captain's LB, Vol. 2, 1805.1

1

Extract from journal of Bezekiah Loomis, Steward, U. S. Mavy, U. 8. Brig Vlnn,
Master Commandant George Cox, U. S. Navy, commanding, Monday, 22 July
1805
punis] Pleasant. Fresh breeze. At 9 o'clock the Congress and ourselves got
underway, stood out of the bay. The Congress stood avay for hlalta. We stood
off and on all night * * *
[L. F. Middiebrook. NDA copy.]
To Captain John Bodgers, U. S. Navy, from William Higgins, U. 8. Mavy Agent,
Malta
MALTAthe W July 1805
SIR AB I expect the ditliculty of obtaining money here will every day encrease
and that I shall not be able to place the bills I now hold unless a t other places, I
beg leave to suggest the necessity, if no u-ar takes place with Tunis, of sendin
one of the small Vessels upon this Service immediately. the more especially as
have been obliged to borrow of all my friends to supply the wants of thesquadron,
By this plan Government will be a considerable saver, as a better Exchange will be
obtained without the expence of freight and Insurance which I should pay if the
Cash was brought by an English hfan of War Leghorn would be the best place
to recur to, the English having no intercourse there and bills would not be so
abundant as one may expect to find them every where else - I take the liberty
of earnestly recommending this business to your attention, and if no other Vessel
could be spared one of the larger Gunboats might ar~swerthe purpose [LC. JRP, Vol 2, Series Two, hfay-Oct 1805.1

f

Extract from journal of U. S . Frigate Conrfifufion.Captah John Rodgers, U.S. Navy,
commanding, Tuesday, 23 July 1805
5
[A.
M.]
weigh,d Made sail and stood out of the harbour All the
At
[Malta]
Squadron in company Meridian light airs and pleasant Weather.

[USNA.]

196

NAVRL OPERATIONS FROM 1806 TO 18W

To Captain Samnel Barron, U. 6. Navy, from Secretary of the Navy
Nav DEPT.U: S. &5 July 1806.
As the Navy Agent a t Syracuse receives no compensation for his trouble in receiving and discharging the Stores and provisions sent to him from the U
Stab
for the use of our Squadron, and as the Articles purchesed by him for us are not to
a great amount, and as the circumstances attending his agency are somewhat
peculiar, I am willing that a Commission of 5 per Cent be allowed to him on ail
purchases made by him for the use of the Squadron. You will therefore allow
him 5 per Cent on the amount of purchases made by him as Navy Agent.
[NDA. LB, 1794-1807.1

-

To Master Commandant Isaac Hull,U. 8. Navy, from William Eaton, 0.8. Navy
Agent for the Barbary Regencies
SYRACUSE
t?6tb July 1806
DEARSIR, Captain Decatur amved here last Evening and leaves this morning,
will touch at Malta, but not go on shore, as he apprehends difficulty in landing
my Horses. I have finally concluded to take passsge in a Merchantman which leaves this in
six days, and flatter myself with the pleasure of going down the Meditersnian
with you. Intend to get into a Yankee a t Gibralter if possible and steer strait
home. - You will have no war with Tunis - That Bey finds a better Account
in stealing Sheep, than in hunting Tigers. [KDA. Isaac Hull LB, 1803-1806.1
Extract from journal of Hegekiah Loomis, Gteword, U. 6. Navy, U. 8. Brig Virlm,
Master Commandant George Cox, U. S. Navy, commanding, Friday, 26 July
1805
Light winds. Saw 2 sail ahead. Made sail and came within gun shot. Found
them to be a PoIeerj Brig and gun boat. They immediately o n seeing our guns
hauled their wind. We fired a shot athwart her bows. She did not regard that.
We gave her another between the two. She paid little attention. We gave her
a third just under her stem. She immediately kept away for us. We boarded her,
also the gun boat. Found them to h e Tunisian~with passports from Consul
Davis. Saw another sail to +ndward, made sail and stood for her - did not
speak her.
b.F. Middlebrook. KDA copy.]
To Lieutenant David Portef, U. S. Envy, from Captain William Bainbridge, U. 6.
Navy
U. STATES
FRIGATE President
Bay of Giblallar HQ July 1806
MY DEARSIR We left Malta on the 13th, and have this moment anchored in
this Bay. I wrote t o you from Malta and have now no news to inform you of.
Corn. Barron is something better and I hope in a fair way to recover his health.
Your servant has got what I hope his master will steer clear of among the fair
eex; however this will not depreciate him, as there is some allowance to be made
for a close confinement of 19 months.
I have to accuse you, my friend, for not making me your confident, and telling
me whom your fair one was, for then, on my arrival in America I could have
visited her and gave you information respicting her tender heart. now I shall have
to find her out by magic: but do not be jealoua of my intention, 4 * *
After my arrival in America I shall give you full details of the Navy, and of all
other matter (in my power) which may be interesting to you. Let me hear from
you aa often as op ortunities will admit.
to be with sincere regard, and honor, glory, and happiness
Believe me, Dr
to attend you,

garter,

0

[NYHS. Naval fIi~t0ry;Sec.I

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS
Extract from log of U. S. Brig H a t , of 18 Guns, Master Commandant Isaac
Chauncey, U. 8. Navy, commanding, 28 July 1805
Wote.-This log fs written from the viewpoint of a Sailing Master and eontains minute detaILs of the
hsndllng d the sails, care of the rigging and all subjects pertaining to the navigation of a tailing veml.1

This Day a t 4 P M the U. S. Brig H m e t was Launched from Mr Prices Yard
[At Baltimore, Md.]. draft of Water forward Seven feet Six inches Aft ten feet 6
inches - Moored the Brig along Side of the Wharf - Officers attached to the
Brig aa follows - Isaac Chauncey Esq? Commander, James Leonard 1st Lieu*
Charles F Grandison Master Lawrence Keene Midshipman, Thomas WarreU do,
Samuel Renshaw do, Peter Penny do, John Nicholson do, Mr Johnson Boatswain
Mr Green Purser [NA. NDA. Original, 1805-1810.1
Extract from journal of Midshipman Charles Morris, Jr., U. S. Bavy, on board
0.6. Frigate President, Captain James Barron, U. S. Bavy, commanding, Sunday,
28- lnlv
.- 1806
6%s d u t e d Admiral Bickerton with 15 Guns as we passed him which he returned
with 13 6 Came to anchor in 13 fathoms in the Harbour of Gibraltar [Mrs. C. E. Fox original, NDA photostat.]
To Captain John Bodgers, U. 6. Navy, from John Broadbent, U. 6. Navy Agent,
Messina
COPY
X~ESSINA
$9, J u l y 1806.
SIR On the 15th of this month arrived in this Port the Gunboat NQ 2 which
had lost convoy about ten days before and was pick'd up or rather taken in tom
by an Imp! vessel about fifty Leagues East of Malta with two men on board
in great distress agreeable to the deposition of Matteo Mievith[?] the Master
which was also confirmed by the men found in her The Implvessels last departure
being Constantinople subjects the Gun boat according to the regulations of the
Health Office here to forty days quarantine consequently I could not go on board
or take any Invcntry of the vessel. About two days afterwards the men went
in a small boat which I had procured them (in order to enable them t o get their
provisions on board) along side H. B. M. Ship Euridice Cap. W Hoste and one
of them remained on board whether he offerd his services or was detained or
what could induce them t o go from their own vessel along side the Frigate which
was also in quarantine I know not, but having demanded the men both tplrough
the means of Mr Bameester the British Consul and direct to Cap Hoste he was
refused alledging that he was an Irish man. Two or three days afterwards I
was informed that some Greeks also in quarantine had been on board and that
they had purchased some thing from the man but of this I have not been able
to get any positive proof Not knowing what might hap n next if the vessel
remained in that state I have come to the resolution to g i p three Sailors here
and have given the command of her to Luigi Autore a native of this Place and a
Pilot who has often been in the Service of the United States and who I believe
has always conducted himself well. I have given him a certificate authenticated
by the Governor of this City, and the French & British Consub, which I hope
will be sufficient to protect the vessel as far as Syracuse I have agreed to allow
him one Dollar per. day, and that the three men shall be paid the same as able
seamen in the Servlce of the U. S. for the 24 of this month to the time that they
can be returned to this Place
I have warmed Autore not to put any of the Ships in Quarantine by going
on board before he ives an account of the circumstance of the vessel having
communicsted with &Vera1 Ships here not admitted to h a t i q u e
[LC. JRP, Vol. 2, Series Two, May-Oct. 1805.1
To William Eaton,

U. 8. Navy Agent for the Barbary Regencies, from William
Biggins, U. 6. Navy Agent, Malta

MALTAthe $9 July 1806
SIB I have been honored with Your three letters of the 19. 23 & 26 July. ta
the contents of which I have paid attention The Turks have been put on b ~

d

198

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1806 TO 1807

the Tunisan Prizes with some others waiting a passage t o Egypt, These t h e
Commodore directed me to allow One Shilling a day t o and I have taken upon
myself in consequence of your recommendation to extend the same support t o
those. Your letters for Captn Hull arrived too late, but he will no doubt be
shortly here =-hen they shall be delivered him, t h a t for Captp Decatur is in his
possession he left us yesterday Morning for Tunis.
I hand you on the other side a Kote of the produce of your Draft which could
not be negociated either here or at Naples, the balance in m y favor stands
charged to your debit in Account. in Doll? 105%
I shall be exceedingly happy t o see you here
E. Huntington L&AG, EA 317.1

m.

To Captain Hugh G. Campbell, U. S. Navy, from George Davis, U. S. Chargb
d'Affaires, Tunis
TUXISJuly 29'h 1806 &IONDAY
NIGXT
SIR you will hsve t h goodness
~
t o inform me whrther you have any communications t h a t require m y immediatr prtssence on board, a s no change has taken plore,
since t h e Frigate Congress left this Bay - and I presume will not untill the
arrival of the Squadron, of which I should be happy t o learn something - you
know the formalities a-hich must be observed before I can have the pleasure
of seeing you in prrson.
[LC. JRP, Vol. 2, Series T a o , May-Oct. 1805.1
Extract from journal of Midshipman Charles Morris, Jr., U. 6. Navy, on board
U. S. Frigate President, Captain James Barron, U. S. Navy, commanding, Monday,
29 July 1805
PIarbor of Gibraltar] T h e U S Bomb Ketch, Vengeance - Lewis arrived
from Boston
[Mrs. C. E. Fox original, K D A photostat,.]
Extract from journal of Hezekiah Loomis, Steward, U. 8. Navy, U. S. Brig Vixen.
Master Commandant George Cox, U. S. Navy, commanding, Monday, 29 July
1805

Excessive hot and calm. At 3 o'clock chascd a ship until we came within
gun shot. We fired two guns a t her and she hovc to, but being so near on shun',
we left to steer into Tunis again, which place she had left the same day.
[L. F. Middlebrook. K D A copy.]
TO Captain John Rodgers, U. 6. Navy, from Captain Hugh G. Campbell, U. S.
Navy
Constellation, TIJNIS BAY.
J u l y 90ib 1806
SIR I arrived at t h e Goleta this morning a t day break, and a t Mcrredian received t h e Encloseil from hlr Davis, which is all the i ~ ~ f o r m a t i oInhave able t o
collect, Except, t h a t t h e Congress and I'izen left his place Eleven days Since - I
informed Ms Davis of your coming a n d requested he would be off in t h e Mor~:ing,
he will probably wish a boat t o attend him
[LC. JRP, Vol. 1, March 1791-Dec. 1814.1
Extract from journal of Hezekiah Loomis, Steward, U. 8. Navy, U. 6. Brig Vixen,
Master Commandant George Cox, U. S. Navy, commanding, Tuesday, 30 July
1805

Tunis Bay. This morning at 8 o'clock saw a sail. We gave chase and came
u p with her a t 10 o'clock. We cleared away t o quarters b u t finding she was riot a
match for us we sent our boat on board and she proved t o be a Tunisian, with a
passport from t h e American C;onsul in Tunis. She mounted 6 guns and 60 men.
We let her proceed about her business. At 1 o'clock P. M. we uaw a number of
sail in t h e offing, some of them very large, a t 4 o'clock spoke t h e first one which was
t h e Constitution, Commodore Ro[d]gers a n d the squadron consisting of sixteen

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

199

sail. We then stood in for Tunis. The fleet now consisted of the Constitution,
Constellation, Essez, John Adams, Brigs Syren, Vixen, Franklin, Schooners Nautilus,
Enterprize, Sloop Hornet and 8 gun boats, making in the whole eighteen sail. Lay
to in the Bay all night.
[L. F. Middlebrook. NDA copy.]
To Captain Alexander Murray, U. S. X a ~ y ,Washington, D. C., from Secretary of
the Navy
KAV DEPT. 81 July 1806
As soon as the Frigate Adams shall he prepared, you will weigh Anchor & proceed to sea, & use all practicable vigilance to carry into execution the following
instructions.
I. The Coast between the river St hlary's & St George's Bank and to the d i e
tance of the Gulf Stream you will consider as your cruising range or station.
11. Within the territorial jurisdiction of the United States, i, e, within a marine
league of the margin of our Coast, you will protect all vessels whatever, as
well foreign as American, against the aggressions of the armed vessels publick or
private of any nation whatever; and you will repress all infractions of law which
map be therein attemptd by any such armed vessels. 111. Any private armed vessel without a regular Commission that you may find
with~nor beyorid our jurisdictional limits cruising to the annoyance of the commerce of the United States, you will bring or send into some port of the United
States for examination & trial.
IV. If the Master of any private armed vessel cruising against the commerce of
the United States, will not when requested produce to you his Commission, or if
when produced there shall, from the Appearance of the Commission itself, or from
the Conduct of the hlaster, be sufticient ground to suspecl its gcnuiness or validity,
you will in every such case, briiig or send her and her Officers and crew into some
port of the U. States for examination and trial. V. Every American Vessel taken within our jurisdictional limits, you will retake
& release in whatever place you may find her; and every American vessel taken
either within or beyond our jurisdiction by a private armed vessel without a
regular Commission, you will retake & release.
VI. Whenever you find an American Vessel that has been captured by a prirate
armed vessel, enquire and ascertain whether the captors are taking her to any port
in St Domingo not possessed by the French, or to any other place where it is notorious there cannot be a regular trial. Also enquire and ascerlian whether the
Captors have plundered the Vessel, or have separated the blaster from the vessel,
or have destroyed or suppressed all or ally of the papers of the Vessel. you
will ill either of these cases release the American Vessel. VII. Publick vessels of war of every nation you are to respect, unless you should
find them violating our territorial jurisdiction. VIII. You are not to extend your protection, unless within the jurisdiction ot
the United States, to any foreign vessels whatever, nor to any American vessels
that may be engaged in a contraband Trade. The Brig IZornet Captain Chauncey will be put, to Sea as soon as she can be prepared. Capt Chauncey will be ordered to place himself under your command.
Whatever additional instruction may hereafter be deemed necessary, will be
deposited for you with the Kary Age~ltsat Kew Tork & Charleston S. C . You
will t h e f o r e wcasionally touch at Ihose ports for such information.
W~ibeto me by every opportunity that, may occur. h p a regular journal of
all your proceedings of which you will transmit me a Copy.
[Similarinstructionsaeresent to blaster CommandantIsaac Chaunccyof U.6. Brlg Hotnct,'23 September
1805 and Lleurenaat James U~ddleof Gunboat h'o. 1,11 October 1805.

[NDA. LB, 1799-1807.1
Extract from journal of Heaekiah Loomis, Steward, U. 6. Navy, U. S. Brig Vixen.
Master Commandant George Cox, U. S. Navy, commanding, Wednesday, 31
July 1805
punis] Pleasant. This day formed a line in two Divisions Capt. Smith had
charge of the first and Capt Coxe the second division. Capt. Smith formed on the
starboard of the Commodore and Capt. Coxe on the larboard side. The frigates
a t proper distance formed their line in center. Thus we sailed into the harbor and
came to anchor a t 2 o'clock P. M. Our line being thus formed stretched athwart

200

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1806 TO 1807

the harbour from one end to the other. The Nautilus was sent in to fire a gun and
hoist a flag of truce, which she did and lay off and on waiting for the American
Consul to come off.
[L. F. Middlebrook. NDA copy.]
[About 1 August 18051
Conversation between the Bey of Tunis and George Davis, U.S. Charge dlA%aires,
Tunis
"Your commodore's letter ought not to be viewed in any other light than a
declaration of war; and I certainly should have acted agreeable to such an impression, had not your master m u r e d me that the hasty and rash acts of a n
individual, which tend to produce such an event, would never be countenanced by
him. Ask any of the Christian consuls in this regency if Hamouda Bashaw has
ever received such an insult from their governments."
"The President of the United States must know, that my fabher and grand
father have sat on the throne and ruled a kingdom. He shall learn from me that
Hamouda is not yet dead, and every crowned head in Europe shall approve the
eternal continuance of that war which you seem resolved to force me into - for I
solemnly pledge myself, that if war is the result, never, while I have a soldier to
fire a gun, will I accord peace. You may form some idea of my character from
the difficulty you had to negotiate a peace, because you weakly permitted the Dey
of Algiers to interfere. You may also learn my conduct to the Venicians, who
rashly forced me into a war; and if I am doomed to engage in another, i t shall be
continued to the last hour of my existence. I frankly tell you, that the famine in
my country has prevented my declaring war against you, in order that I might
convince my subjects that their miseries should not be increased, unless I was
forced thereto. Without such a motive, you certainly never would have been
asked the reason why you captured my vessels; but that just motive t o a protraction of our difficulti?;, must be sacrificed to those considerations which I owe myself and all Europe.
"You are the first power which has ever captured a Tunisian cruiser in full
peace, on any pretext whatever.
You are the first that has ever offered unprovoked insults to Hamouda Bashaw, who hae ruled a kingdom for twenty-seven
yeare, and been respected by all the world, 8s a sovereign. If I waa tamely to
submit to such acts of outrage, what should I expect from nations, far more powerful than yourselves. You have seen what hss been accorded me, by Spain,
Sweden and Denmark, whose local situation, and maritime force must render
them more formidable enemies than the United States. Abstracted from this, the
measures you pursue, are such as do not permit me to enter into any negotiation.
Your commodores have done me great and repeated injuries, for the last of which
my political existence forces me to insist on a proper reparation."
These strong indications of hostility on the part of the Bey of Tunis, determined
commodore Rodgers to pay him a visit with all his disposable force, as soon as our
&airs with the Bashaw of Tripoli would permit; and immediately after the treaty
was concluded, and the necessary meaeures for complying with the stipulations on
our part were taken, he gave orders for all the vessels, not otherwise specially
employed, to prepare with all practicable despatch, to proceed with him to the bay
of Tunis. The frigate Congress and the brig Vizen, were immediately sent thither
to watch the movements of the Bey; and on the 23d Jul , the frigates Constdtution,
Constellation, Essm and J o h n Adama, the brig Siren, tge schooners Nauiilus and
BWmprize, the sloop Hornet, and a number of gun boats sailed from Malta and
arrived in Tunis bay, on the 31st July, and got to anchorage on the 1st August,
1805. The signal for the consul to come on board waa immediately hoisted. He
appeared on board on the 2d August, and ave a detail of all his conferences with
the Bey. A council of war was then callecfby the commodore, who submitted all
the information in his possession. Colonel Lear was present a t this council, and
i t terminated in deciding, that the following letter should be addreseed by the
commodore to the Bey: f8ee let& of 2 hugust 18051
[U. 8. Naval Chronicle.]

-

Extract from journal of U. 8. Frigate ConaliMion Captain John Bodgers, U. 6. Bavy,
commanding, Thurrday, 1 Augnrt 1806
% past 1 [P. M.] shortened sail and [came] too with the larb4 bower anchor in 6
f a t h o m water cape Carthage bearing North distance about 2 miles the Goletts W
j4 6. 5 Miles.

201

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

soon after all the squadron came to anchor [Tunis Bay] - a t sunset sent down
top GI and royal yards.
% p a t 11 [A. M.] the Conpress came to anchor.
[USNA.]
Extract from journal of Midshipman Charles Moms, Jr., U. S. Mavy, on board
U. 8. Frkate Pruided Captain James Barron, U. S. Navy, commanding, Thursday, 1August 1805
[Gibraltar] Pleasant Weather. The U S. Ketch Spitjire arrived.
35 Men Sick
[Mrs. C. E. Fox original, NDA photostat.]
Extract from journal of Hezekiah Loomis, Steward, U. 8. Navy, U. 8. Brig Vixm
Master Commandant Beorge Cox, U. 6. Navy, commanding, Thursday, 1
Augnat 1805
Tunis Harbour. This day blows very fresh. The Consul came off a t 10 o'clock.
At 12 arrived the U. S. Frigate Congreee. The consul retlirned the same evening.
[L, F. Middlebrook. NDA copy.]
To Captain Samuel Barron, U. S. Navy, from Secretary of the Navy
NAVDEPT BQ Aug( 1805.
I have heard with great concern indeed of you? extreme indisposition. It has
continued so long that I fear the climate is unfriendly to you, and that you will not
recover your health whde you remain where are. - Altho under these imperious
circumstances, I feel that you cannot obtain your own consent to ask permission to
leave your Ship. - difficult indeed must i t be for a military gent!eman, ambitious
of glory, to transfer to another the accomplishment of a projected enterprize
which promises a rich harvest of fame. You will not ask permiasion because you
cannot divest yourself of hopes that you will recover your health, and achieve the
enterprize in view - & probably because you fear that asking permission might
excite impressions unworthy of you. These hopes and these fears are natural to
every Gentleman (similarly circumstanced) tenacious of reputation. I must prescribe for you, and advise you if you should still continue unwell,
either to return to America, or go to some healthful place on the Continent of
Europe, in search of Health. Your character cannot suffer by such a measure,
although you may lose an opportunity of acquiring additional reputation. Consider this letter, not as conveying an order, but advice and permission to
pursue it. [KDA. LB, 179!&1807.]
[2 August 18051
To the Bey of Tunis from Tobias Lear, U. S. Consul General, Algiers, on board
U. S. Prigate G ~ t i t u l i o n .Tunis Bay
To Hamuda Bassa, the Most Illustrious and Most Magnificent Prince, the
Bey of Tunis the abode of Happiness
On my departure from the United States, I was honor'd by the President with a
letter for Your Excellency; of which I take the liberty of enclosing you a copy.
I shou'd before this have had the honor of presenting myself to your Excellency,
for the purpose of fulfilling the Presidents wishes express'd in his letter had I not
been informed by Geo e Davis Esqr. the Charge dlAffairs of the
States a t
our Court, that your %xcellency wou'd not receive me, or any other p e m n but
K r D a v i ~ as
, authorized to transact any Affairs relating to the U. States in your
Re ency. 6n consequence of thia declaration I shall decline presenting myself to your
Excellency, u n l m your resolution ahou'd be revoked; 8s I cannot appear in any
other character than that Assign'd to me by the Pmsident of the U. States
. -I pray your Excellency to accept the k u r a n c e s of my high respect L Consideration On board the U. S. Frigate Constitution Tunis Bay Augt 2.4 1805
[NA. SDA. CD, Algiers, Vol. 7, Part 11,Jan. 1806-Sept. 1807.1

-

Tf.

202

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1806 TO 1807

To George Davis, U. S. Chsrg6 dlAffojres, Tunis, from Captain John Eodgers,

U. 6. Navy

ZT. S . SHIP Constitution
Tunis Bay Augt 2, 1806
@ 8 oClock AM.
SIB Yesterday about an hour after you left the Constitution, I had the honor of
receiving from the hands of Capt* Decatur your favor of the 21at Ultq with a Copy
of your statement to the H o n b l ~Secretary of State detailing to him pour con& 16th
ferrences with his Excellency the Bey of Tunis of the 12"13tb-14t4Ultimo on the subject of the Tunetisn xebecque & her two prizes, sent into hlalta
by the U. States Frigate Constituliot~,for a violation of the Blockade of Tripoliafter perusing them with equal attention & concern, as also after the most mature
& deliberate reflection, I feel that our situation with this Regency is such as to
have authorized and determined me to announce to His ExeeEeucy the 'Be? the
resolution contained in the enclosed letter $ which I flatter myself you will
percieve the propriety of his receiving immediately - I am sensible of the
consequences which may ensue to our Country by this determination, but I feel
sensible a t the same time that its effect cant possibly place us in a worse situation
than we now stand; and I have thus acted after I could devise no alternative
between it, & Ignominiously making sacrifices which would irretrievably brand
our common Country with disgrace and myself with more than equal reproach.
If the Bey thinks proper to revoke the declaration he has made you I should
yet be happy to see our differences terminated in Peace, yet I will not suffer
one hour to pass over the 36tb from date of this letter before I will commence
offensive and defensive opperations against his Regency: without I have the
most unequivocal assurances from him that he does not intend War. [NDA. Captain's LB, Vol. 2, 1805.1
(COPY)

@nd-1

To the Bey of Tunia from Captain John Eodgers, U. 6. Navy
17. S. SHIP Consti2u2ion Tusrs BAY
(COPY)
Augt 94 8 oCbck A M . 1805
To the hlosl ZUustrious & most magnificent
~ ~ X A C THE
E
BEYO F TUNIS,
the abode of happiness. SIR,It is with equal pain and astonishment that I u-as yesterday made
acquainted by George Davis Esqr Charge des Affaires to your Court; with your
declarations, wherein you informed him that my appearance here with the
Squadron under my command, would not only be blocking up every avenue
t o a reconciliation but u-auld determine an immediate declaration of War on
your part - If this be the case, those explanations which brought me here,
and which I had hoped would reestablish a good understanding between your
Excellency and the Goverment of my Country, are unnecessary, as it now
only rests for me in justification of my conduct, to request that your Exeellcncy
will have the goodness to inform me whether there has been any mistdie in the
application of your assertions tending to a declaration of War with the U. States,
as your Excellency will without doubt see the propriety as also the necessity on
my part of commencing both defensive and offensive opperations against your
regency in the course of 36 hours, should I not hear from you on this important
& equally (to me) painful subject.
[NDA. Captain's LB, Vol. 2, 1805.1
To John Beekman, Navy Agent, New Pork, B. Y., from Secretsry of the Navy
Nav DEP*Aug: ?d!, 1806
We want for the Brig Hornet one large Cutter, with a well in her Centre 28
feet long 7%feet Bmad and 3%feet deep - Mr Walter Michel baving been in
the habit of building Boats of this Description, and being recommended by
Cap: Chauncey your employing him to make this Cutter will be agreeable to
me. We also want a small cutter of the same Dimensions as the one Built b
M: George Buckmaster for the John Adorns, excepting as to length, to whicg
2 feet must be added - It wilI be agreeable to me that Mr Buckmaster should
Build this small cutter -

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

203

You will have both of these Cutters Built as early as may be pradicableCapt* Chauncey will csll for them and you will at the same time deliver to him
the new 14 inch cable landed by him from the John A d a m if i t should still be
in your Possession
[NDA. GLB, Vol. 8, 1805-1807.1

-

[2 August 18063
To Secretary of the Navy from Beeves sp'alding
SIR I take the liberty to inform you that on the 12%of July last I a t Public

Sale purchased the Brig Transfer ( L t e Scourge) and her Spars and two pieces of
old Cables and two old Anchors one of them unfit for use. I gave the sum of
five IIundred and Kinety Six dollars. her Guns was also sold to another person
for one hundred and fifty doll9 But her Sails, Riggin Blocks and Sundry other
Articles are taken from her and put into the Naval Stores a t Gosport. they are
too much wore and too old to go on board any Ship of War and if they was not
it would Cosr, half their Value to have them Alter'd for any other Vessel. their
being fitted for my Vessel makes me wish to purchase them a t a fair vatueation,
for if they Remain six m o n t h in Store they will not sell for half so much as they
now n ill. * * *
George Town Aug? 2. 1805 [NDA. hlisc. LB, Vol. 4, 1805.1

To George Earriaon, navy Agent, Philadelphia, Pa., from Secretary of the Navy
XAVDEP?2 4 Augt 1805
I have this day received from cap^ Bainbridge a letter enclosing a Statement

of that part of the Crew of the late frigate Philadelphza which have turned Turks
and d s o of those that have died which you will find in the following list Viz
Thomas Prince
Ordy Scaman
John LTilson
Quarter master
Turned Turk, 5.
Peter West
Carpr Crew
Thomas Smith
Seaman
Louis Hickson
Landsman
John hl~Donaldla$,
Seainan
John Rlorrison
Seaman
Edwd Gorman
Ordy Seaman
John Hilliard
Ordv Seaman
Dead, 5.
Jan Anderso~il B t ,
Ordinary Seaman
Seaman
Jacob Dowerdisfier

1

I

Ail paymel~tsupon Powers of attorney granted by these men must cease and
Govern yourself accordingly.
[KDA. GLB, ITo1.8, 1805-1807.1

Extract from journal of Midshipman Charles Morris, Jr., U. 8. Navy, on board
U. S. Frigate Prwidenl, Captain James Barron, U. 6. Navy, commanding, Friday,
2 August 1805
{Gibraltar] 1/2 past 9. A h l n-eighed and stood out of the Bay.
Sllips draught of Water aft 21 F. 6 in. forward 21 feet 34 Men Sick [Mrs. C. E. Fox original, KDA photostat.]

To Captain John Rodgers, U. S. navy, from George Davis, U. 8. Charge d'bffaires,
Tunis

T U ~ JAugzcsi
IS
3@ 1806
Saturday Ilforning 6 oCZock
Srn, The Letter which you honored me nith, yesterday enclosing a Communication for His Escellency the Bey of Tunis. was not received until one oCIock
p. M.; i t wiil bc delivered a t ten this mornlng - no public &aim me tram(COPY)

204

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 18Ub TO 1807

acted after one oclock, until which time I shall certainly engroseallof his attention;
and as you have mitten in English, a translation cannot be made until Sunday
morning; so that i t is impossible t o recieve sn answer, within the prescribed time,
and probably not sooner than Monday or Tuesday As you have informed me, aa well aa His Excellency the Bey, that you will commence Ofendive & d e f e m v e opwdions in 36 hours from the date of your letter if an
answer is not received; I send you this express merely to learn whether you mean
t o give a su@cient time for the Bey t o answer you, & sollicit you to send the bearer
as speedily as possible with your reply, which I expect will findme a t the p&ce. From the conversation which took place when I had the honor of seeing you on
board the Frigate, I could not have expected such s communication - It either
plunges us instantly into a War, or removes dl hopes of accornodation for some
time. [NDA. Captain's LB,Vol. 1, 1805.1
To Captain John Ilodgere, U. S. Havy, U. S. Frigate Comtilution, from George Davis
IT. S. Charge dJAffaires,Tunis
TUNISAugwt 9Q1806
(COPY)
Saturday Afternoon 2, OClock
SIR, I had the honor to address you this morning relative to the expected answer from His Excellency the Bey of Tunis, arid stated to you the impossibility
of receiving it in the limited time - &-as a t the Palace early this morning & had
a long conversation with the Sapatapa; a t 10 the usual hour of the Beys leaving the
Hall of Justice, to give audience to foreign Consuls, 1 was admitted; and informed
his Excellency that I had a Letter from the Commodore, which was handed him he replyed, that he did not read English, & as none of his Christian Secretarys
understood the language, beg'd I would communicate its contents, which was
done (Bey) "The Commodore Stipulates 36, hours for my answer; if he will have it
in the Turkish or Moorish languages, it shall be given immediately; but there is
no christian Clerk a t this time to x ~ i t Kim
e - I however will give you my answer
by word oj mouth, & beg you to communicate it." "My conduct shall be guided wholly by the letter and Spirit of the Treaty;
and I heve already taken the measures which it points out, to wit, a proper
Representation to the President of the United States for reddress of grievances; until an answer is received from him I shall strictly maintain the Peace
which exists between us; but if your Commodore attacks or detains any of
my Vessels, Cruizers, or Merchantment, or fires a single Gun w i t h a hostile
intention, that instant your flag shall be hauled donn; I will hold no converse
with
either relative to peace, or War, change of Treaties, or nny other
public concern; excepting on the subject of the Captured Vessels - no hostile
act shall be commenced by me: his Boats n ~ a ypass freely and without any kind
of interruption - It therefore rests with him to respect the Treaty made by
hi Master or not -for dtho' I am resolved not ta provoke a commencement
of hostilities; still I shall not shrink from it, when properly invited - I
made the Treaty nith the President of the United States, and not with the
Commodore." INDA. Captain's LB, Vol. 2, 1805.1
To George Davis, U. S. Chargd d'dffaires, Tunis, from Captain John Bodgers,
U. 6 . Navy
U. S. SHIPComtitution
Tunis Bay August 9 4 1806
SIBI have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your Letter of this date,
and to inform you that after perusing and duly considering its contents, I i m m 6
diately made the Signal for the commanders of the res ctive Vessels under my
Command to repair on board the Conrtlution, where a guneel of War waa held:
the decision of which, has determined me to extend the time for receiving the Beye
final answer to my Letter to him of yesterday, until Noon of the ensuing Tueedsy
corresponding with 12 O'clock of the fit4 day of the present Month. - I am very
much astonished to find that you were not acqusinted with my determination previous to your leaving the Conslitdion. [LC. JRP, L Bk B, May 1805-July 1806.1

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS
To Captain Samuel Barron, U. 8. Navy, from James Simpson, U. P. Comul, Tangier,
Morocco
TANQIEB9 d August 1806
DEABSIB I received on the 234 laat month your favours of the 26tb April and
and 224 May - to the former I will not trouble you with any reply on Service
to the latter I will only beg to say that none of your Friends more smcerely regretted
the cause of your seeing a necessity to yield up the Command than 1did, - i t is
with equal satisfaction I now learn that you continue to get better. - You have
m best wishes that the Air of your native clime, may perfect your recovery. can scarce snatch a moment to say the disapointment 1 have met, in not obtaining the supplies for you I much wished, by no means proceeds from any particular regulation respecting the Ships of War of The United States, but that of a
general. MI*Simpson joins me in every good wish and I beg you will be assured I am with
every sentiment of reapect and esteem
[Mrs. James S. Barron Col.]

-

f

Extract from journal of Midshipman Charles Morris, Jr., U. S. Navy, on board
U. S. Frigate Prwidcnt, Captain James Barron, U.S. Navy, commanding, Saturday,
3 August 1805
Past 2. Came to Anchor in the bay of Algesiras. with the Larboard Anchor
in 24 Fathoms Water
5 Past 4 A M Weghed and sailed a Portuguese Sixty four under way a t the
same time Noon. Europe point bore E B N. 5 N. and Ceuta S E B S.
Latitude Observed 36' N.
[Mrs. C . E. Fox original, NDA photostat.]

-

Extract from journal of Heaekiah Loomis, Steward, U. S. Navy, U. S. Brig V u q
Master Commandant George Cox, U. 6. Navy, commanding, Saturday, 3 August
1806

This day a Marine was flogged through the fleet. 18 of the Philadelphia's crew
went on board the Syen.
[L. F. Middlebrook. XCDA copy.]
To Captain John Bodgers, U. S. Navy, from George Davis, U. P. Chug6 d'Affaires,
Tunis
TUNISAzlgi 4th 1806.
(Copy) NQ5.
SIB, The letter which I shall have the honor to deliver you in person, contains
the verbal answer of His Excellency the Bey of Tunis, as litterally as can be
translated - I have to sollicit you to give me in writing your resolutions thereon,
before I again leave the Constitution; for if the Bey's answer as detailed by me,
should not prove satisfactory, I see no means on our present plan of reducing things
to a happy accomodation. As I free myself from all responsibility; so I would not wish to obtrudean opinion;
but an imperious sense of duty to my Country, & myself as its Representative
supported by the Instructions of the Honorable the Secretary of State to the
Consul General Lear, relative to the termination of our affairs with this Regency,
urges me to recommend a suspension of any hostile operations, until1 advice can be
received from His Excellency the President of the U. States. - No material injury will arise from the delay - our situation will not be rendered worse; & that
of the Enemys will not certainly be bettered If you should think proper to hold s Council of war on this subject, may 1
solicit the honor of being present. After apologizing for these remarks, I again beg leave to assure you, of the high
respect, with which I have the honor to be,
[NDA. Captain's LB, Vol. 1, 1805.)

206

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1805-'TO 1807

To George Davis, U. S. Charge dJAffaires, Tunis, from Captain John Rodgers,
U. S. Navy
(COPY)
U. S. SHIPConstitution
Tunis Bay August 4 t h 1806
SIR, I have recieved your two Letters of this Instant detailing to me the Beys
Verbal answer to my Letter of the 2nd Instant, & giving your reasons why he has
not answered me officially. You Sir, no doubt will agree with me in the necessity of my recieving from him
in form an answer to so important a question, and to establish which it is a t least
necessary that the British & french Consuls should be present to witness the
Guarantee which he gives me for a continuarlce of Peace - Unless he does this
you are authorized and directed by me to assure him that I will most certainly
dispose the Squadron under my command in a nlanuer not only to guard against
his Cruizers now a t Sea doing our Commerce injury, but also prevent them from
going out of his Ports until I can hear from my Goverment on the subject of their
intentions touching the same P. S. I have named the British and French Consuls as the most proper Persons
to be present to witness the Guarantee given you by the Bey for the maintainance
of Peace; the British Consuls presence is indispensibly necessary, but should any
circumstance that may arrise in your mind, induce the French Consul to decline
giving his presence, I leave it to your discretion to name some other Consul in his
stead. [KDA. Captain's LB, Vol. 2, 1805.1
Extract from journal of U. S. Frigate Constitution. Captain John Bodgers, U. 6. Navy,
commanding, Sunday, 4 August 1805
[Tunis Bay] At 9 [A. M.] IvIr Davis consul came of[f] from Tunis. two tunician Soldiers swam on board from Tunis
[USNA.]
Extract from journal of Midshipman Charles Morris, Jr., U. S. Navy, on board
U. S. Frigate President, Captain James Barron, U. S. Navy, commanding, Sunday,
4 August 1805
past one as we were passing the Town of Tarifa on the Spanish Side with our
colours hoisted the batteries and Gunboats commenced firing upon us. and threw
about 20 Shot over us but without damage In return for this insult we hoisted
the Spanish colours under ours & stood on our course without paying any further
attention to them 4 hove too in the harbor of Tangier and sent a boat on shore.
7. The boat returned, bore up, and made sail to the westward 8 Cape Spartel bore South 5 miles distant, from which I take my departure it
lying in Lat. 35.48 K. and Longitude 5' 48' West.
[Mrs. C. E. Fox original, NDA photostat.]
Extract from journal of Hezekiah Loomis, Steward, U. 8. Navy, U. S. Brig Vixen,
Master Commandant George Cox, U. S. Navy, commanding, Sunday, 4 August
1805
Tunis Harbor. At 9 o'clock got underway and formed upon the right of the
fleet. At 2 o'clock got underway and stood for Jack Island where we lay to all
night in company with the Nautilus.
[L. F. Middlebrook. XDA copy.]
To Yidshipman Charles Robinson, U. 6, Navy, U. 6. Frigate Gnsld~ufion.from Captain John Rodgers, U. s. Navy
U. STATESSHIPConstitution
Tunis Bay Augl6. 1806
SIB You are hereby directed to take charge of the U. S. Brig Franklin (Transport)
and give Lt George W. Reed the necessary receipts. [LC. JRP, Letters & Orders, Book A, 1804-1805.1

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS
To Captain Samuel Barron, U. S. Navy, from Secretary of the Navy
NAVYDEPT
6 Auqt 1805
After peace with Tripoli shall have been effected you will consider yourself
authorized to have any of the vessels of the squadron, that may not otherwise be
in a condition to return in safety to the United States, repaired. You will also
consider yourself authorized to send home immediately such Vessels ss from existing circumstances in relation to the Barbary Powers may in your judgment
securely be spared, & in case the Gun Boats can a t such sesson go to New Orleans
you will order them with one of the Brigs or Schooners under t.he Command of a
Master Commandant of distinguished merit to that place for orders.
[NDA. LB, 179Ck1807.1
[5 August 18051
To the Bey of Tunis from Tobias Lear, U. S. Consul General, Algiers, on board
U. S. Frigate Comlifufion
(COPY)
To His Excellency HAMUDA
B A ~ Ethe
A Moat zllustrious & Most MagnificentPrince,
the Bey of Tunis, the Abode oj Happiness. I had the honor of addressing your Excellency two days past, 8: of enclosing the
Copy of a letter which I bear from the President of the U. Statesto your Excellency,
& which I have been charged to deliver with my own hand, and to make certain
communications on behalf of the President to Your Excellency. As George Davis Esqr. our charg6 d'Affairs a t your Court has informed me, that
on delivering & explaining said letter to your Excellency, that you refus'd to receive me as a person authorized to transact any business of my Nation with you;
I find myself unable to execute the duty Assign'd me, by the President of the U.
States, & which might tend to restore that harmony and good understanding,
which it is desireahle should exist between our Countries, and shall feel it incumbent upon me to place any evil which may result from your Excellency's refusal to
communicate with me, to its proper source
U . S . F . Constitufion Augl5 1805
[NA. SDA. CD, Algiers, Vol. 7, Part IT, Jan. 1806-Sept. 1807.1
'
15 A u y s t 18051
To Tobias Lear, U. S. Consul General, Algiers, from the Bey of Tunis

[Translation]

The BASHAW
BAYOF TUNIS,
the Cily well guarded, the Residence of Felicity To hfr Tobias Lear Consul General of the U States of America, attach'd to the
Re ency of Algiers, and a t present on board the Frigate Constitution, in the Roads
of Eolletta Your genteel letter of the 24 of this Month, I received the day before yesterday,
the contents of which gives me a pleasure, until1 now unknown to me, that is to
say the power, & Character given to you by the President, to have care of different important affairs in the Mediterranean, of which the Copy of your
credentials proves to me - Kot having been before informed of this your
incumbance, & knowing myself, by the Grace of God, independent Lord and
Sovereign of my Country, was the reason I told your Messenger I would not.
treat with a Consul attachcd to another Prince, when their existed a direct
Treaty between your Government & me, & a person here that represented
Your Nation, and if it was the pleasure of the President to employ another,
such Commission might have been sent to the Commodore Commanding in
these Seas, or send me direct a person capable of explaining and terminating
every thing As thereby the tenor & Spirit of the Presidents letter to you, you are appointed
as such to all the Powers, whose Coasts are Wet by the Mediterranean, and as
I am one of those powers, I make not the least difficulty to the Contrary, I would
find the greatest pleasure in conversing with you, &find means as I hope to destroy
all differences and displeasures between us, assuring that you will be received by
me, with all that politeness you merit, 6:the friendship I profess for your President
for whom I have the greatest esteem Not knowing if the Italian language is familar to you, I beg conduct with you a
person, who understands it, that I may not be under an obligation of employing a

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1806 TO 1807

208

Minister or strange Interpreter, which might be displeasing or suspicious t o you I remain anxious to make your personal acquaintance, in the mean time I wish
you all happiness
(Sign'd) HAMUDA
BASSA,Bey DALBARDO
di TUNIS6 t h Aug, 1806 I n the Ebening
[LC. JRP, L Bk B, May 1805-July 1806.1
To George Davis, U. S. Charg6 d'dffaires, Tunis, from Captain John Bodgere,
U. 6. Navy
(COPY)
U. S. SHIP Conatituiion
Tunis Bay August 6'4 1806
SIR, Since the Letter I wrote you yesterday I run induced after more mature
reflections; in order to prevent farther prevarication, and in order that I may not
be again misunderstood on any one point tending to terminate the Business which
brought me here; permit me to observe to you that the Guarantee given by the
Bey must be in the following form and that no longer than until the ensuing
Thursday a t Noon will be given him to decide, and if he does not intend War to
give from under his hand, the result of his determinations, To Wit,
WEEREASthe Commander in chief of the Squadron of the U. States of
America, now laying in Tunis Bay, has been induced to believe that it was
my determination to declare War against the said U. States, in consequence of
one of my cruizers and her two prizes having been detained by the aforesaid
Squadron in their attempting to enter Tripoli during the late Blockade of
that place or from some other cause, I do hereby solemnly declsre that it
is not my intention, and that I will not commence hostilities or declare War
against the said U. States so long as the Treaty existing between myself and
the said United States shall be faithfully adhered t o by them, and not until
I shall have made an application to the Goverment of the U. States for redress
of any injuries which I may recieve or have recieved from the said United
States and have been refused such redress. Captain Stephen Decatur of the U. States Navy who will hand you this is directed by me as my representative to be present a t the audience which the Bey
gives you for the purpose, adduced in this Letter.[NDA. Captain's LR, Vol. 2, 1805.1

-

[5 August 18051
To Captain John Rodgers, U. 6. Wavy, from the Bey of Tunis
OF TUNIS,
the City weU guarded the residence of Felicity The BASHAW
To Commodore JOHN
RODQERB
Commander i n chief of the U. States h'aval forces
i n the Meditnranean, actually on board the Ship Constitution, anchored i n the
roads of Gaktta.
SIR, I n answer to your Letter dated 24 August which I received the day before
yesterday, I declare i t was never my intention to refuse seeing, or treating with
vou, any time you presented yourself in a friendly manner, that is with only a part
bf your Squadron, as I have always had the pleasure of seeing done, by Commanders
sent by other powers my friends, but i t is certain that I have positively declared to the person charged with the &sires of your Goverment residing here,
that I did not know how to tolerate your presenting yourself, in a hostile and powerful manner, as you now have done with d l the force under your Command, when
there was no reason for so doing, except that of a friendly Treaty to be decided
on, for i t is by explanations & clearness of different points that the consolation
of good harmony which happily subsists between your Goverment & me, are to
exist & more and more augment; this for my part I have a l w a y ~maintained & w i l l
maintain according to the tenor of the stipulated & solemn Ratification of our
Treaty.
But as I am now informed that Consul Genl Lear is invested with the power to
make with me a final Treaty, in consequence of which, I invite him to come in
Person in the character which is conferred on him by the President, that he may
explain to me the desires of the same -

-

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS
With pleasure I declare if you find it proper to accompany him, you will be
very welcome, and would give me a particular pleasure.
I n the mean time I have the pleasure of wishing you all happiness.
(Sign'd) HAMUDB ~ s s a Bey
,
The Court of Tunis
I n the evening 5th Augt 1805
Translated from the Italian
[NDA. Captain's LB, Vol. 2, 1805.1

-

To President Thomas Jefferson from Esmet Caramanli
SYEACUSE,
August 6, 1805.
EXCELLEPI'CE:
For nearly eleven years, I have been laboring under the weight of
misfortune; but, notwithstanding which, my distress was never equal to that which
the actual combination of circumstances has made it.
My residence was near Cairo, w-hen there arrived in Alexandria a brig commanded by Captain Hull, in company with General Eaton,who came recommended
to Mr. Briggs, His Britannic Majesty's consul, and inquired of him where I
could be found. My place of abode being made known, a courier was despatched
for Cairo, by order of the general, and on his arrival a t Razid, a second one,which
came to Cairo, directed to the house of Tursuf Bashaw, an officer of the Ottoman
Forte, who received a letter in which he was requested to s d e r me to pass without
interruption, in order that I might co-operate with the Americans t o take Tripoli.
These things being communicated to me, caused me to reflect seriously, whether
they could be true or not. All doubts were dissipated by General Eaton meeting in
Cairo my secretary, named Mahumed hfezaluna, to whom he consigned another
paper, and, in company with two hialtese, arrived a t Said,my place of residence,
and delivered t o me a despatch, urging me to leave that place immediately, in
order that we might have a meeting (as really happened) in the city of Damintur,
where the general was made known to me as one who had been sent thither by your
excellency for the conquest of the Kingdom of Tripoli. I engaged to go with him
t o Syracuse, and also to keep myself secret, from which circumstance I was necessarily compelled to abandon all I possessed, and thus lose my horses. camels, kc.
Previous to my leaving Damintur, General Eaton assured me the peace would
never be made, unless I was placed in my o m seat (throne) and often m o r e by
himself, that he would never take me from where I r a s for the sole purpose of
making the conquest.
I did not, however, fail to suggest to the general, that in case Jussuf Bashaw
should actually remain conqueror, what part he would take in m p favor, as I
should not be able to remain any longer in the Turkish dominions. I was answered
that if the combinations of war should prove favorable t o Jussuf Bashaw, a
pension would be granted me, sufficient to maintain my family and suite; the
people and money demanded by me, to efFect this object, (for such a movement,)
were ready; and that I had better expeditr! my secretary t o Captain Hull, to inform him, that the general had come to conduct me from Upper Egypt to Syracuse,
but that I could not trust myself a t sea in the manner he had. My envoy having
executed his commission, arrived first in Syracuse, and afterwards in Malta, in
consequence of the abrrencc of Captain Hull from the first, (place,) and whom he
afterwards found in the second place, (Malta,) and executed his embassy: he was
amwered by the same (Hull) that every thing I could possibly want was ready,
and in fact, there was sent me a vessel, laden with supplies and provisions, accompanied by the brig commanded by Captain Hun, which arrived at Bomba,
delivering to the general and myself B despatch (to him directed) from the commodore, in which he renders Hull responsible for every thing I might want; I then
asked for cannon, powder, and other urarlike supplies, and was answered that a
frigate wm hourly expected, and that they would be sent t o me. I afterwards left
Bomba, in company with General Eaton, and we pursued our route towards Derne,
arriving near it in twelve hours. Such a voyage made me extremely happy, as
well as sll my people, while the manner in which we were treated by the general
excited universal admiration; his dignified soul (conduct) merits applause. We
were scarcely on the twelfth hour of our voyage, when we 8sw a schooner, which
brought us two pieces of cannon, and nothing more. After an attack of two hours,
in which all the troops applaud and admire the courage of General Eaton, Derne
was taken, (as the people of that country were much in our favor,) and in which
attack the general was wounded in the hand.

210

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1805 TO 1807

After the capture of the city, we received from the chiefs of the brigands, letters
offering to join us. After ten days a troop of cavalry and infantry (of the enemy)
advanced; they were twice broken and put to flight by us. We now asked from
the schooner, which had been sent us, people and arms, while there remained a
respite and peace, and were waiting an answer respecting our demand for people
and arms, in order that we might go and take Bergaea and Tripoli; in the mean
time arrived a frigate which we supposed had brought us people, but she landed a
Turkish ambassador from Jussuf Bashaw, who informed the general of the alliance
of Jussuf Bashaw with your excellency; saying that the said Bashaw would restore my family, and that your excellency would give me, in the name of the
United States, a pension. The same evening of the arrival of the frigate, the
general informed me, that I must embark with with all my people; and thus was
again compelled to abandon all I possessed
the general having prevented the
Turkish ambassador from landing, and thus me parted for Syracuse, where me
found the whole squadron.
I daily expected my family, when finally I was told that he (the Bashaw) would
not let them go: having thus broken his word, I demanded of the general to be
replaced in my own country, which was also denied me, saying that he had no
orders to that effect from your excellency, and it is thus I find myself in this
country, with the small pendon of two hundred dollars per month, and on which
sum I am to support myself with a number of people. Such a state of things
makes me feel that the weight of misfortune has only increased, and for the first
time, am completely abandoned, and by a great nation; I therefore fling myself on
the mercy of your excellency, who, under the influence of just laws, will not fail to
render me that justice which oppression and misfortune entitle me to.
With the hope of an early reply from your excellency, I remain, &c kc.
son of Ali Bashaw, &c.
ACHMET
BASHAW,
[Am. State Papers, For. Rel., Vol. 11, 1797-1807.1

-

To Secretary of the Navy from Captain Stephen Decatur, Sr.
August 6th 1806.
PHILADELPHIA
SIR With the liveliest feelings of sensibility I acknowledge receipt of your letter
of the 13*hulte accompanied by a box containing a sword for my son, voted to him
by Congress and agreeably to your request shall hand over to him the letter and
the Box with its contents when I shall have the pleamre of seeing him.-Please accept my unfeigned thanks for the congratulations you so kindly offer
on this occasion and believe me to be with the greatest sincerity
[NDA. Misc. LR, Vol. 5, 1808.1
Extract from journal of U. S. higate Constitution, Captain John Rodgers, U. S. Navy,
commanding, Monday, 5 August 1805
[Tunis Bay] At 2 [P. M.] Consul Davis left thd Ship for Tunis.
Cap, Decator went on shore a t Tunis
[USNA.]
Extract from journal of Hezekiah Loomis, Steward, U. S. Navy, U. S: Brig Vixen.
Master Commandant George Cox, U. 6. Navy, commanding, Monday, 5 August
1805
[Tunis] We near the Islands. Capt. Coxe and Capt. Dent went on shore.
When they returned we made sail and stood in. We came t o anchor a t 7 o'clock
P. M.
[6 August] Got underway a t 10 o'clock P. M.
L. F, Middlebrook. KDA copy.]
[7 August 18053
To Tobias Lear, U. S. Consul General, Blgiers, from the Bey of Tunis
The BASHAW
BEYOF TUNISthe City Well guarded the residence of the Felicity
To Mr TOBIAS
LEAR Consul General of the U States of America, altuchcd to the
Regency of Algiers, and at present on board the Frigate Constitution i n the roads
of Goletta.
SIR, At this moment I received your second letter, of the day before Yesterday
which was sent to me by a Captain of a Frigate of Your Nation, who said he had

WARS WITH BARBARY PORTERS

211

commission to speak with me, by orders of Your Commodore, but I did not see him.
Hearing now that the above mention'd Captain in company with the messinger,
George Davis has departed this ~ o r n i n to
g go onboard, I send you direct, by the
handsof Davis my answer, & I include you a Copy of what I wrote to you the day
before yesterday, repeating again as you are authorized by the President, I am entirely disposed to hear from You an explanation of Your Wishes, and in consequence expect you with pleasure, & repeat I wish to speak with you.
Be so good make my compliments to Commodore Rodgers & inform him that
I also wmte to him the day before yesterday, Q have no doubt but that the Messenger has consignJd to him my Answer.
I salute you and wish you all good
Bassa - Bey (Sign'd) HAMUDA
DALBARDODI TUNIS
7 t h Augt 1806. 9 oClk A.M.
[NDA. Captain's LB,Vol. 2, 1805.1
To Captain William Hannover, American ship Raleigh, from Secretary of the Hevy
NAVYDEPMT.7 August 1805. CAP; As soon as vou are ready for sea you will weigh anchor and proceed to
Algiers without unnecessarily touching at any other place. On your arrival a t
Algiers you will wait on Consul Lear to whose order. you are to deliver the public
property committed to your care. On your delivering it, you will take a receipt
therefor, stating that it has been received in good order.
I enclose passports for the President of the United States, and from the British
& French Ministers. hfr Wingate will give you directions respecting the payment of freight.
I have only to add that it is expected you will sail as quickly as possible and proeeed on your voyage with all practicable expedition.
[KDA. Barbary Powers LB, 1803-1808.1

(7 August 18051
Notice issued by Sailing Master Benjamin C. Prince, U. S. Navy
August 7 Long 48.30 W Lat 43.54 Fi
U States Sloop Traveller Benj C. Prince
all well out 16 Dav expereance very bad Feather lost sight of the Sloop Rangm
I,&4 43.54 North Lon$ 55.35 West left the Grand Bank 4 A hI. morning.
Wind continually from the Eastm-ard.

B s r i ~C. PRINCE

Commander of U Skates Sloop Traoeliw

lo be put in the paper in the First Port. [LC. EPP, Vol. 15, June-Aug. 1805.1
Extract from journal of Hezekiah Loomis, Steward, U. 8. Navy, U. 6. Brig v h ,
Master Commandant George Cox, U. S. Navy, commanding, Wednesday, 7
August 1806
[Tunis] We were near the westermost Island. A number of officers went on
shore and shot several seals and fowls and then set the Island on fire and came
then stood in and came to anchor a t 3 o'clock P. nf. Fitz H. Babbit
off.
went on board the Frigate Essez.
fL. F. Middlebrook. NDA copy.]
!8 August 18051
TO the Bey of Tunis from Tobias Lear, U. £4. Consul General, Algiers, on board
U. 8. Frigate ComtiIution, Tun18 Bay
(COPY)
To His Excellency HAMTJDA
BASSA,the Most Zllustrio~sand Most Mapnificed
Prince, the Bey of Tunis, the Abode o j Happiness. I hsd the honor last evening to receive your Excellency's letters of the 5 r s &
7th of the present month in answer to mine of the 2"a and 5* of the same.

212

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1806 TO 1807

I n consequence on the information which I received, both before and since
my arrival in this Bay, that your Excellency would not reaeive me, or have any
communication with me on the Affairs of My Nation, I have not had it in my
power, to sa or do any thing, which might have had a tendency to restore
harmony andl a ood understanding between our Nations. - And the repeated
threats of your gxcellency to make war upon the U. States, has obliged the
Commander of the American Squadron in this Sea, to place himself in a situation
t o guard against that evil as much as possible. - I n this state of things, it becomes
necessary for him t o be assured, in the most unequivocal manner, that these
threats of your Excellency will not be carried into effect, while the Treaty between
our Nations remains unbroken on our part, and not until1 you may have been
refused redress for any injuries, in the way pointed out in this Instrument.I am a prehensive that your Excellency has been impress'd with a belief
that the dmmodore came with his Squadron to this Bay, with a view to provoke
or commence hostilities against your Regency. This I can =sure you was very
far from being the case. He had no other view than to see all little matters of
dserence, which then existed amicably adjusted, and he cou'd not conceive,
that the appearance of his Squadron, which was paasing down this Sea, cou'd
be construed into an act of hostility. Your Excellency may then judge of his
surprize, when he found our Country threatend with immediate war, for an
Act which could in no wise be considerd as hostile; and it a t once became his
duty to take such Measures as wou'd avert from or lesson the evil to his Country;
and to persist in those Measures, until he should have such unequivocal evidence
of the relinquishment of hostile intentions on the r r t of your Excellency aa
wou'd fully justify to his Government & to the Worl , his withdrawing his forces
This Assurance he has requested, & still requests our charge d'sffairs to obtain
from your Excellency in a Manner stated t o him, and until i t is accorded in due
form, we must consider every avenue closed which wou'd admit of a fair & friendy
discussion of any points of difference between our Nations - And I cannot
possibly have the honor of presenting myself before your Excellency while we
are without any security for the Continuance of Peace from day to da
The Interest, the Policy, & the Principles of the Government of the
States
of America, lead us to wish to be a t peace will all Nations; and knowing that
the only certain mode of securing that blessing, as far as it is practicable, is to
maintain & secure our own National rights, & repel in a proper manner, any
insult, or indignity offer'd to our Nation; While we a t the same time, respect
the rights of other Nations and inviolably adhere to the letter & Spirit of our
Treaties, & to all public engagements, - We shall always be extreemly cautious
of giving just cause of complaint against us, or when an injury may have been
done, to grant immediate redress for the same. When the application is made
in the form prescribed in Treaties; or in such a way as is usual between Nations
in a State of Amity.
I am fully persuaded that your Excellency, desireaus
of preserving the peace now existing between our Nations, will not hesitate to
give the evidence requested of your pacific intentions, without which i t b impossible to enter into a discussion on any points, to restore and strengthen that
friendship which we so earnestly wish may continue to bind us to each other. ONBOABD
THE U. STATESF+ Cmtitution
Tunis Bay Augt tKtP 1806
[NA. SDA. CL, Algieta, Vol. 7, Part 11, Jan. 1806-Sept. 1807.1

9:-

-

To George Davis, U. 8. Charge dlAffairee, Tunis, from Captain John Bodgen,
U. 6. IWavy
U. S. SHIP Constitution
(COPY)
TUNIS
BATA w 8 t 8th 1806
SIB, As I have not recieved that satisfaction from His Excellency the Bey
of Tunis which the nature of our sffairs required, I now am induced to desire that
in case he does not give you the Guarantee by Tomorrow a t Noon which you
have been directed to demand, that you inform that, no farther advances will
be made by me, and that in consequence of his refusal you are directed to repair
on board the Squadron tomorrow by 4 O'clock P. M. [NDA. Captain's LB, Vol. 2, 1805.1

WARS WITR BARBARY POWERS
To Lieutenant Joshua Blake, U. 6.Eavy, from Captain John Rodgers, U. 6. Navy
U. s. SHIPCcmdtitz1.ti4m
Tudis Bay Augt 8* 1806
SIB You are hereby arrested by me for quarreling with Capts Thomaa
Robineon, commander of the U. States Schooner Enterprize, on the quarter Deck
of thii Ship on the Night of the 6'4 Instant.
[LC. J R P Letters & Orders, Book A, 1804-1805.1
Extract from journel of U,8. Frigate Comfilution,Captain John Bodgere, U,8. fiw,
commanding, Thursday, 8 August 1805
[Tunis Bay] Cap+Decator returned from Tunis accompanyed by Doctr Davis
At 8 [A. M.] sent up top Gf Yards At 10 Consul Davis left the Ship for Tunis
IUSNA.1
To Secretary of the Navy from William Eaton, U. 6. Navy Agent for the Barbary
Regencies
To the Honorable Secretary of the Navy
of the United States
AT SEA. MEDITEBUNEAN
August 9'4 1806
SIR I have now the honor herewith to forward copies of the Correspondences promised in my letter of 6'4 ultimo. a View of the Transactions and the circumstances
in which these correspondences Originated give rise to some Remarks and observations which I shall submit with candor and Frankness.
When i t was Determined by Commodore Barron to co-operate with Hamet
Bashaw though the Commodore then expressed his Doubts Concerning an implied
Discretion in your instructions for Applications of supplies to this object an Idea
was suggested of Maklng this co-operation an instrument only to the attainment
of Peace with the Reigning Bsshaw of Tripoli Kothing was then talked of but
Chastisement the examples of Commodore Preble then recent and conspicuous inspired the Relieving Squadron with an ambition and a confidence equalled only
By their patriotism, insomuch that it seemed to be Regretted the space of a Winter
must intervene before they could be Brought to the theatre of action Peace was
avowedly an object secondary t o national honor and individual applause Of
course every Measure was adopted and every mean embraced which seemed to
favor those primary objects and the Earliest Occasion of the ensuing season was
t o give an Imposing l m o n t o the furtive Pride of Barbary With these impressions Commodore Preble returned home under Engagements
with his successor to give his influence with the Government for hastening forward
such additional aids as the Expedition would require and with the same impressions
I was sent t o Egypt, with entire discretion of using means to Bring Hamet
Bashaw on the Rear of the enemy Commodore Preble executed his commisson
with the exactness and dispatch which mark his character and I have the consciousness of not having been indolent in my endeavours to acquit myself of the
trust confided t o Me, both from one Quarter - and the other measures succeeded
beyond the calculation of the most sanguine expectation and never did a season
For decisive operations open with more flattering prospects of Success than this
in which it has been determined that a flag of truce instead of our squadron should
be Displayed to the enemys vlew the Result is well Known but i t is so foreign to
what we calculated Here and to what it is believed was expected by the Government and People of the United States that apologies are sought t o parry the censure and do awa the Disappointment to which this Result cannot but give Birth.
Among [these sugterfuges I am charged of having gone] too far of having exceeded
the intentions of Government and of having sha d to myself projects the end of
which could not be foreseen if finding out the ogect of my research and moving
understandingly with him against the enemy to exceed the intentions of Government I may have gone to far admitting t h s I Have not penetration enough to
comprehend how it could Have obstructed offensive operatons in other Qusrters
as AB to projects none were new shaped on my part after I left head Quarters but
a t what period the project took Shape of resting the whole expectations of our
country on the Instrumentality of the hapless Hamet Bashaw for the attainment
of Peace 1know not preaume however i t was not till Commodore Barron drefspaired
of recovering hia health in season for activity and not until a man who had no
authoriced agency in the war had intruded himself in T o hie confidence and @ed

214

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1806. TO 1807

a n ascendency over his resolutions the line of conduct pursued a t head Quarters
and the communications from that Quarter t o the coast establish the fact that
such a project had Superceded our Original plans and the event proves it to hare
been Carried into etFect in the Commodores letter to Hamet Bashaw Dated Malta
21.t March he expresses him Self with great satisfaction I have received from M?
Eaton the Intelligence of your Junction with him and of the Measures you had
ado ted to commence your March Towards derne no sooner did I receive this
i n t h g e n c e than I Made every exertion to collect the Succours requierd in your
Letter Here is not only a n explicit and clear Sanction to all we had done but also
an unequivocal as Rance [assurance] of Dispositions Made on the part of the Commodore to Furnish the Succours requlerd by Hamet Bashaws letter for prosecuting
a plan of co.operation but these Succours were what the Bashaw had al~vaysRequierd if therefore I should from any inducement have carried a different language
to him How Justly might he have suspected me of a disposition to raise impedments
to his progress and more especially as the %hole tennor of the Commodores letter
goes to encourage his expectations if the Commodore Requires me To Become
the interpreter of this letter how Inconsistent nay horn treacherous u70uldhe make
himself And me appear By Translating also anothler] from his own hand clearly
expressing his real intentions to be only to lead the Bashaw forward as an instrument I could not but hope that Returning Strength or some candid adviser would
restore the Commodore to Resolutions more worthy of his own and theDignity
of his country on the Day next Succeeding the Date of this letter from the Same
place the Commodore writes me I cannot but applaud the energy and erseverance
that has Characterized your progress thro a serres of Perplexing and giscouraging
difficulties t o the attainment of the object of your Research and attainment
which I am disposed to Consider as a'fair presage to Future Success. Success in
what the co.operation in what Manner this is Explained by the Commodores
Reiterated Resolution to u-ithhold his sanction from any Specific or Definite engagement with Hamet Bashaw and by his unqualified confession of our views in
favoring the cause of the exiled Prince as an instrument only to the attainment of
a n object that this object is a Separate Peace with his rivaland that this object
obtained we would withdraw from him our Succour Struck himself with the Discouraging and dishonorablq Conditions here inlposed of what he calls a co.operation he adds by way of Injunction you will not however conclude that these
Considerations important and Necessary as the? are ought to induce us a t once
to abandon the benefits which the Measures you have adopted Seem to promise Benefits were already Aniticipated from the Measures we had thus far pursued
and the plain Construction of this and the folloning periods of the same letter
enjoins i t on me to perserve in those measures and by way of Encouragement the
Commodore pledges himself to give us the most active and Vigorous El~pport
from his squadron So Soon as the Season and arrangements u-ould permit him to
appear in force before the enemys Walls - and in Case of our Successful Progress
to give the Bashaw Evey Support by a systematic union of operations, so as to
enable him t o come on the Rear of the enemy, * * *
We did persevere and our Success considering the obstacles we had to encounter and the Means afforded to overcome them exceeded our Calculations
what then became of the Most active and Vigorous Support of the Squadron and
Systematic union of operations the instant the Effect of our Successes Discovered
itself through the alarmed Solicitude of the enemy a messenger of Peace is sent to
Meet the overtures of the Panic Struck Joseph Bashaw and to bid him be under no
apprehensions while our To Credulous ally is sacrificed to a Policy a t the Recollection of which honor Recoils and humanity Bleeds I am Says the Commodore to
unwell to write with my own Hand i t was Needless for him to add this i t was
easily perceivable by the Drift and Composition of the communication, there is no
Festure of Barrons manly soul to be traced In it. it is the Work of a Machiavelian Commissioner into whose influence the Commodore had yielded his hfind
through the infirmity of Bodily Weakness i t is a well Known fact that a t this
g r i o d he had been Nearly six Months unable to remain on Shipboard and so
ebiitated by a Painful and wasting Illness that he scarcely retained the remembrance of Occurrences from day to day this Commissioner in order to take
advantage of t b t Circumstance, [affected to be averse to peace, and an advocate]
for exemplary Measures the Sequel will show a Specimen of his Sincerity it is only
proper to observe here that tho the instructions of the Secretary of the Navy left
an entire discretion in the Commodore Concerning the cooperation in View Mr
Lear Confirmed him in his Doubts that the Discretion to act and to apply the
Means of acting were distinct and that the Sum appropriated to this object was
limited to $20,000. Evidence Nevertheless that Government had calculated
upon it on the 23rQ March, the Commodore in his instructions to Captain Hull

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

215

states as you will perceive by my letter To Mr Eaton I have left the application of
these Succours and Consequently the Responsibility wholl to him Which I conceive proper as well on accuuot of his having the Chief 6rection of the Lsnd
operations as that by the time You arrive on the coast he will have it in his power
to form a Just Estimate of the chances of success and thence How far it is safe and
expedient to pursue the object.
I revert to this Clause in the Commodores instruction to Captin Hull to Corroborate what My former Communications Stated that an understanding Subsisted Between the Commander in chief and m elf that I Should go forward And
exercise Discretionary Measures for bringing Kamet Bashaw forwa~d+th a~ his
Influence in order To Intercept Supplies to the Enemy from the country and to
cut of[f] his escape in the rear -. Mr Lear has misrepresented this fact a t Malta
and elsewhere Though the communications which came from the Commodore
by Captain Bull, and which where delivered me a t Bomba were extremely discoraging, I could find nothing in them which would justify an abandonment on
my part of the expedition thus far conducted, But after we had gained p o s s d o n
of Derne and still more so after having beaten the enemy's army in that province
and opened our way to the gates of Tripoli I could not but hope the commodore
would take confidence from tfiese sucsesful and be animated to push hirJ operations
by a systametic union. What then ought t o have been my astonishment to
recieve, on the first of June his letter of l g t P May containing the following perioda.
"If the Bashaw, after having been put in posession of Derne, his former
government and the disfrict [district] in which his interest is said to be most
powerful, has not in himself energy or talent and [is] so destitute of mesna
and resources as not to be able to move on with sucaesful progress seconded
by our naval forse acting on the coast he must be held unworthy of further
suport, and the co-operation as a measure too expensive and too Little pregnant with hope and advantage to justify its further prosecution.
I n Short, Sir, the matter reduses itself to this. We are ready and willing
to support the Bashaw, by an union of operations on the coast so long 8s
the war with Tripoli continues, but his exelency must be explictiy informed
that our suplies of money, arms, and provisions are a t an end, and that he
must now depend on his o m recourses and exersions.
In consequense of recent advises from Tripoli, I have thought it my duty
to state to the consul General Col. Lear (now a t this Plsse) my candid
opinion that the present is a moment highly favourable to treat of peace and
a communication has just been handed me from that gentleman expresing
his determination to meet the overtures of the reigning Bashaw so f a r as to
[found] on it the commencement of a negotiation and to proceed to Tripoli in
the Esex frigate in the course of the week. From a variety concuring Sircumstances the present period appears propitious to such a step."
This Letter labors ingeniously to find some pretext for deserting Hamet Bashaw,
a t the very moment we profit of his operations and his influence to secure pesce to
ourselves.
But the ingenuity of the design is not sufficient to disguise the
hypocrosy of the desighn. we are still to amuse the exile with an idea of co-operation and union of operation on the coast a t the very moment that a pending
negotiation nesessarily suspends all hostile operations on the part of our Commander in Chief. But this was a moment highly favorable to treat of peace. Whet
rendered i t so? a t the period this candid opinion is expresed by the Comodore he
had not seen Tripoli during the last eight months nor ever within gun shot, some of
11isfrigates had not ever been nearer i t than Malta; seldom if ever more than two of
tllcm cruising of[f] the port and generaly not but one; his squadron had never
h e n dis~lav'dto the enemvs view: nor a shot exchanged with the batteries of
Tripoli sin& conlruodore Pieble left the coast except rnpassant: and what is a
truth equalg demonstrable, no risible prcpcration were making a t head quarters
for the investment the ensuing summer which could give the enemy any uneasiness. The commodore I am sensible was too much and invalid to take a n active
part in the expedition. But was he so destitute of energy of mind as to be incapable of directing its operations, and had he no commander in the fleet to whoom
he could confide the conduct of an expedition under his own direction. If destitute of these capasities himself his counseliers possesed them and i t would have
cost them no more exercise of mind to encourage than to derange Plans. But the
theatre of the war was transfered to the eastern provinces. Why not then support
us there with the means of subsistance and detachments of Marines? All that was
now necessary was to support us and show himaelf. The idea of this step surpassing his authority is ridicolous and could not have originated with him. What!
A commander in chief without authority to make discretional dispositions of his

-

216

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1806 TO 1807

forces and the means of subsisting them? I t is objected that the services of the officers were all to be called for on board their respective ships as soon as offensive
measures were entered upon. I n a bombaxdment or a cruise marines are of Little
more use in a man of war than cavalry or Pioneers, and while the vesels are la ing
in port they are used only as badges of Rank and machines of ceremony. %my
not send them where they could be useful a t least till offensive measures were entered upon. Gentlemen of that Corps I a m well asured actuated like there
bretheren of the navy by a manly zeal to distinguish themselves, were ready to
volunteer in the expedition - and i t did not require a greater lettitude of discretion to indulge them the permission to fight a t Derne than to furlough them on parties of pleasure a t Catania - and they must have subsisted cheaper on the coast
than a t any port in Italy. But we were compled to sacrafise forty five days a t
that post fixed, within an hours march of the main force of the army without the
power of attacking them with any reasonable prospect of success: and only for the
want of 200 Bayonets! Would such a detacthment have defeated the great opperations carrying on by the squadron. When peace was finaly resolved upon
what were the provisiolls made for the brave men who have fought our battles in
an enemys country, and who had contributed in renderin this moment propitious
to such an event - Supplies indeed are sent out for &e Christia~wunder my
command but the alternative left me to perish with the mahometans under my
command or desert them to their fate and abandon my post like a coward!
This is the first instance I ever heard of a religious test being required to entitle
a soldier t.o his rations; and the only on[e] of an ally being devoted to destruction
with so little necesity and with so much cool Blood. Is all this to be ascribed to
the debilitated state of the comodores system; I am persuraded it IS. And for thts
reason I cannot but feel the persons near him who dictated his measures as well as
his stile (he says in his letter also he cannot write himself) are deeply reprehe[n]sible for adopting pacific measures so prematurely, under circumstances so favorable to coersion and on conditions so disonnant to the general tone of our Government and Country. - They ought ought a t least to have suspended those
measures until advises which would rlaturaly be expected after the return and
representations of comodore Preble from the head of the Department. The season for naval operations had hardly opened and the delay of two or three months
could work no probable disadvantages in our affairs even should no advise have
come forward. But as provisions were made a t home had the subject been conaidered with due influence over measures, we might with great certainty have calculated on taking posesion of Tripoli and of the enemys person. - Indeed 1 do
firmly believe we might have done it with the means we did originaly poseas had
those means been properly directed into action, and this n-ithout any considerable
mrafice on our part - Some lives might and probaply would have been lost:
but when a man accepts a Sword and bears on his shoulders badges of the c o d dence of his country he ought no longer to calculate on on d ing on a feather bed.
After our commisioner had arived a t Tripoli and had openegcommunication with
Joseph Bashaw the command of the squadron being trasfered to Captain Ro[d]gers, some disagreement occured which Broke of[fl the intercourse. At this crisis
Captain Dent arived of[f] Tripoli, being dispatched by the late comodore with information to the acting comodore of the reinforcement of Gunboats and bombketches having arived in the mediteranean from the United States: and with my
letter of 15% May stating our success against the enemy's srmy in the eastern
Province. Captain Dent was also authorized to asure the comodore of my determination to hold our posesion a t Derne until some thing definite should be decided
in our affairs. Here then was a fair apportunity for the acting comodore Rodgers
to have distinguished himself; to have set an example to all tributary nations, by
chastising the temerity of a Barbary pirate; and to have rendered a most important Service to his country. Why he did not profit of the occation can only be
accounted for by presuming that he was discouraged by the commisior~erof Peace
and by him Led under the impression that it became his duty to govern him@ by
the posthumous opinions of his predecessor. Knowing, as every one does the
patroitism personal energy and laudable ambition of Captain Rogers i t would be
d8cult to conceive any other reason for his not siezing so great an occasion to
have done a singular honour to his flag and t o have immortalized himself. I am
indeed a t a loss for reasons why Mr Lear abandoned these high grounds after having affected so much engagedness for for exemplary measures. But the negosiation was resumed and peace purchased! and on 6'b June this commisioner states
t o me official information of the tra[n]saction. The Bashaw's demands "says"
he were 200,000 Dollars for peace and ransom &c which terms were at once rejected in toto - and after some discmion "he adds" I proposed that a mutual

-

WABS WITH BARBARY POWERS
exchange of risoner~should take place and as he had a balance of more than 200
in his power? would give him 60.000 Dollars for them. but not a cent for p a c e &I
On these terms Lpeace] was deSnitely concluded. b u t this statement adopted
on its literal aence is a n imposition on the understanding of the public. It ia
true indeed that a balance of Prisoners was in Joseph Baahsw's power But we
had in our power being actualy in our possesion the capital of the largest province
in hia Dominions containing between 12 & 15000 Souls. Could not this have
been exchanged for 200 Prisoners of war Was the attempt made. It was manifest
the enemy despaired of obtaining it by Force of arms, and so far from not giving
a cent for peace as asserted by the commisioner - W e gave a kingdom for
peace. Tripoli was in our power and with no verry extmrdinary &art i t might
have bften slso in our hands. The enemy felt a conviction of this and did not
hesitate to acknowledge i t in the presence of commiaioner, and the latter hes
Bince expresed to me his own belief in the feasibility of the enterprize, but he
advances as argument for concluding the peace in the manner he did and with
such prospects before us that we wished to make peace with a man who would
have the ability to kee it. If parricide fatracide treason perfidy to treaty
already experienced a n t ~gstameticpiracy characteristic guarantise of g o d
fslth Mr Lear has chosen the fittest of the two brothers for h
i
s man of confidence:
Their abitity to keep the peace is less esential than ours to keep it, undoubtedly
nothing but terror would bind either of them nor any other Barbary chief to a
faith[ful] observance of treaty stipnIation. Our negotiation ougt however to
have considerd that Hammet Bashaw's was the popular cause and that this
cause is fast gaining ground in Barbary - I t was the cause of Liberty of freedom.
He ought to have considered, that to cede the advantageous Position we held
could not but make the desire of peace appear like too much of an object with
us and could not But leave an impresion of weakness or want of spirit on our
characters. I t would be hard to suspect our commisioner of intentional fraud
on the United States in his generosity with Joseph Bashaw but it is harder to
reconcile hie needless concessions and prodigallties to the test of patriotism.
Although Mr Lear would never admit that our operations in the eastern provinces
had any influence on the disposition of the enemy and althouoh he made i t a
condition upon his entering upon a Negotiation that the comdore should take
measures to compel the evacuation of Derne yet in a paroxism of candor he
expresses himself thus in hi letter above quoted I found that the heroic bravery
of our few countrymen a t Derne and the Idea that we had a lar e forse and immence Supplies a t that place had made a deep impresion on thesashaw I kept
up that idea and endeavoured from thence to make some arangements favourable
to his brother who although not found to be the man whom many had suposed,
was yet entitled to some consideration from us. But I found this was impractable
and if persisted in would drive him to Measures which might prove fatal to our
country men in his power. The reasons here assigned for the deep irnpresion
made on the Bashaw are not strict1 true. It was impossible to conceal from
the enemy our real force a t Derne. %he late governor had obtained exact information of i t before he escaped from the Sanctuary ilnd the enemy themselves
reconnitred us almost daily beside this it was imposibke for us totaly to prevent
communication between the camp and the tomn. Is it probable that a garrison
of one hundred Christians on the coast left totaly destitute of supplies couid of
itself imprcss such deep apprehensions? For shame let us not admit this so
much the more humiliatin our conditions of peace is. KO i t was the dread of
the revolution moved by hamet Bashaw being brought to his capital through
our assistance that made the impresion on the enemy. But the apprehension
insinuated.by Mr Lear that endeavouring t o profit of this circumstance in favour
of the legitimate prince might prove fatal to our country men in h
i
s power betrs
ignorance pusilanimity or design. Or if menaoces were used to impresa such
an apprehesion i t can hardly be admited a s suficient reason for barterin the
honour of our country and deserting the interest of an ally For if he ha8 not
already been made a usinted with the rhodomantade of Joseph Bashaw's
oharacter a common L e r v a n c e of the opperations of human nature might
have taught Kim that man seldom meditaes vengesnse when disolution glsres
him in the face, nor violates the righ? of nature and the law-s of nations when
certain destruction awaits him I n t h s case however the experiment had been
fairly tried, and this Bravado's resolution put t o the test by Comodore Preble.
That Bashaw threatened him and swore by the solemnity of his religion to u t
every on[e] of our country men tp death who were in .tripol if the c o m d r e
fired a &ot into hh batteries. Did he put the threat ~ n t oexecution, On the
oontrary when ever that determined ofiaer approached his walls Bfter the fir&

218

N A V d OPERATIONS FROM 1805 TO 1807

attack the terible basha&-'s first care was t o provide for his own safety and he
uniformly took refuge in his gardens or in his Bomb-proof and all experience has
taught us that the more rou ly he was handled and the nearer danger approached
him the more tractable he %as been rendered but if the idea of our large forse
and immence supplies a t Derne or more honestly our transactions /with his]
Brother made a deep impresion on the Bashaw a s i t manifestly did was this tb-e
first instance of the commisioner being apprized of it? If so he had neglected
his duty for i t %-asnotorious to every other american Officer in the mediteranecn
and he ought to have known i t and t o have madie] an honourable use of it instead
of which he proceeds.
"I therefore engaged of course that on the conclusion of peace (for which
he gave not a cent) we should withdraw all our forces from Derrie and other
Parts of his dominions and the Basham engages that if his brother withdmas
himself quitely from his dominions his wife and family should be restored
to him. He goes further. He realy not only negosiates Hamet Biishaw
out of his own teritories but pledges the faith of the United Stales to carry
the stipulation into execution and a t the same time secretly canvetles cith
Joseph Bashaw that the fullfilment of his engagement in this article shall
never be made a subject matter of consideration. Q7as h 3 ~Lear sent out
to co-operate with Joseph Bashaw? Or is this a crisis in the circumstaliccs
of the United States which renders darkness and duplicity necesary to. our
political safety or existence? I s i t possible tbat any thing can render ~tso
in favour of a piratical chieftain of a barbary garrison whoom one frigate
snd a few tenders had so often drove from his strong holds If so it ought
to appear t o justify our conduct to the world. Our Commisioner closes
his communication to me. I pray you will accept yourself and present to
Mr OJBannon and our brave countrymen with you my sincere congratulations
on an event which your and their heroic bravery has tended to render so
honourable to our country. After having subscribed t o a treaty the conditions of which under the then existing circumstances reflects a wound on
our national dignity and after having siezed an occasion to use me as an
instrument to the atainment of this aqusition as he seems t o think it he
evidently flatters himself he shall absord my Just sence of indignatiou &
Chagrin in a plausil,le paragraph of fulsome adulation. Khatever lxlay bc
considered by capasities capable of judging corectly the merit or Demerit
of my conduct, I beg you will entertain a more favorable [opinion] of my
pride than to supose I ever lived a moment when I should have thought it
an honour to receive a military compliment from the provisional colonel
Lear.
A colonel *
Who never set a squadron in the field
ro&
'
the division of a battle Knows
More than a spinster
Of one thing I am confident
If there be any honour o r advantage in the
peace, a share of the merit cannot be refused to those whose exertions influenced
the event - If it has been too precipitately concluded and all the advantages,
not secured which sitation aforded it was not my fault.
I t was my invariable
opinion and I invariably endeavoured to impress i t both by argument & effort
that the measure ought to be delayed until1 all our means of chastisement were
brought to bear on the enemy But the instrument the most imposing that which
the enemy greatly dreaded and on which our country had fixed its chief hope and
reposed its honour never appeared in the field and our Squadron and our commisioner negociated out of our hands a Post in the enemy's dominions next in
population and consequence t o his capital Without any equivalent whatever.
Thus tho i t was our busineas and tho we had most amply the means to dismar~tle
the enemy instesd of this we have established him in a more safe aituation t o do
us and mankind mischief than he posesed before the war or than he could have
posesed without the war, for by expeling the rival we have relieved his most
dangerous adversary He has gained a kingdom what have we gained bv the war.
However the Peace may be received by the government and people of the United
States here are circumstances in which both our interest and honour are so deeply
involved t h a t the[y] cannot but induce an inquiry

-

* *

-

-

-

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS
P. S. List of the Naval force which might have been employed before Tripoli

by the midle of July actusly a t the rendevous a t Syracuse the 4 4 & 114
1 Not Saild
1 President ----------------- 44
2 Constitution- - - - - - - - - - - - - - 44 o,
2
3
3 Congress
36
4 Constelation - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 36 2 3
4
5 Esscx-_ - - - __ - - - - - - - - - - - - - 32
5
6 JohnAdams-- - - - - - - - - - - - - 32 ,,
6
1 Argus - - - - - - - - - _ - - - _ - - - - 18 2"
7 not arived
2 S ~ / r e.n. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18 S
8
9
3 I / i z c n _ _ - _ - - - - - _ - - - - - - - - - - 14
4 Fra7~klia-- - - - - - - _ - - - - - - - - 8 Gunboats from Tripoli
1
Schooners
2
1 Enterprize _ - - - - - - - - _ - _ - - - -14
2 Natrliliss- - _ - - _ - - - - _- - - - - - 14 Gun Boats from the Adratic
1
Sloop
1 Ilornet _ - - - . - - - - - - 8 - - -2 - - -

:z

__-

351

8
4

318
33

5

-6

1ear$bg

in all Guns & Mortars

[Stephen Decatur Col.]
(9 August 18051
To Captain Samuel Barron, U. S. Navy, Hampton, Va., from C u e s W. Goldsborough, Chief Clerk, Xavy Department

Df SIR,Agreeably to your request I delivered to Gen! Eaton, the note addressed
to hrrn by you, relatively to his communication to the Secretary of the X'avy of
the 9 t h August 1805 - I also delivered to him the newspaper, (in which you had
first read that communication) with marks designating the parts upon Fobich you
required an explanation from Gen! Eaton - These papers were detivered to
Genl Eaton, on the day prior to that, on which he had, previously to receiving
them, determined to leave Wash", & to the day on which he did leave Wash".
At the time that I delivered these papers to Genl Eaton, I remarked t o him,
that as no definitive measures could be immediately taken by you, an immediate
answer was not essentialky necessary.
I stated to him however, that i t would
be agreeable to you, to receive his communications as early as might suit his convenience, as your mind must necessarily be kept in a state of unpleasant auspence
until you did receive them.
The result of Genl Eaton's observations to me, was - an expression of his
hopes that h e ahould be able to give to you satisfactory explanations - he warmly
expressed his esteem for you - he concluded his observations with saying that
if his explanations should not be deemed satisfactory, he shoukd be a t the city of
Washington before you mould have it in pour power to take any decisive course
upon the subject, & would then give such further satisfaction as circumstances
might require WASHPMay 26th 1808
19 August 18051

-

To William Eaton from Captain Samuel Barron, U,S. Navy
21 April 1806

SIR,In your letter t o the Secretary of tbe.Navy of the 9* Augt 1805, you have
nlade some remarks which cannot pass unnoticed as ~t seems to reflect on a Character which hitherto the Breath of Slander has never dared to Sulig
I have requested Mr Goldsborough to ask of you, a n explanation, on certain
l'oints in thc letter above alluded to
I should have adtiressed you sooner but had hopes, that the Decision of the
Committee of the loner house, who are in possession of Documents, which that
of the Senate did not possess, would have enabled me to act a t once decisively,
but i t appears that want of time has stopped the Progress of further proceedings
during the present Seasion

-

220

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1806 TO 1807

[9 August 18051
To Captain Samuel Barron, U. S. Navy, from William Eaton
WASHINGTON
CITY Feb. 14.1807
Sra, No unprejudiced iuference from my letter to the Hon. Secretary of the
Navy of Aug. 9'4 1805 can impute to our dispositions the regrets so universdy
felt on account of our squadron in the kediterranean, that year, not having been
brought to bear on the enemy previously to offering terms of peace. On the contrary, i t cannot but plain1 appear that this misfortune, so far as implicates your
conduct, has been ascribed: and justly, to a general debility of your system over
which you could have no control; an Act of God in which you certainly had no
volition - I disavow any intention in that letter to derogate from your reputation, or to outrage your feelings - The bad management, which no sophistry can
viel, and the reproach due to the inglorious manner of finishing the war with
Tripoli, I meant should fix on our commissioner of peace - I then believed, and
still believe him the author and the Agent of our national disgrace on that coast.
Such is the opinion reported by a Committee of the Senate; who have aU document before them. Such is the opinion impressed on the public mind - I t is
the opinion which ought to obtainOf the sincerity of these declerations you have evidence in a paragraph of that
letter, as follows - "I am" says the Commodore "too unwell to write with my
own hand." It was needless for him to add &his:it was easily percieved by the drift
and composition of the contnzunicution; there is no jeature of Barron's manly s o d to be
traced m it. It zs the work of a Machzavelzon wmmzssaciner into whose influence Me
Commodore yielded his mind through the injirntity of bodily weakness - k c .
Lear was instructed to offer no money as a condition of peace or ransom, except
adversit should render the campaign abortive - It is presumed he never stated
to you t%s article of his instructions - We had experienced no adversity; except
the long, painful, and wasting sickness which inca acitated you to act - This
we considered as a misfortune But yet we believetthere were commanders near
you who would have done honor to the flag of our Country in leading an expedition
under your orders; though you remained a t the rendezvous The grounds we held over the enemy, a t the time of the negotiation, was such as
we would have chosen - For though i t cannot be said, in regard to the squadron,
that the campaign had moved; yet the enemy acknowledged himself conquered The commissioner knew it; and has confessed i t to me - But if the enemy had
not acknowledged it, the humblest capacity, calculating on ordinary events,
cannot but percieve that the means we possessed, if brought into united action,
must have crushed him.
I feel myself warranted in charging to C o l ~Lear the intrigue and duplicity of
prevailing on you first to make arrangements to abandon our conquests a t Derne,
then to resign your command, with a view of rifling from you the honor of an agency
in the peace - Wel! has he signalized himself as a man of diplomatic skill by
offering sixty thousand dollars for a pence at a moment when the enemy would
have ladly yielded half his kingdom to have been left in peaceable posseasion of
the o&er half - I t may not be uncharitable to suspect him willing to snatch a
laurel from my brow as well as yours - and to gratify a cowardly jealous a t the
expense of his country; for in his communications to the Department of i t a t e he
explicit?y says - "I have always been opposed to the Egyptian and Derne expedition - His pretence of the danger of our prisoners is a deception - Captain
Rodgens says i n his report to the Secretary of the Navy - "I never thought
myself, that the lives of the American prisoners were in danger." For these things
I have denounced Lear On reviewing my letter, above alluded to, I am not convinced of any errors
which require correction or modification - Were the movements of our campaign
in the Mediterranean of 1805 retraced I believe facts would come to the support of
my statements - But it must be a forced and a misconstruction of my meaning
to make any part of it carry a censure of your fair intentions [Mrs. James S. Barron Col. NDA photostat.]

R T . B S R71TH BARBARY POWERS

221

[QAugust 18051
To Tobiea Lear, lJ. 8. C o m d General, Algiers, from the Bey of Tunis
The BASHAW
BETOF TUNIS,
the Wty well guarded the Rerideme of Felicity
To Mr TOBIASLEA=Con& General oj the V States of A m w k nttach'd to the
Regency o Algiers, actually onboard the Frigate Conalitutwn, anchm'd i n the
road8 of detfu.
SIR, Reflecting on the different conferrences which I have had for some time,
with the Charge of Affairs of Your Nation & in particular within those few days,
I think there is a misunderstanding between us; Reflecting likewise on the numerous writings which p&ss7dbetween you, your Commodore & me, that you are
the sole Person a t this moment invested with the character & power of the President of your Government to treat with me on affairs relative to your Nation,
I don't hesitate a moment to reply anew, to your complaisant letter of yesterday
received this morning, leaving a t the same time to your penetwtion and to thst of
the Commodore's, who I distinctly reverence, to r e h t & t
a decide on these
appkicatione, from which spring so many contrasts INote: acre I O ~ O W
ak
Snsthm
~ plt

d

lllstion ot diplomstic mrres&mndence.)

More agein t o convince you of my peacable intentions $ good friendship and
&so the esteem I have for the President, whatever may be yaur intentions, or that
of the Commodores, no more to treat with me untill new orders are receiv'd, after
what has happen'd, I propose to you to send a person of distinction of my Regency
to your Government to explain & accomodate all, which will accelerate the final
dependjng between us. If the Commodore will receive him on board his, or any
other vassel of the Squadron, on his advisal he shall be immediateig sent, but if
not 1 will dispatch him in a Vessel chsrter'd by
. myself for that purpwe.
Again I am
(Sign'd) HAXUDAB ~ ABey.
,
(L. S.)
[NDA. Captain's LH, Vol. 2, 1805.3
-

Extract from journaI of Hezekiah Loomis, Steward. U. S. Navy, U. S. Brig ViruL
Master Commandant George CDX, U. S. Navy, commanding, Friday, 9 August
1805
The Arautilua got underway this morning and stood out of the harbour [Tunis].
She came in and came t o anehor a t 4 ofclock P. M. The commodore made a
signal and she immediately got underway and stood out again. Blowing a gale of
wind a11 day.
[L. F. Afiddlebrook. NDA copg.1
110 August 1805)

To the Bey of Tunis from Tobias Lear, U. &. Cansul General, Algiers, on board
U. S. Frigate &~tikdiOn

(Go

4')

To &e Eroellcncp R a u o o ~BASS*, the moat IUmhioul & mod nugni&ent Rim,
the Bey of !Tunis, tke Abode of Happiness
1 had flatter'd myself that I shou'd have had the honor of hearing from Your
Excellency, in answer t o my Ietter of the 8 4 of this month, which was deliver'd t o
Mr Davis, our Cherg6 d'mairs the same dav; who came on board thie Ship

Yesterday by order of the Commodore, without any letter from yaur Excellency,
or the formal assurance for a maintenance of the Peace which I had hoped your
Excellency wou'd have thought proper to have sent, and which might have enabled me to present myself before Tour Excellency, and I trust to have arranged
the differences between our Nations, to our Mutual satisfaction and interest
As this is not the case, and your Excellency map conceive that all communication
is cut. off. since the departure of our Charge d'AfEdw from your Regency, 1 have
the honor to assure you, that there will be on our part, the same security for m y
persons who may come on board our Vessels as has been heretofore, until we may
be in a declared state of hostiiity, which God forbid; and your Excellency may be
mured that sny oommunications from yourself will meet the moat rapectful at+

222

A7AITAL OPERATIONS FROM 1805 TO 1807

tention. I pray your Excellency to accept the homage of my high respect and
consideration
ON BOARDTHE U S Ft. Constitution
August 10tP 1805 [NA. SDA. CL, Algiers, Vol. 7, Part 11, Jan. 1806Sept. 1807.1

U. 8.Frigate Constifufion,from
To Captain John Rodgers, U. S. Navy,
Tobias Lear, U. S. Consul General, Algiers
TUNIS Monday Even: Augt 10,1806
DEARSIR The Bey has appointed 8 OClock t o morrow morning t o see me a t
Bardo, and as I may be gone thither (before the boat comes up) I write a few lines
this evening for her t o take t o you, but of course can say nothing yet, on the main
point - I asked the hlinister to day, a t the Goletta, if it would be expected, t h a t
I should be attended by some Officers in my Audience with the Bey
He said
that would be as I pleased - But that when a person came to the Bey on business,
it was most customary for them to come without any Suit, which would be expected on a visit of Ceremony - I therefore did not request t h a t any one might
come - All the Consuls, excepting the Danish & Spanish (who are in the Country) have been t o see me, and express no doubt but every thing will be done, a.3 mwe
wish; This me shall see t o morrow I presume, I n the meantime I will only say good night, and that I I, very Respectfully
and truly Yours [LC. JRP, L Bk B, &.fay 1805-July 1806.1

-

Extract from journal of U. S. Frigate Constitution, Captain John Rodgers, U. S. Navy,
commanding, Saturday, 10 August 1805
[Tunis Bay] At 4 [P. M.] Consul Davis came on board With his Baggage
Meridian fresh breezes and clear weather
Consul Davis went on board the Constellation With his baggage
[USNA.]
Extract from journal of Hezekiah Loomis, Steward, U. 6. Maw, U. 6. Brig Vixm,
Master Commandant George Cox, U. S. Navy, commanding, Saturday, 10 August
1805
[Tunis] Gale of wind. The Commodore made a signal to us t o get underway,
which A-edid a t 9 o'clock A. hf. and stood off to windward. Saw the Naulilus and
spoke her a t 5 o'clock P. M. Saw %!so the Enterprise coming out.
[L. F. Middlebrook. XDA copy.]
[ I 1 August 18053
To the Bey of Tnnis from Tobias Lear, U. 6. Consul General, Algiers, on board
U. S. Frigate Consfifution, Tnnis Bay
RASSA,the most Illustrious, and most magnijlcent
To His Excellency HAMUDA
Prince, the Bey of Tunis, the Abode of Happiness The length of time necessary for making a full and correct translation of the
letter with which your Excellency honor'd me yesterday, dated the 9tC of the present Month, will, I hope, account for its not having been sooner acknowledged. I have attentively considerd the contents of the last, as well as the former of
your Excellencies letters, and as they contain such assurances of your friendly disposition towards the U. States, & expressions of a determination t o continue that
friendship, on your part, according t o the Treaty now existing between our Nations; I shall not hesitate t o present Myself before your Excellency tomorrow, in
order t o have a full & clear explanation of all differences which have arrisen, & t o
confirm that harmony & good understanding which it is so desireable shou'd always
prevail between your Excellency & the Government of my Country. Shou'd our conference terminate, as I trust i t will, in restoring that confidence
in the continuance of Peace between our Nations which shall be fully satisfactory,
the guarantee which has been required by the Commodore for securing this important point, will no longer become necessary.

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

223

As I am not sufficiently conversant in the Italian language, t o make my communications to your Excellency perfectly understood, I shall take the liberty of carrying with me a Gentleman for that Purpose. [NA, SDA. CL, Algiers, Vol. 7, Part 11, Jan. 1806-Sept. 1807.1
111 August 18051
To Hamnda, Bey of Tunis from Captein John lodgers, U. S. navy
(COPY)
To Hi4 Excellency HAMCDA
BASSA,the Most Illustrious and Most Magnificent
Prince, the Bey of Tunis the abode of Happiness. As your Letter of the 9'h of the present Month to Tobias Lear Esqr Consul
General for Algiers, contained some items addressed to me; I in consequence
again do myself the honor of writing t o assure you that i t is even yet my sincere
wish to see a Peace between you and the U. States founded on the most secure
basis, and different from what present appearances indicate I t having been reported to me that your Excellency had threat'ned my Country
with immediate War in case of my appearing in this Bay nith the Squadron
under my command - that neither myself, nor Consul Gen! Lear (in the capacity
assigned him by his Governient) would be received b~ you, without my having
previously made concessions, by restoring the Xebecque end her two prizes which I
had captured for attemptirlg to violate the Blockade of Tripoli - that you had
summoned the Spanish & Dutch Consuls to witness a protest against me for
detaining said cruizer 8: her two prizes. These ~ i t many
h
other circumstances
of similar magnitude wherein the honor & interest of my Country are deeply
concerned have alone produced the measures I have taken by requiring of your
Excellency a Guarantee for the maintainance of Peace, witnessed by the English
& French ConsuLs, and this measure I feel sstisfied your Excellency cannot
complain of when you revert to your having summoned the Spanish & Dutch
Consuls to witness a protest against me, for the detaining of said Corsair & her
two prizes - I require nothing but n hat is fair and equally honorable to yourself
& my Country, and from this position, sooner than retract in the smallest degree,
I would without any other compensation than that of having the pleasure of
defending the honor of my Country, cheerfully sacrifice every private consideration - As I have never had the smallest intention of acting towards you in
any other shape than as I wished you to do tom-ards my Country, & feeling
convinced that I have executed this intention, I now inform you that no farther
advances can be made by me until you either give me the Guarantee already
reqoired, or propose some other Terms of securing a Peace which I may have
reason to consider an equivalent to the Guarantee. I t appears that your Excellency's greatest cause of complaint is my coming
into your Bay with all my Squadron; even sdmit this measure to be sufficient
grounds for offence; you will perceive (it is likely [in] l a c than 48 hours) that
ou have been deceived in the information you have received respecting our
Force, by the arrival of two Bomb Brigs and one Sloop of War, which I momently
expect here to receive orders for their future destination, and even this does
not compose our whole force in the Mediterranean by one 44 Gun Frigate &ei h t formidable Gun Boats %he Minister your Excellency proposed sending to the U.States I can undertake
to say will be received by the Goverment with all the respect due to his character
and I doubt not but that it will have the most happy effect for both Kations. In order that no part of my language may be considered vague, or admit of
more than one construction, permit me to acquaint your Excellency that in case
the result of Consul Genl Lear's presenting himself a t your Court proves sstisf a c t o v on behalf of the U. States, that I shall consider i t a sufficient equivalent
for the Guarantee which I have already requested
T v ~ r BAY
s
Augt 1 1 t b 1806
[NDA. Captain's LB, Vol. 2, 1805.1

To Captain John Rodgera,

U. S, Navy, from Surgeon James Dodge, U. S. Navy

~ I E DEPI
D
11tP dugusl 1806
U STATESSHIP Con-s'itufwn.
Sm, Permit me to congratulate you onoe more, on that extra state of health,
which the crew of the Coadifution continue in the possession of - You will

224

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1806 TO 1807

doubtless from your own feelings on the subject appreciate mine; Yet I Bdleure
you Sir, my greatest satisfaction, has its origin in a secondary cause; for I believe
sincerely, (and I am happy in being authorized to express the sentiment) that
the unexampled health of the Crew, is principally, and I might say allmost
alltogether owing, to that strict attention to cleadiness, which 1s prescribed by
Your internnl regulatzons, and that particular care and punctuality with which
the orders are carried into effect by the Officers in their respective departments. Indeed I do not hesitate to say that the effect of such attentions has been, to deprive
Surgery of his Knife and render the aid of Medicine allmost superfluous. - No
complaint of a serious nature exists on board; in particular, I cannot trace any
symptom of small pox, by which we have been so lately and justly alarmed.
following, is an abstract from the daily report book, which nil1 a t one view
give you the exact number of those more immediately under my care, their
complaints &Q
R h e u m a t i s m - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - . - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 1.
P n e u m o n i a - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 1.
S o r e l e g - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 2.
Intermitt. F e v e r - - - - - - _ - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 4.
1.
C r a. m
p _ - - - - - _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 1.
-.
s y p. h.~ l ~ s - - - - - - - - - - - - - . . _ - - - - . - - - - - - - - - - - - . . - - . . - - - - - - - - - - - - -4.
P m n m b f e a s t - - - - ~ ~ - ~ ~ . ~ ~ - - - ~ - - ~ ~ - - - - - - - - - - 2.
----------F e v e r - - - - - - - - - - - - - . . - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -1.
Billious
.
.
Debihty_-_---- _ - - - _ _ - _ - - - - - . - - - - 1. - - - - - - Boils. - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - . - - - - - - - - - - -1.- - - - - - - Diarrhea _ - - - - - - - - - - . - - - - - - - - - - - - . . . . . . - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -1.- - - - - -

-

Total

20.

[LC. JRP, Vol. 2, Series Two, May-Oct. 1805.1
To Captain John Rodgers, U.8. Navy, from Tobias Lear, U. S. Consul General,
Algiers
TUNISAugust 12"4 1805 Noon
DEARSIR On reaching the Goletta I found the Minister with whom I took a
cup of Coffee &Q - He had not yet been inform'd by the Bey of my intention to
come on shore, but sent off immediately to inform him of i t - I also sent the
Drogerman from this place for the same purpose - At the Goletta there a p
peard much pleasure when i t was known that I was to see the Bey - At this
place every thing appears quite silent - We saw but very few People from the
landing place t o the House &e
I shall not now detain the Boat to inform you of the time the Bey appoints to
see me, but if you will have the goodness to send her up here, early tomorrow
morning - I can tell you more, and will have provided some things to send off
by her LLC. JRP, L Bk B, May 1805-July 1806.1
To Captain John Bodgers, U. 8. Navy, from Lieutenant James 8. Biginbothom,
U. S. Navy
SYRACK~SE
August 12% 1806 SIR I should have wrote you before this respecting the arrival of Gun Boat
NP2. which was last a t sea on the 7tP of July when under the Convoy of the
United States Schooner Enterprize had I not been informed by Mr Bird Clerk to
Mr Dyson that he Mr D. had inclosed a Letter a copy of the one I received from
our agent a t Missina respecting the arrival of Gun Boat NQ2' in that port in great
distrees being taken up by an Empenal vessel from Constantonople sixty miles to
the eastward of Malta, she amved in this port the 2nd of August from Missina
without provissions or water, suplied them with every thing which was wanting
not being able myself to go on board as she was in Quarantine and had been so from
her first arrival a t Missina on the 7'4 of August having obtained pratique for her,
went on board & took her in the Aminal having strip'd her of every movable
article on board and Lodge them in the magazine of George Dyson Esqr Navy
Agent, taking his recepts for the same, the four men shiped by Mr Brodbent Navy

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

225

Agent a t Missina I have discharged Lewk Autory Pilot of the Schooner Entcrpke
had charge of said Gun Bost and being allow'd one Dollar P1 Day & t h e other
three Men the pay of Able Seaman i t was the opinion of Mr Dyson ss well as
myself that thay should be diiharged from the Service of the United States ss
thay could be of no service to me but an Expence to Government, i t appears from
what Lewis Autory says that a Mbunderstanding has taken place between MI
Brodbent the men & himself that the agreement which had been made that he
would as slso the Men remain in quarantine forty Days after his Amval in this
Port & empresaed with that Idiea he as also the men hsd left Missins to join said
Gun Boat orded t o Syracuse, & having obtain'd prati ue for her on the 7th of July
they were very much diaconserted a t being discharRe8 but from the Letter which
M: Brodbent wrote there was nothing mentioned of any such agreement therefore
I came t o a determination of paying them $30 - Dollars for their services &
leaving the rest for Mr Brodbent to settle This being approved by hlr Dyson
which I witness'd his paying them said sum I have a t present on board each
Boat one man which I received from the Hospital but am sory t o say among the
whole of them not one man understands caulking & a t present the Boats are ail in
want of it sence I have been left in Char e of those Boats thay have stolen from
Trabaccoli NP I One of her large Kedge inchom weighing three hundred & have
stolen from her all pins for rowing also fore & main Tacks & Sheets of new rope
three Inch, & all Blocks & Running Rigging thav have cut H o o k & Thimbles out
of - thay have also taken from Trabaccolo Nsb. two muskatoons which waa
refused m landing in the Town, & has been the case of their being stolen thay
have akloftaken the Iron pins of which I had indeavoured to take sway myseE so
that I could put them in the Magazine but finding it so very difficult as I should
have been obliged to employ four Carpenters & i t would have taken them two days
before thay would have been able to have got them out I therefore thought i t
imposible to be stolen & permited them to remain their & is likewise Several pins
stolen from the Gun Boats in the Arsinal 6: three large sweeps belonging to the
Tripoline Boats which had formely belong'd to the Schooner Enterprise & not
sufficient room for their entering the Magazine their has also been a Number of
Shot Stolen from the Tripoline Boats as yet I have not assertaind the quantity
& have myself been attacked by eight men on board the Trabaccolos having
received several blows Q; my sword forced from my side breaking the Rooks of the
belt, by men that were employed on board, before I had any Ideia of their intention
or time t o draw my sword from my side, the consequence of which I made a
regular report of it t o Mr Dyson & having ordered every man to he imprisoned
give information of i t the Governor $ the follou-ing morning in answer t o Mr D.
from the Governor waa informing him that every man wss imprisoned & sending
the Major of the Town as also his First Officer to request I would forgive them, &
permit them t o come out of prison, but before I had given an answer, or even new
such a message had been sent, every man was released from prison by order of the
Governor, the consequence of which the Next Evening I was a Second time attacked when in the presence of the officer of the Guard when passing through the
Gates returning from the Boats by a large Man with a Stick lifted up to strike me
when I immediately drew my sword & making a blow a t him he avoided it by
Jwnpin backward when at the same moment having recovered my self from the
Blow whch I had made & turning round for fear I should be attacked by some
other person I had Just time t o parry of the Bayonet of the Centinal amed a t my
Brest which had I not have done he must have run me through the same time receiving a blow of a Stone from the crowed but not able t o tell from whom i t came;
this officer coming to my assistance with a guard of Soldiers soon dispersed the
mob, when I immediately demanded of the oficer t o put the sentinal of the Gate
in Confinement for attempting t o take my life & without cause, this was immediately done & Mr Dyson wrote the Governor respecting the manner in which
I had been attacked, but no satisfaction was ever given me & the sentinal forgiven,
I have every reason to suppose that the very men which had been emprisoned by
me & let out by the Governor vrhere t.he very men which robed the Boats having
Broken the Cabins open & some of my owen cloaths stolen. I have on my owen
account offerd five Dollars if information can be brought me, the American which
arrived in the Gun Boat inform- me that the Emperial Vessel had taken from the
Boat eight sweeps one [ms mutilated] sail nearly new, one small Kedqe anchor &
two forty Gallon casks & [msmutilated] the Commander of the Ship Euridise had
sent his boat with an Ims mutilsted] & men & pressed from the Boat John Fitzpatrick belon 'np;to the Schooner Enterprize he having said he was an Irishman
& dim oblige&he other man being only two on board t o go on board the ship 6 by
purwPasion & offering him of money as also did the Commander of the Sea Hwua

226

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1806 TO 1807

Frigate having obliged him to go on board, but finding thay could not perswaid
on the man to deserte his Boat thay permitted him to go. I have wrote Mr
Brodbent respecting the men shiped on board Gun Boat Nq S but as yet I have
not recQ an answer JAMES
S. HIGINBOTHOM
[LC. JRP, Vol. 2, Series Two, May-Oct. 1805.1
Extract from journal of U. S. Frigate Condilufion. Captain John Rodgers, U. 6. Navy,
commanding, Monday, 12 August 1805
[Tunis Bay] At 9 [A. M.] sighted the larbQbower anchor.
Consul Lear left the ship for Tunis
{USNA.]
Extract from journal of Herekiah Loomis, Steward, U. 8. Navy, U. 6. Brig Vixen.
Master Commandant George Cox, U. 6. Navy, commanding, Monday, 12 August
1805

[Tunis] Calm. Saw 2 sail standing out of the Bay. We made sail and stood
for them. At 3 o'clock stood and came to anchor. Capt. Coxe informed the
Commodore that we were in want of water which he told us we must take from
the Constellation.
[L. F. Middlebrook. MDA copy.]
Extract from journal of U. S. Frigate Comtitulion, Captain John Bodgers, U. S. Navy,
commanding, Tuesday, 13 August 1805
past 11 [A. M.] arrived the U. S. Brig Argm
[Tunis Bay]
[USNA.]
Extract from journal of Hezekiah Loomis, Steward, U. S. Navy, U. 6. Brig Vixen.
Master Commandant George Cox, U. 6. Navy, commanding, Tuesday, 15
August 1805
Tunis Bay. This day an address t o the Commodore inclosed in one to Capt.
Coxe was sent into the cabin, expressive of our wishes to return to America, as our
times were out that we engaged for. At 11 o'clock A. M. arrived the U. S. Brig
Argus. R e got underway a t 1 o'clock P. M. and stood out for Jack Island when
we fell in with the Nautilus at 5 o'clock.
[L. F. Middlebrook. NDA copy.]
[14 August 18051
To Tobias Lear, U. S. Consul General, Algiers, from Hamuda, Bey of Tunis
[Translation]
I n order to further convince you of my peaceful intentions, as well as the friendship and esteem which I have for the President, in case it should be your intention
and that of the Commodore not to treat with me until you receive new orders from
Him after what has happened; I propose to send a distinguished personage of my
Regency t o Your Government t o explain everything and remove all difficulties,
and thus to expedite the settlement of all the undecided matters which have
arisen between UR;if the Commodore would receive him aboard His flagship or
aboard any other vessel of His squadron, he will be sent by me immediately upon
notice from him; failing this I shall send him in a Vessel which I shall charter for
the purpose.
I am once again,
HAMUDA
BASHAW
BEY (SEAL)
A true copy, TOBIASLEAE
[NA. SDA, CD, Algiers, Vol. 7, Pt. 11, January 1806September 29, 1807.1

WARS WITH BARBARY PORTERS
[14 August 18051
To Captain John Bodgers, U. 6. Haw, from the Bey of Tunis
The BASHAWBEYOF TUNIS,the City well guarded the Residence of Felicity
To Commodore JOEN
RODQERS,Commander i n chief of the 13.States Naval forces
in the Mediierranean, actually on board ihe Ship Constitution anchored i n the
roads of Goleffa.
SIR, Leaving t o Consul General Lear, the care of informing you, how long and
friendly were our conferrences of yesterday and t o day, limit myself by the present
t o confirm in the most solemn manner, that which I have wrote to you & t o the
same Consul General Lear, assuring you that it was never my intention to declare
War, against your Kation, nor t o be&
- any hostility if not first provoked on
your'pir-t. - I conclude this misunderstanding between us must have originated from those
who have not well understood, or well remembered my words, <r my writings not
being well understood or explained. I n this state of Affairs & to dispel all shade of coldness or misunderstanding,
between the two Xations, I have resolved t o send without delay an -4mbassador
to the President of the United States, t o make a reclamation relative to the-Xebec
& two prizes in question. I dont hesitate a moment in giving you my Viord of
honor 8: that of a Prince, as I reciprocally demand of you, that I will not commence
any hostilities ahatsoever, or make the least change in the present Peace existing
between us, until the return of my Ambassador from your Country, with the ratification of Peace or some other propositions or determinations of the President. Be pleased then in this interval to send me a Charge d ' m a i r s , until there is, by
the President chosen, named and sent t o me a Consul. With confirming the above Said, I salute you & wish you all happiness. HANUDABASSAWBEY
The Prince oj all Princes of Tunis. (L. S.)
TEE COURTOF TUNIS
14'P August 1805. in the Evening.
(A true Copy of the Translation)
[KDA. Captain's LB, Voi. 2, 1805.1
To Captain John Bodgers, U. 6. Navy, from Tobias Lear, U. 6. Consul General,
Algiers
TUXISAugt 14'h 1805 Noon
DEARSIR I had the pleasure t o receive your letter of yesterday, just as I was
about to go to Bardo this morning, from whence I have just returned - I found
the Bey much better disposed than he was yesterday, t o enter fairly into the busiH e began with observing that we had talked over all matters
ness between usyesterday, and had time to reflect upon them, whlch was the Way he wished to do
business, - He has now promised t o write a letter t o you, saying, that he shall
send an Ambassador to the United States, and to give assurances t o you of his
determination to maintain the peace agreeably t o our Treaty $ 9 - His letter will
be sent tomorrow, & soon after he will send you a letter for the President t o the
same effect, to be dispatched by s ressell, if any one should go, before that in
which his Ambassador sails, and that as his Ambassador will be a person of some
consequence here, it will not be possible for him to arange his affairs in less than
15 or 20 Ilays, in such a manner
to enable him t o be absent so long as he must
necessarily be on his Tifission t o the I: States, and as you have promised him a
passage in one of the Frigates, he begs that the one intended for that purpose, map
c ~ t h e rremain here for that t i e , or if she goes elsewhere, to return again here
within a month - He wishes also another person t o be left in charge of our affairs,
untill we may hear from the U. S, as he says, he is afraid that if the person last
here, should remain, their might be new difficulties created - But on this poillt I
presume he will touch in his letter t o youOn the subject of alteration on t h a t
part of our Treaty relating to Commerce, he has expressed a
to place
us, upon the footing of the most favoured nations
But as the arangement of
our present differences was most necessary t o be dispatchd this remains until1 he
shall have so far completed his promise as to write to you, and fix the matter of
sending an Ambassador to the U States

-

-

So far things appear to be in a fair train for settlement - but we can count upon
nothing with certainty untill i t is finishedThe letter which he has promised to
send you tomorrow, & that which he will write to the President will enable us to
judge better of what we may expect in the end - For my own part, I have not
the least doubt of his present determination being to Keep the peace most strictly.
and his sending an Ambassador to the U S will insure it, a t least untill hie return I have not yet had an oppertunity of asking the Dutch Consul, what passed respecting the Protest mentioned in MFDavis s letter, as the Bey re uested I would
do - One thing seems certain (at least so far as depends on the?Beys Christian
Secretary & others who were present) that the Spanish Consul was not there,
and no other than the Dutch, who, it is said was a t Bardo, & that the Bey csll'd
upon him to hear him declare, that if he was forced t o go to War, with us, he
would never make Peace Your letter of yesterday to me was expressive of what I knew to be your just
resolution, & I am convinced, that such conduct towards these people will always
bring them to a proper sense of what they owe to other Nations - The letters
which came by the Argus, have not yet been delivered, as I shall wait for a performance of the promise tomorrow - In the mean time,
P S As I Keep no Copy of my letters t o you, I must have a Copy when I
come on board [LC. JRP, L Bk B, May 1805-July 1806.1
To Tobias Lear, U. S. Consul General, Algiers, from Captain John Rodgers, U.8.
Navy
U S SHIP Constitution
TUNISBAYIdt? August 1805
DEARSIR I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your letter of thia
day, and am happy to find, that the Bey is now disposed to accede, to such terms,
as the honor and Interest, of our relative situation demands without obliging us to
pursue measures which altho', such as to bring him to a sense of his duty, yet
nevertheless, such as only the last resort can justify. The sooner he gives the
necessary Assurance of his Pacific Intentions the better, as it may prevent certain
evils Incident to the present state of our affairs. I mention t h k owing to a circumstance, which happen'd this evening-which -.as as follows. An Armed galley
coming into the Ray, was first discovered close to Cape Carthage, with the Brig
Vizen in chase of her, and on perceiving that the Vizen, would not be able to bring
her too, before she reach the Goletta, I made the Signal for the Essez (Which was
the nearest Ship inshore), to fire on her. however she was suffered to pass, without examination after 12 or 14 Ineffective Shot had been fired discovering a t the
time, that if more decisive measures were taken to stop her that the consequence
would prove fatal to the Galley. His sending an ~mbassadorto the U States will
be one of the greatest proofs of his desire for Peace, and no doubt will have the
most happy effect for us. Therefore so soon as this is made Certain, either the
Conatellation or Congress will be appointed to receive him.As he appears to be dissatisfied with Mr Davis, no doubt an other person would
be most proper to leave in charge of our affairs untill the determination of Goverment shall take place - However I shall not consider myself Justifiable in sending any part of the Force off untill his Embassador is received on board Therefore the sooner he is Embarked the better. So soon as he gives me good and
suficient reasons to su pose that he is sincere, in what he professes, I shall cease
laying his Cruixew un&r th restraint which they a t present are.
[LC. JRP, L Bk B, May 1805July 1806.1
To Captain Stephen Decatur, Jr., U. 6. Navy, commanding U. 6. Frigate Congreu.
from Captain John Bodgers, U. 6. Navy
U S SHIPConstitution
TUNISBAYAugt 14th 1805
SIR As it is my intention that the Frigate Congrees under your command shall
return to the United States, in consequence I have t o desire that you exchange
such part of your crew whose term of service has not expired for an equal number
whose term has expired belonging to the B r i e Argus S en, & Vizen & Schooner
Nautilus, giving t o each a proportionate number of L a m e n Agreeable t o the

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

229

-

respective Rates of the M e r e n t Vessels,
I wish this change to take plscle a4
soon as possible, After which you will be pleased t o furnish me with a fist of the
number of Men you have left whose term of Service hes not expired
[HS of Pa.]

Extrsct from joornal of Henekiah Loomis, Steward, U. 8. Bavy, U. 8. Brig VUCR,
Master Commandant George Cox, U. 8. Navy, commanding, Wednesday, 14
August, 1805
This day at 10 o'clock, saw a s m a l l sail, gave chsse and soon came up with her.
She was from Porto Perana. We sent her back again. At 2 o'clock saw another
sail standing into the port. We gave the until we came within gun shot, she
still crowding sail and standing in for land. We fired several shot into her, but
she would not heave to. We were obliged to stand along the land as we shoaled our
water very fast. We kept firing a t her as often as our guns would bear until she
paesed the Frigates, a t which time they all fired a t her, but were too far from her
t o do much injury, except the Essez,whichgave hersome heavy pills. K e chased
her in under the forts and then stood out t o the Commodore where we received
orders t o let no vessel go into Tunis.
LL. F. Middlebrook. NDA copy.]
f15 August 1805)
A General Order issued by Captain 3 ohn Rodgers, U. S. Bavy
GEKERAL ORDERS

-

The Commodore cannot but express his concern and regrets that an incident
should occur which compels him to order the indiction of punishment on Individuals serving under his command, both painful and degrading t o the character of
a Seaman & Soldier, but viewing the crime of Desertion, particularly from the
service of the U. States, where Seamen have BO many advantages over others in
any other service, EM a Crime of the BLACKEST
Kind & Justly meriting the most
exemplary punishment, and being determined never to pardon Crimes fraught
with such fatal consequences to the Service, nor to mitigate in the smallest degree
the punishment annexed by L a w t o such Crimes; In consequence after having
approved the sentence of the Court Martial decreed against John Graves, John
Piudar, Stephen Kentle, Henry Brim & Michael Penny on the 9* Inst, orders the
same t o be executed this Day on the display of Signal for Punishment Signed JNO.RODQERS
U. STATES
SHIPConstitution
Tunis Bay August 15th 1805
[LC. JRP, Letters & Orders, Book A, 1804-1805.3
To Tobias Sear, U. 6. Gonad Generd, Algiers, from Captain John Rodgers, U. S.
Navy
U STATESSHIPCmtitl~tion
Tunis Bay 15'P August 1806
SIR I have received your two letters of the 12th & 13 Inst, and a m extremely
sorry to find that the Bey is still disposed to equivocate or a t any rate that he is
not willing to accede to such terms as we had reason t o suppose he would, his
saying that if ail is settled, there will be no necessity for sending a minister to the
U States, you will agree with me, I am sure, goes for nothing as a t least he must
do one of three things,by simple request, or else do sI1 three by force, t h a t is he
must either give the Guarantee already required, without any deviation from the
terms already prescribed - He must give sufficient security for peace, and afterwards send a Minister to the U States to adjust the same, or else he must make
such alterations in the Treaty as you may require, and this too in a manner to
satisfy you, that their is confidence to be placed in what he does - His prevaricatin with you in particular, induces me to beleive, that he is now more than
ever the Bcoundral, I had thought him before, and I have only to repeat, that if
he d m not do all that is necessary, & proper, that even a t the risk of my Conducts
being disap roved by my Country, he shall yet feel the Vengeance of the S uadron
now in I& g a y
The Brig Arpw haa just arrived from Alexandria, an%l send

-

230

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1805 TO 1807

you enclosed a small Package of letters for different persons in Tunis, among
others one for Hodge Unis, which you will deliver as you may think proper [LC. JRP, L Bk B, May 1805-July 1806.1
To Richard Oglander from Tobias Lear, U. S. Consul General, Algiers
ON BOARDU. S. F) Constituiion.
Tunis Bay Augt 15. 1806. DEARSIR A Turkish Corvette arrived here the day before yesterday from
Malta, on board of which was a Servant and some Articles for you. As her boat
was not permitted t o land yesterday, the Captain of the Corvette Sent your
S e n t and things on board this Shi requesting they might be forwarded to you
by the first opportunity. - The CPdrvette sailed again yesterday before noon. Your Servt $ 9 would have been sent up yesterday; but the wind was to high to
admit of a boat's going on Shore coveniently. - The boat which goes up now
is very small and will not be able t o take your things; but they will be sent up
tomorrow or next day. I will thank you to inform me if any thing new has occured since I left Tunis.
Should all things remain as when I left that, it is probable Mrp Lear will accompany
me up tomorrow or next day. She Sends her best Comple* to you
PS. My Compliments to Mr Clarke. [Stephen Decatur Col. Bk. B.]
[15 August 18051
To Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Navy, from George Hamson, Navy Agent,
Philadelphia, Pa
Dr SIR The medal is in hand & by the Spring the President will hal-e ye
pleasure of handing i t you - It cannot be done in less time, & as I wish it equal
t o any other of its size (2% inches) I do not press him - One of the three drawings you sent on has been selected - y9 follows are the inscriptions
Edwardo Preble Duci Strenuo
Comitia Americana
Vindici Commercii Americani
Ante Tripoli
1804 - (in Roman characters)
It shall be superior to any thing of the kind ever executed in America AUGUST15% 1805
[LC. EPP, Vol. 15, June-Aug. 1805.1
[15 August 18051
Recommendation to the Merchants of the United States trading to the
Mediteranean
Whereas the Trade of the U. S. to the Mediteranean, is one of the most valuable
of the said States, & has been during the last, & more particularly during the
resent War much molested by an infamous set of Prevateers, fitted out in the
port. of Spain, whose general rendezvous has been, & continues to be, the port
of Algecirrrs, before which port every vessel1 bound to the Mediteranean must
necessarily paw, & whereas I t appears There is no Consul or Agent for the U. S,
nor has there been for several years past a t Algeciras, except a Spaniard nominated
by Mr John Gavino of Gibraltar, within a few weeks, & that the said port being
within the Jurisdiction of the Consul of Cadiz, which office is held by a Spaniard
now residing a t Madrid, & who has not resided for many years past within A0
miles of his Consulate, & that the Interests & honor of The U. S & its Citizens
are totally neglected, & Its v.essells are daily captured & carried into the port of
Algecim, & the Captains or Seamen there engaged either to sign papers in a
foreign language which in many instances are made the grounds of their Condemnation or obliged to enter into compromises e ually injurious both to the honnr
of The U. S & the Interasta of Its Citizens, & $hereas J. Yznardy Consul General
of The U. a t Cadiz & its dependencies has been applied to, to appoint a Vice

A.

Consul at Algeciras, & He has either been unwilling so to do, or has been unable
to get any Person t o serve under him, alledging that no person would consent
t o remain there without a fixed salary, which the Government have refused t o
allow t o any Consul or Vice Consul, & whereas from the above stated facte, I t
clearly appears that The Interests of The U. S. & its Citizens are totally abandoned
to the mercy of a sett of Privateemmen & that immense sums have been loat &
continue daily t o be brought in & condemned.
I t is therefore strongly recommended to The Citizens of The U 8. engaged in
the Trade t o the Meditermean to call meetings in the difierent Sea ports, &
present a petition t o Congress, claiming that protection which they conceive
themselves & their property entitled to, & requesting that a respectable Citizen
of The U. S. may be appointed to the office of Consul Genera1 of Cadiz & its
dependencies, with the obligation of residing a t hihis post, & in case of no Citizen
being willing from the local situation of Algeciras to remain there, without a
Salary, that a Salary m y be allowed t o The Vice Consul residing at the port
of Algecirss.
CADIZ15% AUGUST1805.
[NDA. Misc. LB, Vol. 4, 1806.1
Extract from journal of U. S. Frigate Conntittdion. Captain John Eodgers, U. S. Navy,
commanding, Thursday, 15 Augnst lSOb
[Tunis Bay1 Observ,d the Vizen in chace of A Gally. 5 past 3 fired a gun
to bring the Gally too.
[Colonel Lear returned on board from Tunis on 16 August.]

[USNA.]
Extract from journal of Heaekiah Loomis, Stewerd,U. 8. Navy, U. S. Brig Vkm,
Master Commandant George Cox, U. S. Navy, commanding, Tharaday, I S
August 1806
[Tunis] This b y chased 2 sail, bro't them t o and then let them go about
their business, At 4 o'clock P. M. the Nautilus came out with orders for us to
go in and come to anchor which we did a t half past 9 o'clock.
[L.F. ?*Iiddlebrook. NDA copy.]
To Tobias Lear, U. S. Consul General, Algiers, from Secretary of S t a b

DEPARTMENT
OF STATE
August 169 1806
SIR, Since your last letter dated 34 November from Malta, I have received com-

municatiom from illr hlountford of the 3 & 4 Jan7 1.t Feb? and 25 hlarch. You
will receive the present by a store ship about to aail from Kennebec with a cargo
of plank, timber, spars &c, an invoice of which w-ill be transmitted to you by the
Agent who collected it, and which i t is hoped will be received upon the annuity, of
which more than a year has now become due. To render them the more acceptable
they are accompanied with the five brass Eighteen pounders, with carriages and
apparatus complete. The remainder of the brass guns will be finished and forwarded without delay. Inclosed is a bill of the weight of the Guns which are
correspondently marked, in order that if the practice be as is suggested to weigh
but one as a criterion af the whole, such an one may be selected as may bear the
nearest average proportion to the whole. This is the one numbered 4.
The reluctance manifested by the Regency t o receive the Timber bythe William
and Mary, is the more extraordiuary as it mas intended t o replace thst m n t by
the Sally, which went on shore a t S1 Lucar [20 November 18031, snd as nothing
existed to produce a doubt respecting the necessity of sending it. The present
cargo of wood.was collected last year and is composed of such an assortment as
your communications have indicated as the most desirable at A1 'em. I have
also directed to be shipped a piece of mualio embroidered with golf rnd mother
with silver, according t o the Dey's request signified to Mr Mountford; but in case
the latter piece cannot be obtained two pieces of fine India Dimity are to be sent
in its stead. To these are added two hundred dollars worth of sweetmeats preserved without a spirituous mixture and fifty pounds of Coffee,which as well as
the muslin and Dimity may be presented to t.he Dey. This and the former W ~ O
of timber and the fifteen brass cannon when delivered, i t is calculated will leave
the Regency in our debt. If therefore the select qudity and kinds of timber, plank

232

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1806 TO 1807

composing this w g o and the circumstances of its having been pmcumd before
it was known that it would not be very acceptable and its being accompanied with
the cannon and other articles so much desired, should not fully satisfy the Regency in accepting it, i t may be observed that as nothing will probably be due on
the annuities, we are justly entitled to more time t o procure and forward the articles contained in the disadvantageous list, formerly dictated to you, if i t be absolutely necessary to do so; but much reliance is pl&
in your exertions t o have
i t retracted and to obtain a favorable substitute.
The articles you have on hand from the Consular present received from MI
Cathcart and the Attagon by Commodore Barron, if i t can be disposed of according
t o its value, may constitute part of the biennial present due this year, and the
remainder be obtained in Italy or from the Jews as may be deemed most advisable
in referrence to the comparative cost of the articles and the necessity there may
a r k from circumstances of policy t o deal with the Jews. I shall cause a remittance
t o cover the expence of these supplemental articles in the present, to be made to
Sir Francis Baring & Cq of London, on whom you will consequently draw for it.
[NA. SDA. CL, Despatches to Consuls 1, 1800-1817.1
$6

To Xaster Commandant John Shaw, 0.S. Nsvg, commanding U. S. S. J& Admnr.
from Captain John Bodgeta, U. S. Navy
U STATESFEIQATE
c@t&8litution
finis Bay Augt 16,1806
SIR I have to &rect that you continue hfidsbipman William Reid in the John
Adams until her return to the U. States & that you consider him as Suspended
from all duty as an Officer in the Navy of the same, until the pleasure of his Excellency the President shall be made known respecting the proceeding and decree
of the late Court Martial convened on 12'4 Inst for his Trial; a Copy of which
I shall forward to the Navy Department by you in due form.
Proceedings of a Court Martial held on board the U States Ship Constellation
on the 12%Aug* 1805 by the Order of Commodore John Rodgem for the Trial of
William Reid Midshipman belongin to the John A d a m charged with Drunkenness, and making a Mutinova and SeJitious assembly among the Crew, and writing
a Melicious and False Letter to the Commodore
HUGHG E OCAMPBELL
~
C a p t ~& Preaident
S T E P EDECATUR
~
Captq & Member
CHAV
STEWART
} l o r t e r s Commt & Members

)

~ i e u t t& Membe~sTHOMAS
JOHNSTON
Act* Judge Adot4
The President, Members and Judge Advocate being duly sworn, the Prisoner
WiMam Reid appeared the Charges were read to him which he pleads Not
Guilty. ~~~~~~~~S

The Prisoner then addressed the Court as follows -

Gentlemen of the Court.
You will Consider the situation of a young Midshipman on board of a Frigate,
I am an American, snd you are my Countrymen. The Court being cleared Proceeded to Consider the Case of the Prisoner Wsl
Reid, and after Mature deliberation do determine That on the first Charge Vizt of
hunkeness, he is not Guilty. - On the second charge Viz+ of maklng a Mutinous and seditious assembly among the Crew. do find him not Guilty.
on the
third Charge Vizt Writing a Malicious and false letter t o the Commodore, do Pronounce him Guilty.
Having found him Guilty of the third Charge Writing a Malicious and false
letter to the Commodore, dated Malta 20 July W t , which is in the Opinion of the
Court, a breach of the 34 Article of the regulations for the better Government of
the Kavy of the U States - and do there fore Sentence him to be deprived of
his Warrant and diemissed the service of the U Statee. (Signed) Huaa G CAMPBELL
R
Tao. JOHNSTON
Ad* Judge Advoeat~te
INDA. CMR, No. 29, Vol. 1, 1799-1805.1

-

-

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS
[16 August 18051
To Eamuda, Bey of Tunis, from Captain John Bodgers. U. 6. Navy
To His Excellency HAMUDA
BMEA, the most Illustrious and Most Magnifient
Prince, the Beg of Tunis, the abode of Happiness From the hands of Consul General Tobias Lear, I have the honor to acknowledge
the receipt of your Letter of the 14*4 Inst;the friendly contents of which I most,
sincerely reciprocate - Your friendly treatment of Consul Gent Lear; and
wherein you profess an Intention of placing the U. States on a footing with the
most favored Nations, added to the pacific features of your Letter, wherein you
inform me that you have resolved to send an Embassador to the U. Gtates; are
the strongest and most expressive proofs of your pacific Intentions toward the
President and Citizens of my Country - I therefore beg leave to inform you
that I have in consequence given orders to the Commanders of the Ships and
Vessels under my Command to consider yourself, and Subjects wheresoever the
parties may meet, (on the high seas or elsewhere) as formerly, in the light of friends,
and to behave to them in all respects as such until the source of our Differences
shall have been properly adjusted between yourself and the President of the
U. states. I n expressing to you the wish of my Goverment, I beg leave to inform ou that
I sincerely hope to see a Peace established between yourself & the U. Htates of
America on the most permanent h i s , and a t the same do assure you that nothing
shall ever happen on my part to prevent the same. Another Person to take
charge of our &airs shall be appointed provided you wish it, but in justice to
myself as Mr Davis left your Regency by my orders, I must request that you give
me reasons why he should not be returned.
As my arrangements are such as not to be able to seperate the Squadmn before
your Minister is embarked, I beg that you will do me the favor not to detain him
longer than circumstances make absolutely necessary - I have already ordered
a Frigate, (and which is in all probability the only Vessel that will return to the
U. States) to prepare for his accomodation. U.S. Ship Constitution
TUNISBAYAugust 16th 1800'
[NDA. Captain's LB, Vol. 2, 1805.1
To Captain Hugh G. Campbell, U. S. Navy, commanding U. S. Frigate G&iion,
from Captain John Bodgers, U. S. Navy
U. S. SHIPConstitutwn
Tunis B a y Augs 16* 1806
SIR, I have to request that you cause a Survey to be had on the U. States
Frigate ConsteUation under our command by three of the Senior Captains of the
Gquadmn, & report to me Ker state & condition with their opinion thereon
touching her capacity to perform another years service without any material
repars. [LC. JRP, Letters C% Orders, Book A, 1804-1805.1
To Captain Edward Preble, U. 6. Navy, Portland, Maine, from Secretary of the
Navy
NAVYDEPARTMENT,
16 .Auguat 1806. I intend that the Bombs & Gun boats shall hereafter be commanded by Gentlemen holding the Rank of Masters In the Navy. Look out therefore for competent
persons to command the 2 Bombs and 2 Gun boats now building under your
direction and when you shall have procured good men for these stations, let me
know their names and I will forward appointments to them. They will be
allowed $40 per Month and 2 rations per day which is the pay and rations allowed
to all masters in the Navy.
[NDA. OSW, Vol. 7, 1805-1807.1
Extract from journol of Beaekiah Loomis, Steward, U. S. Navy, U. S. Brig V i m .
Master Commandant George Cox, U. 6. Navy, commanding, Friday, 16 August
1806
[Tunis] This day the Ca tain went on board the.Commodore and blp't oE
word to the Puraer that all t
L who came from Balt~morein the Bng Vto

234

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1805 TO 1807

go home and that he must make out his accounts as soon as possible.
I was called to take all the receipts.
[L. F. M i d d l e b r ~ k . NDA copy.]

Accordingly

To Secretary of the Navy from Captain John Rodgers, U. 8. Navy
U. STATESSHIP Constitution
Tunis B y Augc 17th 1805
SIR In answer to your Letter of the 24th of April on the subject of Lieutt Murdock's relative Rank, permit me to observe I discovered that his removal from
the John A d a m into any other Vessel would have given umbrage to other officers,
he being, by the date of his old Commission senior to any of the Lieutenants not a t
present in command, M? Murdock I have no doubt is a valuable officer he is
spoken well of both as a Gentleman & Officer by all who know him, but at this late
period to give him rank agreeable to the date of his Commission, I am afraid would
be attended with much difficulty and perhaps injury to the service, as I have reason to believe that many valuable Officers would concieve themselves injured, and
a t the same time I cant but observe that his services are an object particularly as
proper characters for first Lieutenants, such as himself, would be found wanting
were as many as fifteen Ships to be fitted out a t any one time within the next
three succeding years - and this circumstance presents forcibly to my mind the
necessity of an unwarped Impartiality being exercised in determining the relative
Rank of all Officers that remains yet undetermined.
[NDA. Captain's LB, Vol. 2, 1805.1

NP 18.

To Doctor James Dodge, appointed to act as U. S. Chargl d'dffaires, Tunis, by
Captain John Rodgers, U. S. Navy

U. S. SHIP Constitution
Tunis Bay August 17tP 1805
SIR I n consequence of authority vested in me I do hereby appoint you Charge
d'Affaires for the U. States of America to the Regency of Tunis, and as successor
to George Davis Esqr, until the pleasure of his Excellency the President shall he
made known to you touching the same: and as Tobias Lear Esqr Consul General for
the Regency of Algiers (who is now present) is invested with Special authority
from his Goverment relating to all matters of the Consulate wherein you are a t
present concerned; I beg leave to refer you to him for all the necessary advice &
Instructions for your present as well as future Goverment respecting the duties
attached to yr office. [NDA. Captain's LB, Vol. 2, 1805.1
(COPY)

To George Davis, U. 6. Chargl d'Affaires, Tunis, from Captain John Rodgerr,
U. S. Navy
U. STATESSHIPConstitution
Tunis Bag Augt 17th 1806
SIR As you have expressed a desire to return to the U. States; I have in consequence nominated & directed Doctor James Dodge (the present Surgeon of this
Ship) to succeed you as Charge dlAffaires for the U. States of America to the Regency of Tunis, until the pleasure & authority of the President shall induce him to
revoke the same. I n consequence I have to request that you will be pleased to
deliver to Doctr Dodge the Seals, with such Papers and appendages as necessarily
belong to the Consulate.
[LC. J R P , L Bk B, May 1805-July 1806.1
To Secretary of the Navy from Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Navy
48
PORTLAND
A u ~ 17.1806
t
SIR I take the liberty to enclose you a letter I recda few days since, from Mr Haswell, and beg leave to observe, that his anxiety to go into the Merchant service, for
a time, proceeded from the most laudable motives - a wish to afford pecuniary aid
to a large family of female relations, dependant on him.
9

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

235

Mr H lost the use of his arm in Battle, on board the Bosbn, where he behaved
well, and his conduct while under my command wae that of a good & meritorious
o5cer.
[NDA. Captain's LB, Vol. 2, 1805.1
To Captain John Bodgers, U. 6. Navy, from lldaster Commandant George Cox,
U. 6. Navy
U. 8. BRIG vizson Augst 17" 1806
SIR If my servisis with propriety can be despenst with in this countrey I will
thank you for permission to r e t u n e to America.
GEO COX
[LC. JRP, Vol. 1, March 1791-Dec. 1814.1

-

Presumably to Secretary of the Navy from Midshipman John B. Nicolson, U. S.
Navy
BALTIMORE Augmt 17"h 1806
SIR Enclosed you will find a warrant which you was so good as t o send me about
one month since, through the recommendation of my friend Wq A. Barnwell You made a mistake in filling it up in regard to the name. My name is spelt
without the h aa thus John B. Nicolson
There is a young gentleman in the navy of the same name - but spells his with
the h. some mistake may occur, which would be perhaps disagreeable: I would
thank you to make the necessary alterration and fonosrd i t on to this place
[NDA. Officers LB, 1802-1805.1
To Captain John Bodgers, U. 6. Navy, from Lieutenant David Porter, U. 6. Navy
Syren TUNIS
BAY August 18'4 1806
SIR Many of the crew of the late Frigate Philadelphia, now distributed about
the Squadron, have personally applied to me to gain information of the intended
destination of them, as the time for which they have entered has expired and have
repeatedly expressed to me their great desire to return to America - *his being
a point on which I could give them no information they have requested me to
apply to you on a point which so nearly concerns them - Any information you
may please to favour me with on this head will be communicated to them with
pleasure by
Sir

Your Obedient
Humblq & Devoted Servt
[F. D. Roosevelt Col.]
[I8 August 18051
To Captain Hngh C+. Campbell, U. S. Navy, from Captain Stephen Decatur, Jr,
Master Commandants Charles Stewart and John Shew, U. S. Navy
SIR R e according to your order's of yesterday's date have proceeded to survey
the Condition of the Frigt Constelkation under your Comg
We are of opinion that her bottom requires a complete overhaul (Caulking and
Coppering) to enable her to perform the services which may be required for the
ensumg year.
Anat 18tP 1805
[LC. JRP, Let. & Doc., Ac. 3647, 1799-1848.1

To Captain Hngh Q. Campbell, U. 8. Navy, commanding U. 6. Frigate Constellofion,
from Captain John Bodgers, U. 6. Navy
U. STATESSHIP Constitution
Tunis Bay Augt 1 8 t P 1806
SIR, YOU are hereby requested to convene a Court Martial on board the U.
States Ship Constellation tomorrow Morning a t jfi past 9 oClock t o try Jwhua

236

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1806 TO 1807

Blake first Lieutenant of the Frigate Constitution - charged with havin Quarrelled with Master Commandt Thomas Robinson on the Quarter Deck of % e Constitution on the night of the 6tP Ins* Captn Robinson himself & Mr Johnston (Purser) are the evidence adduced by
me in support of the Charge exhibited against Lieutenant Blake. [LC. JItP, Letters & Orders, Book A, 1804-1805.1
To Master Commandant John Shew, U.S. Navy, commanding U. S. S. John Admnr,
from Captain John Rodgers, U. S. Navy
U. S. SHIP Constitution
Tunis Bay, August 18tP 1806
SIR, YOUwill please furnish Gun Boats N? 2. 8. 4. 6. 6. 8.8 & 10 with Water
equal to 20 days consumption with what they have on board. If you have any Wood to spare you will furnish Gun boat NP 3, with a small
quantity. [LC. JRP, Letters & Orders, Book A, 1804-1805.1
To Dr. James Dodge, appointed to act as U. S. Charge d'Affaires, Tunis, from
George Davis, former U. 6. Charge d'bffaires, Tunis
OK BOABDTEE U. S. FRIGATE
C~n~telhtzon
Tunis Bay Azlgt 18t4 1806.
SIR, Agreable to the request of Commodore John Rodgers, I deliver to you the
ublic Seals; whatever papers, belong to the ofice, are in the possession of the
Lecretary Amb[rose]. Allegro Esq., & who is directed to deliver them to you. His Salary is fixed a t one Dollar per day, & has been paid up to the first of March
1805 - You will find in him, integrity & fidelity. [NA. SDA. FA, CL, Vol. 2, (7240), 1801-1609.1
To Captain John Rodgers, U. S. Navy, from George Davis, former U. S. Charg6
d'Affaires, Tunis
U. S. FRIGATE
Co7u)tellotwn
Tunis Bay Augt 18t4 1806
SIR, The Letter which you honored me with under date of the 16's [or 101 Inst
was was not recieved until late last night; & in consequence of your order, have this
morning delivered to Doctr James Dodge the Seals of O5ce &9 $9 The just 8: powerful motives which induce me to return to the U. States have
already been stated, and I trust you will concur in the opinion, that it is a measure
enforced, by a high sense of duty to my Country & myself; & from the full conviction that his Excellency the President, --ill learn the Bey of Tunis, that he must
in future, be as circumspect in his Words, ss he has been in his written communications - I shall with your permission, embark on board the Frigate which takes
the ambassador, & again beg leave to assure you * * *
[NDA. Captain's LB, Vol. 1, 1805.1
To Tobias Lear, U. 6. Consul General, Algiers, from Captain John Rodgers, U. 6.
Navy
U S S H I P Con~titution
Tunis Bay lPtb August 1806
DEARBIR, I have this instant (4 P M) received your favor of yesterday by the
Turk to which the Bey has given a Tiskura for procuring the Water a t Port Farina,
which was required for the use of the Squadron - The Syren & some others of the
small Vesselh will proceed thence tomorrow for that purpose The Constellation
and John Adams will proceed to Malta the day after tomorrow, to settle their
Accounst, provision, Water kc, &c & from thence proceed to America, calling here
on their way and if they do not find me here, to proceed direct on their patwage to
the U Btates, If you have any Commands, for Malta one of these Vessells shall
execute them, - This has been a busy day with us, as 8 or 9 of the Vessels has
changed their crews - A survey has bee11 had on the ConsteUation which haa
determined me to send her to America - Pray present my best respects to M v

Lear,

[LC. JRP, L Bk B, May 1805-July 1806.1

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS
To Captain Hugh 6.Campbell, U. 8. Navy, commanding U. 6. Frigate Cmwtddion,
from Captain John Bodgers, U. 8. Navy
U. STATESSHIP Constitution
Tunis Bay Aug$l9tP 1805
SIB,As i t is my intention that the Frigate ConsteUatwn under your command
shall return to the United States; in conwquence I have to desire that you exchange such part of your Crew whose term has not ex ired for an equal number
whose term has expired belonging to the Frigate Esaa, {rig Syren, Schooner Enterprize and Sloop Hornet giving to each a proportionate number of Seamen agreeable
to the respective Rates of the different Vessels. I wish this change to take place as soon as possible, after which you will be
pleased to furnish me with a Libt of the number of Men you have left, whose terms
of service has not expired. ILC. JRP, L Bk B, May 1805-July 1806.1
To Master Commandant John Shsw, U. S. Navy, commanding U. 8. 8. John Ad-,
from Captain John Bodgers, U. 8. Navy
U. S. SHIP Comtitutwn
Tunzs B a y August 19th 1806
SIR, AS i t is my intention that the U. States Ship John Adams under your
Command shall return to the Z;. States; I n consequence I have to desire that you
exchange n-ith the U. States Ship Constitution for such Seamen, Ordinary Seamen,
Boys $ Marines, whose term of service has expired an equal tlumber whose Term
has not expired - also exchange with all the Gun Boats, Effective for such defective Men as they have on board. I wish this change to take place as soon as possible, after which be pleased to
furnish me with a list of the number of Men you have left whose term of service
haa not expired. L C . JRP, L Bk B, May 1805-July 1806.1
To Captain John Bodgers, U. 8. Navy, from Tobias Leer, U. S. Consul General,
Algiers
TUNIS,A y w t 2O'Q 1805
DEARSIR,I had the pleaqure this morning to receive your two letters of yesterday, and feel much obliged by them. I have no further commands for hialta
than what was contained in the letter sent yesterday for Mr Higgens. - Mr
Rylander will send the Box for RT? H. which you have had the goodness to ssy
shall go in one of the Ships. - Ald Feroud tells me he has the permission of the
Sapatapa to carry off to the Squadron anything which may be wanting, without
the formality of a Tisliara, and I have accordingly directed him to take on board
tomorrow morning some Bullocks and some Sheep, when you will give him ordere
for the further quantity which you may want. The old drogerman is still very sick, and his son, who was ordered to go to Bardo
esterday, did not go 'till this morning, which prevented the Bey from fixing the
t o u r to s e me today; and he has desired us to come to Bardo tomorrow morning
at 7 o'clk. - MI, Lear goes with the Swedish Consul's lady early tomorrow
morning to Carthage, and I shall go from Bardo to the same place, from whence
we shall return tomorrow evening. When will the Vessel go to Tripoli, which you mentioned to me your intention of
sending? - I shall wish to write by her to Dr Ridgely & M: Nksen. I pra you will have the goodness to send me by the boat tomorrow three
hundredv& forty Spanish Dollars, which, with the 10 doubloons I recd the other
day, will make 500 doll? - leaving for me still 500 - of the 2000 which were due
me. M v Lear has purchased the two Barnouses and two Shawls for you, and she has
desired hlr Simms to bring up a small trunk of her's, which is in the Cabin, to put
them in, that they may be carried on board without injury. - The Slippers will be
procured a l ~ o and
,
if there is anything else which you wish before we leave thm
place she will procure i t with pleasure, She desires her best compliments to you,
and thanks for the two bottles which were not sent. She knows you did not retain
them for your own use. PC. JRP, Vol. 2, Series Two, May-Oct. 1805.1

238

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1805 TO 1807

[20 August 18051
To Captain John Bodgers, U. S. Navy, from Lientenant Seth Cartee, U. 6. Navy
Will Commodore Roggers be so good as to let me go on shore At Tunis While we
Lay there for A short time he Will Oblige his Obedt friend & One Who wishes his
welfare & success - in Glory. GUNBOAT10 Both August 1806
[LC. JRP, Vol. 2, Series TWO,May - Oct. 1805.1
To Master Commandant Charles Stewart, U.S. Navy, from Captain John Rodgers,
U, 6. Navy
U S SHIP Co~stiiuiion
Tunis Bay 90th Aug$ 1806
SIR Since you request a definite answer to your letter of this morning, wherein
you require permission to return to the U States. Permit me to inform you, that I
have already given you, my answer which was that you could not return unless
vou could prevail on Caps Campbell to take your place, I therefore have nothing
;low to say on the subject.
[LC. JRP, L Bk B, -May 1805-July 1806.1
To Captain Stephen Decatar Jr., U. S. Bavy, from Captain John Bodgers, U. s

xaw

Constitution TUNIS
BAY
Augt dOtC 1806
SIE The Boat you mention as coming from the Goletta is intended to go round
with the Vessels to Farina to bring off the Water - so soon as you have changed
your Crew, you will be pleased to get underweigh & proceed thence for that
purpose.
[LC. JRP, Letters & Orders, Book A, 1804-1805.1

To Secretruy of the Navy from Captain John Rodgers, U. 8. Navy
U. STATESSHIPConetitution
Tunis Bay Augi d o t ) 1806
SIR, Lieut. Robert Henly who hands you this, has got my permission to return
home in consequence of bad health, he is an excellent deserving Officer & will
do credit to his Country, I am convinced, in whatever situation you may think
groper to honor him a i t h - 1 have said thus much of Mr Henly from my own
ersonal Knowiedge of him. Inclosed is the Certificate of his bad health. [LC. JRP, L Bk B, May 1805-July 1806.1
To Master Commandant Thomas Robinson Jr., U. 8. Navy, from Captain John
Rodgers, U. 8. Bavy
U . STATESS H I PConstitution
Tunis Bay Augt 20. 1806
S I R , As I have consented to your returning to the U. States, I have to desire
that you Transfer the command of the li. States Schooner Enterprize, at present
under your command, to Lieu$ David Porter takihg from him all the necesssry
documents & information respecting the said Schooner agreeable to the prescribed
tegulations of the service. [LC. JRP, Letters & Orders, Book A, 1804-1805,)
To James Dodge, appointed to act as U. S. Charge d'Affaires, Tunis, from Captain
John Rodgers, U. S. Navy
Constitution TUXIB
BAY
Augc $OtP 1806
DEAESIR I have this moment receiv'd your polite favor of this day and turr
glad to find that you are pleased with your situation -

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS
There has been greet changes among the officers since you left us; particularly
among the poor Doctors, as a t least one half of them have been changed into
different Vessels - M; Blake hm been tried & acquitted (farther than having
received a reprimand) and is returned to duty again - It is now ten oclock
and I am sleepy - May you enjoy good health, live long, and live happy; Is
the sincere wish of your Friend and Humble serve
[NA. SDA. FA, CL, TuniR, Vol. 2 (7240) 1801-1809.1
To Midshipman Samuel G. Blodget, U. 6. Navy, from Captain John Rodgers, U. 6.
Navy
Constitution. TUXISBAY
August 20th 1806
SIR, YOU are for the present charged with the command of the U. States
Sloop [lo Guns] Hornet; and I have directed Lieu$ Samuel Evans to t,ransfer to
vou all Papers, Documents &? relative to said Sloop, for which you will give him
the necessary receipts. [LC. JRP, Letters & Orders, Book A, 1804-1805.1
To Itfaster Commandant John H. Dent, U. 8. Navy, from Captain John Bodgers,
U. S. Navy
U. STATESSHIPConatitutiun
TUNISBAY,Augwt 20th 1805. SIR As I have consented to your returning to the United States, I have to
desire that you transfer the Command of the U. States Schooner hTautilus, a t
present under your command to Lieut. Sam1 Evans, taking from him all the
necessary Receipts and giving to him all the necessary Documents and Information
respecting the said Schooner, agreeable to the prescribed regulations of the
Service
[NHF. Dent's LB, 1803-1810.1
To Secretary of the Navy from Captain John Rodgers, U. S. Navy

U. STATESSHIPComtitutwn

NP 19.

Tunis Bay Augt 20* 1806
SIR, By the John Adams I recieved your dispatches of €he 30th - 29t4 - 24t4 and
duplicates of the 16'8 of April - In answer to your advices of the 16Q April
permit me to inform you that the extra Men (261 in number) sent by the John
Adants, were, in general, very ordinary; they were put on board the different
Vessels of the Squadron, principally the Gun boats, apportioned comparitively,
with the exigences of the larger Vessels The John Adams as she had all her Guns mounted and her full compliment of
Men, I concieved i t advisable to detain her in the place of the President until after
our affairs with Tunis should be settled; as I could not fairly cslculate on the services of the President, for reasons such as Captain Barron will be best able to explain
to you I n conformity with your Instructions transferred to me by Commodore Barron,
a Court of In uiry was held on C a p 0 Bainbridge's conduct in the loss of the
Fri ate
e phza
. pre~ious
to the receiption of your order revoking the same. #he 38 Lieutenants Commissions I recieved, but the more urgent business of
the Squadron, since my command of it, has prevented the Examinations taking
place - Indeed to determine their relative Rank a t present is impossible altho to have the comparative rank of this class of Officers established is certainly
of great importance to the sewice, but the period when this desirable object was
attainable, being suffered to ass, prevents it a t present and will in all probability
before they return to the U.~ . t a t ewithout
s
giving umbrage to a very large proportion of them - When they return, it may be done with more Justice to them and
more advantage to the service, by a reexamination, as by that time those that are
to be the Judges of their pretentions, will be better acquainted with their seperate
merits: in the mean time as they are examined and qualified I shall deliver their
Commissions, without making any changes diflerenf from the Rank in which they
have acted without urgent necessity shall require it.
[NDA. Captain's LB, Vol. 2, 1805.1

hil lad?

e

240

NAVAL OPERATIOLVSFROM 1806 TO 1807

Extracts from journal of lidshipman Charles l o r r i s , Jr., U. 6. Navy, on board
U. S. Frigate Pruidenf. Captain James Barron, U. 6. Navy, commanding, Tuesday,
20 August 1805
Pleasant weather with very light breeze from the IVorthward.
Midnight moderate breezes 9 A M A Serpent passed the Ship, he was of reddish colour and from the best
judgment formed of it, its lenght was about 30 feet and was 2% feet in circumference. This Serpent proved to be a Squid Long. worked by Garnet projection was 36' 51' West 11 Another Serpent was seen about 15 feet long, and proportioned like the first
seen Lat. Observed 34' 22'
[Mrs. C. E. Fox original, NDA photostat.]
To Secretary of the Navy from Captain John Rodgers, U. S. Navy
N9

11

U. S. SHIPConstitution
TUNISBAYAugt 21.t 1806

SIR, The speedy departure of the Constellation and John Adams for Amcrica,
owing to my wishing them to arrive before the Winter sets in, prevents my laying
before you i n form the proceedings of the Squadron since I last had the honor of
writing you by the Frigate President; farther than to say that the Bey of Tunis has
been brought to a sense of reason in a manner highly honorable I conceive to
the United States, and in a manner I flatter myself to leave such impressions as
will ever again prevent him or his successors from daring to renew the same conduct - Instead of acceding to his terms, he haa been forced to acccde to reason
and ours, and to consent to send an Embassador to the United States, u-hom with
his Suit will in a11 probability arrive in the U. States very soon after this reaches
you - He would have been sent in the Constellation but that Ship having to
go to Malta, to settle her accounts with the Navy Agent previous to her departure
for America, induced me (by the way of saving time) to direct the Congress to
perform this service; which Ship will I presume sail from hence in 7or 8 Days at
farthest, direct for Washington - Should this reach you before the arrival of
the Congress, I must necessarily refer you to Captain Stewart for particulars: In
the mean time permit me to acquaint you that by the arrival of the Congress you
will be regularly informed on every subject. - The ConsteUation, Congress,
John Adams and Brig Franklin are the only Vessels which I shall send home until
I hear from you - These Vessels including the President will reduce the expences of the Mediterranean Forces near, if not quite one half. - Peace on
honorable Terms is always preferable to War, and if Goverment thinks proper
to overlook the late unfriendly conduct of the Bey of Tunis; 1 think I can almost
with certainty say that he never will again attempt to behave in a similar manner;
as I feel satisfied this lesson haa not only changed his opinion of our Maritime
strength, but hss caused him to discover more distinctly his own weakness in
every sense: However should the Goverment determine to chastise him for
what has passed; permit me to solicit the honor of bearing the standard of their
Vengeance; and ss a guarantee for the fullfilment of their wishes, I will pledge all
thats sacred and dear to me in this World, provided such intention is made known
to me by the first of March next; that before the ensuing first of September following, that my Country shall not only obtain an honorable Peace, but make him
pay the expences of the War, and this too with no more Force than what remains
this Winter in the Mediterranean. After Peace may I beg leave to solicit the favor of returning to the United
States?
INDA. Captain's LB, Vol. 2, 1805.1
To Captain Hugh O. Campbell, U. 6, Navy, commanding U. S. Frigate Comlellation.
from Captain John Rodgere, U. 6. Navy
U. S. SHIP Constitution
Tunis Bay August 8l8f1806
Srrt, So soon as the U. States Frigate ConsteUation under your command is
ready to depart I have to request that you proceed to Malta and fill up your Watcr,
Provision your Ship for a passage to the United States, settle her accounts with
Mr Higgins Navy Agent and, from thence proceed with all practiosble dispatch

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS
to the U. States, on your passage calling a t Tangier to learn from Mr Simpson our
Consul the state of our sffairs with that Regency. As I presume i t is the wish of the Goverment that the ConsteUation should be
laid up a t Washington, in preference to any other Port, I have in consequence to
desire that you proceed to the Eastern Branch, and as early as possible report
your arrival to the Navy Department.
[The following uras in diferent ~riting.1
SIR, I am commanded by;Commodore John Rodgers to transfer the above
order to you which you will be pleased act upon as directedHUGHG. CAMPBELL
To Caps CHARLESSTEWART
[NDA. Captain's LB, Vol. 2, 1805.1

To Captain John Bodgers, U. 8. Navy, from Midshipman Oliver Hazard Perry,
U. 8,Navy
U. S. S. Nautilus August dlat1806
SIR Finding that the Constellation is about to return to the U. States, I have to

request your permission to join her again as one of her Lieutr a situation in which
I left America
When I state my reasons for making this application I am convinced you will
not consider them in an ordinary light - My leaving the ConsteUation was very
much against my inclination & as you a t that time gave me to understand (although
not in direct terms) that the order should be revoked: I have not considered my
situation on board the Schooner permanent
Having understood some time since the Constellation was not to return home I
had a wish to place myself under your immediate command as several of your Officers informed me you took a pride in*pmmotingthe interest of such as merit gave
a claim to your influence - In addition to these, I shall ever refuse (from the assurances of the Secretary of the Navy) to be examined for a Lieut. and of course
those officers who pass & rec. Commission will insist on ranking me. Be pleased
to reccollect Commodore that I have been two years and a half acting as a Lieut.
and I see not the least prospect while I remain out here of getting my Commisson I cannot conclude this letter without returning my sincere thanks and a t the
same time expressing my gratitude for the polite and I think I may say friendly
manner in which you treated me in the two interviews I had with you whatever
may be the fate of this request I shall still entertain the same sentiments
P. 5. As I presume Sir from the multiplicity of your business you cannot
answer my letter by writing I will wait on you personally
&C. JRP, Vol. 2, Series Two, May-Oct. 1805.1
To William Higgins, U. S. Navy Agent, Halts, from Captain John Bodgers, U. S
Navy
U 8 SHIP Constitution
Tunis Bay 2l.t August 1800'
DEARSIR As things have turned out, I am induced to send more of the vessellv
home, than I had contemplated. I have therefore sent the John Adams & ConcrtcUation to Malta, for the purpose of provisioning and settling their Accounts, and
aa I shall be obliged to remain here, until1 there return you will greatly oblige me
by giving them all the dispatch in your power - As the season is now far
advanced I shall not be able to make the tour of the Medeterranean,with thesquadron aa I had contemplated - I shall go from this to Leghorn, from thence in
all probability to Algiers, and from the latter place its most iikelv to Malta. The
Gun Boats with a Bri and Three or four more small vessels, I shall send to Syracuse to rendezvous, an8 the Esra 6. two olher smaller Vessella, Gibraltar dividing
that part of the S uadron which remains in the Medeterranean into two Devisiona
If you have any 8ommands for Leghorn, I ~ h o u l dbe glad to execute them. My
businem to Leghorn is principally to procure Cash for the use of the Squadron.
I therefore hope to have the pleasure of seeing you again, a t farthest by the 1.t
OctoCI - The Bey of Tunis hes after considerable prevarication on hia part, been
brought to a sense of reaeon and think I can venture to sa will never oblige us, t o
pursue the same maarures again. He sends an ~mbrusar&r;to the U States. For
articulars relative to our transactions here, I must beg leave to refer you to Cap*
Etewart and Shaw. The Xebecque, and her two prwiea, rrent into Malta by the

+

242

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1805 TO 1807

Constitufwn I beg you will give orders to the Officers in Charge of them, to take
great care of them, as I intend they shall remain unsold untill I hear from the
Goverment [LC. JRP, L Bk B, May 1805-July 1806.1

To James Simpson, U. 8. Consul, Tangier, Morocco, and John (favino, U. 8. Consul,
Gibraltar, from Captain John Bodgers, U. S. Navy
U S SHIP Constitution
Tunis Bay 91 August 1806
DEARSIR I have sent the Essex, and Vizen to remain on the Gibralter s[t]ation
this Winter, for the security of our Trade into the Streights, with directions t o
consult with you, on all matters concerning the same - As it would take a
Volume to inform you, of what has transpired, between us and Tunis, I must beg
leave to refer you to Cap: Campbell for all information on that Score [LC. JRP, L Bk B, May 1805-July 1806.1
To Master Commandant John Shaw, U. S. Bavy, commanding U. 8. 8. John Adam,
from Captain John Rodgers, U. S. Navy
COPY
UNITEDSTATESSHIP Constitution
Tunis Bay I l a +Augt 1806
Srn I have to desire with the United States Ship John Adams under your
Command that you repair to Syracuse, and re uire of Doctr Cutbush to put on
board your Ship all the Invalids, or in other #ords all the Men under his Care
which are unfit for Service. From Syracuse repair with all practicable dispatch to Malta, and Provision
your Ship and Settle her Accounts with Mr Higgins Navy Agent, and from thence
proceed without Loss of Time to the United States, and into the Eastern Branch
(Washington) and as early as possible report your Arrival to the Honb!~the
Secretarv of the Navv.
you a ~ p e e dand
~ pleaatant Paseeage
[NDA. M C LB, 1804-5.1
To Secretary of the Navy from Captain John Bodgers, U. 6. Navy
U. STATESSHIP Constifulion
NQ 7
Tunis Bay Augi 9lst 1805
SIR As Captn Shaw will be best able to explain to you the circumstances to
which the enclosed Letters allude, I must beg leave to refer you to him for the
necessary explanations. [NDA. Captain's LB, Vol. 2, 1805.1
To Captain John Bodgers, U. S. Navy, from Master Commandant John Shaw, U. S.
Navy
U. S. SHIP John Adams
Augzlst d l * , 1805
SIR Induced from a Belief of your Wish to serve an Officer in the Service in
preferrence to injuring his local Situation in Life compels me to make a Statement
to you from a Belief that no Injury or Detention, can arise from my touching a t
Kaples to investigate the Property I left there when in Public Service in the
George Washington. Government gave me a Considerable Tonage in that Ship
and of Course I made Use of it. I was compelled to land a t Naples a Large
Invoice of Goods and consigned to Mesarr Falconett & CQfor which I never have
received a due Remittance.
I will Prove to you that my Ship touching there will Subject the Government
to no Expence
The Advance and Slops to my Crew on an Average amount to 6% Mtbp in
Advance, this will bring them indebted t o Government to the 1 5 4 and 20tC of
h'ovember next, even if I should be detained in the Meditterranean untill the 5 t b
October I would have su5cient Time to come within the Limits of the Service as
Government will have no Demand on a Crew which is discharged before the
Expiration of their Times.

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS
Aa I have been injured in the Public Service, I am of an Opinion I have a m&
Claim on your Patronage, and if granted Sir you may be assured of my making no
unnecessary Delay a t any Place I shall touch at; trusting to your Reconsideration
and Compliance I remain
P. S. Mr Knight Sailing Master of the Constitution was with me a t the Time of
landing the Merchandise. [LC. J R P , Vol. 1, March 1791-Dec. 1814.1
To Master Commandant John Shaw, U. S. Navy, from Captain John Badgers,
U. S. Navy
Constitution, TIJNIB BAY
els+Augusf 1806 SIR I have received your letter of this morning, - And am sorry to wy, that
your request of going to Naples is absolutely out of my power to grant - I t is
what I would not do, even to gain to myself an Independant fortune [LC. JItP, Letters & Orders Book A, 1804-1805.1
To Captain Bugh G. Campbell, U. 6. Navy, U. S. Frigate Consfelfation, from Captain
John Bodgers, U. 6. Navy
Consbitut;on TUXISBAY
21 A u g ~ s t1806 SIR I have to direct that you assume the Command of the U States Frigate
Essez, giving to Capt Stewart, the Command of the Frigate Constelkztzon, both of
you, taking such receipts, and transferring such Docunlents to each other as the
regulations of the service requires After the eschange of Ships you will Transfer the order directing the return of
the Constellation to the U States, to Cap! Stewart [LC. JItP, Letters R: Orders Book A, 1804-1805.1
To Captain John Bodgers, 8. SoNavy, from Captain Eugh G. Campbell, U. S. Navy
C. S. FRXGAT
Constelhtion
Tunis Bay,Augt tlat 1606
SIR There is on board this ship, ten or twelve men that I feel much attached to,
and request the favor of being pcrmited t o take them with me on board the Essa,
i t being an indulgence that commanders in our Service have Generaly Experienced
[LC. JRP, Vol. 1, March 1791-Dec. 1814.1
To Captain Stephen Decatur, Jr., U. S. Navy, from Captain John Bodgers, U. 6.
Navy
UXITEDSTATESSHIP Congress
Tunis Bay Augt dl 1805
SIR YOUwill please to furnish the U Stat,es Ship Argus with ten Seamen and
ordinary Seamen to fill up her compliment, [HS of Pa.]
To Secretary of the Navy from Captain John Bodgers, U. S. Navy
U. STATESSHIP Constitution
NQ 10
Tunis Bay August 21a$[m 831 1806
SIR I herein enclose you a statement fmm Lieutl Laurance [see 12 June 18051
three men taken from Gun boat NQ6, under his command, by a British
Squadron off Cadiz under command of Admiral C01llngs~-00das also a Certificate
wherein it appears that Mr Roach, Midshlpmrul, and second Officer of the Boat,
is accused of neglect of duty
As thls 1s an affmr of great moment not only to
the Character of hlr Roach, but also to his Country, I have sent him home in the
John Adants under suspension from Duty, considering his case such as to require
the decision of a higher authority t.han myself.
[NDA. Captain's LB, Vol. 2, 1805.1

-

244

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1806 TO 1807

To Secretary of the Navy from Captain John Bodgera, U. 6. Navy
U. S. S H I P Constitution
NQ8
T u n i ~Bay Augt Ilm*1806
SIR, Enclosed I forward for your consideration a Copy of a Letter [8 July 18051
from Lieutenant Maxwell stating his having been taken into Algeziras by four
Spanish Gun Boats [on 15 June 18051. - This insult it is possible was owing entirely to the Ignorance of the fellows commanding the Boats which took him in. [KDA. Captain's LB, Vol. 2, 1805.1
To George Harrison, Navy Agent, Philadelphia, Pa., from Secretary of the Navy
Nav D E PAugt
~
81. 1806
You will continue to pay to the Wives, parents and children, of the Officers,
Seamen & Marines (of the late frigate Philadelphia now Captives in Tripoli,
the half pay heretofore respectively authorized by regular poaew of attorney
to be paid to them - but make no payments in cases m-here the powers of attorney
were granted to any other person or persons, than the Wives parents and Children
& you will discontinue all payments which were authorised by such of the Captives, as you have been or shall hereafter be advised have turned Turks.
If any of the Prisoners who have died since their capture left pow-ers of attornev
mith their Wives, parents or Children to receive their half pay & there should
in such cases exist cuniary distress on the part of those r h o may hold such
powers of attorney
pleased to report such cases to me - & 1 will endeavour
to provide for their temporary relief.
[KDA. GLB, Vol. 8, 1805-1807.1

%

Extract from journal of U. 6. Frigate Conslitulion. Captain John Rodgers, U. S. Navy,
commanding, Wednesday, 21 August 1805
[Tunis Bay] % past 6 [P. hl.] Sailed the Congress and Enferprize for ferreno.
[USNA.]
Extracts from journal of Midshipman Charles l o m s , Jr., U. S. Navy, on board
U. S. Frigate Prwident. Captain James Barron, U. S. Navy, commanding, Wedneaday, 2 1 August 1805
6. Saw a Sail under the lee bow standing to the Eastward.
9 Carried away the Slings of the Fore yard.
11. Saw a Sail upon the weather beam.
Midnight pleasant.
I-% Spoke the Strange sail which proved to be the English privateer Bellona
of Liverpool from the River Le Plate bound to London.
6 discovered a fleet bearing S W. standing to the Nd & Eastn-ard.
9 discovered a large ship detached from the fleet in chace of us.
Noon the fleet still in sight to Windward We counted 40 Sail many of them
apparently of the line. continued standing on our Course.
Latitude D. R. 34'27'N. Longitude D. R. 3S03'W.
[Mrs. C. E. Fox original, NDA photostat.]
[22 August 1805)
To Sidi Josseph, Sapatapa and Prime Minister of the Bey of Tunis, from Tobias
Lear, U. S. Consul General, Algiers
TO SIDI JOSSEPE,Sapalapa and prime Minister to His Ezceliency the Bey of
Tunis.
SIR, I n consequence of the converastion which I had the honor to hold with
you yesterday, by order of His Excellency the Bey, on the subject of commerce,
& certain articles of the Treaty now existing between His Excellency, & the U.
States of America - I take the liberty of making the following observations,
for the consideration of His Excellency and yourself. As the sole object of the government of the United States is to inceme th3
harmony & good understanding, which exists between them and those Nations
with whom they are in friendship, they would wish to be placed upon the same
footing with his Excellency, in respect to their Commercial intercourse, & the

-

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS
reception ven to their Citizens ss is observed towards other Nations, with
whom his %xcellencg is in habits of friendship C mutually advantageous commerce. - It is therefore proposed, that the Articles in the Treaty between
His Excellency, and the U. States, which subjects the Citizens of the U. States,
to pay the same duties on merchandize imported into this Regency, under the
Flag of the U. States which wou'd be paid by a Tunisian Subject carrying merchandize to the U. S. shou'd be annul'd; and that the Americans shou'd pay the
same & no more duty on merchandize imported by them into the Regency of
Tunis, than is paid by other Nations the most favour'd, where it does not infringe
upon any Treaty now existing between His Excellency and any foreign Nation
The Article which compels the Msster of a Merchant Vessel, to charter his
Vessel to the Government, if she shou'd be wanted, deprives the said Vessel of
the f a i r Opportunity of making such Voyages as might be most advantageous
to the owners of said Vessel, and lays a restraint on commerce which must be
highly injurious to the same. I t would therefore be desireable to have this
Article either differently modified, or annull'd. The Salute given to Vessels of War of the U. States, to be return'd in the same
manner by such Vessels, and not by the payment of a Barrel of Gun Powder for
each Cannon which may be fired in salute of said Vessel, as i t now stands in the
Treaty. That the Article which relates to Slaves taking refuge on board Ships of m7ar
of the U States, shou'd be the same as that which relates to the same subject
with the most favour'd Nations. The existing Treaty between His Excellency the Bey & the U. States of
America, have been made by the mutual consent of the parties, & duly ratified,
can only be changed by the mutual agreement of the same. - The foregoing
propositions are therefore made for the consideration of His Excellency the Bey,
who will, in his wisdom, be able to judge, if an acquiescence in them will tend to
increase the friendship and good understanding between the two Xations, and
promote their mutual advantage. Should he be convinced that those benefits wou'd result from a confinnation
of them, His Excellency will be pleased to signify his assent thereto; or should
he be of a different opinion, he will have the goodness to make such remarks
thereon, as may arrise in his mind; or suggest other propositions which may
produce the same desireable effects. TUNISAugust Zdnd 1806.
[NA. SDA. CL, Algiers, Vol. 7, Part 11, Jan. 1806-Sept. 1807.1
To William Higgins, U. 6. Navy Agent, Malta, from Captain John Rodgers, U. S.
Nav
U S SHIP Constitution
Tunis Bay August Wd 1800'
SIR Since writing you yesterday, I have changed my mind, respecting the
Constellation, and John Adams, calling a t this Bay, and have directed their proceedin direct to America. Cap* Stewart goes home in the ConsteUation, and
Capl eampbell goes into the E a s a [LC. JRP, L Bk B, May, 1805-July 1806.1
To Master Commandant Charles Stewart, U. S. Navy, U. 6. Prigate Constdldion.
from Captain John Bodgers, U. S. Navy
U S FRIGATE
Constit2(tion
Tunis Bny ZZ Augt 1805
SIB The former Gunner of the Essez C o s o ~ o vis~to return to the U States in
the Constellation, and aa you know him better than myself you will make such
representations to the Secretary of the Navy-respecting him, as his Conduct
is also to return, to the
merits - The former Sail maker of the same ship MASON,
U States in the ConsteUation - Long the Carpenter now on board the Essez is to
return to America in the Constellation - She is I understand in want of a Carpenter, & if you think proper to solicit that he may be reinstated, and attached to
that ship your solicitations shall be attented to
MAEION
sail maker is to be suspended from duty until1 the sentence of the late
Court Martial convened for his trial shall be promulgated by order of the proper
Authority. JR
[LC. JRP, Letters & Ordere, Book A, 1804-1805.3

-

246

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1806 TO 1807

To Captain John Bodgers, U. S. Navy, from Captain Hugh (3. Campbell, U. 8. Navy
U, S, S, Constellation [Essez]T U N IBAY
~
Atlgust ??9d 1806 SIR I have to inform you that I Took Charge of this Ship [Essez] a t Two oClock
P M, Likewise that she has on board Eight thousand Gallons of water, with a
greater proportion of Provisions, with which, she Waits your orders
[LC. JRP, Vol. 1, March, 1791-Dec. 1814.1

-

-. --

To Secretary of the Navy from Captain John Bodgers, U. S. Navy
U S SHIP Cmtitutwn
Tunis Bay 684 August 1806

(Sent by the Congress Frigate)
SIR I herewith have the honor to Enclose the proceedings of all the Courts
Martial, which have been held since my Command of the Squadron - By those
cases you will discover that i t had become high time to make some examples, and
I hope the result will have a good effect - perhaps the next twelve months may
pass over without a single example of the kind being necessary. I should have
sent the F'roceedings of the Courts in the cases of Midshipmen Reid & Cheshire &
Doetr Kipp by the John Adams, as they return to the U States in her, had I been
able to have got them copied in time. Iiipp appears to be a poor Simple creature
and deserves to be pitied [LC. JRP, L Bk B, May 1805-July 1806.1
To Robert Montgomery, U.S. Consul, Alicante, Spain, from Secretary of the Navy
NAVDEPT8.2 Augt 1805.
Cap+ [William Hannover] commanding the [American ship Raleigh] having on
board Naval Stores for Algiers, has been ordered in the event of Algiers being
blockaded to proceed to Alicant and there deliver his cargo to you. If under
these orders Captain [Hannover] should proceed to Alicant, vou mill be pleased to
receive the cargo and have i t taken care of, forwarding to C O ~Lear
Q by the first
opportunity that may offer, all necessary information respecting it and you will be
pleased to attend to such instructions as you may receive from COIQLear on the
subject.
rNDA. Barbary Powers LB, 1803-1808.1
Extracts from journal of Midshipman Charles Moms, Jr., U. S. Navy, on board
U. S. Frigate President. Captain James Barron, U. S. Bavy, commanding, Thursday,
22 August 1805
1% Spoke the Ship which had given chase to w she proved to be his B M.
Ship [space] of 74 Guns. he sent his boat on board us, and informed us the fleet
in sight was the English East India fleet of 37 Sail under Convoy of 7 Said of the
line commanded by Admiral Rainiar
Latitude Observed 34'49' N.
Longitude Observed 40°25' W.
[Mrs. C. E. Fox original, KDA photostat.]
To Secretary of the Bavy from Captain John Bodgera, U. S. Wavy
U. S. SHIP Constitution
Tunia Bay Aug$&S 1805
N9 9.
SIBEnclosed is a Copy of an authority given by me [I2 July 18051 to George
Dyaon Esq: Navy Agent Syracuse for the subsistance of Hamet Baahaw, and have
to request that you will have the goodness to inform me, aa early as possible, what
is t o be done with that unfortunate and helpless Man. - I endeavoured all in
my power to prevail on him to go to the U. States, as I conceived i t would be best
that the Govennent should see him - and have an o portunity of determining
for themselves, however the horrid ideas he entertainei of crosaing the Atlantic,
prevented my persuation having any effect.
[NDA. Captain's LB, Vol. 2, 1805.1

WARS WITH BARBARY POWEBS

-

[23 August 18051
-davit

of Sailing Master John Allen, IT. 6. Navy, and John Thompson, Master's
Mate
CONSULAR OFFICE O F THE UNITED STATES O F AMERICA.

(L. 8.)

GIBRALTAR.

On this 13th day of September, 1805, personally appeared in my consular office
of the United States of America, John Allen, commander of the sloop Ranger,
belonging to the government of the aforesaid United States, and John Thompson,
master's mate on board said sloop Ranger, who, after being sworn on the Holy
Evangelists, did declare jointly and severally, each speaking for himself, that they
sailed in and with said vessel from Boston, in America, on or about the 2lst day
of July last, on the service of said government, in company with the sloop Traueller,
commanded by captain Benjamin Prince, with whom they parted company a few
ria s after their leaving Boston, by stress of weather.
Ghat on the 23d of August last, being in latitude 40 deg. 32 minutes north, and
longitude 30 deg. 33 minutes west, a schooner came up with them movnting six
guns with 16 blunderbusses, and about eighteen men, who, although the American
colours were flying on board the Ranger, and the vessel hove to, fired three broadsides a t her without shewing any colours, ordering a p t . Allen to go on board them,
which he did; they then came on board the sloop Ranger, broke open captain
Allen's chest and trunk, taking from them twelve white shirts, a suit of uniform,
six pair silk and six do. cotton stockings, twelve handkerchiefs, two blue jackets,
three white dimity waistcoats, two new hats, two pair new shoes, and two pair
nankeen pantaloons, a spy-glass, 63 gallons brandy, butter, cheese, pork, and
other articles of ship's stores; likewise, the doctor's box, the mate's, and some of
the men's clothes and money; also, a letter from the governour of Malta, and several other papers.
That the commander and crew of the said schooner privateer behaved in a most
insulting and abusive manner, and they seemed by their appearance, language,
dress, and manners, to have been Spaniards; wherefore, they make this declaration,
and protest, not only for the robbery committed, but also for the insult shewn the
flag under which they sailed.
JOHN
ALLEN,
JOHN
THOMPSON.
Sworn and declared the day and year first above written, before me,
JOHNGAVINO
Consul of the United States of America.
[Am. State Papers, Vol. 5, 1803-1807.1

To Secretary of the Navy from Captain John Rodgers, U. S. Navy
U. STATESSHIP Constitution
Tunis Bay August 2StP 1806
SIR, I herein have the honor to Enclose you a statement of the quantity of Provisions left in Store a t Malta & Syracuse, exclusive of what the Squadron has a t
present on board; This will enable you to form a pretty correct opinion of the
uantity necessar to be sent from the U. States calculating that there is after the
%epartureof the 8ongress, Consldlation and John Adoma for America, about equal
to 1600 Rations consumed pr Day. - 40 or 50 Hawsers from 6 to 10 Inches also 2
Cables of 22 Inch, 2 Do, of 19 Inch, 2 do, of 15 Inch
2 do, of 16 Inch and 4 of
14 Inch, as also 300 coils of Rigging assorted from Ratling to 8 Inch - a small
quantity of Sail Cloth will answer, each Vessel having a pretty good stock on
hand exclusive of what is in Store-Light Canvass is most wanting such as NQ4, 5
& 6 and some Ravens Duck. I pray you will inform me whether the agents a t Syracuse & Malta are to be
allowed 2%pr Cent on all Provisions received & delivered by them, or whether it is
only on their purchases, - This thing appears not yet to be understood, as 5 pr
Cent has in most instances been charged by them on their purchases and nothing
for provisions sent from the U. State&,altho received and delivered by them -two
a half pr Cent on all would be equal to rather more than five pr Cent on purchases
but I concieve it would have a good effect in the end; as they now consider that
they have all the touble as also some responsibility in receiving Provisions sent
from the U. States without any profit.
[NDA. Captain's LB, Vol. 2, 1805.1

NQ 13

-

248

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1806 TO 1807

Ertract from journd of U. 6.Ftigate Constitution, Captain John Bodgers, U. 8. Bavy,
commanding, Friday, 23 August 1805
[Tunis Bay] l/h past 5 [P. M.] the Constellation Got under weigh for Syracuse
past 6 Colonel Lear came on board from Tunis [USNA.]
To Secretary of the Navy from Captain Samuel Barron, U. S. Navy
U. STATESFRIGATE
President
d Sea August 84, 1806.
Sm! I have the Honor to transmit you under Cover of the Present sundry pap
ers relating to the situation of Mr Chaq L. Ridgely, an acting Lieutenant lately
attached to the U. States Schooner Nautilus, with some particulars of which report may probably 'ere this have made you acquainted. Nothing Sir is more distressing to the feelings of a Commander than t o be under the necessity of representing inthe language of regret and censure the Conduct of those Serving under
him; more especially when that Conduct is not confined to the faults of the Individual but tends to commit the reputation of the Service & the National honor
the occurrence to which I allude is one of those which imposes on me this un leasant duty.
The Letter annexed of 13 April [See Vol. 5, p. 5081 from L o u t
Ridgley with the demand of the Governor of Messina addressed to Captain ~ e n i
wiIl best explain the circumstances of this unhappy affair, to these therefore I beg
leave to refer you without entering into further detail as to the facts; I conceive i t
proper however officially to acquaint the Navy Department that on a view of the
nature of the offence complain'd of & the formal Demand of Governor Guillechini,
I felt myself called upon by every principle of right & justice no less than the
aknowledged laws & usages among civilized Nations to deliver up the Officer in
question to a judicial investigation. I t will be seen by a reference to the accompanying papers that this determination was not form d without due & sufficient
deliberation, & that it was chearfully acquiesced in by Mr Ridgley himaelf, who
while he strongly asserted his innocence of the crime laid to his charge, felt in
common with myself & the Officers of the Squadron in general the necessity of
coming forward & publicly clearing his own Character as well as that of the Service from the imputation of an act, so heinous in itself & so abhorrent t o Society;
In consequence of this determination, I placed him in charge of Captain Decatur
comm: the Congress frigate (who was instructed to touch a t klessina on his way to
Leghorn) & having the highest confidence in the judgement of that Officer, who
interested himself warmly in the matter, I left the management of it to him - At
the same time I addressed a Letter to hlr Broadbent our Agent a t Messina, the
respectability of whose Character & standirig in life joined with a great share of
active benevolence, constituted him a fit Advocate on such an occasion, recommending the young Marl in the most impressive terms to his friendly protection,
& earnestly soliciting the exertion in his behalf of the powerful influence which he
possesses with Individuals & with the Governmt.
The letters from that Gentleman, from Captain Decatur & hfr Ridgley will
inform you of the Sequel, & the situation in which the sffair stood a t my Departure
from Sicily; from the measures adopted & the caution observed as well as the
assurances of Mr Broadbent I entertain little doubt that i t has 'ere this been
bmught to a favorable termination, & that Mr R. is return'd with a mind more a t
ease to his duty in the Squadron. I n addressing you Sir who are so well qualified to judge of this subject, i t were
needless to enter into a justification of the motives which dictated my Conduct in
giving up Lieutenant Ridgley to be tried by that authority whose Laws he stood
accused of having violated
these motives bear testimony to their own rectitude, they are such as approve themselves to my own mind & 1am persuaded they
will be perfectly satisfactory to the Department - i t wou'd be equally unnecessary to dwell upon the sinister impression made by this event, not only 1n Sicily,
but a t Malta (the unfortunate Victim of the &ray being a British Subject &
attached to the King's Service) or on the reasons denved fmm a view of the Consequences which must inevitably have ensued to our Operations & our national
Interests in the Mediterr~,had not the claim of the 61clhan Government been
complied with, as these reasons, altho the had their weight being important
in themselves, were et secondary to those wgich originated in a sense of Justice &
the Respect due to tge established Laws C Custom of Nations. You will perceive
by my Correspondence with Commodore Rodgere that a t my su gestion he sent
the Noulilua to Mesaina immediately after Peace aaa aonclude8, in order that
Captain Dent & his Officers might appear on the Trial & render ell the sseietance

-

-

-

7-HE FORTRESS OF GOLETTA NEAR TIJNIS

T W O SKETCliES O F SPANISH GUNBOA'TS O F F GIBRALTAR

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS
in their power; His return was hourly expected when the President left Syracuse
& I doubt not but the Commodore will make known the issue by the earliest
Conveyance. I t is not without deep reluctance that I make this Communication to you, the
subject of which is the more painful as Mr KidgleyJs general Character is in every
respect deserving of the Esteem of his Brother Officers - active, brave and generous, he has given flattering indications of those ualities which matured by experience would form a valuable & distinguished Bfficer, and I cannot sufficiently
lament that in an imprudent hour he ~ h o u l dbring me as Commander of the
Squadron into circumstances productive of so much difficulty & anxiety, & himself
into a situation which might have annulled the promise of his early years, &
placed an insuperable bar to his future advancement and fame; I hope however
that an honorable acquittal will dissipate this cloud & restore him again to the
service of his Coulitry, and i t is greatly to be wished that He as well as other young
Men in the service map not remain unadmonished by this unfortunate occurrence,
which should teach them to be more upon their guard when on shore in foreign
Countries, where it becomes them to consider that they are not the Depositories
of their own reputations only, but of the reputation of the Navy, and the Honor
of the Nation whom they represent. [NDA. Captain's LB, Vol. 2, 1805.1
To Captain John Bodgers, U. S. Wavy, from Tobias Lear, U. S. Consul General,
Algiers
TUNISAugmt 24t4 1806
SIR, I have the pleasure to inform you that me had a passage to this place
yesterday of 5% hours, which made i t too late to go to Bardo according to appointm*
WE
7 o'clk. - At 11 w-e went to the Gardens of the Bey and Sepatapa, where
we received every mark of respect and polite attention. An elegant entertainment
was provided for our Officers, with which they were much pleased. On our return
we met the Bey on a plane, amon his horses, where we stop'd a short time, and I
introduced the officers to him. %e n-as gracious as usual, and full of friendly
expressions. I told him you wrl have come on shore had you not found so much to
engage you on board that prevented your leaving the Squadron with convenience.
He expressed the pleasure he st14 have had in seeing you &*
The Sapatapa is to send me a written answer today to my letter respecting the
alteration of articles in the treaty. - The Ambassador dined with us. He
will pay his respects to you, and go to see the Congress as soon as she arrives; and
in the meantime will be ready to embark by Wednesday or Thursday. The day after tomorrow I shall return on board with Mr9 Lear, who sends her
sends her best regards & Compliments to you
[LC. JRP, Vol. 2, Series Two, May-Oct. 1805.1
To Captain John Bodgers, U. S. Navy, from Captain Hugh G. Campbell, U. 6. Navy
U. S. S. Essa. TUXISBAY
Aug* 84* 1806
SIR I beg leave to inform you That the Wheel of this ship is so defective a8 t o
require immediate repairs. I t is now in the Carpenters hands and nlll I presume
be ready for use by Tomorrow Evening [LC. JRP, Vol 1, March, 1791-Dcc. 1814.1
Extract from journal of U. S. Frigate Co~stitution.Captain John Bodgera, U. S. Navy,
commanding, Saturday, 24 August 1806
[Tunis Bay, :\t 4 [A. bl.] Colonel Lear left the ship for Tunis, the Argus got
u l.ier \veigh for Port Farino to water
- ailed the schconer Nautilus.
To Captain John Rodgers, U. S. Navy, from Tobiae L e u , U. S. Consul General,
Algiers

TUNISAtq.* f!6* 1806
DEABSIR, I had the pleasure this morning to receive your acceptable favor of
yesterday; and am much pleased to find the expressions of respect for w extando

250

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1805 TO 1807

to all parts where our Vessels have been. Here it is unbounded. We went this
morning to
the Ambassador, who shewed us every mark of attention, and received our visit a s a great favor.He desired me to present his Complim'r t o
you, and to my that he would tomorrow, if convenient to you, go on board your
ship to pay bis respects, and t o see We Congress, and return on shore again In the
afternoon. - If you will be so ood as t o have a boat sent up here very early in
the morning we will embark a n t go on board. Would the weather be smooth,
and more proper for rowin than sailin it would be agreeable if you would let
your Barge meet us a t the Eoletta, whict would take us on board better than the
boat which may be sent up here, as I presume that sent up will be one of the
large Cutters. As I shall return here again tomorron- evening with the Ambassador, PVI- Lear
will remain here. She sends her Compls & regards, and hopes you will not wholly
for et how to smiie before she goes on board. $he Minister's letter is to be sent me this evening by Hadge Unis, - and the
Ambassador says he shall be ready toembark in twodays after he has been on board
to see the Ship &? - He seems to be making great preparations for the Voyage.As I suppose the Enterprize w-ill not sail for Tripoli till about the time we take
our departure, I do not send my letters to go by her.
!LC. JRP, Let. & Doc., -4c. 3647, 1794-1848.1
To Lieutenant William

I.Crane, U. 6. Navy, from Captain John Podgers, U. 6.
Navy

U S SHIPConstitution

TUXISBAY86tb Augt I805
SIR I have to direct that, you join the C States Sloop Hornet, as her Commander. Lt Blodget will deliver up to you, all Papers, Documents, & $ relative to
said Sloop; and for which you are to hold yourself accountable
[LC. JRP, Letters & Orders, Book A, 1804-1805.1

To Captain Edward Preble, U. 6. Navy, from William Higgins, U. 6. Bavy Agent,
Malta
~ I A L Tth
A 26 Aug.) 1806
Duplicate
MY DEAR
Sm I send you a Copy of my last letters, I have never received my
Commission and I know i t was not carried away by the President, it has therefore
been lost on this side. J have put under Capt Stewart's Care a pipe of Marsalla
Wine for you and 20 flower Pots, and tho' you did not order the first I dare say
it will be acceptable to you, or some of your friends, I shall place the cost of it to
your account, and send the remaining Pots by the first opportunity; C a p t ~Stewart
could not t a k e more.
You will soon see a Tuneseen Ambassador in america, the Basha has sent him
t o do away all differences, a Sort of War actually took place between this Regency
rrnd the Sqiladron for a few daye, but the wily Bashn finding he could not exact
any terms that suited him and not choosing to yeld himself, has defferred to execute
his repeated threats until the result of his Embassy be known or perhaps until
he finds the Track unprotected, nhen as these Rascals generally do, he will make
a dash and afterwards laugh a t his Enem~es.
A Bomb Commanded by Mr Lewis has just come in, but no letter from You,
I hear however another is t o follow and by her I &hallexpect a long one The Conetellation carries the President's 2 Pipes of Marsalla; Lord Kelson hss
made a long and fruitless Chase after the french.
Coffees and Sugars are rising here and the small Cargo I abe you a note of
might now be sold to good advantage. - Good Martinique Eoffee is now worth
90 Dollars pr Cantar of 175 pounds White Havannah Sugar 32 @ 34. Brown 28.
@ 30. Tea is in Demand good Hybon worth 8. Shilli~~gs
pr pound, Souchong a
Dollar, Rum 7. Shillings per Gallon. Pepper 32. Dollars pr Cantar L o g ~ o o d8.
Dollars pf Dq Nankeen 90 t o 100. Cents
THE5 SEPT.1805
DEARSIR I n haste I refer you to what I wrote you under the 25 Aug! by the
Constellaturn, she carried no flower pots the Man to whom they belonged having
gone into the Country instead of putting them into the ship as he promised to do,
the John A d a m does not come into Port of course they cannot go by her
No

-

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

251

Commission pray send me a Duplicate as soon as possible - The little Cargo
coming out now or during the winter would answer, but I must have liberty to
land & sell out of Store in small parcels I send you a letter for Captc Barron which please forward
[LC. EPP, Vol. 15, June-Aug. 1805.1
Extract from journal of Hezekiah Loomis, Steward, U. 6. Navy, U. 6. Frigate
Congrus. Captain Stephen Decatur, Jr., U. 6. Navy, commanding, Wednesday,
21 August to Sunday, 25 August 1805
[Steward Loomis was transferred to the Congress from the F"en on 19-20
Au ust 1805.1
a e n t to Porto Perana and watered ship and returned and anchored in Tunis Bay
[L. F. Middlebrook. NDA copy.]
Extract from journal of U. 6. Frigate Constitution,Captain John Rodgers, U. S. Bavy,
commanding, Sunday, 25 August 1805
[Tunis Bay] the Frigate Congress Arrived from Port Farino [after midnight].
[USNA.]
Extracts from journal of Midshipman Charles Morris, Jr., U. S. Navy, on board
U. 5. Frigate Pruident. Captain James Barron, U. S. Navy, commanding, Sunday,
25 August 1805
10%Joseph Ferguson fell from the Main top and expired a few minutes after 1% [A. Id.]Commited the body of Joseph Ferguson to the deep with the usual
ceremonies.
Latitude Observed 35O34'N. Longitude D. R. 46'26'W.
[Mrs. C. E. Fox original, NDA photostat.]

To Captain Stephen Decatur, Jr., U, 6. Navy, from Captain John Bodgers. U. 6.
Navy
UKITEDSTATESSHIP Constitution
Tunis Bay August 26th 1805
SIR I have to acquaint you that the Embassador will be down on a visit to your
Ship tomorrow he will call here first $ from this will go to the Congress; I shall
Salute him on his leari~lgthe Ship by mannilkg yards with three cheers, but no
Guns & wish you to do the same, [HS of Pa.]
Certificate concerning U. 6. Brig Franklin
Constiiulion TUNISBAY 26 Augt 1806
These are to Certify that the Brig! Franklin, a t present under the Command of
Mr Charles Robinson Midshipman, is the property of the U States, and that the
crew on board of her, regularly belongs to the service of said States [LC. JRP, Letters & Orders, Book A, 1804-1805.3
To Secretary of the Navy from Captain John Rodgers, U. S. Navy
U. STATESSHIP Comtitution
Nq 16
Tunis Bay August 1 7 % 1805
SIR,For the good of the service - as blaster Commandant Stewart was very
desirous of returning to the U. States I was in consequence induced to direct
Captv Campbell to take command of the Essez & Stewart to return to America
charged with the command of the Constellation. The E s s a and Brig Vizen will remain on the Gibraltar station this Winter for
such reasons as appear in my orders to C a p t ~Campbell,which I herein enclose you.
The remainder of the Squadron will Itendezvous a t Syracuse - I shall send the
Enterprize (the command of which Vessel I have given to Lieut Porter) from t h b

252

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1805 TO 1807

to Tripoli to asscertain how our &airs stand in that Regency, altho this is almost
unnecessary; as I know with certainty that all is well. Was it not that while we
have a force in these Seas so formidable as the present, I concieve i t ought to be
kept in motion; as it not only affords the Officers an op ortunity of gaining information, but also informs the different powera of the Rediterranean that our
Force is not only numerous but active - The Enterprize after communicating
with Tripoli will return to Syracuse. - As it respects my own destination I refer
ou to the orders herein enclosed to C a p t ~Hull - My reasons for going to
ieghorn are to procure Cash for the use of the Squadron as it cannot a t this
moment be procured a t Malta or Syracuse without great loss: COUPLear goes
with me to Leghorn to procure the Biennial present for Algiers, and a t which place
I shall set him down on my return to Syracuse.
To Lieutt Evans I have given the command of the Nazltilus, Master Commandant Dent, her former Commander, having requested permission to return
home in the John Adams, in consequence of bad Health - At present the
Vessels of the Squadron are commanded as follows - Cap$* Campbell of the
Essee-Hull the Brig Argus-Smith, Brig Syren-Cox, Brig Trizen-Porter,
Schooner Enterprize-Evans,
the Nautzlus-Crane,
Sloop Ifornet a n d t h e
Gun Boats the same Commanders as when they left America - Master Commdt
Robinson returns to the U. States in the Congress Frigate. [KDA. Captain's LB, Vol. 2, 1805.1

-

127 August 18051
To Master Commandant Isaac Hull,U. 8. Navy, from Captain John Rodgers, U. S,
Navy
SIR, I would rather you would go to Tu~iisafter Capt.ains Decatur and Smith
return - Cap; Smith has signified that he wishes to go tomorrow, Cap5 Decatur
is now there, and if more of the Commanding Officers then two a t a time m-as to
go; I should be exposing the Vessels in case of bad weather. TUESDAY
EVEXIXG
27th Augt 1806
[KDA. Isaac Hull LB, 1803-1806.1

To Secretary of the Navy from Captain John Bodgers, U. S. Navy
Zi. STATESSHIPConstitution
Tunis B a y Augt 27'4 1806
SIR, Keither of the two Bomb Vessels mentioned in your Letters of the 30'4
of April had arrived at Syracuse or Malta on the 26t4 or 27th of last Month, as
the Congress Ieft both those places on these days - however as the John Adams
calls a t both places before she returns, perhaps you may yet hear of their arrival
by her. [NDA. Captain's LB, Vol. 2, 1805.1
To Secretary of the Navy from Master Commandant Isaac Chauncey, U. 8. Navy
NEWYORKd7'b August 1806
SIE I arived hear on Saturday last and found that the Boats for the Hornel
nearly completed. and I think are two of the finest boats I ever saw I have not yet been able to discover any suitable Character's for a Boatswain,
Gunner, or Carpenter, but hope too befor I leave this. which I contemplate
doing the latter part of this week
[NDA. MC LB, 1804-5.1
Extract from jonmal of Hezekiah Loomis, Steward, U. S. Navy, in U. 8. Prigate
Congrus. Captain Stephen Decatur, Jr., U. 6. Navy, commanding, Tuesday, 27
August 1806
[Tunis] Turkish Consul came on board - fired a salute and manned the yards.
[L. F. Middlebrook. NDA copy.]

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

253

Extract from journd of U. 6. Frigate Constilu[ion. Captain John Bodgers, U. 8. Navy,
commanding, Tuesday, 27 Angust 1805
[Tunis Bay] At 11 [A. M.] the Argus arrived from Port Fareno.
[USNA.]

. To Captain John Bodgers, U, S. Navy, from Tobias Lear, U. S. Consul General,
Algiers

TUNISWednesday Augt 88. 1806

DEARSIR, Owing to the lightness of the wind after we got into the lake, we

were not able to get up to Tunls while there was light enough to know the Channel,
and consequently got fast on the flats, a short distance from the landing place.
where we were detain'd so long as to prevent our getting through the Gates
before they were shut. And after once shut a t night they are opened to no
person. - We were taken by the A m b d o r to the House of one of his friends
in the outskirts of the City, where we met with every hospitality they could
bestow, and furnished with excellent lodgings. - This misfortune prevents us
from going to Bardo, today, as we could not give information of our intention
till this morning. I have now sent the dmgerman out, and expect by bim an
answer, which I presume will fix the hour for tomorrow morning. - Should
we not go to Bardo today I shall not be able to invite those persons on board
tomorrow, as you wished; but the Consuh, if they go would go on friday as
readily as any other day. I shall paw the compliments which you requested
to the Sapatapa & Hadge Iinis; but I do not think either will come on friday. Mr Eaton went down to the Goletta this morn+ in order to go on board your
ship. - I find his arrival here has created much speculation, and no Little 611spicion on the part of some of the natires respect* the object of his visit as i t
relates to our &airs' and I should not be surprized if it should cause a hesitation
in doing all which d g h t otherwise be done. - 1 think he should not have come
on shore, without your knowledge; and hsd his case been mine, I w4 have wished
that the Governt might have known that I was here before I landed. If there are any accounts of the Ships to be settled here, would i t not be well
for hlr Johnson to come up tomorrow for that purpose, as he knows what hse
been or will be sent on board? Mrr Lear desires her regards 8: compliments [LC. JRP, Let. & Doc., Ac. 3647, 1799-1848.1
To Secretary of the Navy from Captain John Bodgers, U. S. Navy
U S SHIPComtildion
Ttlrris Bay M t b August 1806
SIR I herewith enclose to you the Commissions of all the Officers, which have
returned to the U States, as there was no oppertunity to examine them previous to
their return, d t h o one of the first orders, I gave after my succession to the Command of the Squadron, was for that purpose -,
[LC. JRP, L Bk B, May 1805-July 1806.1

NQ22 forwarded by the
Congress Cap+ DECATUR

Extract from journal of Midshipman Charles Morris, Jr., U. S. Navy, on board
U. 8. Frigate Piaidmi, Captain James Baron, U. S. Navg, commanding, Wednesday, 28 August 1806
434 [A. M.] Thomas Dome departed this life having an attack of Convulsion

fits.
9 Committed hie body to the deep LBtitude Observed 3 6 O 11' N. Longitude Observed 50'23' W.
[Mrs. C. E. Fox original, NDA photost~at.1

To Master Commandant John Smith, U. S. Navy, commending U. 8. Brig Strub
from Captain John Bodgers, U. 6. Navy
U S SHIPComtdOLtion
Tunis Bay !?Q% August 1886
SIR You are desird to furnish Cspt Cox with a Copy of dl papers & documents,
relating to the U S Brig Vizen that you received from the Navy Department [LC. JRP, Letfern & Ordw, Book A, 1804-1805.1

2.54

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1806 TO 1807

To Captain John Bodgera. U. S. Navy, from Tobias Lear, U. 6. Consul General,
Algiers
T U N I ~Augt
,
30t4 1806
DEARSIR, We hare been a t Bardo this morning, where we met the usual civilites, such as have been shewn since I have been here. Capt".
goes on board this
forenoon. - The Ambassador has his last audience tomorrow morning, and hse
requested Capt D. to let him have a boat sent up to embark a t 3 o'c1k.I must see the Bey again tomorrow morning, and shall, therefore, not be able to
come off tomorrom, as I mentioned yesterday. For myeelf I would go onbQtomorrow afternoon; but as M.9 Lear goes with me, I should not wish her to take the
chance of being out after night; so that we shall go on Sunday morning to the
Goletta by land, and be there by 7% or 8 oclk, from whence we will go on board in
the Barge, if you nil1 have the goodness to send her for us. - As there may he
many things to be sent on board tomorrow, I will thank you if you will let the first
cutter be sent up here tomorrow morning to take off every thing. Notwithstanding there have been many attempts to interrupt the final sittlement of our business here, in the way it has been done, we shall accomplish i t in
the handsomest manner. Mrr Lear desires desires her best regards & compliments to you. - Believe me
to be very respectfully & truly Pour's
P. S. 12 o'clk. I have this moment recQyour favor of this date, and I find that
which I have written is partly in answer to it, so far as relates to the time of the
Ambawdor's going on board. -- As the time of departure is so pressing I presume i t will not be convenient for those persons to go on board to dine of whom
we spoke when I was on board. - I know how anxious you must be, of course, to
get off from hence, on many accounts, and I am sure I feel the same anxiety; but it
would not be well to depart until all our affairs are fully finished, which will certainly be tomorrow. - I shall see Hadge Unis and the Sapatapa this afternoon,
and will make them the compliment of going on board; but a t the same time ahall
hint a t the necessity of our immediate departure, on account of the season &9
I send this by C a p t ~Decatur, and if anything more occurs before the departure
of the Gigg, - %GI1 communicate it.
[LC. JRP, Vol. 2, Series Two, blay-Oct. 1805.1
To Lieutenant David Porter, U. 6. Bavy, commanding U. 6. Schooner Enterprfze,
from Captain John Rodgers, U. 6. Navy
U S SBIP Comfitufion
Bay 8 0 t h August 1806
TUTLZS
SIR YOUwill proceed to Tripoli and after communicating with Ar! Ridgely our
Charge dlAffaires, and receiving his dispatches you will repair to Syracuse, and
hold yourself subject to the orders of the Senior Officer that you may find in that
port P S When i t is intented you shall commence the execution of these orders the
signal will be made for the Enterprize to weigh J H [LC. JRP, Letters & Orders, Book A, 1804-1805.3
To John Ridgely, U, 6. Char& dlAffaires, Tripoli, from Captain John Rodgers,
U. 6. Navy
U S SHIPConstitution
Tunis Bay 30th August 1806
SIR I have sent the U States Schooner Enterprize Lieutt Porter (your old fellow
sufferer) to Tripoli to asscertain from you, how our affairs are going on &F&P The Bey of Tunis has received a lesson lately such, as he has not hitherto been
accustomed, but aa Lieut Porter is well acquainted with every thing that has
transpired in this quarter, I beg leave to refer you to him for all the necessary
information - After Leutt Porter has con~municatcdwith you, and received
whatever dispatches you may have to forward to Goverment, or m self, 1 have
directed him to proceed to Syracuse - Pray preaent my unfeigne% respects to
that Amiable and good Man Mr Kissen, and tell him that the reason of my not
Sending the Wine, which I promised, was owing to their being none of the same
quality a t Syracuae [LC. JRP, L Bk B, May 1805-July 1806.1

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS
To Master Commandant John Smith, U. 8. Wavy, commanding U. 8. Brig Sirm.
from Captain John Bodgers, U. 8. Navy
U S SHIP Constitzctwn
Tunis Bay SOtb Augt 1806
SIR So soon as the signal is made for the U States Brig Siren, under your command, to weigh. - I have to desire that you proceed without loss of time to
Syracuse, calling a t Malta in your passage to direct the Bomb Brig's if they have
arrived there to proceed to Syracuse to Rendezvous & receive further orders* You
are directed also to remain a t Syracuse with the Siren until1 further orders from
me *In case of a provision Shi having arrived at Malta & her Cargo not landed before you rescb there,
yon are directed to Convoy Ber to Byrato deposit the same m the hands of Mr Dyson Navy A g e n t

[LC. JRP, Letters & Orders, Book A, 1804-1805.1
To William Higgins, U. S. Navy Agent, Malta, from Captain John Rodgers, U. 6.
Wavy
U S SHIPConstitution
Tunis Bay 30Q Augwt 1806
SIR YOUwill receive this by the Siren which vessell, I have directed to call a t
Malta, for the purpose of ordering the Bomb vessels,in case they have arrived
there, to Syracuse, also to Convoy the Store Ship if she has arrived to Syracue,
to make a deposit of her Cargo, provided she has not done this a t hlalta, previous
to this reaching you - I have no news worth Communicating, further than what
Capt Smith, will be able to give you, except that my provisions are so far expended
that I shall be obliged to call a t Syracuse, to replenish, and will perhaps take Malta
in my way thence - The Congress will leave this to morrow for the U States,
with a Tunetian Embassador on board, and I shall leave here, the day after her
departure
[LC. JRP, L Bk B, May 1805-July 1806.1
To Surgeon Thomas Marshall, U. S. Wavy, from Captain John Rodgers, U. 8. Navy
U S SHIP Constitution
Tunis Bay 30tP August 1806
SIR You are here by appointed to act as Surgeon, to the Gun Boats - Your
residence t o be on board of Gun Boat NQ2 , [*] - I n port you are desired t o visit
all the boats once a day and administer to the Sick in such manner as will best
insure the health of their Crews, you will be provided with a Boat for your own
seperate Convenience, in the discharge of your duties, which Boat is not to be used
for any other purposes without your Consent - You u-ill be pleased to establish
a black Ball, about the size of a half Bushell, to be hoisted at. the hlaintopmsst
head of the Boats, rtp a signal to express their want of a Surgeon, in any particular
case, which will be answered by the Boat you may be on board of, a t the time the
signal is made, by an American Ensign a t the same mast head ['Another mpy of this letter state "on board h'o. #".I
[LC, JRP, Letters & Orders, Book A, 1804-1805.1
To ldidshipman Charles Bobinson, U. 8. Navy, commwding U. 8. Brig F r d l i n ,
from Captain John Rodgem, U. 6. Navy
U S SHIP Constitution
Tunis Bay SOtb Augusf 1806.
SIB After getting to Gibraltar, and discharging the provisions you now have on
board, (in such manner as Captaiu Campbell ma): think pro r to direct) you am
desired, to proceed to the Eastern Branch, Washmgton, a n r s s early as possible,
report your arrival to the H o n b l ~the Secretary of the Navy, for further orders [NDA. Officers LB, 1802-1505.1

256

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1806 TO 1807
[31 Auguat 18051
To President Thomas Jefferson &om Hamonda, Bey of Tunis
[Tranelation]

HAMUDA
BASHAWBEY, Prince of Princes of Tunis, the Well Guarded Citg, The
Abode of Felicity.
To Mr. THOMAS
JEFFERSON,
President of the United States of America.
MY GREATAND GOODFRIEND,I certainly did not expect to find myself under
the necessity of writing to you in the present sense; but s i n e an unforeseen chance
requires it, and since the consequences deriving from an inappropriate dispute
forced on me, which I never provoked, offer me this supreme and for me ever new
pleasure, I shall limit myself to telling you that having resolved to send a n Ambassador to you personally, with the aim of still further convincing ou of my good
friendship for you and your nation, and of the high esteem in wgich I hold you
particularly, I have entrusted to him a compendium of the last discussion between
Commodore Rodgers, the Consul General Tobiss Lear, and myself.
From the tame please note that the many unpleasantnesees which I experienced
on this occasion could quite well have been avoided were it not for the too martial
temper of the aforesaid Commodore Rodgers, very imprudently stirred up and
supported by the Charge d1A!Taires, George Davis, whose equivocal conduct has
deserved examination, just as it caused me extreme surprise.
My Ambassador aforesaid, who will be the bearer of the present, is my faithful
and well-deserving servant Soliman Melemelli, whom I had already destined for
an important mission to the Grand Sultan in Constantinople.
He is charged to present you with some tokens of my esteem which I hope you
will be pleased to receive favorably, especially since he will assure you of my perfect good friendship and of my wish to continue it in spite of what has been done
or attempted to plunge us into a state of war.
Inasmuch as, despite the address of the sagacious Consul Lear, who has dealt
with me on this occasion by virtue of the authority conferred on him by you, we
have not been able to settle in a mutually advantageous and reciprocal manner
the divers points of complaint or of pretension raised by Commodore Rodgers
and the Charge dJAffaires,Davis, the latter having become through their own fault
of such a temper that it required your examination and your direct decision;
I therefore have provided my Ambassador with my authority and my instructions
to treat with you and terminate everything in conformity with my said instructions.
The principal demand is that of the alteration and addition to some articles of
our Treaty of Peace, solemnly approved and ratified by your Predecessor.
I do not know nor have I been able to understand how this could be demanded
(threats even having been used against me) when such claims have never been
addressed or indicated to me by you. Wherefore, not knowing any reason for
making such a change, not taking pleasure in altering our treaties, I have however
proposed to Consul General Lear that I should consent to the proposed change,
provided that I be accorded a proportionate Indemnity.
This is one of the principal points on which we have not succeeded in agreeing,
and it is concerning this that I beg you, my Great and Good Friend, to give entire
and full credit to all that my Ambassador will tell you in my name, m u r i n g you
that everything which he may conclude and agree upon with you in the tenor of
and in conformity with the orders and instructions which I have given him will
have my approval.
Impatient to receive your gracious tokens with the notioe of the eafe amval
before you of my Ambassador, whom once again I recommend to you, I wish you
from Heaven, my Great and Good Friend, the most w m lete Hap iness.
At the Bardo of Tun&, the 6th of the Moon Gemed 'J%eni, A. l f 1220, And the
31st of the Month of August, A. D. 1805.
HAMUDA
BASHAW
BEY
(SEAL)
[NA. SDA. CD, Tunis, Vol. 3, July 1806-Sept 1806.1

WARS U7ITH BARBARY POWERS
131 August 18051
To Secretary of State from Jnsanf Hoggia, Keeper of the Seals, Prime Minister of
the Bey of Tunis
[Translation

Jossu~HOGQIA,Keeper of the Seals and Prime Minister of His Ezeellency tk

Bashaw Bey of Tunis.
To the Honorable JAMES MADISON,Secretary of State of the Goaemment of the
United States of America.
Sir, I cannot permit Si Soliman Melemelli, Ambassador of my Illustrious
Master to the President of the United States of America, to leave without entrusting to him this letter of mine to you, Sir, in which I have the pleasure to
assure you directly of mv distinguished esteem, and of my care to maintain in
the mind of my hlaeter friendly and peaceful sentiments toward your nation, of
which he is now giving proof by means of the Ambassador, who beam papers
sufficient to confirm these sentiments and dispositions.
I shall be extremely grateful for aU attentions, kindnesses and facilities which
vou may use toward the bearer of my letter of recommendation and I shall be so
dl the more when I know that through pour valuable assistance he has succeeded
in consolidating the amity between the two nations on a stable and mutually
adrrsntsgeous footing.
To the said Ambassador, Rfelemelli, I have entrusted some remembrances,
which I beg you to accept as a slight token of the ambition which I nourish of
being useful to you and convincing you that on all occasions I shall always be
sincerely
Your Obdt Servr and Friend
J u s s u ~HOQGIA (SEAL)
AT THE BARDO
OF TUNIS
51 August 1805
IN.4, SD.4. CD, Tunis, Vol. 3, July 1BOjSept. 1806.1
[31 August 18051
To Tobias Lear, U. S. Consul General, Algiers, from Jnssnf Boggia, Keeper of tho
Seals, Prime Minister of the Bey of Tunis
[TnmslaUonl

J o s s o ~HOGGIA,
Keeper of the Seals
Prime llfanister of His Ezcellency the Bashaw Bey of Tunis.
To hfr. TOBIAS
LEAR,Consul General of the United Slates of America for the Regency
of Algiers, &c.
SIR, In reply to the letter which you wrote me on the 22d of the current Month
of August, I have the pleasure to inform you that having taken under Consideration the contents of the same, Concerning the requested modification or complete
alteration of four articles of the Treaty of Peace existing between our Regency and
the United States of America, I have rendered an exact account of the whole to
His Excellency the Basbaw Bey, my Illustrious blaster. And after mature re
flection the latter instructs me to tell you that in regard to the article on customs,
he promises from now henceforth and until the return of the ambassador, Sidi
Soliman Melemelli, from America, not to oblige nor make American Subjects who
shall come here to trade in this interval pay any duty in excess of what is here paid
by the most favored nations, and that similsrly he wiLl not make use of American
vessels which he map sometimes need, excepting under the same terms and conditions that apply to the vessels of the most favored nations under similar circumstances.
With regard to the salute to be given by these fortresses to the men-of-war of
the United States which might from time to time call here, and w ~ t hregard to the
flight of slaves aboard the eame, His Excellencp intends to let these two articles
stand with the aame tenor and force as the Treaty itself and not to dter them before the return of the A m b a d o r with the rati6cation of the President or with
such additions or modifications as he &all h&ve made in agreement with Hie
ExceUency the President aforesaid.

258

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1806 TO 1807

Of this I hasten to inform you, and offering you my sincere respects, I am with
the highest regard, Pour most affectionate friend
J u s s n ~HOGGIA (SEAL)
AT THE BABDOOF TUNIS
S1August1805
[NA. SDA, CD, Algiers, Vol. 7, Pt. 11, January 1806September 29, 1807.1

-

To Captain Hugh G. Campbell, U.S. Navy, commanding U.6 . 6 . Euu, from Captain
John Bodgers, U. S. Navy
U S SHIP Constitution
Tunis Bay 91 August 1806.
SIR AS I have resolved on dividing the Squadron, into Two Divisions, or rather
as it is my Intention, that the Frigate Essez, and Brig Vizen, should remain on the
Gibralter Station, during this Winter, for the protection of our Commerce, as also
to forward to me, all important dispatches from our Government; 1 have in consequence to direct that you proceed thence with these Two Vessells, with all
practicable dispatch, and as early as possible, inform yourself of the State of our
affairs, in that quarter, which information you will be pleased to communicate to
me by the Schooner Nautilus, which vessel1 will proceed down with you for that
purpose. The latest accounts from Madrid induce me to suppose, that there is a
great probability of War between the U States & Spain. I therefore suggest to
you the propriety of your visiting Spanish ports with some caution, a t least untill
the appearance of a rupture between the two Countrys, shall be removed. You will communicate with Mt Simpson, our Consul a t Tangier as often ss
possible and keep the Kavy Department, as also myself regularly informed of
every thing of magnitude where in our Country is in any way interested. You
may draw on Messs James MsKenzie & A Glrnnie of London. for what money
you may want for the s~lppliesof the two Ves~elsunder your Command, taking
care to express in the Bills the purposes for which they were drawn. I shall inform the H o n b ' ~the Secretary of the Navy, of your being stationed, a t Gibralter
and suggest to him, the propriety of distinguishing such dispatches, if any) as
require there contents, being made known to you, previous to my reception of
them - As I have directed the Brig Franklan to proceed to the U States I have
to request, that you will convoy her clear of the Streights. After having a t
Gibralter landed or received, on board your Ship, as most convenient, such provisions, as she has on board, leaving her only a sufficient quantity to carry her t o
the U States.
[KDA. Captain's LB, Vol. 2, 1805.1
To Master Commandant Isaac Hull,U. S. Navy, commanding U. S. Brig Argus, from
Captain John Rodgers, U. 6. Navy
U S SHIP Constitution
Tunis Bay 9lStAugust 1805
SIR With the Brig Argus, (under your immediate Command) Sloo Hornet
and Gun Boats N9 l . S . 6 . 5 , 8,8, 9,A. 10, you are directed to proceed to gyracuae,
and there Rendezvous, untill my return (without the Political jarring of the
European Powers, at War, should make Syracuse, an improper Port, for our
Vessels; in which case you are directed to rendezvous a t Malta). I shall proceed
from hence to Leghorn, from thence to Algiers, and i t is most likely from the
latter place to join you a t Syracuse, therefore in all probability, I shall not be
with you again, untill some time in October. In which case, I have to desire,
that about the first of October - you send the Syren, or one of the Schooners,
to this Bay, to Communicate with our Charge d'affaires, & sscertain if all is quiet.
As the Officers, Commanding the Gun Boats, are generally very Young, and
a t an Age, whose prominent trait is not Stability, I have to desire that you pay
great attention, to have regularity and Systim, maintained, in every thing belonging to, and under their respective Commands, and not on any Account,
lo euffer, any alterations to be made, without your special permission, and these
only in instances, where they are absolutely necessary - Among Officers of the
Age of the Majority of those, which will be with you, Dissipation is frequently
not the l a s t conspicuous, and sometime even to a degree, that eaps the loot of
eubordination, to an extent not only injurious to the particular service they are
in, but also to the Character of their Nation. On this subject during my absence,
I shall much rely on your diecretion, & judgement in maintaining that striot

WARS WITIT BARBARY POWERS

259

subordination, & general hsrmony throughout the Squadron, without which'
we cannot be respected. Mr Dyson will furnish you, with all the necessary supplies - Aa it regpeets
Cash, he must furnish you with what small sums you may want, untill my return,
one of my reasons for going to Leghorn, is to procure that Article, therefore,
he will be reembursed immediately on my return. All requisitions to him, must
be made through you - As soon after your arrival a t Syracuse aa possible,
you wiiI write to Mr Higgins and direct that if the Bomb Vessels, have arrived
there, to order them t o proceed to Syracuse - And should a Store Ship have
arrived, - to direct her also to Syracuse to deposite her Stores, an[d] in case the
deposite should have been made a t Malta, previous t o your having s n oppertunity of commr~nicatingthis order, you are directed to dismount the Guns of
the Hornet, and have them transported to Syracuse by her. The Freight of the
Store Ships from America, are to be paid as usual. P 6. When it is intended you shall commence the execution of thew orders,
the ilignal will be made for the Argw lo weigh.
[NDA. Captain's LB, Bol. 2, 1805.1

To Xiidshipman John D. Henley, U. 8. Navy, Gunboat No. 4, from Captain John
Bodgers, U. 6. Rsvy
U S SHIPConstitution

Tunis Bay 31-t Airgt 1806
SIR YOUare directed to discharge hlr J B Henry from Gun Boat NQ4 under
your Command, he having obtained mv permission to leave the service of the
@ States for an unlimited time in Consequence of his accepting the appointment
of Secretary to Coll Lear Consul General for Algiers [LC. JRP, Letters 8: Orders, Book A, 1804-1805.1

17 July to I September 18051
To Secretary of the Navy from Captain John Bodgers, U. S. Navy, Commodore,
lJ. S. Squadron in the Yetliterrtinean

Nq

1.

SIR In my conlunications of the 8th of June, and those by the Frigate President,
of tbe 6th & 7t4 July, you were partially informed of every material event.
appertaining to the &airs of the Squadron, since my succession t o the Command
of it, and I now do myself the honor of detailing to you, all subsequent
Transactions.
Between the 7'4 & 9 t h of July, the J o h n Adams, and Eight Gun Boats amved,
and joind the S ~ u a d r o nat. Syracuse, all within the space of 28 hours. This is
a very extraordinary circumstsnce, and equaiy worthy of remark, when we
consider that they saild on different days, and from all the different pnncdpd
ports between, and including Charleston (S.C.) & Boston (hl C). I n poZnt of
effective force and utility as Grin Boats, they are vastly superior to any thing
of the kind, I have yet seen, and they sail, and behave in all respects uncommonly
well - NQ 7 has not yet join'd tile Squudro11, I am apprehensive that some
accident must have happend to her Maqt, which haw either prolonged her passage
or obliged her to return. This I am induced to believe from the observations
of 8ome of the OfEcers commanding the other Boats, who say, that Lieutenant
Ogilvie complained of her Mast not being well secured By the John Adams, I received your dispatches of the 30*, 29'b, 24* and
duplicate of 'he 16'4 of April, and their contents have been duly respected, as
you -41 discover by the accompanying answers, agreeable t o their respective
dates.
On the 12rb of July, the Enterprize (Cap* Robinson) arrived a t Syracuse,
brin 'ng with him, five boats, part of Six, which he had purchased a t Alcona,
for 8 n Bcatr, for the particulars of which, as also his authority for purchasing
them, I beg leave to refer you, to the accompanying letters denoted S, B, I, B &
R - AE they were neither furnished with Guns, Amunition, or Men, I was
induced to lay them up at Syracuse, in the same state of Ordinary in which they
arrived.
On the 14ib of luly, with the Frigates, Constitution, CmteRation, Essez and John
Adams, Brig Byten, Schooners Neuiilus, and Enterprize, and Gun Boats NQI,S , 4 ,
6, 6, 8 , 9, & 10, as also Brig Franklin (Transport,) I saild for Malta (leaving the
668388--48----18

260

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1806 TO 1807

Sloop Hornet, Lieutt Evans, to obtain an Invento of all the Public Stores remaining in the hands of George Dyson Esqr ~ a Xgent
v ~and to sail in 24 hours
after the departure of the Squadron to join the same a t hfalta) a t which place I
was obliged to call, to furnish many requisitions, which could not be supplied s t
Sgracuse. The Frigate Congress, and Brig Vizen being previously dispatched for
Tunis, to counter act every impending danger, which might effect injury to our
Commerce, before the Squadron, could arrive in that quarter, and the Brig Argve
to Alexandria, to re-emburse Messs Briggs & Brothers of that lace, in the sum of
14,000 Dollars loaned by them to MI Eaton, on account of t i e U States, which
from the length of time, they had lain out of the money,and their pressing solicits- '
tions to be reembursed, I was under the necessity of dlspencing with the services
of the Argus, for the purpose of quieting their importunities. The purpose for
which this money was procured will be explained to you by the documents forwarded by Commodore Barron, previous to his resignation of the Command On thel6'b of July we arrived a t Malta, without any thing happening, on the
passage worthy of remark, and gave orders for all the necessary supplies to be
furnished the Squadron, as soon as possible. On my arrival a t Malta, I found a
Turkish Frigate, which had been sent by the Sublime Port, to claim the Ottoman
Ketch Gheritti, and the two Greek Polacres, loaded with Wheat, and under Ottoman Colours. The former captured by Commodore Preble, (the Gheritti is the
Ketch [Masticrenamcd Inirepidl that destroyed the Frigate Philadelphia, and that
was afterwards, the Infernal which destroyed Lieut'r Somers, Wadsworth and
Israel, and 10 Seamen) and the two latter, two of three veesels captured by ordera
of Commodore Barron, for a violation of the Blockade of Tripoli - As the object
which caused the Capture of these Vessels, had died with our Tn'poline Contest, I
was induced to return them -4th the Amount of their Cargoes, to their Original
Owners, without damagee or costs. This I was induced to do, from a belief that
the President was opposed to the memure, (as appears by his Ideas of Blockade,
quoted in your general instructions) and feeling sensible jn my own mind, that the
consequence of detaining them longer, would in d l probability rove dangerous,
not only by hazarding a rupture with the Nations under whose &lours they were
sailing, but in consequence of the precedent i t would efitablish, to the great and
irrevocable injury of our own Commerce. For the particulars, relative to these
Vesseils, I beg leave to refer you to Commodore Barrons former advices, on the
subiect. and for the result res~ecting
- them, to the accompanying Papers, disignst;?dB, R, H & 0 During our stay at Mslta, their being 8 or 9 British Men of War, anchored in the
same harbour with our Squadron, it gave rise to uneasiness in consequence of the
n , the respective service of the
Desertion of some Seamen from e a ~ ~ s q u a d r ointo
other, which produced remonstrance, and demand of restitution on both sides, es
you will discover by letters denoted A. R. $ B C. The result of this business is not
explained by these letters, as perhaps the British Commander felt there was some
Policy favorable to his Nation, in not committing the discussion to writing, but it
will appear, that altho, an old efitablished Law of England (I say established,
because I was so informed by Cap$ Cohbett of the Frigate Sea Hwse, who was sent
by Commodore Hammond, Senior Officer, to discu~sand arrange the business on
their part) authorises i t s Officers receiving and affording protection to persons who
declare themselves British Subjects, Yet, nev~rtheless,either the Officer has a
right, to modify the Law, in proportion to the opposition he meets in its execution,
or f i e Govennent aware of the consequence of such arbitrary messurm, gives its
Officers articular Instructions relative to their Intentions of the extent which
they wisg it to be exercised, which is perhaps, no further than in instances, where
but little opposition is made. To shew that this is likeIy to be the case, i t is only
necessary for me, to inform you, that the two American Seamen, mentioned in
Cap$ Capels letter, as also the two Deserters from the Constitution were delivered
up, altho you will perceive he sags, that the two latter, were Deserters from the
British Frigate Hos.net, and British Subjects, previous to their having entered into
our service in America.
After receiving the Men, which I had demanded, it was stipulated between
Commodore Hammond, and myself, that all Desertere from our respective Squadrons, (impressed Americans exce ted) should be given u he saying a t the Rame
time, that he did not conceive, ?was bound to give up %en, which had entered
our Service in the United Sfater, whatever might have been their previous situation. This is what the British have never, in any one instance acknowledged
before.
On the l9tb July the Hornet Lieutc Evans arrived s t Malta, after having executed the orders for which she wss left st Syracuse. On the !Z2@ the mpective
vessels of the Squadron were reported to me, as being ready for Sea, but the

W U S WITH BARBARY POWERS

261

Wind then blowing with great obstinacy from the Westward, prevented our departure, untill the morning of the 23t4, when a t 4 A. M. the signal was made to
unmoor, and a t 6 to weigh (altho the Wind still from the Westward, yet the a p
pearance indicative of a change) and a t 7 I had the satisfaction to see the Squadron (consisting of the same Vessels as before, with the addition of the Hornet)
clear of the Harbor.
On the 31rt July after a tedious assage of 8 Days, we reached Tunis Bay,
where I met the Cmteilalion Capl 8ampbell, (who 1 had sent a bead two days
before, to gain rdI the information possible, relative to our affairs before my arrival)
and the Brig Vizen Cap$ Cox, which had been previously dispatched, & from
whom I learnt, that the Congress had mild for Malta tcn days before,
Guddenlg after entering the Bay it falling calm, which being soon after succeded
by a fresh breeze from the S. IT, the Squadron was prevented from getting to
Anchorage untill the la$Day of August, when a t Noon They came too, in 6 fatho m Water,
~
in the Road of the Goletta, and about 4 or 434 Miles from the same The Schooner Nautilus, Cap+ Dent, was dispatched, and remaind, all the remainder part of the day, close in with the Goletta, with a Signal flying, indicative of a
wish to communicate with the Consul, yet Mf Davis did not get on board, untill
the 24, a t which time he handed me, for perusal, the detail of his conferrences with
the Bey of Tunis of the 12th 134 14tb & 16th of July, on the subject of our asairs
denoted Q. wherein you will not only discover the most inconsistant, and petulant
observations on the part of the Bey, but also language highly insulting to our
Government, indeed so much so, ae ought, in my humble opinion to have induced
Mr DavL (particularly as he knew the Force we had here a t hand, and being previousIy informed of my intentions) to have taken his leave - This would have
given me an oppertunity to have assumed, entirely a different posture immediately on my arrival, and one which the submission on his part rendered no less
embarrassing to me, than had I persued a different conduct, viewing matters as
they stood, on my amval, would in all probability have gained me the disapprobation of Government. There can be no doubt a t such a crisis, that War was the Interest of the U
States, and had hlr Davis have left the Regency a t a moment, when such violent
threats, and gross Insult was offered, I should have had a fair pretext, for discussing the subject, by the Language of our Cannon, the only language capable of
making an Imperious Barbary Pirate correct his Conduct - After perusing
with due care Mr Davis's detail to the honb!q Secretary of State, as before mentioned, he observed in presence of Coll Lear (from whom in every &air of magnitude, I have never failed to Consult) that the most certain means of securing the
Friendship of the Beg wouki be, for our Goverment a t once to consent t o pay him
Tribute, and that by keeping three or four years in arrears, in our payments,
We should always have security for the maintenance of Peace - Here I nill
make no comment, as such language to a Spirited Goverment like that of the U
States, speaks for its self, further than to observe, that untill the day of my Death,
I shall lament, that our &airs were now a t a point which required decisive measures, .yet nevertheless, i t required the authority of Goverment, to authorise my
drawlng the Sword of the Nation, in defence of its honor and Interest, a t a moment
when I knew our force was suficient (in Ten Days) to have made him call for
Mercy on his bended Knees, however not being willing to commit any rash act,
however sure of success, I considered it my duty, to obtain the best possible advice on the measures most proper to pursue, and in Consequence made the Signal
for all the Senior Commanders to repair on board the Constitution, where a Council of War (at which Coll L a r was present) was held, the result of which, determined me to write the Bey and Bfr Davis the accompanying letters designated
B & D, and to which on the 4th I received the letter marked R S, here you piill
observe the Bey has changed his tone, altho you nill at the same time perceive,
that his petulant and perverse spirit has not yet foresaken him - After reading
and duly considering the contents of his letter, resolving still not to commit any
act which my Country might disspprove, I again assembied a Council of War
(at which Coll Lesr as before was present) and by the unanimous opinion of all,
wrote Mr Davia letter S, and on the 5'4 directed Cap+ Decatur of the Frigate
Congre~sb re air to Tunis, for reasons such as you will discover in letter X.
On the 7th gap$ Decatur, and Mr Davis returnd again to the Conslilldion, Mr
Davis bringing with him letter 3 E Y-But owing to the Bey's informing & f ~
Davis, that he would not receive Cap' Decatur, in the capacity aqsignd him, by
me Capt Decatur in a Spirited manner, refused visiting him on any other terms,
and in consequence returned on board again. This step (Cap: Decatur's returning
without waiting on the Bey) produced in one hour after hls departure, a letter
from the Bey to Coll Lear, e x p d v e of his alarm, a Copy of which you will re-

262

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1805 TO 1807

ceive denoted F. This Letter was sent express, and received, before Capt Decatur
got on board, altho i t wss written one hour after he embarked On the 85P Mr Davis debarked, for Tunis again, with Instructions N, and a
letter from Coll Lear to the Bey; On the 9th Augr Mr Eavis returned on board
again, accompanyed by his Secretary and Drogerman, (bringing with him his
Baggage) and informed me that the Bey would not give the Guarantee in the
manner required, and (the Bey) saying that he could not consent, to the English,
and French Consuls being present, that his Seal was sufficient - It was now that
I saw, our situation was such, as to require the most decisive measures, a t least to
a certain extent, and this I was enabled to express, by a Brig (whose Colours I
could not distinguish, but believe they were Rigutian) that got under weigh,
which I fired two Shot at, conceiving a t the time, that she had been order'd to
get under Sail, in order to prove whether I would verify my last declaration, of
which MI Davis was the medium of Conveyance, and which produed the cessation
of his Functions denoted N. I now ordered the Nautilus Capt Dent, to get underweigh, and lay off the entrance of the Bay, and to board all Ves,ssels, going out,
and if they belonged to Tunis, and were armed i n any shape, to send them into
Port again, and board all Vessels coming in, and if belongin to Tunis, to ascertain
whether they had committed any depredations on our 8ommeme, previous t o
suffering them to pass, and a t any rate, if Tunetian Cruizers, to obkge the111 to
return into this Port.
On the Morning of the lo* of August the Vizen Cap* Cox, and Enterprize Cap*
Robinson was directed to get underweigh, and cruise a t the entrance of the Bay,
under the same orders, which Cap* Dent had received the preceeding day - At
Noon, and about two hours after the sailing of the two latter Vessela, the Bey
sent by express, letter L, directed to Col! Lear, and by which you wiU discover
the panic that has taken possession of his Royal B r e a s t
On the 11th Coll Lear, and my self both wrote the Bey letters, E & W - and
on the 12'P Col! Lear, accompanied by M? Cruize, (Chaplain of the Constellation)
as Interpreter, debarked for Tunis, on the 13'b received a letter from Col! Lear,
informing me, that he had, had an interview with the Bey, and that the succeeding
Morning was appointed by him to discuss, and arrange all matters of complaint,
altho a t the same time the Bey still appears from his reception of Coll Lear to
feel something of his former disposition to prevaricate.
On the 14tP a t 3 PM. discovered the Vizen coming round Cape Carthage, in
chese of a Galley under Moorish Colours, a t % past 3 P. M. the chase refusing to
heave too for the Vizen, the signal to the Essex (she being the nearest Ship in
Shore) was made to fire a t her, however this did not prevent her pursuing her
course, and I was prevented from taking more effective means, as I conceived
that a further attempt, would bear the appearance of Wencive, rather than
defencive measures. However thus far I felt myself authorised to go, not only
from the nature of the situation, in which I was placed, but from the peculiar
situation, in which the honor of my Countrys Flag was a t this moment pending.
as can be sufficiently elucidated, by the correspondence between myself and the
Bey, and his communications to Mr Davis, as stated in the latter Gentlemans
communications to m e On the 15tP August a t half past 2 PM, Coll Lear returned on board again, and
by whom, I received from the Bey letter Y. and being informed by Coll Lear,
that every thing was in a fair way, for an honorable adjustment on our part,
I was induced immediately to call in all Cruizers, and suspend even the defensive
measures, which had thus far brought our affairs to a ha py issue
On the 16tP wrote the Bey letter G. On the 18th Coll f e a r debarked again for
Tunis in Company with Mr Dodge, Surgeon of the Constitution, as Charge dlAffaires to the U States of America in the place of George Davis &qr - For the
reaeons why Mr Davis was not returned, as Charge d'mair again to Tunis, I beg
leave to refer you to Coll Lears Communications to the H o n b l ~the Secretz of State.
MI Davis express'd a desire to return to the U States, and the Bey signified, that
he did not wish him to be left, in Charge of our affairs, saying that it might be
the cause of new difficulties, therefore as the Bey neither wish'd to receive, nor
M? Davia to return, I was induced to appoint Doctr Dodge in his stead, untill the
President may think proper to appoint some other Person - My reasons for
appointing this Gentleman in preference, was, because his services could be better
dispenced with, in the Squadron, than those of any other Pcrson, of the same
qualifications, that I had a personal knowledge of; Doct? Dodge is a man of good
aense, amiable in his disposition, and his integrity, the most unquestionable,
however I presume, he does not expect to hold this situation, any longer than
another Person can be appointed, and sent, to supercede him.

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

263

On the 19Q [August] procured a Tiskura, on permit, from the Be to procure
Water for the Squadron, a t Port Farina, and sent the Congress, &&en, ViZen,
Entcrprize and Nautiltcs, there for that purpose
On the 224 Coll Lear in company with Doctr Dodge, returned on board the
Constitution, after the Doctr' having been presented to the Bey as Charge
d' Affaires.
On the 24th they returned to Tunis again, accompanied by some Officers from
the Squadron.
On the 27th the Tunetian Embassador Solyman Mella Melly, made me a visit,
accompanied by Coll Lear. Saluted him with 11 Guns, and Manned the Yards
$ 9 , after taking a turn through the Ship, and making his remarks, the particulars
of which I did not understand, he was accompanied by Coll Lear, t o the Congress,
(on board of which Ship, he is to Embark for America) where he again was saluted,
as on board the Constitution, after spending one hour on board the Congress, he
returnd to the Constitution; Dined, and in the afternoon debarked for Tunis - in
Company with Col! Lear and Cap$ Decatur.
On this day ( l r t Sepr) the Embaasador and suit, have embarked on board the
Congreclo t o pursue his voyage, and as she sails to morrow for the U. States, I must
beg leave for the present, to refer you to Captain Decatur for certain items. And
to Coll Lear's dispatches t o the Honblq the Secretary of State for further general
informationAfter having detaild to you, the most material events and their effects since
the departure of the Squadron from Syracuse. I now do my self the honor to
offer with brevity - an exposition of my motives, to justify every part of my proceedings - I t has appeard to me, for upwards of two Years - and ever since,
I have had an oppertunity to jorm a Correct knowledge of our relalive situation caith
Tunis, that the moment had arrived, when decisive measures on our part, were
absolutely necessary, and that such alone could prevent a War, with that Regency.
Those measures have been taken, (and I will add justified by the Beys, unwarrantable conduct, not only before, but since the arrival of the Squadron in this Bay)
under a conviction that whatever might be the result, that the U States would
be benifitted; as I felt sensible that the Force, I had the honor of commanding,
not only from its number of Guns, but the high discipline, Valor and enthusiastic
zeal that prevailed throughout, was such, as to insure success against a far more
formidable Enemy than the Bey of Tunis - The result is now known, and altho we
seperately have gained nothing (I mean the Squadron) yet in common with our
Countrymen, with the means afforded us, we have made those impressions on the
mind of the Prince of this Regency, which naturally turns unprovoked menace,
into Fear, and forces him to seek, the recovery of his lost consequence, by appeal
to the Generosity of our Goverment. In fine; I conceive that our Country has
already gained, every thing that she could have promised herself, from the most
successful War As Coll h r ' s powers were seperate from those invested in the Commanding
Officer of the Squadron, it is but just, that I should assert there is (I conceive)
more than Common merit, in all his transactions with this Regency.
U S SHIP Constitution
Tunis Bag l q t Septemter 1806
@tIs be!ieved that t
k perti&t documants herein mentioned are included In this voiume in tbeir pmper

-

ehronolog~calorder.]

[NDA.

Captain's LB, Vol. 3, 1805.1

[l September 18051
To the People of the United States of America, from Eamet Bashaw, son of Ali
Bashaw, Caramenli of Tripoli
To the People of the United States of America.
It is known to the whole world that the reigning Bashaw of Tripoli, Jusuf,
obtained the Throne by the Murder of our Father and Elder brother and by my
exile, who came next in succession. Driven by his impious and cruel usurpation,
I took refuge in Egypt where I was kindly received by the Mameluke Beys, who
gave me a distinguished rank in the military service. Reposing in the security of
peace, I had ceased to repine for the loss of my Throne, and regretted only the lot
of my unhappy Subjects, doomed to the yoke of m cruel and tyranical brother.
It was a t thin Epoch, t,hat the arrival of General $aton gave. me hopes of better
fortune, and tho' I could not tell what were his powers, I trusted to the fmth pf a
r
t people, of whom he was the ostensible representative, and threw myself rnto
arms. We concluded a Treaty a t Alexandria, a copy of which is among the

264

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1806 TO 1807

papers of Commodore Barron in the custody of his Secretary Mr Robert Denison.
This treaty not only stipulates the recovery of the Throne for me, but also includes
several advantageous articles for the United States, for which Genl Eaton will be
my Voucher: ought I then to suppose that the engagements of an American Agent
would be dispuied by his constituent Government? I cannot suppose that a
Gentleman has pledged towards me the honor of his Country on purpose to deceive me!
General Eaton and myself with our joint followers had already advanced 600
Miles into the Kingdom of Tripoli; and a general defection had seized my brothers
army, and all things prepared the protected of America to be hailed Sovereign of
his usurped Throne. At this juncture a peace is concluded in which a Throne,
acquired by rapine & murder, is guaranteed to its usurper, and I the rightful
Sovereign, the friend and ally of America, am left unprovided for. No article
in my favor, no provision for me and my family, and no remuneration for the
advantages I had foregone in trusting to American honor. - I am left in Syracuse
with 30 dependants, on the pittance of two hundred Dollars per Month and no
prospect of future establishment. What with the expences of my retinue &F&V
I, a Sovereign Prince, am now reduced to the pension of 150 Cents per day.
I must here observe that Mr Eaton, whose generosity I cannot sufficiently
praise, has assisted me from his own finances, else hard indeed had been my lot.
When the prevalence of ages has accustomed men to the Government of one,
the right of a Throne enters into the sy[s]tem of human thoughts, and that usage
must have its rights like others.
In this situation I appeal to the Virtue, generosity and candour of the people
and government of America. I trust that a brave and free Nation will interest
itself in behalf of a fallen Prince, who has trusted to its National honor and good
faith. I trust the Government will take my case into consideration and a t least
send me back to Egypt indemnified for those comforts lost by uniting my fortune
to theirs, and I am confident the American People will feel for the misfortunes of
one, who has fought in the united cause of their interest and his own right.
(Signed) AHMETBASFLAW
SONOF ALI BASHAW,
(L. S.)
CABAMALLI
of Ttipdi.
SYEACUSE
la*
Septr 1806.
[NA. Sen. 9B-B6, Pres. Message, Jan. 1806.1
To Lieutenant Samuel Evans, U. 6. Navy, U. 6. Schooner Nautilus. from Captain
John Rodgers, U. S. Navy
U S SHIPConstitution
TUNISBAYl e t Sepr 1805
SIR,I have authorised Cap* Campbell of the Essez to furnish bills for the amot
of your disbursements a t Gibraltar and in Case of accident after leaving Gibraltar,
you are authorised t o Draw on Messr J M~Kenzie& A Glennie of London for
what money you may require for the use of the Nautilus, taking care to express in
the bills the purposes for which they are drawn [LC. JRP, Letters & Orders, Book A, 1804-1805.1
Extract from journal of U. S. Frigate Constilulion. Captain John Rodgers, U. S. Navy,
commanding, Sunday, 1 September 1806
[Tunis Bay] At 4 [P. M.] the Essez came in
At 11 [A. M.] Colonel Lear came on board from Tunis accompanied by the
Tunician Ambaaador who we Saluted with 11 Guns
[USNA.]
To Secretary of State from Tobias Lear, U. 8. Consul General, Algiers
11
ON BOARD THE U. S. Ship Constitution
T U N IBAY
~ Septr 8, 1806
SIR On the 7th of July I had the honor to receive your respected letter of the 20tb
of April, by which the U S Frigate John Adam; by which I find that the instructions given to me dated June 6th 1804, were to be still followed, as nothing in the
state or prospect of things subsequent thereto, made a change necesssry. - I
have accordingly pursued the same, agreeably to the oircumatanw under whioh
Nq

-

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS
they were brought into operation; and I hope my Conduct will meet the approbstion of the Resident I claim for myself no superior merit for the highly favourable, and indeed
unexpectedmanner in which our affairs have been settled with this Regency. The moment was peculiarly happy for us, and the judicious and decided measures
taken by Commodore Rodgers made so powerfull an impression on the mind of the
Bashaw, that the negotiation afterwards became easy and unembarassed. I had the honor of addressing you on the 5tP of July, by the U. S. Ship Presidmt,
and now forward du licate of that dispatch, with its enclosures. ON TEE 13th OF &LY we left Syracuse, and proceeded to Malta, with dl the
Vessels of war and Gun Boats, where we arrived on the 15tP After taking in the
necessary supplies for the Squadron, the Commodore sailed, on the 22d for Tunis,
as I mentioned in my last was his intention: - He had a tedious snsage of
9 days to this place, owing to calms and head winds, in which %he g u n Boats
(altho' the most excellent Vessels of their kind in the world) could make but little
progress. On the first of August Mr Davis came off on board the Constitution,
and shewed to the Commodore and myself, the Copy of a letter which he had
Written to the Honorable the Secretary of State, detailing the interviews he had
had with the Bey on the 12'P l3'P 14* & 16'4 of July, in which the Bey had reeatedly threatened our Country with immediate War, as you will see by Mr
avis's letter, or the Copy enclosed. He also informed us of his determination to
have gone to Malta or Syracuse, to have had a conferrence with the Commodore &
myself - After some conversation with Mr D. on the subject of our affairs here,
I asked him what he considered would be the best means of securing the Peace of
this Regency on solid grounds; he answered that he conceiv'd it would be best to
give them an Annuity of 8 or 10,000 dollars and keep them two or three years in
Arrears, the fear of losing which would prevent their making War upon us.Upon my expressing some surprize a t such a proposal, and saying that if we
intended doing this it would have been sufficient to have sent a single Vessel for
the purpose; he added that in his opinion we should either do this; or keep always
a force in this Sea sufficient to prevent any evil from a sudden attack. I assured
him I was certain our Government would never leave this Sea without a proper
force to guard our Commerce; while we should have any [of] it; and that we should
never again agree to pay a tribute for peace with any Nation. In consequence of these declarations and hostile disposition of the Bey, as
communicated by Mr Davis the Commodore assured him, that he should feel it his
duty to take measures to prevent has [sic]carrying them into effect, by preventing
his Cruizers now in port, from going to sea, and those which were out, from committing any depredations on our Commerce; and even blockade his port, if
necessary to reduce if him to Reason.Mr Davis declared, that if the Commodore made such communication of his
determination to the Bey he would pledge himself that the Bey would cut down
the Flag staff and declare War in twelve hours. - The Commodore assured
him he should write to that effect, as he conceived that the present state of things
made it necessary for him to come to a decision without delay. - Accordingly
he wrole to the Bey, recapitulating the threats he had made, and the hostile
disposition he had discovered towards the U. S. as stated by MI Davis; and while
he expressed an ernest desire to preserve peace, and restore a good understanding
between the two Nations; yet, if he did not receive from the Bey within 36 hours
assurances of his pacific and friendly disposition, he should feel it his duty t o
Commence defensive & 05ensive measures against his Regency.At the same time I wrote a Letter to the Bey, N? [space] and enclosed a Copy
of the Presidents letter to him, in my hands.ON THE 3rd OF AUGUST MI Davis wrote to the Commodore, stating that i t
would not be practicable to obtain an Answer from the Bey within the 36 hours,
and probably not untill the 5tC or 6Q inst - A Council of War was called on
board the Constitution, when it was determined to extend the time for receiving
an Answer to noon of the 6Q & MI Davis was accordingly informed thereof.AT 10 A M ON THE 4tb Mr Davis came 05and delivered to the commodore two
letters which he (Mr D) had written to him(he had not received the Commodores
last letter) stating that he had an interview Yesterday with the Bey, and delivered
the Commodores letter of the 2* to him. - The Bey said that as the time did
not admit of his wifing an answer to the Commodore, Mr Davis might tell him,
by word of mouth, that it was his determination to adhere t o the letter and
Spirit of our treat with him, and that he would not make war upon the U. States,
untill be should gave h a r d from the President on the Subject of his VeaseIs
captured and detained; and added, m a thfeatn~ngand insulting manner, that if
the Commodore should ittop one Vessel of hla; or fire a mgle ahot; or do any other

6 .

266

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1806 TO 1807

act which could be considered hostile, he would immediately declare war against
the U. States. A Corlncil of war was again called, and it was the opinion of the Commsnder~,
as well as of myself, who was present a t this & the proceeding consultation, that
the Commodore should demand, in writing from the Bey, a declaration that he
would not make war, nor commit any act of hostility against the U. States, so
long as we should adhere to the Treaty now existing, nor until he should be
denied reparation or indemnification for injuries or Iosses he may have sustained
from us, after he should have made his reclaimation agreeably to the Treaty
existing between us; and, ss the Bey had according to Mr Davis's ststernent,
called before him two Consub to hear his protest ages the United States and the
Commodore, that this declaration should be made, in like manner, in presence
of two Consuls. Should the Bey refuse t o give such a declaration in writing, it
would be concluded that he did not intend to adhere t o his uerbal declaration,
and that the Commodore would be justified in taking measures to prevent his
Cruisers from going to Serr, and secure our commerce effectually against any
depredation. M? Davis had always positively declared that the Bey would never receive
me as a person authorized t o do business with him, and his letters both before
and after my arrival in this Bay were pointed to that effect. I had, however
(as I had the honor to inform you in my Isst) very little doubt of his receiving
me in a proper manner, when he should be justly informed of the Character in
which the President had ordered me to present myself to him. ox THE 5th OF AUGUST the Commodore sent Captain Decatur up to Tunis,
with the form of a declaration to be signed by the Bey; or the substance thereof
in other words. I also wrote to the Bey by Capt. Decatur, siating that as I could not be permitted to meet him on business, agreeably to the Presidents letter, I should
impute all evils which might arise from this circumstance to their proper cause. ON TEE 7tb [AuGueT) Capt. Decatur returned from Tunis, in con1 any with
Mr Davis. Capt. D. had not seen the Beg, as lie was informed by $I
Davis,
?
that they Bey refused to have any communication with him, on the Subject
for which he was sent. - Just before they came on board, a boat reached the
Ship from the Goletta, bringing two letters from the Bey to me, which will be
found in the Packet marked, [space] saying thac he had not before understood
the nature of my Mission, that he was willing to see me on the Subject of our
affairs and inviting me strongly to come to Bardo. Mr Davis brought a Copy
of one of these letters, and also a letter from the Bey t o the Commodore. Mr
Davis said that he yesterday presented to the Bey Commodore Rodger's demand
of a guarantee to be given, for the preservation of the peace, which irritated the
Bey exceedingly and he told Mr D that he would take out his eyes if he peraiated i n
ofering it &c* &"r &"* h". The Bey says nothing on that Subject in his letters
either t o the Commodore or myself. Mr Davis reports that great disorder and
consternation prevails a t Tunis - KO business done. - the Bey appearing like
a Madman &c+
ON THE s*P OF AUGUST Mr Davis returned to Tunis with a letter from me to
the Bey (copy in packet) and one from the Commodore to himself, directing
h i , to present to the Bey, without delay, the form of the assurance which was
required from him for preserving the peace &c* and saying that no longer time
than to mOROW noon would be allowed for the Bey to decide on it; and if not
then that he (Mr D) would come off to the Constitution by 4. P. A3 prepared to
leave the Regency; as he was determined, if the Bey should persist in refusing
to give the assurance required, to carry into execution his promise of preventing
the departure of his Cruizers, and of examining every vessel going i n or out of
his ports to guard against any Clandestine attempts to annoy our Commerce;
and Mr Davis having declared in the most solemn manner that these measures
would produce an immediate declaration of war on the part of the Bey, the
Commodore did not think i t would be prudent for him to remain in the power
of the Bey; notwithstanding Mr Davis had told the Commodore $ myself that
let the issue of the present differences be what it might, war or peace, he would
continue in Tunis.
IN THE AmEBNOoN OF THE 9 4 (AUOUSTI Mr Davis came on board the
Comtitulion, with his Baggage, Secretary & the Drogerman. He reported that
the Bey would not give the Guarantee required by the Commodore before two
s
and in the mod
Consuls; but thst he would give the same thing under h ~ Seal,
formal manner, without the witnesses, if Mr Davis would wait till to m o m w
morning, which from the Commodores orders he did not think h i m a wsrranted
an so doing. - Goon after Mr Davis came on board, a Merchant Veaeel got

-

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS
under wag a t the Goletta to go out, when she came within Gun Shot, the Commodore ordered a Shot to be fired a t ber to bring her too for Examination, the
first shot not being regarded, a m o n d was fired, upon which she immediately
put about and went up to the Goletta again t o anchor.
ON TEE lo* [AUGUST]I received a very lengthy letter from the Bey (in Packet
msrked) disavowing hi threats - giving the most solemn assurance of his
determination to keep the peace, and promising t o send an Ambassadore to the
U. States, to arrange, and settle all differences, and give evidences of his friendly
disposition; a t the same time engaging me, in the most earnest manner, t o come
on shore, and settle all points of immediate difference.
I n consequence of thls letter, which was deemed by the Commodore & mywlf
sufficiently expressive of his earnest wish and since desire to maintain the peace,
I wrote to the Bey that I would go on shore the day after to morrow to confer
with him. ON THE 1 x Q [AUGUST] Mr Davis came on Boerd the Constitution from the ConsteUation, where he had taken up hk quarters, when I shewed him the letter I had
received from the Bey, informed him that I waa to go on shore to morrow, and
invited him to accompany me - He expressed some surprize $ resentment againsl
the Bey. on reading the Letter, and said he should not go on shore again, and
never wished to put his foot in the Regency from this time .ON THE 12"Q[AUQUBT] I went on Shore accompanied by Mr [space] Chaplin of the
Conste6lulation, who understood & spoke the Italian lsnguage perfectly, and whom I
afterwards found very useful in the Course of our Negociations. - At the Golet& met the the Sapatapa, whom I requested to send a Messenger to inform the
Bey of my being On Shore, and ready to confer with him a t any time he might
appoint Proceeded to Tunis, from nhence I sent the Dro erman to Bardo with
the like message. On his return he informed me that the Bey had appointed to
morrow morning a t 7. O'clock to give me an Audience. - I n the evening I received a Visit from all the Consuls residing in Tunis. AT 7 oclk A M, OF THE 13tb [AUQUBT] 1 Kent to Bardo where I was immediately
introduced to the Bey in his private Audience room. my reception was cordial
& flattering I delivered him the Presidents letter, which he received with great
respect, and said that the Copy which J sent to him had been translated, and he
knew its contents - After taking Coffee, he ordered all persons to retire excepting his first Secretary - Hadge Unis Ben Unis, one old man, and his Christian
Secretary - He wished to know on what points 1 wished first to enter. - I recapitulated to him his threats of making war upon us a t different times as communicated by hll: Davis, and that in consequence thereof, the Commodore had come
here and taken the messures which he knew of, to avert or
d against that evil.Having a Copy of M? Davis's letter to the Secretary of %e
of the 18'4 of July
detailing his several interviews with the Bey in which he had threatned War, I
recapitualted them in order. First, that he had d d he would make war upon Us in consequence of his
Cruizer and her two prizes having been taken, without asking a question about
restitution, had not the situation of his Country forbid it. - To this he replied
by askin me If I thou h t him a wise man, or a fool? I told him the world gave
hun the Eharacter of a k i s e prmce. - Well, says he, if I am not a fool, do you
think I would have made such a decleration of the distressed situation of my
Country, to the Representative of a Nation with whom I may expect to be a t
War? - 1 told him he knew best what he had said; and asked him if the words
mentioned by Mr Davis a s hi were true, in effect or not. - He replied, fhat it
w a g not true - he had newer expressed hirnse2f in that manner, or to fhat effecl.
Secondly That he (the Bey) had declared to Mr Davis, that if the Commodore
came into this Bay, with his Squadron, he would declare lTTar against the U.
States.
He answered, that he had told our Charge d'aeaires, that if the Commodore csme here with his Squadron he should consider it as a declaration of War
on our part; as he could not conceive why we should come here with such a force,
if our intentions were pacific; but that he had never said that he would declare
War in that event. Thirdly: That he 1-d d h d the Spanish and Dutch Consuis to hear him pmtest,
that if the Government of the U. States did not pay him for llis Cruizers and her
two prizes, and make indemnification for taking and detaining the same, and
him satisfaction for the insults offered him by the Commodors, he would d e c r z
war a
the U. Gtates. - The Bey answered - On that occasion there was
only t i e Dutch Consul present. Ha was a t Bardo and was called into the Hall,
to hear him my that if he rwe forced into a War with the U. States he would never
make peace wlth them as long as he lived. He desired me, (as this waa a point

-

-

268

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1806 TO 1807

on which there might be Witnesses) to ask the Dutch Consul, if this was not the
caae, and the Bpaniah Consul, if he was there. On the Subject of blockaded ports, we had much conversation. - The Bey
saying that Altho' England was a t war with France; yet his Veesels were permitted
to enter the ports of those nations; and also, by them, permitted to enter the
English Ports. I explained to him the nature of a Blockade, such as ours of
Tripoli. - He either did not; or pretended not to understand it. - However,
after some conversation with Hadge Unis, in Turkish, he appeared to have i t
ex lained. k e acknowledged that after the Commodore had received the information from
Mr Davis, as before stated, he was perfectly right to take the measures he had done;
but that the information was groundless. On the subject of sending an Ambassador to the U. States, he said he should
rather wish to have all matters settled now, which would render that measure unnecessary. But 1told him the Commodore could not undertake to restore his
Vessels, even were he inclined so to do, without becoming personally responsible
for them.
We had some conversation respecting the changing certain articles in our Treaty,
which bore hard upon us - He observed that he conceived our Treaty placed us
upon the same round as other Christian Nations stood with h h ; and that the
alteration of a t r e a t y must be by the mutual consent of the parties - This
f granted;but assured him we did not stand on the same footing as other Nations.He said he wouId consider the Subject; but gave no assurance that he would make
any change.
With respect to demands upon the U. States for presents, or payments in any
Shape, he declared he had none. He sclinowledged that he had asked for a Frigate;
but he had only made the request, as from one friend to another; which, if not
convenient or agreeable to grant, should never produce any difference, and as we
did not think proper to give him one, he had never made war or been disgusted in
consequence thereof. - We had made him an ofler of 8 or 10,000dollars annually
in Cash; but he had not thought proper to accept it, which ought not to be a Subject of difFerence between our Nations. After a conversation of more than five hours, which was supported on his part
with much good sense & shrewdness, and great, pleasantness, I took my leave,
promising to wait upon him again to morrow morns a t 7 O'clock to finlsh our
business.
ON THE 14'4 [AUGUST]I went to Bardo a t 7 Oclock agreeably to appointment. - After taking Coffee, the Bey observed that we had yesterday conversed fully on all points between us, and had time to reffect on the Subject, which
was the mode he liked t o do business - After some general conversation, he
asked what I had determined upon; or what I expected him to do. I told him I
expected he would write a ietter to the Commodore, giving him the fullest assurances of his determination to preserve the peace according to the Treaty between
our Nations; and informin him of his intention to send an Ambassador to the U.
States to lay before the +resident his requisition for restoration of his Cruizer
and her two prizes; and to make all arrangeme which might prove mutually beneficial to the parties. This he promised to do this evening or to morrow mornin6 I assured him his
Ambassador would be accomodated in the Frigate accordrng to his rank; and
would be received in the U. States with all the respect and attention due to his
Character. He said the Ambassador would be ready to embark in 15or 20 days. We then entered into the Subject of the Treaty. - I told him that as it now
stood we could have no commercial intercourse with his Regency, as the duties we
should have to pay (being the same as were paid in the Ti. States) were 3 or 4 times
more than were paid here by the English or French, and unless we were put upon
the aame footing with those nations, we could never come in competition with them.
I pointed out the advantages which would accrue to him from a commercial intercourse with ns; besides i t fixing our friendship on a more secure basis. He listened with great attention, and conversed on the Subject wlth his Minister &
Hadge Unis who both appeared to advocate my proposition. The bey then observed, that he had thought we were, by our Treaty, placed upon same footlng, as
i t respects commerce, as the French and English. I assured him he was m i 5
taken. He sent for his Treaty with G. B. and the U. 6. and u on examination
found I was right, as the English only pay 3 per cent duty.
I%then observed
that it was his intention that we should be placed upon the footin of the most
favored nations in this point. - I told him I would put in writing t e alterations
or addittions which we wished in our treaty, and submit i t to him; that it muat be
a matter of mutual consent, and both parties must find their interest in it.

-

-

B

-

WABS WITH BARBARY POWERS

269

The Bey asked me if a Charge dJa$aires would not be placed here. I told him
undoubtedly, and observed if MI Davis wished to return again, he would certainly be sent - The Bey replied that he had rather have some other person; for
sltho' he would not accuse Mr Davis of wilful or intentional misrepresentation; he
might have mistaken his expressions; or he might have forgotton some part of the
Conversation between the time of its taken(g) place & committing i t t o writing;
Yet after what had happened, he could not suppose there would be that Cordiality
existing between them which was so desirable for both parties, and he should prefer some other person. After leaving the Bey. the Prime Miniater sent for me, with whom, I found
Hadge Unis. w e had a iong conversstion on the several points which .had been
discussed by the Bey and myself this and the preceeding day, and they appeared
cordially disposed to promote the object of altering the treaty: On their Assurances however, I place but little dependence. ON THE 15th [AUGUST] I return'd on board the Constitution,&on the 16th I communicated to M: Davis, who had come on board the same Ship, all that had pass'd in
my two interviews with the Bey. - The Commodore asked Mr Davis if it was his
wish to return again to Tunis as Charge d'affaires; because, if it was, he would send
him back again, in a proper manner, notwithstanding what the Bey had said; unless the Bey shou'd give some very strong and substantial reasons for not receiving him. - Mr Davis answer'd, that it was not his wish to go back to Tunis; b u t
t o return to the U. States, as he conceived that the respect due to himself, after
what had pass'd, made i t proper for him to return home and lay his case before the
Government, when he expected to.be sent back again with marks of approbation.He urged very strongly the propnety & necessity there was of Acting immediably
upon the information he had given of the Bey's threats; notwithstanding the Bey
had denied them, and given the most pointed and unequivocal assurances of the
reverse. - I assured him that I did not doubt but the Bey had told him either
the Very words which he had written, or to the Amount of them, and I was also
confident that the Government wou'd not disbelieve him; P e t when i t came to
the point of Acting, the written & solemn assurances of the Bey, & his revoking,
or disavowing such language, must have its weight.
As Mr Davis had declined returning to Tunis under any circumstances, the
Commodore appointed DFJames Dodge, Surgeon of this Ship, to take charge of
our Maires here, untill the pleasure of the President shou'd be made known thereon
ow THE 18th [AUGUST]
I went to Tunis with Dr Dodge to present him t o the
Bey as Charge d'Affairs. - On the 2 1 s t went to Bardo & introduced Ds Dodge,
who was received, in form, rrs the Representative of our Kation.
The Bey
inform'd me that he had instructed his Prime Minister to confer with me on the
subject of making alterations in our Treaty. - After our Audience, we waited
upon the Sapatapa, and immediately enter'd upon the discussion of the several
points which we wish'd to have alter'd. - He a t once recapitulated them, and
said they had long known that they were unfavorable to us, & expected that m-e
shou'd have long befare endeavour'd to get them changed. I told him I knetc application had been made for that purpose but not eiTected. After a full conversation on the business, I promised to write him this day or tomorrow, state our
wishes, and leave it for him to answer me in the same way.
ON THE 2Zn4 [AUGUST]
I return'd on board the Comiilution, where 1 remain'd
'till the 24th when I went again to Tunis with Dr Dodge. and a number of the
Officers of the Squadron; to partake of an Entertainment provided for us at the
Gardens of the Bey, a little beyond Bardo. We met uith every mark of respect
& attention, and found our Entertainment prepared in an Elegant stib. - After
Dinner we met the Bey on a plane near Bardo, where I introduced the Officers to
him &a+
ON THS 30%OF AUGUST had my audience of leave of the Bey, when I presented
him with an Ele ant Watch set with Brilliants - I gave also a watch similar, but
inferior, to the fapatapa; and to the First Turkish, & first Christian Secretaries
each, an enammeled Snuff box ornamented with Brilliants. The custom of the
Country makes i t unavoidable t o give presents on such an Occasion; and I reserved
them to the I& day of My bein here, that they might not be considered as given
with a View of making favorab e impressions for our obtabiig any points with
them which we wished to carry.
I this day received a letter from the Prime Minister on the Subject of certain
Articles in Our Treaty, which you will find in the Packet Marked A. The two
most important points are granted, and the other two left t o be discussed & settled
by the Ambassador sent to the U. States. ON THP l a t OF SEPTEMBEB I came on board this Ship with Sidi Soliman Mellamella, the Ambassador, Accompanied by several of the first Officers of the

-

-

-

f

,

-

270

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1805 TO 1807

Regency-The wind blowing very freeh, obliged the Ambassador and the persons
accompanying him, to remain on board all night, The Next Morning the Ambassador went on board the U. S. Ship Congress, Cap Decatur, prepared to carry
him to the U. States, & the rest returned to Tunis
Thus, Sir, I have given you a faithful detail of events &fa& aa they have Occurred since our arrival in this Bay, not from memory; but from Notes taken a t
the time when such circumstances occurred; The Documents which accompany
this letter, will g v e a more minute account on some points than are stated here. I shall make no comments on what I have written, as I feel an honest pride in
placing only plain facts before those whom I know will receive them with candor,
and draw from them the proper inferences. - I nil1 just observe, that the irnpression made here by the judicious display of our force, and the prompt and
decided conduct of our Commodore is such as has never before been felt, and has
utterly astonished the foreign representations a t this court. - My path, ae I
before observed, was plain & easy, I had rather to guard against asking too much,
least it should be imputed to an improper advantage after the Moment; and I
avoided'pressing, with impetuosity, those points which were demanded, that they
mi h t see we were just as well as powerful. t h e recent situation of Algiers has been such, as to divert the attention of the
Dey from foreign Nations. - A formidable & threatning insurrection in the
heart of his dominions, a lawless and ungovernable soldiery, n ho have lately committed the most horrid hlassacre's in the City, and kept him in awe, have obliged
him to attend to his personal safety only. His Cruizers are disarmed & dismantled,
from a fear that their Crews might seize his Treasures, and carry i t off, so that we
can have nothing to apprehend from that quarter. - As our bienial present becomes due this hlonth, I shall proceed to Leghorn, in this Ship to make arrangements for it, before I return to Algiers; and indeed the pressure of business which
has been upon me during our Negociation a t Tripoli, & since, a t this place, has
very much injured my health, that I feel it necessary to have a few weeks relaxation, before I enter again into the Scenes of anxious business which always occur,
in these Regencies.
You will pardon my remarking that the salary of two thousand Dollars, will not
allow a Public Character to live in Tunis, in a situation by any Means equal to
his Standing - 5 or 6 years ago i t wou'd answer - Now every Article has
encreas'd more than three fold.- I t is not possible for me to prepare my accounts,
for this opportunity The Month past has been occupied very closely - and a t
this Moment the Congress is detaind solely for my dispatches. I shall not fail to
have them prepared 8: forwarded before I return to Algiers.
To the President I pray you will be pleased to present my grateful respects, and
say, that in all my conduct both here, and a t Tripoli, I have been actuated with a
confident belief, that I was conforming to his wishes and determination to support
the honor & dignity of the U. States, while we convinced Nations of our Justice
and Generosity - And I also pray you will receive the warmest testimony of the
highest respect, and purest attachment,
[NA. SDA.
CL, Tunis, Vol. 2, Part 2, 1803-1806 and Stephen Decatur
Col.]
To Captain Hugh G. Campbell, U. 6. Navy, commanding U. S. 6. b u ,from Captain
John Rodgers, U. 6.Navy
U S SHIPConstitution
Tunis Bay %Q Sepr 1805
SIR I n addition to the Instructions given you on the 18s [31 August 18051 Instant
I have to desire that you will direct the Nautilus to touch a t Algiers. Communicate with our Charge d'mairs a t that place, and in Case he has any thing to
Communicate which i t may be necessary that the Consul General Lear, or myself
should be informed of without delay, ou are in this Case, requested to direct the
Nautdus (after having Completed her Gission to Gibralta[r]) to proceed to Leghorn,
and in Case she should not find me there, nor be informed of my having been
there, after tarrying five days to pursue her Course to Syracuse, with whatever
dispatches she may have [LC. JRP, I, Bk B; May 1805-July 1806.1
To Doctor Benjamin Rush, Philadelphia, Pa., from Secretary of the Bevy
Nav Dspt Sep $4 1806
I have received your favor of the 28th ultq However qualified your son may be he cannot be readmitted into the navy ae

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

271

a Lieutenant without violating a rule of the Department in relation to its OfficewThere are but two stations to which he could consistently be appointed - namely
the station of sailing master or midshipman - If he will accept the appointment
of a Sailing master he shall have the command of a Gun Boat, as I intend that the
Gun Boats hereafter shall be commanded by Officers of that Grade - Or if
he should prefer the appointment of a midshipman he shall have a Warrant I n either case it would be some time before he could expect to be raised t o a
Lieutenancy unless indeed he should achieve some very Brilliant Exploit which
would entitle him to promotion [NDA. GLB. Vol. 8, 1805-1807.1
[2 September 18051
To Captain William Bainbridge, U. 8. Navy, from Captain Edward Preble, U. 6.
Navy
Dr SIR With sincere pleasure I congratulate you on your return to your native
country and restoration to your famil & friends - A few days since your
favour of the 1st Nov? last came to h a n g i t could not but be extremely gratifying, as it sssured me that my exertions to relieve you from Tripoline bondage met
the approbation of yourself & officers.
I beg you to present my respectful compliments & congratulations to M*
Bainbridge & to assure you of the friendship & esteem with which I am $9
PORTLAND
Sepr I&
[LC. EPP, Vol. 16, Aug. 1805-Jan. 1806.1

Extract from journal of U. 6.Rigate Comtifufion.Captain John Rodgers, U. 6. Navy,
commanding, Monday, 2 September 1805
[Tunis Bay]
past 5 [P. M.] the Enterprize and Syren Sai1,d
At 10 Sailed the Argus with all the Gunboats
At 7 the Ambasador left the ship
WSNA.1
To Secretary of the Navy from Captain John Rodgers, U. 8. Navy
U S SHIP Constitution
Tunis Bay Sd September 1805
SIR About an hour after closing mv letter, or diary, of the 1st Instant. I received a visit from the Governor of Port Farina, Minister of Marine High Admiral, Commander in Chief of the Troops, the Beys first Secretary, and two or
three other persons cf Distinction, who Dined, remained on board all Night, and
the next morning about 7 OClock, went on shore, the Commander in Chief of the
Troops excepted, who went on board the Congress, mt>hthe Embassador (Solyman
Mella Melley) his Brother. - T'is unnecessary for me, to repeat to you in what
a very M e r e n t light, these people view us to day, to what they did Two years, or
I may say even two Months ago. And I feel satisfied, that the Impression cannot
be eradicated even by the most powerfull, and artful1 h'ations of Europe. The
Consuls of the different European powers appear much astonished, and some of
them have openly said, that no other Nation, has ever Negotiated with the present Bev, on such honorable terms ss ourselves. The Brigs Argus & Syren with all the Gun Boats, and Sloop Hornet, saild for
Syracuse on the IQ* Instant, the Schooner Enter rim, yesterday for the same place,
to call a t Tripoli in her pmsage, and the Essex, Gzkan, Xautilus, nod Brig Franklin,
this day for Gibraltar, to call a t Algiers in their passage thence Whatever may be the Intentions of Goverment, respecting this Regency.
Permit me Sir to suggest to you, the necessity of their bein communicated as
earl next Spring as possible. If Goverment should not see i t to chastise them
furtier, (which indeed I can't a t present see anv necessity for) permit me to say,
that I think One Frigate, Two Brigs and One Bchooner, will always be sufficient
to secure the necessary reapect, and protection to our Commerce in the Mediterranean.
I beg Sir you will excuse the liberty I have taken, to offer thus freely an Opinion,
on so Important a Subject and a t same time, beg pardon for repeating again, that
the Force, which remains in the Mediterranean is rfectly adequate to chastise
. thin Regency, in the moat complete manner, provigd our Goverment is not yet
eatided. I am much afraid the ConstiiWion will soon require, a new Main Meat,

NQ2

272

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1806 TO 1807

as also her Standing Rigging Fore and Aft, however with care, both may, I con-

ceive, be made to answer, another Twelve Months. The Congress has been detained for Colt Lears Dispatches, Thirt Six hours,
longer than I expected when I closed my letter of the 11%Instant, cowever she
will sail to morrow, and I shall leave this in a few hours, after her, with the Constitution, but having only Eight or Nine Days provisions and Water, I shall be
obtiged to call a t Syracuse, to replenish those articles before I proceede to Leghorn
and Aigiers.During the Thirty two days, the Squadron lay in this Bay, no
accident of any kind happened, neither was there, a single Death, I believe, out
of 2,500 Men, those are equally pleasing and remarkable Circumstances.
[ND.4. Captain's LB, Vol. 3, 1805.1

To Captain Stephen Decatnr, Jr., U. S. Navy, commanding U. S. Frigate Congrus,
from Captain John Bodgers, U. S. Kavy
U S SHIP Constitufion

Tunis Bay 3 4 Sep? 1806
SIR As the Embassador Solyman Mella Melley and suit are now embarked on
board the U S Frigate Congress under pour Command, you are directed to proceed
with a11 practicabie dispatch to the U States,
As I presume its the wish of his
Excellency the President that the Congress should return to Washington in
preference to any other port, I have to desire, that you proceed thence, and into
the Easter Branch, and as early as possible report your arrival to the Honb'v the
Secretary of the n'avy for further orders, - as it may be a matter of importance
that the Embassador, as also the dispatches sent by the Congress, does a m v e a t
the Seat of Goverment, as early as possible I have to request that in Case of head
Winds, after you enter the Chesapeak that you will have both Convoyd thence as
early as possible, and in such manner as your own judgement will best point out
to you P S to Cap$S Decaturs Orders
When i t is intended, you shall Commence the execution of these orders, t,he
Signal will be made for the Congress to weigh [LC. JRP, Letters & Orders, Book A, 1804-1805.1

-

-

(3 September 18051
To the Director General of the Fleet from the Secretary of State and of the Marine,
st. Ildefonso
[TranslationI
SIR, - The minister of the United States, complaining of new injuries and
captures of American vessels by Spanish cruisers, has given information of the
carrying to AlgeZiras of eleven vessels of his nation, under pretext, as he says, of
their carrying English merchandize. The king, being made acquainted with it,
has been pleased to determine that, if there be no other cause for the capture of
these vessels t,han that alleged by the minister, they should be put a t liberty again;
since, according to the 15th article of the treaty with the United States, the
American flag secures the freedom of the merchandizes, although t h y may be enemies'
property. But if the cause of detention be any other, his majesty requires that
they be decided in due course, and with as little deley as possible. I communicate
it to you by the royal order, in order that you may communicate i t to the generais
of the departments of marine, in order that they may make i t known to the
commandants of marine in every district, and to the owners of privateers, informing them that they will be responsible for the injuries they may occasion.
ST. ILDEFONGO,
Sept. 3, 1806.
IState Papers, Public Doc., Vol. V., 1803-1807.1
Extract from journal of U. S. Frigate Com~itufion,Captain John Rodgers, U. 8. Navy,
commanding. Tuesday, S September 1806
p u n i s Bay] At daylight the Essez and Nautilus Sailed in company. with the
brigs Vixen and Franklin on their pmsage down the Mediterranean

IUSNA.1

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS
To Captain Stephen Decatur Jr., U. 8. Navy, commanding U. 8. Frigate Corn,
from Captain John Rodgers, U. 8. Navy
U 8 SHIP C o ~ i t u f i o n
Tunis Bay 4 t b Sepr 1806
SIB I n whatever part of the U States the Embassador may be dise@arked I
have to desire, in case Circumtances should prevent your accompanying h m to
the seat of Goverment, that you send an Officer with him. This is absolutely
necessary to prevent those impositions which are often practised in every Country
on Strangers, particularly on people of his discription, and in his situation[LC. JRP, L Bk B, May 1805-July 1806.1
To Secretary of State from Tobias Lear, U. S. Consul General, Algiers
ON BOARD THE U. S. SHIP Constitution
Tunis Bay Sept? 4'b 1806.
DEARSIR, The bearer of this, Sidi Soliman Mellamella, goes to the U. States,
to present himself before the President, as Ambaasador from His Excellency the
Bey of Tunis; as his Credentials &? will fully shew. - He has been Ambassador
from this Court to Naples and Genoa, appears t,o be a man of correct observation,
and much liberality of sentiment. My public dispatches, which accompany this, will fully detail d l matters here I give this to the Ambassador, by his particular desire, as a personal recommendation.If any proper person can be found in Washin@on, who is acquainted with the
manners & customs of these people, it mould bedes~reablethat such an one shou'd see
that the are accommodated, as much in the Style of their Country, as the W e r ence of &mate & circumstances will permit; as I know they will be very backward in
expressing their wants or wishes, least they
- might
- not accord with our ideas of the
prbpriety-of things
Mq Lear unites with me in everv good & friendlv wish for vour good Ladv &
yourself, and I pray you will be &&red of that kffectionate reg&d & sincere
attachment with which I have the honor to be,
[NA. SDA. CL, Algiers, Vol. 7, Part 11.Jan. 1806-Sept. 1807.1

-

To William Smith, Navy Agent, Charleston, S. C., from Captain Alexander Murray,
U. S. Navy
SEPT?dtb 1806.
SIR I am Instructed by the Secretary of the Navy to call off the bar of Charleston for any further orders he may have to communicate, altho I do not as yet
presume that he hath written to me, yet I Have a desire to receive from you any
communications you may deem Necessary as my Object is to afford Protection
to our commerce within our Jurisdictional limits against the Illegal depredations
of any cruisers that Violate our Commercial System as far as the force I am
Intrust? with can enable me, I have not as et met with anv cruisers since I
left the Chesspeak & shall be on this station l c as far as the Aver St M a v s for
a few weeks to come if not Otherwise direct?, can you favour me with some late
News Papers from time to time or any current news you mill much Oblidge me
& if it is possible for you to procure me a careful man as an Acting Lieutenant
and a t the same time well acquaint* with this coast who is a Seaman and otherwise
well disposed I will gladlv receive him on board in that capasity & give him the
pay and emolument of a 'ilieut
[NDA. A. Murray's LB, 1799-1805.1
Extract from journal of Hezekiah Loomis, Steward, U. S. Navy, in U. S. Rigate
Congrur, Captain Stephen Decatur, Jr., U. S. Navy, commanding, Wednesday, 4
September 1806
(No entries from Aug. 28th to Sept. 4th 1805)
Tunis. Sailed with a fair wind from Tunis Bay today. '
[L. F. Middlebrook. NDA copy.]
Extract from log of U. 8. Brig Hornet. of 18 Guns, Master Commandant Boac
Chauncey, U. S. Navy, commanding, 4 September 1805
[At Baltimore, Md.] The whole of this Day pleasant weather hauld the Brig
round to Mr Prices Wharf and Mood head & Stern with the Mooring Junk and
run out the stream Anchor, took on board 200 pieces of Kentledge and 10 Gun
Carriagw
[NA. NDA origina1,!1805-1810.1

274

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1806 TO 18m

Concerning the British Blockade of the ports of Cadiz, San Lucar and Bevilla,
Spain
6tP of September 1806
His Britannic Majestys Ship Saint George
I have received your Letter by the Flag of Truce, addressed to rear Admiral
S
i
r James Saumarez, and in answer I have the honor to acquaint you, that the
Ports, of Cadiz and San Lucar, including Seville being compleatly blockaded,
no Vessel whatever can be permitted to enter or sail from either.
Signed CH. M. POLE
[NA. SDA. FA, Cadiz, Rej$ster, C37 (C9), Vol. 1.1
Extract from journal of U. S. Frigate Constitution. Captain John Bodgers, U. 8. Navy,
commanding, Thursday, 6 September 1805
At 3 [P.M.] weigh,d and made Sail, the Congress Sailed for America
Latitude Observed 37'48' N.
[USNA.]
To Captain John Bodgers, U. 6. Navy, from Surgeon John Bidgely, U.S. Navy,
appointed U. 8. Charge d'Affaires, Tripoli
TRIPOLIIN BARBARY
6 Sepr 1806
(COPY)
SIB By Lc Porter I was honord by yours of the 30th Ultimo, and have the
pleasure to reply, that our affairs are well. Tho I have not the most distant expectation that this Goverment r i l l ever again make a War with us, yet I shall
be glad to see a Ship of War occasionally here, that in case any misunderstanding
should ensue, it might be conveyd to you, and Coll I'ear, in the speediest, and
surest way L, Porter was requested by the Bashaw to take Badge Mahomed, our old Guard
and friend, from here to Bengazi, but from the want of Provisions $ 9 he found i t
necessary to proceed immediately to Syracuse - It gave me pleasure to hear,
that the Pride of Tunis is humbled, me take them in rotation, Rank is everything
It must be mortifying to some of the Neighbouring European Powers, to see that
the Barbary States have been taught their first lesson of humiliation from the
Western World LIST O F BASHAWS CRUISERS A T SEA

Zebec
Do
I(
Martingaia
66

Barque
Kulangis
Corvette
[NDA. Captain's LB, Vol. 3, 1805.1

of
"
"
"
l'

"
"

8 Guns
12 dQ
6 "
4 "
4

1
4
10

"

"
"

"

To Captain John Bodgers, U. 8. Navy, from John Bidgely, acting as U. S. Chard
d'hffairer, Tripoli
TBIPOLX
IN BARBABY
Seplr 6 t b 1806
SIR, About a fortnight ago a Corvette of 22 Guns belonging to the Grand 8i
nior anchored in this port. - The Bashaw Saluted her, and all the ~ o n s u f e
hoisted their flags. As I knew we had neithertreaty with or Ambassador at the
Ottoman Porte, and as I was officially ignorant of the existence of the Turkish
nation, 1 did not hoist my flag. I have been informed (it came indirectly thro'
the French Commisssrie and consequently I dont put all faith in it) that the Turkish Captain expressed his displeasure a t not being Saluted by the American f@,
and that he threatened to insult the first smerican Merchantman he met. If t h e
is true, I regard i t as the vain empty menance of an impotent Turk. I thought
proper to communicate this to you and Col. Lear, and if my conduct is not approbated, to irlRtruct me in case a similar one occurs.
[LC. JRP, Vol. 2, Series Two, May-Oct. 1805.1

-

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS
Extract from jonmul of U. 6. Prigate ConsIitution. Captain John Bodgers, U. 6. Ravy,
commanding, Sunday, 8 September 1806
y( past 4 [A. M.] Saw the Island of Gom bearing S, E. B S - At 11 shorten,d
Sail and back the main top sail the town of Malta bearing S W 5 W. distsnce
Mile the Commodore went on shore in the Gig. accompanied by Col Lear.
the 454 cutter went on shore with C a p t ~Allen and Mate.

[USNA ]
Extracts from journal of Hidshipman Charles Morris, Jr., U. S. Navy, on board
U. S. Frigate Prwident, Captain James Barron, U. 6. Navy, commanding,Sunday,
6 September 1805
6 [A. M.] discovered a fleet a head Standing to the Eastward
Noon Spoke His Brittannic Majesty's Ship I'anguard of 74 Guns from Jamaica,
bound to En land with a Convoy of 60 Sail of Merchantmen - 6 Weeks out.
Latitude 8bserved 35'31' N.
[Mrs. C. E. Fox original, NDA photostat.]

To Secretary of the Navy from Sailing Master Benjamin Clark Prince, U. S. Buvy
GIBRALTER,Sept 9th 1806 BIR - f am happy to inform you of the safe arival of the U. S. Sloop Traveller,
after a passage of five and Forty Days, and likewise to inform you that I lost
si ht of the Ti. S. Sloop Hanger. Lat 43" and Long? 55'35' West. in a Gale of

&nd from the Southward and Eastward. which cause me to lay two sir and thirty
Hours. since my arival the Consil inform me that he Oayly expects the American
Squadron here and his his advice to me, is for rue to make a amall tarry till I can
get some information Concerning the said Squadron and if not, in the space of
two or three Days 1 then shall proceed to Malta
[NDA.

Officers LB, 1802-1805.1

Extract from journal of U. S. Frigate CoruUiution. Captain John Iiodgers, U. 6. Navy,
commanding, Monday, 9 September 1805

314 past 12 the commodore return,d on board a t 1 [P. M.] the 4tP Cutterreturnd,
run the boats up filled away and Made Sail. At 4 the Island of Malta bore W B S
S Distance 7 leagues
At 8 [A. Rl.] the town of Syracuse bore W N W distance 3 or 4 leagues 314 past
9 shorten,d Sail and came to anchor in the harbour of Syrwuse with the larbq bower
in 5 fathw water, the light house bearing S E 1!2 E Mount Et*naNorth found k y inn here the Argus & Syren brigs, the Hornet sloop. the bomb Ketch and all the

[USNA.]
To Secretary of the Navy from Captain William Bainbridge, U. S. Ravy

ON BOARDOF THE U.STATESFRIGATE
Preddent

Hampton Roads 104 September 1806
SIR, I hsve the honor to inform you that I have arrived this day in the U.
States Shi President, Cap* James Barron.
~ n c l o s e xyou have a list of the ORicers of the late Frigate PAilodeEphia, by which
vou will ~ercievewho have returned to the U. States with me. and tbe distribution
of the Crew
have alsa
those i h a t have remained in the Squadron. 101
amved in the President.

of

-

-

Commodore Rodgers has sent to you in his dispatches the proceedin
Court of Inquiry held on my conduct in the loss of the Frigate Phii&$p&?
permit me, Sir, to request that you will be so obliging as to give them publicity.

276

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1805 TO 1807

As I shall hsve the honor of seeing you very soon after the receipt of this letter,

I shall postpone all particulars.

[Enclosure]

List of the Officers of the U. States' late frigate Philadelphia, designating those
returned in the frigate President and those who hsve remained in the Squadron.
RETURNED IN THE

Jacob Jones
Ben. F. Read.
James ~ i b b o n ,
Daniel T. Patterson
James Biddle
James Renshaw
Wallace Wormeley
William Cutbush
Robert Gamble
Keith Spence,
Jonathan Cowdery,
Nicholas Harwood
W. Anderson,
Richard Stephenson,
George Hodge,
Joseph D o u g h s ,
Minor Fountain,

President

- 24 Lieut.

Midshinman & master's mate
D-Q
Do
DQ
DQ
DQ
DQ

Purser,
Surgeon's Mate
DQ
DQ
Captain's Clk.
Gunner
Boatswain
Sailmaker
Master's mate of the Hold.

10%of Septr 1805
Wq BAINBRIDGE

REMAINING I N THE SQUADRON

David Porter, 1 s t Lieut.; now acting Captain of the U. S. frigate Constitution.
Theodore Hunt, 34 Lt; - first Lt of the Brig Argus
Ben. Smith, 4th Lt.; - 24 Lt of the Constitution
Wq Knight, Sailr Master; - charge of the Brig Franklin.
Bernard hen^, Midshipman; - Sailing Master of the Brig Vizen.
Simon Smith, Midship?; - mid^ of the Constitution
Rich4 B. Jones,
DQ;- Mid? & Master's Mate of the Brig Argus
John Ridgeley, Surgeon; - temporary Consul a t Tripoli.
William Godhy, Carpenter; - Carpenter of the Constitution.
10t Septr 1805
Wq BAINBBIDGE
[MDA. Captain's LB, Vol. 3, 1805.1
To Lieutenant Sybrant Van Schaick, U. 6. Navy, from Master Commandant
Isaac Hull, U. 6. Navy
U, S, BRIGArgus 10'b Septr 1806. [Syrscuse]
SIR, By Authority vested in me by John Rodgers Esqr Commander in Chief
of the United States Squadron in the Mediterranean. - I do hereby appoint
you to the superintendance of the United States Arsenal in this place. - You
will as soon as possible take an exact Account of all the Spars & such other Stores
as may be deposited there belongin to the United States. You will likewise be charged wit% the Six Gun Boats now in the Bason, also
with all the public Stores now deposited in different Magazines in Town the
whole of which as soon as you can get an Account of your own to receipt for to the
Commander afloat. You are to receipt & receive from time to time such Stores as may be sent to
the Yard, givin a receipt for them - But no Stores are to be delivered without
written Orden from the Senior Officer in Port. The Stores belonging to the United States being deposited in so many different
Magazines and where they are liable to be stolen. - I should recommend their
being removed to the Store in the Navy Yard as many as can be conveniently
stowed. - The remainder Stowed into such hagazines as may be thought by
You to be eafest. After you have made these arrangrnenta, you will have the Magazine Numbered
and an Account of what each One contains separate that you may know when
to look for such as may be called for in haete. - All Spars, water Casks, or any
other Stores sent to the Yard for safekee inp;cannot be received Unleas they are
Merked or Branded, with the V-h
g a m e they belong to, and you will be

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS
particularly careful y* the Stores of one Vessel are not delivered for the use of
another without Orders from the Senior Officer in Port as you will be Accountable
for the same.
You are to keep an account of all Stores received & delivered and see that
every Vessel is charged with such Articles as She may be furnished with from
you. For the purpose of assisting you in carrying the foregoing Orders into effect
you will be furnished with a Midshipman & ten Men who as well as Yourself
are to sleep within the Walls of the Arsenal. - A regular Watch is to be kept,
and i t is expected that the Yard will never be left without an Officer. You will from time to time be furnished with provision and such other Stores
as you may want by Mr Dyson on Your requisition being signed by the Senior
Officer in Port. [LC. D. Porter P, Let. 6 Ord., 1805-1808.1

-

To Lieutenant Colonel Commandant Franklin Wharton, U. S. Marine Corps, from
Captain John Hall, U. S. Marine Corps
FRIGATE
PriSident
Hampton Roads lothSeptr 1806
SIR I take the earliest opportunity of informing you of my arrival in America & shoud certainly forward you my returns by Mr Pennison, but expect to see
you nearly as soon as he will I beg leave to inform you that Lt Howard of the Brig Siren & Lt Osborn of
the late Frigate Phila+ are Dassengers on board of the President I have added to my ~e-tachmintEighteen good Musicians which hope you
will be pleased with - Corndm Ro[d]gers & (2019: Lear concluded a Peace with
the Bashaw of Tripoli on the 3d June last paying him a Ransom for the Prisoners
of $60000 God knows what they will sav to it a t the Citv - I bea- "
vou will
make my respects to your Family & the Officers a t Barracks.
[AfCA. LR, 1805.1
Extract from journal of U. S. Frigate Comlitution. Captain John Rodgers, U. S. Navy,
commanding, Tuesday, 10 September 1805
[Syracuse] At 11 [A. hf.] the Brig Syren Sailed for Messina
[USNA.]
#

Extract from journal of Midshipman Charles Moms, Jr., U. S. Navy, on board
U. S. Frigate Presided, Captain James Barron, U. 6. Navy, commanding, Tuesday,
10 September 1806
4 [A. M.]. had 18 fathoms - stood to the Westward 55 took a pilot for Hampton Roads and another for the Potomac on board Same time saw the land bearing W B N.
11. Cape Henry light house was abeam. i t being in,
36'57' N. & 76.4
36.54 N. & 75.48
By D Reckoning
Error of D Reckoning
3'
.16'
[Mrs. C. E. FOXoriginal. KDA photostat.]
Extract from journal of Hezekiah Loomis, Steward, U. S. Navy, in U. S. Frigate
Congress. Captain Stephen Decatur, Jr.. U. S. Navy, commanding, Wednesday,
11 September 1805
This evening came to anchor in Alicant.
[L. F. Middlebrook. NDA copy.]

,

Extract from journal of U. 6.Frigate Comtilution, John Captoin Rodgers, U. S. Navy,
commanding, Wednesday, 11 September 1806
[Syracuse] At 4 [P. M.] Col and M* Lear went on board of Gunboat NQ4 to
sail for Catsnia, soon after She Saild
Fresh breezes and s ually throughout the Night - At 8 Gun boat NQ 4
returnd with Col & ~ & a r in consequence of haveing head winds. At 10 C o l a
M* Lear came on board
[USNA.]

278

NAVAL OPERATI0,NS FROM 1806 TO 1807

T o William Higgina, U. 8. Navy Agent, Halta, from Captain John Bodgers, U. 8.
Raw
U S SHIP Constitution
Syracuse l d September 1806
SIB I n consequence of the representations made to me of the leaky condition of
the Constitutions three prizes a t Malta, I have to request that in case the Tunetian
Consul will give proper Security for their Value, in case of their being Condemned
as lawful prizes to the Captors - that you will have them valued, and delivered to
him. If he will not do this (for the Benifit of all Parties) you are hereby Authorised to sell them, holding the Amount of Sales, in your hands, subject to be paid to
whomsover the same may belong - I shall leave this the day after tomorrow for
Leghorn, from thence I shall go to Algiers & from that return to this place by the
Way of Malta
P C . JRP, L Bk B, May 18O&July 1806.1

To William Higgins, U. 6. Navy Agent, Malta, from Captain John Bodgers,
U. S. Navy
U S SHIP Constitution

Syracuse la* September 1806
SIR The Sloop [lo Guns] Hornet, Lieutr Crane, who hands you this, is sent
to Malta for the purpose of transporting the Bread you have in store, over to
this place - The Squadron is much in want of Winter Cloathing for Seamen &
Marines, & as they cannot be procured here, I have directed Capr Hull (who will
Command during my absence) to furnish you with the necessary requisitions
Counter-signed by himself, which you will be so good as to consider sufficient
Authority for your Complyance with the same Both you and myself will be saved much trouble, as also the service benefitted
by your taking Specific Receipts from the receiving Officer, on the delivery of all
Articles furnished the Gun Boats i n particulat, as it will enable me or the Commanding Officer at any time to settle their Accounts without the presence of their
Commanders I wish much the arrival of a Store Ship, as we are entirely out of the Articles of
Cheese, Butter, hfolasses, Rum, flour & Pease & neither to be got here [LC. JRP, L Bk B, May 1805-July 1806.1

[12 September 18051
Concerning Storeship fIunttus
Rundress J. S ~ N S OMr
N
MINUTESof the Judgment in the High Court of Admiralty of England on the
Hearing of the above Cause on the 12th September 1805.
The Right Honorable Sir William Scott Knight the Judge observed: This is a
Question arising on the british Recapture from the Spaniards of a Veesel laden
with naval and military stores going for Malta and Syracuse - it has been truly
stated that generally neutral Property is not liable t o Salvage on recapture, it is
also true that in the course of the last War the Law was, in consequence of the
frequent rapine of the French altered by the consent of Neutrals themselves, this
was founded on the practice of the French and confirmed in recaptures from
them - Naval Stores destined to a british Port are by Treaty between Spain and
America liable to condemnation, these would therefore be subject to Salvage but
in this Instance in fact not going to Malta consigned to English possession or for
english use, but for the use of an American Squadron then notoriously cruieing
against the common Enemy of Spain and America and every other civilized state,
the Property of the Government not lucrandi causa. What therefore would have
been its Situation in a Spanish Tribunal? I think the preceeding Facts are fully
established in Evidence before this Court and that they would have so been before
the Spanish Courts. I cannot but assent to the principle that great deference L
to be paid to the Declaration of Governments, here is that of the President himself confirmed, I cannot eay confirmed for i t needs no confirmation but eeconded,
by that of the french and english Ministers - It is impoesible to euppoae that
the American Government would wish to deceive and that those stores were for
the we of the british in Violation of the Treat with Spain, its good Faith is too
known, 1 am therefore of Opinoin that L t i t u t i o n would have been due

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

279

from the Justice of the S anish Tribunals and that the british re-Captor is not
entitled to more than the E q e n r m of submitting this Question to the Court which
was not improper. Restitution of the Ship and Cargo Decreed upon payment of the Re-Captora
Expences. [NDA. Mia.LB, Vol. 1, 1806.1
Extract from journal of Hezekiah Loomis, Steward, U. S. Navy, in U. 8, Rigate
Congrus, Captain Stephen Decatnr, Jr., U. 6. Navy, commanding, Thursday, 18
September 1805
[Alicante] At 10 o'clock A. M. the Harbour Master came off and informed us
that we must perform quarantine 11 days. At 3 o'clock P. M. got underway.
[L. F. Middlebrook. NDA copy.]
Extract from journal of U. 8. Frigate Comtilulion. Captain John Rodgers, U. 6. N a v ,
commanding, Thursday, 12 September 1806
S
[F]
At 4 the Schooner Enterprize Sailed, with Col & MR Lear On board
for atania.
[USNA.]
To Midshipman William Lewis, U. 6.Navy from Captain John Rodgers, U. 6. Navy
U S SHIP Comtitution
Syracuse Harbour 13 Sepr 1806
SIR I have to desire that you transfer the Command of the U S Bomb Vengeance,
a t present under your Command to Lieut* Benjamin Smith requiring of & receiving from him all the necessary receipts for your security and Exoneration & giving
to him all the necessary documents & information respecting the mid Bomb
agreeable to the prescribed regulations of the Service [LC. JRP, L Bk B, May 1805-July 1806.1
To Midshipman William Lewis, U. S. Navy from Captain John Bodgers, U.S. Navy
U S SHIP Constitution
Syracuse 13% September 1806
SIR You are hereby directed to join the U S Brig Argus, as one of her LieutQ 8
report your self to her Commander Capt Isaac Hull
[LC. JRP, L Bk B, May 1805-July 1806.1
-

To Midshipman James S. Winbothom, U. S. Navy, from Master Commandant
Isaac Hull, U. S. Navy
ON BOARD THE U. S. BRIGArgus
Syracuse id* Sep( 1806.SIR, I n conse uence of Orders I have this Day received from John Rodgers Eaqr
Commander in 8hief of the United States Squadron in the Mediterranean. I have to direct that immediately on receipt of this you repair on board & take
charge of the two Trabacaloes or Gun Boats belonging to the United States now
Moored in this Harbour for the purpose of making Gtore Vessels of them. You are to see they are kept in good order and in readiness to receive any stores
that are sent to them by Order of the Commandin Officer in Port. - You will
"not receive any Stores in Your charge that are not darked with the Vessel's Name
or Number that they belong to; and be particularly carefull that the Stores Receipted for by you from one boat are not delivered to another without an Order
from me or the Commanding Officer as you will be accountable for the m e . You will see that the Stores that are put under your charge are stowed in such a
manner as to admit of their being ot out a t the shortest notice and those of each
Vessel seperate if necessary. - f o r this purpose you will be furnished with a
Midshipman Three Men & a Boy. You will observe that you and the Midshipman are not to be absent a t the same
time and it ia expected that you will be present a t all times when Stores are coming

280

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1806 TO 1807

on board or delivering from the Boats.- as you will be accountable for the same. You will Indent for such Articles as you may want for cookin for Yourself and
the Men under your command likewise for provisions for One hfonth all of which
will be furnished you by Mr Dyson on the requisitions being regularly signed. You will observe that after having received your provisions you will be accountable for the expenditure.- consequently you will see the Men do not recelve more
than they are allowed by the regulations of the Nav
You are from time to time to make a report of the & L e i you have on board and
of the state of the Boats, that they mag be furnished with such Articles as they
are absalutely in want of.As there will most likely be a large quantity of valuable Stores on board these
boats belonging to the US and put there for their Safe Keeping; and the same
Boats having been lately Robbed of every movable Article.I have to request that you Sleep on board One Boat & the Midshipman attached
to them on board the other that we may not be subject to the like con~plaints
in future. [LC. D. Porter P, Let. & Ord., 1805-1808.1
Extract from journal of U. S. Frigate Gnstitution. Captain John Bodgers, U. S. Bavy,
commanding, Saturday, 14 September 1806
[Syracuse] At 5 the English brig Spider sailed with a convo for Malta.
Light airs and pleasant throughout the nightSailed the
S. sloop Hornet
for Malta.
e
PSNA.]

6.

To James Dodge, acting as U. S. Charge dlAffaires, Tunis, from George Davls
U: S: S: Congress
Gibraltar Bay Sep: 15Q 1806
DEARSIB We anchored in Algiciras Bay yesterday morning; and in this a few
hours since, but are in quarantine, it will o~llybe for a day or two - The Essez
& Constellation are here, The John Adams has not yet arrived - as we have had
no communication with the shore, I can give you but little news A store brig sailed a few days since for Malta, & Ship & Schooner are daily expected with supplies; the President sailed on the 5 t h Ultv for the U: States, Comodore Barrons health, was then infinitely better - two fishing stnacks, are lying
here & by which I send you this line; they are a present from Comodore Preble
to Sir Alex: Ball, uncommonly beautiful vessels - Comodore P: has refused to
accept the appointmmt of Secretary of the Xavy - he is to take a tour through
Europe, by order of the Govt: to visit the different Dock & Navy yards, in order
to collect whatever may be useful to our little Kavy; he justly enjoys the unlimited confidence of his Country, for him there is no party; all the world pay him,
those honors, which he has so gallantly acquired There are 35 sail of English blockading Cadiz - & a Portguese Squadron Cruising in the Gut - the Camp near St: lloka is said to consist of more than 12000
men - and is increasing; it is beleived they nrill make an attempt on Gibraltar every thing is quiet with the Emperor of Morocco P: S: I shall always trouble you with an enclosure [KA. SDA. FA, CL, Tunis, Vol. 2, (7240) 1801-1809.1
Extract from journal of Eezekiah Loomis, Steward, U. S. Navy, in U. S. Frigate
Cowrw, Captain Stephen Decatur, Jr., U. 6. Navy, commanding, Sunday, 16
September 1806
This morning arrived a t the Rock of Gibraltar went over to Algesiras and came
t o anchor. The Essex, Vixen, and Nautilus arrived the evening before.
[L. F. Middlebrook. NDA copy.]
To President Thomas Jefferson from Secretary of the Bavy
Nav D E P Septr
~
16, 1806. THE PRESIDENT
- I t would seem from the tenour of the Communications
from our Ministers a t Madrid that they were mortsed not only from their failure
in the negotiation, but from the manner of its being conducted on the part of

WARS WITH BARBRRY POWERS
Spain. Its unfortunate termination, be the motives of Spain what they may, has
brought us to a Crisis that demands great Consideration. That Nation, throughout the whole of her recent deportment in relation to the U. States, has evidently
been presuming much upon our strong predilection, for Peace and upon our not
possessing the means of materially annoying her in War either upon land or upon
water
After what we have experienced, we cannot, without stooping too much, send
mother Envoy Extraordinary, or instruct our Minister Resident again to make
advances towards renewing the Negotiation. If we could allow ourselves to do
either, I see no ground for believing that another Gentleman x-ould, effed what
Munroe and Pinkney were not able to do.
If there should hereafter exist on the part of Spain any disposition to adjust
their differences with us, advances will be made by her. I n exciting such a disposition on the part of Spain her fear, as I understand her character, will be the
most powerful Agent. I would therefore, be for adopting measures calculated
as well to work upon her apprehensions as to protect, in case of war, our Territories and our Commerce. The secure protection of New Orleans ought to be our first Object. That
place in its present weak defenceless condition could easily be taken. And i t
could not be easily retaken by us. I t could not, in my opinion, be retaken by
us, but by means of a large well organized and well disciplined regular army with
a great train of artillery. Some think i t would not be within the resources of the
U. States to retake it, unless we had the command of the Gulf of hIexico, of the
Mississippi and of Lake Ponchatrain. But as we are now in possession and as
our possession is easily defended in case we have the Command of the Mississippi
& Lake Ponchatrain, I would advise the sending into the Mississippi & Lake
Ponchatrain of all the Gun boats we have and as many more as we may be able
to finish in the course of this Autumn and the ensuing Winter and Spring until
the necessary compliment be there stationed.
It ought to be recommended to Congress a t their next Session to provide for
building additional Gun boats - for repairing, equipment and putting in Commission all our Frigates - for building the six 74's for which we already have the
principal part of the Materials - and for building six additional 74's. As far as i t may a t this juncture be necessary and compatible mith the resources
of our Country, we ought to prepare the means of offensive as well as of defensive
War. Such a preparation will not only enable us to press with more effect our
reasonable demands upon Spain; but will, in the future secure us against aggressions and pretensions as injurious as they are humiliating. Such a nation as
Spain would not have dared to have committed such depredations upon our Commerce and such aggressions upon our Rights, and still less would she have dared to
have treated our reasonable demands for explanation and reparation so superciliously, had she not been under the impression that we are utterly unprepared for a
state of war, and of course that we would not be easily provoked to declare war
against her. Spain has, besides, no doubt, been taught to know that, as we have
in our Navy no Vessels above the rate of Frigates, a small number of her line of
Battle Ships stationed a t the Havanna with the aid of a few Frigates $9 would
give her the Command of the Gulf of Mexico and such a Control over our Mississippi Commerce as effectually to intercept all communication between Orleans
and the Ports of Europe and of America. With 12 Ships of the Line added to the Frigates we now have and to the contemplated Gun boats, we would have nothing to apprehend from such a Nation as
Spain. on the contrary we could confidently take u?th respect to her a Commanding attitude. And if she were alone, rather than entangle ourselves in the
mazes of Great Brittain, I would with such an augmentation of our Navy, prefer
encountering her without an Ally. But if France, as there is reason to think,
should be really moving with Spain against the U. States, and if the state-of things
will not admit of delay, then an Alllance with a Natlon capable of atrordlng us the
requisite naval assistance would be expedient. Without such an aid not only our
Commerce and our Sea Port - Towns would in a War with France and Spain, be
~ t l exposed
y
to depredation; but there would be strong ground for apprehendmg the entire & irrevocable loss of Orleans and the adjacent Country. Whereas
with such aid we would be completely protected at every point and we could moreover with great ease take the Floridas which are essentially necessary to our securely enjoying without interruption the numberless advantages resulting from
our lately acquired Territory. But were we even to form an alliance with Great
Brittain and upon the most advantageous Terms, I would recommend the prop o d augmentation of our Navy. I would do it, because inde~endentlvof other

-

282

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1806 TO 1807

powerful considerations i t would be desireable to be not altogether dependent on
the Nation with which we might be so allied. [NDA. Nom. Appts., 1798-1820.1
To Secretary of the Navy from Master Commandant Isaac Channcey, U. 6. Navy
BALTIMORE
16% SepP 1806
SIR The Hornet is now ready to haul in the streem A Marine Guard therefore
will be necessary as soon as possible and if an Officer cou'd be spared one wou'd be
desirable, Music is indespensible, I refer you to my letter of the 2gtb July last for
the number of Non-Commissioned Officers and privates necessary for the Hornet
[NDA. MC LB, 1804-5.1
Extract from journal of Hezekiah Loomis, Steward, U. S. Navy, in U. 8. Frigate
Congrus, Captain Stephen Decstur, Jr., U. S. Navy, commanding, Monday, 16
September 1805
[Gibraltar] This day we were informed that if we did not go to the Rock this
day we should not get product. We got underway a t 4 o'clock P. M. came to
anchor a t the Rock a t 10 o'clock P. hf.
[On the 17th fired a salute of 11 guns.]
[L. F. Middlebrook. KD.4 copy.]
To Captain John Rodgera, U. S. Navy, from James Simpeon, U. S. Consul, Tangier,
Morocco
TANGIERlrtP Septemf 1806
SIR I have received your favour of the 31mtlast Month, advising your having
appointed the Essex and Vizen for the Gibraltar Station. - The 28* August a
Tuniseen Xebeque of six Guns and seventy five hIen arrived a t Tetuan
the
Commander mid he left your Squadron in Tunis Bay and that on shore they
talked of War with the Uuited States. - I am happy to learn that matters have
been full accommodated. - Mr Gavino transmitted to me copy of your advice to
him of A c e having been concluded with Tripoly, which I considered sufficient
authority for me to acquaint the Emperor of that event.His hIajesty immediately ordered the Meshohda should be fitted out, for purpose of sending her
home. - Soon after, Marrat Arraez, arrived in this Bay from Tripoly in a
Vessel of eight Guns with a Letter for Muley Soliman confirming the news of
Peace - we are told he takes command of the Meshohda, but as no application has
been made to the Consuls for Passports for the Ship,.re Dont Know her
estination. - Lisle has in the mean time been on a Cruize to the Westward,
and we are told from Larach, has taken a Doggar of Lubeck. - The only Vessel
of Muley Solimans has been a t Sea this Summer was the Maimona of 32 Guns, she
captured a Lubeck Doggar bound for Lisbon with Naval Stores. At Tetuan they have a Xebeque to mount sixteen Guns, nearly ready for Sea,
but a t this advanced Season it is not likely she will go out - the three Frigates
and Brig of War are now laid up a t Larach. - The Batavian Republik has
lately made Muley Soliman a Present of a Sloop of War, has been for a length of
time a t Ma1aga.Yesterday a Messenger arrived with advice of Orran Treman [?] and that Neighborhood having proclaimed Muley Soliman their
Sovereign, and this morning rejoicings have been made here on the occasion.
[LC. JRP, Vol, 2, Series Two, May-Oct. 1805.1

-

gt

To Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Navy, from Sailing Master Benjamin C. Prince,
U. 8. Navy
Sepr 17'b 1806.GIBRALTER
SIB J am happy to think that it is in my power to inform you of the safe arrival
of the two sloops, the Traveller on the 7th and the Ranger 13'6 the Ranger in the
Lat about 40' and Long 30 West was plunderd by an Spanish priveteer of all
her small stors and people clothes taken away from them, I parted with the Ranger
the tenth Day after I left Boston, in a ale from the southward & Eastward,
which cause me to lay to six and thirty I f o u s , I shall sail the wind for Synccuae
end if I should not meet the Commodore their then to proceed to Malta and their

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS
till he should return from the upper parts of the strates (this advice I have
g o s a p . Cammel and Con& the wind has for the last ten Days been Blowing a
Gale from the Ea~tward
[LC. EPP, Vol. 16, Aug. 1805-Jan. 1806.1
To Captain James Barron, U. S. Ravy, commanding U. 8. Frigate Pruidcnl, Eastern
Branch, Washington, D. C. from Secretary of the Ravy
NAVYDEPM~
17 Septr 1806.I this morning r e d your letter of the 104 inst with the accompanying communications & congratulate you on your safe return to America. The petty officers, able Seamen, ordinary Seamen and boys of the Crew of the
Fri ate President must be paid off and discharged as soon aa she can be brought
to f e r moorings in the Emtern Branch, and her Provisions & stores must be
delivered over by inventor to the order of Captain Thomas Tingey. The
Marines are to be landed andVwill by their Commanding OEcer be delivered up to
the C o l ~Comt of the Marine Corps. To your Commissioned and Warrant Officers
you may give furloughs for 2 weeks, directing them, a t the expiration of that time
to report themselves to me. When these orders shall have been executed, you w i l l deliver up the ship to the
order of Cap%Thomas Tingey. [NDA. OSW, Vol. 7, 1805-1807.1
To Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Navy, from Master Commandant Isaac Chauncey,
U. S. Bavy
BALTIMORE
1Y Sept 1806
Dr SIR Your favour of the 30th Ult. I found a t this place on my return from
New York and Connecticut where I have been for some time in consequence of the
Death's of my own Father and h l r ~Chauncey's Mother who both Died within a
few davs of each other
The 'Dimentions of the Hornet, spars, rigging, &Q &Q shall be forwarded to you in
a few days - We have all our water and stores in and cou'd bend sails tomorrow
if we cou'd get the Joiners out of the ship and the Iron work done - which is
the only things that detains us, and I am fearfull will detain us untill the first
week in October
Some of the officers (late of the Phil.) arived in town last evening - they came
home in the President which has arived and proceaded for Washngton, Commodore
Barron Capt James B a m n and Capt Baimbridge have returned in the Prwident
the former is still ver ill a t Hampton; I suspect that the Burrem are not well
pleased with the new %m4 however as in all probabillitg I shall see them in a few
days I shall then know their sentiments and will write you - hlrp Chaunoey
(who is with me) Joines me in compliments to yourself and M q Preble
[LC. EPP, Vol. 16, Aug. 1805-Jan. 1806.1

*

Extract from journal of U. S. v a t e Comiifulion. Captain John Rodgers, U. S. Bavy,
commendmg, Tuesday, 17 September 1805
[Syracuse] a t 3 [P. &I.] the Enterprize schooner arrived With Col. & Mq Lesr
[USNA.]

To Captain Edward Preble, U. 6. Navy, from Robert Denison, Secretary of Captain
Samuel Barron, U. 6. Navy

GEORGETOWN
(POTOYAK)
18 Sepl1806
SIR! I have the Honor to hand you inclosed a Letter from our mutual friend
the gallant Captain Decatur, whom I left in good Health a t Syracuse early in
July, also one from my Brother in Law Mr Leckie - I arrived from the Niediterwnean in Hampton Roads on board the President Fri ate on the 10 Instant,
ai immediately proceeded by l a n d to this place with the %ispatches for Government - Commodore B m n was landed a t Hampton in a very weak state - he
charged me to present you his particular Regards. I cannot but consider myself unfortunate that the distance which separates
us precludes the pleasure of delivering these Letters to you in person, 1 hope
however that a short time will sfFord me the opportunity of p r s o d a c q d t a n a e

284

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1805

TO

1807

with an Officer who ranks so high in the Estimation of his Country & whose
friendship I should be no less proud than happy to cultivate.- I anticipate the
pleasure of hearing from you & remain with unfeigned sentiments of Respect &
Consideration,
(Care of EDWARD
DEKISONBaltimore)
[LC. EPP, Vol. 16, Aug. 1805-Jan. 1806.1
To Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Navy, from Secretary of the Navy
BALT.Sep. lgUI 1806
SIR, With pleasure I inform you of the safe arrival of Lewis and M~Neela t
Gibralter and of their having proceeded aloft t o join the Squadron.
I am up to the eyes in despatches from the Med? I have only time t o say t o
you that your friend Bainbridge has had a Court of Enquiry on his Conduct &
that the sentence is honorable to him. And further I must inform you that the
Ex-Bashaw [Hamet Caramanli] in a formal Kote to Eaton has explicitly signified
to him his acquiescence in the terms of peace declaring himself fully satisfied with
what the U States had done. I n his note among other expressions of gratitude
he says - "I submit to the will of God and thank the King of America and all
his servants for their kind dispositions towards me" - Eaton in his dispatches
enclosing this Kote remarks "Enclosed is a Copy b translation of a letter Hamet
Bashaw has written to me. This I think is enougK to do away any insinuations
concerning our intercourse with this prince injurious to the honour of the
U. States"
The gallant movements of Eaton in the rear -the sample you gave them last
year of what Americans could do -and the great preparations for assailing them
this summer all conspired to dispose the Bashaw to come forward with overtures
of peace - such as no Nation for a Century past have had made to them. All
Europe is giving us National repetation for this - But our own good folks will
be busy in telling the world that we are in fact a very Contemptible people All the Brittish Admirals and Captains that see our gun boats say they are greatly
superiour to any thing of the kind they ever saw. And a t home they %-erenever
mentiond by certain people but as objects of derision - But so certain worthless
Editors have to act in order that the may get bread I have seen many of the OEcers tgat ,\*ere prisoners - all say positively that
if Lear had persisted in refusing paying a ransom for them peace would not have
been made and they would all have been certainly massacred - The Bashaw
said again & again that having killed a father & brother he would not have any
scruples in killing a few infidels [LC. EPP, Vol. 18, Aug. 1805-Jan. 18OG.I
Extract from journal of U. S. Frigate Conslitution. Captain John Rodgers, U. 6. Navy,
commanding, Thursday, 19 September 1805
At 2 [P. &I.] weighd Made sail and stood out of the harbour [of Syracuse]

[USKA.]
To Captain John Rodgers, U. 6. Navy, from Secretary of the Navy
KAVYD E P M~ 20 Seplr 1806. I concur with Commodore Barron in opinion on the subject of the 3 Corn [?]
Vessels detained by the American Squadron off Tripoli in Septr 1804 and think
i t would be good policy to restore the vessels & the amount of their cargoes to the
Claimants but without damages, interest, or expences. [NDA. LB, 1799-1807.1
To Lieutenant Colonel Commandant Franklin Wharton, U. 8. lldarine Corps, from
Secretary of the Navy
NAVY DEPY?- d0 Septr 1806. You will send a Commissioned Officer of Marines to take command of the
detachment of Marines on board of the [U. S. Brig] Hornet now lying at Baltimore.
FDA. USMC, LR. 1804-1820.1

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS
-

-

-

Extract from journal of Hezekiah Loomis, Steward, U. S. Navy, in U. S. Frigate
Congress, Captain Stephen Decatur, Jr., U. S. Navy, commanding, Friday, 20
September 1805
Watering ship. The Constellation got underway for Tangiers a t 4 o'clock P. M.
I t appeared while we lay a t the Hock that an attack would soon be made by the
Spanish and French upon Gibraltar as their forces lay encamped on the extremity
of the Spanish lines in full view of Gibraltar. Their forces appeared to be very
numerous. Cadiz is blockaded by 36 sail of the line under Lord Nelson, and as
many Spanish and French sail of the line in the harbor waiting to see which will
conquer in the next engagement. I t is said that Lord Kelson intends to lay siege
to the Town and has likewise sent for a number of bomb vessels and fire ships.
[L. F. Middlebrook. NDA copy.]
Extract from journal of U. S. Frigate Constitution, Captain John Bodgers, U. S. Navy,
commanding, Friday, 20 September 1805
Tack,d ship occasional~ybeating into the Straits of hfessina
Made and took in sail as occasion required - 3/4paat 10 [A. M.] shortened
sail and came too with the starbd bower anchor in 26 fathoms water found laying
here the brig Syren
[No~~.-This
journal ended on 27 September 1805 while the Conbtitution was in &5essina.]
[USNA.]
Extracts from journal of Heaekiah Loomis, Steward, U. S. Navy, in U. S. Frigate
Congress, Captain Stephen Decatur, Jr., U. S. Nsvy, commanding, 21 and 22
September 1805
Filled our water casks and got underway at 10 o'clock A. M. At 3 o'clocic P. M.
heard a very heavy cannonading supposed to be a t the Rock. Came to anchor in
Tangiers Bay a t sun set. Found there the 'C'. 6 . F. Constellation, 2 English 74 gun
ships, 3 Frigates and other small vessels.
68 September
[Tangier Bay] The Constellation got underway this morning a t one o'clock.
We got off some wood and stock.
[L. F. Middlebrook. N D A copy.]
To l a s t e r Commandant Isaac Hull, U. 6. Navy, commanding U. S. Brig Argus
Syracuse, from Captain John Bodgers, U. S. Navy
UXITEDSTATES S H I P Constitution
Messina 234 September 1806
DEARSIR, I have this moment received a Letter from Cap* Tingey enclosing a
Bill of Lading of the Store Ship Washington, which I herein forward you. I have given the General of hfarine a t this place permission to have a draft of
one of our Gun Boats, taken by one of their draftmen, which you will be pleased
to comply with. - I arrived here on the 20'8 but the wind has been a head ever
since, so soon as it changes, I shall depart - I n case you should receive dispatches for me, during my absence, of importance, which may require my early
attention - I request you mill send the Enterprize with them to meet me a t
Algiers. [NDA. Isaac Hull LB, 1803-1806.1
[23 September 18051
To Secretary of the Navy from Captain William Bainbridge, U. S. Navy
NP 12
A Report to the Honorable Secretary of the Navy, of the Officers lately under my
command
of the best Officers, I ever knew
David Porter Let, ,,,,---,,--,,--one
Jacob Jones ---- - - - - ---- -- - - - - -a brave good Officer and a correct man
Theodore Hunt -- _--,-- _ _ - - - - - - A good Officer and will do credit to the Service

286

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1805 TO 180r

Benj Smith -,---,
- - - --- - - - --- --Has been five years under my command - I
feel confidence in recommending him to the
notice of the Honorable Secretary
and Masters Mates are fully
Ben. F. Read ---....------,----- Midshipmen
to receive their commissions ae
James Gibbon- --- - _ - - - - - - - -- - - - eutenants,
and will add to the number of
Dan' T. Patterson-- - - - - - - - - ---in our Naval Service
James Biddle ---- - - ..- - - - - - ---..--from his high sense of honor and talents must
one day be conspicuous in the service of his
Country I think him qualified for an acting Leutenantcy, which, I hope the Honorable Secretary will give him
promising Officer and is qualified to do the
James Renshaw - - , - - - - - - - - - - - - a
duty of an acting Lieutenant
Bernard Henry - - - _ _ _- - - - _- - - - - Three very fine young men and promising
Richard Jones
-Simnn
Smith
_ _ _ . Officers .-- Wm Cutbush Midshipman - , a correct your man, but I do not think that
he will ever shine in the service - his head
is always too much engrossed (to make a
good Sailor) with the works of Sir Isaac
Newton
he is an excellent mathematician
think will make a second DECATUR
Robert Gamble
Jonathan Con-dery --- - - - - _ - - - - .. Surgeon Mates, correct Men in their conduct
Nicholas Harwood . - ...-.
..
..
and attentive to their duty.
W- Anderson Cap'"'' Clerk- - - - - .- a very proper character for a purser,
and should he be wanted and the Honorable
Secretary appoints him - I am confident
that he will give entire satisfaction.
------.has
been in the service from the commenceG. Hodge Boatswain
ment of it, and is a good Officer in his
station - should there be be a vacant birth
in the Navy Yard for him - it would be
some recompense for his long services
R. Stephenson Gunner, - --- - ----knows the duties of his office but is too inactive
Wa Godby Carpenter - - _ - - - - - _ t h e best I ever had
Joseph L-uglass Sail Maker - a very decent good Officer
The foregoing report is rnade to the Honorable Secretary of the Kavy with impartiality, and with a reflection how necessary it is for commanding Officers to
give a correct statement to the Secretary of the abilities and merits of the Officers
who may have been under their command
BALTIMORE
294 Septr 1806
The Secretary of the Kavy will confer a favour on Captain Baix~bridge- by
placing the following Officers under his command when he is again ordered on
duty. Gibbon Patterson Biddle Gamble - Altho Captq B. has selected these
four yet he should feel pleasure in having any of the others [NDA. Captain's LB, Vol. 3, 1805.1
-

- - -

-

- - - -

- - -

I

-

.)

To Captain William Bainbridge, U. 8. Navy, from Captain Bichard Dale
PHILADELPHIA
S e p t . 83,1606
DEARBAINBRIDQE
I am very sorry that business calls me to Trenton. I am
under the necessity to sett off today. I am fearfull it will deprive me the pleasure
of your company, while you arein Philadelphia should you arrive while I am goneI shall be in town again on Thursday should you pass through Philadelphia before my return I hope I shall have the pleasure of seeing you before you pass
Trenton
R. DALE
[Morgan Library, New York, N. Y.]

To Captain John Eodgers, U. 6. Navy, from John Broadbent, U. 8. Navy Agent,
Messins
Copy NQ13
MESSINATHE Zdtb Seplr 1806 DEARSIR I have now the pleasure of transmitting thee, an authenticated,
opy of the sentence pronounced by the Tribunal appointed by His Sicilian Maj-

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS
-

eaty for trying Lr Charles L Ridgely of the accusation brought against him, as
Author of the hommicide committed upon the person of George Hutchinson,
which sentence, declares his innocence and restores him spotless to his Country, to
his friends, and to thy esteem.
Notwithstanding all the severity of the Criminal Code, of Sicily, the ability of
the fiscal sdvocate, and the cunning made use of by him in the procecution of this
&air, not even the shadow of a proof hns been brought against him; indeed his
having voluntarily come forward to demand hie trial redounds highly to his credit
as a young man of honorable rinciples, and jealous of his reputation and was from
the beginning was a Pltrong 8men of h k Innocence [NDA. Captain's LB, Vol. 3, 1805.1
Extract from journal of Hereltiah Loomis, Steward, U. 6. Bavy, in U. S. Frigate
Congrus. Captain Stephen Decatur, Jr., U. 6. Navy, commanding, Tuesday, 24
September 1805
[Tangier Bay] We received wood and a few sheep. At half past 6 o'clock the
U. S. F. Essez arrived from Gibraltar. She spoke us and imformed that the firing
which we heard after leaving the Rock was the Spanish gun boats attacking an
English Frigate. R e got underway for America a t half past 7 o'clock P. M.
[From 25 Septcrnber to 3 November there appear no ent'ries except mention of
speaking vessels en route.]
[L. F. Middlebrook. NDA copy.]
To George Dyson, U. S. Navy Agent, Syracuse, from Captain John Rodgers, U. S.
Navy
U S SHIPConstituiion
Afessina 26'4 September 1806
SIR The dispatches by the Spitjire I have received through the hands of Mr
Warrington thev contain nothing new being Duplicates of former advices - I
have been heremuch longer than expected, owing to head Winds & Calms, not
being able to get through the Farro - I am in hopes of leaving this to morrow, a t
any rate shall make the attempt I have no news worth Communicating farther
than that War will most Certainly take place very soon between Austria & France
if it is not already the Case [LC. JRP, L Bk B, May 1805-July 1806.1
To whom not indicated from Captain Hugh 6. Campbell, U. S. Navy
U. S. FRIGATE
Easex
Gibrder Bay. Septr S9t4 1806
SIR I have the honour to inform you of my Amval here the 14# Inet from
Tunis accompanied by the Vixen, & Franklin Store Ship; The Natltlaas likewise
arrived that night from Algiers, where I had sent her with Dispatches from our
Consul General
You are doubtless informed of an insurrection that took place a t Algiers early
in August - I have now to inform you that hlr &fumford in his letter to me of
the 9th inst says that on the 30th Ultv the Dey & Minister of the Regency were
murdered by the Soldiers, that a new Dey was Elected and tbings a t present
quiet I am stationed here with the Easa & Vizen for this Winter by Order of Commodore Rodgers and shall range the Coast of Spain and Barbary as Circumstances
may require & perhaps take a look a t the Rock of Lisbon - I have arrested Mr
Allen late Master of the Smack Rainger for Ungentlemanly and Unofficerly like
conduct, particulars of which ia herein enclosed I shall inform you per the John Adorns of any thing referring to our Situation
here NB. Mr Allen late Master of the Smack Ranger havin borrowed a boat for
the Use of the Service; of Ca t p Chamberlains of the Am* 5hip Argur of Norfolk
w'lich boat h a been lost; I tgerefore Consider the said Allen accountable for the
same - Demsnd being made on me for Indemnity, I have thought proper to
Anewer the same [&]?A. Captain's LB, Val. 3, 1806.1

NQ17

288

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1806 TO 1807

To Secretary of the Navy from Captain Edward Preble, U. 8. Navy
NEWBURY
PORTSepr 2gth1806
NP 18:
SIR Being from Portland when your letter of the 18tP Inst arrived there, I could
not earlier have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of i t - With leasure
I learn that Lewis & MoNiel arrived safe - The honorable acquitt$ of my
friend Bainbridge affords me the highest gratiecation, and I find gives universal
sattisfaction - The Ex Bashaws note and Mr Eatons remarks, must sstisfv the
mind of every person that no dishonorable transaction on the part of the U States
has taken place.
Eatons gallantry, address, & perservance deserves the highest applause, he will
be received in this quarter with every honorable & flattering mark of distinction his verv extraordinary and unprecedented movements, and the increaae of our
Naval iorces in the Mediterranean, undoubtedly occasioned the Bashaw to sue
for peace - and i t is a pleasing circumstance which must be gratifying to every
American, that it has been established on more honorable terms than any other
Nation had been able to command.
The 13 Inch Mortar has been proved and found to be good, it will throw a shell
nearly 3 miles - Mr Brown has of course only received the dimensions of one
to be imported - The two Vessels a t Portland are in rather more forwardnees
than those a t this place, we shall be ready to launch in a fortnight or 3 weeks,
and 1 flatter myself that they will be such vessels as will give satisfaction 8 locks
for Cannon & 8 for Carronades will be wanted and if you should think proper to
allow me to take 4 very bandsome long 24 pounders a t the Navy Pard Boston,
for the Gun Boats, I can have the Carriages made there, suitable for the horizontal Circle on which they are to be fixed.
PS. I shall return to Portland tomorrow.
[NDA. Captain's LB, Vol. 3, 1805.]
To Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Navy, from Captain James Barron, U. S. Navy
Sepl B9. 1806
BALTIMORE
DEARSIR I am Extreanly Sorry to acknowledge that this is the first time I
have Written you since your departure from the Mediterranean However my
Reasons were such as will, I trust, doe away the Suspicion of Neglect hly
Brothers health continued so very Bad that I was continually encompassd in
Gloom consequently my Letters would have afforded you no amusement and as
thay might have Related to news nothing could have been gatherd from them
during the Winter, you have doubtless heard of the precarious State in which my
Brother has Returnd and I t is not Possibl yet to determine what the event will
be Providence alone can only Know What we have to fear as he has allready
outlived all calculation I have Spent a most Misserable time and how much
more before me I left all your friends in the Mediterranean Well and as Mindful1
of you as Ever, your Reception in this Country gave great satisfaction to us all
and Even Comdr R- was much Pleased a t hearing of your being Secretary of
the Navy, at Least he said so, I am now on my Way home and have mearly dropt
you these few Lines as an apology for a Letter Which I Will Write you as soon as
I Reach Hampton and become a Little Settled, the Navy has allmost Ruined me
and I am now meditating Something to bring up Leeway a Mill llrill be my
first attempt if that fails God only Knows what Land fall will bring me up the
Navy Wants so many Reforms that my hopes are Sinking fast to despair, However I will not trouble you With my concerns but conclude With my Best Wishes
for your Happiness Will you also present them for me to my much Esteemd friend
Derby and believe me Yours with sincerity in hast
[LC. EPP, Vol. 16, Aug. 1805-Jan. 1806.1

To Secretary of the Navy from Captain Hugh G. Campbell, U. S. Navy

U S. SHIP Essex Gibralter Bay
[about 901 Sepir 1806
SIR My last respects to you were by the Congress in which I informed you of
my amval here on the 14th Instt accompanied by the Vizen & Franklin, the
NauUass joind us that night from Algiers; the two former are station'd about

these Watens during Winter which circumstance I presume Commodore Rodgera
has acquainted you with, -

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

289

The Nautlusu sail'd on the 234 for Leghorn, with dispatches for Mr Lear & the
Commodore, so did the smacks Ranger & Traveller for Syracuse the same day;
particulars respecting the late Commander of the Ranger you will be informed of
in m dispatch to you by C a p t ~Decatur, with the addition that between nine &
ten Jclock on the night preceeding his arrest, I called on board the Ranger not
without strong suspicion of his improper conduct, where I found Mr Allen in his
bed dressed in full uniform and in such a state of intoxication that he neither
knew me, nor recollected where to have seen me, nor could he be persuaded to
rise from his bed I have now the misfortune to send home a Mr Worthinpton who I understand
was taken on board the Constitution when a t Lisbon, a n a since that period has
acted as Masters Mate on board that ship & the Brig Franklin by order of Commodore Rodgers, for particulars respecting his conduct, I beg leave t o refer you
to the charges herein enclosed The Vizen is a t Gibralter procuring some necessary Supplies, particularly
Bread, of which she has but seven days allowance on board, nor have we an article
of public provisions a t the Rock, one hundred and forty barrels of pork excepted
the most of which was landed from the Franklin; in consequence of which I have
orderd Mr Gavino to procure as much flour as mill serve for two months bread,
which is now a t 13 doll- and daily expected to rise; the Rock is so destitute of
supplies that we find much difficulty in procuring the common necessities of
life, fresh meat of any kind not to be purchased for money
The Brig Franklin in company with two American Vessels left this place on
the 24% instt which I convoyed through the Streights A Cable is much wanted for this Ship which she must have prior to the Winter
setting in; to effect which & procure other supplies will probably require my
presence a t Lisbon Mv situation here is both tantalizing and provoking, the British on one side
the Bay, distress our Commerce partly from h-ecessity, while the Spaniards on
the other are daily practising it in a most Wilful1 manner Although I am order'd here to protect our Commerce, which I shall do to the
utmost of my power yet I deem it necessary to keep sight of the leading features
of our Treaty with those Nations when by them demanded of me - The reverse
of things I sincerely wish for as I find it impossible to look with common patience
on the daily depredations committed about this place, particularly bp the
Spanish Gun Boats, With respect to the Man given up by 14':Allen to the British Frigate, I have
not yet, nor do I expect to receive any satisfaction, in which I flatter myself you
will agree in opinion, when informed of the manner he was disposed of and the
circumstance of his being a Scotchman, Our political situation as respects Europe & Barbary, you will doubtless be
informed of by the proper authorities, - I have only to add that all necessary
information touching the detachment of our Squadron under my Command,
shall be duly forwarded to the Department
[NDA. Captain's LB, Vol. 3, 1805.1
To Lieutenant David Porter, U. 6. Navy, commanding U, S. Schooner Entnpriru,
from Master Commandant Isaac Hull,U. S. navy
U S BRIGA r w
Syracue 30th Sept': 1806
SIR I have been honored with your Letter of this date, requesting a conveyance
of Mr Robertson Purser of the United States Schooner Enterprize under your
Command to Malta, for the purpose of providing Slops for her Crew, - I have
in consequence ordered Lieut Izard, Commanding Gun Boat N P 2, to get his
Vessel in readiness to Sail this Evening for that purpose. His stay a t Malta will be limited a t one week, for the purpose of having the
Slops made, if it should be necessary. [LC. D. Porter P, Let. & Ord., 1805-1808.1
To Master Commandant Isaac Hull, U. 6. Navy, commanding U. S. Brig Arm, from
Assiaant Surgeon Thomas Marshall, U. 6. Navy
UNITEDSTATESGUN BOATS
Syracuse Harbour 30tb Sept 1806
SIR Mr William I. MqIntosh Midshipman on board United Stat,es Gun Boat
No d haa been a long time in very ill health. - I would recommend, a~ perhaps

290

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1806 TO 1807

the only means of his recovery, that he be permitted to return to the United
States. [NDA. Isaac Hull LB, 1803-1806.1
To Secretary of the Navy from Surgeon's Mate Augnstua C. W. Love, U, 8. Navy
U. S. GUNBOAT
NQ1 OffFort Johnteon Octr 19' 1806
SIR,It is with sorrow I inform you that Lieu9 N. Fanning Commanding this
boat died yesterday of a severe relapse of the Bilious fever, ocossion'd b exposure
whilst a convalescent. I think i t partly my duty to inform you of &s melancholly circumstance, that you may send on some Officer to take Command, a s
we already feel the ill effects, the want of one occasions in the licentious conduct
of the Men. [NDA. Officers LB, 1802-1805.1
[8 October 18051
To Captain Samuel Barron, U. S. Navy, from Charles W. Goldsborough, Chief
Clerk, Navy Department
Dr SIR, Altho' probably the last to express my congratulations on your safe
return to your native land, yet surely I was one of the first who experienced
pleasure a t that event. The delicate state of your health excited the sympathy
of all - your recovery will create a proportionate de ree of joy. As soon as I
heard of your arrival I assumed the confidence of an%sculapius & ventured to
pronounce that your native air & hog fish would soon restore you to health
&
I rejoice that my predictions are verifying.
When you shall have entirely recovered your health, I recommend i t to you
to come on to this place for the purpose of settling your accounts with the navy
Depc - Mr Denison has exhibited a general account current, but I apprehend
that your account --ill not be entirely closed untill you shall come on. Every
assistance & facility will then be furnished ou
I have observed in Mr Eaton's letters to
Hull, which have passed through
your hands, some observations in relation to Mr R. W. G. which have given me
great concern. - powerful indeed must the evidence be to convince me of the
correctness of the charges - the offences stated are very foreign to the character
he had theretofore sustained
Let me ask it of you as a particular favor to
give me your opinion of Mr R. W. G. -his general conduct while with you &c &c.
Be pleased to make my most respectful compliments to MQ Barron
&
accept for yourself the sentiments of esteem, with which I remain,
8% O C T'05
~
[Mrs. James S. Barron Col. NDA. photostat.]

-

%$

-

-

To Lieutenant David Porter, U. S. Navy, commanding U. 8. Schooner Enlnprizc,
from William Higgins, U. S. Navy Agent, ldelta
MALTAOctr 9t4 1806
SIB,I a m favoured with your letter of the 30t4 UltmQordering me to me to hold
a t Mr Robertsons disposal, two Thousand Dollars, against Slops to be purchased
by him, for the use of the United States Schooner Enterprize, which will be
attended to, altho' contrary to my Orders from Commodore Rodgers, directing
me to answer no requisitions for money, unless countersigned by himself or
C a p t ~Hull. mC. D. Porter P, Let. & Ord., 1805-1808.1
To Captain John Rodgers, U. S. Navy, from Secretary of the Navy
~ Octf 1806.
NAVYD E P18
If we should not be a t war with Tunis, or an other of the Barbary Powers,
it is the command of the President that the $rigatea Caulellolion, Congnrr,
&8&,
and John Adams, and three of the five mall vessels of war under your
command, be immediate1 ordered home, and ou will without any unnecessary
delay order them to the dastern Branch. The higate. CmWUtim, and such two
of the smell veesels aa may be in the best condition to remain,ase to continue in

-

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

291

the Mediterranean till further orders, for the obviously necessery purpo* of
watching the movements of the different Barbary Powers, & protecting our
lawful commerce. It will be agreeable to me that the A r g w should be one of
the three small vessels to be sent home, but I give you no positive ordem upon
this point.
If you should not have acted upon my letter of the 5 August 1805, you d
l
order all the gun boats and bombs to proceed immediately to Charleston South
Carolina, if in your opinion they can a t such season safely cross the Atlantic.
But if you should think that they cannot safely cross the Atlantic during the
winter months, detain them until they can cross with safety, and then order
them to Charleston. Direct the Commanding Officers to report their arrival
a t Charleston to me, without delay.
Let me hear from you frequently upon Mediterranean Affairs.
[NDA. LB, 179S1807.1
To Lieutenant Colonel Commandant Franklin Wharton, U. S. Marine Corps, from
Secretary of the Navy
KAVDEP+14 O C ~1806.
Q
I enclose an order describing the Uniform of the Marine Corps more particularly
than i t has heretofore been described.
Promulgate this order and have it observed.
[NDA. CSMC, LB, 1804-1820.1
[Enclosure]

Uniform Regulations of U. S. Marine Corps
Ordered, That the following Dress be the Uniform of the Marine Corps. Officers - Navy blue coat, buttoned across the breast, with two rows of navy
Buttons, 8 on each side, the button holes laced, brought to a point in the center
3 buttons on the sleeves, laced in the same manner, the Pockets
thus
with 3 buttons, placed, and with lace, similar to the sleeve. The collar of scarlet
hooked before with 2 Buttons on each side, laced cuffs scarlet. The Skirts turned
up with Scarlet, and two foul Anchors worked with gold thread on each skirt;
the skirts lined with scarlet &. 3 button holes laced (on the lappels of the Coat) on
scarlet: This however not to be seen when on duty in winter. Vest & Pantaloon
white. Hat cocked in winter, with a gold laced loop, and Navy Button under
: the hat to be
the Cockade. The Cockade of Leather thus described,
worn over the right Eye, the range of the cock of the Hat of course over the left
eye, with tassels frgm the sides of the Hat. Round Hat in summer with a gold
band and Tassel, the Band diagonally fixed, the tassel over the right eye. Hats
with scarlet Plume. The hair to be queued. Officers when in full uniform are to wear a scarlet Sash round the waist, outside
the Coat, and black boots to the Hnee, with black silk tassels. Sash tyed on the
left side, fallin over the left Thigh. Black leather Stock when on duty.OfEcers ~ r a j e are
s to be designated in the following manner, v i z s A Colonel - two gold Epaulets - 1 on each shoulder.
A Captain - a gold Epaulet on the right shoulder & a gold strap on the left. A First Lieutc - a gold Epaulet on the right shoulder.
A Second Lieutc - a gold Epaulet on the left shoulder.
The St& to wear a gold Epaulet and a Counterstrap embroidered on blue
cloth. Side-Arms - yellow mounted Sabres and with gilt Scabbards worn over the
Sash, black belts, with yellow mounting. Marines - Uniform to be a Coatee single breasted, one row of buttons, yellow
worsted binding on each side, the extreme ends of which represent a half diamond
thus
white cloth pantaloons, black cloth or linen gaiters, to come up to the
calf of the leg, and linen over-alls in Bummer. High crowned hats without a Brim,
and a plume of red plush on the front of the Hat with a brass eagle and plate,
and Hat-Band of blue, yellow, and red cord with a Tassel of the same Colours
Sergeants to wear leather Cockades on the left side of the Hat, with their plumes.
ROB+SMITH.NDA. USMC, LB. 1804-1820.1
Secretury of the N C I O~~
668388--4620

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1805 TO 1807
To Lieutenant David Porter, U. S. Navy, U. S. Schooner Enterprize, from Lieutenant
Benjamin Smith, U. S. Navy
UNITEDSTATESBOMBKETCH
Vengeance
Harbour of Syracuse Octr 16% 1806
SIR I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your Order of this day in
complyance with which I have examined the United States Sloop Traveller and
find that she has been injured in her hull and rigging by t.he U S Schooner
Nautilus, running foul of her off Cape De Gatt while she had her in tow; I shall
make every exertion in my power to put her in such a state of repairs as your Order
directs as soon as possible. - The following articles will be necessary for her
repairs for which I have directed her commander to indent. (Vizt as follows)
2 three inch Planks
2 two inch
do
3 one inch - do
1011 lOd? Nails
4 fathoms 4 inch rope
4 Oars
281! White Paint
17'1 black DP
GI! Green DP
20 Rotlo of Oii
3 Quarts of Sp@Turpentine
[LC. D. Porter P, Let. & Ord., 1805-1808.1
To Secretary of the Navy from Captain John Rodgers, U. S. Navy
U S S H I P Con~fitution
Leghorn Roads Octr 16t4 1805
SIR I have this da drawn on you in favor of Messrq Degen Purviance & CVa
sett of Exchange a t $hidy days sight for Dollars 28531.41100, say Twenty eight
Thousand five Hundred, and thirty one Dollars four Cents, being for the use of the
Squadron, under my Command [LC. JRP, L Bk B, May 1805-July 1806.1
To Lieutenant Samuel Evans, U. S. Navy, commanding U. S. Schooner Naulilus.
from Captain John Rodgers, U. S. Navy
U S SHIP Comtitution
Leghorn Road 16 Octr 1806
SIR With the U S Schooner hTautilus under your command, you are desired to
proceed with all practicable dispatch to Syracuse, holdin the 10,000$ for which
you have receipted, subject to the orders of the Senior bfficer, a t that place I shall leave this in a Week a t farthest, for Algiers: you therefore may calculate
on seeing me a t Syracuse, shortly after your arrival, there The repairs of the Nautilius you are desired to make a t Syracuse, our principal
deposits being there - Wish? you a pleasant passage [LC. JRP, Order Book, No. 2, 1805-1806.1
To Lieutenant David Porter, U. S. Navy, U. S. Schooner Enterprize. from Assistant
Surgeon Thomas Marshall, U. 6. Navy
U. S. GUNBOATNP6
Syracuse 16t'? OcP 1806
Sra I this morning discovered a Man on board of Gun Boat NV8, to have the
Small Pox. - There are five or Six on board the same Boat who have been so
much exposed before i t waa discovered, that I have reason to beleive they have
taken the infection. - As the danger from innoculation is much lem than by
natural infection, I would beg leave t o innoculate them. If You think proper to permit their innoculation, I would recommend their removal to the Bombard under the Command of Lieu$ Higinbothom, onc of whict.
can be fitted, with little expence for their accommodation.PC. D. Porter PI Let. & Ord., 1805-1808.1

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS
To Lieutenant David Porter, U. 8. Navy, from Burgeon Edward Cutbush, U. 8.
Navy
Syracuse 1 8 4 Odr 1806.
SIR, I r e d Your letter of the 16th Ins;, and have pursuant to your request, taken
the opinion of the Surgeons of the Squadron, on Dz Marshals proposal, to innoculate those ersons, who have been most exposed to the variolous contagion, on
board Gun 8 o s t Nq 8,And beg leave to inform You, that the plan is approved of (Signed) E CUTBU~H,
Hospital Surgeon
[LC. D. Porter P, Let. & Ord., 1805-1808.1
Extract from log of U. S. Brig Hornet, of 18 Guns, Master Commandant Isrrsc
Chauncey, U, 6. Navy, commanding, 18 October 1805
At 4 P M Got Underweigh and sailed from Baltimore a t 5 past 7 brought too
in 7 fq water abreast of Curtis8 Creek At 6 A m Got underweigh people employ4 taking in and setting sail as required At Merid? Anapolis bore W B S Dist
3 Miles
[NA. KDA. original, 180.5-1810.)
To Gaetano Marceano, British Consul, Catania, from Midshipman Ralph Ixard, Jr.,
U. S. Navy
Copy of a letter to the British Consul
AT CATANIA19'b Oct? 1806
SIR When the U S Schooner Enterprize was here she left a Boy on shore by the
Name of Francis Vessels. From information that has been received at Syracuse
the boy wished to return to the said Schooner in Syracuse but was detained by you.
Be pleased to inform me as soon as possible with respect to the ~ e r a c i t ~ofy this
information.(Signed) RA. IZARD
LI
Cornanding U, S, G, B, NPi?
[LC. D. Porter P, Let. & Ord., 1805-1808.1
To Lieutenant David Porter, U. 6. Navy, from Midshipman Daniel McNeill, Jr.,
U. 6 . Navy
Syra~urelgth Octr 1806.
SIR I am sorry to inform you that I have but four hlen on board able to do duty,
except the Marines, after they are innoculated, with the small pox neither an Officer when the Midshipmen are innoculated. - If you will please give me an
Order, for ten men; (Seamen) I will do my best endeavours to be ready for Sea
by Sunday Week, you will please to inform me, what length of time You want the
provisions lsy'd in for
[LC. D. Porter P, Let. & Ord., 1805-1808.1
To Lieutenant David Porter, U. S. Navy, from Midshipman Ralph h a r d , Jr., U, S.
Navy
SIR In pursuance of your Orders of the 18tb Inst I got under way on the eveeng
of the same day & proceeded to Catania where I arrived a t noon on the follomng
day.
After obtainin pratique I enquired for the British Consul. He was out of Town
but was expectei to return that evening I wrote him a letter, a co y of which I
now inclose to you. The next Morning a t 10 OClocli the British 8omul waited
on me and I informed him that the object of my coming to Catania was to apprehend a boy who had been left there by the U S Schr Enterpnze and from every information that could be obtained the boy had been detained by him contrary to
the Boy's wish of returning to Syracuse as soon as possible.-After many
evasive answers he (the British Consul) confess'd that he had seen the boy and
had, had him in his house; that the boy said he u-asafraid to return to the Schooner

294

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1805 TO 1807

for fear of unishment and when he heard that there was a n America Vessel in
port had l& his house. I immedlstely made a demand of the boy and in case of a uoncompliance with
my request to have him delivered on board was determined to request the Governors interference He then acknowledged the boy was in his house and said he would
deliver him to me if I would accompany him thither I went and found the boy.
I immediately ordered him to get his hat and follow me He went out of the room
and while I was conversing with the Consul the boy made his escape. A Mr
Bonano a n Italian Gentleman who has lately been in the U S Service as a Midshipman accompanied me to the Consul's and pursued the boy, He after some
difficulty apprehended him, I went in Company with the Consul two or three
Streets towards the Marine with the Boy. The Consul then gave me his word of
honor (of his own accord) that the boy should be delivered On board which was
done.
I immediately got underway and proceeded to this port. [LC. D. Porter P, Let. & Ord., 1805-1808.1
To Secretary of the Navy from Master Commandant Isaac Chauncey, U. S. Navy
U. STATESSLOOPOF WAR[BRIG]Hornet
Harnpton roads 8OtP OctP 1806
Sir, I arrived here this day i t blowing a hard Gale from the North East - and
as far as I am able to judge in coming down the Bay the Hornet will answer my
most aanguine expectations; - She sails fast, works well, is remarkably stiff,
and I presume will rove an excellent Sea Boat.
I have ordered Eieutenant Leonard to Xorfolk to recruit twenty Seamen if
possible, but if he should not succeed in procuring that number in four days, I
shall proceed for Kern York to complete the Compliment - In the mean time
we shall be employed in setting the Rigging up, and getting otherwise ready to
encounter a Gale of Wind if we should meet one. [NDA. MC LB, 1804-5.1
Extracts from log of U. S. Brig Hornet, of 18 Guns, l a s t e r Commandant Isaac
Chauncey, U. S. Navy, commanding, 20 and 21 October 1805
First part these 24 hours li h t brezes with thick hazep weather All sail set to
the best advantage, wind N# a t 7 PM came to an anchor in 7 f m water abreast
of Newpoint Comfort a t Midnight came on strong brezes from the N E4 Veered
out the long service At 6 AM got underweigh with the wind a t XE At 10 A m
brought up in Hampton Roads in 6 B H f q water, Sewils point bearing E I3 S
Dist about 2 miles, Moored Ship with 100 f m on the Small bower and 35 on the
best bower, same time Struck Royal yards ends with brisk Gales a t t a d 4 with
small rain and thick hazey weather
61 Odober 1806
First part Strong ales with heavy rain At 4 PM Sent the Pilot boat to
Norfolk with Lieutg feonard & Mr Walpole Midship9 to open rendevouse At
5 P M Struck Top Gt. yards At 4 A m the wind Shifted to the NW At 9 A m
clear pleas* weather CrossQ Top G* & Royal yards and loosed all sails to Dry
ends with Serene pleasant weather all hands employ$ in Xecesary work on board
At me rid^ the Pilot return4 from Korfolk with fresh provision for the Crew
[NA. NDA. original, 1805-1810.1
To Secretary of State from Levett Hams, U. 8. Consul General, St. Petersburg,
Russia
St PETERSBURG,
18/82October, 1806.
SIR, Since I had the honor to address you under date of 23 Aug. 4. September
pr Ship Swern via Baltimore Copy via Amsterdam I have received a letter of which
the inclosed A is Co y from Commodore Rogers, advising that a peace had been
concluded with the %ripolitans, and that the Russian Vessel Sc Michael, which
had been captured by a part of the Squadron in September last year in an attempt
to enter Tripoli in defiance of its blockade, together with the amount of the Sales
of her Cargo in Malta, he had taken upon himself to restore to the original owners

*

*

*

*

*

[NA. SDA. CD, St. Petersburg, Vol. 1, 1794-1809.1

8

8

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

295

To James Dodge, acting as U. 6. C h a r d dlAffaires, Tunis, from l a s t e r Commandant Isaac Hull, U. 6. Navy
Argua WQOetr 1806
SIR This will be handed you by Lieut Obannon who comes to Tunis To take
charge of any Communications you may have to the Commodore or the government if you can come onboard I should be happy to see you
I shall leave the bay this evening unless you should have business to detain me
as the season is geting late and my Cables Very bad I have no news but what Mr Obannon will communicate to you
[NA. SDA. FA, CL, Tunis, Vol. 2 (7240) 1801-1809.)

To Master Commandant Isaac Hull, U. 6. Navy, U. 6. Brig Argus. from James
Dodge, acting as U. 6. Charge d'dffaires, Tunis
GOLETTA
TUNISBAY934 October 1806
SIR, I received your favour pr Lieutenant O'Bannon and am extremely happy
to hear of your good health. I regret that I cannot visit you without communicsb
ing with the Bey and getting a Tiskar from him for the purpose, this would consume mucb time and is of less moment, as I have nothing of an unfavourable
nature t o advise you of, every thing remains tranquil & the Bey has on occasion of
my visiting him, shewn me several marks of particular attention, whether this
arises from his natural Politeness to a stranger or is a mark of his particular
respect for the United States 1 know not, but I am well certified he is in no wsy
changed from those sentiments expressed while the Squadron lay here. I immagine the Commodore will call here on his return from Algiers, therefore
shall not detain you by writing to him, as Ms O'Bannon expresses great anxiety
to return to the Brig. [NDA. Isaac Hull LB, 1803-1806.1
To Captain Alexander Murray, U. 6. Wavy, U. 6. S. A d a , New York, N. Y., from
Secretary of the Navy
NAVDEFT- 86 Odr 1806.
The following is an extract of a letter this morning received from the Navy
Agent a t Charleston S. C. "The Adarns Frigate left our Bar on the 5* inst & the very next day a French
Privateer of 12 Guns took her station, who boared almost every Vessel going out
or cornlng in. on the 12th ins. the Ship Two Friends Capr Mcru'iell that was
captured some time since came to the Bar in company with the Britiah Sloop of
War Petterell, whlch the Privateer saw & endeavoured to board, supposing her to
be a Guineaman, but after a contest of 20 Minutes hauled off with the loss, i t is
said of a number of men, and her Hull much injured.
"1 have not understood where the Privateer has gone, but I am in hopes the
injury she has sustained will prevent her interrupting us for some time." Having committed to you the protection of our commerce on our Coast, and
given you particular instructions for the government of your conduct, the present
case does not require any further instructions from me. I give you the above
information, with the confidence that you will improve it by every measure in your
power consistently with the general object of your cruise. [NDA. OSW, Vol. 7, 1805-1807.1

-

To Lieutenant David Porter, U.S. Navy, U. 6. Schooner En!wprire, from mdahipmsn
James S. Higinbothom, U. S. Navy
,??6*Odr 1806.
US BOMBABDS
SIR It will be necessary for the present, that I should have ten Men, for the
urpose of clearing NP 1, for the reception of such sick Officers, & Men, that msy
ge ordered on board, by Doctor Marshall. [LC. D. Porter P, Let. & Ord., 1805-1808.1

296

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1806 TO 1807

To Master Commandant John Smith, U. S. Navy, commanding the U. S. Brig
Siren, from Captain John Rodgers, U. S. Navy
U S SHIP Constdufion
Leghorn Road 16e Odr 1806
Sm As none of our public Vessels have been a t Genoa, and having a desire that
our Officers should acquire a general Knowledge of the principal Ports in the
Mediterranean - I have to desire that you proceed from hence to that port, and
after Communicating with our Consul, and informing yourself of the properties of
the Port, and the Consequence of the American Trade thereto - you will proceed
to Naples, a t which, you being in bad health, and your conceiving that you can be
benifitted by the Waters of Ischia - you in consequence have my permission to
remain with the Syren a t Naplee to a period leaving yourself time to join the
Squadron by the 15aof Decr next - you are de~iredto afford our Commerce all
the lawful protection In your power during your absence, and Communicate with
me a t Syracuse, as often as oppertunities offer [LC. JRP, Order Book No. 2, 1805-1806.1
To William Eaton from Captain Edward Preble, U. 6. Navy
Duplicate
PORTLANDOct' 98* 1806
DEARSIR I t has been announced that you were to sail for the U S. with our
Gallant friend Decatur, in the Congress, and expected to arrive, in all this month;
I presume ere this, that you are safely landed, and beg leave most heartily, &
sinceerely, to congratulate you on your return, to your Native country, after
having rendered it such essential services.
I have the honor to acknowledge the rect of your duplicate dated 25th Jan7
Village of Dimanhour, this is the only letter I have r e d slnce m-e parted, altho I
Eave written several to you
I thank you for your obliging attention in making
this very Interesting communication, wh~chI could not iu justice to yourself,
withhold from the public, through the medium of a News paper, as it places your
The
Intrepidity, Address, Enterprize, &perseverance in a correct point of view
arduous and dangerous services you have performed has justly Immortalised
your name, and astonished, not only your country, but the world. If pecuniary
resourses, & naval strength had been a t your command, what would you not have
done! The opinion expressed of my services, in your Pamphlet, detailing operations of the S q u a d r ~ nunder my command, cannot but be extremely flattering.
I have often regreted that you did not leave the U States with me, an earlier
acquaintance might have given greater reputsti011 to our arms, while I W a s on the
station, but could not have increased your Glory beyond its present Zenith, for
you have acquired Immortal honor, and established the fame of your country in
the East. I ho e you will meet a recompence, such as you deserve.
1 arrived a t 8ashington the 4 s March last, the day of Presidential Inaugurc
tion, and was favorably received
on my return I took passage by water from
New York to Newport, of course had not the honor of seeing your Lady, but
our letters were carefully forwarded. I have lately been employed in building
6omb Ketches, & Gun Boats, a business I am pretty well tired of
if no Nobler
game offers I &all soon give up the chase.
The public are anxiously expecting details from you of the most interesting
nature, respecting your expedition, and the Tripolitan peace; and I can assure
you, i t will afford me much pleasure, to receive a letter from you, should you
find leisure to drop me a few lines. 1 hope soon to see you in this State where
your countrymen stand ready to receive, & pay you distingushed honors due to
your merit. I presume you will be received a t every place you visit, with a
welcome that cannot but be highly gratifying. Kot long since I rec4 a letter from
Dyson with your seal. You cannot conceive how mortified & disappointed I
was on opening i t to find it wanted your signature. as it is not wrtain that you
have yet arrived, I shall close, and wait until I hear from you.
[LC. EPP, Vol. 16, Aug. 1805-Jan. 1806.1

-

-

-

-

.

To Captain Stephen Decatnr, Jr., U. S. Navy, from Captain Edward Preble, U. S.
Navy

PORTLAND
Oetr &?.1805
Dr SIR Your much esteemed favor forwarded by Mr Dennison, I have been h o d
with, i t is the only letter I have re& from you altho I have written several I
oannot but be gratified by the favorable opinion you are pleased to express of

WARS WITH BRRBARY POWERS

297

my talents for the Office i t was supposed I was appointed to. altho I have not
eilt vanity to imagine myself possessed of the newsary qualifications to discharge
the duties of that important station [Secretary of the Navy] with reputation
either to myself or Country, of course had I been actually appointed I should not
have accepted. I regret that env mallice or any uncharitable disposition,
should have led the Magnanimous 8omd9 or Colt so far from the line of correct
conduct as to endeavour to build their reputations on detraction - They ought
to consider that such foundations are of short duration, and cannot fail eventually
to involve them in difficulty, if not ruin. it cannot be a matter of much consequence to the meritorious Officers & Seamen I had the honor to command
what the opinion of those man may be so long as their Country acknowledges
their gallant services I am not astonished a t the singular enquiry the C o m ~is
making respecting Blakes conduct, nor a t the new and singular mode of enquiry,
as I Know the man - I however believe that if MI B. had a proper investigation
of his conduct, by the officers who had an opportunity to witness it. unless
their opinion is very much changed he would not be very well sattisfied with the
result - I t appears to me that the conduct of the Commd is not calculated to
stimulate the officers to great exertions or heroic actions - what his o ~ i n i o nis
respecting me is of very little consequence - that my signal for acfion wss
rem mature for Mr B. is ~ r e t t well
s
understood.
^
Your friend Dennis enclosed your letter in one from himself. altho I am not
personally acquainted his character is known & admired by me, and if ever
opportunity offers to render him service I shall do it with the same pleasure that
I should cultivate a personal acquaintance. It was cruel and indicative of little
minds in those two great men the moment they [ma. mutilated] to treat the worthy
Commde Barron his amiable Brother your friend D and in fact all our friends
in the manner they have done.
I thank you for your friendly congratulation on the honorable reception I
met with from our Government. I shall always feel deeply indebted to your
Gallantry, for a large proportion of my Consels
you have immortalised your
name by actions wllich your Country & the World know how to estimate, your
reception will convince you of it.
I am anxious to hear from you, be assured a long letter will be most acceptable
& gratifying to my friendship.
P S. that a Col [Tobias Lear] should command our Squadron as you inform
me must be matter most of surprise to abroad a s well as a t home [LC. EPP, Vol. 16, Aug. 1805-Jan. 1806.1

-

To James Dodge, acting as U. S. Charge dlAffaires, Tunis, from Tobias Lear, U. S.
Consul General, Algiers
LEGHOBX
Ocfr 69% 1805.DEARSIR.- On the 4'h of Septr we left Tunis Bay, and to avoid the quarantine of 40 days, to which we should have been subjected here, had we come direct
from Barbary, we went round by Sicily and Kaples. - FVe arrived a t Syracuse
on the 9th remained there till the 18th when we sailed for hiessina, where we
passed 3 or 4 days and sailed for Naples. From the latter place the Constitution
sailed for Leghorn on the 6th of the present month. - The next day hlrp Lear
and myself set off by land, and after a pleasant and most interesting Journey,
reached this place on the 19th where we found the Constitution 8: Brig Sfpen,
which had arrived in 4 days from Naples I have established for you here, a Credit of Two Thousand Spanish dollars, on
the House of Mess* Degan, Purviance 8: CQNavy Agents of the U. States, for
which you may draw in such sums as you may have occasion for I rec4 a letter from Mr Gavino, our Consul a t Gibralter dated Sept. 18* saying
that the U. S Ft Congress, with the Ambassador, would sail from that place the
next da for the U. S.
The g a r between the Emperors of France & Germany has commenced, and
threatens to be a very serioris & bloody business, particular1 if Russia should
take a part in it; of which there appears no doubt. - The Brench are said to
have gained great advantages on the Rhine; and it is reported that the Austrians
have been ~uccessfulagainst the Army of Italy, Commanded by Memenis. But
altho' we are so near the scene of Action; we can place but little reliance on reports
which are very contradictory. The French Troo s left this place about 6 w-eeka
ago, and i t now enjoys a perfect Neutrality. &w long i t may remain in this

298

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1806 TO 1807

happy state is uncertain. We have no late news from the U. States. I enclose
some papers of the latest date, which may afford you some amusement. I expect to sail for Algiers in a few days; where I shall find a great change in
affairs; but I think nothing unfavourahle to us - On the 1st of Sepr after the
Massacre and exterpateur of the Jews, the Dey and his prime Minister were
killed by the Soldiers, and another Dey chosen who is said to be popular with
the Soldiers & people. His name is Hamet, and was some time since principal
Secretary to the late Dey. - The internal disturbances still continue; but the
City is a t present tranquil & safe. I enclose you a letter for hfr Ridgely a t Tripoli which I pray you to forward
by the first good conveyance, either by Sea or Land. I shall hope for the pleasure of hearing from you soon and have no doubt but
all will remain well in your quarter.
I pray you to present my respectful Compliments to the Consuls in Tunis,
whose attentions I remember with pleasure, and also to &I; Allegro, as well as to
such of the great men of Tunis who may enquire after me. I write by this Opporunity to Mr. Tulin the Swedish Consul. P. S MITLear & Commodore Rodgers desire their Compliments to you. [NA. SDA. FA, CL, Tunis, Vol. 2 (7240) 1801-1809.1

129 October 18051
To Lieutenant David Porter, U. S. Navy, U. S. Schooner Enterprize, from Sailing
Master Alexander C. Harrison, U. S. Navy
SIR I have had the honor of receiving Pour Orders by Lieut Smith, The Cory a l and one of the privates has been inuoculated for the Small Pox, therefore
have only three to stand Centry, nevertheless if you think proper your orders
shall be obeyed
Octr 29th 1806
[LC. D. Porter PI I&. I% Ord., 1305-1803.1
[29 October 18051

To Lieutenant David Porter, U. S. Navy, U. S. Schooner Enterprize, from Hidehipman
Daniel McNeill, Jr., U. S. Navy
SIR, I am sorry to inform you that I have but four men to do duty; they are
not seamen, I therefore think we should be a disgrace to the Squadron. (Signed) DAN!MQNEILL.
Octr 29 t, 1806
[LC. D. Porter P, Let. & Ord., 1805-1808.1
To Secretary of the Navy from Captain John Rodgers, U. 6. Navy
U S SHIP Comtitutim
Leghorn Road 90'8 Octr 1806
SIR I have the honor to acquaint you, that I arrived here on the 10th Instant
from Syracuse, having called a t Messirm and Naples, in my pansage, and shall
leave this the day after to morrow for Algiers, to land Coll Lear, whom I brought
for the purto this plsce, as mentiond in my former advices by the Congresspose of procurin the Bienniel present - After landing Col! Lear, I shall return
t o Syracuse to join the Squadron again - The Regency of Algiers, has experienced such Convulsions, within those last four Months, that i t is almost impossible
to make any Calcuiations respectin its fate, on the conduct of its Government,
sltho the reault, cannot effect the fnterest of the U States - They are much
weaken'd by their late domestic broils, not only in the City of Algiers itself on account of the Assassination of the late Dey, and the Usurpation of his Successor,
(who i t appears was his own private Secretary) but in consequence of nearly one
half of the Regency, bordering on Tuuis, and Morocco, having renounced their
Alliance to Algiers, and proclaimed the Emperor and Bey their Sovereigns and
attach'd themselves accordingly, to the local situations of their Country - ks
I have mademo Changes of any Consequence, in the disposition of the Squadron,
since my last communications by the Congress, I feel i t not necessary to m y more,
than, that since that period, I have received advicea from Doctor Ridgely, Charge

NQ32

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS
des Mair's at Tri oli, expressive of the friendship, and good ffrith of that Ree p c y , and from
Simpon, Consul for Morocco, not Ezpresrc of any &arm,
opies of both of which, I enclose you - Since the seperation of the E88ez &
Vizen from the Squadron t o the Giberalter Station, I have received letters from
Capt Csmpbell,and MFGavino, but they mention nothing worth communicatingI n fine our &sires a t present, so far as relates to the different Barbary States,
appear to be perfectly a t rest, and indeed quite so, on this side the Atlantic, farther than what is occasioned by British and Spanish depredations on our Commerce, particularly in passing Gibraltar It appears a t this moment that the fate of
Europe depends upon the success of the French Arms - Bounaparte, a t the head
of the French Army, in Eight Days after the commencement of the War with
Austria and Russia has beaides, making himself Master of several Austrian Garrisons, taken the famous City of Ulma, and upwards of 45,000 of the flower of the
Austrian Army among which are 25 General Oficers, the Russian Army had not
yet arrived a t the Theater of War, from the part that Prussia, a t present, is acting, she appears to be a Bamer, to a Junction between Russia and Austria After a passive War between England and France, of near Three Years the
Dogs of War, are now, on a sudden let loose, and it is impossible to say what will
be the result - England and her new Confederates, appear not to have understood one, another, their plans have been badly concerted - This new change in
the affairs of Europe, appears already to present, a favorable opening for the
Extention of our Commerce, into Russia and Turkey, as the American F
at
this period Stands alone, where it is necessary to connect the security of th%erchant with the pride of the Goverment, and honor and General Interest of the
Nation The Trade of the Black Sea would be of immense importance to the U States,
and their remains no doubt, but that the Ottoman Port, would very gladly enter
into any Commercial Intercourse, that our Goverment would propose The Squadron I shall hold in readiness to meet the execution of your orders in
24 Hours after their reception, and should the results of the Tunisian Embassy not
prove satisfactory to the U States, permit me to suggest to you, the necessity of
the E s s a and Vixens being ordered to join me in, com any with the Ship that
Conducts the Ambassador back again to Tunis - If &ar is the consequence I
will agree to forfit my Head, if I do not make the result, the Interest of the United
States, without a single Item more force than what remains in the Mediterranean
[NDA. Captain's LB, Vol. 3, 1805.1

d

-

To Secretary of the Navy from Captain Hugh G. Campbell, U. 15. Navy
U.S.SHIPE8sez.
Harbor of Malapa Octr 30tP 1806.
SIR I beg leave to inform you that since the dep&ure of the John A d a w
our commerce has experienced a severe check, in consequence of a recent order
from the British Government; to detain for ad'udication, all American Vessels
having on board the produce of French or ~ p a n i s hColonies, which has been acted
upon in the most prompt and energetick manner, much to the prejudice of our
trade;
On my first arrival on this station, the conduct of Spanish Cruizers appeared t o
me unjust in the extreme, and now find that of the British equally so, particulars
of which I presume will be made known by our Consub to the department of
State;
The Upper Works of the E s s a have not been corked since she left America,
consequently they are rendered very leaky insomuch as to make every thing uncomfortable below, which defect and approach of the rainy season induced me
to avail myself of t h ~ sPort, i t being most convenient for the repairs of the ship;
leaving C a p t ~Cox in the Vizen to convoy a few American Vessels to the Westwsrd
clear of Cape Spartell, likewise to inform such American Vessels as he might fall
in with of their e m b m ~ a s ' dsituation, and protect them from Insult 8s far as the
nature of their case would admit. I arrived here on the 14tb Insti since that period we have had seven days of heavy
rain, which has so much retarded our rogress, that ten days of good weather are
yet required to prepare the Ship for t e a ; I have no accounts of our Squadron aloft since I left them in Tunis Ba to the
Commander of which 1 ive regular advice of my proceedings, here, nor s h l I be
unmindful of the Navy $epartment, when any thing of consequence transpires, T h k comes by one of the Shi s under convoy of the Vizen, that left Gibrslter
on the 23.1 but meeting n t h %.81mg Wind. before they could clear the StraiY,

-

300

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1806 TO 1807

were forced by the Current West of the Road that prevented them from regaining
Gibralter, and with difficulty get in here - The Bends and upper works ofthe
Viam are very open, and in bad Weather makes much Water, which will oblige
me to order her into Port to refit as soon as the Essez is ready for Sea, and prior
to the inclemency of the Season setting in Letters from Madrid by this days post, mention the capture of fifteen thousand
Austrian troops with two thousand Horse in Bavaria, by forc'd marches of the
French that compleatly surrounded them, - You will probably hear ere' this
can reach you of the desperate action between the English and combin'd Fleets
on the 20th Instt in sight of Cadiz, particulars of which as respects the latter I here
enclose for your perusal, which can be depended on, they being carefully collected,
by a Gentleman in Cadiz and a particular correspondent, with the house of Gravina and Kirkpatrick of this place. m7hen ready for sea my intention is to run down the Coast to Cadiz taking in
my way Gibraltcr, Algeziras, Tangiers &C+.Admiral h'elson and Collingwood are Killed, likewise Six British Ca tains * * *
Since writing the above 1 have received a second account from $diz by this
days post Collingwood is yet living
[NDA. Captain's LB, Vol. 3, 1806.1
-

To Captain John Rodgers, U. S. Navy, from John Gevino, U. S. Consul, Gibraltar
G I B ~3 0 t h Oct? 1806
Dr SIR I rote you 1%the A'atilus since the11 have none of your favt~. Our
&air with Barbary without Sovelty. Publick health has kept well this season
in this quarter. KO Kerns from the U. S. The Essm was a t hlaiaga, & the Vixen
gone to the West with the Trade - a Great action took place the 21.; Ins* off
Cadiz between the Brit'! flcet & the Combined one of france $ Spain as pr the inclosed Paper, but a Gale of Wind from S. W. since has Ocasiond the loss of
some of the Prizes. [LC. JRP, Series Two, Vol. 3, 1805-1807.1
TO Secretary of the Navy from Master Commandant Isaac Chauncey, U. S, Navy
I'.S. SLOOPOF WAR [BRIG]Hornet
New York SlatOctq 1806
SIR I arived here this day after a pleasant passage - The Hornet answers
my fulest and most sanguine expectations, She Sails fast, works well and I think
the stiffest Vessel I ever was on Board of, She certainly does credit to the
Country that she belongs to - and to her constructure and I hope will not loose
i t by her Colnmander Commodore Murray is here in the Adams, T therefore shall make all my future
communications through him
[NDA. hlC LB, 1804-5.1
Extract from log of U. S. Brig Hornet, of 18 Guns, kept by Sailing Master Charles
Fitaherbert Grandison,* U. S. Navy, Master Commandant Isaac Chauncey, U.8.
Navy commanding, 31 October 1805
At 1 A m the British frigate Cambrian,C a p t ~Beresford Sent her boat on board
a t 2 the Boat return9 same time took in sail and hove too, a t 3 bore up with a
light breeze At 8 A m the high land of neversink bore N B W Dist about 4 leap
At 9 AM his hlagestys Frigate sopke [sic] us again same time Sandy Hook bore
N W B N Dist about 4 lea@ At 112 past 11 the light house on S hook bore South
Dist about 2 miles At the same time a Pilot came on board, ends with Moderate
breezes and hazey weather several sail in Compv Standz in Diff t Directions
rUnless otherwk indicated all subsequent extrscts from this log, included in this volume of Naml

Raordi, were by Bailing M E S Orandison.]
~

[NA. NDA.

original, 1805-1810.1

To Secretary of the Navy from Captain Samuel Barron, U. 6. Navy
HAMPTONN O V l~e t 1806 SIR Your communication of the 18th U l t ~should have been sooner replied to
but the weak state to which I am reduced by long ilness, has rendered me incapable

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS
of writing & i t is with much difficulty that I can a t this moment, See sufficiently
to commit my Sentiments to paper I t is my opinion that when an O5cer (holding a Commission in the Service of
his Country) is ordered on any particular service, he should Obey Such Order, &
if he thinks it of a nature either dishonourable or disagreeable, and declines i t
without the Consent of the Authority which invests him with such Command, i t
indubitably may be considered, a Resignation of his Commission [NDA. Captain's LB, Vol. 3, 1805.)
Extract from log of U. S. Brig Hornet, of 18 Guns, Master Commandant Isaac
Chauncey, U. 8. Navy, commanding, 1 November 1805
First and Middle part of these 24 hours fresh breezes with small rain latter
part pleasant weather - At 2 P M passed the U S Frigate Adams lying a t Staten
Island and Cheered her as we passed At 3 past 2 Came to an Anchor in 7 fsl
water abreast of Governors Island and about $4 a mile to the south$ of Rew York
At 5 PM Struck Royal & Top G+ Yards a t % past 10 Confined Rob$ Berry a
Marine for Denial of Duty and insolence, At 10 A m Unbent Royals T Gt sails
& Str sail
[NA. NDA. original, 1805-1810.1
To Lieutenant David Porter, U. S. Navy, U. S. Schooner Enfcrprize, from l a s t e r
Commandant Isaac Hull,U. S. Navy
U S. Brrr~Argus
Nou? 1806. SIR I have been this day informed, that four men have deserted from the U.S.
Ketch Spitfire, one from the Nautilus, and one from Gun Boat NP. 8 -And
from the best information I can get, I hare every reason to beleive, that they
have gone towards hfessina. I have in consequence to request, that you lose no time in getting a description
of the above men, and proceed with the U, S, Schooner Enterprize, under your
Command, to that port, and should they have .arrived there, you will use every
means in your power, to apprehend t,hem, and return to this port uith all convenient dispatch. I have likewise been informed by Mr Dyson, that a small vessel, laden with
Brandy, and Bread, for the use of the Squadron, has been out from Palermo, a
long time, bound to this place, Should she have arrived, a t Messina, and afraid
to proceed, which, I think is the case, you mill take her under Convoy on your
return, hut should she not be there, you will endeavour to inform yourself, if
any such Vessel has been heard of, along the Coast to the Westward. [LC. D. Port,er P, Let. & Ord., 1805-1808.1
- -

To General LaVillette, Governor of Leghorn, from Captain John Bodgers, U. S.
Navy
U S SHIP C c ~ u t i t ~ t i m
Leghorn Rood SP Nwr 1806
SIR I am sorry that absolute necessity should oblige me to address you on a
subject, as equally painful to my pride as the result is insulting to my Country
My Conduct towards you Sir, and your Goverment has ever been marked with
respect, & I most sincerely regret that such conduct .has not met a due return.
Last night a t 25 minutes past 6 OClock on attempt~ngto land, I was Insulted
in the most Grose, and unprecedented manner by the Guard a t the entrance of
the Port, and to aggravate the Indignity I had the mortification to be told that
This I disbelieved, but as the outrageous
your orders sanctioned this abuse
and Indignant manner in which the Insult was offered, leaves me no room for
farther explination, without rehersing to my wounded a circumstance which my
Insulted feeling forbid - farthan than to request that you immediately take the
necessary measures to repair the injury I have sustained, that you treat the Gentle
man who hands you this (who is Chaplain of this S h ~ p with
)
the respect that is due
to his Character, and that you do not detain him, by force one Single moment,
for if you do, I shall immediately put into execution the necessary measures to
convince you have Pacific & respectful, not only my Intentions but my Conduct
have hitherto been, by demoustratively convincing to yourself, and the Respect-

-

-

302

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1806 TO 1807

able Inhabitants of the City of Leghorn, that an American Commodore possessea
the power of opening Gates, with as much facility as Governor Viliette
[LC. J R P , L Bk B, May 1805-July 1806.1

-

Extract from journal of Hesekiab Loomis, Steward, U. 6, Navy, in U. S. Frigate
Coryeu, Captain Stephen Decatur, Jr., U. I.Bavy, commanding, Sunday, 8
Bovember 1806
Saw the land a t 9 o'clock A. &I. At half past 12 o'clock took a pilot. Saw
Smith's Island a t the same time bearing W. N. W. a t 4 o'clock P. M. saw Cape
Henry Light House, and came to anchor a t half past 11 o'clock P. M.
[L. F. Middlebrook. NDA copy.]
To Lieutenant General LaViLlette, Governor of Leghorn, from Cap*
John
Bodgers, U. 6. Navy
NP 36
U S SHIP Constitution
Leghorn Roads 4 NOVF
1806
SIR I regret that the representations made to you, through the American Consul, have not proved sufficient to save me the necessity of addressing you persond y , on a subject as painfull to mv pride, as the result is Insulting to my Country
and to my own Person, and I now Sir inform you,that if you do not immediately render me that just atisfaction, which my demands require; that I shall fee1 myself
bound immediately to exhibit the whole agair to higher authority than yourself As the Consul ~JW,in person represented to you, the Grose and unprecedented
manner in which the Insult (by the Guard at the entrance of the Port, a t 25 Minutes past 6 OClock on the Evening of the 2d Instant) was offered - I beg that
you will not require of me, to repeat over again, a Circumstance the rehearsal of
which, my Insulted feelings forbid - Be pleased to inform the d 5 c e r who hands
you this, when I may expect an answer - I n the mean time I regret that any
Circumstance should oblige me, to inform you, that I shall use the necessary measures to repel similar abuse, not only to myself, but every Individual under my
Command [NDA. Captain's LB, Vol. 3, 1805.1
Presumably to Secretary of the Navy from Captain Stephen Decatnr, Jr., U.S. Navy
UNITEDSTATES[FRIGATE]
Conpetx
Hampton Road Novemr 14,18061
NP40
SIR I have the honor to inform you I arrived here yesterday after a passage of
forty days from Tangier, having on board an Ambassador from the Bey of Tunis to
the Government of the United States, My object in coming here was to procure a supply
. of provisions which were
nearly expended
My orders from Commodore Rodgers were to forward the dispatches from the
first port of America I might arrive in - In compliance of which I have engaged
a boat in which f send Lieu? Tripp[e] who will have the honor of delivering them,
the merite of this deserving Officer being so well known renders i t unnecessary
for me t o aay any thing in his behalf
[NDA. captain'^ LB, Vol. 3, 1805.1
- -

Extract from journal of Herekiah Loomis, Steward, U. 6. Navy, in U. 8. Frigate
Congrcu, Captain Stephen Decatur, Jr., U. 6. Navy, commanding, Monday, 4
Rovember 1806
At half past 3 A. M. got underway and anchored in Hampton Roads at 10
o'clock A. M.
[L. F. Middlebrook. NDA copy.]

303

WARS WITLT BARBARY POWERS

To Lieutenant General LaVillette, Governor of Leghorn, from Captain John
Bodgers, U. 6. Navy
U S SHIP Cmtitutwn
Leghorn Roads 6 Nmr 1806
SIR I have received your letter of yesterday, in reply to mine of the proceeding day, wherein you not only refuse to give me that satisfaction, which I had
a right to expect, but have augmented the injury b informing me, that you approve the Conduct of your Guard; without even Anfronting me, or u&g any
thing like Impartial measures, to inform yourself whether that Guard told you
truth or not - Let me ask you Sir, if you could reasonably 'su pose, that a
guard, who had without any just cause, offered violence to an 8 5 c e r of my
Rank, or even to a private Individual, acknowledge the fact? - Or is i t likely
that I should demand redress, when no injury had been done me?
Even admit that I felt inclined to Insult your Guard, (which is in itself Insulting you) can i t be supposed by any reasonable Man, thatSIshould have taken
such an abstract method of developing my intentions, when a t this moment I have
under my Command in these Seas, Twenty three Sail of different discriptions In matters of dispute, between Parties, even in Civil Law i t is cuetomary I believe, for the Impartial Judge to hear the evidence of both Parties This is placing the affair on its plainest basis; - But Sir, I do not mean i t to be
understood, that I wish you to act contrary to the System, which you have thus
adopted in rendering Justice, farther than merely to exhibit in faint Colours, to
your Immaginatia, what claims I have on your Government, and to which I shall
exhibit the whole affair, for redress; when I assert that the representations made to
you, by the Guard, are as utterly untrue, As your Conduct to me has been unjust,
and Indignant If I had not a sincere respect and regard, for the Rights and happiness of the
Tuscan Nation, and particularly thst of the Inhabitants of Leghorn, as also the
most perfect respect for the Sovereign Rights of your Government, you may be
assured General, that I should have devised other means to have obtained redress,
for the Indignities which you have been pleased t o sanction, a t the expence of
my Pride, and the Rights of my Nation When I appealed to you Sir, i t was in expectation, that you would impartially
investigate the matter, and as impartially render me that Justice, which my Injured feelings demanded [NDA. Captain's LB, Vol. 3, 1805.1

-

To Lieutenant David Porter, U. 6. Navy, U. 8. Schooner Enlrrprfrc. from William
Biggins, U. S. Navy Agent, Malta
~ I A L T A6'4 Nmr 1806
DEARSIR The Stores which have been left on board the Smacks remain there
a t the request of Sir Alexr Ball & of course such as are not belonging to them must
be hereafter accounted for by him, this arrangment took place from our not
knowing exactly what was or what was not included with the Account to be
rendered his Excellency. [LC. D. Porter P, Let. 8- Ord., 1805-1808.1
[7 November 18051
To Mr. Moxai, First Minister to Her Majesty the Queen Regent of M a , Florence,
from Captain John Rodgers, U. S. Navy
SIR I t is not without pain, equal to the Importance of the Subject that I
presume to address your Excellency on a matter of Complaint wainst any Individual of a Nation, in whose Interests and honor, you bear so Conspicuous a
pert; and more particularly so, that, it should be in opposition to one so respectable
in Rsnk and Societv as the resent Governor (General La Villette) of the City
of Leghorn Whenever disputes arise between the Individuals of Nations, which can Servc
in any way to disturb the Friendship and Good understanding, existing between
their res ctive Goverments, i t is but just that the Part agrieved should be
redremeEnd the A gresaor punished I n proportion to tho d m e q u e n c e resulting,
or that may result t ere from Without tresspausing farther on your Excellency's patience permit me to

f

304

-

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1806 TO 1807

Exhibit through you, for the Consideration of your Goverment, the motive of
this address
I came to this Port on the 10tP Ultimo, having business of Importancetotransact,
with the Navy Agents of my Nation, concerning the Squadron, which I have the
honor to Command in these Seas; and Immediately on my arrival waited on the
Governor (General La Villette) and in a manner a t the same time, to have flattered
myself that I had, a t least, a Claim to the ordinary Civilities of the Port; This I
was induced to believe from the adduced reasons
Not only that the Goverment of Tuscany from the Considerable Commercial
Intercourse, existing between its Subjects, and the Citizens of the United States,
but from its Magnanimity, and Friendly disposition towards all Nations, and
that the first Executive Officer too, so important a trust, as the representation
of a place of such consequence as Leghorn, w o ~ ~ feel
l d a Disposition to promote
the Interest of his Goverment (and for which I feel the most disinterested regard)
by treating the Men of War of my Kation, x-ith due respects; But I am sorry
to say, that I have not been so fortunate, as to have experienced, the smallest
Proof of General La Villette's friendly intentions - KO on the Contrary 1have
experienced the reverse, and in a manner as painful to my feelings, as the nature
of the Indi nity is Insulting to my Country - I have been twice Insulted by
a Guard of goldiers, in the most. Grose and unprecedented manner, at the entrance
of the port, and have been refused redress, by the General, in terms as unworthy
the Rank I bear, as its Kature is degrading to my Country, and to myself Enormous falsities have been represented by the same Guards, to the General,
wherein they accuse me, of having been the first Aggressor; and he has suffered
his understanding to be so far imposed on, as to believe, or effect to believe, all
that has been told him, to the prejudice of my Pride, and the honor of my NationAs it would be imposing on your patience, to recite in detail, all that has passed;
I shall content myself for the present by requesting, that your Goverment will
do me the Justice to Investigate impartially the Circumstance, which gave rise
to my thus troubling you I was here about Two Years ago, a t a time when this place was Garison'd by
French Troops, and the Conduct of the Military part of the Community, was
then so very different, to what i t no- is, that I know not how to account for the
Change I have by General La Villette, been refused En~rance,into the City, a t the
early hour of 25 Minutes past 6 OClock in the Evening, under a pretence, th%t
I had attempted to force the Chain, and other ways insulted the Guard Such an offer of violence I can assure your Excellency, was the most distant
from my Intentions, and it can, (if my own word is not sufficient) be incontestably
proved, by some of the most respectable Inhabitants of this City, that no such
thing ever happend.
Is it likely that I would require redress, when I had sustained no Injury?
I s i t reasonable that I would attempt to violate, the Sovereign Rights, and
Peace, of a whole City, with my own hands, when I have in these Seas, Twenty
three Sail of vessels of War, of different discriptions, under my Command? Or
can i t be supposed by any Impartial Community, that I should have thus
pacifically required redress, If my disposition towards your Sovereign rights,
were not the most unequivocally respectful? My stay here is SO limited, as to oblige me, to make the American Consul
Resident here, the Medium of Conveyance, in the place, of doing myself the
honor of waiting on your Excellency in Person.
I therefore beg, that the answer, you may think proper to honor me with,
may be Conveyed to me, through him, in order that I may explain the same to
my Goverment Trusting that your Goverment will render me, the most Ample satisfaction.
I content myself for the present by adding that, * * *
U S SHIPConstitution
Leghorn Road 7 t b Nmr 1805
[LC. JRP, L Bk B, May 1805-Jiily 1806.1

-

To Captain Stephen Decatur, Jr., U. S. Navy, U. S. Frigate Congrus, Hampton Boads,
from Secretary of the Navy
NAVYDEP!9 Nmr 1806.
With respect to the Tunisian Embassador, you rnay either land him st Hampton
or take him with you to New York, ss may be the most agreeable to him.

-

[NDA. OSW,Vol,?, 1805-1807.1

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS
Extract from journal of Hezeliiah Loomis, Steward, U. 6. Navy, in U. 8. Frigate
Gngrws, Captain Stephen Decatur, Jr., U. 6. Navy, commanding, Saturday, 9
November 1805
Sailed for Washington City.
[L. F. hfiddlebrook. KDA copy.]
--

-

To Master Commandant Isaac Hull, U. S. navy, from Lieutenant David Porter,
U. S. Navy
THE U. S. SCHI.
Enterpn'ze
ON BOARD
10th November 1806
SIR, Agreeable to your Orders of the 24 Inst I procured a discription of the
deserters mentioned therein, and proceeded for Messina, where I arrived the next
day. - I n compliance with your Orders I made the necessary enquiries respecting the deserters, and could obtain no information of them, but on enquiring for
the Vessel was informed by Mr Broadbent our agent, that a Vessel from Palermo
bound to Syracuse, with Spirits for the An~ericanSquadron wae lost, a short time
since on the coast of Sicily between Syracuse and Messina - Supposing this to be
the Vessel I was sent in search of, and knowing the great want of Spirits in the
Squadron, I concluded it for the good of the service to make a purchase of as much
Brandy as I could conveniently stow on the Schooners decks, and accordingly
purchased eight Pipes, for the use of the Squadron generally, a statement of the
cost and quantity of which I herev-ith Enclose you. - I left with our Agent a t
Messina a copy of the discription of deserters, and took on board of my Vessel
from Prison, a man who had deserted from the U. States Ship Constitution, when
last a t that place. A considerable quantity of Brandy such as I have on board is to be had a t
Messina a t the same price, and as it is very cheap, and very good, permit me t o
suggest the propriety of sending a Vessel round to Messina, to purchase a large
q ~ a n t i t ~for
y the use of the Squadron - I could not but regret, while there, that I
did not feel myself authorised to Charter a Vessel and load her with it, on Account
of the U.States. - Permit me also to state to you, that Wines can be had there,
a t a much more moderate price, and of a far superior quality to the Sour Wines,
we have been using a t Symcuse, so much to the prejudice of the health of the
Crews of our Vessels, and which-ever you may prefer, Wine or Brandy, will bein
my opinion cheaper, to send a Vessel to Messina, to bring i t to Syracuse, then to
purchase a t this place a t the extravagant price, we have been in the habit of
giving for them. [KDA. Isaac Hull LB, 1803-1806.1
Extract from journal of Eezekiah Loomis, Steward, U. S. Navy, in U. S. Frigate
Congress. Captain Stephen Decatur, Jr., U. S. Navy, commanding, Monday, 11
November 1805
Put back into Hampton Roads. On account of having orders to proceed t o
New York before the men were discharged.
[No more entries until 18 h'ovenlber.1
[L. F. Middlebrook. K D A copy.]

To Secretary of State from Peter Kuhn, Jr., U. 8. Consul, Genoa
GENOA18 Novr 1806.
SIR I have the honour to inform you that on the 28 CIOin the evening came to
anchor in this harbour the United States Armed Brig Syren C a p t ~John Smith
from Leghorn and was admitted to immediate pratique
U on the enterence of the Brig into port she was visited according to custom by
an &cer from the Frigate Commanding in the harbour, who I am Sorry to say,
put very uncommon questions to C a p 0 Smith; some of which he did not think
proper to satisfy; such as, "what brings you here, how long do you intend to stay,"
$ 9 $ 9 - I t is but ~eldom,I believe that our Ships of War are seen in French
orts in the Mediterranean, and the Syren the only one that has ever appeared in
Benoa; which induced the Commandant Afloat (asI have since been informed) to s u s
pect her to have been an En lish Vessel under the disguise of American Colours 1presented Cspr Smith t%e next day to His Serene Highness The Arch T--

306

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1806 TO 1807

urer of the Empire, as also to the Prefect & Mayor who were there present; they
recieved him with every mark of respect - in the course of conversation Ca s
Smith mentioned the questions which were put to him on his arrival - H. S.
express'd his displeasure a t the Officers Conduct; and promised a n explanatiod
from the Commandant At an early hour the following Morning I recieved a note from the Arch Treasurer requesting me to send Cap* Smith to him as soon as possible - Caps
Smith waited immediately upon him - "I am informed by the Commandant,
said the Arch Treasurer to Cap* Smith, that you did not conform to regulations
established in the Ports of France with respect to Armed Vessels on your enterence
here".
cap^ Smith replied that he observed the same rules in coming into the
port of Genoa as he had been accustomed to in entering other Ports; i t was his
care to respect them equally with Government and Officers in every place he
came to; that if there were different regulations established in the ports of France
from what were general elsewhere, he requested to be informed what they were
and he should conform to them as far as was practicable; he had however to
complain to his Highness of an Order he had that morning recieved from the
Commandant to take down his Colours and not to hoist them untill those of the
Frigate were hoisted; he did not think proper to attend to the order, nor could he
accord to any regulation of that nature
His Serene Highness demanded if he Saluted the Port on entering - Cap?
Smith said i t was not a general custom, more especiellp for small vessels, - he had
not: H. S. H. replied it was always the custom in the Ports of France, & his want
of observing i t was the cause of what had happened A fair wind Offering on the 1?* the Syren was about to leave Genotl but an
unluaky accident threw her upon a French Corvette and carried away her Jib:
boom - the Syren had some of her sails torn, her fore yard Carried away, and
much rigging cut by the french crew she was consequently obliged to remain in
Port t o repair the damage recieved - This accident produced another note
from the Arch Treasurer demanding my presence - I went immediately to him "The object of his calling me, he said, was to mention that Cap9 Smith had been
insulting anew the Imperial Navy that he had run his Vessel against one of
their Cometts and broken her $ 9 - all done with premeditated intention that i t was a matter of high importence and could only be settled by the Governments"Knowing well the disposition of his Serene Highness, I regulated my
Answers so as to obtain from him all the different charges which the Commandant had made against Capts Smith - I then told him he was much misinformed
and the charges not just - that I accompanied Cap? Smith on board of the Syren
a t his expected departure, waa an eye witness to the accident and 'should relate
to him the occurences precisely as they occured - The Harbour of Genoa as
H. S. H. was acquainted, is of Circular form, and Surrounded by Mountains,
when the Wind blew from the Land (excepting gales) it was never settled but
subject to instantanious shifts from one point of the port to the other, which was
the unfortunate case that morning a t the moment the Syrcn was geting under
way. her Anchors from the ground, a Sudden flaw from the eastward filled her
head Sails and turned her upon the Corvette, doing her some little damage which
Cap? Smith immediately offered to repair - accidents of the like were not uncommon in the port of Genoa altho' they might not come under the notice of
his S. H. I could not forbear expressing that I thought H. S. H's informent a Very jelous
or a Very Malicious Man, as I could not for a moment suppose from the post he
held in the Imperial Navy that he was wanting in a Knowledge of Sea affairs,
by which he would be acquainted that the occurence was altogether accide[n]tle
His Serene Hi h n w appeared well Satisfied with my explanation I n the
interim however 8apr Smith rece4 a Mesauage that he could not leave the port
without permission from the Prince; greatly astonished he came t o the Consulate
where I found him on my return from the Palace - The Arch Tressurer had
not communicated a word to me of this order - I immediately requested an
interview in Company with Cap* Smith which was soon granted - he assured
that the Syren was not detained but could depart when ever cap^ Smith should
think proper - that i t had been a n~isrrunderstandin
The next morning a t day break Caps Smith c a ~ e d u p o nme t o inform that he
had recieved a new order not to leave the Port I address'd H. S. H. a note upon
the subject, to which an answer was returned (Copy inclosed) repeating that the
Syren was not detained in the port of Genoa, and the sole cause of what had
arrived, was the want of adhearence to the eneral established rules Caps Smith left this the following day foraaples

%

-

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

307

I have thought i t my duty Sir to communicate these particulars to you, & to
express my Opinion in favor of the conduct of Cap* Smith which did not deviete
from proper consistency during these proceedings whose origin were entirely
owing to the Missrepresentations made by the Commandant to his Serene Highness the Arch Treasurer
CORNIGLIANO
5 MILES FROM
GENOA
ldtb Nouemr 1805.
[NA. SDA. CL, Genoa, Vol.1, March, 1799-Oct.1836.1
To Secretary of the Navy from Captain Alexander Murray, U. S. Ravy
Adams
U/S FRIGATE
Of Charles9 Bar Nmr 18'b 1805
Sra After a pleasant passage of Six days fine weather, I arrived here, but as
yet have had no communication with the N:Agent, we have brot too many Vessels
off this coast, none of which hath heard or seen any privateem, we shall however
keep a Vigilant look out, and as far as my Authority exten&, endeavour t o execute
your orders with punctuality. - I have since my last respects to you, on the
eve of my de arture from Sandy Hook, been InfomQ that the Hornet is destined
for another grvice, I shall of course continue here, as long as my stores, & the
state of the Adams, will admit of - I n my communications with Capt* Beresford
of the Cambrian off Sandy Hook, he informed me that he intends taking this
station in Decr so that Charleston will be well guarded in future, or in other
words, BJockadQ by him, as N York hath been & against whom I can afford no
Relief to our commerce, i t must rest with the wisdom of Congress to determine
upon the Le ality of his late proceedings in capturing the Vessels he hath of late
done off the %ook The Pilot tells me there hath not been any french privateers off this coast,
since the battle with the Petteral, Sloop of mar [NDA. A. Murray's LB, 1799-1805.1
To Captain John Rodgers, U. S. Navy, from Captain Hugh G. Campbell, U. S. Xavy
U S SHIP E S S ~
Harbor of Malaga RTwr13'b 1806
SIR I beg leave to inform you that I sailed from Gibraltar the 24'h of Septr
having charge of the Franklin and two Schooners, the Harmony of Boston and
Mary Maryland of Norfolk which cleared the Streights by Sunset, a t which time
I stood for Tangiers Bay, where I found the Congress in the act of sailing for
America, the Constellation having left that place the preeceeding evening - On
the 28tb I run over to the Rock & on the 1 1 t h of Octr anchor'd off Algeziras, called
on the Commander in chief who appeared much disposed to serve us I took this
opportunity of mentioning the conduct of his Batteries toward us, having three
diflerent times been fired at by them; he regretted that i t could not be otherwise
for reason that the British had frequently deceived and insulted them under
American Colours, that the only satisfaction he could give me on that head was
to Keep clear of Gun shot, or send a Boat and declare ourselves friends The John A d a m clear'd the Streights on the 30tC Septr by which conveyance
I was under the necessity of sending Mr Worthington home in arrest on charges
exhibited against him by Midshipman Charles Robinson, particulars of which I
here enclose for our information MI Pinckneg %asleft Spain, Mr Bodwin supercedes him who is now in London,
and soon expeoted a t Madrid, MI Irwin has already been presented as charged with
our sffsirs a t that Court until1 the Minister arrived' I see no prospect of a War with Spain, nor can I find any person that thinks there
The combined fleets left Cadi? pn the 19'4 & 20% Ulto consisting of
will be:
thirty three e l of the hne, whom the Bntish engaged on the 21mr with twenty
seven sail, the result is that ten sail only have return'd to Cadiz and but four of
them worth repairing two of which had struck to the British which were mann'd
with a Prize Master and crew, and unfortunately were drove into Cadiz in conse uence of their crippled state and severity of weather.
%he Upper works of the Essex being very leaky insomuch as to render every
thing uncomfortible below, induced me to avml myself of this port to remedy
that defect prior to the inclemency of the approach?ng Season, having !eft the
Vizsn a t Algeairss to take charge of two American S h p s through the S h g h t a

-

-

-

308

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1805 TO 1807

I n consequence of a recent order from the British Government to detain for
adjudication all Neutrals having on board the produce of French, Spanish or
Dutch Colonies our Commerce has experienced a severe check & several Vessel's
have been carried into Gibralter, for particulars of which I refer you to Mr Gavino.
The Vizen left Gibralter with her convoy on the 24% but meeting with adverse
Winds attempted to regain the Rock but was oblig'd to ancher off this place the
26th from which place she sail'd again for the Westward on the 4tC Inst N B. By an arrival of an American Schooner a t this place We learn of the arrival of the President at. Washington with C0m9 Barron, in better health, & we
may expect daily to hear from the Department.
[LC. JRP,Vol. 1, March 1791-Dec. 1814.1

-

I13 November 18051
To Captain Edward Preble, U. 6, Navy, from Thomas Ttuner, Accountant of the
-vy
DEARSIR This morning I received yours of the 1 s t the Contents shall be duly
attended to.
The Congress is a t Hampton. The Constitution a t Sl Mary's. Captain Stewart
has Just amved a t the Office. and the Constellation I Puppose will be up the first
and the Congress will probably follow in a few days. on first underfair wind
standing she had arrived i t was intended to send her t o New York, and orders
were dispatched accordingly. but that intention I believe has been changed and
the orders Countermanded, and she will of Course if the latter orders reach her in
time come also to the Eastern branch.
Genl Eaton is in the Brig Franklin not yet arrived
the Congress has a
Tunisien Embassador on board and he has according to the custom of his Country,
a number of presents intended for the President of the U. S. one Item of which is
four Arabian Horses

-

-

Nov. IS. 1806
[LC. EPP, Vol. 16, Aug. 1805-Jan. 1806.1
To Captain Edward Preble, U. 8. Navy, from George Davis, former U. S. Char&
d'Affaires, Tunis
HAMPTON
ROADS
U : S: Frigate Congress Noor 14*b 1806
SIR On my first stopping a t this place, I had resolved not to address any of my
friends, untill my arrival a t Fashington; but the different orders which Capt:
Decautur has received occasions a longer delay than I could have wished -I therefore profit of the present moment to offer my thanks for your friendly interference,
in endeavouring to secure for me, the appointment at Tuni6; and with thcassurance,
that I shall ever be Zealous, to merit your friendship and patronage
The movements of Comodore Rodgers a t Tunis, has hurried the Be into a measure he had
long anticipated that of sending an ambassador to the U. &tat@;and hor olsojorcrd
me t o accompany him - I do not know how far i t will meet the approbation of
Govt; but i t has been enforced by a high sense of duty to my country; and proper
respect for myself.
I waa recalled by the Commander in Chief on the 9th of August, with the
solemn assurance that hostilities would commence in less than twenty four hours,
& with instructions to make the same known to the Bey - I had no sooner acted
on these orders than a new negociation was set on foot by Col Lear, without my
knowledge, and in a degree carried into effect, without my being permitted to
accompany him on shore - after such a degradation, I could not return to the
duties of my office, without acknowledging the propriety of his conduct, which had
only been marked with inconsistency and indecision
I shall communicate to
you more fully the state of our affairs in that quarter, after having made my
respects to the Dept of State I am charged with some memento*, from Hull, for yourself and M* P. to which
I beg leave to add; some Trifles; be pleased to inform me how I shallforward them(LC. EPP, Vol. 16, Aug. 1805-Jan. 1800.)

-

-

WARS W I m BARBARY POWERS

309

To Secretary of the Navy from Master Commandant John Show, U. S. Navg
U. S. FRIGATEJ o h n A d a m
Hampton Roads 18 N ~ 1806
T
SIR As soon as OUT Affairs were settled with the Regency of Tunis I received
sailing Orders [dated 21 August 18051from Commodore Rogers to proceed Homewards, a Copy of which I have the Honor of enclosing to you. I got down on the
23'4 Se tember to Gibralter where I filled the greater Part of my Water; but the
Ship's itores being deficient in Bread to carry me Home, and not being able to
procure any of this Article there, I embraced the first Wind that offered and pushed
out into the Gut, where I met a heavy Westerly Wind which compelled me to
come to an Anchor in Tituan Bay
The 30's Sept. the Wind coming from the Eastward I weighed Anchor, and on the
1.t October, got clear of the Gut; On the 9'4 I made the Island of Madeira where I
anchored in search of Bread and to fill up my Water; but was still unsuccessful in
procunn Bread, I therefore proceeded to Sea with Dis atch. On the 1 9 t h of
0ctober found myself obliged to place all Hands on an r&lowance of 7 Ounces of
Bread Per Day, and when I anchored here I found that we had but 3 Days Bread
on board on that Allowance; I have therefore dispatched my Purser to Norfolk,
and as soon as he joins the Shi with supplys I shall trip my Anchor, if the Weather
will permit and proceed for $ashington
[NDA. MC LB, 1804-5.1

5

To Captain John Bodgers, U. 6. Navy, from Tobias Lear, U. 6. Consul General,
Algiers
ALGIERS,November lSth 1806 2 oclk P. M.
DEARSIR, I have this moment returned from visiting the Dey, and as i t is
too late to have my things brought on Shore this evening, I shall postpone my
going on board 'till tomorrow morning, when I will be ready to go off by nine
oclock, if you will have the goodness to let the Gigg come on shore. At the same
time I shall Send 05a Launch to take my things on shore; as all appears to be fair
weather here. - The Dey received me with much satisfaction, and was very far
from saying any thing on the subject which was conjectured. He had not the
least hesitation about confirming the Treaty on the face of it, which he observed
was customary & just; and should have been done before if i t had been here. Tomorrow forenoon it will be sent to the Palace for that purpose.
The Consuls all make their enquiries for you, and send many Compliments. M.r Lear sends her best regards. [LC. JRP, Series Two, Vol. 3, 1805-1807.1
To Master Commandant Isaac Hull, U. S. Navy, U. S. Brig Argus. Syracuse, from
William Higgins, U. S. Navy Agent, Malta
(Duplicate)
MALTA18tb Nmr 1806
DEARSIR, I am very sorry to inform you, that one of the first Bills drawn by
Commodore Rodgers, has been refused acceptance to by the Agents in London,
and the Protist is now layin before me, what the fate of the remainder may therefore be, is doubtful, but I feel myself very uncomfortably situated, as the whole
Amount Paper now running against those Gentlemen is nearly £30,000 & which
bearing my Endorsement I must pay, with all the accumulation of charges, if it
comes back, which there is but too much reason to fear it will. I feel no sort of uneasiness as to my eventual safity, tho' it were twenty times
the sum, but how to meet and ay here so large a sum, throws me into the geatest embarrassment & distress, g r my own funds a t the resent moment would be
far unequal to it. - If the Commodore should be a t bPgracuse, represent to him
I pray, 1x1the strongest manner, the urgent necessity there is for assisting me by
sending to Palermo, Leghorn and Naples, and getting money wherever i t is to be
raised upon the Credit of the United States, for I repeat the ruin perhaps of my
House would follow my being unable to meet this demand; And what future indemnification from America could I expect to recompence me for such a Misfortune. - This Letter will rest between ourselves, You Know the readiness I have
always evinced to asskt the wants of the Squadron, and that when these Bills
were given, the whole or nearly so of our Capital was absorbed in our advances to
it.
The Commodore muat therefore use every means within his Power to save
me from Consiquencea, which if my fears are f U l J d I shudder to think of, every

-

thin demands it, the Credit of Government & my Personal safity. - Until I see
my 6 e a r Sir my way through this cloud, I earnestly entreat of you to make no
more demands upon me for the Squadron,
[LC. JRP, Series Two, Vo1. 3, 1805-1807.1
Concerning Blockade of Cadiz and San Lucar
QUEEN,GIBRALTAR
BAY,10 Novber 1805
MY LORDMARQUISHis Majesty havin been pleased to order that the Ships
of Keutral Kations tradin to the Ports of 6adiz and San Lucar with such cargoes
as are not contraband of 6 a r , shall be permited freely to pass without interruption from his Blockading squadron. I have to request your Excellency will be
pleased to order this, His Majesty's concession to be signified to the Consuls of the
Neutral Nations residing in Cadiz.
C U T H BCOLLINGWOOD
~
To HIS EXCELLENCY
THE MARQUISDE SOLONA
Capt? General of Andalucia, Governour: & c e a d i z
[?;A. SDA. CL, Lisbon, Vol. 2, 1803-1805.1
Extract from log of U. S. Brig Hornel, of 18 Guns, Master Commandant Isaac
Chauncey, U. S. Navy, commanding, 20 November 1806
Commences calm and hazey weather attend4 with small rain a t 1 PM took in
sail and Anch? in f m water to wait for wind & Tide a t 3 weigh4 and Made sail
with a light breeze from the South4 a t 5 came too in 5 & % f m a t Midnight came
~ ~ veered out the long service a t 6 Moderate &
on strong gales with h e a Rain
Clear a t past 6 AM got underweigh with the wind a t SE and ran into Hampton
Roads a t 8 brought too in 5 fm water the United States Frigates Congress &
Jn9 Adams were in the Roads from the Mediteranien ends with fresh breezes &
pleasant weather wind West
[XA. NDA. original, 1805-1810.1
To Secretary of the Navy from Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Navy
Novr [Z3?]1805
PORTLAND
SIR I enclose you an acct of sales of the Cargo of the St Tissimo CrtlGifiso
captured by the Nautilus (while under command of the gallant & worthv Cap(
Somers) for breach of Blockade - the vessels was restored to the former Owners
for 300 Dolls about the Amt of Charges - As the Officers & Crew of the Nautilus
will robably soon arrive in this Country & want their prize money I have written
to $ J. Keene the prize Agent of that Vessel s t Philadelphia, that he may draw
on me for half the am%the other half belonging to the U S I shall wait your Instructions respecting it, I am desirous of relinquishing my share of all prizes to the
Widows or Orphans of those who lost their lives while under my Command.[LC. EPP, Vol. 16, Aug. 1805-Jan. 1806.1
Extract from journal of Hezekiah Loomis, Steward, U. 6. Navy, in U. 6. Frigate
Congrus. Captain Stephen Decatur, Jr., U. S. Navy, commanding, Saturday, 23
November 1805
[I8November in Harnpton Roads, no entries until 23 November.]
Sailed for the City a t half past 4 P. M. and came to anchor a t half past 5 P. M.
[L. I?. Middlebrook. NDA copy.]
To Lieutenant David Porter, U. S. Navy, U. 6. Schooner Enterprize, from Surgeon
Edward Cutbush, U. 6. Navy
U. S. HOSPITALNovr 26*b 1805
SIR, I Am sorry any remarks of yesterday should induce you to Order lodgings
for your wounded Man; the Hospital, I conceived, w-as the most proper place
for an Operation. Beds are in readiness whenever you think proper to send Patients on shore; i t L
not in my power, neither is i t my wish, to make choice of patients or to refuse

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

311

them, when sent with the Necessary documents. If you think proper t o send your
wounded Man, a bed is in readiness to receive him,
[LC. D. Porter P, Let.& Ord., 1805-1808.1
Extract from journal of Hesekiah Loomis, Steward, U. S. Navy, in U. 8. Frigate
Congress. Captain Stephen Decatur, Jr., U. S. Navy, commanding, Monday, 25
November 1805
At half past 1 P. M. weighed and beat up the Potomac abreast of St. Mary's
and came t o a t half past 6 P. hl.
[KOentries until 29 November.]
[L. F. Middlebrook. NDA copy.]
To Secretary of the Navy from Salvadore Catalano, Pilot
U. S. FRIGATEConstellation
A'wr 26th 1805
The memorial of Silvado Catalona - humbly sheweth, that havin been taken
into the service of the United States by Comnlodore Prebble as !Pilot of the
Ketch Intrepid a t the burning of the of the frigate Philadelphia in the Port of
Tripoli and having rendered all the scrl ices in my power in carrying into effect
all plans proposed by the Com~nodorewhen my Knowledge and abilities was
required, I take this opportunity of Petetioning to you and the Goverment trusting t o your benevolence, and pray t h a ~
you will n ~ a k me
e soine compensation
according t o Commodore Prebble's pron~iseto me, I have in my possession a
certificate from hinl and Captain Decatur I have a family in Palermo and m y
situation in life com 11s nle to work hard for a support of them and myself I now
consider myself a G i z e n of the U, S, and trust I shall be protected as Such
as I shall always hold myself ready to assist in protecting the government against
any nation whatever, I trust Sir that you will take my case into consideration
and make me such compensation as you think proper [KDA. Misc. LB, Vol. 6, 1805.1
To Captain Samuel Barron, U. S. Navy, from Captain John Hall, U. S. Marine
Corps
MARINEGARRISON
H7ashington 27th hove': 1806
Dr SIR AS there has been some little difficulty in settling my accounts a t the
Kavy Office respecting the Band I enlisted in Catania, will thank you t o write
me word if i t was riot your Orders for me to obtain one in Sicily - by your doing
this I shall be able t o settle my Accts: directly & s8ve me a great many Dollars I was extremely happy (to hear from Ge~il:Eaton) that you had recovered from
your late indisposition, & sincerely hope you may continue in health - I beg
Sir you will niake nly respects to your onn, 6: Brothers Family & beleive me
sincerely [Mrs. James S. Bnrron Col. KDA photostat.]
Extract from log of U. 6. Brig Hornet. of 18 Guns, Master Commandant Isaac
Chauncey, U. 5. Navy, commanding, 88 November 1805
The whole of these 24 hours Moderate breezes nith extreem pleasant weather
all sail set to the best Advantage a t 4 PM pass? t h e R'arro-cls same time took
in str sails St? sails Gaft & Gaft Top Gt sails and flying Jib At 9 Pass4 the US
Frigate Congress Lying off Stump Neck At 10 Came too in 5 f q water in
Washingtons Reach abreast of h$ount Vcnlon U. S. Frigate Jnq Adams Lyin
in the same place, the Anchr being foul n lien want? to be Let o M I chat
Grandison Sailing Master was ordered t o his Cabin by C a p t ~Ehauncey, at
8 A ~nloosed & refurled the sails, a t 9 hoisted the Boats out a t 10 the Jnqrldams
& Hornet each fired a Salute of 17 Guns
[XA. NDA. original, 1805-1810.1

8

312

NAVAL OPERATrONS FROM ,1806 TO 1807
-

-

-

To William Eiggins, U. S. Navy Agent, Malta, from Captain John Bodgers, U. 6.
Navy
U S SHIP Constitution
Syracuse ZS* Amember 1806
SIR I have to acquaint you that I arrived here the Day before yesterday last
from Algiers, after landing Coll Lear there, who was received by the New Dey
with great Respect, and friendship I have some Money. on board for you, received from Measq Degen Purviance
& Co of Leghorn, which I will forward to you, in a few days, by One of the Vessels
of the Squadron [LC. JRP, L Bk B, May 1805-July 1806.1
To Lieutenant John Cassin, U. 6. Navy, Navy Yard, Washington, D. C., from
Secretary of the Navy
NAVYD E P 29
~ N N ~1806.
I am exceedingly mortified to see that the Constellation is still a t the mouth
of the Eastern Branch. What can be the reason?
If she cannot be got up t o the Yard in her present state, her Topmast must
instantly be struck, and she must be lightened by every other possible means.
I shall be much disappointed, if she should remain where she is four hours longer.
[NDA. OSW, Vol. 7, 1805-1807.1
To Lieutenant John Cassin, U. S. Navy, Navy Yard, Washington, D. C., from
Secretary of the Navy
NAVYD E P 99
~ N d 1806 The Brig Hornet is now in sight.
Have every thing in readiness to dispatch her.
[NDA. OSW, VoL 7, 1805-1807.1
To Master Commandant Charles Stewart, U. S. Navy, Washington, D. C., from
Captain Edward Preble, U. 8. Navy
PORTLAND
NOVT2gt4 1806
DEARSIR, Accept my hearty congratulations on your return to your native
country after long and faithful services perform4 with patriotic zeal. I am much
gratifyed a t your promotion & Command - and hope shortly to have the pleasure
of meeting you a t Washin on.
The private letter from alta which you did me the honor to write soon after
your return from Gibraltar wss received - please to accept my thanks for your
friend1 and polite attention.
M: &gins writes me that you have a pipe of wine & 20 flour pots for me, you
will increase my obligations to you by depositing them with some confidential
person who will take care of them for me for the present, and inform me of the
name. it will afford me pleasure to hear from you.
P S. any expence you may be a t for Wine & Flour Pots I shall repay with
pleasure
[LC. EPP, Vol. 16, Aug. 1805-Jan. 180fi.l

%

Extract from journal of Eezekiah Loomis, Steward, U. S. Navy, in U. 6. Frigate
Congrus, Captain Stephen Decatur, Jr., U. 6. Navy, commanding, Friday, 29
November 1805
Passed Mount Vernon and fired a salute. At 10 o'clock A. M. prassed Alexandria and saluted. At half past 11 A. M. we were grounded on Greenleaf Point
City of Washington.
"While cruising Barbary's pirate Coast
And hopes and wishes almost lost
I there to paper did commit
What in this book you see is writ
But if the critic censure this
Excuse what in i t is amiss
With intentions pure and heart upright
I tried true friendship to unite."
HEZEKIAH
LOO MI^

[L. F. Middlebrook.

NDA copy.]

England-Tripoli-Tun+Alican

te

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS
Extract from log of U. 8. Brig Hornet, of 18 Guns, Xaster Commandant Isaac
Chauncey, U. 8. Navy, commanding, 29 November 1806
First part Moderate breezes with pleasant Wr this Day the sails were taken
out of the sail Room in order to Air them, and a Number were found to be
Damaged owing to the room sweating and allso by water running Down in the
wake of the Topsail sheet Bitts, Middle part Calm a t 8 A m Got underweigh
with a light Air from the S E the Boats were sent ahead to tow the Brig, a t
10 fired a Gun and a t
past 10 returned a salute of 5 Guns off Alexandria,
a t 11 pa.4 the U S Frigate Constelation Lying a t the Entrance of the Branch,
same time a Pilot came on board from the Navy yard a t Merid? Came too a t the
Navy yard between the President & New York Frigates same time Fired a
Salute of 17 Guns this Day Mr Grandison Sailing Master was restored to Duty
Started 20 casks of water in order to Lighten the Brig Forward ends Serene
pleasant Weather
[NA. NDA. original, 1805-1810.1
To Sir Alexander John Ball, Governor of Malta, from Captain John Rodgers, U. S.
Navy
U S SHIP Constitution
Syracuse SO'@November 1806
SIB Since my absence from this port, I find that the TWOFishing Smacks
built for you by order of the U States Government; you have received; and hope
you find them such, as will answer the purposes for which you intended them.
I n delivering those Vessels I was directed by letter from The Hon@l*the Secretary
of the Navy of the U S (Robl Smith Esqr) to inform you of the high consideration, in which our Government, hold your friendly Civilities, & in which I sincerely participate in terms that are worthy of you My absence on the arrival of the Smacks I beg you will consider as sufficient
apology for not expressing to you the sense of my Goverment before this I pray you to accept the high coxlsideration with whch I have the honor to
subscribe myself [LC. JRP, L Bk B, May 1805-July 1806.1
To Lieutenant Theodore Hunt, U. 6. Navy, from Captain John Rodgers, U. S. Navy
U S SHIP Constitution
Syracuse 50 Novr 1806 [I80591
SIR As I consider you Rank, a Lt in Command, you are authorised by me, to
wear your Epaulet agreeable to said Rank - J R
[LC. JRP, Order Book, No. 2, 1805-1806.1
To Lieutenant Theodore Hunt, U. 6. Navy, U. 6. Brig Argus, from Captain John
Rodgers, U. 6. Navy
U S SHIP Constitution
Syracuse SOtb hovember 1805
SIR I have to direct that you assume the Command of the U States Bomb
Spitjire; and that you receive from Lieutc Daniel MqNeil, her present Commander.
all the papcrs, Documents Stores &v $ 9 belonging to her, giving him the necessary
Receipts for the same [LC. JRP, Order Book, KO. 2, 1805-1806.1
To Midshipman Daniel McMeill, Jr., U. S. Navy, 0.6. Bomb Ketch SpiGn, from
Captain John Rodgers, U. S. Navy
U S S U ~ PConstitution
Syracuse SO* November 1805
818 I have a p ointed Lieutenant Theodore Hunt, to the Command of the
U S Bomb ~ ~ i t j r aet, present under your Command - You are therefore
hereby desired to take Triplicate receipts from him for all the Stores $9 belonging
to the Vessell for your own Exoneration after which you will report yourself to
me [LC. JRP, Order Book, No. 2. 1805-1806.1

314

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1806 TO 1807

To Yaster Commandant Isaac Hull,U. S. Navy, commanding U. 6. Brig Argus, from
Captain John Bodgers, U. S. Navy
U S S H I P Comtitution
Syracuse 1 December 1806
SIR Circumstances make i t necessary that I should go to Malta, on public
business of importance - I therefore have to desire that you Continue in force,
the orders, I invested you with, on my last leaving this port
[LC. JRP, Order Book, No. 2, 1805-1806.1

-

To Secretary of the Navy from Captain Alexander Xurray, U. S. Navy

U/S F B ~ ~ AAdams
TE
Of Charleston Bar. Decr 1.t 1806.
SIR Since my last respects t o you of the 12th U l t ~nothing of moment hath
occured with us to arrest your attention, & this is nearly to advise you that we
still remain here, having been constantly favoured with fine pleasant weather &
the crew in good health:
A few days ago his Britainick Majestys Sloop of War, the Indian C a p t ~Austin
arrived here to cruize on this Station for a while, the capture & Inhuman treatment of the crew of their Ship, the Esther, hath convinced them of the necessity
of guarding their own Vessels on this coast, & I presume they will generally keep
a Ship here, as it appears the river S1 Mary? hath become the pleace of rendezvous
for the french privateers & that the one that hath captured the Esther is still
there with her prize & is expectd here every day, I shall keep a good look out,
to observe her motions, & as far as my powers extend, shall not fail in the execution of my duty, I have to lament that cogent circumstances circumscribes my
will,
Mr Biddle is very attentive with his gun boat, keeps out whenever the weather
will admit, & when she goes in returns with a Suply of water, & refreshments for
us, by which means, our present cruize is rendered with the difference of the weather
to what it was last muize, much more to our satisfaction & shall continue here as
long as my provissions will hold out, if not otherwise directd, I know not where
we can be of more service unless the Spanish Court chaulks us out something to
do, we are all ready for them [NDA. A. Murray's LB, 1799-1805.1
To Lieutenant David Porter, U. S. Navy, from Purser Samuel Robertson, U. 6.
Bavy
U. S. SCH?Enterprize 1 s t Deer 1806. SIR Doctor Heap has got his bedding in the Birth I have occupied for Nearly
three years & refuses to give i t up to me, I have many reasons for wishing to
have this Birth, One is I have no other place to take care of my Desk, Books &
Papers; and should these get Injured the consequence would be very serious to
me. - Another is that there is no other Purser in the Service; On board of Any
Vessel, that has been without a Birth, therefore I feel myself intitled to one. I n consequence of which I appeal to you to determine whether I shall again have
a Birth or Remain as I am without One. [LC. D. Porter P, Let. & Ord., 1805-1808.1
To Secretary of the Bavy from Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Navy
NP 15
PORTLAND
Decr 1 s t 1806
SIR When last a t Boston I delivered the Navy agent a painting of the first
Attack on the Tripolitan shipping & Batteries by the Squadron which I had the
honor to Command - The view of the Town & situation of the squadron &
enemies naval force is tolerably correct. I hope it may meet your approbation. Mr Brown was directed to ship i t to Alexandria to cere of Mr Deblois t o be
forwarded to the Navy OEce where I hope it may be deemed worthy of a place.
I shall leave thia in a few days for Washington and hope soon t o have the honor
of personally paying you my respects.
[NDA. Captain's LB, Vol. 3, 1805.1

-

WARS WITH BARBARY P O W R S

315

Extract from log of U. S. Brig H d , of 18 Guns, Master Commandant Isaac
Channcey, U. 6. Navy, commanding, 1 December 1805
[At Washington, D. C.] First part these 24 hours Moderate breezes with
serene pleasant weather - wind S W a t 8 P M came on a heavy squall from the
N W Attend* with sharp Lightr and continued strong gales Dureing the night,
which caused the Brig t o have so much Motion on the Bank as t o break the Iron
Tiller close of[f] by the Mortose of the Rudder head a t 9 Cross Top G* & Royal
yards ends Moderate breezes with pleasant weather Discharged JnQ Coxan as
an invalid
[NA. NDA. original, 1805-1810.1
To Lieutenant Colonel Commandant Franklin Wharton, U. S. Marine Corps, from
Secretaxy of the Navy
~ Decr 1805.NAVYD E P 2nd
COIQWHARTON,A Sergeant's Guard must be placed a t the residence of the
Tunisian Ambassador, w-ith instructions to prevent intrusion.
You will without delay order a guard upon this duty for a few days.
The Guard need not be continued after 10 O'clock a t night.
[Guard discontinued 24 December 1805.1
[KDA. USMC, LB, 1804-1820.3
To Secretary of the Navy from William Eaton, U. S. Navy Agent for the Barbary
Regencies
WASHINGTON
CITY Dec. 6. 1805
SIR, Commodore Barron's instructions to Captain Hull of Sep. 15. 1804 and
my convention with Hamet Bashaw of Feb. 23P 1805 comprise all the obligations
entered into with Hamet - Copies of both which are in the offices as are also all
the correspondencies resulting therefrom - By perusing the Bashaws letters
from Syracuse - and by reviewing the transactions to which they refer I cannot
find that any additional observations of mine can throw more light on our transactions - It is impossible for me t o undertake to say that the Bashaw has not
been deceived - Nor can I by any shape in which the subject can be viewed
reconcile the manner of his being abandoned with those principles of national
Justice and honor which has hitherto marked our character
The term co-operation I always considered so nearly synonimous ~ & haUiance
that it would require the nicest definition of diplomatic skill t o discriminate the
meaning - and hence supposed that an engagement t o co-operate with Hamet
Bashaw excluded the idea of using him as an instrument - This construction
was more readily admitted because until after 'R-e had proceeded far in the cooperation I never heard a syllable of peace, neither from the President, nor from
yourself, nor from our Commander in Chief, which did not look forward beyond
an effort to chastise the enemy - and because 1 always felt a confidence that
such an effort, well conducted, would dethrone him - I really can offer no explanations on t.he subject which are not t o be found in my official communications;
except a circumstance which, I am aware, modesty should conceal - but which
was calculated t o save the honor and the interest of the Unit,ed States harmless On entering the ground of war with Hamet Bashaw Mz OBannon and myself
united in a resolution t o perish with him before the walls of Tripoli, or to triumph
with him within those walls - In the former event we should have acquitted our
duty - in the latter glorified our country - We were supported by similar
resolutions on the part of the commanders in the squadron - And t o encourage
Hamet Bashaw t o perseverance, and in order to move inderstandingly with him I
induced the convention which haa been made the base of our treaty with his
rival [H. E. Huntington L$AG. E A 278.1
To James Dodge, acting a s U. S. ChargB d'Affaires, Tunis, from John Ridgely,
U. 6. Charge d'Affaires, Tripoli
TRIPOLIIN BARBARYDecemr 6 4 1806
Dr SIR, NO occssion hss offered since the coming of your's, 'till the present
moment.

316

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1806 TO 1807

I a m happy to be informed of the tranquillity of affairs a t Tunis, and have the
same intelligence to offer you from here.
I hope you will not fail t o give me the news of the day by every op o n Political intelligence is new here a month or two months after it reaches yr R t y .
C a p t ~Porter was here in Septr and brought letters from C o l ~Lear, who informed me of the situation of affairs a t Tunis and yr appointment. Since when
I have not heard one word of the Squadron. Give me some news of it. What
number of vessels remain? Is i t supposed the present establishment will be permanent? Have you any late news from America?
We daily attend the news of a battle on the Rhine. I regard the ''Empereur
des Francais" as inferior to no Hero of old. Certainly fortuitous circumstances
have greatly facilitated his passage to the Crown, but nothing less than vast
talents and a judicious improvement of those chances could have firmly fixed
him. - I t would appear as if the critical moment of the fate of Europe had
arrived. No person doubts either the disposition or the power of France in extending her conquests, and unless more energetic measures are adopted against
her, than we have a t present reason to believe there will be, there [is] no doubt
that the present war will terminate to her advantage. What think ye of those
&airs? We are now in the middle of the Ramadan and the City consequently dull, I
ho e we shall have a Gay Beiram.
fenclose you a letter to my father which ou will infinitely oblige me by forwarding. I am inclined to think that via 'f'unis, letters would reach America
sooner that thro' Malta or Leghorn. If you think so, I shall trouble you frequently
I shall thank you to send me the arms of the U. S. by the first conveyance.
Do you expect or wish yr appoint confirmed? I pray that my successor will
arrive in the Spring. There is no compensation adequate to the sacrifice of an
unlimited residence in Barbary.
Write to me often. I shall never let a courier leave here without saying a t
least "how d'ye".
[NA. SDA. F A , CL, Tunis, Vol. 2 (7240) 1801-1809.1
To Captain Hugh G. Campbell, U. S. Navy, commanding U. 6. 6. k,
from
Anthony Terry, U. 8. Vice Consul, Cadis
COPY
CADIZrib December 1805.
Owing t o a late decree from Madrid, ordering that Vessels from Gibraltar shall
perform Quaranteen, the Board of Health has been obliged to Consult the Governor
of this City, with respect to the U: S: Frigate Essex under your command; the
Governor being out of Town, his answer cannot be here until1 this evening, but
I am perfectly sure that he will have no objection in ordering Prattic to be given
to ou.
$he Cable is making & will be finished by Monday - Should you be in want
of any Provissions &P (that) you will have the goodness to mention it, that they
may be sent on board immediately. I have the honor to be respectfully
[LC. JRP, Series Two, Vol. 3, 1805-1807.1

-

To Lieutenant Charles Gordon, U. 6. Navy, U. 6. Frigate A d a m from Captain
Alexander Murray, U. S. Navy
U/6 FRIGATE
Adarns
OflSt M a t p rim, Deer 8Q 1806.
SIR I have thought it proper under existing circumstances, that we should obtain an accurate knowled e of our boundery line dividing our Territory from the
Spanish Shore, in the St baryr river, the more especially, as that river appears,
t o be the Rendezvous, for a nest of pirates and have reason t o believe that the
laws of Neutrality, are violated there, & that there is now some unjustifiable proceedings going on with respect to the prize, Ship Esther I now re ueat you will proceed with Lieu+ Biddle in the Gun Boat, up to the
town of St h a r y s , & take particular notice of the Soundings, & situation of that
river, on your way up, and d s o procure every information you can, from eome
of the respectable, Inhabitants of that District, as to the proceedings of the privateemmen, & as soon as you have satisfied yourself, es to these particulars, you
will return on board, without delay -

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS
I recommend to you, to have no unnecessary communication, with the privateers. Civility is due to them, as long as they Merit it, by an honest, & peacible
demeanour. With relianceon your Zeal for the good of the public service, aswell as Industry[R'DA. A. Murray's LB, 1799-1805.1
TO Anthony Terry, U. S. Vice Consul, Cadir, from Captain Hugh Gi. Campbell,
U. S. Navy
v. S. FRIGATE
Essez.
CADIZROAD
Decr 8'h 1805 SIR In an8wer to yours of yesterday I have only to observe, that the Governor
or board of health cannot in my oppinion hesitate for one moment to grant us
pratique when they consider the daily communication between Algeziras and
Gibraltar, & from the former place to this City, likewise that we have not had
further communication with Gibraltar than we how have with Cadiz, in sending
a boat on shore for Information.
The Cable we are much in want of, which be pleased to send off with all posible
dispatch presuming it of the best quality. It is true we are in want of sundry
Articles but unless we are admited to Prati ue, I shall be under the necessity of
going tq some other port for a supply - %ow Services I shall a v d myself of
as occaslon may require [LC. JRP, Series Two, Vol. 3, 1805-1807.1

To John Broadbent, U. S. Navy Agent, Messina, from Captain John Bodgers, U. S'
Navy
U. S. FRIGATE
Constitution
Syracuse 9 t h D e c ~1805
SIR I have the pleasure to inform you that I returned to this Port on the 2 7 t h
U l t ~after landing Col Lear a t Algiers where he was received by the Kew Dey in
a manner compatible with the respect that is due to his Country and to himself. The Nautilus I have directed to Messina to procure a Main mast pran'ded one
can be had on reasonable terms, and to obtain four Peices of Oak Timber - 19
feet long, 10%Inch by 20. and 10 Barrels of Tar - the Anchor which you was so
ood as to borrow from the Arsenal for the Constitution, when she was last a t
bessina, I should be glad to Purchase, but if it cannot be effected will return i t so
soon as I again hear from you.
[LC. JRP, L Bk B, May, 1805-July 1806.1
To Lieutenant William Montgomery Crane, U.S. Navy, commanding U. S. Sloop of
10 Guns, Hornet, from Captain John Bodgers, U. S. Navy
U S SHIP Constitution
Syracuse 9'5 December 1805
SIR I have to direct that you proceed to Malta, with the Cutter Hornet, under
Command, for the Purpose of transporting to this Port, sundry Articles of
tores, which Mf Higgins, Navy Agent, will have put on boar'd of you, - In addition to which you will be pleased to take in, as many Barrels of Pork as you can
Conveniently Stow, and return to this place, with all practicable dispatch PB You will get under way as soon as the Weather will admit [LC. JRP, Order Book, No. 2, 1805-1806.1

kur

Extract from log of U. S. Brig Hornef, of 18 Guns, Master Commandant Isaac
Chauncey, U. S. Navy, commanding, 9 December 1806
a t 10 [A. M.] pass4 Alexandris and a t Merid? fired a Salute of 17 Guns off
Mount Vernon.
[NA. NDA. original, 1805-1810.1

318

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1805 TO 1807

To Lieutenant Samuel Evans, U. S. Navy, commanding U. 8. Schooner Nautilus,
from Captain John Bodgers, U. S. Navy
U. S. FRIGATE
Constitution
Syracuse 10 Decr 1806
SIR YOUare hereby desired t o proceed to hfessina, with the U States Schooner
Nautilus, under your Command, and there endeavour to procure a Main Mast, if
it can be got, on terms that are not so exorbitant, as to outweigh it's necessity In
this case I submit to your Judgment. After having procured the Mast (if one you can provide as specified) and
receiving the Articles which I have Indented for to Mr Broadbrent our Agent,
you are directed t o return t o this Port, with all Practicable dispatch. If any Circumstance should detain You, longer than is a t present expected,
you will be pleased to inform me by Post.
[LC. JRP, Order Book, KO. 2, 1805-1806.1
To Midshipman Oliver Hazard Perry, U. S. Navy, U,S. Schooner Nautilw, from
Captain John Bodgers, U. S. Navy
U S S H I P Constitution
Syracuse 10'9 Decr 1806
SIR YOUare hereby directed to join the U S. Ship Constitution as one of her
Lieutenants
[LC. JRP, Order Book KO. 2, 1805-1806.1

-

To Captain John Bodgers, U. S. Navy, from Master Commandant Iaaac Hull,
U. S. Navy
U. STATESBRIGArgus
Syracuse 11'b Deer 1806
SIR,Agreeable to your Order of Yesterday, I have directed the Commanders of
Gun Boats to furnish the Spitjire with Twenty Men, and to see that they are
furnished with their Accounts. The Selection is made as follows Vzl
Frzm G;n Bzat NQ2-2 Seamen & 3 Ordv
NQ4-2
d~ & 2 d~
''
N95-1
d~ $ 2 d~
"
I'
"
n;9 8-1
do & 3 d~
I'
NQ9-1
d~ & 3 d~

-

ILC.

-

7
13
JRP, Series Two, Voi. 3, 1805-1807.1

To Eon. John C. Smith, Chairman of Commitee of Claims, United States Congress,
from Secretary of the Navy
NAVYD E P12
~ Dee 1805. I have received your letter of the 10th instant accompanied by a memorial to
Congress from James Hog and others, being part of the Crew of the late Frigate
Philadelphia, praying compensation for clothing and other allowances.
The Petitioners have in virtue of the 4th Sec: of the Act entitled "An Act for
the better government of the Navy of the United States" been paid the full amount
of pay and of undrawn rations due to them from the time they entered the service
to the day of their discharge a t the City of Washington. There was no intermission of pay for the period of their captivity: they received for that period
as well as for the periods antecedent and subsequent thereto, their full pay and
full compensation for ration8 not drawn. The Navy Department is not authorized by Law to make any other compensation. Paper A is an exhibit of the
sums of money respectively paid to the Petitioners on their discharge at the
City of Waahington.
With respect to the evidence which you have requested me to furnish in relation
to the claim set forth in their petition, I have to inform you that no such evidence
exists in the Department, and in fact their claim having no foundation in Law
is only t o be considered an sppeel to the bounty of Government. And when I
advert t o the generous provision made by the above mentioned Act of Congress,

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

319

I cannot consider their claim entitled to any kind of countenance. The Petition

-

is herewith returned.

A
An Account of the final balances paid to the following persons being a part of
the Crew of the late United States Frigate Philadelphia for pay & undrawn
rations on their discharge a t Wash" James Hog- - - _ - _ - - - - &r Master - - - - - - . - - - - - 502.
-73- - - - - William Jones - _ - - Seaman
........................
312. 05
Chr Simmons_ - _ _
-_Seaman
- -.- - -..-. -.
_
- _ - - - - 297.
--19- Jacob Farmer--.. . _ Seaman- _ - -.-.. - - -.- - - - - - - - - - 216.89
Hu MqClaskey_ _ - _
0.
.
Seaman
---_-------_
251.
- -86
---.--Jnq Butler- - - - - - _ - - - - Seaman . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
227.80
T. TURNER
AP
12 D E C 1805
~
[NDA. Cong. LB, No. 1, 1798-1811.1
- - -

-

To Captain John Rodgers, U. S. Navy, from John Gavino, U. 6. Consul, Gibraltar
GIBRALTAR
1Stb Dec? 1805
Dr SIR I u ~ o t , eyou the 30th Octr & 34 Ultp since when have none of yours, or
any thing new from the U. 8. indeed we have had no arrivals - The Vizin is
repairing a t Malaga, & the Essez past this a few days ago I beleive her now a t
Cadiz, where intended going for a Cah!e; All is well w t b the Empr of Morrocco,
his Cruisers have lately Captured 3 Italian Vessels. The Algereens have a frigate
& a Brig to the Westward in quest of Portuguese, several ships of Warr of the
latter are Cruising in the Gutt - Sir Xichd Straughans Squadron have Captured
after an action of 3 hours, the four french Line of Battle Ships that got off the
210, of October. [LC. JRP, Series Two, Vol. 3, 1805-1807.1
To Midshipman John Downes, U. S. Navy, U. S. Frigate Consfifufion, from Captain
John Rodgers, U. S. Navy
U. S. SHIP Constitution
Syracuse [16?]Decr 1806
SIR YOUare hereby appointed to act as Sailing Master on board the U States
Bomb SpitfLre a t present under Command of Lieutt T. Hunt; you are therefore
hereby to consider yourself responsible for the duties thereto belonging. [LC. JRP, Order Book, No. 2, 180.51806.]

To Secretary of the Navy from Captain Alexander Murray, U. S. Bavy
[U. S. FRIGATE]
Adam
OffCharleston IS. C.] Decr 16* 1806.
SIR. The uncommon severity of the season on this ~ o k t fnduced
,
me to run
down t o St Mary? with the Gun boat in tow, to make myself acquaint4 with the
situation of that river, & to enquire into the proceedings of the French privateer^,
none of them having appeared off this Coast, since my Arrival, & to examine
into the legality of their Commissions & general deportment, to Investigate this
business I sent Lieut Gordon with Mr Biddle & by particular request of Captv
Austin of the Indian who also accompanied us, I permitt4 one of his Officers to
go with them to try to redeem some of the Crew of the Esther, prisoners on board
the Creole, in which he cou4 not succeed, they found the Ship regularly condemn4
in the Court of Admiraltv a t S t Augustine and she with her Cargo sold to Capt*
MPNeil late of our Navy for $25,000, the cargo was entered a t the Custom house,
& there land@for reexportation, the C a p t ~of the Creole produced his commission
to Mr Gordon & it was found regular, & Issued by the Governor of Gaudaloop,
nothing unfair appeared in the procedure of that Capture or condemnation the
reatest civility was shewn on both sides, C% assurity on the part of the French
apt* who appeared to be quite a genteel man, that he never had or intend4 t o
Violate the Neutrality of the U: States, it appeals further that there was nothing
unusual or Inhuman in that contest, but consummate bravery, i t wes a fair &
manly action on both sides, the Privateer mount* Eight guns 100 men, 30 of

8

320

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1806 TO 1807

whom were kill4 & wound@,the Ship Mountd 22 Guns & 36 Men, most of them
kill* t wound4, the Capta protests that there was not a man Injured after they
knew of the Colours being hauled down, the contest was chiefiy on the Gun
deck there hath lately sailed from thence a spanish privateer that hath been very
Insolent to the Inhabitants & threatened to fire on the town, $ had taken some
of their Kegroes, 'tis supposed she hath gone to cruise off this Station if so we
shall keep a good look out for her I hope to have the pleasure of running her
down, the Inhabitants wants protection against those Marauders, who treat them
with much contempt Our Brigs, or Gun boats wd be very servicable about those
Bar harbours where Frigates cannot go as I couQ not bring with me more than
three Months stores, I shall be obli@ to run for N York towards the middle of
next month, so a s t o be there on or before the 1st of Febu, ae I may have the
weather, we shall have a good deal t o do t o the Adams, such as caulking, putting
New Cable bitts & knees, which are rotten and her rudder, is loose, & must be
examined her beams ought to be survey4 they are in bad condition, to do all
this I shall run her up to the N Yard, where the work can progress with expition
& be secure from the Ice
I must again reiterate my request t o be permitt4 t o visit my family for a few
days that I find requires my personal attendance which I hope you1 be so good
as t o grant, the service will not sustain any Inconvenience by my short absence,
as I can leave such directions with my Lieus as will preclude the Necessity of
personal attendance for a short period, they are a Sett of remarkable fine young
men, well trained & full of ambition, I csnt say so much for my midshipmen,
they are generaly a motley sett of drones We towed the Gun boat. here in 22 hours from St Marys, & on our arrival
found the Brig Dolly here, but not yet, had an Interview with the Capta I expect
him on board today [NDA. A. Murray's LB, 1799-1805.3
Eaval Peace Establishment
REPRESENTATIVES, APRIL 19 AND 21,1808
(Ex-Official.)
NAVYDEPARTMENT,
December 16, 1806.
SIR: The enclosed paper, marked A, exhibits a view of the captains, mssterscommandant, lieutenants, and midshipmen, a t present belonging to the navy of
the United States.
Paper R explains my ideas as t o a Naval Peace Establishment.
Paper C exhibits the proportion of able seamen, ordinary seamen, and boys,
required for a frigate of forty-four guns, a frigate of thirty-six guns, a frigate of
thirty-two guns, a brig of sixteen guns, and a schooner of fourteen guns.
It is desirable that the President should be authorized to appoint five captains,
in addition to the number now in the navy. The five senior masters-commandant,
who would, if authority existed, be promoted to the stations of captains in the
navy are gentlemen distinguished for their services, who have by courtesy been
called csptains, and who are, in every respect, entitled to promotion; the greater
part of whom I fear we shall lose, if they are not promoted. For similar reasons
it is desirable that the President should be authorized t o appoint nine mssterscommandant, and one hundred lieutenants.
With respect to lieutenants, we have unavoidably been obliged to appoint
midshipmen to the station of lieutenants, who were junior to others of equal
merit not appointed. I t is, therefore, obviously desirable that authority should
be given to the President to appoint as many lieutenants ae will include all the
meritorious midshipmen, senior to the junior midshipmen now appointed or
acting ss a lieutenant, and thus give them that rank to which they are entitled,
by their merit and their services.
ANDREWGREGO,Esq.
Chairman of the Committee on the Naoal Peace Establishment.
COMMUNICATED TO THE HOUSE OF

Ih'ote: Enclosures A to D inclusive and letter of k t a r y of the Navy of April 73,1806 are printad In
Amcricon Staiu Paper#, N d Affaira, No. 68.1

[Am. State Papers, Nav. Aff., p. 152, No. 56.1

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS
To Secretary of the Ravy from Joshua Wingate, Jr.
WASEINGTON
CITY
De6 16,1806
SIR I n addition t o the articles I obligated myself to transport to Algiers in your
agreement with me dated Decr 12Q 1804, the following articles belonging to the
United States have been, in conformity with your instructions, shipped by me on
board the Ship Raleigh, bound to the Port aforesaid - (Vk) Five brass 18 pound
Cannon with their Carriages & apparatus complete, Six boxes of Sweetmeats &
one bag of Coffee - as a compensation for the freight of the Cannon &r abovementioned I will agree to receive Six hundred dollars [NDA. Misc. LB, Voi. 6, 1805.1

To Lieutenant Colonel Commandant Franklin Wharton, U. S. Harine Corps, from
Secretary of the Navy
NAVYD E P16
~ Decr 1805.
The mcers of the Marine Corps will in future wear white cross Belts with
Gilt Plates, instead of the B h k , as expressed in the order of the order of the
14* October last.
[NDA. USRIC, LB, 1804-1820.1
To Captain John Bodgers, U. P. Ravy, from William Higgins. U. S, Navy Agent,
Malta
MALTA the 18 Decr 1806.
DEARSIP. I hand you a triplicate Copy of my letter of the 11 Inst to prevent
the possibility of miscarriage - I cannot help remarking to you a very peculiar
circumstance, Capts Stewart of the Consldlaiion drew a bill of £400 on M~Kenzie
& Glennie at the same time yours P £15,000were extended it was presented t o
them, by the same house in London, and a t the same moment with £ 1000 of these,
his was accepted and yours were refused. - This seems w it wcre a marked disgrace and I must therefore once more earnestly entreat of you to shield me from
the effects of it by providing me with funds in time to face the whole should they
come back (of which I am sorry to say there is but too much probability) protested for nonpsyment [LC. JRP, Series Two,Vol. 3, 1805-1807.1
To Degen, Purviance & Co., U. 6. Wavy Agents, Leghorn, from Captain John
Bodgere, U. S. Navy
U. S . S H I P Cotl~titution
Syraeuse 18th Dec? 1806
GENTLEMEN
I have the leasure to acquaint you that after Landing Col1 Lear
a t Algiers, on the 21.1 U l t ~Preached
,
this place on the 27%and found the Squadron
a11 well. Col. Lear was received in the most respectfuI and friendly manner by
the New Dey. - Aa I may perhaps have occasion to draw on you soon, you
will Oblige me by letting me know t o what Amount my drafts can be answered:
The unaccontable conduct of hlessrr Glennie and M~Kenzieof London, induce
me to believe that I shall have this occasion. as they have protested my Bilk,
drawn in favor of Mr Higgins our Agent a t Malta, for £3,500 Sterling, and I think
it cot unlikely they may do the same by £20,000 more; which I drew within five
days of the same date; Their proceedings I can't account for, as the only excuse
they offer, is, that they received no advice of these Bills from me; (dtho Quadruplicate, letters of advice has been forwarded.) The Bills were drawn with or withut
advice; of course does not admit of such an apoio y. - to save Mr Higgins from
unpleasant consequences, I have been under the %isagreeable Necessity of dm*ing Bills to the Amount of $90,000on the Naly Department to reinburse him in
Case the whole should be returned. The demur of Mess- Glennie and M~Eienztie,
I can't but View, a t present as mere Subterfuge to.Evade, a t least, I should s u p
pose the destruction of their House havlng m thelr own particular conctnur out
reached their o m Private resources.
[LC. JRP, L Bk B, May 1805-July 1806.1

322

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1806 TO 1807

To Frederick Degen, U. S. Navy Agent, Naples, from Captain John Rodgers, U. S.
Navy
U. S. S. Constitution
Syracuse 18 Decr 1806
SIR The di5culty there is a t present in Negotiating bills on London, has induced me to send the Brig Argus, to Naples with bills to t,he Amount of Ninety
thousand Dollars at 30 days drawn in favor of yourself on the U States Government, and for ten thousand on you in favor of C a p t ~Isaac Hull, making in all
$100,000. - I hope the Exchange may be so favorable a t Naples as to save me
the Necessity of Supplying myself with Cash for the Use of the Squadron, elsewhere.
P. S. I have no News worth communicating, farther, than what C a p t ~Hull
can give you.
[LC. JRP, L Bk B, May 1805-July 1806.1
To William Biggins, U. S. Navy Agent, Malta, from Captain John Rodgers, U. 6.
Navy
U. S. SHIP Constitution
Syracuse 19% Decr 1805
SIR Your letter of the 11th Inst. was handed me Yesterday Morning; and in
compliance with it's contents I have this day dispatch'd the Argus C a p t ~Hull
to Naples for 100,000$ dollars for the purpose of paying such of the bills to which
you allude, as may return, protested. This extraordinary conduct of Messs
Glennie and M~KenzieI can't account for in any other way than that their circumstances are extremely bad the reasons they assign are pettified indeed.
PS, the Enterprize has been sent for bread. - be pleased to give her dispatch.
[LC. JRP, L Bk B, May 1805-July 1806.1
To Lieutenant David Porter, U. 6. Navy, commanding U. S. Schooner Enferprizc,
from Captain John Bodgers, U. 6. Navy
U S. FRIGATE
Constitution
Syracuse 19 Decr 1800'
SIR The present Scarcity of bread in the Squadron makes it necessary that
I should direct the Enterprize to Malta to Transport to this place as much of that
article as she can conveniently stow.
You are requested to use all the dispatch in your power
PS. you will please to inform yourself what bread there is in Store a t Malta.
[LC. JRP, Order Book, No. 2,1805-1806.1
Order issued by Captain John Bodgers, U. 8. Navy
U. S. SHIP Constitution
Syracuse Decr 19Q 1806
Ordered that all the Bomb Vessels and Gun Boats - have their respective
Numbers painted in White jigures on the bows of their Small boats.
[LC. JRP, Order Book, No. 2, 1805-1806.1 '
To Captain John Bodgers, U. 6. Navy, from William Higgins, U. 8. Navy Agent,
Malta
MALTA
the $0 Deer 1806.
SIR I have the honor to reply to your very valued favor of the 19 Inst informin
me that you had sent the U S. Brig A r p to Naples for 100,000 Dollars sincerely rejoice at your having adopted so indispensable a plan which will put
both me and the Service a t our ease - Previous to the arrival of the Enterprite
I had determined on returning the Hornet to you immediately with a prayer to
this purpose. She will now go to you as soon as the Indents can be filled up but

5

WARS' WITH BARBARY POWERS
you must recollect that all next week or nearly so is holliday I beg to assure you
that no time shall be lost in dispatching her
Another f 1000 is this instant presented, to me with protest
[LC. JRP, Series Two, Vol. 3, 1805-1807.1
To Sailing Master Nathaniel Haraden, U. 6. Navy, U. 6. Gunboat No.8, from
Captain John Rodgers, U. 6. Navy
U S. SHIP Constitution
Syracuse Decr 6 0 4 1805
SIR I have to direct that with U States Gun Boat NP8 you proceed to Malta,
there to take on board aa much bread as you can Conveniently Stow, -and return
to this Port with all practicable dispatch.
[LC. JRP, Order Book No. 2, 1805-1806.1
To Secretary of the Navy from Captain Alexander Murray, U. S. Navy
Nq 55
U. S. FRIGATEAdams
OffCape Henry Dec: dlat 1805
SIR Herewith you have enclosed my respects of the 16th Inst which I expect
will reach you before the original, by which you will perceive the arrangments I
had made respecting the Adams
*
*
*
*
*
For the ensuin Winter months I am confident 'tis unnecessary to be out to run
any hazards, nog~rivateersevery think of approaching our Northern shores a t
this season, those that frequent the Southern Coast, mostly keep on the outer edge
of the Gulf stream looking out for English Vessels, & to avoid the inclemency of
the Weather, i t being many degrees warmer there than on soundings, where their
Crews coud not stand it, they are a set of half naked Devils, so much crowded
together, that they are obliged to be mostly on deck, 8: rarely approach our limits,
nor do we find there hath been any violations to our Commerce within our limits,
since I have been on the station

*

I hope to be favord with a good passage up the River, my Crew are all in good
health, & well disposed upon this occasion to exert themselves, 'tho the short
period of the Cruize will place, Officers & Men, in a pitiable situation, few of them
will have Wages due to take them home [NDA. Captain's LB, Vol. 3, 1805.1
To Thomas Corbett, President of the Board of Directors, South Carolina Insurance
Co., from Master Commandant Isaac Chauncey, U. S. Navy
U. S. SLOOPOF WAR[BRIG]Hurnet
COPY
Harbour of Charleston 2-94 December 1805.
SIR I have been honored with your's of this date, requesting in behalf of the
Board of Directors of the South Carolina Insurance Company a Convoy for a
number of American Vessels with valuable Cargoe's, bonaiide property of Citizens
of the United States, and that said Vessels will be ready for Sea in a few day's. In answer to your letter I have to observe that duty as well as inclination
prompts me to acquiesce in your wishes, altho' I have no instructions from my
Government to afIord Convoy, yet knowing their wishes to protect the Merchant
in an Lawful Trade, and presuming that my acquiescing in the wishes of the
~oardTofDirectors & Merchants of Charleston, will meet with their intire approbation, I shall afford the Convoy required, that is I will protect the Vessels placed
under my charge from the Search or Seizure of every private Armed Vessel; but i t
is proper to inform you that my instructions will not authorize me to prevent any
National Veasel from Searching the Convoy without the Teritorial Jurisdiction of
the U. Statee. The Hornet is now ready for Sea, but will wait until the 25Q Instt on which
day She will take char e of any Vessels for which Convoy has been requested and
see them as far as the 6u1f Streem - in the mean time Masters of Vessels wishing
Convoy will apply on board for Instructions with a Copy of their Manifest.
[NDA. MC LB, 1804-5.1

324

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1806 TO 1807

To Frederick Degen, U. S. Consul, Naples, from Easter Commandant Isaac Hull.
U. S. Nsvy
UNITEDSTATESBRIOArgua
Naples 9.94 December 1806
SIR,The weather is so extremely bad, that I fear, if i t lasta long, the Arpus
will be in danger for want of Cables. I wish you to make application to the Government of this place for the loan
of one, fourteen and % Inches, and assure them that one equally good, shall be
returned them, so soon as i t is possible to have it made. - I wish you likewise
to make interest for our coming into the Mole, as soon as the weather is fair, and
if ossible, without landing our Powder. - Should you not be able to procure
a Eable from the Arsenal, I wish you to Order One made as soon as possible, of
the best Hemp that can be purchased
[NDA. Isaac Hull LB, 1803-1806.1
To Captain John Bodgers, U. S. Navy, from William Biggins, U. S. Navy bgent,
Malta
MALTA the d9 Decr 1805
SIR The enclosed letter was intended for the Enterprize but she unexpectedly
went away without i t and took one which in consequence of your determination
to send the Argus to Naples, I had intended to withdraw Upon reflecting upon the probability of your getting the sum of 100,000 Doll?
I am almost fully persuaded that it cannot be collected a t Naples and 8s this
business is so highly important especially to your credit as Commander in chief
and to the future expence of the S usdron I really think you would do right to
Lear who probably has very considerable
dispatch a Vessel immediately t o
funds by him or if not, he has an open Credit on London which he could make
use of, if i t was only for £5000 or £10,000 by giving us his bills on that City, to
extricate us from our present embanassment
I recommend this measure to Your Serious attention, i t may be unnecessary,
but surely in such a business as this nothing ought to be left to chance, under a
persuasion that you will adopt i t I hand you a letter for the Colonel recieved
sometime ago from London
In consequence of the approaching holidays beginning to morrow I shall not be
able to dispatch the [Sloop] Hornet until Saturday
[LC. JRP, Series Two, Vol. 3, 1805-1807.1

80)

--

To the Seamen and Marines of U. S. Squadron in the Mediterranean from Captain
John Bodgers, U. S. Navy
U S. SHIP Comtitution
Syracuse 294 Decr 1806
General Orders
The Commodore takes this opportunity of expressing to the Seamen and
Marines of the Squadron, that i t is not without regret and indi nation, in proportion to the detestable Crime of Desertion that he should thus End it necessary
to order the infliction (Punishment) on individuals serving under his Command
and that as he is determined never to suffer such an abominable crime; A crime
in itself disgraceful to every principle that constitutes the Name of a Seaman,
Soldier or Man to pass over without the infliction of such punishment, as is Justly
annex'd by the laws of the Service; In consequence after having approved the
Sentence of the Court Martial decree'd against John Reeson on the 16tP Inst,
orders that the same be executed this day on the dia lay of Signal for Punishment
The Officer officiating as Provost Martial is desire$ to read the Proceedings and
Sentence of the Court to the Prisoners previous to their Punishment alongside
of the di£Ferent Vessels of the Squadron
Sign'd JNPRODQERS
[LC. JRP, Order Book No. 2, 1805-1806.1

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS
To Lieutenant David Porter, U. S. Navy commanding U. S. Schooner Enlrrpirz
from Captain John Bodgers, U. S. Navy
U. S. SHIP Constitution
Syracu~e84 Deer 1806
SIR,YOUare requested to make known to the different Commanding Officers
of the U S t a b Vessels, now in this Port, that it is my desire they cause the
different Officem under their Commands, to conform to the Establish'd order, as
i t respects their Uniforms,
This order is iven in consequence of many Midshipmen in the Squadron
assuming Lieut* &oats.
[LC. JRP, Order Book No. 2, 1805-1806.1
To Masters of Merchant Ships under his Convoy from Master Commandant Isaac
Channcey, U. S. Navy
U. S. BRIG Hornet, HARBOUR
OF CHARLESTON
24th Decembet 1806. SIR I n placing yourself under the Convoy of the U. S. Brig Hornet it i~ expected
that you will conform strictly to the following regulations. 1.t You will obey all Orders or signals made from the Hornet. 2a4 You are not to seperate from the Convoy or alter your course without permission so to do. after 8 O'clock P. M. except in answer t o a
3.4 You are not to shew any
- lights
signal. 4th You will be particular in answering any signal made from the Hornet. 54 You are not to impede the Convoy by any unnecessary delays or for the
want of making Sail &Q 6'b No Ship of the Convoy is ever to go before the beem of the Hornet.
7th In case of a Strange Sail coming amongst the Convoy in the night the Ship
discovering her will shew two Horizontal lights
Isaac CHAUNCEY
Captain U S B Hornel
[NDA. XIC LB, 18045.1
To Purser Thomas Johnston, U. S. Navy, from Captain John Rodgers, U. 8. Navy
U S SHIP Col~~titution
Syracuse G4* Deer 1805
SIR YOUare desired to proceed to Malta, in the U S Schooner Enterprize to obtain from Mr Higgins the Amount of his demands against the Vessels of the U S
Squadron, under my Command, respectively and severrally As you are acquainted with my reasons for this proceeding I feel i t unnecessary to
say more to you on the subject - You are requested after the three Vessels
which I now send for Provisions are loaded to inform yourself what quantity of
Stores are remaining in MFHiggin's's possession [LC. JRP, Order Book No. 2, 1805-1806.1
To Captain John Rodgers, U. S. Navy, from Master Commandant Isaac Hull, U. 6.
Navy
UNITEDSTATESBRIG Argus
Naples 26th Decr 1806
SIR I have the honor to inform you of my arrival a t this place, after a very short
but rough p a s s y , and have delivered the Letters I was charged with, from you t o
he Bills drawn in my favor have been accepted and the amount
Mr Dagen. comes by Capt Smith, which I hope you will receive in time, as respects the Bills
drawn on the Government. - I fear Mr Da en will not be able to dispose of
them so favourably as you expected. - I find that, there is no possible a d e for
them, except i t is to American hlercht Ca tains, and as there is but four or five
of them here, a part of which have a l r e a g purchased B i b on England. - 1
fear a small part only of yours will be cashed a t this market.

326

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1806 TO 180T

Mr Dagen however appears to make every possible exertion, and I am sure (if
the money can be had a t this place) he will get it. - He has already written t o
Leghorn to see if i t is possible to dispose of a part of the Bills there. If so, and it can be done without a sacrafice to the Government, we shall do it. I am informed by Capt Smith, that Mr Dagen has written to you for permission, for
the Sven to remain here a few days, until the affairs of this Government are a
But on
little more settled, and that he had determined to wait our answer
the arrival of the Argus, he as well as myself, thought i t dviseable for the S y m t o
sail immediately with the money collected from Mr Dagen, and for the Argus to
remain until your answer to Mr Dsgens Letter arrives, or a t lesst, until every
Should you have
means in our Power was made use of to dispose of the Bills.
given permission for the Syren to remain here, in your answer toMr Dagem Letter, and i t appears that you have a wish, that a Vessel should be here (as the
S y e n has sailed) I shall think it my duty to remain here, until I hear from you
again, unless a part of the Bills are disposed of, in which case I shall make all possible dispatch to join you
Aa I have been but a short time here (the whole of which) the weather has been
such, that I scarcely dare Venture out of my Vessel. - I tun not able to inform
you so correctly as I could wish, concerning the state of this Market for Bills on
America, but from what I can learn, you cannot calculate on, only a s d l part of
the money wanting to be raised, from the Sale of the Bills drawn by you.
Bills
on England are now selling from ten t o fifteen pr Cent loss. - so that we have but
little to hope from ours, except i t is, the small sum that may be wanted by the
Americans. - As Cap* Smith has been here some time, and is perfectly acquainted with the situation of this City, I beg leave to refer you to him for any
information you may want, that I have omitted to give you in this Letter.
I hope the small deviation I am about to make, from your former Orders, will
meet your approbation, And be assured sir, i t is done with no other view, than
that of meeting your wishes. [NDA. Isaac Hull LB, 1803-1806.1

-

-

-

-

To Captain John Rodgers,
U. S. Navy, from Tobias Lear, U. S. Coned General,
Algiers
ALQIERS.December g6$h 1806
DEARSIR, The original of the enclosed was forwarded, via Leghorn, by the
Brig Friendship, Caps Clemmons, mentioned therein who was detained here by
bad weather till the 18tb, when he took his departure for Leghorn. - On the
1 4 t h Instt arrived here the Ship Raleigh from Kennebeck, with a Cargo of plank
and spars for the Regency, On account of our Annuities. - She had a Passage
of 45 days; and brings no news, not even of the arrival of the U.S. Ship President.The Dey & Regency were much dissatisfied that she had not brought Powder or
Cables, none of which have been sent since I have been Consul here, but as they
are desireous of our good will, I found no difficulty in getting over this dissatisfaction. She brought also 5 Brass Canwn of the 15 long since desired; but
there is not the same rage for Cannon now, as in the time of the last Dey.
The three Frigates, and a Polacre Ship of 22 Guns have been out on Cruize
since the 28th Ultimo. - The Admiral, Hameeda Rais, in the Algerine built
Frigate, has gone into the Atlantic, and it is sr~pposedhe will go on the Coast of
Brazil. He is a dashing fellow. He sent in a Portuguise Sloop, loaded with Wax
& Tobacco, which he took after he got into the Atlantic. - The American built
Frigate came into the Bay about ten days ago, the Captain Complaining that
she was in such bad condition, and made so much water, that he could not keep
the Sea. He had taken two Prizes - Vizt a Genoa Brig, which was deserted by
her Crew, acd a Neapolitan, with 14 persons on board, who were landed from the
Frigate; but the Prizes have not yet got in - The Dey would not suffer the
Frigate to enter the Port but ordered her to keep out for the Cruize of 40. The
Captain hesitating, was immediately dismissed and another put in his place, and
the Frigate sent to Sea. This Dey is not to be triflled with. so far he has been
firm and decided in all his measures; a t the same time he is mild and reasonable
in his manners and Conversation. - When the Frigates return which will be
in about 40 days from the time of their Sailing, the Other Cruizers will probably
be sent out, a t lesst such of them as can bear the winter weather; for they are not
all in the best condition. The American built Brig will hardly be able to bear
another Cruize even in Summer.
A few days sgo a Small Vessel arrived from Oran with 600 heads, and a vast
number of Ears of the Insurgents, Over whom the Bey of Oran had gained a

-

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS
great Victory, They take off the Heads of the Slain and the Ears of the Prisoners,
which they send as a proof of their Victory. For the last fifteen da s the weather has been very bad indeed, and is still far
from being settled. - k h e n the American Ship arrived with the Annuity, the
Weather was so bad that she could not enter the Port for 3 days, and lay in a
Situation not very safe. Great exertion were made by the marine for her safety.
They sent off 3 Anchors and Cables to her relief,when their own Prize, the Portuguise Sloop, laying in the same situation, did not get one. I have not heared a word from Tunis or Triple since I have been here. - The
letters brought me from the Government by the Regalia Ship, were dated the
15th of August, before they had heared of our Affairs a t Tripoli or Tunis, and of
course, say nothing on those Subjects
I have been confined to the house, by my ancle for the last 3 weeks and find
that nothing but rest and great care will cure it. - We wish very much for
yourself and some other of our Countrymen to be with us to day, as we have a
very good Christmas Dinner, and but few to partake of it; as it is Customary for
all the Consuls to dine with their Own families on this Day. - We shall have
the En lish Consul, who has no one but himself in family. Mi= %ear unites with me in Compliments of the season, and best wishes for
yourself and those with you.
[Stephen Decatur Col. Bk. B.]
To Secretary of the Navy from Captain John Bodgers, U. S. Bavy
U.S. SHIP Comtitution
S y r a m e 26th Deer 1806
SIR The Tunisian Xebecque and her two Prizes, sent into Malta last Summer by
the Constitution, for a Violation of the Blockade of Tripoli - have been sold, and
the Money deposited in the hands of Mr Higgins, our Agent, for whomsoever the
U. States Govermc may order the same to be paid
Previous to my consenting to these Vessels being sold, as I had no orders from
you respecting them, bfr Higgins, as, also the Officers charged with their care,
wrote me, that to keep them from sinking in the harbour, they wou'd require infinitely greater repairs than they wou'd sell for, after they had receiv'd them
[NDA. Captain's LB, Vol. 3, 1805.1
NQ60

To Surgeon Edward Cutbush, U. S. Navy, U. S. Hospital, Syracuse, from Captain
John Bodgers, U. S. Navy
U. S. SIXIP Constitution
S y r a m e f?6,h Decr 1805
SIB A Report being made to me by Lieut Izard Commanding Gun Boat NQ2
that A Seaman belonging to said Boat was this Morning found dead on board.
I have in consequence to desire that you Summon an Inquest of Surgeons, of the
Squadron, on the body of said dead Seaman, In order to assertsin if his Death
has been occasioned by Violent usage of the Boatswain of the boat to which he
belong'd as has been reported to me; and report to me your opinion thereon
[LC. JRP, Order Book No. 2.1805-1806.1
To Secretary of the Navy from Captain John Bodgers, U. 6.Navy
U S SHIP Constitution
Syracuse 29Q De6 1806.
SIB In Answer to your letter of the 1st July Ulto. Permit me t o inform you
that the two fishin Smacks, have been deliver'd to Sir Alexander Ball, agreeable
to your Orders a n 8 in the manner rescribed by you; - This mark of respect
he receivJd with much Apparent $leasure, and wrote me in Answer, a Very
handsome letter, wherein he says "Whilst I express the deep sense I entertain of the honor conferr'd on me,
by the H o n b l ~Secretary of the Navy, communicated through you, permit
me Sir, to thank you, individually, for the Very handsome terms in which
you express Yourself towards me" "I can only add, that to have an opportunity of shewing any attention
to the Citizens of the U. States (especially so respectable a Body as the
Officers of the Navy) AEor* me the highest satisfaction, as in so doing I
gratify my own feelings, whllst I fulfil the m h e s of my Govermt" NQ62

.

328

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1806 TO 1807

1 have not received as yet, the Bill of Cost of the Smack Ranger - Mr Prince
who brought the Ttavelct out appears to be a Gentlemanly Young Man
and
I think will make a Good bfficer - His Conduct has given me satisfaction
[KDA. Captain's LB, Vol. 3, 1805.1

-

TO Captain John Eodgera,

U. B. Navy, from Lieutenant David Porter, U. 8. Navy
U. S. S c ~ o o Enterpn'ze
r

Deer 90tb 1806

SIR I arived here yesterday after a disagreable passage.

Gun Boats Nor 9 and 10 have just srived and are taking in provisions, I ahall
fill them ss full as possible and will endeavour to get them off this evening.
I shall not be able to take any thing in before the day after tomorrow owing
to tomorrows being a holiday. I calculate on leaving this the same evening.
Mr Pulia will come over with me A ship has arived here from Boston she
brings no inteligence that I can learn, she is quarantined but will endeevour t o
furnish us with papers against our departure.
I a m informed that she is loaded with a cargo that will suit the Squadron
and has some idea of coming to Syracuse.
I shall call dong side and learn more on that subject.
P. S. The ship has just obtained Pratique, and will come to Syracuse I
have collected some papers which I send you by the G Boata - I expect to get
more he has brought no letters for the Squadron
If i can judge from the countenance of Mr Higgins, he is much alarmed - A
BiIl drawn in favour of Mr Dyson by Cap* Decatur on MPKenzie and Glennie
sent o n with a letter of advice has been protested owin as they say to having
This clears the pending &ud D
received no advice
[LC. JRP, Series Two, Vol. 3, 1805-1807.1

-

-

8

To Captain Edward Preble, U. 6. Navy, from William Eaton, former U. S. Navy
Agent for the Barbary Regencies
P ~ L A D E L P HDec.
I A 304 1806
DEARSIR Though the weather and accommodations are good I find travelling very diEcult - I am arrested here and put under keepers for trial next
thunday - Arrangements are making, I am informed, a t Elisabethstom, N
York N Haven, Hartford and Springfield to stop me on the road - so that it is
highly probable you and I may be fellow passengers before I arrive a t Brimfield
It would delight me to pass in your company into my own rustic village
But
should I be disappointed in this, shall nevertheless rely on the promise you half
ave me of taking us in your passage northward - Besides the gratification
shall have in waiting on you in my own homely cottage I may profit of your
advice whether it would be most suitable for me to go to tending mill (I have a
village mill) or t o preaching the Gospell
I shall leave this friday morning - We have no news - And, of oourse, I
have nothing t o add but the assurance of
[LC. EPP, Vol. 16, Aug. 1805-Jan. 1806.1

-

-

9

To Secretary of the Navy from Captain John Bodgers, U. S. Navy
U S SHIP Constitution
Syracvae SI*!Dec~1806
SIB Quadruplicate of your letter of the 5th of Augr 1805 Authorizing the
repairs of Vessels, not otherwise in a condition to return in safety to the U. Stake,
aa also the sending of GUT. Boats under t)le Command of one of the Brigs or
Schooners t o N. Orleans being the h t on zt's eubject, I did not receive until the
28'9- U l t ~however nothing haa been lost by my not receiving it before sr, the
season waa too far advanced, for them t6 return when they left Tunis, a t the
commencement of Septr without considerable risk - Ae matters have conduced,
conceiving i t to be your wish, I shall detain the Gun Boata, as also the other
Vessela until the return-of the Tunisian Ambsssador, without in the interim I
shou'd receive instructions from you to the Contrary - After our Affsire are
permanently settled with Tunis, I conceive one Frigate, two Brigs and a Sohooner,

Ku'n 64

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS
will be adequate to secure the n e w a r y reapect to our Commerce so far as relates
to the Barbary States. The Argus Siren, Enterprize & Vizen,if necessary, are in repairs sufEcient to
remain two kern longer in the Mediterranean, but the Essw and this Shi
will require to be reliev'd
The E s s a will require from the repmentations ma&
of her to me a thorough repair -

-

[NDA.

Captain's LB, Vol. 3, 1805.1

To Lieutenant Theodore Hunt, U. 8. Navy commanding U. S. Bomb Ketch $pi.$*,
from Captain John Bodgers, U. S. Navy
U S SHIP Constitution
Syracuse 11fit Decr 1806
SIR YOUare desired to inform the Officers Commanding the Bombs, and Gun
Boats, that they are not, a t the Expence of Government, to Paint the outside of
their Vessels, oftener than Once in Three Months, the insides (above the Deck)
oftener thsn Once in Six Months, and their Cabins, or whereever Paint is required,
below the Decks, Oftener thsn Once in Twelve Months [LC. JRP, Order Book No. 2, 1805-1806.3

COMMUNICATED

[I8051
Statements of Expenditures of U. 6. Navy
TO THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES,
FEBRUARY 18, 1806.

To Me House of Representatives of the bnited Sides:
I now communicate to the House of Representat~vesthe information desired by
their resolutions of January 24,relative to the fortifications erected a t the several
ports and harbors of the United States, and their territories, and to the navy and
navy yards of the United States.

TH: JEFFERSON.
FEBRUARY
18,1806
A sfafementexhibiting the amount of Money which has been drawn from the ?f.emury
of the United States, and disbursed on account of the Navy, i n each year, Bince the
establishment of the Navy Department, viz.
In theyear 1 7 9 8 , - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - $570,314 24
1799,. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2,848,187 26
1800,----------------_----------3,385,34048
1801,---------------------------2,117,42074
1502,---------------------------946,213 24
1803,---------------------------1,107,92532%
1804,- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 1,246,50274%
1805, . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1,409,94967

NAVYDEPARTMENT,

THOMAS
TURNER,Accountani.

Accountant's Osee, February 6th, 1806.

-

A statement exhibiting the cost of each armed ship or other vessel built or purchased on
account of the United States, for the Navy, mz.

Frigate

United States--- , - - , - - - - - -$299,336
- - - -56
-----Constitutaon- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -- - - 302,718 84

ConsteUation------------------------

314,212 15
197,246 81
Ptm-dent---------------------------220,910 08
Chesa cake
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 220,677 80
~ h i d d ~ -h- - --& -~- - -~- - -~- - ~- - - - - 179,349 00
New Y o r k - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 159,639 60
Essm- - - - - - -- - - - - - - - - - - - -- - - - - - - - - - 139,362 50
John Ahma-----------------------113,505 72
A h m s .............................
76,622 27
Beor911 Washington------------------69,024 92
Conqress---------------------------

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1805 TO 1807

330

Frigate
Ship

Boston- - - - ---- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - $119,570 04
General G r e e n e - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 105,492 32
Insurgent--------------------------96,640 29
80,665 21
Ganges. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Portsmouth . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
59,561 52
46,170 20
Merrirnack . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Connecticut. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57,260 65
Baltimore . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56,277 67
59.563 01
Delaware . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Maryland - - - - - - - - - - - - ,70;
-249
-83
-----,-Patapsw - - - - _ - - - - - - _ _ _ - - _ - _ - - - - - _ -73,104
40
Herald - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - _ _ - - _ _ _ 47,780 77
l ' k u m b d Z - - _ - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 58.494 91
Warren- - - - - - _ - _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ - - - - - - - 34;
- - - 702 01
M o ~ e ~ u r -----,-----,----------na
55,732 13
N w f o l k - - - - _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ - - _ - - - - - - - - - - - - -18,720 55
Richmond . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27,896 87
- -

Brig

Augusta---_--____-----------------16,294
Pick&ng--------------__--_-------32,126
S y e n - - - - - ~ _ - - - - - - - - ~ - - - - - - - - - - - _ -32,521
Argus-------------------------_---37,428

29
06
77
29

Hornet, the accounts for the building
this vessel have not been exhibited;
52,603 00
the advances on account amount toSchooner
Enterpnse - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 16,240 52
16,689 15
+periment- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - V u e n - - - - - - - _ - _ _ _ - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 20,872 73
Nautilus--- - - - - _ - - - - -- - -- - - - - - - - --18,763 51
Galley
South Carolina- . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5, 146 54
Char2eston- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 5, 190 04
Beaufort . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5,030 53
St. Mary's- - - - - _ -- - - - - - - - - - -- - - - - - - 5,575 11
Savannah--_-------------------_-_6,228 69
Protector . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4,443 59
Mars - , - - - - - - - - - - - -4,387
_45_ - - - - - Governor Davie . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3, 125 09
Gwernor Williams- - - _ - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 3,213 41
Gun Boat h7o. 1 , built at Washington-10,210 65
No. 8,Hampton- - - - - - - - - - - 11,399 95
3, Philadelphia- - - - - - - -11,757 48
I
Washinnton.. - - - - - - - - 11.989 50
.,.
6, ~ a l t i m & e- - - - - - - - - - 12; 293 87
6 , New Y o r k - - - - - - - - - - 13,790 00
7, New York - - - - - - - - - 12,729 50
8, Boston _ - - - - - - - - - - - 13,090 97
9, Charleston, 6. C .----- 12,792 64
10, Washington- - - ---- - 12,072 46
Bomb Ketch Spitfire- - - - - - - - --- - - - - - - - - - - - - _ - - - - 17,307 83
Vengeance- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 18,443 24

_

Nm.-The frigates Unfted Sates Constitution,and CondcUation were built More the establishment ofthe
Navy Department, and their costs ascertained from data obtalnedfrom the Tmmry and War Departmenb.
THOMU TUBNEB,Accountant

NAVYDEPARTMENT,
Accountant's O$ce, February 6th, 1806.

-

A statement ezhibitin the amount of money ezpended in the purchase and imptocement
of eacR Navy Yard belonpng to the United States, riz.
Navy Yard at Washington.......................
$180,920 15
Boston . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
80,521 94
Portsmouth, New Hampshire- - - - - - - - 33,249 07
New York ------------------------- 89,555 50
Philadelphia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41,180 84
Norfolk , - - - - - - - - - - - -52,748
- - -78
-_-----T H O M ATURNER,
S
Accountant.
NAVYD E P A R ~ E N T ,
Accountant's Olpiee, February 6th 1806.
[Am. State Papers, Nav. M., 149, No. 52.1

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS
John Rodgers, U. S. Navy
U S SHIPConstitution
Syracuse 1 ** Janr 1806
SIB In answer to Duplicate of your letter of the 25'P of June 1805 by the Store
Brig Washington permit me t o say, that the Marine cloathing, in lieu of that
ship'd in the Huntress, has been procured by Cap. Gale, of Marines, agreeabk
to your Orders, - But that Gun Boat NP7 has not yet arrived in the Mediterranean
a t least I have not yet heard of her - therefore !presume that subsequent to the 25 Q of June you had given orders for her not to proceed [NDA. Captain's LB, Vol. 1, 1806.1
To Secretary of the Navy from Cap-

-

To Secretary of the Navy from Ceptain John Rodgers, U. S. Bevy
U . S. S H I P Comtituiion
Syracuse 10,Jan? 1806
SIR The contents of your letter of the 25tb of July, directing that five PI Cent
be allow'd, on the am$ of all purchases made by the Navy Agent a[t] Syracuse
for the Use of the Squadron, I have made him acquainted of
[LC. JRP, L Bk 3,May, 1805-July 1806.1
To Lieutenant David Porter, U. S. Navy, commanding 17. 6. Schooner Entapdu,
from Captain C. Y.Schomberg, B. N.
HIS MAJESTYS
SHIPMCldf~d
M d t a 1st January 1806
SIR, The Seaman you claim as a Deserter from the United States Schooner
under your command having been entered onboard His Majestys Ship Madras
under my command from the Ant Merchant Vessel where he appears to have
shipped himself a t Venice, as a British subject & Seaman, I can by no means
take upon myself to restore him to you as a Deserter from the American Service,
nor can I consider it necessary to enquire in what situation the man might have
been prior to his being found on board the Ant, you are I trust Sir aware of the
difference that exists between a British Seaman deserting from your service, and
one deserting directly from it, into ours in that case he would have been b e diatly restored, altho' perhaps afterwards he would have been claimed as a
British subject [NDA. MC LB, 1806-1807.1
To Captain C. H.Schomberg, B. B.,commanding H. B. X.S. Ibladrua. from
Lieutenant David Porter, U. S. Navy
To which I returned the following reply
U . S. SCH?Enterpri~e
Malta 9 d Jan? 1806
SIR, Retaliation seems justified by the lams of Nature and of Nations, therefore
an act admited on principles of equity should excite no surprize.
[NDA. MC LB, 1806-1807.1
To Secretary of the Navy from Captain John Bodgers, U. S. Bavy
U, S, SHIP Constitution
Syracuse 9 Janr 1806 S~rc;As nothing material, relative to our affairs, had occurred between the
time of my communications bv the Fri ate Congress, and my last letter from
,
than what you were informed
Leghorn of the 1-1 of the preceding ~ o n t %farther
of - I feel i t unnecessary to add more, than merely to make you acquainted
with subsequent Transactions
I sail'd from Leghorn on the 9 4 November and arrived in Algiers Bay on t h e
17tP but a Gale coming on suddenly after my entering the Bay, I was obliged
to put to Sea and was not able to Anchor until the 19Q a t which time Coll Lear
landed and was received by the New Dey in the most respectful and friendly
manner: As C o l l ~Lear was absent a t the time of the death (assassination) of
the preceding Dey, his first object, of course, was to know the determination of

332

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1806 TO 1807

W successor, concerning the Treaty; and on this subject he met with no acuity, m the Dey without hesitation acknowledged and confirm'd it, I understood
from C o l l ~Lear, with so much apparent good humour, and in so friendly a manner that I am induced to believe, he feels it his interest, rather to secure to himself
by friendly conduct, the benefits which he, a t present, derives from the Treaty;
than by a different behaviour, not only lose this important acquisition, but
hazard to exposure the real weakness of the boasted strength of his Regency The present Dey was private Secretary to the preceding one, and 'tis said ie a
Man of much superior understanding,
Algiers is very well defended by its fortifications except in the very place that
requires it most, and this particular point, has, oweing to some circumstances,
been so far neglected, as to render all their Batteries of little consequence, was
they a t war with an Active Entrepid Enemy possessing only a small Force w d
chosen The parts of Algiers bordering on Morocco & Tunis, altho they had Revolted,
did not attach themselves to Tunis and Morocco as was stated, and as I wrote
you from Leghorn; neither has the internal strength of the City itself been d e c t e d
by their domestic contentions, more than is common in the destruction of one Dey,
and another usurping his place. The day after landing C o l l ~Lear, finding that our affairs wore as favorable an
ihpect, a t least, as they had ever done; and indeed even m well, as our Treaty in
its nature, would admit; I took my departure and on the 28th u l t ~join'd the
Squadron again a t this place - On my passage from Algiers, I intended calling
a t Tunis, but by the time I reached it's Longt was prevented by a Gale, blowing
directly into the Bay; however I since find, that my not calling was of little or no
consequence: as the Argus (Cap. Hull) who I had, previous to my Departure from
Syracuse, order'd thence to communicate with our Charge des Affairs during my
absence, who had only left the Bay about two weeks previous to my passing it,
being inform'd by Mr Dodge, that he had not experience'd any difference between
then, and the time of the Squadron's leaving there, that the Bey appear'd friend1
toward the U. States, and that He as their charge des aEairs was treated wit1
proper respect. Tripoli I hear from often, and the Bashaw professes that kind of warm friendship, which dear bought experience has taught him to be his interest. The Vengeance Bomb, commanded by Lt Lewis arrived a t Malta on the 25'P
of August, but the Spitfire Lt MoNeill, altho ahe is the fastest Sailor of the two,
not until the 12th of September and this, I am sorry to say, I have strong grounds
for supposing was in a Great measure occasion'd by the Intemperance of her
Commander, who by his own request, I have given permission to return to the
U. States Mr McNeill, it appears was, on his passage from the U. States, a t times
Intoxicated for several days together, it also has been reported to me, that he lost
some time in getting to the Squadron, by keeping company with a Merchant I7essel
he met with, and having her master on board to dine with him - This latter
circumstance alone, considering the Orders he was under, a t the time, is proof
possitive, that he is not (to give it no harsher name) calculated for the Service. To Lieu$ Theodore Hunt, late of the Frigate Philadelphia, I have given command of the Spit re, and to Lieu$ Benjamin Smith late of the same Ship, the
command of the engeance. - Lt Lewis, whose conduct during his command of
the Vengeance was such as to merit my entire approbation, I have placed on board
of the Brig Argus, as one of her Lieu*; on no other account than the Juniotity of
his Rank. - Indeed I shou'd consider myself wanting in Justice was I not to
recommend him to your Notice, as a very promising Officer.
Since my arrival here the Constitution has been put in the most complete order,
from her keelson to her Trucks, - all her ballast washed and stow'd over again,
and all her water casks, repair'd, The ground Tier of which were in a miserable
state indeed; the Average of new Staves put in them were 11 to a cask - Having
the entire use of the Arsenal here, the expence of her Repairs am very inconsiderable, in pro ortion to their magnitude; as they were executed principally by her
own crew; Bowever altho' she is in most respects complete, she nevertheless will
soon require new lower masts and Standing Rigging - The Vesmls of the
Squadron in General, are in the handsomest order and fit for any service.
The Gun Boats, most certainly, are superior to any thing of the kind that has
ever yet been built; But the Bombs Vengeance and Spitfire are very indifferent,
not oweing to the Veesels themaebea, but the constructions on which their Mortere
are fixed. Gun boat NQ3, which I understand was built by Hutton, in Philadelphia, I
think preferable to the rest, for altho she is much the smallest, ehe is capsble of

F

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

333

carrying 32 pounders and of performing the same service of the larger boats; she
draws less water and sails equally well, No 8, built in Boston is a fine Boat and
saile Very fest; her and NQ6 built a t New York; I think posseeaes more good p r o p
erties than the rest, NQ41 excepted, NQ 2 is vastly inferior to all. - The boats
are commanded by the same Officers that brou ht them from America, who a:e,
in General, very promising and deserving young%en - The Store Vessels, Brig
Washington and Schooner Molly, arrived and commenced delivering their stores
here on the 22q4 Septr The Squadron had been for some time destitute of cheese,
Butter, molasses, & rice, when they arrived of course, such of these Articles as
they brought, were soon consumed; of Beef we have a t present about 800 Barrels
and Pork about 400 Bbls, bread about 40 Tons, cordage is much wanting and two
Bower Anchors for this ship of 6,300 weight. The cast Anchors I find will not
answer, indeed I consider a ship is never safe that uses them, The Comtitution
has broken three since I have commanded her
I have kept one of the Small Vessels a t Naples, since the first of the preceding
October, for the convenience of our Trade, and at present it has become more
necessary, oweimg to the Additional Anarchy existing there a t this moment Between the conduct of the combin'd Armies & that of France, there is no aaying a t present, what will become of Naples. The Natdilw will sail in a few days
for Tripoli and Tunis to communicate with our Consuls A very considerable quantity of the Beef which has been sent from the U. States,
within thew last twelve Months, has been condemn'd, being unfit t o eat; oweing
to it's being badly cured: - I t was orriginally good - The Russia Canvass
that has been supplied from the U States, has also been very indifferent. The
Squadron I shall hold in Readiness to commence the execution of Your Orders
a t a moments warning
I have not heard from Capta Campbell since I wrote you from Leghorn; therefore suppose that his silence is oweing to nothing, worth communicating, having
Transpired, since the last and only letter that I have reaeiv'd from him; and which
contained nothing of sufficient consequence to trouble you with a communicationCaptz Hull has been'four years in the Mediternmean, and has requested of
me to solicit your permiasion for his return to America, on the reduction of the
Mediterranean Squadron; Shou'd there be any Vacancies to cause promotion
permit me to remind you of his claims P. S. I have received no let,ters from you, of a later date than the 16tP August
lest - J R
INDA. Captain's LB, Vol. 1, 1806.1
To Secretary of the Navy from Soiling Master John Earle, U. 8. Navy
U. S. B ~ I Franklin
G
off A h n d r i a [Va.]SQJan? 1806
SIR The T;. S. Brig Fraflklin under my Command, is now lying safe moored
before Alexandria with every thing in readinem lo proceed - I have received
Lieutt Baldwin with fifteen Marines - Rlr Kennedy whom you was pleased t o
appoint second Officer has not ye' Joined; but, Mr BaIlard and Mr Budds, attention has fully compensated for his Absence.
Waiting for your future orders I remain, Sir,
[NDA. Officers LB, Vol. 1, 1806.1
To William Biggins, U. 6. Navy Agent, Malta, from Captain John Eodgers, U. S.
Navy
U S FEIGATE
Cowttution
Spanure 34 Jan? 1806
SIR The U S Brig Siren has this moment arrived here, from Naples, with part
of the money intended to take up the Bills, provided they should be protested for
non psyment, which hss caused you, so much uneesiness - The Argus Cap+
Hull, will be here with the residue, I expect in a week or ten days, a t farthest You will be pleased t o draw on me, on account of my Bills on Mess.9 MqKencie &
Glennie, if ultimately dishonord the instant you have occasion [LC. JRP, L Bk 3, May 1805July 1806.1

334
-

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1806 TO 1807

-

To Frederick Degen, U. S. Navy Agent, Naples, from Captain John Bodgere, U. 8.
Navy
U S SHIPConstitution
Syracuse 4% January 1806
SIR I have received your esteemed favors of the 7tP.and 254 Ultimo, the
former four days ago, the latter yesterday by the Brig Siren, together with the
10,000$ which you forwarded by said Vessel I r e b ~ e that
t
you should find so much difficulty in selling the Bills, which I have
drawn on the U S Goverment, as I feel much affraid, that I shall really require
the Sum of their Amount, even should I be obliged to make a greater sacrifice,
than what I have already stipulated, and which in itself offers greater loss on
U S Goverment bills, than I have ever Known before. The Enterprize Lieutt Commandant Porter, will sail the day after to morrow
for Naples, for the purpose of rendering such protection to our Trade, and sssistance to you, as the Change, and Nature of affairs, will make necessary
hlr Dyson is a t Malta a t present, so soon as he returns, I shall make the enquiries respecting the Anchors, you mention, and inform you accordingly [LC. JRP, L Bk B, May 1805-July 1806.1

-

To Jacob Otto, of the Merchant Ship Hibernia, from Captain John Rodgers, U. S.
Navy

U S SHIPConstitution

Syracuse 4Q January 1806
SIR I have this Instant received your letter of the 30% Ultimo, and noie ita
Contents. I intend sending a Vessel to Gibraltar about the 15th Instant, should the
Hibernia be ready to sail, this Vessel, altho' charged with Dispatches, will Convoy
her as far as Gibraltar; should you have serious reasons to believe that Convoy is
necessary, I mill afford you such as far as that Port - If your Vessel should not
be ready to take advantage of this oppertunity, by some other
hlr JACOB
OTTO
Esqr
Care of J BROADBENT
Messina
[LC. JRP, L Bk B, May 1805-July 1806.1

-

To Master Commandant Isaac Hull, U. S. Navy, U. S. Brig Argus, Baples, from
Captain John Bodgers, U. S. Navy
U S SHIPConstitution
Syracuse 6th Jan? 1806 SIR Your letter of the 25th Ulto by the Siren, I recQ Yesterday, with the $10,000
accompanying it I am happy to inform you that the circumstance which caused
your Mission to Naples no longer exists, as I have this very moment rec4 information that :he Second, of my bills on Messrs Glennie & M~Kenzieof London,
amounting to S25,000 have been paid This has relieved me from considerable
embarrasment The Enterprize is now on her passage hence from Malta So
soon as she arrives I shall dispatch her to Naples, a t which place you are desired
to remain, to afford protection to our Trade until1 her arrival
If the Govermt Bills which you took to Naples are not sold before thie reaches
you, will be pleased not to make any sacrifice of them, but return with the cssh
for such part, if any, as may have been sold after the Enterprize arrives
[LC. JRP, L Bk B, May 1805-July 1806.1
To Frederick Degen, U. 6. Navy Agent. Naples, from Captain John Rodgers, U. S.
Navy
U S FRIGATE
C&?J~tii~tion
Syracuse 6th Jan? 1806 SIR Since writing you yesterday by Post, I am happy t o acquaint you, that the
cause which authoriz'd my drawing bills on Govermt in your favor for $90,000 no
longer exists, I therefore have to request, that in case you have not disposed of
said bills, that you will be pleas'd not to do it, and return them by the Brig Argus,
unless they can be Negotiated without sacrifice

WARS WITH B a B A R Y POWERS
-

- -

The Schooner Enterprize will be with you in two or three days after this reaches
you the Argus will remain a t Naples until1 the Arrival of the Enterprize
[LC. JRP, L Bk B, May 1805-July 1806.1
To William Higgins, U. S. Navy Agent, Malta, from Captain John Rodgers, U. S.
Navy
U. S. SHIP Constitution
Syracuae 6* Jan? 1806
SIR, Your letters of the 20tb 23d & 31.t of last month, I have received, and have
88 dispassionately considered their contents, 8s I promptly and Zealously adopted
and put in execution, the necessary Measures to have saved you the Necessity
of writing them
You will oblige me a t present, by not requiring of me further comment
[LC. JRP, L Bk B, May 1805-July 1806.1
To Midshipman Ralph b a r d , Jr., U. 6. Mavy, U. 6 . Gunboat No. 2, from Captain
John Rodgers, U. S,Navy
U S SBIPConstitution
Syracuse [6 Jan?] 1806 SIR YOUare desired to proceed with Gun Boat NP9. to Malta and Transport
to this place as much of the Public Bread and Pork, from the Store of Mr Higgins,
as you can conveniently Stow
[LC. JRP, Order Book KO. 2,1805-1806.1
To the Commander-in-Chief of the British Naval Forces in the Mediterranean
from Tobias Lear, U. S. Consul General, Algiers
ALGIERS,January 6'4 1806.
SIR, I have the honor to transmit you a copy of my letter of the 5* of December;
and to add, that this day my Dro erman informed me that the Dey requested I
would be so good as to forward a 8opy of my letter by any oppr which would be
likely to reach you. - And to say, that he was very anxious to receive an answer
to his letter which had been transmitted to you by H. B. hI. Frigate Amphion,
Capts Hoste as it was his sincere aish to remain on the best terms with his old
Friends the hnglish Nation; and that he had as a friend asked for a Frigate to
Carry his Regalia to Constantinople, which H. B. M. eonsul promised should
come; but when she came, some objections were made to her going. The Dey
says he asked this as a favor, and if it had been declined, he should not have made
any difficulty on that account, as he could not demand a Vessel for that purpose,
unless perfectly agreeable to you. - He expresses his stron desire to be in friendship, and says that if a Frigate should be sent for him to &patch to Constaatinople it would make a due impression on his mind.
[Stephen Decatur Col. Book B, 1806-1807.1
To Joseph Pulis, U. S. Consul, Malta, from Captain John Rodgers, U. S. Mavy
U S SHIP Constitution
Syracuse 6 Jan? 1806
SIR, Your Esteem'd favor of the 2sQ Ins* I have this hloment received, and for
the friendly manner in which you express yourself towards my Country and myself, be pleased to accept my most sincere thanks
The cause of my wishing to see you is so far remoov'd, as to enable me to dispense
with that pleasure, until the arrival of the Constitution a t Malta, which will not
be longer than ten or twelve days
[LC. JRP, L Bk B, May 1805-July 1806.1

-

To Captain John Rodgers, U. 6. Navy, from Thomas Appleton, U. 6. Consul,
Leghorn, Italy
LEGHORN
6 Q January 1806
SIR I have just received a letter from Colonel Lear, 8: as the courier is the
moment of departure I have only time to acquaint you that the Brig Fncndship

336

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1805 TO 1807

Captain Clemmons was sent into Algiers by a Frigate of that Regency, ss being
unprovided with the new Mediterranean Pass agreeably to the arrangement intered into with the United States. - Colonel Lear adds that every civility was
shewn to the Captain & Crew, and the vessel was suffered to depart with a special
passport for her future protection granted by the New Dey
The enclos'd I
received Yesterday under cover [LC. JRP, Series Two, Vol. 3, 1805-1807.1

-

To Lieutenant David Porter, U. S. Navy, from Captain John Rodgers, U. 6. Navy
U S SEIPConstitution
Syracuse 6* January 1808
SIR I n consequence of a letter, I have lately received from Mr Degen our Agent
a t Naples, you are desired to proceed to that place, with the U S Schooner Enterprize, under your Command, for the Purpose of affording such protection to our
Commerce, as the confused State of Politics in that Country may make necessary,
and in affording this protection you will be particularly carefull to advice with
M: Degen our Agent, as also, not to commit the Neutrality of the U States in the
smallest degree The confidence I feel in your discretion, and judgment in committing this
important Charge to your trust, serves in a great measure, to disembarrass me,
of these unpleasant feelings, which naturally accompanies the suspence, particular to matters, where i t is not possible to prescribe any possitive line of Conduct,
for your guidance, owing to not being able to foresee the result, of the present
confused situation of that Kingdom You will Keep your Vessel in readiness to depart, a t a momenh Warning, and
write to me by every oppertunity, and should the Complexion of affairs, so Change
as for Mr Degen to conceive, that the services of the Enterprize can be dispenced
with, you are desired to join the Squadron again a t this Port, as soon as possible [LC. JRP, Order Book No. 2, 1805-1806.1
--

To Secretary of State from John Ridgely, U. 6. ChargB dlAffaires, Tripoli
TRIPOLIIN THE WEST
Jan7 6tP 1806
SIR, I enclose for your information a list of the cruisers belonging to thisRegency
When I was left here by Colo Lear charged with the affairs of the United Stater,
I had neither expectation or wish that the appointment would be confirmed. I n
my several communications to you I have avoided expressing such a desire; because situations and emergencies might occur which from the nature of my education and pursuits it could not be expected I should be qualified to meet; as well a6
private reasons, which would render my residence here peculiarly comfortless.
I look forward with anxious expectation to the amval of the Gentleman whom the
President of the United States shall honor with this appointment.
[Enolosurel

List of Cruisers belonging to the Regency of Tripoli in Barbary.
1 Corvette (copper-bottomed) carrying - - - - - - - - - - - - - 28 Guns.
1
DQ---_--------------------------------10
1 Z e b e q u e - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 14
1
D?-------------------------------------14
1
D?-------------------------------------8
1
D?-------------------------------------6
1
D?-------------------------------------6
1 Kirlangis---------------------------_--------8
1
d~-------------------------------------- 6
1
d~---_------------_--------------------4
1 Martingana-----------------------------4
1
n?---_---------------------------------4
-

--

Besides gun boats which cruise in the summer, and carry one or two guns or
two or four swivels.
JOHNRIDQELY
TRIPOLIIN BAXBAEY
Jan7 4% 1806
[NA. SDA. CL, Tripoli, Vol. 8, 1806-1811.1

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

337

To Cuptain John Rodgers, U. 6. Barry, from Degen, Purviance & Co.,
U. 6. Navy Agents, Leghorn, Italy
LEGHORN
6 Jan? 1806
SIR We have just received the letter with which you have honord us in date of
the 18 Decr -t o which the quick departure of the post obliges us to answer rather
briefly. - We are inclined to think your bills on Rlackenzie & Glennie will not
ultimately meet the fate you seem to apprehend, as the sett we took from one of
our neighbours of which we mentioned having received protest for non acceptance
has not come back
We therefore presume it was paid a t maturity, & doubt
not but those you drew in favor of Mr Higgins will be equally paid. In answer to your question respecting the funds we have of the Navy Department we have to inform you that we shall have about $25,000 in hand after discharging the drafts now running on us, which sum remains a t your disposal. We ehdl do every thing in our power to facilitate the negotiation of your drafts on
the U. S. respecting which we are now in correspondence with our relative Mr
Frederic Degen a t Naples. We have to inclose you a letter just received from Col. Lear a t Algiers, & begging you will a t all times command our services, we are with the compts of your
friends in this quarter very sincerely & respectfully
[LC. JRP, Series Two, Vol. 3, 1805-1807.1

-

To Master Commandant Isaac Hull, U. S. Navy, U. S. Brig Argus, Naples, from
Captain John Rodgers, U. 6. Navy
UNITEDSTATESSXIP Constitution
Syracuse 7th Jan? 1806
SIR, I n addition to writing you by His Britanic hlajestys Schooner Reynard,
permit me to inform you that I have sent the Enterprize to remain a t Naples for
the protection of our Trade. On the arrival of the Enterprize, you are desired to
leturn to this Port, bringing
- - with you the amount of such Rills as may have been
ne ociaced. k v Bills on London as mentioned t o vou in mv Letter D? the Revnard have
finalb been paid. In awe any circumstance should have occured, respecting the Bills which you
may have had sold to make the protraction of your departure necessary, you are
requested nat to hurry yourself to the prejudice of the service you are on. [NDA. Issac Hull LB, 1803-1806.1
To Frederick Degen, U. S. Mavy Agent, Maples, from Captain John Rodgere, U. 6.
Na~y
U S SHIP Constitution
Syracuse 7 Jan? 1806 SIR In addition to my letters cf the 4% & 5'4 1nst.I have the honor to acquaint
you,that I now have sent the U. S. Schooner Entetprize, L* Commands Porier,
whom you will find an officer of merit to remain a t Naples, for the purpose of affording the Necessary protection to our Trade.
The circumstances which authorieed my drawing the bills on Govern$ for the
$90,000 sent by Cap** Hull, no longer exists, I therefore have to request, that you
will be pleased, in case you have not Negotiated them, not to do so under par. [LC. JRP, L Bk, B, May 1805-July 1806.1
To George Harrison, Navy Agent, Philadelphia, Pa., from Secretary of the Navy
NAVYD E P7~J a n u ~1808.
SIR I have received your letter of the 4'4
Have the medal executed - and have 200 ~trucliin copper.
[NDA. GLB, Vol. 8, 1805-1807.1
To Captain Thomae Tingey, U. S. Navy, Superintendent, Navy Yard, Washington,
D. C., from Secretary of the Navy
NAVYD E P 7~ Jan? 1806
Receive the Bearer Silvador [Salvadore] Catalano into the public service st
the Navy Yard under your Command, and assign him such duties aa he may be

338

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1805 TO 1807

capable of discharging. He is to be paid for his services a t the rate of $30 pr
month & 2 rations per day. P. S. Send Midsp More to my office to morrow morning st 10 oclock.
[NDA. OSW, Vol. 7, 1805-1807.1
To Sir Alexander John Ball from Tobias Lear, U. S. Consul General, Algiers
ALGIERS,~anuary'8* 1806
MY DEARSIR I take the liberty of giving this letter, for Your Excellency,
to Sidi Mahomet Bentalib, a respectable Moorish Merchant of this place, who
oes t o Malta, in the American Ship Raleigh (which has been chartered to get a
argo of wheat) for the purpose of purchasing said Cargo, and have assured him
that he will receive all proper civilities from your Excellency, and all means of
expediting his business which lays within your pleasure to give. [Stephen Decatur Col. Book B, 1806-1807.1

6

To Sir Alexander John Ball from Tobias Lear, U. S. Consul General, Algiers
ALGIERSJanuary 8tP 1806.
MY DEARSIR This will be handed to you by Mr John Wingate, an American
Gentleman, Supercargo and part owner of the American Ship Raleigh, which
brought a Cargo to this place, and has been chartered to go from hence to Malta
for Wheat. &IT Wingate wishes to have the honor of being linown to your
Excellency,and I canventure to reccomend him as a Young Gentleman of respectability. - A respectable Moorish Merchant, of the name of Bentalib, goes in
this Vessel with money to purchase wheat in Malta, and I have told him I would
take the liberty of mentioning his name to your Excellency.
I take the liberty of enclosing a Copy of a letter which I had the honor of
writing to you on the 26'P of December. Since the date of that letter nothing
new has occurred on the Subject of it excepting ran increase of differences between
the Dey & Mr Carthwright. How these will terminate you can probably say
better than I can. The Dey uniformly declares that he is very far from having
a wish to break with the English, but the reverse, that he would do every thing
in his power to preserve peace with his Ancient Friends. I am happy to inform you that Mv Lear continues to enjoy good health and
desires that her best respects and regards may be made acceptable to Lady Ball
and yourself to which I beg leave to add mine
[Stephen Decatur Col. Book B, 1806-1807.1
To Captain John Bodgers, U. 8. Navy, from John Ridgely, U. S. Charge d'Affaires
Tripoli
TRIPOLI
IN THE WEST
Duplicate (copy)
Jan? 8'4 1806
SIR, It has been a long time since I had the pleasure of hearing from you or
seeing any of the Squadron - The Weather has been very tempestious for a
Month past, which rendered the Coast hazardous.
I enclose for your information a list [See 6 January 18061 of the Cruizers belonging to this Regency - All things here stand as You left them. If you have any
late news from America, I shall be much indebted for i t [NDA. Captain's LB. Vol. 1, 1806.1

To Secretary of the Navy from Captain John Rodgers, U. S. Navy
U S SHIP Constitution
Syracuse 8cb Jan? 1806
SIR, I n order that the Resident might not be detain'd, longer than was
absolutely necessary, I permitted Captn James Barron, to proceed on his passage
t o the U. States, on condition of his leaving the acctr of her crew (which wes
exchanged for this Ship's in consequence of the term of the latter having expired)
a t Gibraltar, and with positive Orders Not t o leave there without doing so
I

-

-

am as equally astonish'd a t C a p t ~Barrons not having complied with this order,
as I a m (for his sake) sorry to be obliged to request, that you will be pleased to
Order that the same shall be Transmitted to me -

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS
Cap@Barron ought to have been so sensible of the inconvenience attending my
not being possessed of these accQ as to have saved me the necessity of troubling
you [NDA. Captain's LB, Vol. 1, 1806.1
To Captain Hugh G. Campbell, U.6. Navy, commanding U. S. 6. k ,
from Captain
John Bodgers, U. 6. Navy
U S SHIP Constitution
Syracuse 9'4 Jan? 1806
SIR Your letter of the 1 3 t h Novr last enclosing a copy of a Certificate from
h l r Charles Benson, on the subject on the conduct of Henry Worthington, I have
this moment receiv'd, and note their Contents; I have recQ Papers, altho no
letters, from America subsequent t o the dates of your last, and I conceive there
is a t present more than ever, appearances of a Rupture between the U. States &
Spain, Mr Bodewin went t o Madrid to supercede blr Pinckney but was not
recd as Minister, after which Mr Irvin our late Consul for London, was appointed,
Charge des Affairs, by Mr Munroe The latter Gentleman not being able to
effect any thing adratageous t o the business which produced his Embassy
After the sailing of the Siren shou'd you receive any Dispatches for me from
Govt I request you will dispatch the Vixen with them to me without delay, as
I have reason t o believe they may require my early attention. Capt! Smith will be able to give you all the news of this Quarter
LLC. JRP, L Bk B, May 1805-July 1806.1
To Brs. Izerd from Midshipman Ralph Izard, Jr., U. S. Navy
MALTA
9th January 1806. MY DEARMOTHER,
Since we left Tunis which was in September I have not had
an opportunity of forwarding a letter to any part of the U. S. & even now I write
by the Kay of New Orleans. To be able to judge of our feelings one ought t o
have been a companion of ours for these three last months in Syracuse. I think
nothing but an absolute prison can be worse than the being confined to that most
disagreeable of Christian towns. I t is very hard to conceive the wretchedness of
this once beautiful & powerfull city. You will hardly credit me when I assure
you that to my knowledge more than twenty men women & children have perished
jn the streets for t h e want of bread. I have once or twice been relieved from
being a constant witness t o all t.heir misery by being sent to this place for provisions. I was once sent to Cntania which you know is at. the foot of Mount
Etna. I was there too short a time to pay a visit t o any thing but the museum
& the famous Convent of S* Nicolas which contains among many other curiosities
a most astonishing Organ. Amber is found here in great abundance. The
streets are beautiful. The nobility very showy very polite & very poor. The
lower class of people more decent & not quite so wretched as those of the more
Southern parts of Sicily. As you proceed Northwardly in Sicily, you may judge
of the state of things in general by the looks of the first peasant you see Altho'
they tell you of the famous Militia that is stationed every two or three miles
round the southern coast of Sicily still they cannot prevent the Tripolitans &
Tunisians from making a landing now & then & taking off a family into slavery.
In the beginning of December there appeared off the harbor of Syracuse a vessel
of war belonging t o some of the barbary powers. She was not within six miles
1 am convinced of the shore but so frightened mere the good folks of Syracuse
that they determined to let them know that there were guns mounted in Syracuse
$ for that purpose, they began to pop away a t them & when some of us enquired
the r e s o n of such proceeding they observed that the vessel would be frightened
a t the noise & would sheer off. That very night their boats landed about ten
miles from Syracuse & attacked a poor fisherman in hi hovel. They took from
him his wife & children & he b y great good luck escaped & brought the news to
Syracuse. The man found h a way to the Governor demanded of him hi wife
& children calling upon him as the father of his people to take means t o restore
them. The good Governor with a great deal of patience heard him out & then
observed that the man was "patso" & ordered him to prison, by. way
. of preventing
.
his complaints in future.
Strange are changes in Italy. At one moment we hear of Bonaparte's being
defeated, the next moment 8II express arrives with information of the entire
defeat of the combined armies. We have great reason t o believe now that an

340

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1805 TO 1807

Armistice has been signed by the Emperor of Germany in which he has promised
the Emperor of France that no army inimical to France shall be allowed to enter
his dominions. The Russians have been famously beaten, that however does
not induce the Russian Emperor to knuckle to the Great Little man. He observes
that he does not mind the loss of one battle & that he will try the result of several
previous to his determination of forming any armistice. The King of Prussia
has been very delatory; the last news however from him state that he had d e
clared on the 4% Decr last in favor of the coalition. An army of 400 000 men
were immediately got together from his provinces & i t is supposed that he m a y
check for a while the ardor of the french troops, than which nothing is more
astonishing. A large army of Russians & English are now about Naples. They
appear to think that Rome will shortly be invested, but by whom I guess they
cent determine.
Since my leaving America I have not been blessed with one word from a human
being in it. Vessels now and then arrive from Boston & I feel rather annoyed
a t seeing others more fortunate than myself.
What is the intention of our Commodore with respect to our movements I
cannot divine. How often do I think of this return with which we are promised The good people a t home do not appear to like our treaty with the folks of Tripoli.
I think from appearances a Spanish war cannot be avoided - How famously
did Lord Nelson handle them off Trafalgar!
Last night I was a t a Garrison Ball. To day I have the honor to dine with
his Excell? Admiral Sir Alex? Ball &Q $ 9 & q - who is very polite to all arnericans
in these parts. In three of four days more f shall return to Syracuse with a few
barrels of provisions for which I came over & shall perhaps for another two or
three months continue the same dull uninteresting lethargic routine of duty
Should my E. be with you my dear Mother tell her that a letter is on the
stocks ready to be launched by the first direct opportunity. Give my love to
all. I will not repeat again my anxiety to be with you. I shall endeavour t.o be
the first Boat to arrive among you if we ever should be permitted to run accross
the Atlantic which in my humble [opinion is] as feasible as if we were all frigates. Adieu my Mother.
(NA. NDA. Area 4, 1806-1810.1
To Tobias Lear, U. S. Consul General, Algiers, from Captain John Rodgers, U. S.
Navy
U S SHIP Cmtitution
Syracuse 10th January 1808
DEARSIR I have been prevented sending the Siren down to Gibraltar so soon
ss I had contemplated, when I last saw you, owing to her not arriving here, so
soon as I expected she would; in Consequence I should have sent the Argus had
I not been obliged to send her to Naples, to procure, Cash to secure M: Higgins,
our Agent at Malta, from disagreeable Consequences, In case my Bills drawn in his
favor on Messs M~Kenzie& Glennie of London amounting to $25,000 should be
protested for non payment, Mr Higgins having received advice of $5,000being
protested for non acceptance, because (as the House on which they were drawn
say) they had received no advice of the same, however I am happy to learn, a
few days since, that on their second presentment for payment they were honored This disembarrasses me very much, as I have found more difficulty in selling,
U S Government Bills a t Naples, than I expecled, every thing in that place a t
present being in the utmost Confusion - Mr Higdns's conduct in this business
has been extremely reprehensible the particulars of which you shall learn hereafter To Cap$ Smith I have given orders to convey your dispatches to Gibraltsr,
and to call in his way back, to this port, and hand you such aa he may find a t
Gibraltar I have no news worth communicating, further than what Cap+ Smith will be
able to make you acquainted with The Nautilwr will leave this in a few days for Tunis, and Gun Boat N P8 for
Tripoli, by which I shall propose to Mr Neessen, his permitting me to send one
of the small vessels to carry him, to any port in the Mediterranean, in Case of
his leaving Tripoli. On my arrival here, finding every thing, relating to the Squadron, under aa
favorable Circumstances as Could be expected, and indeed, with very few excep
tions, as propitious as I could wish, afforded me, soon after my arrival an oppertunity of visiting Malts in the Enterprize, where yourself and MQ Lar, were

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS
articularly and affectionately enquired after by all your friends, and particuhly
8ir Alexander and Lady Bdl, Doctor & M. Sewell, all of whom appeared rejoiced
Their enquiries were mixed with a Kind of
to hear of M* Lears recovery
solicitude that convinced me perfectly of their unfeigned attachment - Sir
Alexr B--spoke much of ou, and of the sincere plemure he would experience in
seeing you soon again a t h a l t s
Accept my best wishes for the Happiness of yourself and your truly amiable M s

-

k

l

[LC. JRP, L Bk B, May 1805-July 1806.1
To Secretary of the Navy from Captain John Rodgers, U. S. Navy
U S SHIP Constitution
Syracuse 10% January 1806
SIR I have been induced to give Lieutt Charles Ridgely permission to return
to the U States - My reasons for granting h i this permission are contained
in the enclosed, - An opportunity not having yet offered to Authorise my having a board Convened for the examination of Officers of Mr Ridgelys grade I have thought proper to return you his Commission
[LC. JRP, L Bk B, May 1805-July 1806.1
To Secretary of the Navy from Master Commandant Isaac Chauncey, U. S. Navy
U. S. BRIG Hornet orF CHARLESTON
BARE
11 January 1806.
SIR, I had the honor of writing you on the 26th Ult. the day I left Charleston,
since which time I have had the misfortune of springing my Main Mast, and
have received considerable damage otherwise in a heavy gale of wind from S. E.
on the 294 Ult. for the particulars of which I refer you to an Extract from my
Journal herewith enclosed My inlention is to go into Charleston the first favourable oppertunity and there
to get a new Main Mast if it can be procured in a few days, if not, to fish the one
we have in such a manner as to enable me to keep the Sea untill the middle of
february in the mean time the Spar for the new one can be procured and the Mast
made and ready by the time I arrive, so that no time will be lost in shifting the
Msst; our other damages can bt soon repaired and enable us to resume our station
again in a few days, I have wrote to the Agent to have every thing necessary got
ready by the time we get into Port. - I also enclose you a List of Vessels boarded
and spoke by me since I left Charleston. [NDA. MC LB, 18061807.]

*

[I1 January 18061

To Captain John Bodgers, U. 6. Navy, from George Dyson, U. S. Navy Agent,

Syracuse
SIR To morrow being the Birth day of His Sicilian Majesty the Town Major
has call'd and requests me to inform you of the usual cerimony on this occation a t Eleven oClock in the forenoon the Governor will attend in His palace t o
receive the Visits of all officers who please to honor Him in full Dress UniformSYRACUSE
11'4 Jan? 1806
[LC. JRP, Series Two, Vol. 3, 1805-1807.1

To Captain John Rodgers, U. 8. Navy, from Lieutenant James 6. Higinbothom,
U. 6. Navy

U. S. TRABACCOLO
NQ9 SYRACUSE
HARBOUR
Janr 11 Q 1806
SIR, Undersfanding that the Brig Syren Sails Shortly for Gibralter, & as you
have granted me the permission of returning to the U. States by the first Conveyance, I request I may be permitted to go in the Bri 88 far as Gibralter, where
I hope I shall be able to p o o u r e a passtye to America for in my-present Situation
I have no ambition, [bemg] thrown entirely out of actual Servlce, when I see ao

342

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1805 TO 1807

many younger officers placed over my head. I know well my Enemies and the
means by which I have been thrown asside, however it does not become me, or
is it my Character, to act on the part of retalliation,
[LC. .JRP, Vol. 1, March, 1791-Dec. 1814.1
To Secretary of the Navy from Master Commandant Isaac Chauncey, U. S. Navy
U. S. BRIGHornet CHARLESTON
18'h January 1806
SIR, I had the honor of writing you Yesterday off the Barn At which time I did
not expect lo get in so soon but the wind favouring in the afternoon we Anchored
here in the Evening, we have got our Main Mast stripped and shall have it out
this Evening and I expect to get i t fished and in again in two or three days and
about the 16'4 I think we shall be ready to proceed on service - The Carpenter
nforms me that he cannot procure a Sparr for a new Mast in less than three weeks,
I therefore thought it adviseable to fish the old Mast so as to be in readiness for
any service that I may be ordered on. - I however have ordered a new Mast
to be procured.
Your Letter of the 16Q Ult I received this day and agreeably to that order shall
wait here for further Orders.
[NDA. MC LB, 1806-1807.1

-

To Frederick Degen, U. S. Navy Agent, Naples, from Captain John Bodgers, U. S.
Navy
U S SHIP Constitution
Syracuse 1.2 Janr 1806 SIR You will oblige me by having a Cable made for this Ship Size 22 Inches of
the best quality, in time to forward i t by the next U. States Vessel that comes
from Naples to this Place As good cables are so essential an appendage to the safety of a Ship, it is not
only necessary they shou'd be made of the best Hemp, but that the Maker shou'd
be perfectly acquainted with his profession, to do Justice to a Cable of the Size required, Capt" Porter will be the most proper Judge of the quality of the Hemp and
abilities of the Rope Maker
[LC. JRP, L Bk B, May 1805-July 1806.1
To Secretary of State from Abraham Gibbs, U. S. Consul, Palermo
PALERMO
18% January 1806
SIR. Under 12'4 Novr ultimo, hlr John Gavino of Gibraltar forwarded me the
Letter you did me the honor of addressing to me l l t b May last, whereby I observe
with infinite degree of satisfaction that the President. had been pleased to name me
Consul of the United States for the Port of Palermo, and superseding Mr J. Barnes
to whom I shall forward your inclosed Letter to that effect. - You will doubtless have heard from that Gentleman that I have for some time executed the functions of the office, in his name during his absence: Your said Letter will now enable
me to continue same more effectually until I receive my Commission, which by
some accident has not reached me to this Day & you will see the necessity by so
much time beeing elapsed of favoring me with a Duplicate thereof.
Comode Rodgers is actually a t Syracuse & through my Means he receives from
this Government all the p~otection& assistance he is in need of. The Barbary
Powers are all a t Present in perfect Amity with the United States & while the
Squadron remains in the Mediterranean I expect they will continue so.
Allow me, Sir, to insinuate your addressing a few lines to the King of the Two
sicilies first Minister of State, General Sir John Acton, who expressed a wish when
Comodflrebble was here to that purpose, as never any Communication has taken
place, between the two Governments.
I take the Liberty of enclosing a list of the arrivals a t this port, of the Un. St.
Vessels, slnce the Commencement of my Office to this Day;

Duplicate
[NA. SDA. CL, Palermo, 1802-1838.1

WARS UTITH BARBARY POWERS

343

To Secretary of the Navy from Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Bavy
PORTLAND
Janr 18 1806
SIR The nine Gun Boats built under my direction are compleatcd ss far as my
contract extends, except sheathing the b o t t o m the materials f o which
~
are ail
ready and it can be done in 48 hours. I have however thought i t best to defer
sheathing them until a few days before they ale launched, in order to give the
oakum a fair chance to shrink before recaulking - The weather has been so
severely cold and atill continues to be so, with so great a quantity of Ice floating in
the harbour, that I have thought it best to give the builders a trifling consideration
to let the whole of the boats rest on the blocks until the middle or k t of March.
I have however compleated the cables, anchors, Rigging, sails, awnings &c of one
Boat and have estimated the whole cost of her equipment for sea excIusive of
uns - military stores provision to be $2746 in addition to the expences of the
k1ud masts & spars &c agreable to my contract. - I enclose the estimate for
your perusal - The utmost economy will be necessary to get them t o sea for this
sum, I will however undertake to do it, either by contract, or as agent, it will at
any rate be best to purchase all the Duck immediately as it is dayly rising and
There is a strong probability of a great scarcity, it w+ll also be best to have all the
Cordage & cables immediately made & the standing rigging fitted - I should be
glad of your instructions on this head, as by the Time I can receive an answer to
this lel ter it will be Febr. and we shall have no time to spare in having the whole
of the Cordage made I% fitted, and sails arid awnings &c compleated by April The Joiners bill Cables & anchors, standing & running rigging, Blocks Canvas
& sailmakers Bill will be the first wanting and will amount to $15,957 which sum
to enable me to make the purchases to advantage I wish you to remit me ss eaily
as convenient - The people
- - are already calling- on me for the am: of the Boat
equipped
there are only two guns in the Kavy yard Charleston that will answer for these
boats, it will therefore be necessary to send on 16- 24 pounders to compleat the
other eight boats - and it will be best t o have them as early as possible to enable
us to make the carriages to fitt them the more exactly. P S. I have enga ed the refusal of the necessary quantity of duck for compleatling] all the gun oats, until I can hear from you [LC. EPP, Vol. 16, Aug. 1805-Jan. 1806.1

5

To the United States Senate from President Thomas Jefferson
JANUARY
13, 1806.
To the Senate of the United Stales:
According to the request of the Senate of December 30, I now lay before them
the correspondence of the naval commanders Barron and Rodgers, and of Mr.
Eaton, late consul at Tunis, tespecting the progress of the war with Tripoli, antecedent to the treaty with the Bey and regency of Tripoli, and respecting the negotiations for the same; and the commission and instructions of Mr. Eaton, with
such other correspondence, in possession of the offices, as,I suppose, may be useful
to the Senate in t,heir deliberations upon the said treaty.
The instruc\ions which were given to Mr. Lear, the consul-general a t Algiers,
respecting the negotiations for the said treaty, accompanied 'the treaty and the
message concerning the same, and are now with them in possession of the Senate.
So much of these papers has been exlracied and communicated to the House of
Representatives, as relates to the principles of the co-operation between the
United States and Hamet Caramalli, which is the subject of a joint message to
both Houses of Congress, bearing equal date with the presenl ; and, ss those now
communicated to the Senate comprehend the whole of that matter, I request that
they may be conside~edas comprising the documents stated in thst message as
accompanying it. Being mostly originals or sole copies, a return of them is requested a t the convenience of the Senate.
U'e have no letter from Mr. Lear respecting Tripoline &airs of later date than
that of July 5, which was transmitted to the Senate with the treaty, nor, consequently, any later information of what steps have been tclien to carry into effect
the stipulation for the delivery of the wife and children of the brother of the
reigning Bashaw of Tripoli.
TH:JEFFERSON.
[Am. State Papers, For. Rel., Vol. 11, 1797-1807.1

.344

NAVAT, OPERATIONS FROM 1806 TO 1807
-

To the ~ o n ~ r e s s ' othe
f United States from President Thomas Jefferson
JANUARY
13, 1806.
To the Senate and House of Representatwes o the United States:
I lay before Congress the application of m e t Caramalli, elder brother of the
reigning Bashaw of Tripoli, soliciting from the United States attention to his
services and sufferings in the late war against that State; and, in order to possess
them of the ground on which that application stands, the facts shall be stated
according to the views and information of the Executive.
During the war with Tripoli, it was suggested that Hamet Caramalli elder
brother of the reigning Bashaw, and driven by h+ from his throne, meditated
the recovery of his inheritance, and that a concert in actlon with us was desirable
to him. We considered that concerted operations by those who have a common
enemy were entirely justifiable, and might produce effects favorable to both,
without bindin either to guaranty the objects of the other. But the distance of
the scene, the b c u l t i e s of communication, and the uncertainty of our information inducing the less confidence in the measure, it was committed to our agents
as one which might be resorted to, if it promised to promote our success.
Mr. Eaton, however, our late consul, on his return from the Mediterranean,
possessing personal knowledge of the scene, and having confidence in the effect of
a joint operation, we authorized Commodore Barron, then proceeding with his
squadron, to enter into an understandin with Hamet, if he should deem i t useful;
and, as i t was represented that he woul8 need some aid of arms and ammunition,
and even of money, he was authoriwd to furnish them to a moderate extent,
according to the prospect of utility to be expected from it. I n order to avail him
of the advantages of Mr. Eaton's knowledge of circumstances, an occasional employment was provided for the latter as an agent for the navy in that sea. Our
expectation was that an intercourse should be kept up between the ex-Bashaw and
the Commodore; that, while the former moved on by land, our squadron should
proceed with equal pace, so as to arrive a t their destination together, and to
attack the common enemy by land and sea a t the same time. The instructions
of June 6 to Commodore Barron show that a co-operation only was intended,
and by no means an union of our object with the fortune of the ex-Bashaw; and
the commodore's letters, of March 22 and May 19, prove that he had the most
correct idea of our intentions. His verbal instructions, indeed, to Mr. Eaton and
Captain Hull, if the expressions are accurately committed to writing by those
gentlemen, do not limit the extent of his co-operation as rigorously as he probably
intended, but it is certain, from the ex-Bashaw's letter of January 3, written when
he was proceeding to join Mr. Eaton, an! in which he says, "your operations
should be carried on by sea, mine by land, that he left the position in which he
was, with a proper idea of the nature of the co-operation. If Mr. Eaton's subsequent convention should appear to bring forward other objects, his letter of April
29 and May 1 views this convention but as provisional, the second article, as he
expressly states, guarding it against any ill effect, and his letter of June 30 confirms this construction. I n the event it was found, that, after placing the exBashaw in possession of Derne, one of the most important cities and provinces of
the country, where he had mided himself as Governor, he was totally unable t o
command any resources, or to bear any part in co-operation with us. This hope
was then a t an end, and we certainly had never contemplated, nor were we prepared t o land an army of our own, or to raise, pay, or subsist an army of Arabs,
to march from Derne to Tripoli, and to carry on a land war a t such a distance
from our resources. Our means and our authority were merely naval; and, that
such were the expectations of Hamet, his letter of June 29 is an unequivocal
acknowledgment. Whilst, therefore, an impreesion from the capture of Derne
might still operate a t Tripoli, and an attack on that place from our squadron was
daily expected, Colonel Lear thou ht i t the be& moment to listen to overtures of
p a c e , then made by the Bashaw f ~ u s u f ] he
; did so; and, while urging provisions
for the United States, he paid attention also to the interests of Hamet, but was
able to effect nothin more than to enga the restitution of hi family; and even
the persevering in t& demand suspengd for some time the conclusion of the
treaty.
In operations a t such a distance, it becomes necessary t o leave much t o the
discretion of the agents employed; but events may still turn up beyond the limits
of that discretion. Unable in such a case t o consult his Government, a zealous
citizen will act as he believes that would direct him, were i t apprised of the circumstances, and will take on himself the responsibility. In all these cases, the
of the motives should shield the agent from blame, and
purity and patriot*
even secure a sanction, where the error is not too injurious. Should it be thought

d

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

345

by any that the verbal instructions, said t o have been given by Commodore
Barron to Mr. Eaton, amount t o a stipulation that the United States should
place Hamet Caramalli on the throne of Tripoli, a stipulation so entirely unauthorized, so far beyond our views, and so onerous, could not be sanctioned by our
Government; or should Hamet Cararnalii, contrary to the evidence of his letters
of January 3, and June 29, be thought to have left the position, which he now
seems to regret, under a mistaken expectation that we were, a t all events, to place
him on his throne, on an appeal to the liberality of the nation something equivalent to the replacing him in his former situation might be worthy its consideration.
A nation, by establishing a character of liberality and magnanimity, gains, in the
friendship and respect of others more than the worth of mere money. This
appeal is now made by Hamet daramalli to the United States. The ground he
has taken being diderent, not only from our views, but from those expressed by
himself on former occasions, Mr. Eaton was desired to state whether any verbal
communications passed from him to Hamet, which had varied what we saw in
writing. His answer of December 5 is herewith transmitted, and has rendered it
still more necessary that, in presenting to the Legislature the application of
Hamet, I should present them, a t the same time, an exact statement of the views
and proceedings of the Executive through this whole business, that they m a y
clearly understand the ground on which we are placed. I t is accompanied by all
the papers which bear any relation to the principles of the co-operation and which
can inform their judgment in deciding on the application of Hamet C'sramalli
TH: JEFFEBBON.
[Am. State Papers, For. Rel., Vol. 11, 1797-1807.1
TO Captain John Rodgers, U. S. Navy, or the Commanding Ofacer of the U. S.
Squadron in the Mediterranean, from Secretary of the Navy
NAVDEPM*13 Jan? 1806
I have been informed that there is a oung man on board some one of the
ublick vessels, acting under the name of &emy Jones, in the station of a private.
Eenry Jones is an assumed name - His real name is John Ennalls Ayrea. He
is a young man of respectable connexions, & from what I have understood merits
our attention. Find him out and make him an Acting Midshipman and after a
fair trial report to me his Conduct that I may determine whether to give him a
warrant or not.
[NDA. OSW, Vol. 7, 1805-1807.1
To Secretary of State from William Lyman, U. 6. Consul General, London, England
AMERICAN
CONSULATE
& AGENCY
London 14* Janry. 1806
SIR, I had the Honor to address you on the 7* Novemr last which I doubt not
bath been duly received as a Duplicate thereof was thereafter transmitted by
another conveyance and whereto I must request your reference for the advicea
therein contained: At this time I have the honour to transmit herewith An
Abstract or Report of the Vessels of the United States which have entered the
Ports of this District for the time therein expressed, also a Return or List and an
Abstract thereof of American Seamen and Citizens who have been Impressed and
held in His Britannic Majesty's Service as is therein stated; I also herewith
enclose my Account Current with the United States for the Quarter ending the
31.1 Deer last which I hope will be safely received in due time, if any Items therein
shall be thought to need explanation shall hope to be thereof advised in the mean
time beg leave only to remark that the sum for Office Rent is the same as I must
have paid for the O5ce of my Predecessor, and that what I have encouraged Mr
Lyman who is a Young Gentleman of Education who came with me from America
to expect is barely sufficient for his most economical support.
The particular case and Fate hitherto of the Huntress, a Vessel laden by the
United States with Naval and Militar Stores and Provisions for the use of and
destined for their Squadron in some %ort in the Mediterranean Sea, I believe
you have been made acquainted with by our Minister who has been constantly
adviaed therein and whose Instructions in what ever relates thereto will be
etrictly pursued by me, I enclose you however Minutes of the Decree of the High
Court of Admiralty in the csse from whence you will see and jud e of the reasons
therefor; I also enclose Minutes of the Decree in the case of the &%ooner La Anna
taken at the Mouth of the River Mississippi in violation of the Territorial

346

NAVAL OPEEATIONS FROM 1805 TO 1807

Authority and Jurisdiction of the United States, whereby may be seen the light
in which such aggressions are held by t h e Tribunals here
indeed i t is b u t
just t o acknowledge t h a t Sir Killiam Scott the Judge hath ever seemed well
disposed t o us ward and as far as consistent with his station, reluctant t o condemn
American Vessels and properly particularly for Colonial Intercourse although a
part a t least of the Ministry are I think very tenacious of t h a t principle but of
them it is now confidently expected there will be a Change hl? I'itt is thought by
many in dangerously ill health consequently a new Era in Politicks is looked for
t o take place in a little time which will be not less favourable probably t o our
Interests and Prosperity than the present, however I forbear further observations
thereon a s you will be so much more fully advised herein by our Minister: Ptly
Pealth though not yet fully restored continues improving and will I trust recover
ere long t o pristine state and vigour so t h a t a due Discharge of Duties will be
easy and pleasant t o
[NDA. hlisc. LB, Vol. 1, 1806.1

-

To Secretary of State from William Kirkpatrick, U. S. Consul, Malaga, Spain
MALAGA
1 5 $ h January 1806.
SIR NO particular occurrence having taken place since the date of my last
Letter t o you of the 4th October, I have not troubled you with any communications - You will now find enclos'd a Triplicate thereof, and the return of arrivals
in this Port, during the last six months, in conformity t o your Instructions The Frigate Essex,Hugh Campbell Esqr Commander, remained in this hlole
under a state of repairs and taking in Provisions from the beginning of Octobcr
until December, when she proceeded t o Cadiz for a new Cable of which she stood
i n need.
The Brig Vzxen also staid here some Weelis for the same purpose,
a n d left us for Algeceras and Gibraltar a few days ago - I have had no late
accounts from the remainder of t h e Squadron in the Mideterranean. So soon as it was Known t h a t t h e Yellow Fever had broke out in Philadelphia
a n d Kew York, strict orders were communicated t o t h e respective Boards of
Health throughout t h e Kingdom, t o p u t all Vessels from every quarter of t h e
United States under a rigorous quarantine, this has not yet been abated in the
smallest degree; however our Citizens a t this Place, have not suffered so materially
under i t a s formerly, permission having been granted t o permit all articles, not
considered susceptible of contagion, t o be landed whilst it lasted, as also t o ship
all Kinds of Goods, consequently many have been dis atched without having
a n y communication whatever with the Shore - Our fjlag, in general, is now
respected by t h e Spanish and French P r i ~ a t ~ e e rout
s of Algeceras, t h e former
have been considerably contained since the Orders, of which I transmitted you
Copies, in my last, were notified t o the several Marine Tribunals in t h e Kingdom,
none have been brought in here
We continued t o enjoy the best health, no Symptoms whatever of a contagious
nature remain, or have been manifested in any of the Cities which last season
suffered so much by the Yellow Fever
[NA. SDA. CL, Malaga, Vol. 1, June, 1793-May, 1814.1

-

To Tobias Lear, U. S. Consul General, Algiers, from Captain John Bodgers, U. S.
Navy
U S S H I P Constitution
Syracuse 16 January 1806
SIR Your letters of the 10th & 25th Ultimo I have this moment received, and
their perusal has given me great pleasure, particularly on Account of the Independance of your situation, and t h e Natural consequences resulting t o our
Country, from the same - both of which are verified by the Circumstances
which you mention of t h e American Brig Friendship's release for she was most
certainly liable t o condemnation in a Court of Admiralty, of any Christian Nation
(with whom we had a similar Treaty) much more that of Algiers, When Men so
far feel a disregard, t o the laws of their Country, as Mr Clemmens has done, they
are no longer objects either worthy of protection, or entitled to the interference of
their Country, and M? Clemmens ought t o bless his Stars, for having got off so
well I was some what surprised a t Sir Alex? Balls enquiries about t h e situation
of their Consul, when I was last at Malta, after leaving you a t Algiers - but
from what you mention, respecting t h e Consuls situation, I now clearly understand

his meaning -

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS
Sir Alex? Ball said "He hoped their Consul would soon Know you, and that
after Knowing you, he wished that in all matters of Consequence, in which his
Country was concerned, that he would consult you"Our affairs in this quarter, stand on the usual footing
I heared from Tunis
& Tripoli, yesterday, by a Vessel which left both places, within these last three
Reeks all appears t o be quiet in both, altho' I have not hesred from either Mr
Dodge, or Mr Tiidgely, since I saw you last, The iVuutilus will sail for Tunis the day after t o morrow, and Gun Boat Nq 8
for Tripoli on the same day The Siren has been detained longer than was intended by obstinate Westerly
Wi~lds,and bad weather, also some repairs in her Rigging &c - which took u p
rnore time, than I could have wished - I have received no Ietters from Govern~nelltyet, since the arrival of Commodore Barron in America, nor even News papers that contain any interesting Communications; however such as I have received. I sent for your perusal, and request that you will return them by the Siren,
on her passage back from Gibraltar, as they have been lent me, by an American
Gentleman a t hlessina, with directions to return them to him again The pal-ticulnrs of the Brave Neilson's Action, we have had here long since Bounaparte has swept every thing before him, on the Continent
Austria has
lost her Capital, without fighting a single Battle, and has consented to an Armist.ice - The other combined powers, from present appearances, will not do much
better, and in all probability, sooner or later, will be forcd to make a most dishonorable peace The papers I send you, appear to exclaim loudly against the English and Spaniards for depredations committed on our Commerce, nut this is so common a thing
that I Ieave to yourself, to judge what is to be expected 11: Broadbent has received his Commission as Consul, accompanied by a letter
of dislnissel to M? Barns The most perfect Anarchy exists a t Kaples, a t present which has induced me (a
few days since) to send the Enterprize, in that quarter, for the protection of the
Government funds, in the hands of Mr Degen our Agent, as also our Trade The Officers of the Constitution Join with me, in wishing you, and h i s Lear all
possible happiness
L? Henley is, and has been very well ever since you last saw him
[LC. JRP, L Bk B, May 1805-July 1806.1

-

-

-

-

To Secretary of the Navy from William Eaton, U. 6. Navy Agent for the Barbary
Regencies
BOSTONJan. 16. 1806SIR, I t may recur that I signified my intention of asking Ieave t o resign the
agency I have the honor to hold in your department so soon as I should arrive
here - I request the date of my resignation may be fixed on the first of the present month
[NDA. Misc. LB, Vol. 1, 1806.1

-

To Secretary of the Navy from William Smith, ST., Navy Agent, Charleston, S. C.
CRARLESTON
16'h Jany 1806
SIR, I have the honor to inform you that a few days ago the Hornet Cap%
Chauncey came into this Port t o refit, having sprung her Mainmast and receiv'd other damage, not very material, which probably can be repair'd in the
course of a week - Gun Boat NP1 is also in this harbour, and it will be prudent
for her to remain here until the weather moderates.
For the use of these Vessels I have drawn on you, through the Branch Bank of
the United States for one thousand Dollars, and so soon as the Hornet refits, the
accounts of both Vessels shall be sent on
[NDA. Misc. LB, Vol. 1, 1806.1
To Secretary of the Navy from Master Commandant Isaac Chauncey, U. S. Navy
U. STATESBRIQHornet
CHARLBSTOWN
16Q January 1806
SIR, After we had got out our Main Mast and examined it, we found i t so
badly sprung that the Carpenter was of opinion that i t could not be su5ciently

-

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1806 TO 1807

348

secured without taking off the cheeks and replacing them with new one's which
would cost us much and take as long a time to do, as to get, a new mast particularly as hlr Simons (who I understood was under Contract with the Government
to furnish spars for the Navy) had a number a t his landing belonging to the Government of a sufficient size to make a Mast for us. I therefore wrote him a letter
stating my situation and requesting a Spar to make a hlast for the Hornet, which
He has let me have, and the Carpenter assures me that the mast shall be completed by the 20'4 If so, I think we shall be ready to proceed on service by the
25'4 a longer period than I at first contemplated - However a t that time it was
not my intention to wait for a new Mast but merely to fish the old one, and get it
in. - Circumstances having altered my former determination of taking the old
Mast again, but in preference to wait for a new one
I fiatter myself that my
last determination will meet with your approbation particularly as it will only
make a difference of three or four days in our equipment for Sea [NDA. MC LB, 1806-1807.1

-

To John Broadbent, U. S. Navy Agent and Consul, Messina, from Captain John
Rodgers, U. S. Navy
U S SHIP Constitution
Syracuse l Y t b Jan? 1806 SIR Your letter of the 13th Instant enclosing two others from Lieutt Porter,
came duly to hand - For the supplies of the Squadron I am not neceasiated for
money a t present, but, if Mr Otto wishes to purchase b i b on the U States I will
give him them for the sum he requires at par
altho' the general mode of American Merchants here, making their remittances are through England yet nevertheless this does not effect American Bills so much as to bring them, and British Bills,
in any way on a level For the small sums I may require, I shall be much disappointed if I am ever
obliged to make a greater sacrifice than 5 Pr Ct on U S Government Bills, and this
only in extraordinary Cases [LC. JRP, L Bk B, itlay 1805-July 1806.1

-

118 January 18061
To Captain John Rodgers, U. S. Navy, from Midshipman Charles L. Ridgely, U. S.
Navy
SIR
Circumstances of the greatest importance obliges me to request of you
permission to return to America by the way of Gibraltar, an opportunity to which
place offers by the S y e n - I flatter myself Sir that I need not state to you that
my long cruize has any influence in the request, or that any thing than circumstances of the last importance could induce me to leave actual service, for the
purpose of ease and pleasure, particularly when I have the happiness to be attached
to your ship - I will not trouble you again with a repetition of my reasons for
desiring to return to relieve in person my mothers anxiety for the unfortunate
&air of Messina Not Sir that I doubdt you would make every allowance for the
feelings of a son, but because I feel conscious nothing I could say would give weight
on that subject - I t was my fortune to be included among the legatee's of C a p t ~
Chr Ridgely but the estate he left me is entailed so that should any thing happen
to myself it would [be] disposed of very contrary to the dearest interests of my
I have received a letter from my brother who tells me he has consulted
family
council and that my presence is absolutely necessary for the cutting the entail,
that necessity has been again repeated by my cousin Mr Holliday who from a
complete knowledge of my situation and his profession is enabled to judge correctly, from the above reasons Sir I have been induced to make this request by granting
which you will confer the greatest possible obligation on [me]
CH. L RIDQELY
JAN?18 1806
INDA. Captain's LB, Vol. 1, 1806.1

-

-

.

To Secretary of the Navy from Captain John Eodgers, U. 6. Navy
U S SHIP Cmtitulion
Syracuue 18'4 January 1806
SIR, Westerly winds, and bad Weather having detained the S en longer than
I expected; atfords me the oppertunity of Transmitting to you, &pies of Lettern

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS
from Coli Lear a t Algiers; which will distinctly show the footing, on which we stand
with that Regency. Also Copy of a letter [8January 18061 from Doctor (John]
Ridgely a t 'Mpoli A s the Syren will call at Algiers, on her passage to Gibraltar, the State Department will of course receive later dvicea from Coll Lear INDA. Misc. LB, Vol. 1, 1806.1

To Secretary of the Navy from Captain John Rodgers, U. S. Navy
U S SHIPCmtitvtion

Sq/ramse 18tb January 1806
SIR Discovering by a letter from Commodore Preble to Commodore Barron,
that Mr Prince (who brought the Smack Traveller from America to this port)
entered the service as sailing Master, on Condition of being permitted to return,
sfter the delivery of said Smack; I have in Consequence given him this permission,
with orders to Report himself to you immediately on his arrival in the U States Mr Princes conduct while he commanded the Traveller, and durin the short
time, he was under my orders, was such as to authorize my recommenfing him to
your Notice, as a correct deserving Officer bLC. JRP, L Bk B, May 1805-July 1806.1

To Secretary of the Navy from Captain John Rodgers, U. S. Bavy
U S SHIPConatiiutwn

Sgracuse 1 StP January 1806SIR Since writing you on the 18th Tilt* (wherein 1 informed you, that I had
drawn on the Navy Department for 90,000$ with my Reasons for so doing) I am
afforded the pleasure of now acquainting you, that the Bills drawn by me, in favor
of Mr Higgins our A ent a t Malta, on Mess- RIcKenzie & Glennie of London, on
being presented the k c o n d time, were paid, snd no doubt, all of the same tenor
and date, will be duly honor'd This very much disembarressed me, as when I drew the Bills for 90,000$ on
ou, I allowed 7 Pr Ct, as the greatest loss, a t which they were to be Negotiated,
gut by the first post from Naples, after the arrival of the Bills, I was informed by
Mr Degen our Agent there, that owing to the arrlval of the Russian Army, in that
City - he was afraid that he could not sell the Bilh on the terms which I hsd
limited; however the same moment that afforded me this Letter, put me in possession of another (from a Gentleman in Malta) informing me, that my Bills on
Mess* MvKenzie & Glennie, which were protested for non acceptance, were on
Maturity (ultimately) paid These Bills being all duly paid (and which I now have not the smallest doubt
of) %-illplace me very much at my esse. as I shall have in my possession at lesst
70,000$ out of the 90,000$ for which I have drawn on you - and this too.
after paying all the expences of the Squadron, up to this date 1LC. JRP, L Bk B, May 1805-July 1806.1

-

To William Eaton, former U. S. Navy Agent for the Barbary Regencies, from
General Stephen Row Bradley
WASEINGT~N,
January 19,1806
DEARSIR:The Tripoline treaty is not agreed to as yet by the Senate, its fate
is doubtful, the probability is, it will not be ratified, the documents which the
Senate have by their request obtained from the Executive have laid open the
whole of the correspondence between yourself, Barron, Hull, Tobiss Lear, etc.,
and exhibited Lesr's negotiations in such a point of light that you can have no conception of the indignation with which it is viewed and unless the President should
immediately recall Lear I doubt whether the Senate will not express their opinion
freely on the subject, a t present the whole subject is referred, together with the
ex-Bashaw's claim to the following committee Bradley Smith of Maryland
Wright Trac
Baldwin as Chairman of the committee some of the members
have requesteBme t o write to you to obtain correct information when you wikl
be in this city, as your personal attendance before the Committee would enable
them 1 have no doubt t o obtain important information in relation t o certain
pointa a t pweent ohscure.

,

350

h7AVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1805 TO 1807

And here give me leave as a friend to remark that the present moment were
vou on the spot would undoubtedly be the most propitious t o your obtaining
that justice which you have so richly merrited from your Country and the World,
and, should the situation of your domestic concerns render it impossible for you
to attend it mould be matter of regret to your friends here a t any rate be kind
enough on the receipt of this drop me a line by the mail what your friends may
expect here and
accept dear Sir assurances of my personal respect and esteem

[NL'YHS.]
To President Thomas Jefferson from Hamet Caramanli, son of Ali Bashaw, and
rightful Bashaw of Tripoli
[Translation]

SYRACUSE,
20 January 1806
THE MOSTEXCELLENT
PRESIDENT
Sovereign of the Linited States of America
It is in accordance with the desire and honor of the United States that I am
writing. In these few lines I wanted to send these particulars none the less.
Being here in this city of Syracuse as a prisoner, I beg you to send me some
token, in order that I may not remain in the dark. I am bearing my fate with
all the strength and devotion that is in me, but I place my hope in appealing
to you, [since] I no longer feel myself strong enough to endure it.
I remain therefore a t your service and recommend myself respectfully To Tour
Excellency and Elector of the Government of the United States of America
(SEAL) AHMETCARAMALLI,
GENITORE
lHead or Ruler]
of Tripoli, Barbary
Son of Alli Bmhaw
[Tsah-SLATOR'S
SOTE.-This letter is extremely incoherent in the original. A very free translation has
been made, since a more or less literal rendering would have made no sense in English. In the signature
the word "Oenitore" has been questioned. The only Italian meaning of this word is "father" or "parent".]

INA.

SDA, CD, Algiers, Vol. 7, Pt. 11, January 1806-September 29, 1807.1

Presumably to Secretary of State from Anthony Terry, U. S. Vice Consul, Cadiz,
Spain
AMERICAN
CONSULATE
Cadiz IOtP January 1806.
RESPECTED
SIR. Referring to my last via Marblehead & Lisbon
I now have
the pleasure to inclose you the List of the American Vessels Arrived & Sailed in
this Bay, San Lucar and Algezirns during the last Six Months of the Year 1806.
Under date of the 18%November last, a Iioyal Decree came down from hladrid
t o this Board of Health, ordering that Vessels from any Port of the United States,
and Gibraltar arriving in this I-lay, should perform forty days Quaranteen; in
consequence I have made a strong representation to the Presidente del Conseso de
Castilla, which I got signed by all the Merchants in the American Line, requesting
a shortness of said rigorous Quarenteen, as the Sickness in America was over,
and the Vessels being provided with Bills of Health Certified in due form by the
Spanish Consuls in America; I hope t o have a favourable answer, which if I
receive before this Vessel Sails, I will do myself the pleasure of advising you for
the government of our trade.

-

*

[NA.

*

SDA.

*

*

*

*

*

CL, Cadiz, Vol. 2, 18061808.1

To Master Commandant Isaac Chauncey, U. S. Navy, commanding U. S. Brig
Hornet, from Secretary of the Navy
NAVYD E P$0
~ Jan7 1806.
You will proceed t o New York and there wait my further orders. Inform me
of our arrival there.
6rior to leaving Charleston, if the provisions sent from Baltimore should have
arrived there, you will take in as much as the Hornet will conveniently carry
but if these provisions should not have arrived, you will proceed to New York
without waiting for them.
LNDA. OSW,Vol. 7, 1805-1807.1

-

351

WARS WITH BARBARY POTVERS
To secretary of the Navy from Captain Hugh G. Campbell, U. S. Navy
U. S. S. Esset. GIBRALTARROAD

Jan7 81 Q 1806

RESPECTED
SIR, When ever i t may be your Pleasure to order me home, may I

be Permited t o request your permission t o take in my way the Island of S t
Bartholamew, and the Havannah, the difference in distance is not more than
and will no doubt be of Infinite service to
that from Havannah t o the U. S.
many of our officers who have never seen any part of the Westindies, and give me
the favorable opportunity of hearing Mr Clarksons Sentiments Respecting
Eighteen thousand dollars that he has unjustly held for several years as prize
money due the Eagle while under my command
The many m a r k of your friendly attention toward me, has Emboldened me t o
ask this particular favor and beg leave to hope for a favorable answer - I hope
Sir, you have not been unmindful1 of my Commission that was to have been given
me on the death of Commodore Barrey as it has been much wanted, and more so
at present, being detatched from the bommander of the Squadron without m y
publick authority, Except his written Instructions, which I flatter myself will
merit your consideration
[NDA. Captain's LB, Vol. 1, 1806.1

-

-

T o Secretary of the N ~ v yfrom Captain Hugh G. Cempbell, U. S. Navy
U. S. SHIPEssa, GIBRALTAR,
J a n ~81.t 1806.
SIR, The dissolution of Mr Gadsden's Grandfather has induced me, a t his
request, to grant permission for his return home; which has rendered it necmsary
to place Mr Burrows on board the Vizen, who for some months, ha^ been attached
to this Ship, a fifth Lieubenant: - Likewise, on request of Cap%Cox for a third
Midshipman, I have turned over to that Brig hf? G. C. Read. - Not hearing
from Commodore Rodgers since Sepl last, and the uncertainty of hearing from
him in a reasonable time, is the cause of my acting thus without his knowledge.
Mr Chalmers, Midshipman, has my permission to return to America, for the
following reasons, - he has frequently committed himself, by neglect of duty,
and frequent fits of intoxication; and as frequently have I thrown a veil on his
conduct, in hopes that he would improve by advice and experience; neither of
which, I am sorry to say has had the desired effect, on his manners, or morals, to
which, add a recent ungentlemanly conduct to one of his Messmates, that has
obliged me t o suspend h w from duty, and should have confined him for trial, had
he not requested, in a particular manner, t o be indulged with permission t o return
home, assuring me that his wish and intention is t o resign t o which I consented, it being the opinion of every Officer acquainted with Mr khalmem, that his friends
has made a false estimate of his talents, by placing him on board a Ship of War; all of which I hope will meet your approbation. Since my last respects to you, Oct? 26th, I have visited the Port of C a d i ,
Barbary Coast, and p0rt.s within this Bay, without hearing any thing worthy of
notice, except the Emperor's Two Ships a t Salle, that have orders, I understand,
to proceed on a Cruize when ready for sea; and the destruction of several Nutrals
by the Rochford Squadron, off the Western Islands.I shall strictly attend to
the Emperors motions although I do not believe his intentions are hostile towards
US.

-

[NDA. Captains' LB, Vof. 1, 1806.1
To Captain Stephen Decatur, Jr., U. S. Navy, and Dr. George Davis, former Chard
dlAffaires, Tunis, W a h g t o n , D. C., from Secretary of the Navy
Nav D E P284
~ JanY 1806.
I request t h a t you will communicate t o me all the information you may possess
relatively t o the Tunisian Zebecque & Prizes captured by the Frigate President
while attempting t o enter the port of Tripoli then blockaded by our Squadron.
I wish particular1y t o be informed upon the folkwing points 1st.-Wi.'ss the Port of Tripoli a t the time of the capturing of the Zebecque and
Prizes actually blocliaded by a force so &posed before it as t o have created an
evident danger in entering it? 2nd.-Had the Commanding Officer of the Zebecque previous knowledge of the
existence of the Blocksde and had been forewarned from entering it7 -

352

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1806 TO 1807

3rd.-Was he taken in attempting to enter the Port after a notification of the
same being blockaded? 4th.-Had the Zebecque the usual regular Passports? By making these particular interrogatories, I do not mean to convey the idea
that you are to confine yourself to separate answers - I wish only such information as it may be in your power to stford upon the subject generally.
[NDA. OSW, Vol. 7, 1805-1807.1

-

To John Broadbent, U. 6. Navy Agent and Consul, Messina, from Master
Commandant Isaac H d l , U. 8. Navy
UNITEDSTATESBRIG Atgut
OffMessina C8Q Jan? 1806
DEAR SIB, I am two days from Naples, and am sorry I have i t not in my
power t o call and see you. The English Squadron are in sight - The Rusian will be here tomorrow.
The King is to leave Naples immediately for Spain, as report says. - It ia
much feared, that the Mob will be very troublesome a t Naples
every thing
is in confusion. - As you will no doubt have Letters, I shall not enter into
particulars
Please make my Compliments to all friends, and believe me
N. B. Please pay the bearer the customary Pilotage and forward the Bill to
Syracuse.
Please see that he is not quarentined. LNDA. Isssc Hull LB, 1803-1806.1

-

-

-

To Secretary of the Navy from Master Commandant Isaac Channcey, U. 6. Bavg
U S BRIG Hornet CHARLESTON
894 Jan? 1806
Sra, The carpenters did not finish our Main Mast untill last Evening we however got i t in tho' late and are now ready to cross top allant yards our head and
head rails are not yet completed the heavy rain this $ay has prevented the carnter's working, I presume however that they can complete us the first fair day.
y h e Boats are nearly done and we shall commence watering tomorrow and I
think be ready to carry into execution any order that I may receive after three days
[NDA. MC LB, 1806-1807.1
To Master Commandant John Smith, U. S. Navy, U. 6. Brig Sirm, Malta, from
Captain John Bodgers, U. 6. Navy
U S SHIP Constitution
M d t a ,934 January 1806
SIR With all practicable dispatch you are desired to proceed with the U S Sloop
Syren, under your Command to Gibraltar; and require of Mr Gavino Our Consul,
to 've you such letters, or Dispatches, as he may have in his possession, for me,
a n f a t the same time, request of him, that he gives those you hand him, the
earliest Conveyance possible On your passages from this to Gibraltar, and back to Syracuse, you will be
pleased to call a t Algiers, to d o r d Conveyance to such dispatches, as you may
Receive from Colt Lear a t the latter place or find a t the former for him
As
also to Convey from him, to me, any sdvicea he may concider necessary to give
[LC. JRP, Order Book No. 2, 1805-1806.1

- -

To John Gavino, U. 8. Consul, Gibraltar, from Captain John Bodgerr, U. 8. Krry
U S SHIP C m t i t u f i m
Malta 94* January 1806
DEARSIR Your esteemed favors of the 30'4 Octr, and 34 November, I have
received (but the latter not untill this moment) and thank you for the information they Contained Every thing relative to our Concernea with the Barbary Powers, as well ae
others, rest on the same footing, aa when I wrote you by the Essez

-

353

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

I hsve no Communications worth troubling you with, farther than wbat Capt
Smith (who hands you this) will be able to afford you, except the great Respect
& Regard, with which I have the honor to be
ILC. JRP, L Bk B, May, 1805-July, 1806.1
To Captain John Bodgers, U. 6. Navy, from Master Commandant Isset? K d l , U. S.
Bavy
UNITEDSTATESBEKGA t p a
Syracuse 94% Jan? 1808
SIR I have the honor to inform you of my arrival a t this place this morning
from haples, since which time, several Letters have come to hand by Post from
the Navy department directed t o you, In consiquence of which (knowing your
anxiety to receive Letten from that quarter) I hsve thought proper to dispatch
Gun Boat N? & with them, and hope Mr Izsrd will be so fortunate as to 6nd vou
a t Matts. I likewise enclose you a Letter from Mt Dsgen, and one from Cap1 Porter, slso
an Order on the Commanding OEcer a t Malta for an Anchor, to replace one that
was Ient by Capf Smith to the Morgeaner a t Naples. - If the Anchor in questlilon is returned, it will answer for the Argus, should you think proper to order
i t t o her
she is much in want of one, and we have none in the Yard.
I have brought back all the Bills I was charged with, except $2500 which hsp
ened to be negociated the day before Capt Porter arrived, a t 7 pr Cent loss $he money 1have in my bands. - I think it a happy circumstance that we were
not able to negotiate any more, as you have received information of your Bills
having been paid in England. - Every thing is in very great confusion a t Naples
the English all left there with me - the Rusians were to leave it next day, and
the King and Court the day following. - I t is much feared that the moment
they are off, the mob will be very troublesome, and property very unsafe.
LNDA. Isasc Hull LB, 1803-1806.1

-

-

-

To Captain John Bodgers, U. 6. Navy, from Lieutenant David Porter, U. S. Eavy
ON BOARD TEE U. S. Scar Enterprize
Duplicate
Naples Mole 24Q Jan? 1806. SIR, The King left this place last night with the Queen and it issaid has with
the consent of France abdicated the Throne to his eldest son, some reports say
that he wili retire to the Court of Spain, others to Sicily; he has embarked all his
furniture even to his Chairs and Tables.
Considerable bodies of new recruits continue to arive from aU parts of tho
Kingdom, and the l ~ g a t i o nsent to treat with Massena it is said is hourly expected
here, and hopes are entertained that every thing will be adjusted without having
resourse to Arms.
bfassena it is also said will be in this City in the courae of
a few days; all the British and part of the Russian Fleet of Transports have
sailed, the destination of the first not known, the latter it is said are bound for
Corf ou A few days will decide the fate of Naples, but I am not of opinion that harmony
will be destroyed, every thing a t present is perfectly tranquil, and I hardly conceive it possible that Naples will disturb it by placing her raw recruits in opposition t o the disciplined troops of France, I am of opinion that they will submit to
their fate without opposition, nor do I conceive that the Laearoni will create
any disturbance as the stay of the Prince will ensure good order smong them
until the French army arives, then the bayonets of the Soldiers will certainly
promote it.
Should anything of moment transpire I shall embrace the fimt opportunity of
communicating it to you. [LC. JRP,Series Two, Vol. 3, 1805-1807.1

-

To Captain John Bodgers, U. S. Navy, from William Biggins, U. S. Navy Agent,
Halt0
MALTA
the $4 Jan? 1808
SIB On the letter which you were pleased to shew me yesterday addressed to
you from Lieu, Crane of the U S. Bomb Hornet, I think i t neceesery to make one

354

NAVAL OPERATIOArS FR0ll.l 1805 TO 1807

or two observations, the more especially, as that appears to be one of the principal
grounds of your displeasure
As far as my recollection carries me, his statement of the Conversation which
took place between him and me is fair and Correct, yet surely he misconceived my
meaning and intentions when he supposed that I intendend t o withhold the aupply
as well of the stores to be purchased, as those in my hands belonging to the Governmt. for allow me to ask what where the stores be wanted? 200 bags of bread on
the Outside, and could the withholding of so insignificant an object whose value
did not exceed £200 be a matter of any importance or consideration to me
At
that time I certainly was not acquainted with the urgent wants of the Squadron
and I pressed his instant return t o you with all the solicitude wbjch the subject of
my letter called for.
I did say most certainly, if driven t o extremities, I should be obliged to sell t,he
Public stores, could you or the Government blame me for so doing, I might also
have been obliged to sell every thing belonging to myself - I said also that in
case of necessity you must pawn the Colastitution it must have struck you surely,
and I am surprised that it did not Mr Crane, that such an expression could only
be made use of in a Jocose way, for would the stake of the ship under your Command be of more validity than that of the honor and responsibility of your Government, bound to answer all the engagements which you might enter into for its
service.
For the reat Sir I repeat that neither my faith in you nor the Government knew
"any diminution, the assistance of both I was convinced I should receive as soon as
circumstances permitted it
My apprehensions however were, if that assistance
could reach me in time
[LC. JRP, Series Two, Vol. 3, 1605-1807.1

-

-

To Secretary of the

Navy from

William Higgins, U. S. Navy Agent, Malta
MALTAthe 24 Jan? 1806.

SIB, I hsve the honor to acknowledge your letters in Duplicate, the 14 May and
Original the 25 June - The Provision Ship Huntress has never appeared a t this
place and the Brig Washington proceeded t o Syracuse to discharge her Cargo in
conformity with the orders left me by Commodore Rodgers. the letters of credit
you enclosed me I have therefore destroyed
[NDA. Misc. LB, VoI. 1, 1806.1
[25 January 18061
[NOTE.-In the National Archives, State Department Records, Cpnsular Letters, Alg~ers.Vol. 7. part 2,
pages 353-3.59 may be found a letter to the Secretary of State from Toblm Lear End dated Jan. 25.1806. While
this letter contalus certain references to naval affamthe greater part. details the politloel aspeots of Algiers.
Because of the length of this letter therefore it 1s not Included in thls v a l u e of ru'aval Documents 1

To Secretary of the Navy from Captain John Rodgers, U. 6,Navy
U S SHIPConstitution MALTA
.??6January
"
1806 SIR, I have this moment received your letters of the 20th & 30tP Sepr & 12tb
October, but as i t does not appear by either of them, that you had received any
information from me, on the subject of our affairs with Tunis; I shall consider that
it ia your intention that I should continue the present Force, Consisting of the
Cmtitutim, Essex, A r g w , Seren, Vizen, Nautilus. Enterprize, Hornet, Bombs
Vengeance and Spiljire and Eight Gun Boats, in the Mediterranean until1 our
affairs are permanently and finally settled with Tunis - I am this moment advised of the arrival of the Brig Argw a t Syracuse, from Naples, where she left the
Schooner Enterprize for the protection of our trade The Argus has only brought with her 25,0008 - The confusion in all Commercial Transactions in Naples, existing to a Degree to have prevented the sale,
of the rest of the bilk which I drew on you The bills for these 25,000$ were negotiated at 7 pr Cent loss, and I flatter
myeelf, that I shall never be obliged to make a greater sacrifice, on b i b drawn on
you, than in the present instance, for any sums which I may require in future, for
defraying the expences of the Squadron The present State of the Kingdom of Naples is such, that matters must very
soon be brought to a Crisis; in fact it is expected from day to day that a Change
of Gov* will take place -

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

355

Genl Messina has arrived a t Rome, and the French Army must have entered
the Kingdom of Naples before this time, The Russian and Engtisb Armies, have
embarked a t Naples, and are by this tune, I imagine, on their way to Sciciiy 8:
this Island, Bounaparte appears to have borne down every thing before him on
the Continent - Austria i t is just reported has made a separate Peace with
France. The King of Kaples & family embarked on board a British Man of War,
on the 20tb Inst! for Palermo
[NDA. Captain's LB, Vol. 1, 1806.1
To John Bidgely, U. 15. Charge dlAffaires, Tripoli, from Captain John Bodgers,
U. S. Navy
U S SHIP Constitution
Malta W b January 1806
DEARSIR I arrived a t Syracuse on the 28% November, after landing Coll Lesr
a t Algiers, on the 21af of the same Month, Our affairs stand perfectly well a t Algiers, or a t least ss much so as the Nature
of our Treaty will admit -at Any rate we are even there gaining ground in point
of Respectability and Consequence as a Nation; and I believe Col! Lear feels an
Independance on the part of his Country, a t present, such as a Number of Circumstances prevented hitherto
I understand that h 3 ~Neesson, expects very shortly to be superceeded - You
will be pleased to tell him, that I claim the right of landing him, in whatever part
of the hfedite~aneanthats most suitable to himself; and shall not think we are
well treated by him, if he does not afford me an oppertunity of sending a Vessel
for him, when ever he is ready to Embark, by giving me a few days Notice before
hand
Pray present my best Respects to him, Your Letters by Lieut* Porter, as also
that the under date of the 8 Janr I have received - And owing to the extreme
bad Weather, we have lately had, was prevented from sending One of the Vessels
to Tripoli before - Permit me to acquaint you that the Cause, which produced
the disposition in you, not to hoist your Colours, in Compliment to Ottoman Men
of War, no longer exists; as those unfriendly appearances indicated by their Conduct towards us, some time ago, are since removed, by a DifTerent behaviour {LC. JRP, L Bk B, May, 1805-July, 1806.1

-

-

To James Dodge (Surgeon, U. S. Navy), U. 6. Chars6 d'dffaires, Tunis, from
Captain John Bodgers, U. S. Navy
U S SHIPComtiti~tion
Malta 26% January 1806
DEARSIR I arrived at Syracuse on the 281P November, after landing Coll Lear
at Algiers on the 21st of the same RIonth Our sffain stand perfectly well at Algiers, or at least as much so, as the Nature
of our Treaty will admit, - At any rate we are even there gaining ground in
point of Respectability and Consequence as a Nation, and I believe CoIl Lear
feels an Independance, on the part of his Country, a t present, such as a Number
of Circumstances prevented hitherto I have no News worth mentioning more than Cap+Evans, can CommunicsteYour old bZessmates are all well [LC. JRP, L Bk B, May 1805-July 1806.1
To Lieutenant Samuel Evans, U. S. Navy, commanding U. S. Schooner Nautilus,
from Captain John Bodgers, U, S. Navy
U S SHIP Constitution
d4alta 26% Januaty 1806
SIR You are desired to proceed with the U S Schooner Nautilus, under your
Command, with a11 practicable dispatch to Tunis, and after Communicating with
Mr Dodge, U S Charge &Affairs, a t that place, you are Requested t o join the
Squadron again a t Syracuse, as early as possible LC. JRP, Order Book No. 2, 1805-1806.1

356

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1806 TO 1807

To Sailing Pester Nathaniel Baraden, U. 8. Navy, U. 8, Qunboat NO. 8, from
Captain John Bodgers, U. S. Navy
U S SHIPConstitulim
Malta 86tC January 1806
SIB YOUare desired to proceed with the U S Gun Boat Nq 8, under your Command, with all racticable diapatch to Tripoli, and after Communicating with
Mr Hidgely, U fj Charge dJAEair's, a t that place, you are requested to Join the
Squadron again a t Syracuse, as early as possible Wishing you quick and pleasant paseage [LC. JRP, Order Book No. 2, 1805-1806.1
To George Dyson, U. 6. Navy Agent, Syracuse, from Captain John Rodgers, U. 8.
Navy
U S SHIPConstitution
Syracuse 88" Jan? 1806
SIB I have to desire that you will cause the Sennate or Officers of the Health
of this Port, Conven'd by to morrow morning a t 9 OClock, in order that I may
Know whether I am to be admitted to Prattique or not - As I am determined
to move with the whole Squadron Immediately, in Case of s refusal to some Port
more friendly [LC. JRP, L Bk B, May 1805-July 1806.1
To Captain John Rodgers, U. 6. Navy, from James Dodge, U. 8. Chargd d'Affaires.
Tunis
TUNIS98 January 1806.
SIR, An oppurtunity a t length offers (which I have long and anxiously looked
for) of communicating with you; not that I have any intelligence of an alarming
or serious nature to transmit. Our Affairs, as they relate, to Government or
State, have suffered no change since you was here: things remain in statu quo and
I am happy to say All is Well!
which is saying a great deal, and answers all
interrogatories a t once. Indeed, I sincerely believe, We, (i. e.) the United States, will never again have
any difFerence of great moment, with this Regency. His Excellency, the Bey, is
perfectly queiscent, and seemingly very friendly: I visit him once in a month, and
must acknowledge he allways appears pleased to see me: He begins to grow
anxious, however, for dispatches from his Embassador to America, and expects
them daily. I do not in my own mind, esteem him a man of duplicity, although there is a
great deal of what might be stiledpnesse and Court intrigue in him, joined however
with a degree of candour and simplicity, which, in my estimation form a strange,
or rather a curious accomodation in his Character; It would require a Sorceror
to find him out, and the Witch of Endor to render him a Reason.
His long reign, and consequent experience, entitles him to this deference,
allthough he is as ignorant as the Figure head of the Constitution relative to
Letters, or the olitical history or situation of any country on Earth, beyond the
bounds of the Zorizon. He is a t present fitting out all his Cruizers, I mean such as particularly belong
to himself; their destination I know not, nor when they will mil; but I imagine
they cannot be ready for Sea under six or eight weeks. Their description as follows. - One Xebeque, Spanish built of 36 Guns - one
Xebeque, Spanish built 34 Guns, and one Xebeque, Spanish built of 32 Guns, with
a Corvette Tuniseen built of 24 Guns; They have been fitting three months, progress very slowly, nor does there appear from their manovres, or any intelligence I
have been able t o collect, any hurry or principle for their fitting out a t all. - It
m y be a mere whim of his Excellency, to see how they (the Spanish built Vesesls)
will behave a t Sea, as they have never been out since he received them, which is now
nearly two Years. - I believe I have nothing more of any kind of importance to
inform You of in an o5cial or public way; except that his Excellency has often

-

questioned me, respectin the number and force of the American Vessels, h t did
or would remain in the heditemnean, their place of Rendezvous, &r C* rirhed
particularly t o know the business of the Brig Argus Capt. Hull, who wss in the Bay
about ten hours in Oct: last; This kind of enquiry I have constantly been aware of,
and have given him such answers t o hi interogatories, (as how long will they stay?
how many will stay? and of what force? &F &c.) as I deemed most just and usefull
to the Nation I stand pledged for, and to the Commerce of that Nation which is a t
present directed toward the Mediterranean. - The fact is, I believe, the man baa
been deceived or rather perhaps never was informed, or had any Idea, of America,
its Strength, bealth, extent of Territory, or resources; until1 the arrival of our
Squadron last fall; since which, He has taken pains to collect, from different sources
(the Eumpean Consuls) many items relative t o the U. S., and I believe at
present, views them as more formidable and important as a Nation, then ever He
bas heretofore. - Believe me Sir, the broad-side of a stately Ship, full of holes,
and every hole nicely accomodated with a 24 PT,
is no very h s y argument in case
of negociating with these powers. Tunis is a t present, a sink of misery, Sickness & Famine - one of my Sewante,
laps ill of a malignant fever which has much putridity attached to its type, and
indeed he is (asthey commonly say) a t the point of death: He is a Slave of Genoa,
end has been many years; and poor fellow, anticipates hie death with pleasure,
deeming i t a release from Captivity, in which the Grave alone can be his d e l i v e r e v
I am feelingky happy t o say, my health is much restored & established since I had
the pleasure of seeing you; and yet altho' the Climate of Tunis seems congenial,
and very fnendly to my constitution, I hope to be relieved from this situation in
time to return to America with you, in my much loved old Ship Constitution.
I sincerely hope you have shared health and the best of blessings in the interval
of our seperation - Letters are not used to blush, (neither can they) therefore I
can sa with freedom, that I have often ejaculated Heaven in your behalf, and find
a p e o u L satisfaction in thinking of the many days I passed under your CommandI
especially as they are connected with the remembrance of a man I truly esteem,
and feel pmud to enter first on the list of my Friends. My Sec7 & much esteemed friend Mr Allegro, (who had occasion to visit the
Constitution several times while in the Bay) begs to offer you his respectfullremembrance, and most earnest prayers for yr health & prosperity: He is my right hand
mm. and indeed I may say, my left hand one also: I find in him Fidelity & Integrity,
steady as a pump-bolt, and much attached to myself & America, & whatever or
whomsoever have any connection or business, or name, jpined to that of the U. d.With thi6 permit me to conclude, & I pray you will receive my best wishes for your
happiness, Temporal & Eternal; and believe me, with all Consideration and
Respect,
Dear Sir, not only
but much attached & unalterable Friend
- -your much obliged,
-

-

[LC, JRP,Series Two, Vol. 3, 1805-1807.1

To Eon, N. Macon, Speaker of the House of Representatives, from Secretary of
the Navy
NAVD E P38
~ Jan7 1806. In obedience to the Resolution of the House of Representatives of the 27'b ins,

directing the Secretary of the Navy "to lay before the House a report on the condition of the Frigates, and other public armed vessels, belonging to the United
States, distinguishing the Frigates fit for actual service, distinguishing such aa
require repair, and the sum necessary for repairing each; and distinguishing also
such as it may be the Interest of the United States to dispose of, rather than repair"
I have the honor to state
That the Frigate Conatittdion is now in a state of thornugh repair and in all
rea cts pre ared for service.
g a t the !,gate Chesapeake has lately been repaired & is fit for service.
That the Frigates Adarns, &sa, & John Adam are also fit for service.
That the Bn 8 Siren, Hornet, Argus, and Vaken, the Schooners Natdaltcs and
EMa+prize, the gombs Spilfire & Vengeance, and all the Gun boats are now in, and
fit for eervice. -

-

358

NAVAL OPERATIOhTS FROM 1806 TO 1807

That the Frigates President, United States, Congress, Constellation, New York,

& Bo~ton,require to be repaired; but it is utterly impossible to form an accurate

Estimate of the "Sum necessary for repalring each".I know of no Vessel belonging to the Navy which I consider i t "would be the
Interest of the United States to dispose of rather than repaire.All which is respectfully submitted,
[NA. NDA. Cong. LB, Vol. 1, Dec. 179&Feb. 1811.1

To Easter Commandant Isaac Bull, U. S. Navy, U. 6. Brig Argw, from Captain
John Bodgers, 0.8. Navy
U S SHIPConstitution
Syracuse 99'4 January 1806
SIR,I n Consequence of Communications made to me this morning I have t o
desire that you make Known to the different Officers Commanding the U S Vessels,
now in this Port, that it is contrary to my Orders, that any Officers of their
Respective Vessels do wear Masks during the Carnival
[LC. JRP, Order Book No. 2, 1805-1806.1

-

To Lieutenant Sybrant Van Schaick, U. 6. Navy, Arsenal, Syracuse from Captain
John Rodgers, U. S. Navy
U. S SHIPConstitution
Syracuse 30'4 Jan? 1606
SIR, You are desired to have the two Tripoline Gun Boats, put in order for Service;
In the execution of which, this Ship, and the Argus will afford you the
necessary assistance
P C . JRP, Order Book No. 2, 1805-1806.1

-

To Secretary of the Navy from Xaster Commandant Isaac Chauncey, U. 6. ~

a

.*

U.S. BRIGHornet, CHARLESTON

31 Januaty 1806.
SIR, I was this day honored with your Letter of the 20tP Inst, ordering me to
proceed to New York We shall complete watering tomorrow (which we have had much difficulty in
procuring) after which I shall leave this for New York the first Wind that will
suffer us to cross the Ban.
[NDA. MC LB, 1806-1807.1

To the Commanding OfBcers, U. S. Squadron in the Mediterranean, from Captain
John Rodgers, U. S. Navy
(Circular)
U S SHIPConstitution
Syacuse 1 Feb7 1808
SIB By recent accounts rendered me by the Agenta for the U States Navy
Department in the Mediterranean, i t appears, that a art of the Third Article
of the rinted instructions of the President of the U Itates (on the Subject of
610 s) fssued on the 25'4 Jan7 1802 [See Navd Docum&, United Sfutea Wars
the Barbar Powerr. Vol. 11, page 37.1 - has not been attended to by all the
P u m in the lquadron.
I have now to request and direct, that your purser will Conform Strictly to
all and every part of the h r d , Ninth, Tenth and Eleventh Articles of the Printed
instructions of the President before recited, with the exception to that part of
the Third Article, which relates to the profit Authorised to be Charged on the
Slops, Issued to the Crew: and that in future you will instruct your Purser to

v

~

WARS WITH BARBARY POWEBS
Charge in place there of, the prices annexed to each several articles of S l o p Contained in the list below
Hair Mattrasses
- - - - $5. 00
Yellow DP
- - - - $2
Wool
DP
4.00
White Shirk
,--2. Moss
Do
---- 3.00
Blk Silk Hdfs
- - - - 1. 50
Bbnkets
,--3. 50
Hats
---- L 5 0
P. Jackets
,--7.00
Do Fine
- - - - 8.Blue Jackets
,--4.50
Fine Shoe
,--2.50
Woolen Vests
---- 2.00
Brushes
- - - - 0. 25
Blue Trowsers
,
,
- - 3.00
Sugar
---- 0.25
Stockings
---- 1.00
Tea
---- 2.Drawers
---- 1.00
Tobacco
- - - - .50
Soap
- _ - - .25
,--1.75
B~~gfUY
Gurnmy Frock NP1 ,- - - 2.50
Knives
- - . 3 0 i.
D
Q
DP No2 ---- 2-00
Mustard
- - - - .25 Bottle
---- 2.25
Duck Jackets
Tin pots with lids ---- - 5 0
DP Frocka
,--2.25
DQ without ---- .30
D9 Trowsers
-- - - 1. 75
Spoons
---15
,--Blue Nankeen
4. Combe
---15

-

-

----

..

NB Fine Hats charged @ 8$ either En fish or American of the first qualityFine Shws @ $2. 50 of first quality either Snglish or American - Nankeens @
48 & 2%the piece are to be long - The Nankeens, Fine Hats, and fine Shoea aa
expressed in the List, an the other Side, are Terms so vague, as to induce me to
ive them a more distinct difinition to prevent the possibility of more than one
tonatruction J R
Copy of the above Deliverd to the following Comrs.
Li
Lawrence, Gun Boat NQ6
Cap/ I Hull. Brig Argus
Lt 3 Smith, Bomb Vengeuncs
Lt
Elbert, Gun Boat NP 9
L1
Crane, Cutter Hornet
Lt
Cartee, Gun Boat NQ10
L*
Izrud, Gun Boat NPd
LI
Hunt, Bomb Spitfire
Lt
Maxwell, Gun Boat NQS
Lt Commc S Evans, Schr Nautilus
L@ Henley, Gun Boat NP4
Lt Harraden, G Boat NP 8
Lt
Harrison, Gun Boat No 6
[LC. JRP, Order Book No. 2, 1805-1806.)
To Hidshipman John D. Henley, U. S. Navy, U. S. Gunboat No. 4, from Captain
John Bodgers, U. 8. navy

U S SHIPComtitution
Syracuse P Feb? 1808
SIB You will proceed to Malta with the U S Gun Boat h* 4 under your

Command for the purpose of delivering, at the Navy Arsenal of that p u , the
board, and receiving from thence, one
in return which Cap* Schomberg will have the Goodness, on your handing him
m letter, to order the Master Intendant to furnish you with
s o u are desired not to remain at Malts, more than 48 hours longer than is
necwary to procure the Anchor and to return to this place
Should the Bomb S '@re not have left MaIta before you arrive there, you are
Hunt, that I laish him to take advantage of the fust
directed to acquaint
fair Wind to join the Squadron
[LC. JRP, Order Book No. 2, 1805-1806.1

Two Anchors which you have taken on

-

-

To Captain C. bI, Schomberg, B. Irl.. commanding H. B. M. S. Madras. Yalta, from
Captmn John Rodgsrs, U. 6. Buvy
U S SHIP Constdufion
Syracuse 8 6 Pebr 1808
SIRI have taken the liberty of aending a Vessel to Malta, wit;h Two Anchora
weighing 30 & 33 hundred weight, in the room of the one whch you were eo
obliging to say you would lend me, in their place &C. JRP, L Bk B, May 1805July 1806.1

360

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1806 TO 1807

To Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Navy, from William Eaton, former U. S. Navy
Agent for the Barbary Regencies
SPRINGFIELDFeb. fl 1806.
DEARSIB, 1 am now on my passage to the seat of Government with a view of
helping Aunt Lear and her Lieutenants, Barron and Rodgers, out of some difficulty - The inclosed copy of a letter [See 19 January 18061 from General
Bradley will give you a pretty distinct idea of what will be the nature of my
friendly offices - As the letter comes with no mjunct~onsof confidence I have
no objection to your communicating i t to your private freinds; as you may, if
you please, also the printed co y of my letter to the Secretary of the Navy of
Aug. 19, 18051 I shall publish t f e latter soon after my arrival a t Wasbngton If any thing occurs during my residence there which I think may be interesting
I will communicate it [LC. EPP, Vol. 17, Jan.-June 1806.1
To Lieutenant Samuel Evans, U. S, Navy, commanding U. S. Schooner Nautilus.
Syracuse, from Captain John Rodgers, U. S. Navy
U S SHIP Constitufion
Syracuse 34 Feb? 1806
SIR You are directed to proceed with the U 5 schooner Nautilus, under your
Command, to Leghorn, for the purpose of procurmg her a Main Mast, and negotiating through Mess- Degen Purviance & CP, the Bills on the U S Navy Department, for which I hold your Receipt, amounting to $20,000 provided they can
be cashed under,-or not exceeding 7 Pr Cl loss As the Season is now advancing which authorises a belief that I shall soon hear
from Goverment the result of the Tunitian Embsasg with particular instructions,
relative to the future opperations of the Squadron I must request that you will
not loose a moment in the execution of your present Mission, which can retard
your joining the Squadron again ss early as possible - Wishing you pleasant
and quick passages
[LC. JRP, Order Book No. 2, 1805-1806.1
To Degen, Purviance & Co., U. S. Navy Agents, Leghorn, Italy, from Captain
John Rodgers, U. S. Navy
U S SHIP Constitution
Syracuse 34 Febr 1806
GENTLEMEN
I have sent the Nautilus Lt Command* Evans to your port, for
the purpose of procuring a Main Mast and Cash to the Amount of $20,000, - provided Bills can be Negotiated a t not exceeding 7 Pr C+loss I have no news worth Communicating, further than what L+ Evans will be able
t o &ord you, and to whom, I beg you will give all the diepatch in our power
I ray you present my very best res cts to your Amiable MT %egen and all
the 8entlemen of your house MTSam! !?%vianee & Mr Swarta in particular, and
believe me I am
[LC. JRP, L Bk B, May 1805-July 1806.1

-

To Captain John Rodgers, U. S. Navy, from Degen, Purviance & Co., U. S. Navy
Agents, Leghorn, Italy
LEGHOIIN
fl Pebr 1806.
SIR, We this morning received a Letter from samuel Evans Esqr Commander
of the United States' Schooner Nautilus requeeting to be informed whither a Spar
could be procured here of the dimentions he describes. We have in consequence
made the necessary enquiries & agreable to that Gentleman'e deaire we hasten
to communicate the result thereof I% have to inform ou that we Can procure
a spar of the dimentions wanted say seventy Three feet ibng & Twenty two I n c h a
diameter for the fix price of eighty Zecchina in its rough State.

361

WkRS WITH BARBARY POWERS

We have the honour to enclose you a late American Paper received by the Ship
Thofrom Boston, which arrived the day before yesterday in 44 days, being
pemaded, you will find it interesting as i t contains the president's Messsge to
the Congress
[LC. JRP, Series TWO,Vol. 3, 1805-1807.J
To Master Commandant Isaac Eull, U. 6. Navy, U. S. Brig Argus, Syracuse, from
Captain John Bodgers, U. 8. Navy
U S SHIPConstitution
Sytancse 34 Febv 1806
SIR YOUare directed to inform the Commanchng Officers of the Respective
Veseels of the Squadron, that it is Contrary to my orders that any private Marine
or Non Commiasloned officer of Manna8 belonging to their Vessels, be permitted
to go on Shore, on liberty, until1 they ahall be officially informed of the Revocation
of the same [LC. JRP, Order Book No. 2, 1805-1806.1

To Captain John Rodgers, IJ. 6. Navy, from Lieutenant David Porter, U. S. Wavy
ON BOARD THE U S SCATEnterprize
Duplicde

Harbour of Naples 3'4 Febtlaty 1806
SIR, Nothing of a decisive nature has yet transpired, every thing remains in
the =me unsettled state as when I last wrote you, and we are still in expectation
that every moment will make a change; reports are various, and no dependance
to be placed in them, therefore we can only draw conclusions from what we see.
They continue to raise new recruits, and have embarked all the baggage of the
Royal Family and the Royal Guards and a cons~derablequantity of Amunition
a d Artiliry; the have had a large number of Amunition Waggomi, Pontoons
and a number of gield Pieces laying in the Foss for those many days read t o be
removed a t a moments warning, Messengers have passed to and from the grench
who are said t o be a t Rome and various reports have been circulated as to the
result, none of which we can give any credit to; This day a Courier arrived and
brought information (as report says) that an .Armistice was effected for three
Months in consequence of which Public thankspvings were ordered to be Offered

"&his latter report I do not beleive a3 there has been some coqsiderable stir in
hastening the emberkage of baggage to day, and as the Artdery Amunition
Waggons and Pontoons were removed from the Foss this evening and sent towards
Calabria, this induces me to beleive that they have given up all thoughts of making
their peace with Joseph Buonaparte (who commands the Troops a t Rome) and
that the intention is to leave Naples to its fate and trust their safety t o defending
the passes to Calabria which are said to be very difficult, what confirms me in this
opinion is, that no drafts of Men have been made from that Quarter although
they are bringing them in every day from every other and large bodies of Men are
collected there (ss report says) and placed to guard the passes. The re rt of the Armistice is credited by every Neapolitan with whom I have
ConversedPOon the subject, but the circumstances I have related induce me to
beleive it to be only a trick t o lull the people into repose while the Court has an
opportunity of making its escape. - I cannot think that Joseph Buonaparte has
some all the way from Paris to Rome to make an Armistice with the Queen of Italy.
He will undoubtedly be King of Italy and his tarry a t Rome may be owin to
him wish to give the Royal Family time to leave this place a. is evidently &eir
intention Should any time elapse between their embarkation and the arrival of the French
confusion must ensue on the first appearance of s-hlch I shall haw1 out of the Mole
and take the Americans here and their property under my protection.
[LC. JRP, Series Two, Vol. 3, 1805-1807.1

-

362

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1806 TO 1807

To Lieutenant David Porter, U. S. Navy, from Thomas Hall, to direct the making
of Tripolitan Monument
LEGHORN
8'4 F e b v 1806
SIR,By Your letter of the 25th U l t ~I am made happy by the confidence you &
E u r Brother Officers have reposed in appointing me as the Director of a
onument to be made in remembrance of those brave Americans who loriously
fell before Tripoli in fighting for their Country; Your choice might reachy fallen
on one more equal to the task, but on none more willing to exert his abilities, a t all
times, in what will give pleasure to his countrymen. The Sum of 1800 or 2,000 dollars, in my opinion, nil1 amply suffise for the
purpose It would have been no small help to me, had you given me some outlines or
even the smallest idea of what you and Your brother Officers would have wished
for, as these would have served as a ground work to build on. - at present I
have nothing before me but the rough block of Marble on which I should like
to see living figures come forth. However some thing analogous to the glorious
event will be thought of & by the next post you will receive three or four Sketches
of which will enable you to communicate to me fully your intentions,
[LC. D. Porter P, Let. & Ord., 1805-1808.1
To Captain John Rodgera, U. 6. Navy, from John Bidgely, U. S. Charge d'bffaires,
Tnpoli
TRIPOLIIN BARBARY
Feb? 3. 1806.
DEAR
SIR I received your's of the 25" Ult. by Lt Haraden. I t gave me pleasure
to hear of the safe arrival of C o l ~Lear and the good state of our affairs a t Algiers.
I communicated to Mr Nissen, that part of your letter respecting him; he
expressed many acknowledgments for your attention, and said he w? write to you.
I n looking over my letters I find one of the 28 of Octr 1805 addressed to you,
which has not been noticed in yours and consequently not received. I now do
myself the pleasure to transcribe and enclose it.
The U. S. Gun Boat NP8 has excited great admiration here. She has been
visited by all the country. She answered a salute of 21 guns in a very handsome
manner.
One of the marines, misled by some miscreant renegadoes here, fled to the
Barshaw's castle, and wished t o become a Mussulman. Upon demand he was
immediately restored, and Sidi Mahomet Dghies (who is really a good man)
desired me to solicit you on his part to pardon or a t least mitigate the punishment
of the poor culprit.
As provision, fruit vegetables &c - are high in hlalta and low here, if you shd
think it well to send a small vessel here for a load, I shall be happy t o procure them.
The Spanish Consul requests me to inform you that he has a fine young Ostrich
for you; and that by the Spring, when he says, you partly promised to visit Tripoli,
he will have procured many other curiosities of the country for you.
JOHN
RIDGELY
[MCA. LR, 1806.1
To Captain John Bodgers, U. S. Navy, from Lieutenant Benjamin Smith, 0.6.
Navy
HARBOUR
OF SYRACUSE
Feb~
4t4 1806
U. S. BOMBKETCHVengeance
SIR I have the honor to inform you that on the night of the 2n? Instant a seaman
by the name of Thomas Dixon belonging to the fishing smack Traveller came on
board this Vessel and claimed Protection as an American Citizen, he stated that
he was born in the Town of Rye in the state of Massachusets that he had been
Pressed out of an American Vessel about three years ago since which time he had
been constrained to serve in the British Navy, although had a t the time he was
pressed and still has a Protection as an American Citizen. Being Sensible of the
great inconveniance occasioned by one Nation harbouring Deserters of another
and the high contempt in which you hold the Practice as I was not confident of
his being an American I felt it my duty to send him to his own Vessel and inform
you of the circumstance
[LC. JRP, Series Two, Vol. 3, 1805-1807.1

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

363

To Thomae Appleton, U. S. Consul, Leghorn, Italy, from Captain John Eodgers,
U. S. Navy
U S Smp Constitulion
Syracuse 4* Fet? 1806
SIB Pours enclosing a letter from His Excellency Mr Moezi &v $9 has duly come
to hand, and altho i t is both friendly and polite, is not as perfectly satisfactory,
as I could have wished, or conceive had resson to expect. [LC. JRP, L Bk B, May 1805J u l y 1806.1
To Captain William Bainbridge, U. 6. Navy, Perth Amboy, N. I., from Eecretary
of the Navy
KAVYD E P6~Febr 1806.
I enclose you a copy of a Resolution of Congresa calling on me for information
relative to the nature and extent of the services rendered to your crew while in
Captivity by the Danish Consul a t Tripoli. Be pleased to enable me to comply with the Resolution by giving me a detail
of the services rendered by Mr Nissen, with rn little delay ss pwible. [NDA. OSW, Vol. 7, 1805-1807.1
To Lieutenant David Porter, U. 6. Navy, from Midshipman Thomas C. Eagruder,
U. 6. Navy
U. S. SCHTEnterprize
Harbour o j Naples 6* Febr 1806
i 3 r ~ I must confess I have been acquainted with the Article mentioned in your
note; b u t I hope you are too generous to think I broke that article to mortify your
feelings, but can assure you i t was done with a motive to maintain the character
of an Officer; I having ordered Boyd to get me some Nails by permission of the
Carpenter and in answer to which order he replied he would not in presence of all
the Men; i t was then I struck him and should have immediately reported him aa
Drunk and abusive had not you and Mr Macdonough been engaged a t that time,
aod the Carpenter Hearing me threaten to report Boyd, he came to me and desired me not to say any thing more about i t as it would fall upon him, he having
treated him on Shore, to which request I gave no answer, he then fearing I would
report them both and thinking the most advisable scheme to clear himself would
be to report me first he therefore watched his opportunity and reported me; for
which report Mr Macdonough arrested me without giving me a hearing or scarcely
informing me for what I was arrested - Now Sir, let me beg you to recall to
your memory the time when you was in the Station that I now am and if ever you
took the like insult from a Man before the Mast, I have only to add that I hope
you will consider that f have been very unfortunate while 1have had the honor of
being under your command not being able to do scarcely any duty & now being
laced in this disagreeable situation for a thing which I may say I ww forsed to
go. [LC. D. Porter P, Let & Ord., 1805-1808.1

To Secretary of the Navy from Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Navy
PORTLAND
Feb? 6* IS06
SIB, I have seen a Gentlemsn from Halifax Novascotia who informld me t h a t
not iong since an American Vessel from the Mediterranean was carried into that
place on suspicion of having enemiee property on board.
Soon after her arrival
a passenger landed dressed in the full Uniform of a Captain in our Navy The guards were turn'd out and he was received with presented aand all the
marks of ceremony & respect usually aid to Captr of Men of War, i t was however (to the great mortfication of the k m m a n d e r of the Troop@ dkoovered that
the paesenger was a Clerk in the American consular office a t Merseilles, who called
himself Chancellor of the Consulate.- I a m also informed that the Capt, $ Officem
of Armed Vessels from New York and other places forceing a trade to Hispaniola,
wear the Uniform of the Navy and Feir, ships the pendant of a Man of War,which
often enables them to prrss as pubho ships of the U States,and thereby bringing
disgrace on our Navy. I cannot but regret the want of a Law to prohibit M e r

-

364

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1805 TO 1807'

chant Vessels from wearing pendants, and all persons not attach'd to the Navy
from wearing the Uniform establish'd for that service.
I wish that some Uniform more appropriate than that of the Navy could be established for our Consuls. The Consul a t Malta (and it is the case in many other
laces) wore the Uniform of a full Captain, and his Clerk, or what he called his
ice Consul, that of a Master Commandant, notwithstanding he was well known
to be an infamous character, - I hope you will believe Sir, that nothing but the
respect I have for our Naval Establishment could induce me to make the foregoing observations, - and that you will excuse the liberty I have taken.
Mr Rowe & M? Wadsworth are the only two Officers in the Navy (excepting
myself) belonging to the District of Maine. M? W. is a t an Academy, and as
I am in want of an officer to assist me, I have this day called into service (here)
Mr Rowe, his conduct has been very proper since his return, and it would be an
agreable thing to the people here should he be confirmed as a Lieu* - it is
thought he deserves it. - If you please he can take charge of the Gun Boat
N9 11 in the Spring, to conduct her where ever you may direct, or as a subordinate
Lieut on board the Etna Bomb whch certainly ought to have one of our ablest
Lieutr for a commsnder. - I have also called on Mr Llyde Purser, as I shall
want his assistance in collecting the Bills for the four Vessels, settling the accounts,
making out Indents, procuring men &c &c his services can however be dkpensed
with the moment he is wanted for more important service.
If the Officers to Command the Bomb Ketches, are ordered on to join them
by the middle of March, it will be saving expence to the Government.
P. S. W y you lease to send me the Warrant for Mr Moore late Carpenter
of the ~onstttution? I ment~onedhim to you, &- you observed he should have
one, but I neglected to take it with me. he can be of great service t o me here,
in getting the Vessels away. - EP.
[NDA. Captains' LB, Vol. 1, 1806.1

b

To William Eaton, former U. 8. Navy Agent for the Barbary Regencies, from
Captain Edward Preble, U. 8. Navy
PORTLAND
Feb? 8.1806
Genl EATON
DEARSIR, I am hon? with your esteemed favour 34 Inst and its enclosure a
document highly interesting as i t assures me that the senate feel that just sense
of indignation which they ought a t the sacrifice of National honor which has been
made by an ignominious negotiation. I t is generall understood hme from the
publication of the comspandence alluded to in Gent 8radley1aletter on an article
in Lesrs treaty that the Ex-Bashaws family haa been delivered up - this I have
contradicted as I believe yourself, & several officers of the Squadron [?] have informd me that Lear assured the reigning Bashaw that he should never be called
on to fulfill that article I rejoice that you are on your way to Head Quarters
to sett all right - If government do you the justice they ought and which your
Gsllsnt and meritorious services deserve, they will order ou a medsl a sword
a Brigadier GenJ Commission, a pay until promoted. recall %ar and appoint you
Consul General in his stead. be w e d my dear friend I take a lively interest
in every thing that concerns your Honor or Interest - My private friends will
be highly gratifyed with the indulgence you allow me to give them. I think you
are right to publish yours to the Sec? of augt
I hope this will find you safe amved and, that i t will not be !ong before I shall
have the pleasure of hearing from you I have nothing new in this quarter Snow two feet deep good roads and excellent eleying, but too cold to enjoy it. [LC. EPP, Vol. 17, Jan.-June 1806.1
[9 February 1W]
To Captain John Rodgers, U. 8. Navy, from Bailing Master Bathmiel Earaden,
U. 8. Navy
Snt! While the u s Gunboat N9 8 under m Command was a t Tripoly by the
particular ~ C p e S of
t the nmerican Consul. f g a v e twelve Men liberty on shore
they all returnd agreeable to time except Thomas Burk a Marine I received information he waa a t the Bashaw Castel indevouring to turn Turk I waited on the
Consul Thomas. Burk was demanded from the Bashaw apl a subjet of the United
States he was gven up and wnducted by a guard to the Consul house, where he

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS
was secured during the Night in the cool deliberated hour of the Morning Thomas
Burke fled again to the Bashaws Castle and claimed protection tw a Turk on the
second demand the Alcoron was produced and several passage read as a plea for
detaining him after some conversation he waa sent on Board where he now remains
in doubie irons, I therefore request you will please to order a Courtmarchal Towards evening of the same day the Scotch Admiral waited on me and beg@ I
wouId receive a small present from the Bashaw as a mark of his sttention to the
Americana the Boat wss Boon crowded with Cowes Sheeps fowls B r e d and Vegetablea I then run up all my signai flaga saluted five guns weigh* and came to see
this part of politness on my side was nearly to show the Bashaw that i was pleased
with the greatest part of his Conduct and did not leave his port in degust

SAEAQOSA
HABBOUB U 6 GUN
BOATN Q8 Febr gt4 1806
[MCA. LR, 1806.1

[I0February 18061

To Secretary of

State from Sidi Suliman Xelli Melli, Tunisian Ambaaaador
Plenipotentiary to United Statee from Hsmouds, Bey of Tunis

SIDI SULIMAN
MELLA MENNI Ambassador Plenipolentiary from hi8 Ezcelkncy
the Bashaw of Tunis near his Ezcellency the President of Ike United St&s of
America, To the Honbie JAMESMADISONE8qr Secretary of Sfate
HEALTH

I have had the honor to receive your communication of the 5fb of Febz 1806

in answer to mine of the 3 1 ~ tof Decr 1805 and have paid particulsr attention to
its contents. The Xebeck (captured by the vessels of war belonging to the IJnited
States) while under the command of Rmz Hassan bo1AU'y a subject of Tunis,
was Tunisian property, ss a proof of which her officers & crew were discharged
by the Captors, have return'd to Tunis & there now reside; I therefore request
that I may be the bearer of an order from his Excellency the President to the

Commanding officer of the American squadron stationed in the Mediterranean
to deliver up the said Xebeck & her two prizes to his Excellency the Bashaw of
Tunis, for although their value view'd on a nstional scale is really trifting (not
being more than 4000 dollars) it envolves consequences of real importance to
myself, as the nature of the Tunisian government is such, that even should I
succeedin attaining the objects of my mission to their full extent, & to my
Masters entire satisfaction, praise would only be given t o God for my success! &
no credit whatever would accrue to myself for my exertions!! on the contrary
should I return empty handed I would be subjected to censure and the B&shaws
displeasure which might operate against me individually, to an extent of which
no adequate idea can be form'd by the inhabitants of this country, I therefore
urgently request that this favor may be granted by His Excellency the President
on my own private account, d t h o i t would be more congenial to my feelings to
obtain i t on my Masters.
[signed in Arabic]
was am am^ F e b ~loth 1806
The letter to which this certificate is annext was compiled by the subscriber
from the verbal communications of Siddi Suliman Mella menni by request of the
Honk'* the Secretary of State,dk in the preaense of Mr Hatfield in a eimilar manner
to said Mella Mennis memoral of the 31rt of Decr 1805

-

JAMESLEANDEBCATHCABT

W ~ s m a z v nPebr 1 0 s h 1806
[NA. SDA, CD, Tunis, Vol. 3, 1805-1806.1
from Thomas Hall
LEQHOBN
Febr 10*4 1806.
SIR,I n Answer to your letter of tbe 25% Jant- by the Isst post, I flattered myself
that I should have been able by this conveyence, to have forwarded you pome
sketches of the monument that you and your brother Officers desire t o be made
To Lieutenant David Porter, U. 6. Navy, U. 6. Schooner .!%&@11rr,

-

in remembrance of thoee breve Americsns who fell before Tripoli fighting in their
magnitude %an
Country's cause but 1 find it impractible; the task being of greagreater
I a t first immegined it: i t is not an affair to be determined on m a day, it require#
some time for reflection, & must not be done in a hurry.
I have written on the

-

366

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1805 TO 1807

subject to one of the first Artists a t Rome, perhaps in Europe, - the Michael
Angelo of the present age, if he will agree to undertake it, it will be a chef d'auvre,
& do honour to the Generous, noble s irited men who have subscribed to the execution of it, By Way ?f theme. - have suggest,edthst i t would be necessary to
introduce as the principal figure America, under the figure of a Young beautiful
female Indian adorned with feathers bending over the tombs & lamentin the loss
of her beloved Sons: & in another part as a secondary figure a wingad Victory
& in the other
advancing towards America with a Crown of laurels in one hand
an Olive branch & that from the block of Marble everything should come forth that
could be found analogous to the Occasion. - but at the same time left to his fertile
genius to improve on the hint^ I have given him. - You must request however
your Brother Officers not to be too sanguine in their expectations of seeing a Work
like this finihed in an instant; as it must require time and immense labour. I take for granted a Monument of this kind is to be placed in some public building, like that in Westminster Abbey in London raised in honor of the Gallant
General Wolf? who fell at Quebec, But if it is to be raised on a pedestal in the o en
Air - the design of the sculpture and the Workmanship i k l f would be w i L y
different for my government - pray Write me as soon a.3 pomible,
P C . D. Porter P, Let. & Ord., 1805-1808.1

?

-

To Lieutenant David Porter, U. 6. Navy, U. 6. Schooner Enfuprize, from Samuel
Purviance, Leghorn
LEGHORN
FEB?lOtO 1806.DFJABSIR,The Rev@Mr Hall has shewn me together with others of my Country
men, the letter you addressed him some days past expressive of your's and fellow
Officers desire t c erect a Monument to the Memory of the OEcers wllo fell in the
different attacks on Tripoli - it may appear intrusive in me to suggest an opinion
that your kleritorious intentions would bc fully and in every respect more satisfactorily accornplinhed by employing in the execution of your design Mr Micali of this
City who is uliiversally known as a person of acknowledged taste- Should you not
have made arrangements with Mr Hal1 previous to reeeipt of this f could wit.h your
approbation communicate to Mr hIicali - the general outlines of yr intentions from which hs could form two or three designs & forward you - he could also correspond with you direct on the subject, as to any alterations or additions that
might be proposed as well a~ respecting the conditions on which he could have the
work executed. On a same Occasion one hundred doll9 were left with Mr Hall for the erecting of
a Monument in the English burying Ground how far the contributors to this purpoee have been realised i t is not for me to say I will only add that a more decent
& handsome ornament could have been placed for fifty dollars.
[LC. D. Porter P, Let. & Ord., 1803-1808.1

-

To Lieutenant David Porter, U..6. Bavy, commanding U. S. Schooner ~ p r i ~ c ,
from Captam John Bodgers, U. 6. Navy
U S SHIPComtitution
Syracuse 11Y Feb? 1806
SIB Your favor of the 24 Ultq Came duly to hand - Circumstances make it
necessary that I should direct that you join the Squadron a t this Port, by the 5*
Da of next Month d o u l d any good seamen or very good Ordinar Seamen offer ou may enter as
many as fifty On the same terms of yourown &ew
The Auadron is about
that Number short of Compliment, but you will take care, not to enter those, which
will cause w Contention hereaftor
as you Know how we stand with the British
on this subject. I shall say no more No advance can be made the Men you enter exceeding half a Months Pay without having good security in the Men themselves Or some other Persons Dont forget to bring the Cable that has been order'd a t Naples for the Constitu-

-

t h

-

-

The Nautilus has gone to Leghorn for a Mainmast;
Poor Maxwell is Dead I have no news worth Communicating [LC. JRP, L Bk B, May 1805-July 1806.1

-

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS
To Frederick Degen, U. 8. Navy Agent, Ifaples, from Captain John Bodgers, U. 6.
Navy

U S SEIPConstitution

Syracuse I l t b Febr 1806-

Sir Your Esteemed favor of the 25 Ultv I have duly r e d , as Our affairs will
remain, in some Measure unsettled, with a Certain Piratical Power, until1 I am

Authorised by my Government, either with the Masculine effect of the Arrow, or
Feminine Ar ument of the Olive Branch, (the ktter of which indeed seldom produces any goog Consequences On the Minds of pirate^) to Concludc a permenant
pee
As I have reaaon t o believe from a Number of Circumstances that our Government no more intends, than we are inclined, to act with Effeminacy; - I am under
the necessity of ordering the Enterprize to join the Squadron by the first of next
Month NB The reasons, why I have not been more explicite, you shall hear hereafter [LC. JRP, L Bk B, May 1805-July 1806.1

-

To Midshipman Ralph Irard, Jr., 77. 6. Xavy, from Captain John Bodgere, U. 5.

Haw
U S SHIPConstitution
S y a c u s e 11*Q Febu 1806
(Circular)
SIR You are desired to have the U S Gun Boat NQb, in the most complek Order
ossible for actual Service, by the first day of March ensuing Et ~zara
Commi the U S G Boat NP 8 Syracuse
Co y of the above sent to: Lt Maxwell Nq 3; Lt Henleg
4; Lt Harrison NQ6;
Lt Lwrence NP 6: L+Haraden NQ8; Lt Elbert A7q 9; L* W e e Nq 20.
PC. JRP,Order Book No. 2, 1805-1806.1
To Lieutenant Benjamin Smith, U. S. Nevy, U. S. Bomb V~~
from Captain
John Bodgers, U. 6. Navy
U S S H I P Constifution
Syracuse 11 F e k 1806
SIR The Bottom of the U S Bomb Vengeance being foul, you are desired t o
grave the Pame, and prepare her in all Respects for actual Service by the first
day of March ensuing A Copy of the above order sent to L+Wq Crane--Hornet Lt Theo Hunt--Spitfire
[LC. JRP, Order Book No. 2! 1905-1806.1

To Lieutenant Joshua Blake, U. S. Navy, from Captain John Bodgers, U. 8. levy
U S SHIPConslitrrlion
Syracuse I I Q Feb? 1806 SIR You are desired to inform the Officeis commanding the Respective U 8
Vessels, now in thii port that it is my request they will attend the funeral of
1,t Maxwell in Militmy Mo~irning(full dress) to morrow a t 2 P. hf. at the late
lodgings of the Dexe~sed- Such other officers as can be spared from duty,
are slso requested to attend [LC. JRP, Order Book No. 2, 1805-1806.1
To Captain John Bodgers, 0.8, Navy, from George Dyson, U. S. Navy Agent,
Syracuse
SYRACUSE11 FebT 1806
SIBThc Governor requests me to resent you his respects, t says that if He
naa to give permhion for Armed s o h e r s to enter this City it might plsce Him
in a very unpleasant situation, being Contrary to his ordem - He therefore begs
that the Corpse msy be convey'd without the Gate snd that the Marinert under

368

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1806 TO 1807

arms may be paraded near the waterin piace or on the plain near the sminal if
at the latter place you will please let %im Know that orders may be given t o
admit them at. the outer gates without difticulty
[LC. JRP, Series Two, Vol. 3, 1805-1807.1
--

To Secretary of the Navy from Captain John Rodger~,0.8. l a v y
U S SEIPConstitution
Syracuse letb Fe& 1806
SIR I have this day Valued on you in favor of D Hinckly Esqr of Boston for
Thirteen Hundred Forty five Dollars, and forty One Cents, a t Thirty Days
Sight, for Provision and Slop Cloathing, furnished for the use of the Squadron,
under my Command, which be pleased to honor [LC. JRP, L Bk B, May 1805-July 1806.1
To the Commanding Officers of the U. 8. (funboats in the Mediterranean from
Captain John Eodgere. U. 8. Navy
U S SHIPComiitlLfim
Syracuse l b FebT 1806 In the Equipment of the Gun Boats the following Articles are Tndispeneihle
Each Gun Boat is to take on board 300 Round Shot, Wads in proportion As
much Powder as their Mazazines will conveniently Stow
25 Stand of Grape or Musket Bails, in Bags, or Canisters
As much Water as can be stowed without being detrimental to the accommodation of the Crew Orders will be given hereafter as it Respects the quantity, of Provision they
are to take on board A Copy of the above sent to:- L+Izard NQ 2; Commr officer A'Q 5 . Lt Henley
NQ4 ; L* Hmison N P5; L+ Lawrence NQ 6; Lt Harsden NQ8 ; Lt dkbert NP9;
Id$Cartee NQ10.
[LC. JRP, Order Book No. 2, 1805-1806.1

-

--

To Secretary of the Navy from Captain William Beinbridge, U. 8. Navy
NEW YORE12% February 1806
SIR In compliance with your letter of the 6th !instant, (which this day came to
hand) I hasten to detail the services rendered to the Crew of the U. S. IateFrigate
Philadelphia while in captivity a t Tripoli,by Nicholas C Nissen Esqr, His Danish
Majesty's Consul residing there.
I n consequence of the mode of imprisonment it was impossible for the Officers
to procure the necessary articles of subsistence they were therefore necessiated
to receive their daily provission &c through another channel. Mr Nissen generously offered his services to obtain our necessary supplies; which he did in the
most faithful manner for 19 Month8 & 3 days (the period of our Captivity)
And a t times, when the funds placed a t my command in Tripoli were expended,
he continued our daily supply by hia own means until ours were renewed by the
Commodore of the Mediterranean Squadron or George Davis Esqr Charge of
Affairs a t Tunis. (to whom we are gratefully indebted)
Had i t not been for the friendly aid of Consul Nissen, we should not have
received our subsistence in so regular a manner as we did, & should have been
exposed a t a great expence to the impositions of the lowest class of our Enemy
his sttentione were not confined ~oielyto the Officers,but was equally extended
to the Seamen & Soldier.
Consul Nissen was the first Christian we rurw after landing on the Ghore of
Africa, and he met us the ve evening of our misfortune with the philanthrophy
of a man of feeling, & immezately administered to our wants, by sending provision & bedding from his house, and ameliorated as much as possible our truly
UII leasant eituation.
faannet in justice P his attention omit mentioning a circumstance, which shows
the lively interest he took in our situation, & the hazard he ran to serve us. When
Commodore Preble attached Tripoli, Mr Nieeen's house wns IMmuch exposed m
m y in the Town, & h i e l f in danger from the Bombardment
I solicited him

-

-

-

WARS WITR BARBARY POWERS
frequently to bave his dangerous situation and retire to the Gardens where the'
Consuls were; he requested me not to importune more on leaving the Town, for
he prefered running the risque of the Shots & Shells from our Squadron and
attending to our wants & subsistence, then resorting to the Gardens. I n thus
pursuing the dictatea of a feeling mind, he wrn very near loosing his life by a Shot
rom the Constitution. Had he not acted in this friendly manner towards us, it
is very probable that we should have been several days without provission, es the
Enemy were occupied & exasperated.
I have Sir detailed to you generdy, the services rendered to the Officers di.
Crew of the hhzb+ a t Tripoli, by Nicholae C. Nissen Esqr, but it is impossible for
me to convey a just sense of them - Nothing but a perfect acquaintance of our
situation & the aid we received can truly estimate the services rendered.
[LC. U.S.N., 1805-1811.1
To secretary of the Xevy from Captain William Bainbridge, U. 6. B a v
NEW YORK12t4 February 1806
SIR,I have the honor to enclose an answer to your letter of the 6* inst
A few days since I received a letter from Niesen a t Tripoli, in which he mentiom
that a Tripilitan Cruiser under the command of Murad Rais, ( a l iLile) had made
a three months cruise in the Atlantic & took a Prusian Merchant Vessel for not
having a paaport from the Grand Seignor, he also writes that Farfaro the Chief of
of the Jews in Tripoli, had been sssasinated in the Bashaw's Palace
[NDA. Captain's LB, Vol. 1, 1806.1
To Secretary of the Bavy from Captain John Bodgers, U. 6.Bavy
U S SHIPConstitution
Syracuse 14t4 Fely 1806

SIR, Since writing you b t , I have received letters from Mr Ridgely and Mr
Dodge, Our charge dlafEaires, a t Tripoli and Tunis, by Gun Boat No 8, and the
Schooner Nautilus, instead of the Nautilus alone, as I informed you in my letter
of the 34 Ultv; NQ 8 excited much astonishment, as well as Curiosity at Tripoli; She was
saluted with 21 Guns on her arrival, which she returned in so handsome a manner,
both a s to time, and regularity that the most knowing of the Tripolines, observed
that it would have done no discredit to a Ship of the Line; The Bashaw observed that she was very different from his Boats and Requested permission to have a Draught taken of her, by his Spaniah karpenter;
Lf Haraden, her Commander, informed him, that this he could not permit,
wjthout my Consent, but gave permission to examine her - While NQ8 lay a t
Tripoli, One of her Marines desented, and took the necessary steps to constitute
himself a Turk, and afterwards got to the Bashaws Castle, and demanded hi
protection however after a remonetrance by Mr Ridgelp, our charge d'affsirs he
was delivered up, by the Bashaw, in direct opposition to their Religious and Civil
Laws, the Bashaw asserting, I understand from Lt Haraden, that he would not
have done the like for any other Christian Nation; I mention the aEair of the Marine, 813 proof positive of the indubitable deaire
the Barihaw has of maintaining a good understanding with the U States; For your information as to the T e r n on which we stand with Tunis, permit
me to tranecribe you s Paragraph of Doctr Dodges letter dated the 28'P Ultimo
"Our affairs as thev relate to Government or State, have sugered no change
since you was here, things remain in &atu quo, and I am happy to say, aU is
well, which is saying s great deal, and answers all interrogatories at once -"
The fate of Na lea remains as get undecided, no part of the Royal Family,
except the King, g h o haa arrived a t Palerrno) hnr yet left it
Joae h Bouna arte is, it is reported, a t Rome, at the head of a iarge Army
insteatoi Gen! Kessina, aa I wrote yon in my letter of the 25 Ultimo; and it
is believed on his way to Naples, to disembarrass LCing Ferdinand of hia Royal
Functions by taking his Title to himself;
Joseph Bounaparte has been some time a t Rome, and aa his object ia without
doubt the acquisition of Naplea, his halt a t Rome, 18 not yet accounted for:
[NDA. Captain's LB, Vol. 1, 18M.I

-

-

-

-

370

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1806 TO 1807

To Secretary of the Navy from l a s t e r Commandant Isaac Chauncey, U. 8. Navy
U. S. BRIGHornet, NEWYORK
14t4 February 1806.
SIR, I arrived Yesterday, after a Boisterous passage of seven days but did not
get up to Town before to day. Prior to my leaving Charleston we completed our Beef Pork, Bread & Flour for
three Months, the other Articles composing the Ration was not sent from Baltimore, I therefore did not purchase them, shall I complete them here? Midshipman Beard made application to exchange with Midshipman Watson of
Gun Boat NQ1. and the exchange being perfectly agreeable to Lieutenant Biddle,
I permitted the exchange to take place. [NDA. MC LB, 1806-1807.1
To the Commanding Offlcers of the U. 8. Gunboats in the Mediterranean from
Captain John Rodgers, U. S. Navy
U S SHIPConstitution
Syracuse 16tP Feb? 1806
SIR Not being informed that any specified Ivfonthly pay had been established
by the Navy Department, for your Gunner Boatswain or Steward, previous to your
sailing from the U States I do hereby order that you enter them on your Books as acting in these D e p a r t
ments, entitled, (the Two former) to the pay of Boatswain and Gunners Mates,
& the latter to that of a $7 Master Copy of the above send to: - Lt Izard N? 3; Comr Officer NQ3; L+ Henley
N? 4; Lt Harrison N? 6; Lt Lawrence NQ6; Lt Haraden NQ8; L+Elbert NQ9;
Lt Cartee N QPO.
[Also Lt B. Smith - Vengeance and L* Theodore Hunt - Spitfire.]
[LC. JRP, Order Book No. 2, 1805-1806.1
To William Eaton from Eon. Stephen Row Bradley, Chairman of the Committee
on the Application of Hamet Caramanli, United States Senate
Documents Respecting HAMETCARAMALLI.
Published by order of the Senate.
Feb. 16,1806.
WASHINGTON,
SIR, -As chairman of the committee of the Senate of the United States, on the
application of Hamet bashaw, I request of you information on the following points:
1st. Did the said Hamet bashaw, on the information of a peace being concluded
between the United States and the reigning bashaw of Tripoli, withdraw himself
from the territory of the said reigning bashaw - and what were the reasons urged
to induce him to withdraw?
2d. Were the wife and children of the said Hamet bashaw delivered up to him
upon his withdrawing, and if not, what were the reasons, to the best of your
knowledge and belief?
3d. Did you take any measures or attempt any thing to obtain for him his wife
and children, and if so, what were they?
4th. Did you have any conversation with Rlr. Lear, who negotiated the treaty,
after the same had been concluded; or with any of the officers on that station, in
relation to the foregoing subject, and if so, what was the substance thereof?
5th. And to give any other information in relation to the third article of the
treaty with Tripoli, as has fell within your knowledge and belief?
You will please to communicate your answer in writing aa soon as may be convenient, and accept the assurances of my personal respect and esteem.
[Am. State Papers, Vol. 5, 1803-1807.1
To Eon. Stephen Row Bradley, Chairman of the Committee on the Application
of Hamet Caramanli, United States Senate, from William Eaton
WASHINGTON,
February 16,1806.
Bir, - I n obedience to your requisition of yesterday, I have the honour to state:
1st. On the information of a peace being concluded between the United States
and the reigning bashaw of Tripoli, Hsmet bmhaw did withdraw himself from the
"

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

371

territory of the said reigning baahaw. A stipulation in the third article of our
treaty with the said reigning bashaw, im wed a n me the duty t o use all the means
in n v power, toilhout force, Lo persuade J a m t bmhrw to withdraw himelf; and, in
addition to the provision made in the same article, that his wife and children should
be delivered up, on condition of his so withdrawing himself. Mr. Lear says, in his
letter to me of June 6th, "And I have no doubt but tbe United States will, if d e e m place him in a situation as eligible as that in which he was found."
heae were, undoubtedly, inducements with Hamet baahaw to withdraw himself.
But, had no such inducements been offered, the circumstance of the reigning
bashaw being suppIied with funds, and left to the free exercise of his naval force
by our treaty, together with the disappointment which Hamet's followers must
feel, from our seceding from the co-operation, rendered'the measure necesatlry to
his safety.
2d. The wife and children of Hamet bashaw were not delivered up to him upon
his withdrawing. They have never been demanded.
3d. At the request of Hamet bashaw, on or about the 6th of July last, I waited
on the acting commodore Rodgers, on board his ship in the harbour of Sy~acuse,
and asked permission for a smdl vessel to go and demand the delivery of the wife
and children of Hamet bashaw, of the reigning baahaw of Tripoli, agreeably to
treaty; but did not obtain it.
4th. Mr. L a , who negotiated the treaty with Tripoli, was in commodore
Rodeers's cabin. when I stated Ilamet bashaw's reauest for a smell vessel. I urwd
the keasure as 'a just claim on our honour and o& humanity; till a t length &.
Lear observed, that it would be useless a t present to send for Hamet's family; for
that i t was expected by the reigning bashaw, they were not to be chimed until
Hamet should be so withdrawn and so situated, as to remove all apprehensions of
his ever further attempting to regain his kingdom. This I understood to be a
secret engagement on the part of our commissioner of peace.
I had afterward much conversation upon this subject with the o3icers on that
station, and found the idea current, and asserted without reserve among them, that
this private engagement went so far as to induce a confidence on the part of Joseph
bashaw, that the fulfilment of the last clause of the third article of the treaty,
would not be insisted on by the government of the United States as a condition of
i t s ratification.
No other information in relation to the third article of the treaty with Tripoli,
hrrs fallen within my knowledge.
[Am, State Papers, Vol. 5, 1803-1807.1

*%

-

-

-

-

To Secretary of the Navy from Captoin John Rodger~,U. S. Navy
U S SHIPCmtitUtim
Syraeuse 160 Feby 1806
SIR It is with much regret I inform you of the Deeth of Lc J Maxwell (late in
Command of Gun Boat XQ3) on the 11'4 Instant; I n whom the Service has lost
a Young Officer, who romised, a t a future period, to have been One of its brightest
ornaments;
His g e s t h was occasioned by the Rupturing of a Blood Vessel,
succeeded by a decline, which he only survived Six Weeks: [LC. 3RP, L Bk B, May 1805-July 1806.1

-

[16 February 18061
Order of Captain John Rodgers, U. 6. Navy, Commodore and Commander in Chief,
U. 6. Sqnodron in the Mediterranesn
NOTE

Powder is never to be removed from the Magazine of any Vessel of the Squedron
without permiasion, and the Boat or Boats, that removes the fame, to Continue
a red flag hoisted, so long as the Powder remains on board of her or them.
Extinguish dl fire, and none admitted so long 8e this Signal is flying [LC. JRP, Order Book No. 2, 1805-1806.3

372

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1805 TO 1807

To Midshipman Ralph Izard, Jr., U. S. Navy, U. S. Gunboat No. 2, Syracuse, from
Captain John Rodgers, U. S. Navy
U S Ship Constitution
Suracuse lrtP F e b ~1806
SIR Understanding that you are acquainted with the family of Lt Joseph
Maxwell (late in CommQ of Gun Boat NQ9) Deceased; I have t o request that you
will take under your Charge all his Effects for their preservation and safe Keeping,
for his relations, to whom the same will by right belong Of these, you will be
leased to furnish me, with an Inventory, together with all his Public Papers and
gocuments; [LC. JRP, Order Book No. 2, 1805-1806.1
To Secretary of the Navy from Midshipman Robert T. Spence, U. 8. Navy
PHILADELPHIAFebruy [I71 1806
SIR The leave of absence I had the honour to receive from you being Unlimited
or rather indefinitely express'd I fear I have extended i t beyond the period contemplated - If by this protraction I have Abused your indulgence I hope My
being engaged in some studies which involved me beyond a time anticipated will
plead My Excuse - Even with this extenuation, I cannot in-justice to myself
avoid observing that I have daily inform'd myself of every circumstance, that
could require my services; and had their existed an Appearance which would have
introduced an impression unfavourable to the general tenour of my conduct any
persuits I might have engaged in, should not have precluded a speedy report I now design troubling your Attention for a few Moments respecting those
Expences I incur'd while a t sick quarters in Italy; - From Dr Marshalls Certificate you will perceive that my being left a t Leghorn myas considered by him
as indespensably Necessarv for My recovery ; The liberty of drawing on the department I sincerly wish could have been Obviated, And had not the Misfortunes of
My Father precluded my drawing on him, 1could not have felt Myself Authorized
to draw on the Accountant - As my ill health was prolong'd for a considerable
Elapse of time, My expences were increased beyond what I could have wishd -.
I hope Upon consideration You will be pleased to allow them as they resulted
from unavoidable Necessity - Was I not dependent wholly on my pay for
Support I should wave importuning you with this solicitation; though the Sum
be very inconsiderable I t will materialy effect the finances of a dependant Man My Account, relative to this AfFair is in the possession of the department I shall continue assiduously to pursue branches of study (which from going
extremly young to Sea prevented my acquiring) such as are appropriate and
Necessary for an Officer to be acquainted with, until I am Summon'd to duty WDA. Officers LB, Vol. 1, 1806.1
To Master Commandant Isaac Channcey, U. S. Navy, commanding U. S, Brig
Hornd, New York, M. Y., from Secretary of the Navy
NAVD E P 18
~ F e b ~1806I this day received your letter of the 14th ins, announcing your arrival with
the Hornet a t New York. The Hornet is intended for a special service which it will take her several Months
to perform. Before she can perform this service you will be raised t o the rank
of a Captain in the Navy. Under these Circumstances I cannot ask you t o
continue in the Hotnet, presuming i t would not be agreeable to you t o hold a
command subordinate to your rank. I have therefore ordered Master Commandant J. H. Dent to proceed immediately t o New York and relieve you in the
Command of the Hornet. On his arrival you will be pleased t o deliver up the
Hornet to him, and remain yourself a t New York until further orders. Your Lieutenants are also to be relieved - Lieutenants Trippe, Morris, and
Marcellin are ordered to the Hornet. When they arrive you will furlough your
Lieutenants for one month, ordering them a t the expiration of that period to
report themselves to me by letter.
[NDA. OSW, Vol. 7, 1805-1807.1

W D S WITH BARBARY POWERS

373

To Master Commandant John H. Dent, U. 8. Navy, Piscataway, Md., from Secretary
of the Navy
NAVYD E P 18
~ Fe& 1806.
You will immediately
to New York, & take the Command of the Brin
- proceed
Hornet.
You will find her, I presume, prepared in all respects for Sea; but if she should
want any supplies, you will indent for them to the Navy Agent who will furnish
them. Lieutenants Trippe, Morris, & Marcellin, have been ordered to join you. Capt
Chauncey will furlough the Lieutenants a t present on board of the Hornet. You will receive your further orders in a few days. [NDA. OSW, Vol. 7, 1805-1807.1

-

To Lieutenant Sybrant Van Schaick, U. S. Navy, Arsenal, Syracuse, from Captain
John Rodgers, U. S. Navy
U S SHIPConstitution
Syracuse 19th Febr 1806 SIR YOUare desired ss soon as possible to make a return of the Expenditures
of the Public Stores, under your Charge, with a regular Statement, of such ss
remains on hand; - After which you are required uniformly to make your
returns of Receipts and Expenditures Weckly to be laid before me, (or in my
absence, the Commanding Officer afloat) on every Monday forenoon between the
hours of 8 oClock and Noon; [LC. JRP, Order Book No. 2, 1805-1806.1
To Second Lieutenant Wallace W. Wormeley, U. S. Marine Corps, from Hon.
Stephen Bow Bradley, Chairman of a Committee of the U. S. Senate
WASHINGTON,
February 19,1806.
SIR, -As chairman of the committee of the Senate of the United States, on
the application of Hamet bashaw, I request of you information on the following
points:
1st. Was you a prisoner of war in Tripoli in June last, a t the time the treaty
of peace was concluded between the United States and that regency?
2d. What was the state and condition of the bashaw of Tripoli in relation to
his force, his finances, and his disposition, at, and anterior to the conclusion of
that treaty, to the best of your knowledge and belief?
3d. Did you, or did the other American prisoners, to the best of your knowledge and belief, apprehend that an attack made on Tripoli, by the squadron,
or by the army of Hamet bashaw, would prove fatal to the prisoners in the power
of the reigning bashaw, by his putting them to death?
4th. And any other information that relates to the state of Tripoli a t that
time, or the disposition of the inhabitants thereof. You will please to communicate your answer in writing, as soon as may be convenient.
And accept the assurance of my respect and esteem.
S. R. BRADLEY.
[Am. State Papers, Vol. 5, 1803-1807.1
To Hon. Stephen Row Bradley, Chairman of a Committee of the U. S. Senate,
from Second Lieutenant Wallace W. Wormeley, U. 6. Marine Corps
WASHINGTON,
Feb. 19,1806.
SIB,-In answer to your letter of this morning's date, I reply to the following
questions contained therein.
1st. I was a prisoner of war in Tripoli in June last, a t the conclusion of a peace
between the United States and that re ency.
2d. I believe Tripoli a t that time to ave been in the most diatreased situation,
not only from the entire annihilation of her commerce by our squadron; but also
from the difficulties into which she was thrown by the ca ture of Derne, by the
troops under the command of general Eaton and Hamet pashaw. My being in
close confinement a t the time this intelligence waa received in Tripoli, revented
me in some measure from observing as fully as I could have wished, %e effects

f

374

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1806 TO 1807

that this news had on the inhabitants; but it wrrs apparent to the most indifferent
observer (that on the arrival of the second courier announcing the defeat of the
reigning bashaw's army by genera1 Eaton and Hamet bashaw,) that the grestat
terror and consternation reigned throughout the whole town of Tripoli.
The bashaw was confident of the exhausted state of his finances, 8s well as
those of his subjects - he dared not levy new contributions for fear of their
revolting and joining Hamet bashaw.
3d. I do not believe that there was any danger t o be apprehended for our lives,
even if general Eaton and Hamet bashaw had have marched under the walk of
Tripoli. It would have been to the interest of every subject, (private as well as
political) to have protected us; it is my opinion that Jassuf bashaw never had any
serious intention of taking our lives.
4th. I believe that had it not have been for the capture of Derne by general
Eton and the ex-bashaw, we should have been to this day prisoners in Tripoli;
for the reigning bashaw would have withdrawn, (m case of an attack from our
squadron) vith his prisoners into the interior; but the idea of his having lost
Derne, together with the co-operation of the United States with his brother, would
in my opinion have induced him to comply with any terms prescribed by our
government.
I moreover bclieve, that general Eaton could have marched from Derne to
Tripoli, almost without firing a shot. The entire defeat of the bashaw's army,
together with the inconstancy and fickIeness of those people, authorize me in this
assertion. They have no ides of loyalty or patriotism, and they always lean to
that side which preponderates.
Should you wish an interview with me, I will a t any time do myself the pleasure
to wait on you.
Accept sir, my highest consideration, and believe with sentiments of the most
unfeigned respect and esteem, your obedient humble servant.
[Am, State Papers, Vol. 5, 1803-1807.1

WALLACEWORMELEY.

To Nicholas C. Nissen, Danish Consul, Tripoli, from Captain John Bodgera, U. 6.
Navy
U S SHIPConstitution
Syracuse $I**
Feby 1808 M Y DEARSIR By the U S Gun Boat h7?8, Your Polite and Kind letter of the
24 Instant came duly to hand; and I beg of you, to accept of my most sincere acknowledgements, for it's friendly tenor, and more particular1 so, for the indubitable
proofs you have uniformly given, that in its diction, your %en was directed b the
ure Maxims of an Honest 8 Manly heart, in a Species of profession; which a&me I
[old in high Estimation in any hlan, and be assured it is particularly grateful to
my feelings, when coming from One whose friendship I so highly regard as that
of yourself; The time you mention as being the most likely that your Successor will srrive
a t Tripoli, will be I imagine, a t a period when the Vessels of the Squadron will
be totaly.unemp1oy'd; In which case I shall most certainly call for you myself, as in so doing, I shall
particularly gratify my own feelings (whilst I feel Confident; that I fulfil the Wiehee
of my Government I shall send another Vessel to Tripoli, some time in March; [LC. JRP, L Bk B, May 1805-July 1806.1
To Captain Edward Preble, U.6. Navy, from Master Commandant Iseac Chauncey,
U. 8. Navy
NEW YORK 61.i February 1806
Dr SIB, From a combination of ojrcumstancea I have neglected writing to you
for some months past I however have not ceased to think with pleasum on that
part of my Military Life wherein I had the honour of serving under your Immediate order's and also the pleasure and instruction derived from your company
in our pmssge from the Mediterranean, I also indulge the hope that whenever you
are agein ordered to a command that I shall have the honour of aerveing under you
The Hornet which I now command is one of the finest V B B Bof~ her
~ claee I ever
a w l h e mils uncommonly fast, steera and works well and k an excelent e+ Boat.
I had an opportunity of trying her the 289 of December lsst off the Fryng P a

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS
shoah in a very heavy gale from S E in which we was oblidged to carry so heavy
a ress of sail t h ~ It sprung my main Mast and received considerable damage
otterwise we however carryed close reefed topsails & reefed courses when I think
but few shi 's in service would have done it by which means we cleared the
d o a h - ?was ordered from Charleston to this port to wait for further orders
rumour say's my destination is Europe. M* Chauncey however hope's not. by
the by M* C - is extreemly mortifyed that you should have passed twice
through New York without callin on her, the more so as you was a particular
favorite of her's so much so that should be s little Jealous if you was a single
man Moreover she wished to present you with a little stranger that she has been
blessed with since she saw you and which she intended to have called Edward
Preble after the Friend of her Husband, if i t had been a boy The dimentions of the Hornet is made out and I am only waiting for a private
conveyance to forward them to you - Mr9 Chauncey Joins me in Respects to
Mn Preble and yourself and hopes that when you again visit New York that you
will not forget to call on her [LC. EPP, Vol. 17, Jan.-June 1806.1

f

To Midshipman Ralph Irard, Jr., U. 8. Navy, U. 6. (iunboat NO. 2, from Captain
John Rodgers, U. S. Navy
U. S SHIP Constitufion
Sracuse ,223Fe& 1806
SIR In conformity with your request; You have permission to go to Malta
with Gun Boat N? d, but circumstances make it necessary that you should return again to this port as soon as possible, after remaining there 48 Hours, unleas
bad weather, or your not being able to get out of the harbour, should prevent
your Complyance; Copy sent t o Lc Haraden [&I Lc Lawrence
[LC. JRP, Order, Book No. 2, 1805-1806.)
To William Biggins, U. 8. Wavy Agent, Malta, from Captain John Bodgers, U. S.
Navy
U S SHIP Constitution
Syracuse ,984 Feby 1806
SIR Your letters of the Is* and 11'4 Instant came duly to hand; The letters
the rst contained from M Wilkie were forwarded to their direction. ' d e purport of the last, and ita enclosure I have considered, and altho' the
Squadron will soon be in want of the Articles they mention, I feel so Cofident,
that Stores will soon arrive from the U States, that I would rather defer purchaain a t such high prices, for a t least a few weeks; have ordered a quantity of Bread from Palerrno a t 4II pr Centum
[LC. JRP, L Rk B, May 1805-July 1806.1

5

To Richard Cartwright, British Consul General, Algiers, from Tobias Lear, U. S.
Coned General, Algiers
Algiers F e b 834 1806
SIB I have had the honor to receive your two letters of this day; with the
pledges mentioned in the one. - I will take the keys of your house as you request, and comply with your wishes as far as I can. - 1have been very unwell
for some days, and now write in bed, or I should have been to see you. MI. Lear
unites with me in thanks for your kind offers and friendly wishes, and reciprocate
them most sincerely
[Stephen Decatur Col. Book B, 1806-1807.1
To Captain John Bodgere, U. 8. Navy, from Lieutenant Samuel Evans, U. S. Navy
U. S. SCHOONER
Nautilus,
Naples Bay Pebr 34* 1806
Sra I have the pleasure to inform you of my arrival a t Leghorn on the 15'4 inst$
Bfter a pawage of six days from Messina and wss quarantined for 15 days that
period being imposed by a regulation since I left there upon all Vessels coming
from Scicily.

376

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1806 TO 1807

The day after my arrival which was Friday night I saw Mess* Degen and
Purviance and informed them of my business a t that port. the Monday following
Mr P - informed me of what I apprehended on examining the Bills you charged
me with previous to my arrival a t Leghorn, Vizt that they could not be negotiated
without being endorsed by Fredk Degen. - As they also informed me that if they
were endorsed they could be sold a t about four B Cent Loss, and as my being quarantined prevented my doing anything with my Mast I concluded to employ the
term of my quarantine in coming to this place in order to have them endorsed. I arrived here last night and having compleated my business shsll sail this
evening. The French have been in possession of this place about 10 days a detachment of
four Thousand left this place this morning for Calabria, they talk loud of taking
possession of Scicily. I have sent on board of Captain Porter some of the latest American and English
P a ~ e r sthat were in Leehorn when I left it and desired him to send them to you
whkn he joins you, one ouf the latter contains the presidents message to congress:
There is a Spar in Leghorn that will answer for my mast and I am in hopes that
I shall not be detained there more than a week a t furthest [LC. JRP, Series Two, Vol. 3, 1805-1807.1
To Lieutenant David Porter, U. S. Navy, U. 6. Schooner Enterprize, Rome, Italy, from
Frederick Degen, U. 6. Navy Agent, Naples
NAPLES february 26*b1806 DEARSIR, I hope this will find You safe a t Rome and in good health, and that
you have already viewed the principal part of the Roman antiquities. On Sunday evening I received a letter from Commodore Rodgers, whereof I
annex you a Copy by which you will observe his wish that the Enterprize should
join the Squadron Without delay - I regret that this Circumstance should
shorten the pleasure of your excursion, but cannot do less than communicate it
to You. The U S Schooner Nautilus Cap* Evans arrived Yesterday from Leghorn, and
sailed again this afternoon for the same Port where she has to take in some cash
for the Squadron - she brings no news whatsoever
M: Smith has delivered me a letter for you from the Commodore which I keep
by me till you return being fearfull that by sending it by the Post it might possibly
be lost. I n the hope to have soon again the pleasure of welcoming you here, I remain
sincerely
[LC. D. Porter P, Let. & Ord., 1805-1808.1
Land conveyed to William Eaton, former U. S. Navy Agent for the Barbary
Begencies, by Commonwealth of Massachusetts
INSENATE,Feb. 26th, 1806.
WHEREAS
in a rising Republic, it is highly important to cherish that patriotism
which conquers a love of ease, of pleasure and of wealth, which prompts individuals to a love of their country, and induces them to embrace every opportunity to
advance its prosperity and happiness, as well by ameliorating the fate of those
citizens whom the fortune of war has thrown into captivity, as by cheerfully contributing to its support and defence: And whereas the love of enterprise, when
guided by a just sense of propriety and benevolence, may become the parent of
many virtues, and a state is sometimes indebted for its safety, to the virtues and
undaunted courage of a single man.
And whereas the Senate and House of Representatives of this Commonwealth,
are desirous &o perpetuate a remembrance of the heroic enterprise of William
Eaton, Esq. while engaged in the service of the United States, whose undaunted
courage and brilliant services, so eminently contributed to release a large number
of hia fellow citizens, late prisoners in Tripoli, from the chains of slavery, and to
restore them to freedom, their country, and their friends; - therefore
RESOLVED,
that the Committee for the sale of eastern lands be, and they are
hereby authorized and directed, to convey to William Eaton, Esq. a citizen of this
Commonwealth, and to his heirs and wigns, a tract of land to contain ten thousand scm, of any of the unappropriated land of this Commonwealth,in theDiatrict
of Maine; excepting the ten townships on Penobscot river.

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS
And be i t further resolved, that his Excellency the Governor be requested, aa
soon as conveniently may be, to cause to be transmitted to the a i d William Eaton,
Esq. an authentic copy of this resolution.
Sent down for concurrence,
H. G. OTIS,
President.
In the House of Representatives, March Sd, 1806.
Read and concurred,
TIMOTBY
BIOELOW,
Speaker.
MARCH4th, 1806.
Approved, CALEBSTRONG.
True Copy, Attest, JOHNAVERY,Secretary.
[NR&L. No. 9217, Bm.1 E 14.1
To Eon. Stephen Row Bradley, Chairman of a Committee of the U. S. Senate, from
Master Commandant John H. Dent, U. 8. Navy
WASHINGTON,
February 26,1806.
SIR,- I have the honour to acknowledge the receipt of your letter of this day's
date, requesting information on three points relative to the transactions in the
Mediterranean; and in reply I have the honour to inform you:
1st. That I consider commodore Barron's health, during the last winter and
spring, and until after the negotiation, such as to disqualify him from transacting any business, his mind being so much impaired as scarcely to recollect any
thing that transpired from one day to another. He was continually confined to
his quarters on shore, and by frequent applications to him for instructions, he
mould lose the recollection of what passed in the course of conversation.
2d. I have heard Mr. Lear say repeatedly, previously to my going to Derne,
that he believed the expedition conducted by the ex-bashaw and general Eaton,
would prove fruitlem; and that they and their adherents would be sacrificed
before they reached Derne. The capture of Derne, the 27th of April, was communicated by the sloop Hornet previously to a negotiation being opened with the
reigning bashaw. I was the bearer of the intelligence of the defeat of the enemy's
army before Derne, of the 13th of May, and arrived off Tripoli with this information, and with despatches from the Secretary of the Navy, wishing the commodore
to suspend his attack on Tripoli till the 1st of July, as reinforcements would join
them about that time, before the terms of the treaty were concluded. Mr Lear
then observed, that we did not want the assistance of Hamet bashaw's army to
bring the enemy to terms, for the navy was sufficient to bring him to any t e r n .
3d. I t was generally believed by the officers in the Mediterranean, that Mr.
Lear had a great nscendency over the commodore in all his measures relative t o
the squadron, and from frequent observations of Mr. Lear's intimacy with the
commodore during his debilitated state, I am of the same opinion.
[Am. State Papers, Vol. 5, 1803-1807 and Huntington LtAG.]
To Lieutenant Joshua Blake, U. 1. Navy, from Captain John Rodgera, U. 6. Navy
U S SHIP Cmstitution
Syracuse 87'h Feb? 1806
SIR, You are desired to inform the Officers ~ o m m a n d rthe respective Vessels
of the Squadron, that I shall require of t,hem a report,, made to me, of the state
of their Vessels, as alao the quantity of Amunition, small Arms, ever apsratus
belonging to their great Guns, and the number of Days Water they
carry,
allowing 3 Quarts Pr Man Pr Day, on the l r t day of next Month [LC. JRP, Order Book No. 2, 1805-1806.1

6m

TO Captain John Rodgers, U. S. Navy, from Captain Hugh 0 . Campbell, U.S. Navy
U. S. SHIP Essez, AT SEA,March 1806 SIR, I have to acknowledge the receipt of your letter dated - "Syracuse, D e d
24" - directing me to draw on the Navy Department for this Ship and the Vken's
disbursments, instead of Messs Glennie &kfqICenzie of London; to which, due attention shall be given. I beg leave to inform you that I drew on that Firm, in November last, for Eight
Thousand and odd Dollars, in favor of Wq Kirkpatrick, of which no account 1s yet

378

NAVRT; OPERATIONS FROM 1806 TO 1807

received: - I likewise drew for Three Thousand Dollars in Decr, in favor of R. W.
Mead, of Cadiz; which was forwarded, and has not been heard of since. These circumstances induced me to think they were honored, althou h I had
determined, prior to the receipt of your advice to draw in future, on the #avy Department, for reason, that the rate of Exchange is very low, and frequent offers
are made by Americans, of Money for Bills on Government. It was not until1 the 29" Ult that I received your further advice by the Syren the
contents of which I have noted, and shall strictly attend to Orders respecting 60vernment Dispatches, and conduct myself towards the Spaniards as circumstances
may require.
You have no doubt seen the President's Speech, but I cannot find by the latest
Papers that Congress has passed one Resolution. The shattered remains of 33 Sail of line begin to reappear: - of ten, five have
dropt down to the upper Road of Cadiz, from the Carracas, and i t is thought the
remainder will reach that distance in the course of the month of May. We have not an article of Public Provision in the Store a t Gibraltar since my
arrival on this Station,. (pork
excepted) nor have I any account of a Store Ship
coming out.
The Mabouker [Mirboka] that was captured by Cap+Bainbridge, is lost, and the
Emperor has lately received a Twenty Gun Ship from England; which, with hie
other Cruisers, is laid up in the Port of Satlee. - The Meshuda is gone to Tripoli
with a load of Wheat. [LC. JRP, Series Two, Vol. 3, 1805-1807.1
To Captain John Bodgers, U. 8. Navy, from Midehipman John D. Henley, U. 8. Hovy
U S G m BOATNP 4 SYRACUSE
1.t March. 1806.
SIR. I have the honor, to inform you that the Vessel under my command, is in
compleat order for Sea, excepting some Masters and Boatswains Stores, which
cannot be procured in this place, & to enclose an account of Gunners Stores, 8
the quantity of Water a t present on board.
[LC. JRP, Series Two, Vol. 3, 1805-1807.1
To William Eaton from Secretary of State
DEPARTMENT
OF STATE,March 1.1806.

Gen. EATON.
SIB. In answer to the letter in which you bring the subject of your claims,
arising whilst you were the Consul a t Tunis, again before this Department, I
have to observe that no new evidence has been received since the letter to the Committee of claims, of which a copy is enclosed, was written, except the statementa
of Doctor Davis. These as you will perceive, tend to prove the actual extortion
from you of ten thousand dollars by the Minister of the Bey of Tunis, and the
rate a t which the Gloria might have been freighted during the period for which you
charge her service to the United States.
Whilst according to the principles explained in the letter to t,he Committee of
Claims, the legislature is considered sa best adapted to the dispensation of relief
in the particulars in question, the indemnity respecting the case of Porcile, which
subsequent events have determined you to add to your claims, seems to require the
game recourse.
You will be pleased to observe that I have purposely abstained from entering
into the circumstances & merita of those claims, since a comprehensive examination of them, as well as the equitable considerations flowing from themwill doubt
lees be produced by the application necessary to be made to Congress, to whom all
the explanations afforded by the archives of this Department will be accessible.
JAMES
MADISON
[NA. SDA. Dom. L, Vol. 15, June 1805-July 1810.1

To Secretary of the Navy from Xaster Commandant Ieaac Chonncey, U. 8. Navy
NEW YOBK8 4 March 1806.
SIB, I herewith enclose a copy of a Letter received from C o l ~Barclay, the British Consul General with my Answer.
I was honored with your Letter of the 18'4 Ult and am ready to give u the
Co-d
of the Hornet whenever Cap$ Dent arrivw, Lieutenants Trippe, &mi13

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

379

and Marceline have been in Town these ten days, but I understand that they do
not intend reporting themselves until Capt. Dent assumes the Command of the
Hornet.
[NDA. M C LB, 18W1807.]
To Captain John Bodgers, U. B. Navy, from Frederick Degen, U. 6. Bavy Agent,
Naples
NAPLES
94 March 1806.
SIR, I have the honor to acknowledge your favor of the llih past the contents of
which I communicated imidiately to Cap* Porter who agreable to your orders
Saiis with the Enterpn'ze this morning, the wind being very favorable I hope he
will Soon reach Syracuse.
I infinitely regret that I cannot send you by this Conveyance the Cable you
ordered Some time Since for the Constitution, but sltho I agreed long ago with one
of our beet Rope makers as to the price and quality of hemp with Captain Porter's
approbation it baa been impossible to have it done or even to begin the work yet. The only place where a Cable fit for a frigate can be finished in this City is a public
building, and has been Shut up from the time the late King left the Capital, but
I have reason to believe that it will Shortly be reopened when I Shall lose no time
to have your Cable done according to your I ~ t r u c t i o n and
s hold it a t your &poaaI.
Capr Evans of the U: S: Schooner Nautdua caned in here the 24th past, and
requested me to endorse four Setts of Bills drawn by you on the Navy Depal tment
to my order which I have done in Course, he Sailed again for Leghorn the following

-

*$he
Cbaoge of this Government has been eBected without the least disorder or
disturbance, I be leave t o refer to Cap* Porter's verbal Informations as to the
many particubr iroumstancea
Inclosed you will find a paper containing the Several orders and Iaws given by
Prince Joseph Bonaparte, who owing to his mild behavior to the Inhabitants of this
Country is universally esteemed and beloved - 1 also take the liberty toinclose
you an English paper containing the President's Speech.
Bills on America could a t this moment be easily negotiated a t a reasonable
Say from 4 to 6 Pr C;
I should be extreemely happy to wellcome you Soon again a t Naples, and remain
very respectfully. [LC. JRP, Series Two, Vol. 3, 1805-1807.1

8

-

To James Dodge, U. S. Char& dJAffaires, Tunis, from Captain John Bodgers,
U. S. Bevy
U S SHIP Comtitutim
Syracuse 4'4 March 1806
DEARSIR, Your truly esteemed favor of the 2Sth January came duly t o hand,
and permit me to thank you, on the part of my Public Situation, for the information it contained relative to the affairs of our Country; and to offer my most
sincere acknowledgements for the Generous Tenor of its Contents, in professions
of Personal Friendship, which I more highly estimate, from a self conviction of
sincerity, in which the Mute delineations of vour pen, have done so much Justice
to the diminterested effusions of your honest Beart. Capt Hull, who hands you this, has received Instructionfi to Cruize in the Neighbourhood of Tunis, with the Argus and Hornet, not with the smallest intention to
menace, but merely to observe, and watch the movements of the Beys Cruizers,
and afford the Necessary protection to our Commerce, untill the return of his
Embssasdor from the U. States - AE it is my Intentron not to h r d for one

-

The arrival of the Tunitian Embaasador, I momently expect from America
Be pleeeed to p ~ n my
t mpects to your Secretary and friend, Mr A m b w

380

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1806 TO 1807

Allegro, whom I regard particularly on account of the high Terms, in which you
speak of him.
I have no news worth Communicating, farther than what Capt Hull will be able
to afford you.
Mr Pitt (British Minister) is Dead.
The Officers of the Constitution join with me, in wishing you health and happiness [Note: Another copy of this letter is dated 10 March. It isin John Rodgers Papers, Library of Congress.]
NA. SDA. FA, CL, Tunis, Vol. 2 (7240) 1801-1809.1

-

-

To Secretary of State from Joseph Yznardi, U. S. Consul, Cadiz, Spain
Duplicate.
AMERICAN
CONSULAR
OFFICE
Cadit 4'h March 1806
Original via Lisbon.
RESPECTED
SIR. I am just returned from Madrid to reside here, I have left
Mr Erving in good health, who has been received with the highest attention and
politeness by the Prince of Peace, and Minister of State, with whom I have had
various conferences respecting the pending Affairs with the United States, and to
the best of my believe their wishes are t o establish & Keep a good &. friendly Correspondance with our Government.
Deprived of your valued instructions respecting the various points on which
I have represented, and particularly respecting the Port of Algeziras, which is
(as represented by some malicious person) abandoned by me, notwithstanding
there been a Clever Agent properly protected, as you are already informed by
Mr A. Terry, untill that Government determines what map be proper in the business; therefore I consider myself free of all responsibility by what I have represented to you on said Subject; and as during my Absence this. Office has been
attended with Activity, attention and the greatest Zeal. I hope In your rectitude
that you will honor me with the same good oppinion, I believe, I always merited
of you, Sir, dispising the false Publication with which they accuse me, by aspersing
that this Office and the Ports under its District are abandoned, when by the Official
Correspondance with you the contrary is proved.
The U, S, Frigate Essex, H. G. Campbell Commr is just arrived from Algeziras,
I cannot tell the object of her voyage, because said Commr was here a few weeks
ago and valued on M? Meade without taking the least notice of this office, notwithstanding that every politeness was shew'd him, and offered to give every
assistance, and taking the proper steps to obtain prattic, the same has happened
now, having MI: A. Terry the V. Consul gone along side to pay his respects & offer
him his services in my name, he was answered that Commanders of Vessels of
War were a t liberty to value on whom they pleased, and that they only occupied
the Consuls when they wanted them, such behaviour on his part may be the
cause of some unjust & false complaints in disdain of this Office; therefore I shall
esteem in a very particular manner your giving me instructions & advising me
how 1 am to act in such cases, as I would be very sorry to be u~antingin the
least, or enter into Disputes; particularly as it might be attributed to self Interest,
a thing that is against my upright way of acting.
The Blockade of this Port continues the same as advised you by Mr Terry.
The french Frigates & Brigs sailed on the night of the 27. u l t ~with a Strong
fair Wind, it is reported for certain that the English Frigate & Brig that wm off
this Port spyed them, as the moment they got under way, they began to make
Signals & all Sail, since said period no Vessels have been seen off It is reported that the affairs of Naples will be settled to satisfaction by the
intercession of the Pope & the King of Spain. With Sentiments of high esteem
& veneration
I have the honor to be
[NA. SDA. CL, Cadiz, Vol. 2, 1806-1808.1

-

-

To Secretary of the Navy from Captain John Rodgers, 0.8. Navy
U S SHIP Constitution
Syacuse 6
'
4 March 1806.
SIR,I n former communications I informed you, that owing to the confused
Political state of affairs, and extreme Anarchy existing a t Naples, I had sent the
Schooner Entmprize (Lt Commandant Porter) thence, for the purpose of affording protection to our Trade, particuhrl destined t o that port
with orders, unquestionably to avoid committing our geutrality, with the Belligerent Powers

-

-

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

381

The Enterprize haa this day Joined the Squadron again, and brings intelligence
of the French, under command of Joseph Bounaparte, having taken possession
of Naples, On the 15th Ultimo, without any kind of opposition: the King snd
Family having previously left it, and who all arrived a t Palermo, except the Prince
Heridetary, Who with the Major psirt of the Neapolitan Army, has retreated into
Calabria, with an intention, i t is said, to defend that part of his Fathers Dominions; However there is but little probability he will defend that part of his Kingdom with more resolution than he did his Capital Instead of Joseph Bounaparte's being proclaimed King of Naples, his Brother
Napolean has added to his other Titles - King! of the Two Sicily's The mild, persuasive, Political manner, in which Joseph Bounaparte took possession of Naples, had the effect, I am informed, to perfectly reconcile the Inhabitants to the change of Government, and new order of things Our Commerce has sustained, a t least, no direct Injury by the change The British have Garisoned hlessina, and, report says, will immediately ~ O E sess themselves of all the strong holds in the Island, in order to secure its necessary
connection with Malta The French so jar, have carried all before them, on the Continent, snd without
(almost) opposition The Squadron with the addition of the Two Tripoline Gun Boats, captured by
Commodore Preble, one of the Boats purchased by Cap$ Robinson, and fitted as
a Bombard with the Mortar sent out by the Argus, and another fixed up as a
Transport, are in complete condition, to meet the execution of your orders, in
any shape . The Argus Brig and Cutter Hornet, will sail on a cruize on the l o t h Inst? off
Tunis, where I shall Keep a t least two Vessels, untill the return of the Tunitian
Embassador, and untill our differences it$ his Regency are finally settled. This precaution is more with an intention to employ the Vessels, under my
command, than any thing else, and I have given positive orders not to infringe,
in the smalest degree, the Friendship which the Bey has latterly been in the
habit of professing for the U States, nor even to cruize so near his coast, as t o
create the smallest suspicion unfavorable to a good understanding, or even that
he is the cause of their being a t Sea I have had a fair Trial of the Constitution, since the Stowage uf her Ballast has
been altered, and the change meets my most sanguine expectations - She sails
much better, and from one of the most uneasy Ships I ever was in, is now among
the most easy.
The Conduct of the British, since my Command of the Squadron, has been the
most frinedly.
I have not had the smallest cause for disputes, which hitherto occurred almost
every day, respecting Seamen, when our Ships were together in the same Ports They have universally given up our Deserters and all Impressed Americans
where there was proof of their heing such. [NDA. hlisc. LB, Vol. 1, 1806.1
16 March 18061
To Secretary of the Navy from Secretary of State
The Secretary of State presents his respects to the Secretary of the Navy, and
has the honor to enclose a copy of a letter, this day written to the Ambassador
of Tunis, communicating the President's determination respecting the restitution
of the Xebeque and her two prizes captured from Tunisian subjects during the war
with Tripoli. The object of transmitting this copy is that the Secretary of the
Navy may have the goodness to issue the orders, which may correspond with the
President's determination.
JAMESMADISON
DEPTOF STATE,March 6, 1806
[NA. SDA. Dom. L, Vol. 15, June 1805-July 1810.1
To Master Commandant Isaac Chauncey, U. S. Navy, commanding U. S. Brig
Hornd New York, B. Y., from Secretary of the Navy
NAVYD E P ~
6 March 1806. I have received your lett,er of the 2 4 instant with it's enclosures. Your Conduct in relation to the Seaman demanded by the British Consul is
entirely approved. [NDA. OSW, Vol. 7, 1805-1807.1

382

NAVAL OPERATIONS PROM 1806

TO 18W

To I o s t e r Commandant John B. Dent, U. 8. Xavy, from Master Commandant
Isaac Chauncey, U. S. Navy
U. S. Brua Hornet - NEWYOEK
7*4 March 1806
SIR, In resigning the command of the U. S. Brig Hmnd, I give up, and you
will receive one of the h e s t vessels of her class in any service. The Hornet does not poasess a single bad quality that I have discovered - She
is strong and tight, Sails remarkable fast by and large; steers and works well.
is very stiff, and an excellent Sea Boat; - Her best saiIing is on s wind, and
her best trim fifteen inches by the stern - however I have never discovered that
a few inches materially affected her Sailing. She trims by the head with all her
stores in: I have therefore found it necessary to use from forward first. - She
stores three months provisions and water, below the birth deck; - Her Store
Rooms are generally capacious and good; - Her Bread room particularly,
which holds nearly 14,000Q of Bread
The Hornet has two suites of Sails compIet,e; three excellent Boats (which is
as many as she can carry with convenience) and IS well found with Cables and
Anchom. Wishing you every Success and happiness in so enviable command.
[NDA. MC LB, 1806-1807.1
To ~ s p t a i nJohn Rodgers, U. S. Navy, from Captain Anthony Gtde, U. S. Marine
Corps
U. S. SHIP Conslilutim
Match 8. 1806
SIB On the 6 t b Instant you remarked to me that a small part of the Marines
on parade that day were in a different uniform from the others, they were from
the Enterprize
White belts I presume you particularly alluded to, they have
been adopted in the United States, but the difficulty attending a general change
in this country was my principal reaeon for not attempting the alteration, a
partisl one I conceived would be improper, as it would appear unmilitary, when
the whole would be assembled together, to see in so small a party so much
dissimilarity .
[LC. JRP, Vol. 1, March 1791-Dec. 1814.1

-

To Captain Anthony Gale, U. S. Marine Corps, from Captain John Bodgers, U. 8.
Navy
U S SEJP Constitution
Syaczlae 8tb March 1806
SIB I have to direct that you furnish the U States Schooner Enterprize's Marines
with the same belts as are worn b those of the other Veasels of the Squadron,
that the present Uniform of the darines of the respective Vessels of the Squadron be as nearly preserved aa possible, and that no alteration be made in the aame,
without my written order You will be pleased to Communicate the Contents of this to the re8
ive Cornmanding Officers of the Vessels Composing the Squadron under my o m m a d Cap* ANTHYGALE
of the U S Ship Conetitution &
Senior Ofleer of Marines of the present
U States Mediterranean Squadron
[LC. JRP, Order Book No. 2, 1805-1806.1

ee"

To Becretary of the Navy from Mamter Commandant John H. Dent, U. 8. Nary
U. STATESBRIGHomcl
New York--8 March 1806
Sm,I have the honor to inform you that I have just received from Captv
Chsunoey the Command of the United dtates Brig - It is unneoeesary to add
that my ex2&ctations have been fully answered; and that valuable Officer
deserves great
dit for the internal arrangements of the Brig - He bas dk
played great Teete combined with convenience; - I believe the Hornct to be
one of the fine& V888els of her rate in the World.

*,

-

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

383

-

The Officers have d joined her, and are much plessed with their situation
The Midshipmen that will be continued on board are not yet elected - They all
a pear anxious to remain, but i t is impossible she can accomodate with any degree
of comfort, more than Eight, which is two mo? than is necesmry to rform
the duty on board a vessel of her rate - Midsbpman Keene is confin&
sick
quarters, on shore, and I fear will not be su5ciently recovered to go on board
previous to the Sailing of the Hornet
I n that case I shall put one of those
now attached to her to supply his place.
The heavy ales of wind for several days paat have revented any communication with the %rig - We are however filling up her endent, and collecting such
provisions and stores aa will be necessary - From Desertion and sickness I
find the Brig short of her Compliment of Men by nearly twenty Seamen which
I fear will be difficult to re lace, in consequence of the difference of wages between
the Merchant Service
that of the Navy. - It will be neceamry to m e e
an advance of three or four M o n t h pay to the Officers for the purpose of procuring

-

anb

Stores $9

-

I a m informed by the purser that his stock of slop Cloathing is nearly exhausted
and that a sum of between two and three thousand dollars will be necessary t o
replace them - Your answer to this letter and orders on the A g e ~ for
~ t the sums
that may be necessary to defray the Expences of the Brig, and for procuring the
necessary Stores, will be anxiously expected The following is a list of the Officers a t present attached to the Hornet
Midshi men
Lieu$-- - - -- - - - - - - - - - Mr Trippe
M; Reene
Morris
Marcelline
Kerr
Maeter - - - - - - - - - - - - - Grandison
Woodyear
MqCormick
Hoffman
Surgeon - - - - - - - - ---,
Purser - - - - _ _ - - - - - - - Green
Worrel
Colegate
Dallaa
Surgv Mate- - - - - - - - - Berry
Nicholson
Boatswain ----------Cana
D e M
Gunner- - - - - - - - - - - - - Penny
Carpenter - - - - - - - None
--,
Armourer - - - - - - - - - - - None
Watson
Savage Masters Mate
Goldsborough Cpt Clk
[NDA. MC LB, 1806-1807.1
To Secretary of the Navy from Haster Commandant Ieaac Chsnncey, U. 8. Ravy
NEW YORK8 4 Match 1806
SIR,Captain Dent has amved and will assume the Command of the Homct
this day.
[NDA. MC LB, 1806-1807.1
To ?+faster Commandant Isaac Hull,U. 6. Xavy. U.6. Brig Arm, from Captain John
Badgers, U. 8. Navy
U s SFrW C ~ ~ t i t U f i O n
Syacwre 109 March 1808
SIBAs I am et ignorant of the nature and extent of the Tunitian E m b a d o n ,
Mission to the f J States and equally so of what will be the reault; - In order to
prevent the possibility of injury being done to our Commerce before Peace,with
that Nation ia permanently established; I have t o direct that with the U S Sloop
Argus, and Cutter Hornet, you will proceed to Tunis Bay, and (Youreclf) after
communicatin with Mr Dodge, our Charge d'affaires, that you will Cruize between
the Limits of t u s s B the Island of Galita, with said Vessels, to afford our Trade,
such protection, 88 you may, after Communicating with Mr Dodge, find neceaaary,
according to existin Circumstances; It would be well, conceive, not to make your appearance in the Bay, with more
than your own Vessel, as otherwise i t might lead to suspicions unfavorable to a
good underetanding, which i t is a t least our duty to avoid; If Mr Qodge should have any thing of importanoe to Communicate to me, you
will be pleased to eend the Hotnct baok to this port, with hia Dispatohes; but should
it be otherwise, and you discover from him that our afpairs, present a favorable
.~rpect; I wish you, with both Vessels, to visit Celarie, in Sardinia, in order to

f

3&4

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1806 TO 1807

inform yourself of the properties of the Harbour, the convenience of procuring
fresh Water, and its ability to furnish provisions, and other necessary supplies;
However let me remind you, that no appearances of Friendship on the part of
the Bey of Tucis, will Justify trusting the Duplicity which we Know he pmsrres,
for the result of its Consequence to our Commerce and our own particular Interest; You will be relieved in the Course of a Month a t Farthest, from the date of this
order, unless some unforeseen Circumstance Occurs to prevent the same, and in
which case you will be informed thereof: If you should a t any time during your Cruize, find it necessary to communicate
to me any particular Intelligence, you may use the Hornet for the purpose of the
eame - Wishing you a pleasant cruize
NB Let me remind you that i t would be improper to board Vessels within the
Jurisdictional Limits of the Regency of Tunis, under present Circumstances,
without good and sufficient reasons for doing so. [LC. JRP, Order Book No. 2, 1805-1806.1
To William Biggins, U. S. Navy Agent, Pdalta, from Captain John Rodgera, U. S.
Navy
U S S H I P Constitution
Syracuse 1 0 t h March 1806
SIR By Gun Boat ATQ 6 1 received your favor of the 5tQ Inst,, and have given
Cap. Hull directions to Cause a Survey on the Provisions you mention - The
Brandy you mention we are not in immediate want of, therefore will thank you t o
Continue it in Store until1 it may be wanting As I had received no information respecting the Siren, since her Departure from
the Squadron your mention of her, has served to remove the apprehentions I had
entertained of some accident having happend [LC. JRP, L Bk B, May 1805-July 1806.1
[lo March 18061
A Description of the Monument to be erected in Memory of those Officers who fell
in attacks on Tripoli
anno domino 1804.
No 1 The baes releivo represents the City of Tripoli in the Act of attacking the
American Vessels & Gun Boats in the time of action.
NQ2 The Urn containing the sshes of those Killed in Action.
NP 3 The Column is in memory of the Naval Victory obtained by the intrepid
Americans over the Tripolines. NB a Similar Column was erected to the Consul Duillio when he conquered
the Carthagenians in Africa. NQ4 The Eagle or American Arms in honor of the Nation.
N? 5 This Statue represents the Mother Country with a towering Crown on
her head in the Act of protecting the Citizens her sons, pointing to the Basso
Releivo I which represents the Victory gained by her compatriots over the City
of Tripoli; The two Boys are ir, a position of Admiration one holding a faces with
the 15 Stripes & the Motto E P U all representing the fraternity of the Union. NQ6 This Statue represents History that guards the Mother Country & in the
act of immortalizing the memory of this Glorious event.
NP 7 This fine figure is Victory who with the palm of glory & the Crown of
Merit honor. the ashes of the brave deceased Wariors.
NB The palm ought to be gilt Bronze.
NQ8 These four lamps of black Marble & vase of Gilt bronze give heat round
the tombas thebreasts of Citizens should be warmed by the love of their Country.N? 9 This fine figure re resents ys Genius of Commerce dedicated to America
in the Act of revealing the Rames of the Commander. b Ofiicers who then fought
to proteet Her: with the inscription engraved on the base of the Pedestal immortshzing this memorable victory &e & the names of those who contributed to erect
thii Monument.
NB. The heighth from the ground as r scale is abt 20 feet, the Base in proportion 16 feet long by 16 feet Wide, being gquare $c.

-

-

-

-

-

M O N U M E N T TO COMMEMORATE DEEDS O F N A V A L OFFICERS
I N ATTACKS ON TRIPOLI. 1804.

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS
Sir. I have estimated the expence of the Monument according to my drawing
in Marble of Carrara, the figures to be erfectly executed and ornamented in Basso
Releivo enriched with gilt bronze of Rajestic size & form as ~r scale under the
drawing.
I think it will cost 850 or 900 Sachines [?I say about $1700 - or $1800 of 10
pauls. I calculate the time from 8 to 10 Months constant Work from the day the
Commissn is given. It. is necessary to say; it is necessary to pay me the half of the Money a t the
time of giving the orders & the rest a t the time it is finished. - I shall take care
to finish it in such a manner as to do honor to him who orders i t as well as him who
has care of the execution. 10tQMARCH1806. (Signed) JOESN
CHARLESMICHALI
[LC. D.Porter P, Let.& Ord., 1805-1808.1
To Naster Cornmandent Isaac Hull, U. 6. N a v , U. S. Brig Argus, Syracuse, from
Captain John lodgers, U. S. Navy
U S SHIP Constitution
S y a w s e 10tP March 1806
SIR If your stay a t Malta will admit,; You are requested to Cause a survey t o be
had on the Public provisions in the stores of Mr Higgins and make a report t o me,
of the same, giving a t the same tlme hf? Higgins an order to sell such, if any, as
are condemned [LC. JRP, Order Book KO.2, 1805-1806.1
To Secretary of the Navy from Master Commandant Isaac Chauncey, U. 6. Navy
NEW YORK-10 March 1806
Sir, I resigned the Command of the Hornet to Ca tain Dent on Saturday I herewith enclose you Copies of my Letters to &t? Dent, and Lieutenants
Leonard, Blakeley and Renshaw
[NDA. MC LB, 1806-1807.1
[I1 March 18061
To Secretary of State from Sidi Sulimsn Idelli Melli, Tunisian Ambassador
Plenipotentiary to United States, from Eamonda, Beg of Tunis
SIDISITLIMAN
MELLAMEXNIAmbassador Plenipotentiary from His Ezu the Bashaw
of Tunis near His Ez? the President of the United States of America, To the
HonPlq JAMES
MADISON
Esqr Secretary of Stale
BEALTH

SIR I am honor'd with your communication of the 4th inst in answer to mine of
the 5Ch Ultq wherein I mentioned that the Xebeck formerly commanded by Raiz
Hsssan bo' Ally & her two prizes, were not intrinsically worth more than 4000 dolIan, but I by no means meant that you should understand that i t was possible for
me to consent to a compromise to that amount (in case of the sale of said vegsels)
or that it would be deem'd an equivalent by His Exr Hamouda b h a w ; on the
contrary I dare not even mention it to him, as I assure you he would consider the
offer meant as an insult to his dignity, & I should thereby inevitably incur his
hi hest displeasure the vessels in question ere a t the disposal of the Agents of the Unites States
in the mediterranean, it is expected that they will be return'd in the same d t e
that they were in when captured; if they are sold or otherwise disposed of, that the
Government of the United States will substitute another Cruiser in lieu thereof,
& give positive orders to the commanding officer of the American Squadron to deliver her to Hamouda Bashaw; as a substitute in cash cannot be admited in a case
that involves the honor of the Tunisian Flag Having the greatest desire to terminate the objects of my mission in an micable manner & to the satisfaction of all parties: permit me to observe, that if l&
Ex? the President should deem it e dient 40 give orders for a quantity of navel
atores to be embark'd on board the?eb?ck
(which m a y be done from the s u p r -

If

fluitieg of the American Squadron with little expense or inconvenience) in order
that they may be presented to His EX?the Bashaw as a compliment or token of
his Excellency the Presidents esteem; that it would be the means of continuing
the Peace & harmony which has so long subsisted between the parties, for a t least
three years longer, and during that period frequent communications might be made
between our respective governments, through the Agency of the American C o d
resident at Tunis, in which our relations in future might be amicably arranged,
& finally adjusted The interest which I feel in the amicable conclusion of existing differences, induces me to request you not to give credit to the communications of MI D a v k
they are either dictated by malice or interest; he has aaserted a palpable faleehood
in affirming that the Emperor of the French has not made presents to the Bashaw
of Tunis, & has thereby deceiv'd his government, & led them to erroneous conclusions; in the first instance the Emperor presented the Bsshaw with an arm'd
Xebeque: this occasioned the sending of an Ambassador from Tunis to France
who procured two cargoes of naval stores timber &q and forty ship carpenters who since their arrival at Tunis have built two large Pontoons of infinite
service in clearing the canal that facilitates the communication between the
Goletta & the City of Tunis as the lake in the summer season is nearly dry Having endeavor'd by every means in my power to cultivate a good understanding between our respective nations, I am persuaded that you will attribute t o a continuance of that desire the statement of the terms which I have had the honor to
propose as my ultimatum: and however disagreeable the task, my duty renders i t
incumbent on me to inform you, that if those t e r n are not complied with; that
from the date of my arrival a t Tunis, the term of one ear as prescribed by the
23rd Article of the Treaty between the United States oY~merica6 the Regency
of Tunis for the discussion of differences between the contracting parties, will
commence, that if the existing differences are not amicably adjusted during
that period; that hisExs the Bashaw of Tunis, a t the expiration of the said term of
one year will give orders to strike the Flag of the United States of America a t
Tunis, andwar will be declared in form against the said United States Having already stated my desire that this communication may be consider'd
my Ultimatum, I have only to request that I may receive (as early as possible) an
answer, couch'd in as explicit t e r n as its nature requires; & that no reference
may be made to the Commanders of the American Squadron in the mediterranean,
as they cannot be acquainted with the objects of my mission and I am particularly instructed to request a direct answer to the Bashaws requisitions, from
his EX?the President of the United States without any reference being made t o
anv other Derson [signed in Arabic]
C m OF WASHINGTON
March 11th 1806
The letter to which this certificate is annext was compiled by the subscriber
from the oral communications of Sidi Suliman Mella Menni a t the request of
The HonCle the Secretarv of State JAMES
LEA; CATHCART
CITY OF WASHINGTON
March llfh 1806
[NA. SDA, CD, Tunis, Vol. 3, 1805-1806.1
To Lieutenant David Porter, U. 6. Navy,from qamnel Purviance, Leghorn
LEGHORN
11'4 March 1806.
SIR, Your esteemed letter of the 218r F e b waa
~ duly received And conformin to
your wish of having executed a design of a Mausoleum Mr Micali hss undertaten
the same & I have availed myseK of the return of the Nautilus to Syracuse to
transmit You the draft as it now is subject to any modifications that may be
groposed - together with an explanation and letter addressed me on the subject
y Mr Micali.
-Should the design & terms meet Your approbation you will have the Goodnesa
to signify the same to me and the Work may be immediately begun
in such
csse i t will be Necessary to return the drawing by some secure conveyance as
soon aa convenient. [LC. D. Porter P, Let. & Ord., 1805-1808.1

-

-

-

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

387

To ]Idaster Commandant John H.Dent, U. 6. Navy, commanding U. S. Brig HOT&,
N e w York, N. Y., from Secretary of the Navy
NAVYD E P M1.9~ March 1806.
I have received your letter of the 8*b Ins
I am hap y to receive the expression of your opinion with respect to Capt
Chauncey rsio justly stands very high in my erjtimation. When one oficer perceives and expresses his high opinion of merit in another it is an evidence of hia
possessing merit hiroself. This liberality is commendable and honorable. I
wish i t was universally felt and practised in our Navy. The Hornet must be completely prepared in all respects to sail upon your receiving your instructions which you may expect every day. If necessary recruit men,
and if you can't procure them a t $12 per month you may t o good men allow a
Bounty of not exceeding 20 Drr, but this must be avoided if possible. I have remitted to the Navy Agent 5000% to be applied to providing necessary
provisions, advancing to such Officers aa have not s h m d y received advances,
recruiting men, advance to M I Green the Purser for the purpase of providing
necessary glop Clothing, and for every other expence that the Brig may incur
prior to leaving the Port of New York. This Sum is all that I can allow for the
complete outfit8 of the Brig: you must therefore be ss thrifty & economical as
oesible, applying the money to objects of necessity only. Consult with the
avy Agent and with him so manage as to expend no more than the Sum remitted
t o him.
Perceiving that you have no Carpenter, I have this day ordered Livingston
Shannon, now a t New York, to join you. The following Midshipmen have lately been ordered to join you, and are to
continue on board the Brig, MessrQ Carr, Woodyesr, Dallas, Fendall, Elton.
Select 3 others from among those now on board, leaving the residue a t New York,
with permission to go to their respective homes, and directions to report themselves to me on their arrival there. [NDA. OSW, Vol. 7, 1805-1807.1

-

%

[13 March 18061
To Xidnhipmen William Lewis and W i o c k Clarke, U. 8. Wavy, from Idauter
Commandant Isaac Hall, U. 6. Wavy
I n Pursuance of Orders I have received from John Rodgers Esquire Commander in chief of the United States Squadron in the Mediteranian to cause B
Survey to be made on a uantity of Provisions, and other Stores belonging to
the United States (ssid t o 8 e dsm ed and unfit for use) now in dieerent Magazines in this place, under charge of%iUiam Higgens Equire I have to request that you carefully examine and strictly 'survey such Provisions or other Stores as may be shown you by Mr Higgens, said to be damaged,
and report to me your proceedings thereon as soon as possible.
You will be pleased to state as near ss possible the quantity of each cuticle
you find unfit for use. Given under my hand on board the U. S. Brig Argw Malta 13Q March 1806
Isaac HULL
Lieutenant's LEWIS& CLARKE
of the U . S. Brig Argua
[LC. JRP, Series Two, Vol. 3, 1805-1807.1
To E w t e r Commrrndant Upsc Hull, U. S. Navy, U. S. Brig Argus, from Midshipmen
W
i
l
l
i
P
m Lewis and Winlock Clarke, U. 8. Navy
MALTA14% March 1806
SIR, In obedince to your Order of the 13% Instant we this day examined several
Articles of United States Naval Stores and Pmvisions m different Magsines in

388

NATTAL OPERATIONS FROM 1806 TO 1807

Malta, and under the care of William Higgens United States Naval Agent, of
which the following are damaged and unfit for use -Vizt 1 Pipe Rice
6 Barrels
21 Hogsheads Bread
12 Sacks
1 Barrel
ditto
8 Blocks difft Sizes Broken
2 large Boxes &
14 Barrels Beef
1 teirce 96 or full
4 Barrels Pork. [LC. JRP, Series Two, Vol. 3, 1805-1807.1

!

..

To Master Commandant Isaac Chauncey, U. S. Navy, New York, R. Y., from
Secretary of the Navy
NAVYD E P 15
~ March 1806. Your
services entitle you
I have received your letter of the 1 1 t h Instant.
to a furlough, but knowing the great value of your services and believing that
they may possibly be required before the expiration of your furlough, I can't
but feel a degree of reluctance in granting it. However it is not certain that
they will be required and it is but reasonable that you should have an Opportunity
of reimbursing yourself for the losses you have sustained. I grant you therefore
the furlough you ask for with a sincere wish that you may derive great benefit
from it.
[NDA. OSW, Vol. 7, 1805-1807.1

-

To Captain John Rodgers, 0.S. Navy, from Charles F. Degen
LEGHORN
16*4March 1806
DEARSIB I have t o return you many thanks in my own & MIQDegen's name
for the kind manner in which you are pleased to recollect us in your letter by the
Nautilus. - Capts Evans will bring you your Sabre & the miniature of General
Washington respecting which I presume Mr Sam! Purviance will write you by
the present conveyance. - You will further receive with this a few of our latest
London Papers which will I hope afford you some amusement.
We have handed over a note of the negotiation of the bills you sent us, to Captq
Evans: - We have shewn every disposition to be attentive to him, &q we always
are happy to be towards the Gentlemen of the Navy - but we are sorry to say
that for the first time since we hold the office of Navy Agents we have been treated
with the highest incivility & disrespect. - It is not necessary to enter into psrticulars here - I may perhaps one of these days have the pleasure of taking
you by the hand again - when I shall explain to you the nature & I believe the
cause of Cap@ Evans's Conduct. - He leaves us with my hearty wishes
that
I may never see his face again.
You will oblige me, my dear sir, but not
noticing what I now mention to the Gentleman in question. After about a weeks correspondence about points which did not merit discussion
we have endeavord to arrange matters with Captv Evans i n his own way. - As
the Schooner is on the point of sailing I cannot send you a statement of what has
passed between us. - If therefore he should say any thing on the subject I
have only to hope that you will suspend your Judgement till we have a n opportunity of explaining facts to you as they really have occured.
We have nothing new in this quarter. At home the general Voice seems to
be for the creation of a Navy upon a lar er scale than what the narrow politics
of our country has hitherto advocated. ieveral ships of the line are voted
I
hope to see you an Admiral yet before I die.
Accept the assurance of mine & Ms Degens friendly regards & believe me with
true respect,
[LC. JRP, Series Two, Vol. 3, 1805-1807.1

-

-

-

-

-

To Secretary of the Navy from James Leander Cathcart, concerning Hicholas C.
Missen, Danish Consul, Tripoli
GEORGETOWN
March 16'4 1806
SIR, Some unpleasant circumstances having been communicated to me of a
nature tending to excite my sensibility, I have long determined to publish an

-

390

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1806 TO 18W

To Captain John Bodgers, U. 6. Navy, from Master Commandant Isaac Bull,U. 8.
navy
UNITEDSTATESBRIO Argus
Malta 1 6 4 March 1806
SIR, YOUwill be informed by this, that I arrived a t this place the day after
leaving Syracuse. - I have since been detained by the absence of the Hornet She has this moment arrived, and as I find that Lieutenant Crane has a number
of articles to collect which will take a t least one day, and this being Sunday and
nothing to be done - I have determined to sail this Evening, and direct him
to follow, as soon as hi stores are collected. - We have nothing new a t this
place, a Convoy is hourly expected from Gibralter. - Report says that the
Syren has been spoke off the West End of Sicily in bad weather, and that she
had put into Palermo, but I think it must be a mistake as she would have arrived
a t Syracuse before this. - I send you a copy of a Survey held on a quantity
of Public Stores, and an Order for their being sold. - The Provisions now in
store are in very bad order for want of their being fresh Pickled & Hooped. Orders are given for its being done. We have a quantity of Powder here in
store, but how much I cannot tell. - I have directed Mi Henley to take over
a few Blocks and such other articles as are receiving damage here, that they may
be altogether, and be taken care of. INDA. Isaac Hull LB, 1803-1806.1
To James Dodge, U. S. Charge d'Affaires, Tunis, from John Edge$, U. 6. Chug6
d'dffaires, Tripoli
TRIPOLIIN BARBARYMarch 1 7 4 1806.
DEARSIR, By an occasion which offers tomorrow for Spax, I have the pleasure
to acknowledge the reception of your's of the 22 Jan7 & 12 of February; accompanied with a letter and bundle of Gazettes from C o l ~Lear. They came to
hand yesterday.
I perceive by your's that two of my letters have miscarried. The delays and
accidents to which letters are subjected between here and Tunis are great.
I have lately received a letter from the Commodore, who informs me he will
send a vessel here in April. I t will probably sail from Tunis, if so, i t will be 8
good occasion to send me the U. S. arms you mention.
One of the Bashaw's cruisers amved this morning. The Rais says thst he
spoke an U. S. gun boat a few days since, which informed him that one of our
gun boats had foundered in a gale of wind and all the crew perished. I still indulge a hope that i t is a mistake.
I am really glad to hear that you are so much pleased with Tunis. Tripoli
is the most wretched hole that can be imagined; no society, no friendly intercourse.
No consideration would induce me to remain in it. Have you any wish or expectation that your appointment will be confirmed?
I have great cause to complain of the brevity of your letters, particularly as
a t this period all European news is interesting and Tripoli is the last place a t
which it arrives.
Mr Nissen and I contemplate a trip to Lebda in the course of next month;
in the first U. S. vessel that comes. I wish sincerely you were of the part. We
expect to make a fine collection of antiques.
The shallowness of Barbary politicks is well known; until1 lately she had no
idea of the strength or resources of the U. S. But the late energetic measurea
adopted by our government, had placed affairs in their proper light, and made
her sensible of our power and their imbecillity.
A Xebeque of 10 guns belonging to the Bashaw was shipwrecked last month
in the Adriatic sea.
The commerce of Tripoli is languid, owing to the impolitic restrictions and
abuses which prevail in all them countries; and also i t doea not appear to have
entirely recovered the shock it received during our war. When any obstructions of that kind occur, trade is soon diverted into another channel.
Gun-boat NQ.8 was here last month & answered a salute of 21 gum in a verry
handsome manner.
'
I thank you for the attention you have paid to my letters.
We have received intelligence of a general peace (ie) the negotiation ia in a
happy train. Notwithstanding the pleasure i t would give me, I much doubt
that i t will be a permanent one; particularly if the Empereur des Francaie should
die-won.

391

WARS WITH BRRBARY POWERS

I am happy t o hear that all things etaied well with you, and have the pleasure
to sa the same.
I &I certainly quarrel with you, if you dont write me often and a m d ma nawa,
gazettes Cq.
If the U. 8. should appoint Consuls for Tunis & Tripoli, they will probably
be out with the vessel which brings the dispatches; in that case we shall have
the pleasure of returning together.
Accept the assurances of my sincere regard and esteem
J03N

RIDGELT

[NA. SDA. FA, CL, Tunis, Vol. 2, (72401, 1801-1809.1
Report of the Committee to whom wee referred the mesaage of the President of
United States, on the application of Hamet Carnmanli
I n Senate of the United Stales.
MARCH17, 1806.
Mr. BEADLEY,
from the committee to whom was referred the application of HAMET
CARAMALLI,
ex-Bashaw of Tripoli,submitted the following

REPORT-

The ex-Bashaw founds his claim on the justice of the United States, from his
services and sufferings in their cause, and from his having been deceived and
amused with the prospect of being placed on his throne, as legitimate sovereign
of Tripoli, and frequently drawn from eligible situations for the purpoae of being
made the dupe and instrument of policy, and finally sscrificed to midortune and
wretchedness. The committee, from a full investigation of the documents which
have been laid before Congress, with other evidence that has come within their
knowledge, are enabled to lay before the Senate a brief statement of facts in relation to the ex-Bashaw, and the result of their deliberations thereon.
This unfortunate prince by the treason and perfidy of his brother, the reigning
Bashaw, was driven from his throne, an exile to the regencp of Tunis; where the
agents of the United States in the Mediterranean, found bim; and aa early as
August eighteen hundred and one, entered into a convention to cooperate with
him, the object of which was to obtain a permanent peace with Tripoli, to place
the ex-Bashaw on his throne, and procure indemnification for all expense in
accomplishing the same. This agreement nraa renewed in November following,
with enoouragement that the United States would persevere, until they hsd
effected the object; and in eighteen hundred and two, when the reigning Baahaw
had made overtures to the ex-Bashaw to settle on him the two provinces of Derne
and Bengazi, and when the ex-Bashaw was on the point of leaving Tunis, under
an escort furnished him by the reigning Bashaw, the agents of the United Statea
prevailed on him to abandon the offer, with assurance that the United Statmi
would effectually co-operate, and place him on the throne of Tripoli.
The same engagements were renewed in eighteen hundred and three, and the
plan of owperation so arranged, that the =Barhaw by his own exertions a d
orce, took possession of the rovince of Derne; but the American squadron, a t
that time under the commanB of commodore Morris, instead of improvmg that
favorable moment, to co-operate with the ex-Bashaw, and to put an end to the m,
unfortunately abandoned the Barbary coast, and left the ex-Bashaw to contend
solely .with all the force of the reigning Bashaw, and who in consequence was obli ed, m the fore part of the year eighteen hundred and four t o give up his conquest
and fly from the fury of the usurper into Egypt. *hew transactions
OD
!,from time to time, not only communicated by our agents to government, but were
laid before C o n g r e ~in February, eighteen hundred and four, in the documente
accompan ing the report of the committee of claims on the petition of Mr. a t o n ,
late consuf a t Tunis, which committee expressed their decided approbation of his
official condudt, and to which report the committee beg leave to refer.
In full possession of the knowiege of these facts, the government of the United
S t a h , in June, eighteen hundred and four, dispatched commodore Barron, with
a squadron into the Mediterranean, and in his instructions, submitted t o his entire
discretion, the subject of svailing himself of the co-operation of the ex-Bashaw,
for that
and referring him to Mr. Eston, as an agent sent out by. government
-

P ~ W After commodore Barron had arrived on tbe etation in September, eighteen hundred and four, he dispatched Mr. Eaton and captain Hull into Egypt, to find the
ex-Bashaw, with instmctiqna to assure lum that-the commodore would take the
most efEectual measures wbh the forces under hm command, to oo-operate with

392

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1805 TO 1807

him against the usurper, his brother, and to establish him in the regency of Tripoli.
After encountering many difficulties and dangers, the ex-Bsshaw was found in
upper Egypt with the Mamalukes, and commanding the Arabs; the same assurances were again made to him, and a convention was reduced to writing, the
stipulations of which had the same objects in view; the United States to obtain
a permanent peace and their prisoners, the ex-Bashaw to obtain his throne. Under
these impressions, and with the fullest confidence in the assurances he had received
from the agents of the United States, and even from commodore Barron himself,
by one of his (the Bashaw's) secretaries, whom he had sent t o wait on the commodore for that purpose, he gave up his prospects in Egypt, abandoned his property in that country, constituted Mr. Eaton general and commander in chief of his
forces, and with such an army as he was able to raise and support, marched through
the Libyan desert, suffering every hardship incident to such a erilous undertaking;
and with his army commanded by general Eaton, aided by 8 ' ~ a n n o nand Mann,
three American officers, who shared with him the dangers and hardships of the
campaign, and whose names their country will forever record with honor, attacked
the city of Derne in the regency of Tripoli, on the twenty seventh day of April,
one thousand eight hundred and five, and after a well fought battle took the same;
and for the first time planted the American colors on the ramparts of a Tripolitan
fort. And in several battles afterwards, one of which he fought without the aid
of the Americans, (they having been restrained by orders, not warranted by any
policy, issued as appears by Mr. Lear, the American consul,) defeated the army of
the usurper, with great slaughter, maintained his conquest, and without the hazard
of a repulse, would have marched to the throne of Tripoli, had he been supported
by the co-operation of the American squadron, which in honor and good faith he
had a right to expect. The committee would here explicitly declare, that in their
opinion, no blame ought to attach to commodore Barron, a wasting sickness, and
consequent mental as well as bodily debility, had rendered him totally unable to
exercise the duties of commanding the squadron, previous to this momentous crisis,
and from which he has nevel recovered; and to this cause alone may be attributed
the final failure of the plan of co-operation which sppears to have been wisely concerted by the government, and hitherto bravely executed by its officers.
But however unpleasant the task, the committee are compelled by the obligations of truth and duty, to state further, that Mr. Lear, to whom was entrusted the
power of negotiating the peace, appears to have gained a complete ascendency over
the commodore, thus debilitated by sickness; or rather, having assumed the command in the name of the commodore, *to have dictated every measure; to have
paralised every military operation by sea and land; and finally, without displaying
the fleet or squadron before Tripoli, without consulting even the safety of theexBashaw or his army, against the opinion of all the officers of the Beet, so far as the
committee have been able to obtain the same, and of commodore Rodgers (as
appears from Mr. Lear's lettert to the secretary of state, dated Syracuse harbor,
July 5th, 1805) to have entered into a convention with the reigning Bashaw, by
which, contrary to his instructions, he stipulated to pay him sixty thousand dollars,
to abandon the ex-bashaw, and to withdraw all aid and assistance from his army.
And, although a stipulation was made that the wife and children of the ex-Bashaw
should be delivered to him on his withdrawing from the territories of Tripoli, yet
that stipulation has not been carried into execution, and it is highly probable was
never intended to be. The committee forbear to make any comment on the impropriet of the orders issued to general Eaton to evacuate Derne, five days previous
Lear's sailing from Malta for Tripoli, to enter on his negotiation; and the
to
honor of the nation forbids any remarks on the unworthy attempt to compel the
ex-Bashaw and general Eaton, to give up and abandon their conquest, by withholding supplies from the army a t Derne, eight days previous to the commencement of the negotiation; nor will the committee condescend to enter into a consideration of pretended reasons, assigned by Mr. Lear to palliate his management
of the afiairs of the negotiation; such as, the danger of the American prisoners in
Tripoli, the unfitness of the ships for service, and the want of means to prosecute the
war; they appear to the committee to have no foundation in fact, and are used
rather as a veil to cover an inglorious deed, than solid reasons to justify the negotiator's conduct. The committee are free to say, that, in their opinion, it wss in
the power of the United States, with the force then employed, and a small portion
of the sixty thousand dollars, thus improperly expended, to have placed Hamet
Caramalli, the rightful sovereign of Tripoli, on his throne; to have obtained their
prisoners in perfect safety,$ without the payment of a cent, with assurance, and
probable certainty, of eventual remuneration for all expense; and to have establiahed a p a c e with the Barbary powers, that would have been secure and perma-

d.

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

393

nent, and which would have dinnifjed
the name and character of the American
. .~
peo ie.
ghatever Hamet, the ex-Bashaw, may have said, in his letter of June %th, 1805,
to palliate the conduct which first abandoned and then ruined him, the Senate
cannot fail to discern that he wss then a t Syracuse, in a country of strangers to his
merits, and hostile to his nation and religion, and where every circumstance conspired to depress him, which, together with the fear of starving, left him Bcarcely
a moral agent.
Upon these facts, and to carry into effect the principles of duty arising out of
them, the only remuneration now left in the power of the United States to make,
the committee herewith present a bill for the consideration of the Senate. The
committee are confident that the legislature of a free and christian country, can
never leave i t in the power of a mahometan t o say that they violate their faith, or
wMthholdthe operalions of justice from one who h a fallen a victim fo his unbounded
conjidence i n their integrity and honor.
'Extrsct of a letter from captain Dent.
"It w m generally believed by the officers in the Meditethat Mr. LMII had a great awmdmcy
over the commod?m in all his measures relative to the squadron,'and from frequent observations of Mr.
Lear's iutimwy with the w m o d o r e during hls debilitated state. I am of the eame opinion."
t "I must here pay a tribute of justlee to commodore Rodgcrs, whose conduct during the negotiation an
board, was mixed with thet manly firmnp,and evident wish tp continue the war. if it could he done with
ropnety whiie be displayed the rnagnanlrn~tyof an Amencan in declaring that we fought not for eonquest
gut to rniiutain our Just rights and national dignity, as fully &nvineed the negotiators that we did not ad
but grant pace."
"You w9l pardon me if I here introduce a circumstance ,evincive of the spirit of our countrymen. A t
breakfast this morning, commodore Rodgers observed that 1f t h e Bashaw would consent tq deliver up our
oounsrymen without m w g peace, he would e
to give blm two hundred thousand instead of sixty
thousand doUm and rslse the difIerence t e t w e e 3 e two sums from the ofhcers of the navy, who he wss
perfectly assured, would contribute ta it with the highest sstislmtion."
iExtnrct froma letter of commodore Rodgem. "I never thought the prisonen were in danger."
Extract from a lettar of lieUtemat nrormeley, then a prisoner in Tripoli. "I do not believe that there
was any danger to tm agpretended for our lives, even if general Eaton and Hnmet Bashaw had h a w marohed
under the walls of Tripoli.

-

I E n c ~ ~ ~
A BILL FOR THE REWEF OF E A M E T C A U M A L W EXBASHAW O F TRIPOLI

Be it enacfed by the Senate and house of representatives of the United States of
America in Congress assembled That in consideration of the services and sufferings
of Hamet Caramalli the exBashaw of Tripoli iu cooperating with the Unit.ed
States in the war with Ti4p& that Regency, The President of the United Statbe and hereby is authorized & requested to cause t,o be paid out of any monies
in the treasury not otherwise appropriated the Sum of [space] Thousand dollars
to the said Hamet Caramalli which shdl be considered as full Satisfaction for
all claims he may have against the United States
[NA. Sen, Files, 3lessage of Pres., 9th Congress.]

To Alexander Bodgers, Beltimore, Md., from Secretary of the Ravy
NAVYDEPARTMENT
17Q March 1806.
SIR I this day received your letter of the 14tb ins.
I have received no information whatever, from the Alediteranean, in relabion
to the report in circulation relatively to Commr~Rodgers & Capt: Gale - nor
have I received any information that afTords any countenance to the report The letters, which I lest received from the Squadron, are dated early in November,
and reached me in February last From the established System of discipline in the Navy, I cannot allow myself
to give the least faith to this disagreeable report. [NDA. GLB, Vol. 8, 1805-1807.1

To Msater Commandant John H. Dent, U. 6. Navy, U. 6. Brig Homd New York,
N. Y., from Secretary of the Navy
NAVYDEPT17 March 1806 Mr Skipwith is t o have a prassage in the Hornet. Eis stores are to be found by
the publick. Indent. therefore to tbe Navy Agent, for all necessar Stores, and
make every other necessary preparation for his accommodation. I$e can't sleep
in a Cot. Make therefore other provision for him in the Cabin. [NDA. OSW, Vol. 7, 1805-1807.1

394
- --

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1806 TO 1807

[18March 18061
To Secretary of State from Sidi Suliman Melli M
,!e
Ambassador Plenipotentiary
from the Beg of Tnnu
Smr SUUMANMELLA MENNI Ambassador Phipotentiary from his EzceUenq
the Bashaw of Tunis, near his Ezcellency the President of the United Slates of
Amm'ca, To the HonPle JAMES MADISONEsqr Secretarg of State

-

HEALTH

SIR In answer to your letter of yesterday, I have the honor to inform you, that
no pewe between the United States of America & the Regency of Tunis, can be
ever permanent, untif the Government of said States, conform t o the custom
practised by other Christian powers of the same magnitude, & occasionally make
presents of military stores to the Regency of Tunis: my proposal relative to your
sending some articles of that description by the Xebeque, when return'd t o hie
Excellency my Master, proceeded from my great desire to promote a good
understanding between him, & his Excellency the President; in hopes that in the
fluctuation of human events, something might intervene to render the parties
more propitious to each others views, $ to thus prevent a war As those terms have been rejected, by his EXYthe President; I have now the
honor to propose, & if accepted will conclude, a Truce between the parties, for
the term of one year, to commence from my arrival a t Tunis, as i t is my wish to
prevent our respective governments from deciding precipitately upon an &air
of so much importance, & which may involve consequences a t present incalculable
by both parties; but if his Ex? the President thinks that the period of one ycar
is too long to be allow7dfor discussion, $ wishes a final decision to be made immediately after my arrival a t Tunis; I am instructed to inform you that the term
may be reduced to one month, to commence in like manner, leaving the choice
of either, entirely a t the option of his Excellency the President of the United
States By the letter of credence which I had the honor to present to his Excellency
the President immediately after my arrival in this City, you will be inform'd
t h t my Master haa vested me with full power to transact all his concerns a t
this Court, & haa promised to ratify whatever arrangment I may think proper to
make in his name, with his EX?the President, consequently the measures you
propose to take in the Mediterranean for ascertaining from the Bashaw himself,
whether he means war or peace is superfluous, as it can be ascertain'd here on
the spot, & I presume that the eubjeet of this communication will remove every
doubt from the Presidents mind relative to Hamouda Bashaws intentions Whether a Truce should be concluded for one, or for twelve months, I respectfully request hie Excellency the President to have the goodneas to mention the
riod in his letter to the Bashaw of Tunis, which I hope to hsve the honor t o
in answer to one I deliver'd to him on my anival, & that a duplicate of
any agreement that may take place, sign'd 8E seal'd by the contracting parties,
may be enclosed therein, in order to prevent the possibility of misunderstanding
each other With heartfelt regret I shall leave this Country while our sffairs wear so inauspicious a complexion; but I am bound to obey the commands of my Master:
what depended upon me I have already done, a t present nothing remains but
to await the event [signed in Arabic]
CITYOF WASHINGTON
March 18Q 1806
T h i ~letter was compiIed by the Subscriber from the verbal communications
of Biddi Sulimsn Mella Menni JAMES LEASCATECABT
CITYOF WASHINGTON
March 18Q 1806
F A . SDA, CD, Tunis, Vol. 3, 1805-1806.1

Ear,

To Secretary of the Navy from Xaeter Commandant john H. Dent, U. 8. Navy
U. STATESBRIOHmet
New Ymk
18 March 1808
8% I have the honor t o inform you of the receipt of yonr favor of the 12kb
Inatant.
The H m d will dropdown to Staten IsIand on the evening of tomorrow completely equipt and ready for 6ea on the shorteat notice

-

WRRS WJ!i!H BARBARY POWERS
I have ordered Mr Morrise to recruit as many m twenty men, could the be
got; but .fta a weeks exertion I find he has engaged only seven, nor do I t
L
we shall procure the remainder, even with the assistance of the twenty dollare
bounty, which has not however been tendered ss yet
Seamen are very scarce
a t this time in New York, and much wanted by the merchants, who are giving
twenty six and twenty eight dollars pr month - Should we however remain
here any length of time, perhaps we may procure six or eight more, which may
be sufficient although the H m e t is considerably short of her Compliment Livingston Shannon the Carpenter you have ordered to join the Brig, left this
place for Charlatown a few days previous to the receipt of your letter. - I therefore engaged a person to act in his place, and who is represented as a tolerable
good Csrpenter - Should there however be one a t the Navy Yard you can
epare i t will perhaps be as well to send him on.
Agreeably to your r uest I have had some conversation with the Agent on
the subject of the Bri %xpences $9 - and have drawn up a statement of the
probable amount, a n f f i n d they exceed the remittance of $5000 more than one
half - We have used every possible economy in the purchase of the articles
wanted, snd I have taken on board barely sufficient for present use and to guard
mt accidente, and yet i t is nearb eight thousand dollars and less I suspect
t an the real m o u n t will prove to be.
None of the Oficera attached to the
Brig have had advances in New York; 1 have ordered the purser to give them
from three to four months, as it may be found necessary
Neither has there
been a single Indent filled, previous t o my taking Commsnd although a considerable number of articles; such as rigging, canvm & Blocks were necessary
these
I have ordered t o be made out and procured; as well as provisions, which have not
been filled up since $he Horneta leaving Washington in Decr with the exception
of Beef Pork & Bread, received in Charlestown. The purser has informed me of his having written to you on the subject of
Slop Cloathing, and has I imagine given a11 the information necessary on that
subject. The disagreeable situation of the Officers who have been dischsrged on furlough has induced me to order them an advance of two months pa?, t o enable
them to proceed on to their respective homes as many of them have a Considerable distance to travel, and not a cent t o defray their expences - this is perhaps informal, as the advince is made by the agent - But the necessity of the
case will sanction the act and meet I am in hopes your approbation
I am sorry to inform you that the indisposition of Mr Keene will prevent hia
joining the Hornet - He hsa been confined to sick quarters on shore ever since
the arrival of the Brig in New York - 1 shall inclose for your better infotion the Certificate of the Sur eon on this subject, as well ss several of the Crew,
whom I have ordered to the Ifmpital in this place. Mr Fate [bl~Fate] a Boatswain in the service and a t this time in Washington
is perhaps one of the best attached to the Navy, and would I believe be glad to
receive orders to join the Hornet
I should feel gratified by your exohangeing
him for Mr Berry the one now on board - Mr Berry I believe to possess every
uali6cation but that of Commanding which is absolutely necessary on board a
eesel of War
and the service on which we are going makes i t proper if not
necessary to have to have the beat Officers of the kind our Navy possesses. I n a day or two I shall write you more fully,
[NDA. MC LB, 1806-1807.1

-

P

-

-

-

-

%

-

To Mr. Jo. Milledge, Loniaville, Ky.,from Secretary of the Navy
NAVYDEPART
- 18 March 1806.
I this day received your letter of the ZS* ult9
Mr Henry is 1 believe acting as sailing master on board of one of the vessels of

the Mediteranean Squadron. This station being greatly superior to that of Mi&*
both in rank and emolument, Mr Henry has of course received some promotion his next step will be to a lieutenant which I shakl be happy to confer whenever
I can consistently do it. AE Mr &emy has always been mentioned to me in
teTme of very high approbation. Asaure his friends, that his merite shsll be duly
noticed.

(NDA. GLB,Vol. 8, 1805-1807.1

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1805 TO 1807

396

To Secretary of the Navy from Captain John Rodgers, U. S. Navy
Triplicate
U S SHIP Constitution
Syacuse lgthMarch 1806.
SIR, The U S Brig Syren arrived and joined the Squadron a t this place yesterday from Gibraltar, having touched on her passages both up and down a t
Algiers
By her I have received a letter from Coll Lear, dated the 15Q Instant,
but it contains nothing interesting further than what the following paragraphs
exhibit
"Capt Smith calls here in great haste, and begs I would let him off in a
few hours, which will not allow me to give you any details, which however, I
have talked over with him, and he will give them to you; We stand well here
a t present, and I trust shall continue to do so, while we have a respectable
force in this Sea; but if the Dey makes peace with Portugal, as i t is probable
he will, he must break out upon some other nation; and the Sweeds Danes
or Americans, are the most likely to be the objects; I think we are the most
secure, but still I should not be surprised, if he should choose us, altho' he
is very far now from shewing the least disposition to that effect The Cruizers are all in port, and diemantled, as is usual in Winter, and
I presume will not go out, untill the business with Portugal is determined.
The Frigate Crescent, American built, and the Brig are to be broken up, as
they find them unfit for further service, and their other Cruizers, are in very
bad order -"
I do not myself conceive their is any probability that the Dey of Algiers (who
is said to be a illan of very superior understanding to any of his predecessors)
even if he does make peace with Portugal, will prefer the Commerce of the U
States, for the exercise of his Piratical inclinations; no on the Contrary; it is
my opinion that he would prefer any of the Powers of Europe, (England and
France excepted) he will not I feel satisfied in my own mind, hazard the loosing
forever the advantageous Treaty he has a t present, with the U States, for the
sake of any advantages he can reasonably promise himself by a War, and afterwards making a better, so long a t least, as we are represented by a hian of Col!
Lears experience and prudence, altho' he will without doubt ere long, make N7ar
against some Christian Nation or other, with which he is a t present a t Peace, as
all the King of Naples Dominions (Scicily excepted) being in the possession of
the French, and of Course under their protection, he must find employment elsewhere for his Cruizers, without effecting England France or Spain; the two
former because he is afraid of them, and the latter because the Tribute she pays
him, is more than equal, to the Tributes paid him by all the other Powers of
Europe, with which he is a t Peace, and I beleive I may include America also Our affairs with Tripoli and Tunis, stand as they did when I wrote you last
With Tripoli I do not suppose we shall ever have War again, neither do I beleive
that the Bey of Tunis, will have the Temerity again to assume his former tone,
but as I am convinced he feels himself humbled and ashamed of the measures that
he has been obliged t o pursue, I do not think it prudent to reduce the Squadron,
as your Orders t o that effect appeared to have been written previous to the arrival of the Frigate Congress, and previous to your having heard of the cause, of
the Tunitian Embassadors being sent to the U States, untill after his return, as
I am well convinced that it is a formidable force alone, (read21 to act) that would
induce his Sovereign to ratify his measures, provided they are such; as from
existing Circumstances, our Government will feel itself authorised and bound,
not only to propose, but oblige him to acceede to - It may be asked if our
Peace with Tunis will exist on so flimsy a foundation as to require the keeping
of so large a force in the Mediterranean t o support it? To this I answer No!
that the force you have allotted for the protection of our Trade, (a Frigate and
Two small Vessels) may be sufficient, but that as we cannot distinctly be said to
be a t peace, untill after the approval of the Covenant, that the Tunitiari Embassador may devise with the U S Government, are confirmed, and ratified by his
Sovereign; as it would a t least be leaving him room to equivocate, and perhaps
in the end, oblige the U States to send such another force to induce him to accept
the T e r m - He is absolutely afraid of War, but his natural disposition, prone
to duplicity, and feeling chagrined as he does, a t the loss of Consequence, he would
prevaricate, if he had the least idea, that he could do it without incuring our
immediate Vengeance - Under these Circumstances I do not suppose it was
your intention, that the Squadron should be reduced, untill this and object is
effected, partioularly as the detention of the small Vessels, for Three or Four
Weeks, even after the Season admits of their return, cannot be attended (I flatter
myself) with any serious bad Consequencee
However should I not hear from

-

-

-

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

391

you, further on this aubject by the first of May, I shall immediately act on your
Orders of the 124 October, by sending the Gun Boats and Bombs, with all possible dispatch, direct to Charleston, under Command of the Argus, and the EWEZ
and Vizen to Wrashin ton, on supposition that it was not your intention they should
be detained for the &a1 settlement of our &airs with Tunis This subject has given me more uneasiness, than feelings less ~usceptablethan
your own; are capable of appretiating, fearing that I may not have acted precisely agreeable to your expectations and wishes, and which if I have not, I have
no other apology t o offer, for my error, than an unbounded Zeal for the Interest
of my Country which hm surpassed my Judgement The French have obtained complete possession of all the King of Naples Dominions (except Scicily) - The Hereditary Prince evacuated Calabria on the
15%Instant, and has arrived a t Messina The Syren and Enterprize will be the Vessels that I shall detain - To Lt Ss
Clair of the Frigate Essm, I have given the Command of Gun Boat NP3, in the
place of Lieutt Maxwell Deceased - The Enterprize carrys this to Gibraltar,
under orders to bring any dispatches their may be a t that place, from you to me Having informed you in my several letters, (since the receipt of your orders
directing in case of our being a t Peace with Tunis, to reduce the Squadron) that
I should hold the Squadron in readiness to meet the execution of your Orders,
was owing to their dates being anterior to the arrival of the Congress in America,
and presuming that you would not have given them, had you previously known
our situation with Tunis As the Winds generally prevail, the return part of the Squadron, will arrive in
America, as soon within ten Days, or Two Weeks, by sailing on the First of May,
as if they had sailed a Month sooner [NDA. 00, 1801-3-7.1

To Lieutenant David Porter, U. 8, IYavy, from Captain John Bodgers, U. S. Navy
Cmtitution SYRACUSE
19th March 1806.SIRI have this moment received Pour Letter of this Date., and am fully persuaded,
not only of the correctness of your intentions relative to the duties attached to
your command; but confidently Satisfied of the propriety of the purchase which
(White be1t.a) you mention; and I should not have given orders for the change
which you have been informed of was it not that all the other Marines of the Squadron are from a principle of Occonomy ; obliged to wear Black, and a Wish to have
them all in the Same Oniform. - In fact the change could not be e£iected
a t this moment even Was it my wish. [LC. D. Porter P, Let. & Ord., 1805-1808.1

To Captain John Bodgers, U.6.Navy, Syracuse, from William Higgins, U. S. Navy
Agent, Malta
MALTAthe 19 March 1806
SIR I have the honor to reply to your favors of the 25 febr 2 & 10 Ins5
I will be obliged to you to retain the letter from Mr Fernandez to Mr Webb L
forward it, if you send any other Vessel of the Squadron under your Command to
Leghorn
Your letters for America are in the Mail for Gibraltar under cover to John Gavino
Esqr and will go with the Lively tomorrow Sundry Stores have been condemned by the Surveying Officers and in the
course of next week, 1 shall proceed to sell them by Auction in conformity with
the orders given me by Capt* Hull I shall hold the brandy until you have occasion for it
An American Vessel has arrived from Liverpoole in 25 days, but brings nothing
new.
The Captain has some American Papers of January and if I can persuade him to
give them to me they shall go t o you by this Conveyance.
As I am persuaded it will be agreeable to you to have my Accounte with the
Gun-boats &c Kept in a state of settlement I have taken the liberty t o inclose you
the following U S Schooner Nautdw Gunboat N- 6, 10, 3, 8, 8r Bomb
Vengeance - which I will be thankful your delivering to the rea tive Commandars for examination t after returned to me t o be findly d o s e c t the ~ametime
I take the liberty of mentioning that from a rough calculation I appear to be in

398

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1806 TO 1807

advance on Acct of the Service between ten & twelve thousand Dollm, but I
mention this only for as much as it may be perfectly convenient t o you to make
me a remittance
[LC. JRP, Series Two, Vol. 3, 1805-1807.1
To Yaater Commandant John H. Dent, U. S. Ravy, commanding U. 6. Brig Hmnd.
New York, B. Y., from Secretary of the Navy
NAVD E P20
~ March 1806 You are already informed by my letter of the 17* instant that Mr Skipwith is
t o have a passage in the Hornet to France. As soon as he arrives a t New York
end you are prepared for sea you will proceed to L'Orient or such other convenient
port in fiance as Mr Skipwith may advise, & after Landing him you will proceed without delay t o join our Squadron in the Mediterranean andplaoe yourself
under the Commanding Officer of that Station. In case you stand in need of money for any necessary disbursements for the
Hornet on your arrival in France, you will apply to the American Consul a t the
Port you may be at, who will obtain for you the necessary advances on your Bills,
drawn on this Department. Sailed from Xew York, 29 March 1806. [NDA. LB, 1799-1807.1
To Captain Edward Preble, U. 6. Bavy, from William Eaton
WASHINGTON
CITY March S l a t 1806
MY DEARSIB, I have now the satisfaction to enclose to you a report [ I ? March
1806) of the Committee of the Senate to whom was referred the claim of Hamet
Caramalli - I am persuaded it will gratify you; not so much because it do=
justice to a man whom you have honored with your friendship, as because it gives
us proof that the s e n e of honor, justice & indignation against baseness which hse
heretofore and always ought to mark the character of the nation is not wholly
absorbed in the pusilanimity of the Executive: these virtues still exist in the r e p
resentation of the states Some time since, I sent a copy of my letter of 9 Aug. t o X P Ruaael of Boston,
and another to Hartford for publication: the coldness I met a t headquarters, &
insinuations put in circulation of my being in disgrace there, on my arrival here,
brought me to thia resolution - a t the same time I distributed among the representatives a number of copies in pamphlets - Previosly to my leaving this I
had put one of these pamphlets into the hands of Gen. Bradley Gen. Jackson (who
waa buried yesterday) M r Pickering - hlr Crowningshield - Mz Dana.
JnQ C. Smith and others - The effect has been that the Executive has been
probed to the core, every syllable of document drawn from him which could throw
light on the subject; and, you have the result - Lear will be impeached
All other national affairs remain as they were were I last wrote - I predict
a war with Tunis - Should it happen, will you embark? I will go [as] your
Lieutenant - and, without adulation, let me tell you, you are the only General
of my acquaintance in America, with whom I should be willing to take this relation
in that sea The report is for publication if you do not get i t sooner by other channels
My consular accounts are with the Committee of Claims - I shall be indemnified - I renew my congratuletions on the arrival of the young Commodore so I do my cordial salutations [LC. EPP,Vol. 17, Jan.-June 1806.1

-

-

To Captain Hugh G. Campbell, U. 8. Bavy, cammending U. 6, S. k,
from Cap&
John Rodgers, U. 6. Navy
U S SHIPCbnstitutwn
Syracuse $14 March 1808
SIE,Your letters of the 25* of Jan? and March without date, I have received,
and feel myself obliged by their Contents
I have no news worth Communicating, farther than that the French have, at
thia moment, Complete possession of aU the King of Na lea Dominions, except
Jkioily, and a part of the drmy h.. already reached the *Puo or Sailla - They

-

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

399

are collecting a Flotiia a t Naples i t is said, to Convey them across the Fam, and
if the Britiah do not Keep a very bright look out, they wiU most certainly crws
I have received orders from Government, dated anterior to the arrival of the
Tunitian Embassador in America, to send home a part of the Squadron; I therefore have to desire, that you will have the Essw and Vizen,in readiness t o proceede thence, by the time you next hear from me, which it is most likely will be

-

some time in May, unless in the interim, you should receive diEerent instructions
either from the Government or myself, however should dispatches for me arrive
a t Gibraltar, after the Departure of the Enterprize from thence, & before you
hear from me again, you are requested to dispatch the Vizen with them to Malta,
with orders on her passage t o look into Tunis Bay, as perhaps I ma be there
I wish you would let me Know by the ERterprize, if a quantity of sread can be
had a t Gibraltar, as we are short of that article [LC. JRP, L Bk B, May 1805-July 1806.1

-

To President Thomas Jefferson from Secretary of the Navy
NAVYD E P M$1
~ March 1808. THEPRESIDENT
- I deem it proper to inform you that, Congress having made

no appropriation for the service of the Navy for the year 1806, I am not in posseasion of the means of sending the Brig Hornet to Sea, on the intended Cruise.
[XDA. Nom. & Appts., 1798-1820.1

To John Gauino, U. 6. Consul, Gibraltar, from Captsin John Bodgers, U. S. Bevy
U S SHIP C0128titutim
Syracuse 81m*Murch 1808

DEARSIR Your letter of the 224 U l t ~came duly to hand, and I have noted
its Contents - The French have gained Complete possession of all the King of

Naples Dominions, Scicily excepted I have no news worth Communicating fsrther than what Lt Porter will be
able to give you - Our &airs stand perfectly well in this quarter [LC. JRP, L Bk B, &lay 1805-July 1806.1

To Captain John Bodgers, U. S. Navy, from Secretary of the Navy
NAVYDEP$92 March 1806 Your Letter of the 21.s Augt 1805 requesting permission to return to the United
States after the Conclusion of Peace, has been received. That event having taken
place, and there being no reason to believe that we shall soon be en aged in hostilitiw with any of the Barbary Powers, the President has authorisei me to allow
you the permission re uested. The President, however, considering the importance of keeping the Jmutitution in the Mediterranean - her present fitness for
servlce - and the time of her Crew not expiring
- - until 1807. wishes her to remain
on that station. Cap: Dent of the Brig Hornet is ordered to join the Squadron in the Mediterranean. On his arrival you may send home either of the small Vessels you may
choose, in which you can return, or in such other way as may be most agreeable
to ourself.
6pon leaving the Mediterranean Station, you r i l l select an officer to take
charge of the Constitution until the arrival of a Commanding Officer who will go
out in the John Adam or in some other Store Ship from this Country. It is my wish that the Commanding Officers of the Vessels of the Squadron,
should be permitted t o retain their respective vessels, and that no change of
Veesel be made, but under circumstances of indispensable necessity.[NA. NDA. LB, May 1779-July 1807.1

-

To Midshipman Arthur Sinclair, U. S. Navy, U. S. Brig Siren, from Captain John
Bodgers, U. 6. Kavy
U S SHIP Constitution
Syracuse dW M a ~ d
1806
SIRI have to direct that you assume the Command of the U S. Gun Boat
No 3, and that you receive from Mr Woodhouse, Midshipman, now Commanding

400

NAV&

OPERATlONS FROM 1806 TO 1807

O5cer on board of her dl the Papers, Documents Stores $9 &v belongin to her,
and for which you are accountable, giving the necessary receipts for the bame [LC. JRP, Order Book No. 2, 1805-1806.1

To Lieutenant David Porter, U. S. Navy, U. S. Schooner Enterprize, Syracuse, from
Captain John Bodgers, U
' . S. Navy
U S SHIP Constitution
Syracuse 22P March 1806
SIR YOUare directed to proceede with the U States Schooner Enterprize direct
to Gibraltar for the purpose of affording Conveyance to the letters which I have
handed you, directed to the Honbls Secretary of the Navy, and bringing with you,
such dispatches, as you may fin'd there for me; on your Way back calling a t Al iers
(provided the Winds are such as not to prolong your passage) to Know if Col! e!ar
has any Communications t o make - As it is uncertain where I shall be on your
return, you are desired to look into Tunis Bay, in coming up, & a t which place if I
am not, proceede to Malta where if you do not find me, you wilI at least hear where

IamP. S. to Lr C m m r David Porters Orders dated the 224 March 1806 -

On your passage down, in case you should meet the Vessel that conducts the
Embsssador from the U States, to the hlediterranesn, or with any Public Vessel
Conveyingme dispatches from Government, you are desired to return to this port.
with all practicable dispatch, taking Malta in your Way hence, to ascertain if I am
not there - J R [LC. JRP, Order Book No. 2, 1805-1806.1
[24 March 18061
To Secretary of the Navy from Captain Samuel Barron, U. 5. Navy
SIR I enclose a list of the Articles Shipped On board the Brig Argus, & Sloop
Hornet, for the use of the Christians serving on the Expedition (with Mr Eaton)
on the Coast of Africa, which Articles were shipped a t Malta, agreeable to My
Order, by MTBiggins the Agent of Goverment, residing a t that Place. As i t respects the Quality of those Provisions, this is the first time, I recollect, to have heard
i t complained of, I was too sick a t the time, to inspect (personally) into its State
I recollect nothing of the Pease, having been condemned a t Syracuse, I suppmed
they had been landed a t Malta, by some Store Ship from America
The Flour (I believe) was french, and had been condemned by the admiralty
Court, sold pursuant to its Decree, & purchased by the American Agent, with
respect to the price, I am incapable of giving any information, st this time, but
that can be ascertained, by reference being had, t o the Returns of MI
which I suppose, are in the Office of the Accountant of the Navy,
never had conceived HAMET BASHAW, was destitute, of Means, & Resources,
as to reduce to extremity, our Countrymen, who had voluntaril contributed their
aid, in hia Cause, hence the Necessity, of instantly meeting the sernands made for
Supplies, and the possibility, that the Quality of the Provisions, was not such, aa
I had always felt disposed to have provided for them.
I hope to be a t Washington in about ten Days, provided I am so fortunate, as
not t o relapse, when I shall probably, be better enabled, to throw Light, on any
Subject, connected with my Command (while in the Mediterranean) than can be
done by a Communication in this Way.
[Maine HS. NDA photostat.]

-

To Master Commandant John Smith, U. 8. Navy, U. S. Brig Siren, Syracuse, from
Captain John Bodgers, U. 15. Navy
U S SHIP Conslilulion
Syracuse g6t4 March 1806
~ I YOU
E
are deaired to Convene a Court Martial on board the U S Sloop Siren
under your Command to morrow morning a t 10 OClock for the purpose of trying
L* 8 Vanschaik, l&e superintendant to the U States Stores a t this port, on the
Charge of disobedience of orders on the 27% U l t ~- You are requested to appoint
a proper person to officiate as Judge Advocate [LC. JRP,Order 3 o o ~ N o . ~ 218,06-1806.1

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS
To James Dodge, U. S. Charg6 d8Affaires, Tunis, from Master Commandant
Isaac Hull,U. 6. Navy
UKITED
STATESBBIGAfgU.9
Tunis Bay 25Q March 1806
DEARSIR,The Argus Anchored in this Bay IrastEvening, eight days from Malta
she has been Ordered here for the purpose of conveying such dispatches as you may
have for Commodore Rodgers, should they be of importance - should you not
have any thing of moment, I shall sail tomorrow Evening, f have several Letters
for you. and anumber tor Mr O.Glander, but as I am not acquainted with the Man
that brings this, I do not send them. - Should it be convenient, 1 should be
happy to see you on board this Evening or tomorrow. - Should you not be able
t o come, I wish you to send a Person for the Letters. - The Hornet Cutter is
cruizing off Cape Bon - Should you have nothing of importance for the Commodore, I shall sail Tomorrouv Evening for Sardinia, and return to this Bay in a few
As I hope to have the pleasure of seeing you on board, I do not send you
days.
either Letters or News Papers
[NDA. Isaac Hull LB, 1803-1806.1

-

To James Dodge, U. S. Charg6 dtAffaires, Tunis, from Master Commbndant b a a c
Pull, U. S. Navy
UNITEDSTATES
BRIGArgu8
Tunis Bay 25thMarch 1806
DEARSIR,I wrote you this morning, but I find you had not received my Letter,
when the bearer left Town.
I send you a Number of Letters which I wish you
t o deliver as directed. - I m o t e you that a Boat would be on shore for you a t 7,
but I find that you have not obtained permission 60 come off as yet, consequently
I shall not send her until1 Ten or Eleven - I shall expect you a t Dinner. Please say to Mr 0. Glander, that I shall send the two Parcels by the next
opportunitv
Should (he Weather be fair I shall come nearer the Goletta in Morning.
[NA. SDA. FA, CL, Tunis, Vol. 2, (7240) 1801-1809.1

-

-

To Captain Edward Preble, U.S. Navy, from Xsster Commandant Isaac Chauncey,
U. S. Navy
NEW YORK 26th March lgOG
Dr SIR, I have obtained a furlou h and have got. a. Ship for China
Expect
to sail about the 20th of April - I f I can bring at: thing from that country
for you - i t will afford me pleasure to receive your ommands
I see no prospect of Congress doing any thin for the Kavy or officers therefor
the sooner we can get good employ in private 8hips the better a t least for those
who has no fortunes to depend on -The Dimentions of the Hornel I have forwarded
by Mr Morris who has promised to deliver them t o you - Be pleased t o present me to M ~ I'reble
P
[LC. EPP, Vol. 17, Jan.-June 1806.1

-

6

To Master Commandant Isaac Bull,U. S. Navy, U. S. Brig Arw, from James Dodge,
U. S. Charge d'bffaires, Tunis
TUNIS
26Q March 1806
MY DEARSIR, My Drogoman hss been a t Bardo, since 7 0.Clock this morning,
waiting on the Bey for a Tiskara; i t is now half past 12 0.Clock and he is not yet
feturned; I do not expect he %ill procure one after all, aa his Excellency has no
information from his Officer a t Goletta of the arrival of any such V w l : A t any
rate i t will be impossible (one hour or two hence) for me t o visit the Argus, arid
return before they shut the Gates this Evening, so that I should be obliged t o
stay with you all night, which would be an unpleasant detention of the Vessel, or
depend upon chance for a lodging outside the Walls, 8s I could not get in Town
after the Gates are shut.
It being also such a charming Wind for your intended Voyage, I am loath t o
keep you, a l t h ~I am extremely anxious to take you by the hand once more; but
must defer that pleasure until our return, by which time I shall have a Letter
ready for the Commodore. - ouwillplease to observe, on your next arrival, t o

-

f

402

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1806 TO 1807

send your Boat immediately to Goletta to inform the Aga of your amval &9 as
the Aga - for althq he may know, who and what you are, He will not inform the
Bey, untill he has an offitial notice from the Cap* of the Vessel. - As ou do
not return to Syracuse before you visit this Bav again, I shall not send any E t t e r s
on board a t present; but have them ready agiinst that time:
Every thing however is very tranquil in this quarter, nor do I apprehend the
occurrence of any thing, to form dispatches of great moment to the Commodore.You observe his Excellency's Cruiser's laying before you: I fancy they will
sail in about ten days, with several small craft of 4 & 6 Guns $9 making a Squadron
of Seven or eight Vessels of War. Please to accept a few Almonds & Dates which I send pr the bearer, they may
answer you a leisure half hour, with the Company of a good Bottle of Porter or
so: I wish I had something to offer, more worthy your acceptance, a t the same
time Portable for land Carriage. - 1 should esteem i t a particular favor, and
convenience, if, when you come in again, you would approach the Goletta a little
nearer, unless you have some particular objection. Compliments to the Gentlemen of the W. Room & believe me
Your sincere friend
JAMES
DODGE
P. S. One 0.Clock P. M.
I have just obtained a Tiskera, a vmy great favoutf as his Excellency hasnot yet
recQ official intelligence of your being in the Road - for the reasons stated above,
I shall defer visiting you a t this time & send this by my Drogeman, by whom I
wish vou to transmit the Parcels for Mr 0. Glander. arid anv old news ~
rs
- a
* ~ evou
may have kicking about
[NDA. Isaac Hull LB, 1803-1806.1

-

To James Dodge, U,8. Charge d'Affaires, Tunis, from Master Commandant Isaac
Hull, U. S. Navy
UNITEDSTATESBRIGArgus TUNISBAY.
Seven O.Clock at Night 66 March 1806.
DEARSIR, Your Letter has this moment come to hand by your Drogoman. I am very sorry to learn that you are in ill health, and that I shall not have the
pleasure of seeing you before I go. The Drogeman likewise informs me, that he learnt a t the Goletta from the
Cap* of the Privateer that came in Yesterday, that a Vessel with one Mast,
apparently American built, was driven on shore near Cape Bon Yesterday. from the discription he gives, I am induced to suppose it is the United States
Sloop Hornet Lieutenant Crane. - I have in consequence directed Lieutenant
Lewis to accompany your man to the Capt of the Vessel, to endeavor to get more
correct information from him, and to ascertain the spot; that you may take such
measures, as may appear t o you most proper for the preservation of the Crew,
and such part of the Wreck as may be found - should i t be the Hornet. - I am
not acquainted with the Customs of this Country, in cases of Ship Wreck, but,
suppose that the men will be immediately taken and sent to this place. - I
have directed Mr Lewis, should the information he gets, be such as leads him to
believe i t is the Hornet, to accompany your man to Tunis, as I think if a Vessel
has been stranded, the news must by this time have reached you. - I will
thank you to give him every possible information on the subject, and likewise
inform me what way we shall most likely get the Crew soonest. - I should suppose i t will be proper to send off a trusty man of this Country, to prevent their
You
being Robbed, if it is not too late, should!it prove to be the Hornet.
however will be the best judge what is proper to be done. [NDA. Issac Hull LB, 1803-1806.1

-

-

To Secretary of the Navy from Captain Thomas Tingey, U.S. Navy, Buperintendent
Navy Yard, Washington, D. C.
NAVYY a m WASHING'*$6 Mar: 1806
SIB, I have the honor to transmit you herewith, a parcel of papers & letters, forwarded to me by Mr Wv Hodgson of Alex* Agent for the Ownera of the Ship
Huntress - whlch was captured by the Spaniards, and afterwards recaptur'd
by the English.
These papers are intended to establish a claim on the Navy Department. for
the Damage-s, Detention & Extra-expencea of eaid ship, in consequence of the
capture &o -

WARS WITH BARBARIT POWERS
From a cursory view of the document Nq 3. there are chargee, which I conoejve
will be deemed inadmissible - But I forbear farther comment on this business,
until your determination of the course that shall be pursued thereon.
[NDA. Captains' LB, Vol. 1, 1806.1
To Eon. John C. Smith,Chairman of the Committee of Claims, from Secretary of
State
D E P ~OF STATEMarch %6W 1808.
SIL In answer to your b t t e r of the 21.4 inst enclosing the a plication of William
Eaton Esqr and the various documents to substantiate it, find it unnewwmj
to add much to the explanations they contain.
The answer which I had the honor to give to your letter of the 20th Jan7 last,
respecting the claim of MI Cotton; the development of M TEaton's views and ini
s transactions respecting the Anna Man'a as contained
ducements relative to h
in his letter of the 6 March 1801, to the Department of State, and his statement
to the House of Representatives of the 16 Feb. 1804, will I presume enable the
Committee to appreciate the equity of this part of the claim, which appears to
be derived from an attempt, disastrous to himself, to secure by combining with
a private mercantile operation the interest of the owners of the Anna Maria,
placed a t hazard by the Government of Tunis, and to protect in Bome degree
also the national harmony with that Regency. I t may not be improper to add,
that any supposed impolicy of the Consuls in the Barbary States engagin5 in Commerce, ought not t o impress an unfavorable character upon the transact~on,since
no legal or Executive prohibition existed, and because a Commercial intercourse
between the U. States & Tunis wm earnestly desired by the government of
the former, as expressed in the year 1800 to the Bey of Tunis by the President
of the U: States,and by the Secretary of State to Mr Eaton.
24 It a peaw that for the promised good offices of the Minister of Tuniii in
promoting %r Eaton's views in the employment of Hamet Bashaw against Tripoli,
ten thousand dollars were stipulated in the event of success, and that though the
condition on which i t was to be paid wss not performed, this sum waa retained
from Mr Eaton by the Minister. Of the fact of the detention of the money there
is no doubt; whilst the cause of i t appears to be best explained by the zeal with
which Mr &ton endeavoured to avail the United Stat.es of Hamet Bashaws pretensions to the throne of Tripoli, a mode of acting against that Regency which
was retrospectively sanctioned by the Executive.
34 S ringing from the same source with the last, is Mr Eaton's claim for the
service demurrage of the Ship Gloria. I t would be superfiuous to recapitulate
the circumstances respecting her employment in, and discharge from the public
service, as they are already stated st large. It will be sufEcient to observe, that
the instructions given fo the Auditor for the settlement of Mr Eaton's accounts
contemplate the allowance of a reasonable rate of compensation, whilst she was
in ~ c t u a service,
l
and that it remains for Congress if they see cawe, to sanction
the balance of the claim for the detention of the k e e l at Tunis, and until she
discharged her Crew a t Le horn.
4t4 The last head of Ibfr Eaton's claims respects Anna Parcili, a christian
captive ransomed by him from Slavery. To the inclosed extracts from the communications of Mr Davis, respecting the affair, i t would have been desirable t o
add the instructions given for his guidance by the Department of State. The
official copy of them, however being mislaid, i t may be desirable to obtain another
from Mr Davis, who is daily expected to arrive in this city. Should this not
happen, or should he not b e possessed of the original, the substance of the inetruction will be communicated from memory, if the Committee desire.
[ N A . SDA. Dom. L, Vol. 16, June 1805-July 1810.1

f

X

To Bscretary of State from James Simp~on,U, 6. Conad, Tangier, lorocco

NQ108 duplicate. -

TANGIER87*4 Mar& 1806
SIR Nq 107 dated 12* last Month accompanied the Accounts of fhis Consulate
for last year, and waa entrusted to Mr Gavino's care to be forwarded.
Ite with concern I have now to acquaint you that yesterday I received by Exprese from Mr Gwyn the unplemnt intelligence of the loaa of the Brig Indefatigable
of Philadelphia B F Severs Master on the South Coast in Lat: 28. - An'bab
brought him a paper written by a Pessenger, of whioh I herewith'th'trammit-oopy

-

404
NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1806 TO 1807
-for your information; he brought slso a Gibraltar Bill of Health for the Vessel
dated 29% January laat. - T h a e are all the direct information I have yet r e
ceived, the next I hope may be from Captain Severs with more particulars. - A
Merchant of Mogadore writes me that a Friend of his to the Southward (without
mentioning the place of his Residence) had got possession of twelve of the Crew
of this Vessel, which with the Contents of Mr Berrets note gives hopes they all
got safe on shore. - The redem tion of those people fourteen in all, will go far
beyond that of the C k w of the 8hip Oewego, for it appears all Chrietiana have
encountered a similar misfortune of late years, have been bought from the Arabs
who first seized them, by others who keep them back with a view of advantage. This I fear is a growing evil and which i t appears impossible to check or controul,
save by a measure too dreadful to mention - leaving some of the Victims with
them. The Baoditti who frequent rather than Inhabit that dangerous Coast live in
a state of total insubordination. - This precludes every hope of forming with
them a Convention for bringing t o Mogadore without delay all Christians indiscriminately who might have the misfortune to be wrecked there and fall in their
hands. - Knowing the dreadful hardships they are made to undergo whilst
they rema& with those Savage Men a plan of this Nature came under consideration
of the Consula here, but was found impracticable; on the contrary there appeared
reason to dread it. might lead to a greater evil, as the holding forth a liberal encouragement or reward might promote an increase of demands, under a strong
presumption they would be accorded to. - For these reasons it has been deemed
most adviseable to leave the success of Redemption to chance as heretofore. Spain in the beginning of 1805 redeemed a Crew by the interventioli of Agents
employed by the Emperour, a mode they will not repeat as it cost them very
dear. - Five Swedes who landed in the Month of May 1804 near Cape Non
in quest of Water, will now probably be speedily released as orders have lately
been sent to Mogadore to redeem them on the best terms can be established three hundred dollars each has been demanded. Six English Seamen saved out of a Vessel wrecked, for whom a Negotiation
with the Arab who has them, has long been ending under Mr Gwyns management, still continue in the Country beyond Iduley Solimans Dominions, because
the sum demanded for them has been deemed more than regular. As I cannot consider any part of the duty of the Office I am honourd with
to go before the preservation of the lives and restoring the Liberty of Citizins
of the United States, I have not lost a moment in directing Mr Gwyn to take
such previous measures as may pave the way for the speedy release of Captr
Severs and his Ships Company, without however his comeing under any positive
engagement until1 I shall have given him farther Instructions. - A few days
may bring advice of the rate paid for the mentioned Swedes, on which the fate
of the Englishmen will very much depend. - These will be a guide to us. Taking into consideration the state in which Captives are whilst with the Arabs,
I fully perbuade myself the Redemption of these unfortunate Men without delay,
will meet the fullest approbation of Government. - The great dMiculty exp c e d at this time to passing Bills on the United Rtatee a t the Neighbouring
orta of Europe, may if it continues prove an unpleasant circumstance in this
busyness, by preventing my obtaining readily the necessary funds. I can only say my best endeavours shall not be wanting for obviating that or
any other obstacle may interfere or threaten to retard a full attsinrnent of the
desirable object in view. - At the time the late Emperour Sidy Mobamet
concluded the Treaty of 1786 with the United States, he wished the World to
believe hie dominion extended far beyond where in fact it reached. - This
gave rise to the second clause of the 10% Article, which certainly neither him
or any of hie, Successors have had i t in their power to fulfill. - When Muley
Soliman has been able to get any Christians out of the hands of the Arabs, he
has sent them to Tangier; as we experienced with some of the Ship Oswego and
Schooner Beteeye Crew: but t o have reliance on him for the release of all would
aerioualy hazard the loss of many. - The E uipment of the Emperours Ships
a t Larach for a Cruize is in forwardness; all g u t the Mirbaha, which has been
laid on the Beach as unfit for further Service. The Magistrates of Bremen havin authori~edthe Portu ese Consul General
here to negotiate the release of the &aptsin and Crew of t%e Vessel under that
F* &ken last Summer, the Emperour referred him to 8idy Muhammud Selawy,
m t h whom the Redem tion was six weeks ago established a t s thousand DoIlars
for the Muter, la mucg for the Mate and six hundred for each of the Seamen. This arrangement has not yet been approved by His Maleaty, of consequence

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS
delay givw room to apprehend a greater
-- the-

the people remain a t Rhabat,
Ransom is expected for them.

[Enclclwrel

Translation of Letter from B. Berret a Passenger on board the Brig Indefatigable
to the Consul of the United States a t Tangiers. Note. This Letter marks
neither Place nor Date.
I have the honor to inform you that the Brig indefatigable of Philadelphia,
sailing from Gibraltar was lost on the Coast of africa. We have fallen into the
hands of the Turks. As Americans we claim of you that you would cause us
to be taken to Tangiers. As we have all been dispersed I take the Liberty to
address to you the present Letter (as a Passenger in the said Brig and a Nsrtive
of New Orleans.
The Bearer of this Letter will inform you where we are he is one of those who
took us on the shore I know not whether the Captain has written to you. Five
days after we were taken we were sent off into Slavery.
B. BEBEET
The Captain's name is B. F. Seavers, the name of the Mate is Lee, the Crew
consist.^ of eleven Men besides the Cabbin Boy.
[NA. SDA. CL, Tangier, Vol. 2, 1803-1810.1

-

To Yidshipman Thomas Macdonongh, U. 8. Navy, U. 8. Schooner Entcrptilc. from
Captain John Rodgers, U. S. Navy
U S SHIP Constitution
Syracuse Htb March 1806
SIR You are desired to join the U States SIoop Siren, as one of her Lieut*,
and report yourself to Cap# John Smith her Commander [LC. JRP, Order Book No. 2, 1805-1806.1

To William Biggins, U. S. Navy Agent, Xalta, from Captain John Bodgers, U. 8.
Syracuse t Y t h March 1806

SIB Your letter of the 19* Instant, with the enclosed Accounts, came duly

-

to hand by Gun Boat Ns 4
I shall come over to Malta, I expect, with the Squadron, about the 5t+ of next
Month, in order to settle their Accounts As no Store Ship has yet arrived from the U States, I could wish that you
would have twenty Tons of Bread procured by the time I mention being at Malta,
ss I wish t o proceede as far Westward as Tunis - When I come over, I will
either give you Cash for the disbursements of the Squadron or K
ills,as most
suitable to yourself.
[LC. JRP, L Bk B, May 1805-July 1806.1

To Secretary of the Navy from Captain John Ilodgers, U. S. Navy
U S SHIPConstituiion
Syracuse 87t4 March 1806
SIR I have to inform you, that out of the Bills drawn by me, on you, of the
18th December 1805 for 90,000$ in favor of Frederick Degen Esqr Naples - I
have Negotiated but 22,500$the residue I have destroyed [LC. JRP, L Bk B, May 1805-July 1806.1
To Burgeon Edwnrd Cntbnsh, U. 8. Navy, U. S. Hoepitel, S p c n s e , &om Capkin
John Rodgera, U. 8. Navy
U S SHIP ComfitUtion
Syracuse 87t4 March 1806
SIR YOU are requested to send the Men in the Hospital, under your care,
belon ing to the U S Sloop Siran and Schooner Bderpn'w, on board their respective h s e l s , provided they are not eo unwell as absolutely to forbid the Bsme
(LC. JRP, Order Book No. 2, 1806-1806.1

-

406

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1806 TO 1807

To lieutenant James Semphill Higinbothom, U. 6. Navy, Trabaccolo No. 2, Syracuse,
from Captain John Rodgers, U. 6. Navy
U S SHIPConstitution
Syracwe g7*b March 1808
SIR You are desired to give the charge of Trabacolo N? b to MFA Coale Midshipman, furnishing him with an Inventory of a11 the provisions and other public
Stores on board, and belonging to said Vessel, taking duplicate receipts from M;
Coale for the same, one of whtch you will t r a n m l t me. [LC. JRP, Order Book No. 2, 1805-1806.1
To James Dodge, U. 6. Charg6 diAffaires, Tunis, from l a s t e r Commandant Issac
Hull, U. S. Navy
UNITEDSTATESBEIG Argw
Thursday Morning 7 0.Qock
Tunis Bay b7tb March 1808
DEAR
SIR,The [U.S. Sloop of 10 Guns] Hornets Boat has this moment arrived
with information, that she is on shore, about ten miles this side of Cape Bon,
and that she will most likely go to pieces. - I wish you to send off a man i m m e
diate1y to her assistance, with an officer of the Beys to prevent the Arabs from
Robbing the men It will be necessary to have a large Boat to go down to bring off the men, and
raise the Guns if possible -when the Boat comes down, I wish you to send some
erson that you are acquainted with to go in her, I shall send an officer from the
- I pray you to make all possible dispatch. It will be well to send a Cable and Anchor to heave her off, if she has not gone
to pieces. - Mr Clarke & Mr Lewis will give you every mistance. [NDA. I m c Hull LB, 1803-1806.1

hig.

William Kirkpatrick, U. S. Conaul, Mdega, Spain, from Captain John Rodgers,

U. s. Navy

U S SHIPComzitution

Syracuse $7 March 1806

DEAESIR Your truly esteemed, & duly appretiated favor of the 8tP Instant,
I received by the Siren,and for which be pleased to accept my most ~incereac-

knowledgements I t is not for want of inclination, that I have been so long, in the Mediterranean
without visiting my worthy friends in Malaga, and aa letters are not used to blush,
I can tell you, with a clear conscience, that I have not yet, made an Acquaintance
among the Exquisitely Polite Italians, that I hold in Competition with thst of Mr
Kirkpatrick and his Amiable family I have thought of you every day, and aa offen wished to see you, but the nature
of our &airs has denied me the happiness I congratulate you, on the general health of Malaga last Summer, & fall, and
sincerely hope you may n m r have a return of the horid Yellow fever
This quarter affords no news worthy of remark, farther than what is produced
by the Gigantic Strides, and Complete success of Bounaparte, who appears to
bear down every thing before him, on the Continent, He is now in complete possession of all the King of Naples Dominions, except Scjcily
My poor Italian friends, are much more inclined to listen, attentively to soft
Muaick Issued from the Mouth of a pretty Woman, or the Pipes of a Piana, than
they are to the rough discord gulfed from the Muzzles of Cannons; therefore had
the Politeness to evacuate Naples, without affording the French so far as to listen
to a single tune.
I hope soon to have the pleasure of seeing you in Person-I pray you present my
most respectful regards to your Amiable M- Kirkpatrick and familly, with whom
you have my most earnest wishes for your Health & happiness The 2 Boxes of Raisins I have recgived, and for which be pleased to accept my
thanka PC. J R P , L Bk B, May 18QWdy 1806.1

-

-

W&S

WITH BARBARY POWERS

To James Dodge, U. S. Chard d'Affaires, Tunis, from Xnster Commandant
Isaac Ed, U. 8. Navy
UNITED~TA!I'EBBBIQ Atgtla
Tunis Bag S8Q March 180g

DEARSIB, I am happy to inform you that the Hornet [Sloop of 10 Guns] hag

been got off, without receiving much damage, except the loss of the Cable, Anchors and Gum, and consequently we shall not want the assistance of the Boats
I wrote to you for on the 27'4
Mr Crane comes to Town to endeavor to purchase a Cable and two A n c h m
for the Hornet, I wish you to assist him in getting them - He will give his draft
on Mr Higgins for the amount, countersigned by me if necemary. - f think it may
be possible to purchase one from the Brig that drifted on shore this morning, or perhaps Hadunis may have one that he will sell or lend until1 we can return it.
If an
oppertunity offers I wish you to thank the Admiral in my name for his kind and
friendly treatment to the Officer belonging t o the Hornet, who slept on bosrd hB
Ship the other Might. - Mr Crane likewise informs me that he wss treated
politely by the Cap5 of the Forte near Cape Bon when he was on shore, i t will be
well to thank him for his att.ention. - It will be necessary for us to land near this
Fort in Order to get the Guns of the Homet, which 1 suppose will make i t net*
sary for you to inform him that we are coming and for what purpose- - I ?sh
you likewise to send on board a Man from Town to go down with us, o t h e m I
fear the Arabs will not let us land, without doing it by force - You may desire
the man you send to be prepared to stay six or eight days on board, for i t is uncertain whether we shall have Weather that we can land in - A man that is
acquainted will be the most acceptable. - We have had a very heavy Gale and I
fear much damage is done among the Merchant Ships
Three are already on
shore - The Hornet has no Anchors, and has been riding by us the whole
Gale. [NDA. Isasc Hull LB, 1803-1806.1

-

-

-

To Secretary of the Navy from Master Commandant John H. Dent, U. 8. Navy
U. STATESSLOOP[BRIG]Hornet
New York - d8 March 1806

SIR,I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your fetters of the 20 & 224
Inst together with one under cover to Commodore Rodgers - they came to hand

on the 25 The Hwnei is now unmoored, and will in a few hours be a t sea
I should have
Bailed on the morning of yesterday had not not Mr Skipwith thought it advisable
to wait for the arrival of the mail of today, to receive such letters as might be
on their way for Himself or the Hornet I am concerned to inform you that Mr Fate [MoFate] haa not yet arrived, and
fear he will not previous to our sa~ling
I am ordered by your letter to join the squadron in the hlediterranean
On
my arrival there being junior in command to some of the Captw, a change may
be desired, and acceded to by the Commodore - to be superseeded in the command of the of the Hornet would I confess be very mortifying, and is a circumstance
I have eve reason to suspect unless secured in the command by your particular
order - This small favor I flatter rnyseLf I mas ask with c o ~ d e n c esince
,
the
service can derive no particular advantage from the change that frequently takes
place among our smaller vessels - on the contrary it is generally attended with
considerable disadvantages as well as expenae, and that of being removed from a
Crew whom we have trained ourselves, and whose services we can rely upon t o
one we know nothing of, and will always require a considerable time to acquire
that knowledge so necessary on board a Vessel of War - is, perhaps not the least,
and might of itself be a sufiicient consideration to prevent its being done unleaa in
cases of particular necessity - I am now fully prepared for a Cruise of the usual
length of time, and will with plelasure oontinue on any station I may have the
honor of being on, if this vessel is secured to me - if not, I must beg the llberty
of returning and be disposed of in some other way-As our present destination is
for France it will perhaps afford sufficient time for your orders should you think
pro r to honor me with them in Gibraltar x e Expeoces of the Hmnef r i l l no doubt surprise you on ?he first dew, but
will I doubt not subside when you ere acquainted with ber part~cultvsituation on
my taking command, and that not a single Indent for stores or proviaions had

-

-

-

408

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1806 TO 1807

been filled up, and that every necegsruy article required by a vessel on her fitting

out was necessary Mr Green haa forwarded to the acconttant a Muster Table from which will
derive all the information respecting the Crew &9
[NDA. MC LB, 1806-1807.1

-

To lieutenant Sybrant Van Schaick, U. 8. Navy, from Captoin John Bodgera, U. 8.
Ban'
U S S a r ~Cmtitulion
Syracuse 29Q March 1806
Sm I have to inform you, that by the sentence of a Court Martial, approved by
me, you are suspended from your Command as Lt in the Navy of the U States for
One Month, commencing on the 28th Instant - As also that you are, by sentence
of said Court, to be Mulked of all your pay, from the date of your Arrest of the
27t9 Ultimo untill the expiration of the period for which you are suspended [LC. JRP, Order Book No. 2, 1805-1806.1

T o Secretary of the Navg from fdaster Commandant John H. Dent, U. S. Bavy
U STATESBRIGHornef AT SEA.
g9 March I806

SIR,I have the honor to inform of our having left New York this morning and in
a few minutes shall discharge the Pilot having the light house of Sandy Hook now
aatern with a fine Breese from the Westward - I a m sorry to inform you that
the Marines Clothing did not arrive before our leaving New York, for the want
of which I fear the Marines will suffer very much
MvFate & the Carpenter joined the Brig yesterday
[NDA. MC LB, 1806-1807.1
-

-

To Captain Samuel Sbaflord, commanding American Ship ~ a n & n Pw&fh Baltimore,
Md., from Secretary of the Navy

NAVYDEPART.

29 March 1806.
As soon as the London Packet1 shall be ready for Sea you will weigh anchor and
proceed direct to Gibraltar. On your Arrival a t Gibraltar you will wait on John
Gavino Esqs to whom you will deliver the enclosed letter, and &-hosedirections you
will take relatively to the disposition of the Cargo. Should Mr. Gavino direct you
to proceed to Syracuse with a part or the whole of your Cargo you will then immediately proceed to that place and on your Arrival there wait on George Dyson Esqi
Navy Agent, deliver to him the enclosed letter addressed to him & the letter
addressed to Mr. Higgins and land your Cargo under his directions. But should
Mr. Gavino direct you to proceed to Malta you will then deliver to Wv Higgins
Esqr Navy Agent a t that place the letter addressed to him and also the lettex
addressed to George Dyson Esqr and you will take Mr. Higgins's directions respecting your Cargo.
[NDA. GLB, VoI. 8, 1805-1807.1
--

Extract from log of IT. 6. Brig Hornet, of 18 ouns, Master Commandant John H.
Dent, U. 8. Bavy, commanding, 29 l a r c h 1806
First part these 24 hours fresh breezes from the S: W with clear weather People employed making every preparation for Sea. Mr M ~ F a t eBoatswain joined
the Brig and Mr Berry Boatswain left the Brig on furloe. - Middle art light
At 6 a m got underneigh and miled from New fork. A t
Airs from the N W
10 A M discharged the Pilot and made sail the light house then bearing €3 W;B W
dietant about 3 miles. A t 11. A M the Iight House on Sandy Hook. bore W % N
distant 6 leagues, stowed the anchors At Meridian the Body of the Highlands
of Never Sink bore West dietance 7 leagues from which I take my departure.
Ends light airs and pleasant weether Mr Savage, Masters Mateof the Hold wae
left a t New York, in conse uence of his not coming on board m time
He wse
absent 6 days prior to the %eweis &ling [NA. NDA. original, 1805-1810.1

-

-

-

WARS WITH BARBARY POWER8

409

To President Thomae Jefferson from Secretary of the navy
Nav D E P 91
~ March 1806
THEPRESIDENT- 1 consider i t proper to submit to your consideration the proceedings of Wq Lyman Esqr Conaul a t London in relation to the Ship Huntress md
her Cargo consisting of provisions and stores for our Squadmn in the Mediterranean. I would however premise that, Mr Lyman not having made to me any kind
of communication upon the subject the only information I possess is derived from
papers that have been transmitted to me by the owner of the Huntress and from
a Letter from Mr Lyman to the Secretary of State dated Jam 14 1806.
This vessel and cargo having been acquitted by the decree of the Admiralty
Court the Captain was thereupon bound by virtue of her Bill of Lading and Charter Party to have proceeded on the Vo age and to have delivered the car o a t
Malta or Syracuse. But, it seems, Mr $man authorized him to land the &rgo
in England for sale and t o return to the United States without performing the
Contract made by him with the Navy Depmt
From tbis interference of our Consul our Squadron had been deprived of a very
valuable and well assorted Cargo of stores and Provisions and the United States
b v e moreover been subje'cted to the payment of freight to which the owner would
not have been entitled but upon the delivery of the Cargo a t hlalta or Syracuse. From the papers I have seen i t further appears that Mr Lyman hss (upon what
principle I know not) paid the expences of certain repairs of the Huntress and has
his letters countenanced an expectahon that the United States would defray all
other expences for her repairs and all other costs and charges of the Captain in
relation to her. An Account has aceordingIy since the return of this vessel been
presented to me by the Owner to the amount of $7407:54. This claim not being
sanctioned by Law nor by the usage of merchants I have informed the Owner it
cannot be paid by the Navy Department. This Cargo was by the sentence of the Court restored to us on the 12t4 of
Sepr 1805 and Mr Lyman has not yet rendered to me an account of the Sales
thereof nor haa he given me any kind of information respecting it. And the first
communication made by him to the State Department of the Decree of the
Admiralty Court was dated Jsnr 14 1806 - four months after the date of the
decree. It is not unworthy of notice that this Cargo cost in the United States Dq
49,503:84 and was probably worth more in England. Mr Lyman in one of his
letters to the Captain states that he has advised him to return with the Huntress
to the U. States "as not only the condition of the Cargo but the future probable
want thereof at the place of original
destination render it unadviseable that the
same shall be sent there". With respect to the condition of the Cargo i t does not appear that Mr Lyman
had caused, as is usual, a Survey to be made thereon or that he wss in possession
of any sort of proof to satisfy himself that the Cargo was not in good condition.
And when I consider the articles that compose the cargo I cannot permit myself
to believe that any such proof could have been produced. For what could have
injured the most valuable articles of the Cargo - such as Beef-Pork-WhiskeyRum-Molasses-Cannon
Shot-Powder-Masts-Spars-Plank-ScantlingCordage and the l i e ? There were in the Cargo but a few articles and those of
little importance that could bave been injured. And with respect to the "probable want of the Cargo in the Mediterranean"
Mr Lyman not having been apprized of the views or the arrangements of the
Government ought to have known that he was utterly incompetent to judge.
And in truth in his judgment he did err most egregiously. [NDA. Nom. & Appta., 1798-1820.1

-

To Captain 3ohn Bodgers, U. S. Navy, or the OfEcer Commanding the U.6. Squadron in the Mediterranean, from Secretary of the l a w
XAVYD E P U.
~ STAPES31 March 1806,

Captain Shaflord of the Store Ship London Packett* will deliver to you thh letter.
He hss been directed to take the directions of Mr Gavino respectznq the dispogition
of the Cargo committed to hie charge. A part will probably be delivered a t

410

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1806 TO 1'807

Gibraltar - the remainder a t Malta or Syracuse as Mr Gavino may judge most
expedient from his communications with you. I enclose copies of my letters of 12tb Octr 1805 - and 2 2 4 March 1806.
*Strandedgoing oat of the Chesapwke,ApcU 8,1808.

[NA.

NDA.

-

-

LB, May 1799-July 1807.1

To Secretary of the Navy from Yaster'e Mate John B. Henry, U. 6. Navy
PHILAD*
3I.e March 1806. SIR.- I take the Liberty of addressing you to inform you that according to
our Orders last April I joined Gun Boat NP4 Commanded by Lieut Henley as
&asters Mate in which situation I continued on Board said Vessel untill we came
on terms with the Tunisiens I then solicited permission from Corn. Rodgers
to return home on Furlow my psy not being adequate to the support of my
Family Com. Rodgers very kindly offered me the first Vacancy of blaster & a t
the same time mentioned that Col. Lear wished me very much to accept the
situation of Secretary to him I accepted of it Sir on receivin an Unlimited furlow
from Corn. Ralgers d continued in the Service of Col. f e a r better than three
months I left him two days previous to the d l i n g of the Constitution from
Leghorn for Algiers, I took passage Sir from Leghorn for Philadelphia in the Ship
Phoeniz Capts Peterson which place I left on the 14tP Dect in the latter part of
January we arrived on the Coast & owing to severe Weather had to bear away
for the West Indies under the Lee of Guadsloupe was boarded in a Calm by three
armed Boats from the British Frigate Zlnicorn Capt? Hardyman who overhauled
our papers & ordered our Ship for Antigua after putting a Lieut. 2 Midshipmen
& 4 Seamen on Board, she wss sent in under the Idea of being bound from one
Enemy's port to another & will no doubt be Condemned they take all our Vessels
most that are bound to or from their Enernys ports. I remained there untill I
got an Opportunity of getting a passage home which happened a Week after
direct for Philadelphia where I arrived a few days ago.
With respect to my Conduct as sn Officer Sir I refer you to Lieut. John D.
Henly's Brother or any Officer in Washington that came home in the lsst Squadron
from the Meditteranian who were ac uainted with Lieut. Eenley since he assumed
the command of Gun Boat N* 4. !Nothing Sir but the Interest of my Family
caused me to demand a Furlow & our Country being a t Peace with all Nations
thought my Services could be dispensed with untill Actual Service required it
If you will please to direct an Answer to the care of Geo. A Henry Mercht NP 56
N. Front Street
[NDA. Officers LB, Vol. 1, Jan-May 1806.1

-

-

--

[3l March 18061
Extract from Regulations issued by Master Commandant John Shaw, U. S, Navy,
New Orleans
Art 6 Every seaman belonging to the yard is expected to supply himself with
the following list of Clothes and the commanding officer is to keep an account
of the clothes belonging to the men vix*
2 Jacoats
2 r Stock2 Waistcoats
2 h a c k silk Hkdfs
1Eat
3 p white Trowsers
1 Blue Trowsers
2 p Drawera
4 Ehirta
1 pr Shoes
[NDA. MC LB, 1806-1807.1
To Sailing Masters Xathaniel Haraden and A. C. Harrison, Limtenants Arthur
Sinclair and James Lawrence, lllidshipman John D. Benley, U.8. Navy and Commanding O5cer of Gunboat NO.10, from Captain John Bodgers, U. 8. Hevy

U S SKIPCanstiluSion

Syamse 1 Apl 1808
SIB You will put on board of Gun Boat Nq 7 (Tripoline) Two Seamen & Two
Ordinary Seamen, who are to remain on your Books and be Victualed from the
Veaeell under Your Command urtill further Orders, On sending theae Men on

411

- WARS W1T.R BARBARY POWERS

Board you are desired to send with them 15 Days Provisions, for which you will
take the rsc, of the OEcer under whose Command they are placed Lc U H a r d e n hrp 8

LI S+ Clair
DQgent to

"

5

I
_

Lt Narriaon
Lt Lawrence

" 6 t~f u y h i!f$2 ( T r i ~ i n e }

"6

QQ~ e nto
t
" 4 to furnish Latteen Bombard
L1 Hedey
C o m e officer " 10" &g
QQ
$9
P. S. I n addition t o the 4 Men ordered, you will put 2 Ordinary Seamen
on board Trabaccola NP2 under Charge of Mt Coale with 15 Days provisions,
which Men are also to remain on your Books, and lrictusUed from under your
Command until1 further Orders
[LC. JRP, Order Book No. 2, 1805-1806.1

-

To Lieutenant Joahna Blake, 73. S. Navy, from Captain John Rodgem, U. 8. Navy
U S SHIPConstitution
Syracuse I** Api 1806

SJRYou are desired to inform the Commanding Officers of the U S Vessels
now in this Port, that it is my request they will, as many of them whose duty's

will admit a dis-tion
of their presence on board, attend the Funeral of Lieut*
Cartee, from the U S Hospital a t half past one OClock
[LC. JRP, Order Baok No. 2, 1805-1806.1

-

T o Midshipman W f i m J. Mclntosh, U. 6. Navy, from Captain John Bodgem
U. S. Navy

U S SHIPCmtilPrtion

Syracuse 1.1 Apl 1806

SIR You are directed to remain a t this place, in Charge of the four Trabaccaloa,

&O all the Public Stores in the Arsensl, including those on board the Trabaccalm
in the Baaon of the same, and in the Store house No 4 as you will be held acwuntable for every Article of Stores under your charge, for whch you have receipted,
It is necessary t.hat you &odd not omit taking the proper Receipta for Stores,
you may deliver to any Vessel of the Squadron that map require the e r n e , during
my absence; In this case the same regulations are to exist as has been m form
hitherto The delivery of Stores being subject only t o the order of the Commanding Officer in Port - To assist you in the performance of these Orders,
Two Ordinary Seamen will be placed under your Immediate directions,
[LC. JRP, Order Book No. 2, 1805-1806.1

-

To Captain James Barron, U. 8. Navy, Bampton, VB.,from Secretary of the Navy
NAVD E P9, ~April 1806.
called on t o takeathe Command of the
It is probsble that you will soon
Squadron in the Mediterranem. 'i glve you this information now that you may
be making your arrangements accordingly. [NDA. OSW, Vol. 7, 1805-180'7.1

To Lieutenant Arthur Binclair, U. 8. Navy, from Cap%& John Bodgera, U. S. Brvp
U S SHIPConstitution
Syaczcbe M Apl1806

BLR Inatead of Gun Boat NP9, I have to direct that you Besume the Chmmsnd
of Gan Boat NP10, and that you receive from M FSteele, Midshipmen, now Commanding Officer on board of her, sll the papers, Documents Stores &* &o belonging
to her, and for which you are accountable, giving the necessary recei ts for the
aame
YOU. will C a n 4 My Order of the 224 M m h , givmg MI d b a o d h o ~
Command untdl further orders
PC. JRP, Order Book No. 2, 1805-1806.1

-

-

412

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1806 TO 1807

To Midshipman Alfred Code, U. S. Navy, U. 8. Trebaccolo No.2. from Captain
John Bodgers, U. S. Navy
U S SELIPConstdution
Syracuse 84 Apl 1806
Sra You are directed to remain here, with the U S 'lkabaccalo NQ 2 subject

to the orders of the Commanding OfFicer of the U f5 Schooner Nauiilus, until1
further orders from me, you xill be held accountable for the Expenditure of every
Ration of Provisions put on board the Vessel under your Commend [LC. JRP, Order Book No. 2, 180.5-1806.3
To Lieutenant Samuel Evans, U. S. Navy, commanding U. S, Schooner N a u f i h ,
Syracuse, from Captain John Bodgers, U. S. Navy
U S SHIP Constitution
Syracuse Bd April 1806
SIR After my Departure from this Port, should either a transport arrive with
provisions for the Squadroxi or a Vessel with dispatches for me, you are desired
to direct them to proceede to Malta, without loosing a single Moment - You
are to remain here with the Nautilus untill further orders
[LC. JRP, Order Book No. 2, 1805-1SO6.1

-

To Purser Thomas Johnson lor Johnston], U.S. Navy, U. 6. Frigate ComfIIufion,from
Captain John Rodgers, U. S. Navy
U S SHIP Constitution
Syracuse dB A p L 18W
SIR YOUare directed to take under your Charge, untill further Orders, all
the Private effects of Lt S Cartee, Deceased, late Commander of Gun Boat NQ10
[LC. JRP, Order Book No. 2, 1805-1806.1

-

To Captain John Bodgers, U. 6. Navy, from Master Comm andant Isaac Hull,
U. S. Navy
UNITEDSTATESBRIGArgus
08 Cape Bun 34 April 1806
SIR, I am sorry to inform you, that the Hornet has been on shore near Cape
Bon, where she lay several hours on very Rocky bottom, which leads me to suppose, that her bottom must be very much injured - So much so, as to make i t
That and the circumstance of his having stove
necessary to heave her out
some of her Water Casks, and lost Anchors and Cables, and one of her Boats;
has induced me to send her into Port, for the purpose of refitting, knowing that
i t is your wish, that the Veseefs of the Squadron should be in the best possible
order for service a t this moment. - I thought i t more adviseable to send her
in now, than to detain her, untill the Cruize is out, Particularly as every thing
for the particulars of her going on shore, and what
is quiet on this station
has since happened, I beg leave to refer you to Lieutenant Crane. I enclose you a copy of all the Letters that have passed between M r Dodge
and myself, by which you will see that every thing is quiet on this station, and
that every possible means was resorted to for the preservation of the Crew of
the Hornet, had she not been so fortunate as to have got off.
The Bey appeared to do every thing in his power to assist us
He gave orders for our being
furnished with Boats Cables and Anchors for the purpose of heaving her off. And on Mr Dodge's making application for a man to send down to a fort near
where she was on shore, to inform them what Vessel it was, and to give orders
that the men should be protected. He instantly sent off three of his soldiers,
with directions to the Cap? of the fort, t o give them every mistance in his Power,
and to see that the Crew were protected from the Arabs.I am extremely
sorry that the circumstance of the Hornsie getting on shore, and her very long
passage to this Bay, is likely t o oblige me to deviate from that part of your
Orders that directs me to go t o Cagliara in Sardenia, but I trust when ou are
made acquainted with the dela and dificuhy I have had in getting up the K w n e t ' s
Gum Bt fitting her again for ,&a, that you wdl be convinced that i t has not as
yet been in my power and I fear that so much time has already elapsed, that I

-

-

-

-

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

413

shall not have time to go there and return here again, before the time you sppointed for my being relieved, will have expired. I have two of the Hornets Guns on board but the weather is such that they
cannot be sent on board without great danger
I shall keep them mtill she
returns.
mDA. Isaac Hull LB, 1803-1806.1

-

-

[4 April 18061
Gtatement of the Account of Charles W. Peale againat the United States for
Presents to the Bey of Tunis
The UNITEDSTATESDr.
To CHARLES
W. PEALEFor 3 Polygraphs Mounted with Silver for the Bey of Tunis,}

@??go.

-

ea- - - - - - - - - _ - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -

Walnut cases lined with C1ot.h & 2 packing cases for the same- -

-

30.

-

$600.

-

The above mentioned articles have been obtained from Mr Peale as presents

to the Bey of Tunis and they may therefore be paid out of the appropriations
for Barbary Intercourse
DEPART+
STATE4 April 1806
[GAO. No. 17,916.1

JACOBWAGNERCh. Clk.

To John Ridgely, U. S. Charg6 d'bffaires, Tripoli, from Captain John Bodgera,
U. 6. Navy
U S SHIPConstitution
Malta 614 Ap! 1806
DEARSIR Your esteemed favor of the 14th U l t ~I have this moment RecQ and
feel my self much obliged by its contents - I much regret that Circumstances
have so conduced as to prevent my sendiog a Vessel to Tripoli, in conformity
with my last intentions to you, having been ever since that period in momently
expectatioris of receiving advices from Government, which would enable me to
make a regular disposition of the different Vessels
however I have received
some instructions which has ohliged me to Keep the Squadron collected, and such
as the fear of this not falling into your hands, prevents my Communicating a t
this moment - I shall in the course of Six weeks be able to send a Vessel to
Tripoli, and a t the same time take you and your friends t o Lebda, and our worthy
friend kIr Niessen, if he is xeady to depart, to any part of Europe, within the
Mediterranean, that he nlay wish to be landed a t The Bey of Tunis is too wise not to Know his own Vulnarability sufficiently
well to give us decided cause to make him fee1 our Resentment by the exercise of
such a force as we have here a t present - Instead of a general Peace in Europe,
Appearances, a t present, I rather conceive indicate a general War I arrived here the day before yesterday with Ten Gun Boats, Three Bombs,
One Brig, One Schooner, and my own Ship - The Argus and Hornet are on a
Cruize of observation, and the Essez, Vimn and Enterprize a t Gibraltar - The
Entwpn'ze I expect here every moment with &patches from Government Pray Present my respects to h47 Niessen & the Spanish Consul - I hope yet
to see yo11 soon.
The Siren is just returned from Algiers, Col! Lear has not mentioned any thing
particular farther than that a Portuguese Squadron is off there, whose business
is to make a Peace with the Dey, & that the English Consul has just quit the
Regency in disgust
[LC. JRP, L Bk B, May 1805-1806.1

-

To John ffavino, TY. S, Consul, Gibreltar, from Captain John Badgers, U. S. Navy
G S SHIP Constitution
MALTA7tP Apl18U6
DEABSIR I reached this place with the Squadron the day before Yesterday
I ahrrll remain here until1 the 14 of next Month; when I intend moving with the

-

414

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1806 TO I807

-

Squadron, a little farther Westward
I feel much astonished that I have not
yet hear'd, from our Government, a Single SyIable on the Subject of Tunis.
The British and French are now looking
- s t each other across the Fanu, of
Messina
I have no news to Communicate of any Kind
I beg you be so good as to give
the Enclosed a safe Conveyance to America.
L C . JRP, L Bk B, May 1805-1806.1

-

-

To Secretary of State from Sidi Sulirnan Yelli Melli, Tunisian Ambassador Plenipotentiary, from Hamouda, Bey of Tunis
WASHINGTON
April ?'th 1806
Sm I receiv'd your favor of the 319: UIt on the 5 t h inst and have the honor to
inform you, that I shall hold myself in readiness to depart for Tunis, in as short
a period after I receive an intimation of the rout design'd for me to take, aa the
necessary arrangments for the accomodation of my suit will admit [signed in Arabic]
Compiled from the verbal communicationrt of Siddi Sulirnan Mella Menni
By J L CATHCAET
[NA. SDA, CD, Tunis, Vol. 3, 1805-1806.1
[7 April 18061
To Secretary of the Navy from George Harrison, Navy Agent, Philadelphia, Pa.
SIR, Commodore Prebles medal is a t length struck
& its execution will not
discredit our country
I think i t in every respect equal to that of Gustavus'e I am only waiting for a suitable Box to be made, to forward i t PHILAD
April 7. 1806
[NDA. Misc. LB, Vol. 2, 1806.1

-

-

To Eon. Stephen Row Bradley, United States Senate, from Secretary of the Navy
NAVYD E P8~April 1806 In answer to your letter of the 7tb ins, I have the honor to state, that by an
account settled by the Accountant of the Navy with William Eaton Esqr, it
appears that the sum of $41,487 34/100 has been expended in the expedition with
Hamet Carsmalli against Tripoli. [KA. NDA. Cong. LB, Vol. 1, Dec. 179%-Feb. 1811.5
To George Ilyson, U. 6. Navy Agent, Syracuse, from Captain John Rodgers, 0.6.
Nan'

U S SHIPCmtitution
MALTA
IO* Apl 1806
SIR I have directed L* Evans to proceede hence with the Nautilus,and as you

no doubt have by this time Completed the General Account of the Squadron, you
will do well I Conceive by coming over with him, and bring the same with you I am et as much in the Dark relative to the intentions of Government respecting the $uadmn, M when I Left Syracuse - In Consequence of h e s h Provisions
being scarce a t this place, you will promote the interest of the Service by purchwing 15 or 20 Good Bullocks & sending them over in Trebaccola NQ2 which Vessel
I hsve directed to this place under Convoy of the Nautilus - However I do not
wkh the Vessel detained on this account
[LC. JRP, L 3 k B, May 1805-July 1806.1
To Surgeon Edward Cntbush, U. 6. Navy, U. S. Hospital, Syracuse, from Captain
John Bodgers, U. 8. Navy
U S S ~ I PConstitution
MALTA10% Apl 1808
SIB I have to request that you break u the U S Navy Hospital a t Syracuse, and
have all the furniture Stores, & every tfhgelse belonging to it, removed to the
Magazine of MI Dyson, for their safe Keeping, taking his Reoeipta for the aame -

415

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

The Turkish Officer [Marmora], Wounded, you may either leave with the
Bashaw, on an sllowance of 40 Cents per Day, or bring him here with you in the
Nautilus, the Commander of which Vessel I have directed to furnish you with a
passage [LC. JRP, Order Book No. 2, 1805-1806.1
[I0 April 18061
To Secretary of the Haw, from George Henison, Bavy Agent, Phiradelpbio, Pa.
Sra, I have this day put into the Post Ofice, to your address, the Medal executed
by your order
I t must not be handled or the polish will be injured, by turning
the casewhich covers it, it can be shewnwithout fingering & to the best advantsgeThe Mint being much engaged a t this moment striking small coins, it will be
some time before the Cop er impressions are taken, when finhh'd, will you give
Would it be improper to have
me your orden as to the gisposal of the Diea .a few struck off in silver for individuals, a t lhezr expence
The Artist hes hsnded me in his Bill & for Engraving, polishing &o he has
charged the enormous sum of $850
certainly 350 - if not 450$ more than I
shall pay
When I engaged him he refused to name any price observing i t wse
not possible for him, but that his charge should be a fair & equitable one
460%
will be paying him with great liberality
I will t o morrow or y~ ensuing day,
hand you epecimens of his work from other dies with their prices - I shall then
be obliged by your directions, on this subject
[NDA. Mac. LB, Vol. 2, 1808.1

-

-

-

-

-

[ l o April 18061
Becognition of Nicholas C. Nissen's assbtsnce to U. 6. captives in Tripoli
RESOLUTION
RESPECTING N. C. NISSEN, DANISH CONSUL AT TBIPOLL

Resobed, &c., That the President of the United States be requested to cause to
be made known to Nicholas C. Nissen, esquire, his Danish majesty's consul residing a t Tripoli, the high senm entertained by Congress of hia disintermted and
benevolent attentions manifested to Captain Bainbridge, his officers, and crew,
during the time of their captivity in Tripoli.
APPROVED,
April 10, 1806.
[Navy Register 1798.)
To James Dodge, U. 6. Ch-6
dYAffaires,Tunis, from Master Commandant
lsaac HuH, U. S. Navy

UNITEDSTATESBRIGA r m

Tunis Bay I1*C April 1808
DEARSIR, Agreeable to my promise I have called in for your Letters to the
Commodore, and any others you may have to your friends. - I have been so
fortunste as to get all the Hornets Guns, except one, and that we shall be able to
get any good day that we choose to call for it. - I have sent her to Syracuse to
refit.- Siice I had the pleasure of seeing you I have fallen in with the Enterprk
Capf Porter bound to Gibralter
he left the Commodore well a t Syracuse on
the U l t ~and I fell in with him on the 3@Ins, off Cape BOD
of April, I believe
The Commodore expected to leave Syracuse on the
for Malta with the whole Squadron, and I think most likely he wit1 come off
this Bay - At any rate some of the Squadron must be here soon to relieve
the Argus. - Should your Letters be ready I think you had better send them
on board, for although the Commodore may csll off the Bay, I do not suppose
any of the Squadron will come in, unlw your Communications to him should
make i t necessary, therefore i t will be well for me to have the Lettersto handhim
whenever I may fall in with him. - Capt Smith had arrived from Gibraltar,
but brought no news, and I am told not a single Letter from America. When Capt Porter left Syracuse, news had arrived there that the French had
got pomssion of dl Calabria, and that the Prince had anived at M e d n a ~ t h
ali the Nep0lita.n Troops with him, except such as went over to the French, which
I am told was no mall part of them.
Should our b t t e m get on board tomonow, I shall sail and continyq to WU~W
until I f d i n with some of the Squadron
INDA, Tsssg Hull LB, 1803-1806.1

-

-

416

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1806 TO 1807

To Captain John Rodgers, U. S. Navy, from James Dodge, U. 6 . Charge d'bffaires,
Tunis
TUNISl3tP April 1806
DEARSIR.- On l l t b Inst I waited on the Bey in order to thank him for his
Friendship, and ready complyance with the requests I made some time since,
for assistance &c in the case of the Cutter Hornet. I found his Excellency in
meellent humor, and observed to him in the course of conversation, that I should
mention his activity and attention in the above affair, whenever I should communicate with the Commodore or my Government with which he seemed highly
pleased. - Indeed I must say he behaved truly like a Christian Ally in affording
the relief I requested, and instead of sending only One Mamluke to the =sistance
of the stranded Vessel, and for the protection of any Men or Articles that might
possibly have got on ehore, he sent four of his best Guards well armed, and Letters
to the Governours of the different districts thereabout, to protect the Crew &q
&F if the Vessel had gone to pieces, and to pass them unmolested to Tunis, with
proper attendance. He appears anxious for the return of Sidi Melli Melli and when I informed
him, he was expected hourly, he exclaim'd "God send."
His Cruizers, five
in number are now taking in Water a t Porto Farina, and will sail, it is reported
in about ten days - As I have granted their passports since I had the honor
of writing you, I can now give you a more correct account of their force, altho'
it may not be deemed a matter of such magnitude, as to occupy my pen every
time I write, however no harm can result from your haveing an exact and true
account of them. - The Commadore's Ship is a Frigate of 38 Guns, 350 Men:
she is called the Gamo or Shrimp, commanded by Mustapha Modorly
the
second a Frigate (if you please) of 36 Guns, 300 Men - Third, 34 Guns & 280
fourth 32 Guns 280 Men and the fifth a small corvette of 16 Guns & 110
en - I have forgot I see to mention the Names of the Commanders, here
thev followto the Ship of 36 Guns Rais hlohamet Moraley - 34 Guns,
~ C h a m eLaz'Oglou:
t
32 Guns Sheik Mohamet: & the Corvette by Kalil Magrebly:
I think if the old Constitution could cleverly get in the centre of the whole,
with a little luck she would give a very takeing account of their Mohametehips.
No change whatever has taken place in matters relating to Government. Tunis is in a state of Famine allmost, and a Malignant Fever rages violently
a few days more dry weather will entirely ruin
among the Jews & Moors.the harvest, and we may then expect a severe Famine Pestilence & Plague all
the
together.The Hornet was supplied here with a Cable and one Anchor
anchor is not expected to be paid for or returned, but I have given my word
t o replace the Cable with a new one, it was a 10% Inch hawser: I suppose i t
cen be returned from the Squadron some time, which however you willno doubt
order, in such a way and a t such a time as may be most convenient. - I hope
soon t o have the honor of takeing you by the hand,
P. S. I h v e given the Name of Gamo t o the wrong Vessel, it is the large Xebeque
that bears that name [LC. J R P , Series Two, Vol. 3, 1805-1807.1

-

-

P:
-

-

To Tobias Lear, U. S. Consul General, Algiers, from Captain John Rodgers, U. 8.
Navy
U S SHIP Constitution
&falla
Apl 1806
SIR Your esteemed favor of the 1564 Ultimo, came duly t o hand by the Siren.
and I feel much gratified t o fined that yourself and M19 Lear enjoys good health
I came over here with the Squadron on the 5th Instt in order to settlethe Accounts
of the different Vessels that are orderd home, which Consists of all, except the
Constitzltion Siren and Enter n'ze; This to me is the most extraordinary thing
that I have ever Known our Jovernment t o do, for even admit that these Vessels
are sufficient for the protection of our Trade, in a n ordinary Peace with the
Barbary Powers, it is not most Certainly sound Policy to reduce the Squadron,
a t least until1 after the return of the Tunitian Embaseador, and our affairs are
permanently settled with his Sovereign -

-

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

417

It is equally extraordinary that I have not received but One letter from Government since the arrival of the Congress and Constellatwn, and its whole Contenta
consists, in saying "Let us hear often on the subject of Barbary Atfsirs" - This
circumstance induces me to beleive that Letters must have miscarried, and in
consequence, I shall detain the Vessels ordered home, untill the first of May,
with a belief that I shall receive different Instructions however should this not
be the case, I cant with justice to myself detain them longer, as the order for
their return is positive, and I have received it in Quadruplicate, but as I shall
to the last moment, they remain in the Mediterranean, feel a beIief that I map
receive different advice; I shall proceed down as far as Gibraltar with the whole
Squadron myself; you therefore in that case, may expect to see me off Algiers
by the 15th of next Month a t farthest, but I shall not come into the Bay, with
more than my own ship, until1 after I see you - You may observe in the Presidents Speech that he considers Our Peace with all the Barbary Powers on a secure
footing. - I am sure your Ideas and my own, perfectly agree on this subjed,
which is, that we can not distinctly be said to he a t Peace with Tunis, untill after
the Bey has ratifled the measures his Embassador Concerts with our Government, and for which reasons, i t Cant be otherwise than bad Policy to reduce the
Squadron, untill this grand object is effected, particularly as we Know that the
Bey feels himself humbled and asshamed of the measures, which obleged him to
send an Embassador to the U States, and we also as %-ellKnow that he will prevaricate, and perhaps object to the mertsures his Agent may have devised with
our Government, provided our Force is not equal, to make him feel our immediate
Vengeance, in case of his refusal. The Argus and Hornet have been on a Cruize
of observation off Tunis, since the 1 0 t h March The British are Garisoning Messina and Syracuse, and if they are not quicker
in their movements than they have lately been, the French Army which is now
looking a t them across the Farro, will before the Summer is over, have possession
of Scicily I received a letter from Mr Ridgely yesterday dated the 1-t Inst and it mentions
that we stand perfectly well in that quarter, and that hl? Niessen, is yet there, and
not relieved - Your friends Sir A Ball and Doctr Sewell and their family's are
well When I first met them, after my arrival here, instead of $rsl asking myself
how I was, they enquired WHEN I HAD EEAR'D FROM YOU AND MRS LEAB dc HOW YOU
WERE; This needs no farther explinationThe American Ship Lewis Cap, Pratt of Boston, bound to Palerrno, was sent in
here about three Weeks ago, by an English privaterr and is acquitted with damages
the Captors paying f 600 with Insurance to the port of her destination; This will
make the privateers more cautious Since writing you last, poor Maxwell Commanding Gun Boat NQ 3 & Cartee
No 10have died, Lt Evans Commanding the Xautilus I am afraid will soon Steer
the same Course The Cutter Hornet L$ Crane has just return'd to this port to refit having rrtn
onshore about 3 Leagues to the Westward of Cape Bon she has received but little
damage altho she was 10 hours aground altho, she received no aid in gettine off
yet every assistance was offered by the Tunitians - Lt Crane had no merit i t
is certain in getting the Hornet onshore, yet it is equally certain that he had great
merit in getting her off The Officersof the Squadron & among whom there are a Number of very Clever
fellows desire their Res cts to yourself & 31- Lear, to whom I beg you will present
the most Respectful g m p * of your
[LC. JRP, L Bk B, May 1805-July 1806.1
To Lieutenant Samuel Bvans, U. 8. Navy, commanding U. 6. Schooner Naufihts,
Syrecuse, from Captain John Bodgers, U. 8. Kavy
U S SHIPConstitution
Malta 16t4 Apl 1806
SIRI have to desire that you will proceed hence with the U S Schooner Neulilw,
under your Command without delay, bringing with you, Trebaccalo NQ 2, and affordin to Mr Dyson & Doctr Cutbuah passages hence - You will please to
leave Sirections for whatever Public Vessel may arrive a t Syracuse to proceede
hence for further orders [LC. JRP, Order Book No. 2, 1805-1806.1

418

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1806 TO 1807

[I8 April 18061
Message of President Thomas Jefferson concerning differences with Tunis
To the Senate of the finited States.
I n compliance with the request of the Senate of yesterday's date, I now communicate the entire correspondence between the Ambassador of Tunis and the
Secretary of State. from which the Senate will see that, the first application by the
Ambassador for restitution of the vessels taken in violation of blockade having been
yielded to, the only remaining cause of difference brought forward by him is the
requisition of a present of Naval Stores to secure a peace for three years, after
which, the inference is obvious that, a renewal of the presents is to be expected
to renew the prolongation of peace for another term. but this demand has been
pressed in verbal conferences much more explicitly and pertinaciously than
appears in the written correspondence. to save the delay of copying, some originals are inclosed with a request that they be returned.
TH: JEFFERSON
Apr. 18. 1806.
(Correspondence herein referred to not found in records of Department of
State.)
[NA. Sen. Files, Message of Pres., No. 184, 9th Congress.]
To Captain John Rodgers, U. S. Navy, from Captain Hugh G. Campbell, U. S. Bavy
U S SHIP Essez
Algeziras Roads 18*b April 1806
SIR,I am favor'd with the enclosed by an arrival this morning in 27 days from
Savannah; it is the only paper that I have seen of the least consequence to us, since
that which I forwarded to you on the 30th ult? by the British Ship Pompey bearing
the flag of Sir Sydney Smith On the 3rd instt I run to Tangiers where nothing of consequence has transpired
since my last advice, except that the Emperor has taken possesuion of the Portuguese ship that was captured by the Algerine Frigate, and is now in the act of
storing her cargo. his reason I am told for such conduct is, that the same Frigate
captur'd a small Portuguese Vessel from Sallee, having on board the property of
some Jews of that place, which the Algerines have refused to deliver up. I anchor'd here on the 6tP for the purpose of enjoying good anchorage and the
convenience of filling water, as the wind has invariously blown from the Westward these forty days past, with the exception of about fifty hours - The Spanish Government has order'd an oath of fidelity to be offered to all transient residents in the Kingdom, which seriously sffects Mr Richard Mead of Philadelphia
a t present s Merchant residing in Cadiz - Who has solicited of me to appoint
him our Navy Agent for that Port, in as full a form as my authority would authorize, which he thinks will be sufficient not only to exclude him from the oath but
place him quite independant of many a r b i t m y customs and usages in Spainwhich request I have complied with and hope it will have the desired effect asMr
Mead has acted in that capacity for this ship & The Vizen since December last &
in consequence of our Consul being mostly a t Madrid and those he left to do his
business not being as correct as they should be &C. JRP, Series Two, Vol. 3, 1805-1807.1
To Lieutenant Colonel Commandant Franklin Wharton, U. S. Marine Corps, from
Secretary of the Navy
N a n DEPAETMENT
18Q April 1806.
I n answer to your letter of this day's date, I have to inform you that the Marine
Clothing lost in the frigate Philadelphia in consequence of her capture by the
Tripolitans are to be considered as a loss sustained by the Publick - & Mr.
Osborne the Marine Officer, who had charge of them, is to be allowed for them in
his clothing accounts.
[NDA. USMC, LB, 1804r1820.1

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS
To George Harrison, navy Agent, Philadelphia, Pa., from Secretary of the Navy
NAVYDEPARTMENT
A p d 18. 1808.
I have received your letters of the lo* & 1 2 4 inst relating to Mr Reich'r bill
for engraving &? the model for Commodore Preble. Does Mr Reich's bill for 850$ include the value of the Gold & Copper for the
200 impressions. If so we had better pay i t - It is a delicat Subject, and
rather than have any dispute about it, I would pay 100 or 200s more than the
real value of the Services - The engraving and polishing are admirably executed, & the artist merits a liberal reward. The Medal for Commodore Truxton
cost but 237%
After aigain seeing Mr Reich upon the Subject of his Bill let me hear from you.
INDA. GLB, Vol. 8, 18051807.1

-

[I8 April 18061
Report on message of President tho ma^ Jefferson
The Committee to whom was referred the message of the President of the
United States, of the 18* inst: and the communications accompanying it, submit the following resolution as proper to be adopted by the Senate:
Resolved, That the communications accompanying the message of the President
of the United Statea of the 18* inst. be returned to him, and that he be requested
to renew negotiations with the envoy of the bey of Tunis, and endeavour by
amicable adjustment to settle the differences which am stated to exist between
that regency and the United States; and to redress the injuries and aggressions
which the bey complains of having received from the squadron and agents of
the United States in the Mediterranean, contrary as he says to the express provisions of the treaty more than nine years subsisting between us so far as he may
deem it conformable to justice and the common usage of civilized nations in
their intercourse with The Barbary powers, or the honor and interest of the
United States m a y require
[NA. Sen. Files, Message of Pres., 9th Congress.]

To Saiiing Yaster Bathaniel Haraden, U. S. Bavy, commanding U. S. Gunboat
No.8, from Captain John Rodgers, U. S. Bavy
U S SHIPComlitution
M d l a l Q t P April 1808

SIB You are desired to proceed with Gun Boat N P8 to Syracuse, and transport

to this place the Bread Contained in the encloseel order
to join the Squadron again as early as possible
&C. JRP, Order Book No. 2, 1805-1806.1

-

You are requested

[21 April 18061
Act pertaining to the U. S. Navy, or Peace Establishment Act
United State8 Statutes a t Large. Ninth Congress. Sess. I
An Act in addition to an a d , intituled "An ad supplem-y
to the ad propriding
for a naval peace establiahmeni and for other purposes.
Be it enaded by the Senate a d house of Representatiuee of the United Sfates of
America in Congress assembled, That the second and fourth sectioffs of "An act
providing for a naval peace establishment, and for other purposes, be, and the
same are hereby repealed.
SEC. 2. And be it jurther enacted, That the President of the United States be,
and he is hereby authorized to keep in actual service, in time of peace, so many of
the frigates end other public armed vessels of the United States! as in hi judgment
the nature of the eervice may require, and to cause the rewdue thereof to be
laid up in ordinary in convenient ports.
SEC.3. And be it further enaded, That the public armed vessels of the United
Sta?, in actual service, in time of pesce, shall be ofEcered and manned, as the
President of the United States e h d l direct; proyided that the officere !hall not
exceed the following numbers and grades, that ~sto say; thuteen captmm, nlne
m ~ t e r commandant,
s
seventy-two lieutenants, and one hundred and fifty midehipmen: but the said o 5 c m shell reaeive no mare than half their monthly pay,

420

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1806 TO 1807

during the time when they shall not be under orders for actual service; and
provided further, that the whole number of able seamen, ordinary seamen and boys
shall not exceed nine hundred and twenty-five; but the President may appoint,
for the vessels in actual service, so many surgeons, surgeon's mates, sailing masters, chaplains, pursers, boatswains, gunners, sail makers, and carpenters, as may
in his opinion be necessary and proper.
APPROVED,
APRIL21, 1806.
[Statutes Vol. 11, p. 390.1
a

To Captain James Barron, U. S. Navy, Washington, D. C., from Secretary of the
Raw
NAVYD E P ~
&&@April 1806.
You will hold yourself in readiness to go to the Mediterranean in the Frigate
Chesapeake, for the purpose of taking the Command of the American Squadron
in that quarter. The Chesapeake will probably sail from this place about the 1st
June next, & will call for you a t Hampton unless your presence should be required
a t this place, which is rather improbable. Your Instructions will in due season
be forwarded to you.
[NDA. OSW, Vol. 7, 1805-1807.1

-

To Lieutenant Colonel B. Sewell, Valetta, Malta, from Captain John Rodgers,
U. S. Navy
U S SHIP Constitution
Malta 294 Ap! 1806
Sm, I have the honor to acknowledge the Rect of your letter of yesterday on
the Subject of Two Deserters from the 81 Regiment, and in answer to it's Consequent purport, have to acquaint you that I immediately sent to all the U S
Vessels, now in this port, to ascertain if any such Men were on board of them; I now have to assure you they are not, neither can I discover that any suoh have
offered themselves - The positive Orders under which the Officers, Commanding
the Vessels, of the American Squadron, Act, are such, as to prevent their receiving Deserters from this Garrison, and should any such Men be discovered by
them on board their Vessels after leaving this port, I do assure you they shall
be returned by the very first possible oppertunity Lt C O LRO
~ SEWELL
Dep Adj: Genl La Valette
[LC. JRP, L Bk B, May 1805-July 1806.1
Captain's Commissions sent to Charles Stewart, Isaac Bull and Isaac Chauncey,
from Secretary of the Bavy
NAVD E P24
~ April 1806.
CAP$CEQSTEWART
- Philad*
CAP$ISAAC
HULL- Medq
CAP$ISAAC
CHAUNCEY
- New Yotk.
It affords me real pleasure to have it in my power to transmit to you herewith
s Commission, to which your honorable services so justly entitle you. [NDA. OSW, Vol. 7, 1805-1807.1
Extract from log of U. 8. Brig H o d of 18 Guns, Master Commandant John H.
Dent, U. 6. Navy, commanding, 24 April 1806
These 24 hours commences with strong gales and dark cloudy weather tack
At 1 fired two Guns
Ship occasionally port Louis bearing about N N E.
and made a signal for a Pilot a t 3 past 1 sent the Boat on shore with Lieut
Marcellain to request a Pilot and to inform the Fort the Brig was an American,
they had fired 3 Guns shotted successively a t the Brig to obstruct her approach.
st M past 2 set Jib and F. & Aft Mainsail at 3 struck top gallant yards, and
furled the square Mainsail At 5 received a Pilot on hoard from Port Louia a t 6.
came too an Anchor in 10 fathoms water in Port Louis Roads and furled the
Sails, unbent the small Sails a t 8. the Boat returned with Lieu~Marcellan. Ends
fresh breezes and pleasant Weather.
pA. NDA. origina1, 1805-1810.1

-

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

421

Captain C.M. Schomberg, B. N.,H. B.M.S. Mndtm, from Captain John Bodgers,
U. s. Navy
U S SHIPConstitution
MALTAZ6'c Ap! 1806
SIRAn American Seaman by the Name of French Kellan, a t present on board
H B M Cutter HirondeUe entreats me to request you t o order his discharge from
H B M Service - Not Knowing the particulars relative to said Kellan I am
prevented giving you a farther detail [LC. JRP, L Bk B, May 1805-July 1806.1
To Secretary of the Navy, from A. Vail, U. S. Commercial Agent, L'Orient
L'ORIENT36 April 1806.
SIR, I have the honour to inform you that the [Brig of 18 Guns] Horszd sloop of
war Cap* Dent arived here the day before yesterday after a passage of 24 days,
without accident.
Mr Skipwith who left my house early this morning for Paris, begs the favour of
you to give this information to the department of State.
[Nm.-The official seal 8t the to^ of tblfl letter shows fltteen'stars.J

[NDA.

Misc. LB, Vol. 1, 1806.1

Extract from log of U. S. Brig HM& of 18 Guns, Yaster Commandant John B.Dent,
U. S. Navy, commanding, 25 April 1806
The whole of these 24 hours strong breezes from the N W with pleasant weather
People variously employed At 6 struck top gallant yards. At 8. AM cross'd
Royal and Top Gallant yards and sent the sliding Gunter Masts on end. - This
day Mr Skipwith Consul Genera1 left the Brig for Paris - Patrick Brown was
punished with 2 dozen lashes for drunkenness and insolent language to Lieut
Trippe - This day a britjsh Brig appeared off the Port [Louis], and the Fort
fired several Shot a t her to obstruct her nearer approach
[NA. NDA original, 1805-1810.]
To Secretary of the Navy from Captain Charlee Stewart, U. S. Navy
PEILAD* April 96*91806.
SIR, I am honor'd with the receipt of your letter, of the 244 Ins* together with
my Commission as Cap* in the Navy of the United States. This additional mark of confidence is to me extremely grateful and permit me
to assure you, it is much increased, by the flattering manner in which you have
been pleased to convey it to me.
[NDA. CaptainsJ LB, Vol. 1, 1806.1
Extract from Iog of U. S. Brig Hornet of 18 Guns, Master Commandant John H.
Dent, U. S. Navy, commanding, 26 April 1606
First part these 24 hours fresh breezes from the N: E.; Middle part calm, At
4 AM Weighed the Anchors and with the assistance of shore boats warped the
Brig up to the Mouth of Port Louis, when there, the wind suddenly freshened to
the E. N. E. which obliged us to return and a t 8 AM came too in the Roads again,
veered out 35 f= Cable, Ends with fresh breezes and pleasant weather
[NA. NDA original, 1805-1810.1
To President Thomas Jefferson from John Beich
PEIIAD* April 88% 1806 SIR, It is with great reluctance that 1 have been induced to trouble you upon
any business which merely aonmma myself, but a4 I conceive that I have not
been justly treated I have taken the liberty of intruding a few moments on your
time snd of appealing t o your candour When the Congress of the United States voted a Medal to be presented by
you to Commodore Prebie for hw gallwtry and good conduct in the Tripolifan

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1805 TO 1807

422

War, I was applied to by the Navy agent here to undertake the execution of the
work. After Seven months unremitted labour and attention the dies were completed and the engraving finished in a Style which I apprehend has given universal Satisfaction and which will I flatter myself do credit to the state of the
arts in America. I had hoped that as I was instructed to spare neither time,
expense or pains, that I should have received some adequate compensation.
How great then was my surprise a t being told, when my bill was presented,
that a charge of Eight hundred and fifty dollars for Seven months labour was
"extravagantly high". I confess that I was not prepared for such an observstion nor for another that "it looked like imposition". Of my talents as an artist
you may be enabled to form a judgment from the work in question; and you
will decide whether they are overrated in a charge of about Four dollars a day
for their employment. I trust I shall be pardoned for feeling indignant on this
occasion; but I had no expectation of my being put upon a footing of common
bargain, or having it rated by a comparison with the inferior work of artists in
other branches of engraving, or even with my o m for other purposes. I have
written more in detail to the Secretary of the Navy on this subject; and the
reason of my troubling you is that there is no artist in the Union regularly educated
to the branch of business I profess, there can be none who can be a competent
judge of the merits of such work. Knowing Sir, the opportunities which you
have had of exarning similar productions of art, I have been induced to appeal
to you as the onIy person on whose judgment I can rely. Confiding that after
having examined the medal, you will decide with justice respecting its merit, I
shall rest satisfied with your decision, whatever i t may be. You will permit me
Sir, to ask the favor of an answer to this application.
Jn? REICH
NQ3 South Sixth Sirwl
THOMASJEFFERSON
President of the United States,
Washington
[NDA. Misc. LB, Vol. 2, 1806.1
To Csptoin Charles Stewart, U. 6. Navy, Philadelphia, Pa., from Secretary of the
Navy
NAVYDEPI $8 April 1806.
You will immediately repair to the City of Washington and take the Command
of the Frigate the Chesapeake. [NDA. OSW, Vol. 7, 1805-1807.)
To Hidehipman James BiddIe, U. 8. Navy, U. S. Gunboat NO.I. Charleston, 8. C.,
from Secretary of the Xavy
NAVD E P M ~t 8 April 1806 I have received your letter of the 31'1 ult*
A Gunboat expedition is in contemplation, and the services of No 1 will be
required. I presume that you would not, after receiving this information, wish
t o ive up the command of her. 8ou w i shortiy
~
receive your instructions. I am respu sir, yr ob S+
[NDA. Off. Comdg. Gunboats, 1803-1808.1

-

To Secretary of the Navy from Captain Isaac Chauncey, U. 6. Xavy
NEWYORE $ 8 4 A p d 1806
SIB, I was this day honoured with your letter of the 24tP Ins+ enclosein me
a Commission a. a Captain in the Navy of the United S t a h Permit me &r to
tender you my acknowledgements for the very handsome and obliging manner
that ou have been plesae'd to communicate this further msrk of confidence
And beg to assure you that no exertion's of mine shall be wanting to merit so
high an honour - The importance of which I am fully sensible; eo much BO
that I trust you will have no cause to regret a mieplace'd confidence [NDA. Captains' LB, VoL 1, 1806.1

f

-

W m S WITH BABBARY POWERS

423

To Xaster Commandant David Porter, U. 8. Navy, from Secretary of the Navy
NAVYDEPM*28th A+.! 1806. SIR, I have the pleasure to transmit to you herewith your Commission as a
Master Commandant in the Navy of the United States. {LC. D. Porter P, Let. L Ord., 1805-1808.1
Extract from log of U. 8. Brig Hornet of 18 Guns, Master Commandsnt John H.
Dent, U. S. Navy, commanding, 29 April 1806
[At Port Louis] First part these 24 hours fresh breezes from the N W. with
cloudy weather - A lighter came dong side into which waa put alI the sails and
running Rigging oE the deck to clear i t - All hands occasionally employed, overhauling the Rigging and parparing the Brig. this day the French Commodore
came on board with his Officers and waa very much pleased with his reception.
NDA original, 1805-1810.1

mk

To Sailing Master Humphrey Magreth, U. 8. Navy, U. 6. Schooner N d h , from
Captain John Rodgers, U. 6. Navy
U S S ~ I Constitution
P
MALTA
1'4 May 1806
SIB I have t o direct that you assume the Command of the U S Gun Boat NQ3,
and that you receive from Mr Woodhouse, Midshipman, now Commanding Officer
on board of her, all the Papers, Documents Stores &g $9 belonging to her, and for
which you are accountable, giving the neceasaTy receipts for the same [LC. JRP, Order Book No. 2, 1805-1806.1

Isaac Hull, U. 6. Navy, 7J. S. Brig A t g u from Captain John Rodgers,
U. S. Mavy
U 8 SHIPConstddwn
At Sea 24 May 1806
SIR I shall proceed on direct to Tunis with the Nautilus, and request you to
follow with the Bombs and Gun Boats - Should you arrive a t the entrance of
the Bay, before I have commmicated with Mr Dodge, you are desired to lay off
Imbre Island, Your movements and Station to be regulated according t o existing
Circumstsnces, it being possible that bad Weather may oblige you to pa=, either
to the Eastward or Westward of the Bay [LC. JRP, Order Book No. 2, 1805-1806.1

To Cap*

To James Dodge, U. 8. Charg6 dlAffsires, Tunis, from Captain John Bodgera, U. 6.
Navy
U S SHIPCmtitzdion
Tunis Bay 4 May 1806
DEARSLR1have stood in with my own Ship to ac mint you that the Squadron
is off the entrance of the Bag, on their way to the U & a h , the CaUitution Syren
and Enletprize excepted, these three latter Veasels being all that will remain in the
Mediterranean for the protection of our Commerce & the purpose of Keeping the
Cruiaers of the difFerent Barbary powers in check - I wish to Know from you,
our real sentiments as to the change this will make, on the mind of the Bey? and
Ghether it will be likely to produce a change in his Conduct towards us - For
if so, I shall change the plans, I have in contemplation at present and dispose of
the small Force that remains in a manner to prevent the powlbility of his doing us
any injury
I have not heard a Sylable from Government, respecting Tunis,
since the arrival of the Tunitian Embassador in America, and alltho' the order
which directs my reducing the S uadron, is dated anterior to his arrival in the U
States, yet i t is a, ossitive that! do not feel myself authorbed to act contrary to
its substance - $ou may d
y judge of my Embarrassed situation, as you
Know that f did not expect any part of the present Forces would be ordered home
before ow. &airs were ultimately & finally settled with this Regency - My
present intention is to proceed down to Gibraltar with the Squadron, calling a t

-

424

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1806 TO 1807

Algiers on my passage, in hopes by the time I reach there to, a t least, hear something from Government respecting Tunis, if not a Total suspension of their former
order, until3 after the Embassador is returned to his Court, and the measures he
haa adopted with our Government are ratified and confirmd by his Sovereign My stay here, I m'kh to make as short as possible and as I am obliged to Communicate with Gibraltar, I greatly regret that I shall be prevented the pleasure of
taking you by the hand, untill my return, which
be in about a month or 5
Weeks hence -however I shall leave One of the Bngs or Schooners ob this place on
a Cruize of observation to proceed immediately down to me, in case of necessity I beg you will present my respects to his Excellency the Bey, and tender him my
most respectfd acknowledgements for his friendly offers of assistance to the U S
Cutter Hornet when she was onshore in his Bay, - and assure him that I will make
mention of it to my Government in a manner worthy of him [LC. JRP, L Bk B, May 1805-July1806.1
To Captain John Bodgers, U. 6. Navy, U. S. Frigate Constitufion,Tunis, from Captain
Isaac Hull, IT. 6. Navy
UNITEDSTATESBRIGATQW
OffCape Bon 4 tQ &fay 1806
SIR, I have the Honour to inform you that we arrived off Cape Bon this morning,
where I shall wait your Orders. - Ms Harraden has not yet joined us, but from
the winds we have had, I think he must in the course of the day. - Mr Hunts
Vessel sails very dull, we were obliged to run under our Top Sails clewed up all day
yesterday, and then with difficulty he came up. [NDA. Isaac Hull LB, 1803-1806.1
To Secretary of the Navy from Captain Hugh G. Campbell, U,S. Navy
U.S. FRIGATE Essez
Cadiz Harbour May 6th 1806
SIR,I sail'd from Algesiras on the 2244 U l t ~for this port where I arrived the
following day, leaving the Vzken & Enterprise Lieu$ Porter, a t the former place,
the latter to fill up Water & return without deby to Syracuse which place She
left on the 22" March with dispatches from the Commodore for the Navy Department, duplicate of which are forwarded by this Conveyance- being under
the Necessity of purchasing every species of Stores for this Ship since August
k t , induced me to take up Money which I fortunately procured a t par to the
Ammount of Twenty thousand Nine hundred dollaw in Sundries Sets of Bills,
which will Save to Government a small commission
Mr Iznardy being most of his time in Madrid, and those that had charge of
his office not being as active as the Nature of the Service require, I have thought
proper to appoint M' R. W. Meade of Philadelphia resident here Agent for the
detachment of the Squadron under my command- his mark4 and friendly attention to his Countrymen a t this place, and particularly to the Service merit this
mark of attention from me, & hope it will meet Your Approbation
[NDA. Captain's LB, Vol. 1, 1806.1

-

-

To Secretary of State from James Simpson, 0.6. Consul, Tangier, Morocco

No 111 Triplicate. -

TANGIER7th M a y 1806
SIR I have now the honour to advise that Mr Gwyn of Magadore has transmitted to me a Letter written to him b Mr Benjamin Frsnklin Seavers late
Master of the Brig Indefatigable dated $adnor 19tQ March 1806. - In this
Letter which employs nearly eight Folio pages, he gives an ample detail of the
principal occurrences with respect to that Vessel from the time of her leaving
Bourdeaux up to her being Wrecked and in continuation what had befallen himself and Ships Company from the day of that disaster to the date of his Letter. It ie too prolix to trouble you with the whole. - M? Seavers states he purchased
the Vessel a t Gibraltar and paid for her out of that part of his private adventure
from Bourdeaux restored to him. - That he was bound from Gibraltar to the
Cape Le Verd Islands for a load of salt and that the Brig was stranded on the
Coast of Africa in the night of the 9t* Februar in Latitude 28. - That on the
la* the Arab8 took possession of the Ships 6ompW, with all they had been

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS
able to land from the Vessel and on the 14th burnt the Wreck to get out the Iron
That on the 15th they were all stript by those Savages, who left them
Work.
but some of the worst of their Cloaths and a blanket each. That in this deplorable state they were marched a Journey, as he describes i t
of eleven days, when they reached Wadnon. - Cap! Seavers says "to censure
myself for this misfortune I cannot, but must impute it to a strong Current, setting beyond a common calculation from the Westward."
He gives the following statement of the Crew of the Brig
B F Seavers
Master
N$ve of
Brookline near Boston
Joseph Lee
Mate
Marblehead
John Bottle
Seaman
II
Norfolk - Virginia
II
Thomas Black
Portsmouth NH
I(
Henry Long
Charleston S C
II
Wilmington N C
William Riggs
I(
Robert Wise
New York ' I
James Fenwick
Cook
Charleston S C
John Shoalts
Sea~an
Citizen
Boston
Antonio Parelege
Ragusian
I1
$ Dartmouth - England
Edward Studham
Louie Gimbal
Apprentice
Bourdeaux - France
Jean Batiste Barret
Passenger
"
New Orleans
He then says "The Moor who appears to be the cheif a t this place, and who
bought the Zndefatigables Crew two days March from this, has made me to understand that I shall not be permitted t o go from this without paying him a Ramom
of One thousand dollars and five hundred for each of my people."
This is so heavy an increase to any Ransom has been demanded, or paid for
persons in a similar situation, I should not consider myself justified in submitting
thereto immediately. - Besides this, since I had the honour of addressing you
on subject of the Indefatigable, circumstances respecting that Vessel have
come to my knowledge I could not have had any Idea of before.
At the first
notice of an American Vessel being stranded and the Crew fallen into the hands
of the Arabs, it appeared my duty to endeavour a t obtaining their Release the
soonest possible. It is not necessary for me to repeat on what I understand you have already been
made acquainted with, touching Captp Seavers having undertaken a Voyage from
Bourdeaux, contrary to the Condition of a Bond given your Consul a t that port,
a t the time he obtained a Certificate of the purchase had been made there of the
Indefatigable. On that Voyage (I presume you have been informed) the Brig
was detained and carried to Gibraltar where she was Condemned and then bought
by Mr Seavers. - Mr Gavino in his Letter of the 3 1 n t April tells me, on that
occasion he saw cause for declining to grant the Certificate had been usualy
deemed necessary they should be provided with, previous to Vessels so purchased
hoisting American Colours. - Mr Gavino adds he had assigned his reasons to
you. - Hence it appears Mr Seavers entered upon a Voyage from Gibraltar
for the Cape de Verd Islands to load Salt, most probably for the United States,
but on a Vessel unprovided with papers to justify agreeable to Law his Navigating her under the Flag of the Union.
I t was on that Voyage the Vessel
was wrecked. -14
If she was then thro' the fault or neglect of the Commander in the prediccament
I have stated, I humbly conceive it rests with the Governmwt alone to bestow
on her the Character of an American Vessel, and equaly to direct or not the benefits arising from that acknowledgement being extended to the unfortunate
people were on board of her when Wrecked.
Sensible that it would be presumption in me to determine this delicate point,
I have thought it necesssry thus to lay before you the motives have induced me
to entreat you would be pleased to honour me with your precise Instructions on
the occasion and to determine whether I am or not to obtain the release of Captain
Seavers and the other mentioned persons with him a t the Public charge; or if any,
what distinction is to be made. - The Crew being in part Forreigners and Mr
Gavino having told me he has reason to think the Passenger is a Native of St
Domingo and not of New Orleans, occasions the latter clause of my request.This however I presume would be unnecessary in the event of a bonajide American
Vessel falling under a similar misfortune
An ardent desire to guard against doing any thing hazardous of exposing me to
other than the full approbation of Government, has enduced me to trouble you
with this Letter and with the request of your Commands for my guidance, in
this seemingly particular case.

-

-

- - - - --

--

-

-

-

-

-

-

426

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1806 TO 1807

The delay must necessarily arises 'ere I can enter upon any Close Treaty with
the Arab [who] has the people, gives me concern; but I have the fulle~thope i t
will be imputed by him to the demand he has made being considered exhorbitant,.
and that he will considerably lower his terms when he sees they are not readily
closed with. I think best to confine the subject of the present dispatch to what i t has already
treated on, that if you see fit the determination of Government thereon may
alone constitute its answer. [NA. SDA. CL, Tangier, Vol. 2, 1803-1810.1
Extract from log of U. S. Brig Hornet, of 18 Guns, Master Commandant John H. Dent,
U. S. Navy, commanding, 7 May 1806
[At Port Louis] The whole of these 24 hours moderate breezes from the S. W.
with rain a t intervals people employed painting kc. Run a Kedge out astern.
this day Mr Marcellan return'd from Paris,
[NA. KDA. original, 1805-1810.1
To President Thomas Jefferson, Monticello, from Secretary of the Navy
NAVYDEP* 14+b M a y 1806.
From the enclosed letters you will perceive that Corn- Rodgers proposes to
keep in the Mediterranean the Vessels that had been conditionally ordered home
by letter dated Oct. 12. 1805 under the reasonable presumption that we did not
then know the state of things with Tunis. My letter however by the Hornet of
March 22. 1806 conveying to him the information that we have no reason to
believe that we shall soon be engaged in hostilities with any of the Barbary
Powers, will suggest to him that we have been expecting he had sent home the
Vessels and under that impression he will certainly order them home. If the
Tunisian Minister should return in auch a state of things and especially as we
cannot send out the Chesapeake the Bey presuming upon our weakness in the Mediterranean would be very exorbitant in his demands. If the force now in the
Mediterranean should be detained we could under its influence prescribe our own
terms. A Merchant Vessel freighted by me to carry storea to the Mediterranean is
stopped upon demurrage until I know whether you are disposed to countermand
the order of the 12'4 Oct: 1805. The enclosed letter to Cornr? Rodgers in such
case is submitted to your consideration. I t will reach Gibralter before the returning vessels can have paaeed the straite. The Tunisian Minister may return in a small Brig of very good properties
belonging to the Navy Department which can be transferred to the State Department and which may be presented to the Bey in lieu of the Zebecque. I have considered it proper to address an official Note to the Secretary of the
Treasury in relation to the Navy appropriations. You will herewith receive a copy
of this note and the original of his Answer. You will have the goodness after
reading the answer t o return i t to the Department.
[NDA. Nom. & Appts., 1798-1820.1

To Master Commandant David Porter, U. 6. Navy, U. S. Schooner Eniaprize, from
Captain John Bodgers, U. 8. Navy
U 8 HIP Constitution
Algiers 16 May 1806.
SIB, As I shall be totally unable to make any determinate disposition of the
services of the Entmprize, untill I hear further from Government, or untill the
Tunitian Embassador is returned to his Court. - I have to direct that you
Cmize off Tunis Bay, in observance of the movements of the Cruizers of that
Regency, as also to sfford yourself an oppertunity of Communicating with MI
Dodge Our Charge d'Affair's, often, so as to assure yourself that nothing of Consequence transpires, relating to our Country which he may consider necessary to
Communicate to me, without having i t in your power to Comply with his request,
our Country's Interest, and our own sacred duty - Our situation with the
Regency of Tunis, a t present is such, as to make it my duty t o remind you, that
in the execution of these Orders, you will use the utmost delicacy and Circumspection toward their Cmizers, their Commerce and in fine every thing else,

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

427

which csn in any W8 furniah them j u t grounds, or even a lausible pretext for
My &tention a t present is, after getting to Eibraitar and redue
Corn h i n t
ing tge Squadron agreeable t o the orders I have r e d to leave the Syen a t Gibrsltar and proceed aloft again with the Conalitution, provided I do not, in the
Interim, receive orders from Government to render this disposition dispensible
In all probability I shall not be more than a Month absent, I shall return to
Malta, and on my passage thence, look into Tunis Bay a t which place if I do not
find you, I shall expect to meet you a t Malta - As we have so lstely been a t
Tunis, and ss I have a sincere desire to be servicable to Mr Kissen, you ms proceed from hence to Tripoli, in order, if he is relieved, to cang him t o Mar&, or
any part of the Continent of Europe, which will admit of your Communicsting
with Mr Dodge in Four Weeks from the date of your Communication with him,
which will be as soon after you leave this Bay as possible Inform Mr Ridgely that I have nothing particular to Communicate, to whom,
and Mr Neissen I beg you to present my best Respects [LC. JRP, Order Book No.2, 1805-1806.1

-

-

To Lieutenant William Id. Crrfne, U. S. Ravy, U. S. Sloop HOT&, of 10 GUM, from
Captmn John Rodgers, U. 6. Navy
U S SHIPConstitution
Algzcrs Bay 16 May 1806.
SIB, On meetin with the U S Schooner Enterprize you are directed to exchange your Bra= &uns, for her Iron Guns, receiving 2 less than you give her
[LC. JRP, Order Book No. 2, 1805-1806.1

-

To Lieutenant Jacob Jones, U. 6. Navy, Washington, D. C., from Secretary of the
Navy

NAVYDEPI May 17. 1806.
Herewith you will receive a Medal voted by Congress to Corn.? Preble. T h k
Medal you will deliver in person to Commodore Preble. [NDA. OSW, Vol. 7, 1805-1807.1
To Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Navy, from Secretary of the Navy
NAVDEPC M a y 17. 1806,
COM*End PREBLE,
delivered to Lt Jacob Jones, Presend In pursuance of the Resolution of Congress of the 34 March 1805 requesting the
President of the United States to cause a Gold Medal to be struck emblematicsl
of the attacks on the Town, Batteries, and Naval Force of Tripoli, by the Squadron
under your command, and to present it to you in such manner as in his opinion
would be most honorable to you, the Medal, which will herewith be delivered to
you by Lieu$ Jones, h been struck. You wil3 receive it, Sir, as a testimony of
your Country's estimation of the important and honorable services rendered by
you, and you will be pleased to accept an assurance of the great pleasure I have
in the honor of presenting i t to you. [NDA. OSW,Vol. 7, 1805-1801.1
[17 May 18061
To President James Madison from Secretary of the Mavy
NAV: DEP'MTdl. Decemr 181.9
On the subject of the resolution, of the HonbQthe House of Representatives of
the 16Q Instant I have the honor to state.
Thst, in pursuance of the resolution of C o n g r e ~of the 34 March 1805. - a
gold medal, emblematical of the Town, batteries, & Naval force of Tripoli by the
squadron, under Corn.? Preblea command, was presented to Corn- Preble, in the
manner stated, in the enclosed letter, dated May. 17. 1806.
Thst one months pay, waa allowed - "exclusively of the common allowance,
to all the Petty oflieera, Seamen & Marines, of the equadron who so gloriously

428

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1806 TO 1807

supported the honor of the American flag. under the orders, of their gallant Commander, in the several attacks"
That no sword has been presented to either of the Commissioned officers, or
midshipmen, who distinguished themselves in the several attacks
And it is not known to this Department, that there ever was made by Congress,
a Specific appropriation of 20.000$ for the purpose of carrying into effect, the resolution which - "requests the President to cause a sword to be presented to each
of the Commission Officers, & Midshipmen who distinguished themselves: I t is
presumed, that the President, saw, what to his mind, appeared difficulties of great
delicacy, from the peculiar language of the resolution" - By the resolution, he
was requested to present swords t o such only, as had distinguished themselves;
& all having been represented to him, as having acted gloriously, he could not in
justice, draw with precission, a line of discrimination: He felt, it is presumed, a
repugnance, to the making of a selection, which by implication, would necessarily
have cast reproach upon all not therein included - a degradation of that Kind,
mould in his opinion, have greatly injured the service I% could not possibly have
been gratefull to the honorable feelings of the favored officers.
[NA, NDA. Nom. & Appts, 179&1820.]
Extract from log of U. S. Brig Hornet, of 18 Guns, kept by Master Commandant
John H. Dent, U. S. Navy, commanding, 17 May 1806
First part fresh breezes from the N W. with pleasant weather - Middle part
Calm latter part light airs from the NorthwP At 9 Ahl the Pilot came on board
and got underweigh and run down to Port Louis where in consequence of the wind
coming in from the Westward we were obliged to bring too and moor with Bower
and Stream
[NA. NDA original, 1805-1810.1
To Master Commandant Samuel Evans, U. S. Navy, U. S. Schooner N ~ ~ i i l ufrom
s,
Captain John Rodgers, U. S. Navy
U S SHIP Constitution
At Sea 18 May 1806
SIR Col! Lears dispatches not being ready I have to desire that you Will wait
for them & so soon as you receive them, proceed with all practicable dispatch to
Gibraltar for further Orders - As it is likely I may Water the Squadron a t
Malaga you will please look into that Bay on your passage. - I hope you are
in better health If you have 500$ be pleased to let Col Lear have it, & I will repay you, when
you join me
[LC. JRP, Order Book No. 2, 1805-1806.1
Circular letter concerning a tour for the Tunisian Ambassador, from Secretary of
State
(Circular)
DEPARTMENT
OF STATE,
T o A. J. DALLAS-Philad*
May 19'P 1806.
G E N S.
~ SMITH. Baltimore.
DEWITTCLINTON. N. York.
Dr WIPEUSTIS-Boston
SIR. I t has been thought not improper that the Tunisian Minister, before
his departure from the United States, should have an opportunity of seeing our
principal Cities & the most populous parts of our Country; and the rather as there
is some ground for suspecting that erronious impressions with respect to our
Strength have found their way into his mind.
With this view, and in order to render the tour the more agreeable to him,
Mr Cathcart has been so obliging as to be his companion, and to supply by they
respectability of his character & standing, the place of other hon[or]ary marks
of attention & distinction used in other Countries on such occasions.
Will you permit me to introduce Mr Cathcart to your civilities, and to ask the
favor of you, in communication with him, to facilitate the opportunities of gratifying the curiosity of his Tunisian Companion, as far as your City may furnish
useful means for the purpose.
[NA. SDA. Dom. L,Vol. 15, June 1805-1810.1

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

429

Extract from log of U. 6. Brig Hornd, of 18 Guns, Master Commandant John H.Dent,
U. S. Navy, commanding, 19 May 1806
First part these 24 hollrs fresh breezes from the Westward - Middle and latter
part light breezes from the NQ
At 3 AM unmoored and got underweigh At 4 AM dismiss'd the Pilot and made
sail to the Westward At 7 spoke two British Brigs of War. At 8 the North
oint of the Isle of Groa, bore E. B N K N - distant about 6 leagues from which
take my departure. At K past 8 was spoken by His Britannick Majesty%
Ship Dejiance of 74 Guns, who sent her boat on board, At 10 made sail At
Meridian spoke the American ship Rose of Alexandria from Nantz bound to
Copenhagen.
L a t Q a by O b s ~47'13'
Stowed the Anchors and coiled the Cables below
[NA. NDA original, 1805-1810.1

f

To the Commanding Officers of U. S. Gunboats and Bomb Ketches in the
Mediterranean, from Captain John Rodgers, U. S. Navy
U S SHIP Constitutio~~
Gibraltar B l o t May 18u6
SIR YOUare desired to furnish me (immediately) with your Requisition for
65 Days Provisions, including what you have on board Coav sent to
L+X a r d
C o m ~NP2
Lt Magrah
" 3
Lt Henley
It
4
Lt Harrison " " 6
Lt Lawrence I'
" 6
Lt Haraden
" 8
Lt Elbert
" 9
Lt St Clair
" " 10
Lt Crane Cutter Hornet
Lt Smith Bolyb Vengeance
Lt Hunt
Spitfire
[LC. JRP, Order Book No. 2, 1805-1806.1

::
::

To Secretary of the Navy from Captain John Rodgers, U. S. Navy
U S SHIP Constitution
Gibraltar 2 2 9 d May 1806
SIR, I t is with infinite pleasure I inform you, that since my Command of the
Squadron, the most perfect harmony has subsisted between the Officers of every
denomination, added to an uniform descipline on board of the respective Vessels,
which would not have done discredit to a much elder service, thsn our own; and
I am happy to say, with these pleasing reflections, I can add with truth, that will
ever bear the test, that the impressions which they have left behind them, are
such, as will never disgrace their Country a t any future Age The Officers Commanding the Bombs and Gun Boats, are Young Men, who
I conceive, deserved well of their Country - To Lieut* Hunt and Smith,
Commanding the Bombs, I should feel myself wanting in Common Justice, wes
I not to recommend them to your notice in the warmest terms; and without
intending any reflection on other Officers, I am bound by the same rule, to include
Lieut* Izard, StClair, Crane, Lawrence and Henly, as Young Men, from whom
their Country has much to expect The merits of other Officers, Senior to these Gentlemen, you are well acquainted
with, I shall therefore say no more a t present, further than to observe, that I
have not detained any Officer, from returning to the U States, owing to an unfavorable opinion of him, as I feel sensible that your disposition will not be less
just, toward those who will be absent, tlian your Conspicuous Rank in the Government affords you an oppertunity of rewarding their merits I pray you to excuse the manner of this letter, as on its subject, to Men whom
I really respect, no other [Ms mutilated] is familiar to me [NDA. Captain's LB, Vol. 2, 1806.1

430

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1806 TO 1807

John Bodgem, U. S. Wavy
U 6 SHIP COn8tittdk
Gibraltar 9 9 ~ Mag
Q
1806
SIB., I have the honor to inform you, that in aonsequence of the reduction of
the Squadron, I was induced to break up the Hospital a t Syracuse, by which
not requiring the immediate Services of its Surgeon, Doctr Cutbuah, I have
directed his return to the U States in the Frigate Essa Dodr Cutbush's private Character, Ability and uniform correct Conduct,
during the very long time, he has been in the Service, demands that I should
solicit your Intereat, in his behalf in procuring him some appointment in the
Service onshore, preferable to the Surgency of a Ship Doctr Ridgely, our present Charge dlABaires, a t Tripoli, wishes I understand,
t o return to America, and as Medical Men, when they possess the proper quslifieations, are, I conceive, preferable as Consuls, to the Regencys of Tunis and
Tripoli; permit me to say, that I think Mr Cutbush, one of the most suitable
Charactem I know to fill that office, a t either of these places, as added to hia
being a Man, of very General Information, he understands the Italian language
very well, a knowledge of which, is almost indespemibly neoessary to a Barbary
Coneul Any situation, preferable to the one he now holds, which you may please to
procure him, will, he informs me, be acceptable [NDA. Captain's LB, Vol. 2, 1806.1
To Secretary of the Navy from Cap-

To George Dyson, U. 6. Navy Agent, Syracuse, from Secretary of the Navy
NAVYDEPAR~
W94 May 1806.
The Store Ship the Stapleton Cap$ Francis Blackwell with Stores & provisions
for our Squadron in the Mediterranean has been ordered to proceed to Gibraltar
and there to take the directions of Mr Gavino respecting the delivery of her
Cargo. Should Mq Gavino direct a final delivery, of the Cargo a t Syracuse, you
will be pleased to receive it as heretofore and pay the freight agreeably to bill of
lading, by drafts on either Messrr Jaq M~Kenzie& A. Glennie London or Meesrc
Degen Purviance & Cq Leghorn as may be most advantageous. Letters of credit
empowering you to draw upon either of these Houses upon this account, will be
duly forwarded.
[NDA. GLB, Vol. 8, 1805-1807.1
[22 May 18061
Passport issued to American Ship Staphton

JAMES
MADISON,

Secretary of State of the United States.
To all whom it may concern.
Know ye that the American Ship Stapleton, whereof is Master Francis Blackwell, is bound from Baltimore to Gibraltar, and thence to Malta or Syracuse
with provisions & stores the property of the United States, and intended for the
supply of the Mediterranean Squadron; Wherefore I request all whom it m a y
concern not to give or suffer to be given to her any hindrance or molestation,
but on the contrary to afford her every aid and facility she may need of in the
prosecution of her Goyage.
I n faith whereof I James Madison Secretary for the Dept of State of the U:
States, have si ed these presents, and caused the seal of my ofice to be &xed
hereto, at the &tY of Washington the 224 day of May A D. 1806, Br in the 30*
year of the Independence of d States.
JAMES
MADISON
WA. SDA. Dom. L, Vol. 15. June 1805-July 1810.1
To Secretary of the navy from Captain John Bodgere, U. S. Navy
U. S. SHIP Constiltdim
Gibraltar $84 May 1808
8111A8 I was the pereon that solicited your favor, in behalf of Mr J P Love&
hiling Master in the U S Service, and as I conceive that perhaps my solicitation
indueed you fo -use his promotion; I need noti nform you, that nothing leee than

THE

U . S.

FRIGATE C O N S T I T U T I O N GETTING UNDER WAY W I T H REEFED TOPSAILS.

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS
a Duty I owe to you, to myself, and to the service in general, could make me
undertake the painful task of acquainting you, that I have the strongest grounds
for beleiving his Character is such, as not to entitle him to your Confidence; and
from what I have lately heard, from several British O5cers, such, I am sorry to
say, as totally cancells the good opinion, I had entertained of him - I must
confess that I always thought there was some Mystery in his History, owing to
the manner in which he came into our service, but my suspicions were removed
in a great memure by the address and art, of his own account of himself, added
to his correct Conduct while he was under my Command - The enclosed representation by LC Porter, is no doubt correct [LC. JRP, L Bk B, May 1805-July 1806.1
To President Thomas Jefferson, Monticello, from Secretary of the Bavy
NAVYD E P ~ May 83, 1806. I have had the honor of receiving your favour of the 19th instant, and agreeably
thereto and to the opinion of the Members of the Administration who are in
Washington, I have not forwarded to Comr9 Rodgers the proposed letter countermanding the orders of the 12%Oct? 1805, as to sending home the Essex, the Sloops
of War, and the gun boats. I have on the contrary recalled his attention to
your orders of the 12 Octr 1805, and have specially charged him to carry them
into effect. There will then remain in the Mediterranean, the Conatztutzon, the
Hornet, and one of the other small vessels. More than that number would occasion an expence beyond the Navy Appropriation. And in addition to this
objection it is to be remarked that the terms of service for which tbe Crem of
the Essex and of the returning small vessels had stipulated, have expired & will
have expired before the return of those Vessels.
Judging from the conversation I have had with the Secretary of State, I would
presume that the Tunisiin Minister will not leave the United States before the
middle of July, and of course that there will be an abundance of time, before his
departure, for a due consideration of the necessary instructions in relation to
the measures to be pursued after the Bey shall have received Mali Meli's oommunications. I would now only remark that the Minister will probably not
reach home until about the middle of September - a season too late for any
military operations on our part. [NDA. Nom. & Appts., 1798-1820.)
To Secretary of the Navy from Captain John Bodgers, U. S. Bavy
U S SHIP Constitution
Gibraltar 234 May 1806
SIR, I have the honor to acquaint you that I arrived here on the 21.t Instant with
the Constitution, Argus, Syren, Bombs Vengeance and Spitfire, Cutter Honzd and
Gun Boats NQ 9, 3, 4, 6,6 , 8,9, & 10, where I found the Frigate E s s a and Brig
Vizen, which Two Vessels have been stationed a t the entrance of the Strai hta,
since the Month of Septr last, for the purpose of affording protection to our o
!(mmerce, as I informed you in my several Communications On the 34 Ultimo after having made the disposition for the settlement of the
General and several Accounts of the Squadron, and after having obtained regular
and minute Inventory's of all Public Stores, remaining in Store a t Syracuse; I proceeded to Malta, for the same purpose, and to make arrangements necessary for the
return part of the Squadron, previous to their departure for America On the 5tb of April, I arrived a t Malta with the Constitution, Bombs Vengeanec
& SpitJEre, Gun Bosts NP8, 5, 4, 6, 6, 8, 9 & 10 also the Two Cidevant Tripoline
Gun Boats, captured during the Command of Commodore Preble, and one of the
Boats purchased a t Alcona, by order of Commodore Barron, fitted as a Bomb (with
the Mortar sent from the U States in the Brig Argus) without experiencing on my
passage any thing worthy of mention On the 9t4 of April the Nautilus arrived and joined the Squadron from Syracuse,
bringing with her, Mr Dyson, Navy Agent, and a Store Vessel, (one of the Alcona
boats) Between the 13t4 & 234 April, the Hornet and Argus arrived, which Vessels
had been from the 28%of March 08Tunis, on a Cruize of observation. The result
and particulars of which, as the execution of my Orders were vested in Cap9 Hull,
who is charged with this Dispatch, and whom I beg leave to recommend to your
notice, se an Officer of merit, and qualified both from his personal ability, and
relative eituation, to give you, the moat correct and minute information

-

432

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1805 TO 1807

On the l a $ of May after having accomplished the object of my Visit to Malta,
(where I received the most fnendly attentlous of the British Government, through
the medium of the Governor, Sir Alex Ball,) I sailed with the Squadron consisting
of the Constitution, Argus, Nautilus, Bombs Spitjire & Vengeance Cutter Hornet and
Gun Boats N9 2,3,4,6,
6, 8,9, & 10, leaving a t Malta, the two Cidevant Tripoline
Boats, and the two Alcona boats, fitted as Bomb and Store Vessels - The boat
fitted aa a Bomb, is about 28 Tons, and (in my Opinion) very superior, in point of
active and effective force, to either the Vengeance, or Spitfire, her Mortar is fixed
on a plan entirely different t o any I had seen, it is constructed to elevate, and
depress from the Angles of 45' to 10' Degrees, and can be pointed in any direction,
with ease by one Man - This Mortar has been thoroughly proved, and found
to effect the Vessel, in so small a degree, as to authorise my saying that any Vessel
of the same size, even our worst Bay Craft, is capable of bearing a 12 Inch Mortar,
i f fixed on the same principles On the 24 of Mag, with the Constitution and Nautilus, in order not to detain the
Squadron in its passage, I made Sail, and pursued my Course on to Tunis Bay, t o
Communicate with M~Dodge,ChargedlAffaires, if possible by the time of itsarrival,
leaving the Argus, Bombs, and Gull Boats to follow - On the 3d entered the
Ray, and was joined by the Syren Cap$ Smith, ~ h had
o been stationed in that
Neighbourhood on a Cruize of observation, under the same orders, which governed
Caps Hull, in the Argus, whom he relieved On the 4% I anchor'd about four Miles from the Goletta, with the Constitution
and Syren, and sent a boat on shore, but did not hear from Ms Dodge, (who it
appears was in the Country a t the time) untill 2 OClock the next day, a t which
moment the Enterpfize waa signalized coming from the Westward, (Gibraltar) she
having been, previous t o my departure from Syracuse, sent t o Gibraltar, with
advices from me to you, and with orders t o bring such as she might find there for
me - After Speaking the Enterprize, weighed, with her and the Syren, sailed,
and the next morning joined the Argus, Nautilus, Bombs and Gun Boats, at the
entrance of the Bay, - The intention of my visit being plea-singly realised, by
assurances from hlr Dodge, of the most friendly observances of Conduct on the
part of the Bey, ever since his residence in the Regency, with remarks, relative to
the Beys propitious disposition to maintain a good understanding with the U
States On joining the Argue, we shered for Algiers, and in a few hours after, I made
sail with the Constitution, Syren and Enterprize, leaving her with the Nautilus,
Bombs and Gun Boats to follow me, On the 1 4 t h May, arrived a t Algiers, with the Constitution Syren and Enterprize,
and on Anchoring was saluted from the Battery's with 21 Guns, which I returned
with an equal number, - Our affairs with Algiers stand on their usual footing.
altho Col! Lear, informed me, he was not without*apprehention, that, after the
Squadron was reduced, that the Dey might change his Tone, - About two
hours after Anchoring, a Danish Merchant Ship, of about 500 Tons, ladend with
Presents, and a Consul, from Denmark, successor to the present one, arrived After communicating with Coll Lear, I dispatched the Syren to Gibraltar, to
inform Cap$ Campbell of the Essez and Cox of the Vixen, of my being on my
passage thence, and to prepare their Vessels to depart for America on my arrival On the 15* in Company with Coll Lear, I made the Dey s visit of Ceremony,
and was received with much Civility, "he" having consented to receive me, wearing my Sword, and saying "that this distinction was owing to the particular
respect he felt for my Country" - I am the first Christian that has ever been
permitted t o visit a Dey of Algiers with Side Arms, and I think it worth remarking to you, particularly as I have reasons to beIeive, he had understood by Coll
Lears Drogeman, that a refusal to receive me with my Sword, would be to him,
a deprivation of my intended visit As Col! Lears dispatches to the Honbb Secretary of State, will afford you
particulars, I feel it unnecessary in me, t o enter into minutia On the 17th the Argus, Nautilus, Bombs and Gun Boats, hove in sight, a t which
Instant I got underweigh with the Constitution to join them, and dispatched the
Enterprize on a Cruize of observation off Tunis - The Winds light, I was
prevented joining the Argus, untill the 18tP a t Noon, a t which time, I made sail
with the Squadron, consisting of the Constitution, Argus, the Two Bombs, Eight
Gun Boats and Cutter Hornet, and sent the Nautilus into the Bay, to w a ~ tfor
Col! Lears dispatches (which were not quite ready when the Squadron made in
appearance) with orders to follow me to Gibraltar -

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

433

At the time I entered Gibraltar Bay with the Squadron, i t was blowing a stiff
Lavant Gale, which encreased to such violence, as t o render the safety of many of
the Vessels extremely precarious for Two days, and particularly my own Ship,
as both her Bower Anchors broke in the hight of the Gale; however I am happy
to say, that the Injury done to my Anchors, and the loss of some Spars, and
small Anchors by the other vessels, are in substance the only unpleasant Consequences we have ultimately experienced For particulars relative to our affairs on this station, I must beg leave to refer
you to Cap$ Campbell, who in the Essez, will sail for Washington in a day or
two, after the Departure of the Argus, and the Vizen, Gun Boats and Bombs for
Charleston, about the same time, as they cannot be watered sooner - The
Nautilus I shall detain untill two or three days after the other Vessels have sailed,
to afford me time t o write you more particularly [NDA. Captain's LB, Vol. 2, 1806.1

To Captain Hugh 0. Campbell, U.S. Navy, U.S. S. Esse*, from Captain John Bodgers,
U. S. Navy

U S SHIP Constitution

Gibraltar [26]
.Mall
. 1806
SIR, I n consequence of orders I have recently received from Government, I
have t o desire that you assume the Command of the U S Ship Constitution, on
the exchange of my Pendant, into the U S Frigate Essez, a t present under your
Command - The U S Brig Hornet Cap* Dent, and Schooner Enterprize Cap$
Porter, I shall leave in the Mediterranean, under your Orders, and I recommend
that one of these Vessels be employed in observance of the Conduct of the Bey
of Tunis, untill our affairs are permanently settled with his regency - As you
are well acquainted with the relative situation of our Country, with that of each
of the Barbary States, I feel it unnecessary t o add more than what the orders I
have acted under from Government, will explain, all of which, 1 transmit you a
literal Copy of [LC. JRP, Order Book No. 2, 1805-1806.1
To Master Commandant George Cox, U. S. Navy, U. S. Brig Vixen. from Captain
John Bodgers, U. 6. Navy
U S SHIP Constitution
Gibraltar Bay 26 May 1806
SIR, In pursuance of orders received from the Honbl the Secretary of the Navy,
I have to desire that so soon as the U S Brig Vzken, Bombs SpiGre and Vengeance,
Cutter Hornet & Gun boats NQ2, 3, 4 , 6 , 6 , 8, 9 & 10 are Victualed, Watered and
ready for Sea, that you proceed with them, without a moments unnecessary
delay, direct to Charleston (S C) and on your arrival, report the same to the
Honbl? Secretary of the Navy for further orders, as also to direct the several
Commanders to report the state of their Vessels and Crew &? &$ to him immediately on their arrival - As the Climate of South Carolina, is a t best unhealthy
in the Summer season, and more particularly so in the vicinity of Charleston, I
am induced to surmise to you the propriety of the Vessels laying a t Sulivans Island,
where you will find the air much more wholesome than higher up the river;
however as this place abounds with Shell Fish, you will find it absolutely necessary
to abstain from eating them, during the hot Weather! particularly Oysters and
l
with you, are dull
Crabs - Con~ideringthat part of the Vessels you w ~ l have
sailors, I would recommend your pursuing a Southern passage, as the most certain
means of not having a long one, and this will give you an oppertunitv of filling
up your Water a t the Island of Maderia, if by the time you reach its Longitude,
ou should find i t necessary to replenish that Article - After reaching the
Eon itude where you intend hauling out of the Trades, and shaping your course
for 8harleston, I would recommend your dispatch~ngNo 8, as she is a fast Sailor
to that Port, under orders to apprize Government when to expect your arrival Wishing you health and happiness, and a short passage [LC. JRP, Order Book No. 2, 1805-1806.1

434

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1806 TO 1807

To the Commanding Officers of U. S. Gunboats, Bomb Ketches Yutgamcc and Spi(1;re
and Sloop Hornet, 10 Guns, from Captain John Bodgers, U. 6. Navy
U S SHIP Constitutwn
Gibraltar $6 May 1806
SIR So soon as ou are ready for Sea, report the same to Cap$ Geo Cox Commanding the U S %rig Vden for further Orders L* Izard
Comr Gun,'Boat NQd
L*Magrah
3
Lt Henly
11
4
,'
Lc Harrison
6
II
L* Lawrence
6
II
L* Haraden
S
11
L1 Elbert
9
Lt Sainclair [Sinclair]
10
L* B Smith
Bomb Vengeance
L*Theo Hunt
Do Spitfire
Lt Crane
Cutter Hornet [Sloop of 10 Guns]
[LC. JRP,Order Book No. 2, 1805-1806.1
16

To Secretary of the Navy from Master Commandant John H. Dent, U. 5. Navy
U STATESSLOOPOF WAR
[Brig of 18 Guns] Hornet
GUraltar 26 May 1806
SIB, I have the honor to inform you that I joined Commodore Rodgera and
the Squadron yesterday morning after an extraordinary passage of six days from
L'Orient, where in conformity to your orders I left Mr Skipwith on the twenty
fourth ultimo all well - My reception by the Government and the Civilities
shewn myself and Officers were of the most flattering nature, and I flatter myself
that the Hornet has done away the bad impressions which C a p 0 M~Neilhad left
of the American Officers. I found i t necessary after a very boisterous passage on my arrival in L'Orient
to strip the Brig and overhaul her rigging, to put her in order before I joined
the Miditerranean Squadron, which I accomplished in ten days, but was detained for a week after by contrary Winds - It will be unnecessary for me
to say any thing of the performance of the Hornet after the report of C a p t ~Chauncey, suflice i t to say that she answers my most sanguine expectations in every
respect and was much admired in France by their nautical men [NDA. MC LB, 1806-1807.1
To Secretary of the Navy from Captain John Bodgers, U. S. Navy
U S SHIP Constituiion
Gibraltar 66*4 May 1805
SIR, The Argus just being on the eve of Departure for Washington, I have
but a Moment to inform you, that the U S Brig Hornet, Cap$ Dent, has this
Instant arrived here, after a passage of eight days from L'OrientCap1 Dent
brings no news, further than that, he was treated with great Civility during his
&a in L'Orient, and that Mr Skipwith landed in good health the Hornet I received your letter of the !224 of March, granting me permi?
sion to return to the U States, which I accept with pleasure, particular1 , as lt
appears by some strictures in New Papers, which the Hwnet brings, tzat my
prwence in America, has become indispensible, in the support of a Character,
which must ever, In my Breast! take precedence of every other Consideration A Character; compared with which, my life is not even a Secondary Consideration, and such as no Man, s h l l ever defame with impunity, so long 88 the soul,
its Companion, has even a Shadow of earthly existence To Cap* Campbell I ahall give the Command of the Constitution tomorrow,
and shall immediately after roceed for Washington with the Essez, leaving the
Hornet and Enterprize (in &tion
to the Constitution) in the Mediterranean -

Jy

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

435

I therefore beg you wilI suspend your opinion of the Reports, which you may
have heard, unfavorable to me, until1 my arrival in America.
Cap$ Hull will be able to give you particulars, relative to the d a b of the
Squadron [PiDA. Captain's LB, Vol. 2, 1806.1
To Hidshipman Pascal PaoIi Peck, U. S. Navy, from Secretary of the Navy
Nav D E P ~26 May 1806,
M i d s ~PAECAL
P. PECK
Care of Comro PEEBLIJ
Direded to Newbury Port Me
As you are under orders for actual service your resignation cannot be accepted.
I pmuade myeelf that you will not by &obeying the orders you have received
subject youraelf to the sentence of a Court Martial.
[NDA. OSW, Vol. 7, 1805-1807.1

-

-

Extract from log of U. 6. Brig Hornd of 18 Guns, Maater Commandant John E.Dent,
U. 6.Navy, commanding, 26 May 1806
These 24 hours commences with Iight breezes and pleasant weather At 2 set the Starboard Fore and Main topmast studsails
A t % past 10 discovered Cape Spartel bearing by Compass S W B W distant
3 leagues. At 6 AM came too in 25 Fathoms water in the Bay of Gibraltar
We found in Gibraltar Commodore Ro[d]gers with two Frigates 3 brigs and
11 Gun boats.
[NA. NDA original, 1805-1810.1

To Captain Bngh Q. Campbell, U. S. Mavy, from Captain John Bodgsrs, U. 6, Navy

U

S SHIPConstitution
Gibraltar 27 May 1806

SIBPursuant to what is stated in my Letter of the 224 Instant, Officially Communicating my resignation of the Command of the U States Squadron into your
hands, I have the honor herewith to hand you Copies of all my instructions Orders
& Authorities, from the Navy Department, agreeable to the subjoind list; you
will be good enough to acknowledge their Receipt SPECIFICALLY;
Should you require
any further explanations, or any extracts from my Correspondence, that may
throw li h t upon subjects Connected with the important trust, which hae devolved
e mention that they will be furnished with Cheerfulness, and in
on you, beg l e ~ v to
Complying with every necessary arrangement - With sincere Wishes for your
Success and Glory {LC. JRP, L Bk B, May 1805-July 1806.1

f

To Officers of U. 6. Squadron in the lldediterranean from Captain John Bodgers,
U. 6. Navy
U S SHIP Comtitzdion
Gibraltar 67 M a y 1806
GENTLEMENYour polite and friendly letter of this days date, wherein you
mention, that you are about to depart for America, I have r e d with such pIeasure,
as can only be equalled, by the regard I feel for its Authors; -With Whom, if my
Country should ever honor me with a Command, in which their ia distinction to
be ac uired, nothing would make me more happy, than to share the Species of
rewar8, which is only due to Men,who serve thew Country from the purest motives of Zeal & Patriotism:
and before taking my leave of you, I should do my
own sensibility injustice, was I not to add, that the regret I experience in parting
with you, can be compensated only, by the honor I shall feel, if it ever should be
my lot, to Command you again -

-

436

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1806 TO 1807

I pray you to accept, my most sincere Wishes for your future prosperity, and
beleive me I am, with sentiments of the most perfect regardGentlemen your obt s$
J R.TO I/r [or MIDBHIPMEN]
THO[THEODORE]
HUNT
B [BENJAMIN]
SMITH
R IZARD
[RALPH,JR.]
MAGRATH]
H MC GRAH[HUMPHREY
JNOHENLY
A C HARRISON
J [JAMES]
LAWRENCE
N H ARRADAN NATHANIEL
EARADEN]
S [ST. CLAIR] LLrom
ARTHURSINCLAIR]
N St CLAIR[POSSIBLY
WM [WILLIAM
M.] CRANE
[LC JRP, L Bk B, May 1805-July 1806.1

k

To Tobias Lear, U. S. Consul General, Algiers, from Captain John Bodgers, U. 6.
Navy
U S SHIP Constitution
Gibraltar 87th May 1806
SIR By the U S Brig Hornet Capt Dent, I have received a letter from the Secretary of the Navy, granting me permission to return home; I n consequence of
which I shall Change my Pendant into the Essez, and ive Capt Campbell Command of the Cmtitution, which Ship with the Hornet%rig and Schooner Enlaprize are the only Vessels which will remain I am sorry to find (more by verbal account, than any thing I have seen in the
papem) that my presence In America has become absolutely necesssry in support
of my Character which has been secretly aspersed in the most grose manner As the news papers will inform you in three Months from this date, I expect,
I shall forbear, a t present, troubling you with the effusionsof my wounded Soul The Copy of the Pamphlet and extract from the News Papers enclosed, will point
out to you what Course you have to shape; and added to this I am informed that
the Treaty of Tripoli is absolutely rejected by the Senate and will not be rati&d I could not have supposed that our Country had ever bred so many base scoundrels - Men Known to the Circumstances, and either too Infamous or too pusilanimous to come forward to Contradict the most absurd, Grose lies - No
more a t present, you shall hear from me soon after I get to America Pray present my very best Respects to Mr*Lear - God bless you both Adieu
[LC. JRP, L Bk B, May 1805-July 1806.1

To Captain Isaac Hull, U. 6. Navy, U. 8. Brig Argus. from Captain John Rodgers,
U. 8. Navy
U S SHIP Constitution
Gibraltar t7tP May 1806
SIR So soon as the U S Sloop Argw under your Command, is ready for Sw,
I have to desire that you proceed with all practicable &patch direct to the E a s b m
Branch, Washington, and immediately on your arrival thence report the same
to the Honblc the Secretary of the Navy for further orders You will be pl-d
to take the earliest oppertunity to deliver my letters to the Navy Depsrtment Wishing you health and happiness a pleasant and quick psssage
[LC. JRP, Order Book No. 2, 1805-1806.1
To Master Commandant John Smith, U. 8. Navy, commanding U. 8. Brig Sfruq
from Captain John Bodgers, U. 8. Navy
U S SHIP Conetitution
Gibraltar $7 May 1806
SIR SO soon as the U S Sloop Syten, under your Command, is ready for Sea I
have to desire, that you proceed with all practicable Dispatch, direct to the

WARS WIT22 BABBABY POWERS
Eastern Branch, Washington, and immediate1 on your arrival thence report the
same, to the Honb* Secr of the Navy for ffurtger orders - Wishing you health
and happiness, a pleasant and quick passage [LC. JRP, Order Book No. 2, 1805-1806.1
Extract from log of U. S. Brig Homd, of 18 Guns, Master Commandant John H. Dent,
U. 6. Navy, commanding, 27 May 1806
[In Gibraltar Bay] The whole of these 24 hours fresh breezes from the westward with pleasant weather At 7 AM the Commodore hoisted signal for Ca tains
to repair on board the Conefitulion - At 4 PM moored ship 65 fv on each gable.
At 7 struck Royal and Top gallant yards. At 8 AM cross'd Top gallant Masts
and run the Skysail Masts on end. - Ends with light Aim from the S: E [NA. NDA original, 1805-1810.J
Letter of farewell to Captain John Rodgers, U. S. Navy
U STATESSHIP CUnStil~tkn
Gibraltar May 28tP 1806 SIR A8 you are about to leave the Constitution to return to the United States;
permit us to express our Sincere thanks for the politeness and attention, we have
had the honor to receive, while under your command, and our opinion of the high
sense we entertain of your Character as an Officer and Gentleman. may no
clouds obscure the merit you have so justly acquired, and may your happiness
increase with the number of your years
With hi h Consideration of respect
I 8 e remain your Humble Servants
W. LEWIS
WILLIAMF. BAQOT.
RICHARDSMITH
[LC. JRP, Vol. 1, March 1791-Dec. 1814.1
To the Commander of H. B. M. 6. Prince, from Captain John Rodgers, U. 6. Navy
U S SHIP Constitution
Gibraltar 28 May 1806
Sm Thomas Challis, a Seaman on board his B M Ship Prince, under your
Command, has applied to me, to request that you will have the goodness to discharge him from his Majesty's service He having informed me that he is an
American, and Impressed into your Service from on board the Ship Joseph of
Portland (Me)
[LC. JRP, L Bk B, May 1805-July 1806.1
To James Dodge, U. 6. Charge dlAffaires, Tunis, from Captain John Rodgers, U. 6.

l'Jsvy
U S S H ~ PConstitution
Gibraltar 98 May 1806
DEAESIB I regret that Circumstsnces, should have so conduced, ae to prevent
me the pleasure of seeing you again, before my return to the United States: As
in Consequence of the reduction of the Squadron, I have received permission,
to return to my happy Country - It is not yet Known, who will Command
the next Bquadron, but I think it not imposeible, that it will be Cap* Murray the Constitution has to remain until1 relieved by one of the
er Ships, I have
ven Capt Campbell the Command of her, and Changed my endant into the

+

%sa

-

"b;

I shall sail for America tomorrow
[NA. BDA.

-

FA, CL, Tunis, Vol. 2 (7240) 1801-1809.1

438

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1806 TO 1807

To Master Commandant David Porter, U. S. Navy, commanding U. 6. Schooner
Entrrprize, from Captain John Rodgers, U. 6. Navy
U S SHIP Constitution
Gibraltar 28 May 1806
SIR I n justice to your merits - I have the sincere pleasure to inform you,
that you are appointed a Master & Commander - A Rank which I feel pleased
to say*that I Know you will do honor to
I n donsequence of the reduction of the Squadron I have received permission
to return to the U States, but as it appears to be the wish of Government, that
the Constitution shall remain until1 relieved by a Ship of the same [class?] I have
in Consequence shifted my Pendant into the Essez, and have given Capt C a m p
bell Command of the admirable Constitution - To whose orders you are now
subject [LC. JRP, L Bk B, May 1805-July 1806.1

-

Extract from log of U. S. Brig Hornet, of 18 Guns, Master Commandant John E.Dent,
U. S. Navy, commanding, 28 May 1806
[In Gibraltar Bay] The whole of these 24 hours fresh breezes from the Eastward At 2 PM sighted the larboard Bower and moored a ship with 5 a cable on
each anchor. At 7 struck top gallant yards. - At 6 AM the U: S. Brig Argus
and Syren sailed for America. At 9 AM. cleared Hawse, got the sheet Anchor in
the Larboard Fore chains and bent the sheet Cable. All hands variously employed,
One Boy deserted, Jos. Thomas.
[NA. NDA original, 1805-1810.1
A circular letter to all U. S. Consuls and Navy Agents from Captain John Rodgers,
U. 6. Navy

(Circular)

U S SHIP Constitution

Gibraltar g9t4 May 1806
SIR I have to inform you, that I have this day resigned the Command of the
Mediterranean Squadron, into the hands of Cap$ Hugh G Campbell, to whom
I have given Charge of the U S Ship Constitution, as I intend returning immediately
t o America in the Essez, late under his Command Allicant
Rob* Montgomery Esqr
Consul
Jno Broadbent
Consul
Messina
Fredt Degen
Agent
Naples
DQ
Syracuse
Geo Dyson
Degen Purviance & CQ
DQ
Leghorn
MvKenzie & Glennie
DQ
London
W41 Higgins
DQ
Malta
Consul
Leghorn
Ths Appleton
DQ
Malaga
W* Kirkpatrick
DQ
Gibraltar
Jn? Gavino
DQ
Tangier
James Simpson
DQ
Cadia
Joseph Yznmrdi
DQ
Lisbon
W* Jarvis
DQ
Malta
Joseph Pulis
Charge d'Affair
Tripoli
John Ridgely
DQ
Tunis
James Dodge
JRP,
LBli
B,
May
1805-July
1806.1
(LC.
[30 May 18061
To Willi,am Kirkpatrick, 0.9. Consul, Malaga, Spain, from Captain Hector Coffin,
American Herchant Brig Aidan
COPY
MALAGA
June 10.1806
WILLIAMKIRKPATRICK
Esqr
American Consul General for the
Province of Granada in Spain &CQ
SIB, At the request of your deputy I with pleasure and satisfaction note the
treatment I received on board of an Algerine Ship, with the hope that b your
influence the wrongs of o w Countrymen, will have proper attention p a i 8 them

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS
by that Government whose flag they sail under, and whose Revenue is increased
by their spirit of Enterprize and toil On friday t.he 30. May a t 6 A M under close reef tops&, off the Highlands at
the Western end of the bay of Almira, was spoken by a Polacre ship, under Algerine
Colors. (with a Pink stem vellow side. black bulwarks and Ports. oainted nettinas
on her'qhrter, flush deckIwandfigured head, supposed her to be 8ble to fight 16 or
18 Guns, and full of men) was order'd on board in my Boat, accordingly got my
boat out, and went on board of her, carrying all my purchase papers &C* with me,
leaving my Mediterranean pass for fear the boat should be capsised, the Ca tain
examined my papers and sent me back with two men in the Boat for my &ditteranean pass, which they examined and told me was very right, that I need not
carry it on board; then they immediately began to search my Cabin, state Rooms
&C* at which I strongly remonstrated, but to no urpose, they informing me i t
was their Captains orders; took up my Azimuth &mpass, an anchor of Brandy
and were then making their demands for Coffee, Sugar, Bread, the live stock &C+,
told them that if it was war they were welcome to every thing, but as it was peace,
and the Vessel was furnished with every document necessary to navigate any sea
under Heavens, if they took any thing whatever from me I would inform their
government of it, On going on board, they took with them the compsss and
brandy, I went with them to make my demands of the Captain for those Articles
and was treated in the most abusive manner, threatning to lash me to one of the
guns and flog me &C+then sent me on board my Brig after my Mediterranean
pass, but being about 20 fathoms from the Vessel caIled me back to the ship,
detained me merely to insult me and sent my boat after my Mediterranean pass,
As the Boat was going from the Vessel, order'd me to send him a barrel of wine,
threatning highly if I did not, after some altercation finally ordered a Keg of wine
brought.
When the boat return'd on board he examined my Mediterranean
pass, with its counterpart and told me I might go, but if it was not his holliday,
he would treat me worse than any man ever was treated &Cr I told him all his
treatment, bad or good should be made known to his government, and requested
the name of him and his People, but could get no answer except by the way of
curses and finally said, that was not for me to know finally after detaining me
untill half past 9 A M, liberated me a t the same time telling me, that out of 200
American Vessels he had boarded, they had always been treated with large presents
and never met with such a man as me amongst the whole of them and never had
such insults given him in his life adding that was it not a holliday, you damnd
Buggar, I would make you repent it - I t does not alter me said I. all your conduct and thefts shall be made known to your government - NB, In company
with the ship was a Galliott, said to be a Dane, which on their giving chase to was
deserted by all her Crew and Officers, taking with them their Cpmpasses and Quadrants - such conduct seems improbable and I finally beleive the unfortunate
Danes were either in Irons, or in some less painfull situation
The last title
noted as given me by the Commander of the ship, was as little insulting as any used
by hi,whilst on board of him, On putting his fist in my face, and seeing two hands
near me, apparently for the purpose of lashing me, I told him Sir, such treatment
is ungenerous, were you or any of your men alone they would not do this - What
said he, you damned Buggar damn your Eyes, are not we as good as Americans?
you may be Sir,said I but is impossible for you to be better,
Having noted the general outline of my treatment by this G E N T L EA W,
you wiIl no doubt be able, with the addition of that of others, to make our Government feel what a precarious footing our Treaty with the Nation stands on. In
with hearty thanks for your attention, while here
haste
HECTOR
COFFIN
Of the American Brig Aidan of Newbury Pwll
[ N D k Captain's LB, Vol. 2, 1806.1

-

-

-

To Joseph Ymardi, U. S. Consul, Cadi, Spain, from Master Commandant John
Smith, U. S, Navy

COPY--

U. S.

SLOOPSiren CADIZE A ~ B O U R
May 31-t 1806.
SIR. I have the honour to communicate to you the arriy* of the U, S. Sloop
Siren under my Command this evening caused b the Springing of her Bowsprit
on our pastage from the Mediterranean to the &tad States, the interest of the
service requiring the most possitive & effective exertion on my part to her requirement. I must sollioit vour interference for the removal of Quarantine, an

440

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1806 TO 1807

event that will operate msterialIy to the good of the service. My leaving
Algeziras with pratique Q not having communication with any thing at Sea,
together with the perfect health of the Crew under my command, must I conceive remove every obstacle to your obtaining me pratique.
[NA. S D k CL, Cadiz, Vol. 2, 1806-1808.1

fo Master Commandant Samuel Evans, U. 8. Navy, U. 8. Schooner NuufiZw, from
Captain John Bodgers, U. S. Navy
U S Smp Easez
Gibrdtar 31 May 1806
SIB On your arrival here, you are, after filling up your Water, and replenishing
your Provisions, directed to proceed in the U S Schooner Nautzlus, under your
Command with all practicable dispatch, direct to the Eastern Branch Washington,
and on your arrival thence, report the same to the Honb'e Secretary of the Navy
for further orders I am happy to add, that you are promoted to a Master and Commander A Rank I feel Confident you will do great honor to [LC. JRP, Order Book No. 2, 1805-1806.1

'

To Secretary of the Navy from Sailing Mester Benjamin C. Prince, U. 6. Navy
BOBTON,
May, dla+1806
SIR I do myself the Honor to report to you my anival a t this place Yesterday
after a long passage from the Meditersnean, in the Course of which I was detained
and Carried into Algeria8 by the Spaniards The Public Letters intrusted to my Care wase forwarded on amval by Main,
except the one from Commodore Rodgers which aa it applied personsly to me
has been delay'd until1 to day.
[NDA. Officers LB, Vol. I, Jan-May 1806.1
To Tobias Lear, U. S. Consul General, Algiers, from Captain John Bodgers, U. 6.
Navy
U S SHIPEasez
Gibrallar lot June 1805
SIR Since writing you on the 27 Ultimo, I have been detained by a Gale from
the Westward, which has put me in possession of a New York News paper of the
21 April, and from which the enclosed Message of the President I have copied
for your sstisfaction - It appears also by the same paper, that the day after
the Tripoline Treaty was Ratified by a hlajority of 21, that Congreas broke up
in Session The Gun Boats have been detained by Wester1 Winds; however they will sail
for America the Instant the Wind changes and {shall accompany them in the
BSQclear of the Gut, on my way to Washington - No doubt the Gun Boat8
will be sent directly back to the Mediterranean, after their arrival in America This is singular Work
God help our Country! Pray give my Respects to your Amiable Wife [LC. JRP, L Bk B, May 1805July 1806.1

-

To James Leander Cathcart, Baltimore, Md., from Secretary of State
OF STATE,
DEPARTMENT
June .H 1806
SIR. The Secretary of the Navy has anticipated the anewer to your letter of
the 30th Ult. by authorizing you to inform the Tunisian Minister, that the small
armed Vessel [Franklin]is intended as a present to the Bey; that he may load her
on his own account; and, that, after calling a t Baltimore to receive his purchsses,
she will take him and the residue of his property on board, a t Boston. YOU
are therefore a t liberty to proceed towards P W e l p h i a aa soon as you find it
coovenient
[NA. SDA. Dom. L, Vol. 15, June 1805-July 1810.1

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

441

To Secretary of the Navy from Secretary of State
DEPARTMENT
OF STATE
June sr41806.
SIR. It being understood, that the President has directed the Brig Franklin to
be pre ared as a present to the Bay of Tunis, I have the honor to request that
your Rgenta may be ordered to put her in a complete state for the Voyage, by
providing her with officers, crew, stores &c
JAMES
MADISON.
[NA. SDA. Dom. L, Vol. 15, June 1805-July 1810.1
Extracts from log of U. S. Brig Hornet, of 18 Guns, Master Commandant John H.
Dent, U. S. Navy, commanding
3 June 1806
First part these 24 hours light breezes from the Westward - At 4 cleared
Hawse middle part Calm, At % past 8 the U: S: Frigate Essez, the Brig Vizen
the Bombards and Gun Boats got underweigh with a fine breeze to the Eastward
and sailed from Gibraltar for America At % past 9 took in the green Cutter
and got the black Cutter off deck, and run up astern, At 10 unmoored, At M
past 10 hoisted the green Cutter out and remoored, according to orders from the
Commodore At $ past 11 unmoored and a t Meridian, got underweigh from
Gibraltar and stood towards Algeziras - Received on board one man named
John Butler - Ends with light breezes from the S: E. and pleasant weather
4 June 1806
First part these 24 hours light breezes from the Eastward - At 2 PM came
too in algeziras Bay in 25 fip water At 10 minutes past 7 struck Royal Yards.
Middle part Calm, At 8AM cross'd Royal yards - At 11 AM got underweigh with a light breeze a t S: E: Ends light breezes with pleasant weather This day the U: S. Schooner Nautilus arrived in Gibraltar from Algiers
[NA. NDA original, 1805-1810.1
To James L. Cathcart, Baltimore, Md., from Secretary of the Navy
NAVYDEPART+
6th June 1806.
I answered your letter of the 30th u l t ~immediately on receiving i t - but
having entrusted my answer to a private conveyance it possibly may not reach
you aa early ss desirable, I therefore repeat what I then wrote to you. The President having determined not to send out the Chesapeake for some time
to come, & presuming that i t is the wish of the Tunisian Minister to return to
his Country by an earlier conve ance than the Chesapeak will afIord, has ordered,
a copper bottomed well found 6rig, built principally of live oak, to be prepared
for the purpose of conveying him to Tunis - She will be o5cered by Officers
of the Navy, and manned with a su5cient number of Seamen to navigate her
safe1 - We shall put on board this Brig none but articles essentielly necessary
for tKe voyage,- and no passengers other than the Minister and his Suite, were
to go in her - so that there will, i t is presumed, be abundantly room enough for
all the Ministers goods - Be pleased to assure him explicitly, that we intend
putting on board, nothing but what may be required for the use of the Crew on
their vo age to Tunis.
This 8rig as soon as she may be equipped will be ordered to Baltimore to receive
the Minister goods, & will then proceed to Boston to receive his excellency &
Suite, and will sail from Boston to Tunis. She will mount 10 Guns & it is probable
that the President may determine to present her to his Excellency the Bey of
Tunis as a Testimony of his high consideration.
P: S: Colo. Stricker has been requested to receive into the publick Stores, the
Ministers goods, & to keep them until called for.
[NDA. GLB, Vol. 8, 1805-1807.1
Extract from log of U. 8. Brig Hornd, of 18 Guns, Master Commandant John B.
Dent, U. S. Navy, commanding, 6 June 1806
First part these 24 hours light aim and Calm All .hands employed working
ships out of the Bay of Gibraltar the Boats a head towlng

442

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1806 TO 1807

At 8 a light breeze sprung up from the Westward hoistad the Boats in, Europa
Point bearing N. N. E: distant one Mile - At midni ht took in top gallant
sails hauled the Courses up and settled the Topsails on t%e Cap.
At 4 AM made sail At % past 7 took in sail and prepared to anchor: At 8. AM brought up in
Malaga Roads in 15 fip water, the Cathedral bearing N B W distant 2 or 3 miles
veered out 60 F% Cable. - At 9 sent the Gig on shore with Lieu* Marcellan
in order to obtain Product, but being a day of festivity could not obtain i t
Two Swedish Frigates came too in the Roads with us
Ends pleasant breezes from the Northward
[ N h NDA original, 1805-1810.1
To Lieutenant Colonel Commandant Franklin Wharton, U. S. Marine Corps,
from Secretary of the Navy
NAVYD E P A R6~ June 1806.
The old clothing collected from the knapsacks of Deserters & dead men must
be surveyed, and such as may be unfit for a second issue, must be sold and the
proceeds must be paid to the Pay master, who will account therefore to the
Accountant of the Navy, to whom an account sales must be transmitted.
You will also have a Survey upon the old Tents and Cartock Boxes.
[NDA. USMC, LB, 1804-1820.1
Extract from log of U. S. Brig Hornet, of 18 Guns, Master Commandant John H.
Dent, U. S. Navy, commanding, 7 June 1806
First part these 24 hours moderate breezes from the South4 At 1 P. M. a
Pilot came on board At 2 got underweigh and went into the Mole of Malaga
At 3 hoisted the Boats out and moored Ship head and stern along side the Quay.
At 7 struck top gallant yards At 8 AM struck the Fore topmast in order to
get the Cross trees upon deck, to repair the Trestle Trees they being.carried
away. - This day a Polaca came along side to take the Sails and rigglng out.
in order to clear the store Rooms - Ends light breezes from the South with hot
sultry Weather
All hands variously employed
[NA. NDA original, 1805-1810.)
To Secretary of State from Joseph Yznardi, U. S. Consul, Cadis, Spain
CONSULAR
OFFICEOF THE UNITEDSTATES
Cadiz 10'4 June 1806.
RESPECTED
SIR. On the 318t ultimo arrived in this Bay homeward bound the
U. S. Brig Siren John Smith Commr on account of having sprung her Bowsprit, in
consequence he wrote me the letter, Copy of which &of my answer thereto I herein inclose you; and as the Governor was a t his Country House a t Chiclana, an Express was dispatched immediately to obtain his decree that the Board of Health
might give pratique to the Brig, the Express returned on the 24 - Mr Terry
went along side immediately and offered him his. services as is customary, he
replied that until1 he obtained pratique he wanted no Supplys; notwithstanding
he forwarded us a note (while under Quarenteen) of sundrys for the use of the
Brig, which was sent off without loss of time; having obtained pratique the evening the Express returned Mr Meade who meddles himself, in what corresponds
to m representation, on account of the appointment of Nav Agent giving him
by dptCampbell waited on him (notwithstanding one of &r Terrys Brothers
being present, Mr Terry having one to the Island being called by the Cap,
General of Marines) and brought 8apt Smith on shore, of course valued on Meacle
for everv other necessary, the same as Capf Campbell does, and never appeared
in this Office; I mention and trouble you with such details fearing that new representations against me may take place, and as I do not wish to meddle or create
disputes, I wait with impatience the instructions called for from you Sir to act
accordingly.
By the inclosed paragraph of a Letter from Mr Young our Consul General
a t Madrid, you will be informed that nothing haa been obtained with respect to
a shorten8 of the 40 days laid on Vessels from the United States.
[NA. SDA. CL, Cadiz, Vol. 2, 1806-1808.1

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS
To Secretary of the Navy from Captain Thomas Tingey, U. S. Navy, Superintendent,
Navy Yard, Washington, D. C.
N A VYARD
~
WASE*~,.l$-Jun6 1806
SIR,I have received your instructions relative to the Brig Franklin's proceeding
to Baltimore which shall be promptly attended - She will be ready before the
last of next week - I t would be eligible that the Officer who is to command her
was already here
[NDA. Captain's LB, Vol. 2, 1806.1
116 June 18061
To Captain Edward Preble, U. 6. Navy, from Thomas Turner, Accountant of the
Navy
DEARSIR I have recQ your packet of the 8th Inst. Commodore Barron not
being a t Washington nor expected soon - I forward the Letter for him to
Hampton. I also forward the one for Mr Davis to Norfolk. that for Midshipman Wadsworth, I have this moment delivered did you know that the Chesapeake was not going to the Mediterranean st
present? She is dismantled and the officers discharged. The Last Act of Conrelative to the Kavy limiting the number of Seamen &c to be employed a
ampered the department that she could not be sent out.
16.JUNE 1806.
[LC. EPP, Vol. 18,June-Nov. 1806.1
To James Dodge, U. S. Charge d'dffaires, Tunis, from Master Commandant
David Porter, U. S. Navy
U S SCH:Enterprize TUNISBAYl 7 f b June 1806. SIR, My object is to know if our adairs with this Regency are on a peaceable
footing; if they are not so you will please to give mersuch information by Mr Clarke
as will enable me to make Commodore Rodgers acquainted with the cause of the
cause of the existing difference. I shall be in here from time to time, and my object will be the same, so that
if time should not admit of your procuring a Tiskera to come on board, you will
be enabled to communicate with me a t the Gouletta where I shall meet you or
send an Officer. Should i t be necessary for you to come on board you will there be. informed
of it: but a t all events it will be best (to save time and anxiety)
- , to come down
or send a Drogerman.
I t will be necessary for me to obtain pratique when I return to a Christian
Port; therefore I beg you not to come on board unless your information should
be of such a nature as to render it indispensably necessary. [NA. SDA. FA, CL, Tunis, Vol. 2 (7240) 1801-1809.1
To Master Commandant David Porter, U. 6. Navy, from Midshipmen Lewis
Warrington, Winlock Clark and Richard B. Jones, U. S. Navy
U S Sc Enterprize
17th June 1806.
SIB,In compliance with your letter of the 204 Inst We have carefully & minutely examined the whole of the Gun Carriages on board this vessel, and are of
opinion, that all of them but two which were taken on board a t Venice are unsound
and intirely unfit for service, the Sides & Axletrees being decayed, rotten & wormeaten, and the principle part of the Iron work consumed by rust, age and long
exposure to the weather. - Some of them are in so bad a state, that we have
deemed it expedient to preserve specimens of them. L WARRINQTON

-

[LC. D. Porter P, Let. 8 Ord., 1805-1808.1

444

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1806 TO 1807

To Secretary of the Navy from Captain Edward Preble, U. 6. Navy
June 17. 1806
PORTLAND
SIR, The resolution of Congress of the 34 March 1805 requesting the President
of the United States to cause a gold medal to be struck emblematical of the attacks,
on the town, batteries and naval forces of Tripoly, by the Squadron under my
command, and to present it to me in such manner as would be most honorable has been complied with. - Lieut Jones of the Navy ha9 this day delivered me
your Official letter of the 17th U l t ~accompanying the Medal - please to comrnunicate to the President, that I accept this honorable testimony of the approbation
of my Country, with gratitude & respect - and I acknowledge with pleasure,
the very handsome R: obliging manner of its presentation.
[LC. EPP, Vol. 18, June-Nov. 1806.1
Extract from log of U. S. Brig Hard, of 18 Guns, Master Commandant John H.
Dent, U. S. N a o , commanding, 17 June 1806
The whole of these 24 hours moderate breezes from the NW. People employed
as before. this day the U: S: States Frigate Constitution came to an anchor in
the Roads [Malaga]
[NA. NDA original, 1805-1810.1

'

[20 June 18061
To Secretary of the Navy from R. W. Meade, Cadiz, Spain
SIR, I have the honor to hand you at foot an extract from a letter received
yesterday from John Gavino Esqr our Consul a t Gibraltar, informing me of a
Tunisian Squadron having made it's appearance as far down the Mediteranean
as Majorca, & of which I gave immediate notice to Captain Campbell, who is
a t present with the Hornet Brig a t Malaga. - Prior to Commodore Rodger's
departure for America, I communicated to him throh Capt Campbell the message of The President to Congress on the subject of The Tunisian Ambassador, it
did not occasion him to make any change in the orders already issued for the
sailing of the Squadron for America; & whether The Tunisian fleet has come out
with hostile Intentions to our flag or not, remains yet uncertain, I can not however, but be of opinion, That thier appearance so immediately after the departure
of our fleet from that part of the Mediteranean, is in cooperation with their
Minister sent to America, & an anticipation of his mission, the results of which
they must well have known from the nature of the demands, I should not be
the least surprized, If this fleet should fall on our Commerce, the moment, they
are apprized of our diminished force in these seas, & the final results of their
Embassy to America. - These Sir, are in a great degree, surmises of my own,
but I am firmly persuaded & convinced, that this, as well as the remaining Barbarian States are only to be kept in awe by a respectable force being constantly
kept up in these Seas I request you Sir t o communicate this intelligence to The President, & to
beleive me to be Sir With due respect & Consideration
CADIZ20th June 1806
Eztract of a letter from J . Gaoino Esor Consul of The U. S. dated Gib? 16')
~ u n to
e R. 'w.~ e a d Cadiz.
;
I have a letter from Consul Baker of Majorca advising under date 20'4 Ult9
that a Tunisian S uadron of 5 sail was there watering $ 9 one a Frigate 38
Guns. the other 4?Xabeaues. one of 38, two of 36 & one of 16 Guns, all full
of men, Said they were in uest of Poituguese, & from the information He
could collect, he understod no hostile intention's were in agitation against
our flag [NDA. Misc. LB, Vol. 3, 1806.1

To Captain Edward Preble, U. 6. Navy, Portland, Maine, from Captain William
Bainbridge, U. 6. Nav~r
Ow BOARDSHIP Hebe
ofl Cape Henlopen June ZO* 1806.
M Y DEAB SIB I am now entering the Ocean on a Mercantile Voyage, bound
to Liverpool & from thence shall make a Circuitous Voyage to the Southward,
ss yet undetermined on - and %-illbe so until my arrival in England
The

-

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS
Ship I command is a fine Vessel coppered bottom, has only made one Voyage, Canton, & belongs to my articular friends Savage & Dugan
A8 the Cargo from England is to be under my directions I expect some profit
which will in part reimburse me for the losses I have sustained - I am confident
I have your good wishes for thousands -be assured you have mine for all happiness
to attend you
Should any thing be done in the navy line in my absence, I must beg your recollection.
If any appertunity offers for London or Live ool pray drop me line, to London
direct to the care of Mess., Baring Brothers $ 7 9 and a t Liverpool to Mr Murray
American Consul Should you go to the Southward - M s Bainbridge will be happy to see you a t
Amboy My respects & best wishes to M'P Preble & the littk commodore
[LC. EPP, Vol. 18, June-Nov. 1806.1

A Circular Letter from Secretary of the Navy concerning policy with respect to
personnel
NAVDEPARTMENT
do June 1806,SIR, Herewith I enclose to you a Warrant as a Midshipman in the Navy dated
this day. I enclose also a Copy of the rules and regulations of the Navy - a Copy
of the Mariner's Dictionary - a Copy of the Uniform - and a blank oath which
you will take and return to me with a letter accepting this appointment, from the
date of which acceptance your pay will commence. If you are not engaged a t this time in the study of the Theory of Navigation it
will be agreeable to me that you make a voyage in the Merchant service, and in
this case you will make application for a furlough. [NDA. OSW, Vol. 7,1805-1807.1
To James Leander Cathcart from Secretary of State
D E P OF
~ STATE,June dl,1806.
SIR. I have requested the Secretary of the Treasury to remit to you a t the
branch bank a t Boston, two thousand dollars as a personal present to Mr Mellimelli. I t is intended to make presents in money to his suite and servants, 8 s
noted on the next page* Will you be pleased to ascertain from him, whether it
would be most agreeable to have the money placed in his own hands for distribution or for us to distribute the portions allotted to those who remain in this City.
Instead of the Cattle & horses being sent, i t seems best to add to the list of presents for the Bey, an equivalent in other acceptable articles, which the Ambassador
may point out. The Franklin will be ready to leave the Navy Yard in less than
8 week.
It is hoped that you have kept in view the separate presents for the Sapatspa.
Their amount may be two thousand dollars, or if you think a payment of one
thoussnd dollars by Mr Lear (who is to go to Tunis) would be acceptable and
more politic; you may limit the purchase to one thousand.
*List of the resents to the suite & Servants.
To a
1ieogia
400
Mahomet Choux
900
Mahomet Be1 Hogia
100
Mustapha
M
Bollman
M
Hadjl Mahomet
140
Three B W each 20 Doh 60

[NA. SDA. Dom. L, Vol. 15, June 1805-July 1810.1
To Secretary of the Navy from William Lyman, U. S. Consul, London, England
AMERICANCONSULATE
$ AGENCY
London. Z?WJune 1806.
SIB, Your Letter and Instructions of the gt+ April last relative to the Cargo of
the Huntress was not received here until1 the 30% Ultimo; - but thereupon in
compliance therewith I instantly wrote to James Maur Esqr our Consul a t
liverpool ta charter forthwith a Suitable Vessel for the %urposet~therein msn-

446

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1806 TO 1807

tioned which I have the honor to advise you he hath accomplished, and chartered
the Bickford an American Vessel Joseph Mudge Master who hath taken on Board
there the unsold Part of the said Cargo, an Invoice,whereof is herewith enclosed
and expected to sail thence for Gibraltar yesterday wind permitting: as Boon as I
am in possession of all the Particulars I shall fully advise you thereof:
[NDA. Misc. LB, Vol. 3, 1806.1
To Banter Commandant David Porter, U. S. Navy, commanding U. 6. Schooner
Enterprize, from Captain Hugh G. Campbell, U. 6. Navy
U S . SHIP Constitution
June I S , 1806. Malaga Roads
SIR, The Return of Commodore Rodgers to America has developed on me, the
command of our present forces in those Seas, in consequence of which, I have to
desire you to proceed to Gibraltar with all practicable dispatch in the U. S.
Schooner Enterprize, under your command, where you will receive further orders;
you will please take charge of Captain Dents Dispatches, or any communication
he may have to make respecting the service, likewise call a t Tunis and Algiers for
such dispatches as Doctr Dodge a t the former and Tobias Lear Esquire a t the latter
place may have to make; - In the hope of seeing you soon [NDA. Captains' LB, Vol. 2, 1806.1
To Xasber Commandant John E. Dent, U. S. Navy, commanding U. S. Brig Hornet,
from Captain Hugh G. Campbell, U. S. Navy
U . S . S ~ Constitution
P
June bSrQ 1806 hfalaga Roads
SIR, I have to desire that you proceed with all possible dispatch to Algiers in
the U. S. Brig Hornett, under your command, and receive from our Consul General
a t that place any communications he may have to make respecting the service;
from thence you are to proceed to Tunis and confer with Doct? Dodge, who is
charg'd with our affairs in that Regency, and govern yourself toward that power
as circumstances and the information you may receive may require; - I do not
beleive their present intentions are hostile toward us, nor is it my opinion that
they will be so until1 the return of their Ambassador from America, yet think
that a vigilant attention to thcir motions are necessary; and should any thing
of an hostile nature on their part, present itself toward our flag, you are desired to
repel such outrage as far as is in your power, nor must you permit them to take
into port any American Vessel either in Peace or War; while you have sufficient
force to prevent them, - Should appearances a t Tunis be friendly you will
please proceed to Malta, and deliver such dispatches, as you may have for our
Agent there, who will furnish you with the necessary supplies for the Brig; for
the payment of which you may draw on the Navy Department M~Kenzie&
Glennie of London, or give him an order on me; the latter I presume will be more
advantageous, i t being probable by that time that I shall be able to draw on the
Navy department to more advantage, - I have further to require and direct
€hat you communicate with Tunis every fourteen or twenty days, and give me
by the earliest conveyance the result thereof; I t will likewise be necessary for you
to establish a correspondence with Mr Ridgely a t Tripoli, and occasionally call
a t that place; (Duplicate)
[NDA. Captain's LB, Vol. 2, 1806.1
Extract from log of U. 6. Brig Hornd, of 18 Guns, Master Commandant John H.
Dent, U. 6. Navy, commanding, 24 June 1806
First and middle part these 24 hours strong breezes from the Eastward with
pleast weather, At 6 p M. struck Royal yards At 7 Ah1 unmoored. At 5
past 8 weigh'd and run out of Malaga Mole. At 9 AM anchorJd in the Roads
in 10% fathoms abrest of the Constitution the Cathedral Church of Malaga
bearing N B E. distant about 1%mile, ends with pleasant breezes from the

8: E [NA. NDA original, 1805-1810.1

To Captain John Rodgers, U. S. Navy, or the Ofacer Commanding the 0.S.
Squadron in the Mediterranean, from Secretary of the Navy
JUNE 364 1806,
NAVYDEPARTMENT
Congress by an Act of the 21.; April 1806 appropriated the sum of D s 2400
for the relief of Hamet Caramalli ExBashaw of Tripoli. I have directed John Stricker Esqr Navy Agent a t Baltimore to remit you
this Sum in a Bill on Leghorn which you will be pleased to pay to the ExBashaw
taking his Receipt, which you will forward to Col? Stricker. -

*

*

[NA.

NDA.

*

*

*

*

*

LB, May 1799-July 1807.1

Extract from log of U. S. Brig Hornd, of 18 Guna, Master Commandant John H.
Dent, U. S. Navy, commanding, 25 June 1806
First part these 24 hours light airs from the S: E. At 4 P M got underweigh
and sailed from Malaga Roads
At Meridian spoke the American Ship Merrymack of Newbury Port from
Teneriffe bound to Alicant At 10 minutes past noon tack'd ship tack'd Ship to
the N: E. the Body of the High Land of Grenada bearing N N E distant 6
leagues
Latdr by Obss 36'17'
[NA. NDA original, 1805-1810.1
To Secretary of the Navy from Surgeon Lewis Heermann, U. S. Navy
XORFOLKJune 26*4 1806.
SIR,Emboldned with the pleasing hope, that you will pardon my intrusion on
you, & the request that accompanies it, I have vextured to entreat your leave for
absenting myself from the service & the U: S: for the space of ejghteen months.
It is my intention to profit during that period in attendingqthe Hospitals in
Europe; in order to obtain that improvement, which those seminaries offer to
professional men; & which is so necessary to the officers, who devote their services
to their country - I decline to comment on the advantages, arising from such
indulgences - your zeal for the department, over which you preside makes i t
unnecessary. Suffer me then to hope your sanction to this application; & I have
tc honor to be with sentiments of profound respect
[NDA. Officers LB, Vol. 2, 1806.1
To Secretary of State from one of the Tunisian Ambassador's Suite
KAVYYARDWASHINGTON
June %8rb 1806
SIRI am directed by the Ambassadour to take Sulliman the Servant on Board
the Brig with me, he inclines to go to Baltimore by land, and I fear he has no
intention to go to Tunis If you please to order him on board, or to clear me of
any censure which may occur
[ALLI HOGGIA]
[NA. SDA, CD, Tunis, Vol. 3, 1805-1806.1
To Lieutenant Philemon Charles Wederstrandt, U. S. Navy, commanding U. S.
Brig Fradlin, from Secretary of the Navy
Nav D E P M ~JuneJO. 1806,
You will deliver t o Capt Tingey all the articles which you have received on
board the Brig Franklin intended for the Bey of Tunis or the Tunisian Minister,
excepting such as may be indisper~sablynecessary for the Minister and his Suite
on the pasage. Cap+ Tinge? will deposit the articles he receives in the publick
atoms, and they will be sent 1n a frigate which will be fitted out for the Mediterranean this fall or the next Gpring. [NDA. OSW,Vol. 7,1805-1807.1

NAVRI, OPERATIONS FROM 1806 TO 1807

448

Presumably to Secretary of State from James Leander Cathcart
BOSTON July I** 1806
SIR,I arrived here yesterday and was duly h o d with your favor of the 21q*
Ult - and have r e d drafts on Ohe U. S branch bank a t this place to the amount
of 5000dollars the appropriation of which shall correspond with your instructionsThe Ambassador requests that the cash intended as presents to his suite may
be paid into his hands a t Boston, as several debts have been contracted by them
which he has paid and he wishes to embrace this opportunity to indemnify himselfI have made no arranqement for a seperate present to the Sahibtappa as the
5000 do19 which I recejv d a t Washington will hardly be su5cient to compleat
the present for the Bashaw; I will however have a present prepared for him long
before the brig arrives a t this port: The offer of one thousand dollars in cash
would be consider'd as an insult by the Sahibtappa when Mella Menni has receiv'd double that sum, but 500 doh laid out in articles not common in that
country would be receiv'd as a compliment, consequently I will expend 2000
dols on his account (unless you think proper to order me to the contrary) which
will increase the appropriation for presents exdlusive of the brass field pieces
to 7000 dollars which is the least sum that can be expended to answer this end
contemplated by government in sending them I am anx!ous for the arrival of the Brig as I assure you I am heartily tired of
my companion Dr James Leander Cathcart in account with the United States of America- - - - Cr
To Cash recP in warrants from the Department of
$10,000
State as p: date . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
By presents to the Bashaw of Tunis - - - - - - - - - - - - - ---..---.5000
By
do to the Sahibtappa- . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2000
By
do to the Ambassador Mella Menni
2000
By
do to his suit . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1200
By Salary to Mella Menni say twelve weeks a t 200 D o l ~pr
Week---------------------------- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 2400
By carriage hire ----------- .------------------------- 400

$13,000
Deficiency 3000 dollars By the above rough statement will be seen in what manner the money will be
expended and I request the deficiency which is 3000 dollars may be remited m
soon as convenient JAMES
LEA^ CATECABT
[NA. SDA, CD, Tunis, Vol. 3, 1805-1806.1
Extrscts from log of U. 6. Brig Homd, of 18 Guns, Master Commandant John H.
Dent, U. S. Navy, commanding, 2, 4 and 6 July 1806
First part these 24 hours moderate breezes from the Southward
Received one boat load of Firewood
At 9 P.M sent up Royal Yards and hove short:
- At- 1. P.M got under weigh and sailed from b e a n t with a light breeze off the
Land.
At 5 AM the Castle on the Hill over the Town of Aiicant bore N W B W.
distant 5 le
- a t past 10 tak'd to the S: E. At 11 took in staysails,
Ro als, and%;k
Jib and 1 Reef in each Topsail
I t Meridian a 8kip passed ue steering to the Westw? Stowed the Anchors
L a t e by O b s ~37'48'
[4 July 18061
This day all hands commenced wearing Mustashoes
[6 J d y 18061

First part these 24 hours light breezes and pleasant Weather At % pest 1
took in sail and prepared to Anchor: At % past 1 Calm At 2 PM came too
off the City of Algiers in 21 frp water the light house hearing N. W B N. distant
4 miles Cape Caxin N. N. W. 3 leagues and Cape Matifan E. B: S distant 4
le ues - At j4 pmt 2 Mr Lear the Consul General m e Saluted him with
9%uns
At 3 the Castle of Al&m saluted us with 21 Guns we returned
the artole number. - At 5 Captain Dent went on shore and waa received with

-

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

449

-

a d u t e of 9 Guns We returned the ssme number
Ends with fresh breezes
from the Northwa with pleasant weather. struck Royal Yards and veered out
60 fi Cable
[NA. NDA original, 1805-1810.1

-

To Lieutenant Philemon Charles Wederstrandt, U. S. Navy, commanding U.S. Brig
F~Iz&VII, Baltimore, Md., from Secretary of the Navy
NAVD E P M ~7 Julv 1806.
You will call on C o l ~Stricker a t Baltimore and from him receive on board of the
Brig Franklin all the articles in his possession purchased by the Tunisian Minister,
& by Mr Cathcart for the Tunisian Minister or for the Bey of Tunis. After executing this order you will weigh Anchor and proceed with the Franklin directly t o
Boston where you will receive such other articles as may there have been purchased,
or be there deposited, by the Tunisian Minister & by Mr Cathcart. At Boston you
will receive your final Instructions, if it should not be determined to transmit
them to you while you remain a t Balto t:

*

*

*

*

*

*

[NDA. OSW, Vol. 7, 1805-1807.1
To Secretary of the Navy from Joshua Wingate, Jr.
HALLOWELLJuly 7. 1806
SIB, The Ship Raleigh, which took the Spars &C to the Mediteranean is expected
at Philadelphia by the time this will reach Washington - I have been requested
by the ownem thereof to write & solicit you, if the Govt should have occasion to
freight her to the Mediteranean or any other place, to advise my Brother John
Wingate, the Supercargo of the Ship, of your wishes on the subject, who is authorised to make such disposition of her as he shall deem proper - Your attention
to the foregoing will command my warmest acknowledgments [NDA. Misc. LB, Vol. 3, 1806.1
To Secretary of the Navy from Qeorge Davis, appointed U. S. Consul, Tripoli
NORFOLKJuly 7t4 1806
SIR, having determined to embark immediately in a Merchant Vessel for the
Mediterranean, I beg leave to re-call, your attention to the subject of the letter
which, I had last the honor of addressing to you; (vie) "to permit one of our
Publick Vessels on that Station, to place me in Tripoli" I shall be happy to be charged with any particular commands which you may
have for that quarter [NDA. Misc. LB, Vol. 3, 1806.1
To Lieutenant Colonel Commandant Franklin Wharton, U. S. Marine Corps,
from Secretary of the Navy
NAVYDEPARTMENT
7 July 1806
Sir. Yellow Ban& dc Tassels, instead of those described under my order of the
14* Octr 1805, will in future be worn by the non-commissioned officers, musicians
& privates of the Marine Corps.
[MCA. LR, 1806.1

Extract from log of U. 8. Brig Homl, of 18 Guns, Xaster Commandant John H.
Dent, U. 8. Navy, commanding, 8 July 1806
First art these 24 hours light breezes from the North4 A t 1P M the Dey sent

on b o 2 a Present 8 bullocks, 6 shee with fruit and Vegetable At 2 as Captain
Dent reta on board the Castle salute$ him with 5 Guns the same number were
returned by us At 3 got underweigh and stood out of the Bay. At sunset Cape
Caxin bore W J(; N dist 5 leagues Cape Matifon 6 W B W. distant 3 miles and
Cape Beringue E. B 8 distant 9 leagues. At 3 past 9 a breeze sprung up from the

450

NAVAL OPERATION8 FROM 1806 TO 1807

5: W. let fall the Foresail and set Top gallant Studsails At 5 AM the City of

Algiers bore W. S W. distant 8 lea ues Cape Matifon S. W. B W. distant 4 leagues
and Cape Beringue 6 : E. B E. 5 - distant 7 leagues - At 9 hauled down the
Jibs At K past 10 hauled down Main topmaat Staysail and hauled aboard the
Main tack
At Meridian Cape Matifon bore S: B. W. distant 9 leagues and Cape Beringue
8:E. B. E. distant 14 leagues
Latds by O b s ~37O10' - N.
[NA. NDA original, 1805-1810.1

%

To Lieutenant Philemon Charles Wederstrandt, U. S. Navy, of the U. 8. Brig
Franklin, from Secretary of the Navy
NAVD E P ~9 J d y 1806.
On your arrival a t Boston, you will see nil? Cat,hcart whom you will find there,
and get him to prepare for you a statement of the provisions which will be required
by the Tunisian Minister and his Suite for their Voyage on board of the 13rig
Franklin from Boston to Tuck, and as these supplies are to be furnished st the
expence of the Government, you will present. the statement which M r Cathcart
may prepare for you t o Samuel Brown Esquire Navy Agent, subscribing your
name thereto, and J l c Brown will purchase and pay for them, and send them to
you to be received on board of the Franklin. After receiving such supplies & being in other respects prepared for sea, you
will inform Mr Cathcart that you are ready to receive on board of the Brig Franklin
the Tunisian Minister and his Suite, and after receiving them you will weigh
Anchor and proceed to Gibraltar.
On your arrival a t Gibraltar, you will ascertain whether C o l ~Lear is there or
not. Finding him there, you will deliver to him the enclosed letter to him,
receive him on board of the Brig Franklin, and having informed yourself a t
Gibraltar if the information can be there obtained where the Commodore of the
Mediterranean Squadron may may be, you will proceed in search of him and upon
falling in with him deliver to him the enclosed Letter and thenceforth consider
yourself as under his Command & obey his orders accordingly. But if Col. Lear
should deem it most expedient to proceed from Gibraltar immediately t o Tunis
and not to go in search of the Commodore, and should advise you so to act, you
will in that case proceed from Gibraltar immediately to Tunis & follow such
directions as you may receive from Col. Lear after your arrival a t Tunis relatively
t o the Brig Franklin. If on your arrival a t Gibraltar, CoI. Lear should not be there, and there should
not be a t Gibraltar any of our publick armed Vessels, you will in that case proceed
from Gibraltar to Algiers for Col. Lear, deliver to him the enclosed letter addressed
to him, & after receiving him on board you will either proceed in search of the
Commodore or immediately to Tunis as he Col. Lear may advise But if, not finding Col. Lear a t Gibraltar, you should find one or more of our
publick armed Vessels a t that place, you will in such case deliver t o the Commanding Officer of such Vessel or Vessels the Ietter herewith sent to you and directed
t o him, & t o Col. Lear -which Commanding Officer will thereupon either proceed
himself or direct one of the Vessels under hi Command t o proceed to Algiers
for Col. Lear, and you will proceed with the Franklin from Gibraltar immediately
in search of the Commodore and falling in with him place yourself under his
command. He will proceed with you t o Tunis, and i t is probable in this case,
that you will arrive with him a t Tunis, nearly as soon 8s the Vessel that is t o
call a t Algiers for for Mr Lear, may arrive there. I need not I am persuaded enforce upon your mind the propriety and the
policy of treating the Tunisian Minister with that respectful attention and civility
to which his distinguished character entitles him. [NA. NDA. LB, May 1799-July 1807.1

-

a.

Campbell, U. 8. Navy
GIBRALTAR
BAY;
U. S. Ship Constitution J d y 10Q 1806
SIR,f had the honor t o inform you by the Essm and Nautlass of all the particulars that I thought necessary a t that time, as the return of Commodore
Rodgers to America, would furnish you with a more particular account of the
Squadron, t o the time of his leaving this station; since a t period I have been
To Secretary of the Eavy from Captain Hugh

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS
at Malsga where I receiv'd information that a Tunisian Squadron had arrived
at Minorcs in May last, which place I have since been informed, they left about

the latter end of that month, for particulars respecting them I beg leave to refer
you to the enclosed letter from our Consul a t that place; they have not been
heard of since that period, although we have certain accounts of Algerinea
Tunesians, Tripolines and Morocco Corsairs being out, both to the ~ a s t w a r d
and Westward, all of which I am happy to find continue to treat our flag with
a friendly respect, except in one instance near Almeria, as will appear by the
protest of Hector Coffin which is here enclosed for your consideration - Were
i t possible to have negociated the Bills drawn by Commodore Rodgers, I should
have sent the money to Mr Higgins by the Hornett, that not bein the case, I
dispatched Captain Dent with the enclosed orders for himself a n t Lieutenant
Porter, which will make you acquainted with the present distribution of our
small force in these Seas;
My intention is to continue t o the Westward until1 all the Barbary Corsairs
have return'd into Port; a measure in my opinion adviseable, there being a t present
many of them without the strait.^, and direct in the way of intercepting our
commerce to any part of Portugal, Spain, or the Mediterranean; during that
time I shall employ the Enterprize as a Vessel of observation, between this and
Tripoli, alternately going up, and coming down;
P. S. the portugeas are at war with Tripoli and have captured a Tripolene
Corsair among the crew are three Renegadoes, one of them is Williams that was
taken in the Philadelphia - they had likewise taken an Algerene Schooner H. G. C [NDA. Captain's LB, Vol. 2, 1806.1
To Secretary of the Ravy from Captain Hugh G. Campbell, U. S. Navy
U. S. SHIP Cmstitution
Gibraltar bay 10th Jwly 1806
SIB, The standing rigging of the Constitution is so much impaired as to render
i t necessary to procure a new Gang, both forward and aft, prior to the Winter
setting in; the present state of it being insufficient to bear the common strain of
what is termed by Seamen freshining the lanyard; add to this on a strict survey
of stores on board, we find her without any spare cordage, and but a few bolts
of Csnvass, that are already expended for Hammocks, so is she destitute of Paints
and many other articles. Her Sails are in bad condition, the Canvass of the new sett'is rotten, and that of
the other suits in such condition as to render the most of i t unnecessa lumber on
board; - The Ships Hull is in good order, the Rudder head a little xfective. [NDA. Captain's LB, Vol. 2, 1806.1
To Captain John Rodgers, U. S. Navy, from Secretary of the Navy
Nav D E P11
~ July 1806.
I have just received your letters of the 5th and 19tb March last. The considerations which induced you to detain all the Vessels of the Squadron
under your Command, in the Mediterranean, until the 1st May last, were certainly reasonable and proper. Your Conduct on the occasion is entirely approved.
[NA. NDA. LB, May 1799-July 1807.1
To Captain Isaac Hull, U. S. Navy, commanding U. 6. Brig Argus, Charieston, S. C.,
from Secretary of the Navy
Nav D E P ~1 8 t h July 1808.
From dispatches just received from Com. Rodgers I have reason to presume
that before this letter can reach Charleston you will have arrived there with the
At w , Bomb Vessels and Gun Boats. h r e e of the Gun Boats are to remain at Charleston, to be paid off, and to be
placed under the charge of Lieu* Gadsden to whom I have this day given the
requisite orders upon the subject. Furlough the Commissioned Officers and the
Midshipmen (if any) of these boats after they shall be paid off and delivered up
to Lieut Gadsden, directing them to report themselves to me a t the expiration of
one month. It may be convenient that No d and No 9 - should be two of the
three boats that are to remain a t Charleston. -

452

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1805 TO 180r

Three of the Gun Boats are to repair to Norfolk and there wait for my orders.
Gun Boat Ns 1 - is also to repair to that place; to her Commanding Officer
(Lieu$ Ballard) I have this day given the necessary orders. The Commanders
of the 3 of those under your Command that are to repair to Norfolk, you will
instruct to prepare and send to me, immediately on their arrival a t Norfolk, or
from Charleston if it can be there conveniently done, a statement exhibiting the
amount of money that will be required to pay off their respective Veasels a t
Norfolk. If the gun boats and other small Vessels captured and purchased in
the Mediterranean should be of your Command let the 3 to be sent to Norfolk
be 3 of them. The residue of the Gun Boats and the Bomb Vessels under your Command
are to repair to New York and there wait my orders. The Commanders are to
have the same instructions with res ct to forwarding Statements of monies that
will be required for paying oB the Eews, that those who are to proceed to Norfolk are to have.
Having apprized you of our arrangements with respect to the Gun Boats &
Bomb Vessels under your command, it remains for me to direct that you give
every necessary order for carrying them into effect. After having issued all the
necessary orders and taken on board the Argus such supplies as you may require,
you will proceed with her immediately to this place.
The Marines if any of the Gun Boats to be left a t Charleston are to remain on
board until further orders, and the Boatswains & Gunners also of each are to be
retained on board and will be under the command of Lieutt Gadsden. With respect to the paying off of these Gun Boats, you will require the Commanding Officer of each to make to you a statement of the sum required by him
for that object. Finding such Statements correct, you will draw upon M? Ingraham the Navy Agent for the amount which upon receiving you will pay over to
such Commanding Officers. If any of the Officers should wish to come on to this place in the Argus, you will
of course give them permission to do so if you can conveniently accommodrtte them.
[NDA. OSW, Vol. 7, 1805-1807.1
Extract from log of U. S. Brig Homcf, of 18 Guns, Master Commandant John H.
Dent, U. S. Navy, commanding, 13 July 1806
These 24 hours light breezes and calm a t Intervals - Made and shortened
sail ss required
At 3 discovered a brig to the Eastward standing to the Westward At 112
past 4 brought her too with a shot. At 5 hove too and sent the Boat on board
for the Captain she proved to be the Louisa Wheldon Captain Kelly from
Cagliari bound to Baltimore At 114 before 7 filled away and made sail
Mr Mumford Secretary to Colonel Lear, Consul General a t Algiers whom we
brought from that place, went on board said Brig to go to Baltimore
Latitude Obse 37O55'
[NA. NDA original, 1805-1810.1

-

To James Dodge, U. S. Charge d'dffaires, Tunis, from Master Commandant
John H. Dent, U. S. Navy
U 8. BRIGHornet
Tunis Bay. July 14 tP 1806.
SIR I am charged with Letters from Commodore Rodgers to you, with orders
to communicate with you previous to my going to Malta. As I am from America
I should like to see you on board early in the Morning, if deprived of that pleasure
you will please send some person for the Letters My boat will be a t the Goletta a t 8. AM. Tomorrow mr
[NA. SDA. FA, CL, Tunis, Vol. 2 (7240) 1801-1809.)
To Master Commandant George Cox, U. S. Navy, or the Commanding Offlcer of
the Public Vessels, Charleston, 6. C., from Secretary of the Navy
NAVD E P M 14
~ J u l y 1806.
I have just understood that the small vessel purchased in the Mediterranean
and called the Hornet, will arrive a t Charleston with you.
Order her to this place, and order the Marines from on board of the Gun boats
that are to remain a t Charleston and the Marines on board of the Gun Boats that

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

453

are to proceed to Norfolk, to join the Vizen and the Hornet & bring them to this
place. [NDA. OSW, Vol. 7, 1805-1807.1
To Nathaniel Ingraham, Navy Agent, Charleston, S. C., from Secretary of the
Navy
NAVYDEPAR~
14 July 1806.
Since writin to you my letter of the 11th ins: Cap$ Hull has arrived a t this
place with t h e s r i g Argus. - You will be pleased therefore to deliver the letter,
which was enclosed to you for him, in mine of the 11th to the commanding Officer
of the publick vessels that have arrived or may shortly arrive a t Charleston, who
is directed to consider such letter as addressed to himself & to act accordingly.
And you will be pleased to supply him with money upon his requisitions ss you
were instructed to Sup ly Cap, Hull, in my letter of the l l t 4 - I enclose a letter
for the Commanding Baicer which you will be pleased to deliver.
[NDA. GLB, Vol. 8, 1805-1807.1
To Secretary of the Navy from Midshipman Ralph bard, Jr., U. S. Navy
CHAELESTON
J d y 16'P 1806
U S. GUNBOATNP2 SIR, Sir in pursuance of orders received from Capt. Geo. Cox, I have the honor
to inform you of the arrival of the U. S. Gun Boat NQ2 under my command a t this
place, after a passage of 40 days from Gibraltar I parted company with the fleet
in Lat 34' 48' N Long 1 5 O W having Gun Boat NQ9 in tow, & continued towing
her until1 we arrived in latp 29. 30 Long 28O when the difference of the sailing of the
two boats in those light winds was so trifiing as not to make towing an object. I
therefore parted company with her.
The Hull & rigging of Gun Boat NQ[g?] are in tolerably good order The crew consists vrincivalls of men turned over from the Constitution whose
terms of service haveexpired
Permit me Sir to hope you will grant me permission to go on furlough for a few
months & leave to repair to Washington for the purpose of settling my accounts.
[NDA. Officers LB, Vol. 2, June-Aug. 1806.1

-

Extract from log of U. 6. Brig Hornd, of 18 Guns, Master Commandant John E.
Dent, U. 8. Navy, commanding, 16 July 1806
The whole of these 24 hours pleasant breezes from the N. E - a t
ast noon
Anchored in the Bay of Tunis in 6 fr water Cape Carthage bearing Eorth the
Castle on the Gulleta West and Cape [space] E. B N. Veered out 40 F4r Cable and
set the Rigging up Fore & Aft.
[NA. NDA original, 1805-1810.l
[16 July 18061
To Secretary of the Navy from Sailing Master Nathaniel Earaden, U. 6. Navy
SIR, I arrived here thirty Days after parting from the Squadron which was off
Maderia the Men belonging to NP 8 forty two in Number times is out they are
anxious for being aid off which I cannot do till I receive Orders
CHARLESTOWN
C, lGtC J u l y 1806
[NDA. Officers LB, Vol. 2, June-Aug. 1806.1

!

To Captain Hugh G. Campbell, U. 6: Navy, U. S. Frigate Corutitufion, Commodore
of U. S. Squadron in the Mediterranean, from Secretary of the Navy
NAVYD E P16tP
~ July 1806,
We have ex rienced serious inconveniences from the circumstance of the
Commanding &cers of Vessels drawing such large supplies of money. They
are too extravagant. the practice must be checked. You will by letter order all the Commanding Officers of the Squadron not to
draw money excepting in cases where i t may be indispensably necesssry; not to

454

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1806 TO 1807

make any drafts without specifying in the body of such drafts the ob'ect or objects for which they shall be drawn, and when they draw upon me they are to
forward with each draft advice of its having been drawn and a statement of the
objects in detail which may have rendered it necessary to dram.
No alteration whtever must be made in any of the publick Vessels. I n repairing they are to confine themselves to the pre-existing fashion or shape of the
object to be repaired, and not alter the original fashion or shape. Whenever a
publick Vessel under your command comes into a port where you may be to
repair or obtain supplies you will instruct the Commanding Officer to report to
you all his wants, examine such report & approve or disapprove i t as your judgment shall direct you.
I will hereafter protest all Bills that may be drawn upon me by any O5cer of
the Sauadron not drawn in exact conformitv to these orders, and I shall consider
every'such draft as a Breach of orders.
You will yourself observe these orders particularly & minutely. [NA. NDA. LB, May 1799-July 1807.1
To Captain Hugh G. Campbell, U.S. Navy, from Secretary of the Navy
~ July 1806.NAVD E PI6
I have just received from Com. Rodgers a letter addressed by Capt. Porter to
him of which the following is a Copy. ON BOARD
THE U. S. SCHOONER
Enterprize Algims Bay. 17'4 May 1806
Sm During the time that I lay in Naples Mole I became acquainted with
Capt. Pierce of his Britannick Majesty's Brig Halcyon who informed me
that John P. Lovel now a Sailing Master in our service, had been first lieu*of
a British Ship of war in the West Indies, and that the Ship being on the point
of sailing the Captain sent Lovel on shore to the agent to receive the prize.-. money due the Crew, in order to have i t distributed on board - that he
(Lovel) received the money, put i t on board an American Vessel lying in the
'"
Roads and went off in her to America.
He also informed me that the British Government had sent orders to Lord
Nelson, a short time previous to his death (which orders Capt. Pierce informed me he brought from England) to demand Lovel from from the American Commodore as a Deserter &q It is mortifying to me that such a Man should have insinuated himself into
our Navy. If he were now alive and within our reach, he would, immediately
upon being demanded, be delivered up to his Government. Our Navy shall
never knowingly shelter such Culprits from their merited punishment. Should you be called on in this case you will give every assurance that you
honorably can give, that Lovel was appointed a Sailing Master in the Navy
without a knowledge on our part of his offences - that if we bad possessed
while he was alive the information with respect to him that we now possess he
would instantly have been dismissed the service, and that if he were alive he
would be chearfully & immediately delivered up - upon being demanded. But
he died a t the Navy Yard a t this place about the 20tb of March last.
[NA. NDA. LB, May 1799-July 1807.1

U. S. Brig Hornd, of 18 Guns, l a s t e r Commandant John H.
Dent, U. S. Navy, commanding, 16 July 1806

Extract from log of

The whole of these 24 hours moderate breezes and pleasant weather took in
boats and prepared to et Underneigh - At 5 got underweigh with the Wind
from N N W. - At funset the Island of Chunaro bore N. E. B. E. distant 5
leagues - Cape Farine N B W. distant 6 leagues Cape Bin E. B N. dist 9
leagues. - the Eastern point of the Bay East distant 4 leagues and Cape Carthage N W B W. distant 4 or 5 miles - Made and short'ned sail as required.
At 5 saw the Enterpn'ze Schooner Captain Porter A t Noon the Island of
Chunaro, bore N N E distant 14: mile Cape Bin E B N. distant 7 miles and
the Rock, E N. F& distant 2 miles - The U: S: Schooner Enterpn'ze still in
Company.
LatQqby Obso 37'04'
[NA. NDA. orginsl, 1805-1810.1

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

455

To Master Commandant David Porter, U. S. Navy, from Captain Hugh G. Campbell,
U. S. Navy
US SHIP Constitution
Gibraltar Roads 17ts July 1806.
SIR, Should you arrive a t this place prior to my return from the westward,
I have to desire that after you have taken in a supply of provisions, that you proceed on a Cruize between Gibraltar and Laratch until you fall in with the Constitution, bearing in mind to recapture any American vessel or individual that
you may find in possession of a Barbary Corsair; I t is possible that I shall call
a t Cadiz, during my cruise in that case a line directed to Mr Mead of that place
will be sure to find me
Your Commission as blaster and Commander is in possession of M? Gavino
U s Consul [LC. D. Porter P, Let. & Ord., 1805-1808.1
To George Davis, Norfolk, Va., appointed U. S. Consul, Tripoli, from Secretary
of the Navy
NAVD E P ~
17 Julg 1806,
I have received your letter of the 7tP ins. - Agreeably to your request I
have in the enclosed letter directed the Commanding Officer of the American
Squadron in the Mediterranean to cause you to be carried to Tripoli in a publick
Vessel, if no objection of importance should present itself to him. [NOTE.-He
sailed from Norfolk Ln August 1806, but did not reach Tripoli until M a y 1807.1

[NDA. OSW, Vol. 7, 1805-1807.1
To Secretary of the Navy from Lieutenant James Lawrence, U. 8. Navy
CHARLESTOWN
[S. C.] July 17th [I8061
SIR, I have the honor to inform ou of my arrival in this port yesterday after
a passage of thirty four days from adeira, a t which place I touched for refreshments, in company with the U. S. brig Vizen, two Bombards the Sloop Hornet,
and five gun boats after leaving Madeira, being considerably to leeward of the
Squadron I lost sight of them in the night, and seeing nothing of them in the
morning, shaped my course for Charlestown agreeably to orders from C a p t ~
Cox, where I shall wait your orders, I beg leave to observe that the term of service of the crew of No. 6 has expired (having been shiped in New York when
the Constellation sailed) having exchanged crews with the U. S. brig Syren persuant to an order from Commodore Rodgers P S. I returned with both guns mounted and found the vessel made as good
weather as she did going out, with them below [NDA. Officers LB, Vol. 2, June-Aug. 1806.1

&

To Captain Hugh G. Campbell, U. S. Navy, commanding the U. S. Squadron in
the Mediterranean, from Secretary of the Navy
Nav DEP* 18 July 1806.
Doctor Davis who has been appointed Consul from the U. States to the Regency
of Tripoli, has requested me to allow one of the Publick Vessels in the Mediterranean to place him in Tripoli.
I can see nd objection to gratifying him - indeed it is proper that he should
be conveyed to Tripoli in a publick Vessel, when not inconvenient. I f therefore
no objection should present itself to your mind, you will cause Doctor Davis
to be conveyed to Tripoli in one of the Vessels under your command.
[NDA. OSW, Vol. 7, 1805-1807.1
To R. W. Meade, appointed U. 6. Navy Agent, Cadiz, Spain, from Secretary of the

Naw

You will consider yourself as hereby appointed Agent for the ~ a of; the
~
United States for the Port of Cadiz.
For your trouble in executing the duties arising out of this Appointment you
will be allowed a commission of two pr Cent on the amount of all supplies pur-

456

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1806 TO 1807

chased and furnished by you to our publick vessels; One per Cent on the amount
of all articles sold by you, & one half per Cent on all monies advanced by you
for recruiting & such like purposes.
Thomas Turner Esqr the Accountant of the Navy will give you instructions
relatively to the forms to be observed in keeping your Accounts.
You will be pleased to render to our publick Vessels every attention and assistance which they may require.
[NDA. GLB, Vol. 8, 1805-1807.1
To Secretary of the Navy from Lieutenant Benjamin Smith, U. S. Navy
U S. BOMBVESSELVengeance
Harbour of Charlestown [S. C.] July 1 9 t h 1806
Sm, I have the honor to inform you that I arrived there this day after a passage
of forty six days from Gibralter via Madeira, my Crew consists of thirty four Men
twenty of whose term of service has expired. I shall employ them in putting my
Vessel in Order for Sea untill honord with your Commands
I have had the misfortune to loose one of my Officers. MI' Simon Smith midshipman who died on the next day after our leaving Gibralter. I parted Company
with the Brig Vizen and Gun Boat NQ6 in twelve fathom water off the bar. I
mw NQ 9 about 10 Miles to leeward of Sullivans Island, as the all have Pilots
on board they will no doubt be able to get in tomorrow Gun &oat NP 3 and 4
arrived here a few hours before me
[NDA. Officers LB, Vo1.2, June-Aug.1806.1
To Secretary of the Navy from Sailing Master Humphrey Magrath, U. S. Navy
CHARLESTON
[S. C.] July 20th 1806.
SIR, I have the honor to inform you of my arrival, with Gun Boat N P 8. on
Saturday July 19th
N P 3. has sustained the loss of her Boat on the passage, also sprung her Bowsprit and Cross Jack Yard. [NDA. Officers LB, Vol. 2, June-Aug. 1806.1
To Secretary of the Navy from Midshipman John D. Henley, U. S. Navy
CHARLESTOWN
[S. C.] July 20th 1806
Sm, I have the Honour to inform you of the Safe Arrival of U S Gun Boat N P4
under my Command I got in last evening after a passage of 46 days from Gibraltar & 37 from hladiera. I continued in Company with the Brig untill within half
da s sail of the Bar.
kventeen of my crew which was drafted from the Conatitutibn whopie time are
expired N P 6 & the Veng[e]anee Bum Ketch was also in company
[NDA. Officers LB, Vol. 2, June-Aug. 1806.1
To Secretary of the Navy from Nathaniel Ingraham, Navy Agent, Charleston, S. C.
CHARLESTON
[S. C.] ,??Oth July 1806
SIR, My last to you was of the 15 Ins* since which I havenot had the honor
to receive any of your Esteem favors I then acquainted you that NQ 9 had
arrived, since then 3. 4. 6 & 8 have arrived, & I am this moment informed that
the Bomb Ketch Vengence has a pilot on board, Nq I , ie still on a cruize Southward
in the hope that I may soon have the honor to receive your particular commands
as relates to this Squadron,
[NDA. Mbc. LB, Vol. 3, 1806.1
To Jacob Wagner, Department of State, from James Leander Cathcart
BOSTON July 90th 1806DEARSIR I had the honor to receive the Secretary of States letter of the 7'4 inst
in c o u w of post and immediately sent the proper acknowledgment to the Treamrer
of the United States for the remitance of four thousend dollars contain'd therein,
which shall be expended to the best advantage

-

457

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

Doctor Triplett arrived here without the Turks on the ll* inst as he had been
put to a considerable extra expense by their extravagance, & could not succeed
in persuading them to join the Ambassador, he consequently abandon'd them to
the care of their Interpreter Carlo, & came here in all haste in order to consult me
on the measures most proper to be pursued: Carlo arrived here on the 17tb complaining that the Turks had spent all their money, & had contracted debts; I
conversed with the Ambassador upon the subject, he declared that he would leave
them in America, & was determined to have nothing farther to do with them;
knowing that if they remain'd in the United States, that they would be continually tormenting the heads of Departments for money, I concluded to write
to the Mayor of New York requesting him to dischargstheir debts to the emount
of one hundred dollars, and that the Ambassador wish'd his interference & had
desired me to inform him, that he might exert his authority to compel them to
embark by sea for this place, or Providence, provided he found i t necessary: I
disppatch d Carlo the same day, & hope he is now near New York; I contemplate
much trouble before these people are embark'd & heartily repent having accompanied the Ambassador as he is extremely petulant and troublesome
We have receiv'd letters from Colonel Stricker of the 11tP & 14 ins$ informing
us that the Franklin would not contain all the goods purchased by the Ambassador, & that he had forwarded 14,000lbs of loaf sugar, & 10 Tons of Logwood to
Washington, to be forwarded to Tunis in the first public vessel that sails for the
Mediterranean; The Ambassador is now mean enough to make a plea of his not
having given orders for that arrangment to demand the value of the goods which
is 2643 dola & requests the United States to take the goods upon their own account,
& says there can be but little loss on them in this Country if any, which they are
better able to bear than he is, & he adds that it may be three years before he receives his goods a t Tunis, & it might so happen that he never would receive them:
he is in fact a very mean, suspicious, avaricious character; bias'd by nothing but
self interest, devoid of every sense of delicacy, and the sooner we get rid of him
entirely the better-I request you to make the above communications to the Secretary of State immediately, & communicate to me his instructions as soon as possible; I likewise
request his orders how to act should the Turks prove refractory & refuse to embark quietly[NA. SDA, CD, Tunis, Vol. 3, 1805-1806.1

-

Extract from log of U. 6. Brig Hornd, of 18 Guns, Master Commandant John H.
Dent, U. 6. Navy, commanding, 20 July 1806
The whole of these 24 hours fresh breezes and pleasant weather
Made and short'ned sail as requisite,
At 3 the Island of Goza bore S. B
E - At 4 the west point of Goza bore W B N distant 5 miles - At 10 short'ned
sail off the Island of Malta and sent the boat on shore a t Le Vallee. At 11 the
Boat returned and made sail At 8. Cape Passaro bore W N W. distant 3 miles - At Meridian Cape Passaro bore S. W B W. distant 4 leagues and Cape Ponella N N E distant 3 leagues
Lat* by O b s ~36'52'
[NA. NDA original, 1805-1810.1
To Secretary of the Navy from Master Commandant George Cox, U. S. Navy
U. S. BRIGVuen CHARLESTOWN
[S. C.]
July the dirt 1806 SIR,I have the honour to inform you that I arrived here yesterday after passage
of 47 days with the Ketch Vengeance Gunboats NQ3. 4 & 5. All the other vessels'
parted company before I reached the trade mnds. I find that three of the Boats
have arrived and NP 9 is outside of the Barr with a ilot on Board, - The sloop
H a M I and N* 10 has been seen off Cape Roman, !suppose they will arrive in a
da or two
&he Vixens crew's time is expired and am sorry to inform you that I am so unwell and have been so the greater part of the passage that I have not been able to
pay the necessary attention to the Brig - Commodore Rodgers has directed me
to wait here for your ordera [NDA. OfEoers LB, Vol. 2, June-Aug. 1806.1

-

458

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1806 TO 1807

To Secretary of the Navy from Sailing Master Alexander C. Harrison, U. 6. Havy
U S. GUN BOATNq 6 July the 61qt 1806
Charles Ton South Carolina
SIR, I have the Honour to inform you of the arrival of the U S. Gun Boat NQ6
under my command on the 219 of the present Ultimo
I shall awate your commands
[NDA. Officers LB, VoI. 2, June-Aug. 1806.1
To Secretary of the Xavy from Nathaniel Ingraham, Navy Agent, Charleston, 6. C.
CHARLESTON
[S. C.] 21 *t July 1806.
SIR. I did myself the honor, to address you the last Mail, since which the Brig
Vizen, Bomb Ketch Vengence, and Gun Boats 5 & 9 together will Sail now in this
port, & hope in my next to announce to you the arrival of the remainder of this
Squadron NP 1 is still absent, otherwise I should have made my return to Mr Turner, agreeable to his request. Embracing the period, of the arrival of this Squadron, the moment N P I. arrives it shall be forwarded
C

*

*

-

8

Squadron now in Port Brig. Vken Bomb. Vengence Gun Boats, 8.9,4,6.68 & 9
[NDA. Misc. LB. Vol. 3, 1806.1
Extract from log of U. S. Erig Hornet, of 18 Guns, Master Commandant John B.
Dent, U. S. Navy, commanding, 21 July 1806
These 24 hours light airs and clear weather - A t past 8 set Studding sails At 5 took in sail and prepared to Anchor - At 6 Anchored in the Harbor of Syracuse in 5 fathoms water same time obtained product and commenced watering
[NA. NDA original, 1805-2810.1
To Secretary of the Navy from Lieutenant SamueI Elbert, U. 6. Navy
CHARLESTON
[S. C.] July $24 1806
SIR, I have the Honour to inform you of the safe arrival of the United State8
Gun Boat N P 9 under my command after a passage of forty Ei h t days from
Gibraltar - which place I left in com any with the Vzken Cap: 8ox but unfortunately parted company from her to East of Madiera My crew are all in good
health and have the times expired - Mr Boyd the Midshipman you ordered
on board of me before I left this place was arrested in Syracuse by Commodore
Rodgers - for disobediance of orders and uno5cer like conduct - he st% remains
in that situation - and will untii further orders
[NDA. Officers LB, Vol. 2, June-Aug. 1806.1
To Captain Eugh G. Campbell, U. 8. Navy, commanding U. 8. higate ConsllluUa
from Tobias Lear, U. S. Consul General, Algiers
ALGIERS.July, 9 4 i b 1806
DEARSIR I have received with much pleasure the two letters which you wrote
me by Capts Smith and C a p t ~Dent, and am much obliged to you for the information contained in them. I have nothin particular to communicate from this place a t present; except
that two small Lateen boats, carrying one cannon each, sailed from this place a few
days ago; one commanded by Rais Hammeda, the erst Captain in the service,
and the other by Rais Ally, also a Conspicuous Character in that l i e . Their
destination was not known ublickly; but it was supposed they intended to pats
the Straits and make some 8rtptures of the Portuguise in the AtIantic.
There have been strong Rumours of a War between this Regency and Tunis;
but it is now said that the Bey of Tunis has made proper acknowledgements, and
the matter m t s . - A strong force has gone from this place to the interiour
in order to oompletely crush the Insurection which has for some time past prevailed there. Two Frigates of 44 Guns each, and two Polacres of 32 & 28 Gum are ready for
Sea in this Port. - A fine new frigate of 48 Gune ia almost ready for s e a The
other Cruizere are in very bad condition

-

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS
We stand very well here a t present; and I do not see anything which will alter
our situation but, a t the same time, we cannot be certain of a continuance of

this friendly disposition, as every thing is so changable in these Latitudes. We flatter ourselves with the pleasure of seeing you here soon, as you promised
to make us a Visit. - I refer you to Captain Porter for any details of affairs
here; and shdl only add that Mrp Lear unites with me in every wish for your
health and happiness, and in compliments and regards for your Officers.
Beleive me to be with real esteem,
[Stephen Decatur Col. Book B, 1806-1807.1

-

[24 July 18061
Protest against Quarantine at Cadiz, Spain, by American Ships
We the subscribers Citizens of the United States, Commanders & supercargoes
of American Vessels now in the Bay of Cadiz do Certify that the Quarantine
imposed on all American Vessells indiscrimenately from every part of the United
States of America & from Gibraltar to this port is forty days, which Quarantine
is most rigorously maintain'd without allowing us to have any communication
whatever with the shore.
We do further declare that Joseph Ysnardi American Consul for the port of
Cadiz does not reside in Cadiz but a t R0t.a. a small Town on the opposite side of
the Bay of Cadiz & distant by water about Ten miles & by land according to the
best of our Knowledge & belief between Thirty & Forty. Given under our hands a t Cadiz this 24tP July 1806. G BRAYmr of the S C HHiram
~
N . York.
JOSEPH
GLENNof SHIP Minerva of Philadelphia
WILLIAMHOOPERBRIGColumbia of Boston
JOHN
HEKENS[?]BRIG TWOBrothers of Gloucester
J. HERBERTS,
S C HEliza
~
Ann of Nor olk, Vir*
JOHNBABBIDGE
BRIGSusannah of ewbury Port
NATHJM PARSONS
BRIGMary Newyork
SAM!C NICOLLSHIPSally New York
JAMESORNSHIPMontgomery Portsb N. hampshirs
[NDA. Misc. LB, Vol. 3, 1806.1

Nf

To the Gentlemen of the Steerage and Cockpit from Captain John Rodgers, U. S.
Navy
U S FRIGATEEssez
Chesapeak Bay July 86t4 1806
GENTLEMEN
The Letter which you did me the honor to write of yesterdays
date, as a testimony of your personal regard, and approbation of my conduct as
an O5cer1 during the time you were placed under my Command, is grateful to my
feelings, not only as an O5cer; but in a degree, which alone, a Father feels for
the attachment of his Children; and it is with lasting pleasure, I can justly say,
that I have commanded You incidentally, and that you have obeyed me from inherent principles - These pleasing reflections, added to your Gentlemany and
uniform correct Conduct during the period of your services while under my
Command, are Considerations which alone entitles you to my warmest Friendship
and Esteem - I shall always feel a lively Interest in all your ublic, as well ss
private Concerns and that your laudible ambition, patriotic e a l , and correct
intentions may meet a due reward, is the most fervent Wish of To The Gentlemen of the Steerage and Cock Pit
[LC. JRP, L Bk B, May 1805-July 1806.1
To Secretary of the Navy from Master Commandant George Cox, U. S. Navy
U, S, BRIGV u e n CHARLESTOWN,
July, t?6* 1806 SIR, I have received your letter of the 14tb Instant and one of the 124 directed
to Cap, Hull respecting the small vessels that have returned from the Meditterranean
Agreeable to your orders I have directed the crews of Nv 2, 3, & 9 to be disoharged a t this place & the Boats delivered in charge of Lieut Gadsden No 4. 5

-

460

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1806 TO 180'7

& 10 proceeds to Norfolk and NQ6 & 8 with the Bomb Ketch Vengeance to New
york The Ketch Spitjire B: Sloop Hornet have not Arrived should they not arrive
before the Vixen is ready to sail I will leave directions with the Agent for the
Hornet to repair to Washington and the Ketch to New york [NDA. Officers LB, Vol. 2, June-Aug. 1806.1

To Midshipman Bdph Izard Jr., U. 6. Navy, commanding U. 6. Gunboat NO.2,
Charleston, S. C., from Secretary of the Navy
NAVYD E P ~96 J u l y 1806. I this day received your letter of the 15*binstant and congratulate you on your
eafe arrival in America. On the 1 1 t h instant I wrote to the Commanding Officer of the Gun Boats &9
that were ordered to Charleston and gave him the necessary instructions with
respect to them. If he should have arrived you will of course receive your
orders from him. If he should not have arrived the Crew of Gun boat NQ 9
must be immediately paid off and discharged with the exception of the Marines
and the Boatswain and Gunner who are to remain in board until the arrival of
the Commanding Officer. MI Ingraham upon your showing him this letter will supply you with the
necessary monies to pay off your Crew. After the Crew shall be paid off and discharged you will give up the command
of NQ 2 to Lieut Gadsden, and consider yourself on furlough, and a t liberty to
proceed to this place - which if convenient you can do in the Vixen. [NDA. OSW, Vo1. 7, 1805-1807.1
To Secretary of the Navy from Midshipman Arthur Sinclair, U. 6. Navy
U, S GUNBOAT
NP10 - CHARLESTON
[S. C. ]
July the 96'b 1806SIR,I have the honour to inform you of my arrival a t this place, yesterday
The time of our departure you are no doubt apprized of by Cap* Cox of the
Vizen; which vessel I unluckily parted company with on the night of the 13tb
June in L o n e 18. 40 LattQ 31. 30; and agreeable to my instructions have made
the best of my way for this port; but on the 11@of this month having got as
far on my passage as Lon@ 65.00 Lstt4 27.00 - I lost the trade wind, and
have ever since had i t blowing strong from S W to W S W; which added to the
current in crossing the Gulf, brought me on Soundings off Cape Roman
From this place I vainly attempted (for four days) to beat up to my destin4
port; but the wind increasing to such a heighth that I could not carry sail sufficient to hold my own, and a Pilot just a t this time offering, I put into a small,
but good, harbour about 6 miles to windward of the above Cape, waiting there
for a more favourable time
Nothin transpired on my passage after leaving the Vizen until the 12tP of
thia ,on& I fell in with an homeward bound English convoy under command
of Ca t M~Kenzieof his Majesties ship Carisjord, who brought me too, and
after Liling, in person, and being answered what vessel this was, he ordered
me onboard his ship - I answered that i t was an invariable rule with me never
to leave my vessel a t sea; but if he would send his boat I would give him what
information might be requisite - He then in a more authoritive tone, ordered
my boat hoisted out and myself to come onboard immediate1 or he should find
a method to compel me - I answered to this threat, that had not been accustomed to such conduct towards a, U S Vessel, and that he might rest himself
assured such orders should not be obeyed unless enforced by compulsory means;
and that I was very well convinced his Government had neither vested him with
authority to make such demands, or the power to enforce them Much passed between us, until he a t length sent his boat with a Lieut onboard
an an apology that he had a t first taken us for a French privateer; which wm
ce~rtainlynot less erroneous than i t was pitiful and degrading to its author I had imagined that Cap; MvKenzies object was ta have empressed my crew
and wm armed against such an attempt; but the Officer behaved politely while
onboard
merely enquiring the news of Europe &C* and then departed -

-

f

-

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS
As 1 considered this conduct bordering on an insult offered our Flag, I have
thought i t proper you should be made acquainted with i t
I should have forwarded a statement of the crew under my command; but
we are not to leave this vessel in Charleston (but to procede farther north) I do
imagine it would be of no consequence to you - however to give you some idea
of the sum necessary to be ordered for the discharge of the Officers & crew;
there are forty in number who8 accounts up to this data will averge one hundred
dollsre
The hull of this Vessel is in good order, excep her deck seams which the southern
Lattitudes have rendered a little open, and which for the preservation of the
Vessel and comfort of the crew I should have had calked if my stay a t this place
would admit it; but as i t will not I shall have it done as early as possible either
on the passsge or as soon as we arrive in port again
Her running rigging is old and generally unfit for service; being principally what
she was first supplied with
Her mast I discovered in the first of our passage to be badly sprung, so much
so, that I have been uneasy for its safety; notwithstanding the necessary precautions I took for its security - Exclusive of this defect the mast is too small
in diameter for the [Ms mutilated] of canvass the alteration of her original rig [Ms
mutilated] your concent it shall be replaced by one better [Ms mutilated]
Her Sails, standing rigging, and Cables are [Ms mutilated] as yet Should i t not interfere with any arrangements you have made or be inconsistent with the good of the service I should feal my self much obligated by being
ordered to Washington as early as conveniant
[NDA. Officers LB, Vol. 2, June-Aug. 1806.1

-

-

To Captain Hugh G. Campbell, U. 6. Navy, from Secretary of the Navy
NAV D E P ~26tP July 1806.I transmit to you herewith copy of my letter of the 15th May last.
Since writing that letter I have been informed that a Band of Music has actually
been engaged. If so, they must be discharged immediately. There is no a p
propriation out of which they can be paid. The Commanders of publick Vessels
must be satisfied with the Music assigned them from this Country - they have
no authority to encrease the number placed on board in this Country. [NA. NDA. LB, May 1799-July 1807.1
To Secretary of the Navy from Captain John Rodgers, U. 6. Navy
U S FBIGATEf i s e x
Polomack 2 6 t h July 1806
SIR, I am happy I have it in my power to inform you that during my Command
of the Squadron in the Mediterranean the best possible understanding subsisted
between our Vessels and the different Ports which they visited, Leghorn and
Genoa excepted - In Leghorn I was myself treated in a Rude insulting manner
by a Guard a t the entrance of the Port, during my stay there, without receiving
such redress from the Governor of the place, as I felt myself not only authorised
but bound to demand - I therefore made the circumstances Known b letter
which I herein enclose, with the answer from Mr Mozsi Minister for goreign
Relations to Her Majesty the Queen of Etruria for your consideration, as also
the letters which passed between myself and the Governor I should have made you acquainted with the circumstances, was i t not that
I did not receive Mr Mozzi's answer but a few days previous to my leaving- Syracuse last It will appear somewhat singular, that the only Individuals we have had the
least dispute with, are Frenchmen, both the Governor of Leghorn, and the French
Agent a t Genoa, the latter of which it appears has the entire controul of both
As Capt Smith is now present
the Military and Civil departments a t Genoapermit me to refer you to him for particulars relative to the treatment shewn
the Brig Syren a t Genoa; - The Syren is the only U States Vessel that has
ever been a t Genoa; - Any farther information you may require respecting
the conduct I met with a t Leghorn, I shall feel a pleasure in Communioating [NDA. Captain's LB, Vol. 2, 1806.1

462

N A V K OPERATIONS FROM 1805 TO 1807
--

To Secretary of the Navy from Captain Edward Preble, U. 6. Navy
BOSTON July 16. 1806
SIR, The appearance of an Officer assuming rank over those of his Brother
Officers Senior to him in commission, has an unfavorable appearance and is
generally calculated to create uneasiness and injure the service. - Lt Wederstrandt, Lt Jones and the other Lieu@commanding vessels here, excepting Lieu$
Leonard, very properly wear the Lieu* Uniform - Lt Leonard, alone, has assumed
the Uniform of a Msster Commandant by wearing the Epaulet on the right
shoulder, in lieu of the left. I presume, as the rank of Lt Commandant, by commission is done away, that in this instance he is acting contrary to the regulations
of the service, unless especially authorised by you.
I conceive it my duty to give you this information in order, if M: Leonard
is incorrect, that you may act on the case as you may think proper.
The vessel with the military stores for the Bombs & Gun vessels has not yet
arrived nor has the mortars from England.
[NDA. Captain's LB, Vol. 2, 1806.1
To Secretary of the Navy from Lieutenant P. C. Wederstrandt, U. 6. Navy
BOSTON July 16t4 1806 SIR, I have the pleasure to inform you I arrived here on the 24th after a disagreeable passage from Baltq having met with Contrary winds and Calms I t affords me some satisfaction to find I am still in time as that part of the
Suite which left Washington to come on by land have not yet arrived I shall in a few days be ready for sea having to fill our water and get onboard
such few articles as t,he Ambaaidor may have to ship [NDA. Officers LB, Vol. 2, June-Aug. 1806.1
To Secretary of State from James Leander Cathcart
BOSTON July B6tb 1806 -1
SIR On the 24th ins* I had the honor to receive your dispatches for the Tunisian
Ambassador & on the 25th the Brig Franklin arrived here; elate with hope of
terminating this disagreeable business & of returning to my family, judge my
regret a t being under the necessity of forwarding the enclosed: I have made
use of every persuasive argument in my power to induce the Ambassador to embark quietly but to no purpose, and not conceiving myself authorized to make
use of force I have deem'd it expedient to remain here until I receive your instructions: Mohamet Chaoux and the Turks that are in his company have
not arrived; neither have I heard from Carlo since I dispatch'd him to New York
on the 17th inst [NA. SDA, CD, Tunis, Vol. 3, 1805-1806.1
126 July 18061
To President Thomas Jefferson from Sidi Suliman Melli Melli, Tunisian
Ambassador Plenipotentiary, from Hamouda, Bey of Tunis
SIDDISULIMANMELLAMENNIAmbassador Pleniopotentiary from the Regency of
Tunis to his Excellency the President of the United Stutes of America
HEALTHPEACEAND PROSPERITYSIR, The Brig Franklin arrived here yesterday, and with great concern I haqe
found her to be a prize vessel captured by a Tripolitan Cruiser and sold a t Tunis
in the ear 1803: This vessel was freighted twice by myself and afterwards sent
from Junis to Triest where she wss sold by the express order of the Bashaw of
Tunis: - I therefore cannot receive her as a substitute for the Cruisers which
were captured off Tripoli and request that this vessel may be consign'd to Consul
Lear to be by him deliver'd to the Bashaw of Tunis my Master and that your
Excellency will give me permission to remain in any part of the United Stat@
with two servants only until I receive answers to the letters which I propose
sending by the Brig Franklin As this is a proposal of my own I conceive the United States exonorated from
every expense I% do not wish that my Salary should be oontinued after your
Excellency honors me with an answer to this letter -

WRnS WITH BARBARY POWERS
If the above proposal should not meet your Excellencys approbation I request
that you will either order Mc Cathcart to charter a small vessel to convey me to
Tunis or permit me to charter one myself as i t is more than my life is worth to
feturn in a vessel that has already belong'd to my Master and was sold to Christtans by his partiaular order.
That the immortal Allah may have you under his holy protection is the prayer
of the poorest Slave of God.
Done a t Boston July the 26tP 1806 [signed in Arabic]
[NA. SDA, CD, Tunis, Vol. 3, 1505-1806.1

To Secretary of the Nary from Captain John Rodgers, U. S. Nary
U S SHIP Essm
Eastern Branch 27 July 1806
SIR,I n addition to my Communications by the U S Brig Argus Capt Hull,
Copies of which I here with transmit you; - I now have the honor to acquaint
you of my arrival a t this place with the U S Frigate Essez, after a passage of 51
Days to the Chesapeak, having left Gibraltar on the 34 Ultimo, (Seven days after
the departure of the Argus and Syren) in Company with the U S Brig Vzxen Capt
Cox, Bombs Spitfire and Vengeance, Lieuttr Hunt and Smith, Cutter Hornet Lieutt
Crane, and Gun Boats N? 2, 3, 4, 6, 6,8, 9, & 10 Commanded by LP Izard,
MgGrath, Henly, Harrison, Lawrence, Haraden, Elbert and Saint Clair, which
Vessels I parted Company with on the day of sailing from Gibraltar, after seeing
them clear of the Streights, and under orders to proceed with all practicable dispatch direct to Charleston (S c ) agreeable to your orders to that effect; The prevailing weather in the Mediterranean (which was extremly bad, almost without
Intmmission, from the 1-s of March untill the 18, of May,) not authorising their
departuresoonerThe Nautilus which in my Communications of the 23d May,
by the Argus, I informed ou, I had left a t A1 iers for Coll Lears dispatches; I fell
in with as 1 came out of Cfibraltar Bay, took
Lears dispatches from him, and
order'd her Commander to proceed into the Bay, replenish his Water and Provisions, and t o Sail immediately after for Washington, however I find the Nautilus
has arrived before me - The reason of the Essm, Vizen, Bombs and Gun Boats
not sailing so soon as I informed you they would by the Argus, was owing t o
strong Westerly Winds (part of the time, a more severe Gale than was ever experienced a t the same season, by the oldest Inhabitants of Gibraltar) which lasted
from 12 hours after the miling of the Argus and Syren, untill the Morning of the
34 Ultimo, the Wind shifting suddenly to the Eastward As the Essez was under sailing orders for Washington, when I received your
letter bearing date the 224 March, informing me that the President had been
pleased t o consent to my request of August last, by giving me permission t o
return to the U States; I in consequence transfered the Command of the Constitution t o Capt Campbell a s being the next Officer in Seniority, and hoisted my
Pendant on board the Esscz, in which Ship a t the date of my leaving the Mediterranean; the Conssitution and Brig Hornet was a t Gibraltar, and the Schooner
Enterprize, off Tunis on a Cruize of observation, as my intention, in the event of
my not being permitted to return, was to have taken a Center station in the
Constitution off Algiers, and t o have made Minorca my Rendevouze, to have kept
one of the small vessels in the Neighbourhood of Morocco to have received her
supplies a t Gibraltar, and the other off Tunis and Tripoli, to have received the
same a t Syracuse, and Malta; Minorca t o have been the General Rendevouze,
where the other Two Vessels would have been directed to meet me, on the first
day of everv Second Month - This disposition, once in every Six blonths,
making the
of the Several Barbary Ports with my own Ship, would have
completely inform'd me a t all times of the Situation of our affairs with each of
these Regencies, and a t the same time have enabled me to have kept you regularly
informed; and this disposition I have advised Capt Campbell to pursue, untill a
Commanding Officer t o the Squadron arrives.
The length of my passage hence, was owing t o the prevalence of, almost,
incessant Westerly Winds, and as the Vixen Bombs and Gun Boats have pursued
a Southern pmsage, I am in hopes that in proportion to their General Sailing
with this Ship, their passage will be much shorter, than mine has been
I have nothing new to communicate [NDA. Captain's LB, Vol. 2, 1806.1

8011

our

-

464

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1806 TO 1807

To Richard W. Xeade, U. 6. Kavy Agent, Cadi&, Spain, from Captain Hugh Q.
Campbell, U. S. Navy
U S. SHIP Constitution.
Cadiz Harbor 284 July 1806
SIR, This being the fourth time that I have visited Cadiz ss Commander of'
the American forces on this station, without having once seen Joseph Iznardi
Ekqr American Consul for that City, and its dependencies, or receiving from him
that aid or attention, that the duties of his office require of him; and presuming
that those he has left to transact his business are by no means adequate, to the
task imposed on them, which in all probability, has occasioned an improper
representation to the Governor of our situation and relations with Algeziras and
this place; I have to desire and request in the name of the government I have
the honor to serve, that you will take such measures as in your Opinion are proper
for procuring us pratique, assuring upon my word and honor that we were admitted
to pratique immediately on our arrival from Gibraltar, to Algeziras, where we
enjoyed every priviledge due to the flag of the United States and sailed direct from
that place for Cadiz,where we arrived on the 25th Instt-free of any communication
with any other Port or Vessel whatever; - I therefore expect you will demand
it as a right, that We be admitted to Pratique immediately.
COPY,
[NDA. Captain's LB, Vol. 2, 1806.1

To Captain John Bodgers, U. S. Navy, Washington, D. C., from OfEcere of the

U. S. Ship EsJa

U S SHIP &sex
Washington 28 July 1808
SIR The period having a t length arrived which must of necessity separate us
from each other, we should do injustice to our feelings and be wanting gratitude,
were we not Sir, to tender you our testimony of the high sense we entertain of
your worth as an O5cer & Commander in the Navy of the U. States - and
be assured Sir, that when your Country shall again require your services, that
i t will be more than gratifying to us to be placed under your immediate Command. - The very friendly and polite treatment which we have a t all times
received from you will ever be held in the greatful recollection of Sir
Yr Most Ob. Serv*
LARKINGRIFFIN
Jose BLAKE
OLIVERH. PERRY LAWRENCE
CRUISE
Wm H, ALLEN
RICHARD
SMITE
JAM?
TRANT
THOJOHNSTON
SAM.G. BLODGET DAVIDWHANN
E CUTBUSH
ANTHONY
GALE
[NDA. Area 7.1

To Secretary of the Navy from Lieutenant P. C. Wederstrandt, U. S. Navy, U. S.
Brig F r d l i n

BOSTON
July ,984 1806
SIR, My last to you was on the 26tP informing you of my arrival, I have now
to inform you i t appears the Ambassador has resolved not to go in the Brig ih
consequence of which Mr Cath[c]art has written Mr Madison informing him of his
Deterlqination - This Citcumstance will greatly retard the Brigs sailhg and I
beg you will have the goodness to inform me in what manner I am to act I omited informing you in my last that on the passage round we fell in with the
Brig Juliana John Keene Master from Gibraltar out Eighty Two Da s and for
New York, Deatitute of Bread, that I aupplied her with a barrel an8recevd of
the Master the Sum of one Guinia In L'ieu thereof with which I shall supply
the place of the above Barrel
As our stay here will be much longer than
Could possibly have been extected in order to save our Salt Provisions, I have requested MI Brown to furnish the Brig with Fresh and shall settle with him out
of the Monies entrusted with me for the Disbursment's of the Brig unless, you
should otherwise Direct - I Satter myself the Ambassador could have had no
objections to the situation in which he found the Brig, as I believe I can Venture
to Say she is in as good order as i t is possible to have a Vessel of her Discription
and I think his only objections is that she is the Brig Franklin -

-

-

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS
The Ambasssdor ask'd me today if my Orders would admit of my aiIing with
a part of his Suite, My re ly u m no, That I was order'd here to take him and his
suite, and consequently ould Not think of ailing unleas otherwise Directed,
I wait with Much anxiety to hear from you, In order that I may Know in what
way I sm to act in cese the Ambassador should insist in his resolution not to go - I
am this Moment ready for Sea and wait only his pleasure to Embark
INDA. Officers LB, Vol. 2, June-Aug 1806.1

8

To Midshipmen Benjamin F. Reid and Daniel Todd Patterson, U. 6. Bavy, Hew
Orleans, La., from Secretary of the Bavy
NAVYDEPM! 99 July 1806,
I have received your Letter upon the subject of your Commission. The delay in issuing the Commissions for Lieutenants authorized by the late
Act of Congrese necessarily arose out of the absence of several Lieutenants in
the Mediterranean and elsewhere. Thia circumstance has now brought us so near
the period of the next Session of Congress that I have determined to postpone
issuing any Commissions at all until Congress meet and the regular nominations
can be made to the Senate. As soon aa the nominations shall be confirmed the
Commissions shall issue, but i t is altogether unnecessary to issue them at this
moment as they could be in force for so short a time, and new Commissions
would become necessary under the confirmation of Senate. [NDA. OSW, Vol. 7, 1805-1807.1
To the Gentlemen of the Gun Room from Captain John Bodgers, U. S. Elavy
U S SHIPEd$&
Wcrshingtm 30 J d y 1806
GENTLEMEN
The letter which you did me the honor to write of the 28 Ins+teatifying your approbation of my Conduct toward you, as an Officer,and Commander
in the Navy of the U States, is greatful to my feelings, to a degree, which my heart
feels proud to acknowledge; and i t is with lasting pleasure I can justly say, that
I have Commanded you incidentally, and that you have obeyd me from inherent
principle, these pleasing reflections, added to your Gentlemany and correct conduct, during the Period of your services, while under my Command, entitles you
to my Warmest friendship & Esteem
I shall always feel a lively interest in all
your Public, as we11 as private Concerns; That you may receive from your Country
on all occasions a reward in proportion to your Services, will be a gratification
which can only be equalld by the regard of, Gentlemen,
The Gentlemen of the Gun Room [LC. JRP, L Bk B, May 1805-July 1806.1

-

To President Thomas Jefferson from Captain John Bodgers, U. 8. Navy
WASHINQTON
50 July 1806
SIRRaving heard Mr Smith the Secretary of the Navy, say that you were desirous
of convincing yourself of the properties of the Barbary broad tail Sheep I have in
Consequence taken the liberty of sending to your Steward, a t this place a Male
and Female of the Tripoline Breed; which I beg you will do me the honor to
accept [LC. JRP, L Bk B, May 1805-July 1806.1
To Jamee Dodge, U. S. Charge dlAffuiree, Tunis, from John Bidgely, U. S. Charge
dYAffairea,Tripoli
TRIPOLI IN BARBARY31.9 [July ?I 1806
DEARSIR,I am SO IT^ to inform you that on the 27*Qan U. S. merchant ship was
wrecked in thie port. She was bound for Leghorn and had taken on board half a
cargo of Senna & madder on account of the Jews. No life lost. You may imagine
my trouble with a houseful of sailors. The master and his mates go in a few days
in an Imperial Brig to Leghorn. I pray you give this information the earliest
convevance to Commodore Barron. who will probably adopt eome step t o get
away ihe crew.
By the same gale which wrecked the ship, a large Imperial vessel waa foundered
off Malta. A few days before an English frigate put on board her a prize master,

466

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROil4 1806 TO 1807

&I and ordered her to Malta for examination. The Englishmen and Imperhlista
arrived here safely yesterday morning in the jolly and long boats.
MI Nissen departs in the aforesaid Imperial Brig; he desires me to present his
compliments, and say that if he does not write you hence, he will on his arrival
a t Leghorn.
I have strong expectations that this will find the Commodore and Envoy in
Tunis. Consul Davis I hope is not far behind. If any thing interesting takes place
I beg you to dispatch a courier.
I t has been a long while since I had the pleasure of hearing from you.
[NA. SDA. FA, CL, Tunis, Vol. 2 (7240) 1801-1809.1

131 July 18061
To Secretary of the Navy from Sailing Easter Alexander C. Harrison, U. 6. Navy
SIR, I have the honour to inform you that the U S Gun Boat Nv 6 under my
command arrived in this Port today The Orders that I received from Lieutenant
Commandt Cox Commandr U S Brig Vizen to report myself to you likewise the
sum of money that would be necessary to ay the crew. i t amounts to Twenty
aeven hundred dollars the evening of this
NORFOLK
July $ f a t 1806.5
[NDA. Officers LR, Vol. 2, June-Aug. 1806.1

Zy

To Secretary of the Mavy from Nathaniel Ingraham, Navy Agent, Charleston, 6. C.
CHARLESTON
Q1.t July 1806
SIR,I did myself the honor of addressing you on the 25*@Inst since which the
Inclosed for LI Lawrence has come to hand, which I return you. The Squadron
having Sailed on the Morning of the 27Sb Ins, consisting of the V&en, 7'engeonce,
& Gun Boats 4. 6: 6 8 & 10. Nq I. arrived on Monday 28'4 and sailed yesterday
Momjn , I hope in my next to announce to you the arrival of the remaining two
of this Rquadron, but from the ~ i n d ~ w
have
e had I rathersuppose-they have fallen
to the n o r t h d The Gun boats A ~ Q
9:S & 8 are moored in Ashley River which is the most secure
place a t this Season, I have deposited the Powder in the magazine & taken their
materials & Stores from on board, and I must beg leave to observe to you that the
number of men now on board are not Sufficient for their Safety, Especially as we
may expect gales a t a Season when the Sun is approaching the Line, I however
submit the consideration of it to you, doubting not but you will give the necessary
directions to Lf Gadsden for their Safe Keeping, my return for t is Squadron shall
be transmitted in a few days, presuming i t will be requisite they should appear
when the commanders are settling their A/cr
[XDA. Misc. LB, Vol. 4, 1806.1
To Secretary of the Navy from Midshipman John D. Henley, U. S. Navy
U S. GUN BOAT NQ4 NORFOLK
Augst 1.t 1806
SIR, I have the honor to inform you of the arrival of U. S. Gun Boat Nv 4
under my Command, after a passage of five days from Charleston. Agresble
to orders from Cap$ Cox, I have encIosed a statement of the Money Necessary
to pay off her Crew up to the 12 of this month, which amounts to Two Thousand
Nine Hundred & Seventy dollars.
I have only Sixteen Men, whose times are out, the rest have near ten months
to Serve. Those whose times have not expired are as follows, Viz the Boatswain,
Gunner, Steward, Cook, for Seamen, & two Or Seamen, who were shipt a t Norfolk
for this Boat.
[NDA. Officers LB, Vol. 2, June-Aug. 1806.1
Extract from log of U. 6. Brig Hmnrf, of 18 Guns, Master Commandant John H.Dent,
U. 8. Navy, commanding, 1 August 1806
[Syracuse] The whole of these 24 hours variable winds with pleasant Weather,
this day the Ex Bashaw of Tripoli came on board was received with a salute
of 5 Guns - Ail hands employed in preparing for Sea.

[NA. NDA original, 1805-1810.1

W m S WITH BARBARY POWERS

467

To Secretary of the Navy from Hidshipman Arthur Sinclair, U. S. Navy
NORFOLK
August the 2"s 1806
SIR,I had the honour to make you acquainted with my arrival a t Charleston
and the circumstances relating to the Vessel and crew under m command; immediately after which I received orders through the medium of 6api Cox to procede to this place - where I arrived the third day after leaving Charleston I found your orders respecting the discharge of my crew as well as those of three
other Gunboats destined for this place, and should as Seignior Officer of those
Vessels have writen you immediately on the subject, had I not been in hourly
expectation of gunboat NQ4 Lieu%Henley, who sailed from Charleston the same
day of my departure; but as this circumstance has not yet taken place and I do
imajine he has fallen to the northward and will not get in until we have a change
of wind, I have thought it proper to state to you my havin complied with your
orders as far as the arrivals of this Vessel and Gunboat i89 5, Lieu$ Harrison,
will admit
Those two vessels are dismantled and moored a t Gosport, their materials put
in store and the necessary arrangements made for their safety and preservation
You have directed the retaining the Gunners and Boatswains of those vessels,
which shall be done until I hear farther from you on the subject - Those men
are generally worthless and of no service what ever onboard, and I think i t would
be advisable to change such as are so, for others more trusty; or if this cannot be
done, to discharge them from the service
After a full compliance with your orders res ecting the four boats to be I J d
up a t this place under my charge as seignior &her; I have to request the indulgence of occasionally, visiting my friends, whoa residence is not a days journey from this place, and shall not interfere with my duty in taking proper care
of the Vessels [NDA. Officers LB, Vol. 2, June-hug. 1806.1
Extract from log of U.S. Brig Hortac~of 18 Guns, Master Commandant John B.Dent
U. S. Navy, commanding, 2 August 1806
First part light winds and variable A t 2 PM unmoored.
At 8 PM got underu-ei h and sailed from Syracuse with the wind at North. From 8 to 12 laylng off on for the Boat.11
At Midnight the Boat returned and made sail Made and short'ned sail as required
At Meridian Mount Aetna bore N W distant 20 leagues and Cape L a m e N,
B W distant 10 Leagues
Latd9 by O b s ~37"211
[NA. NDA original, 1805-1810.1

To Secretary of the Navy from Lieutenant Benjamin Smith, U. S. navy
U. 8. BOMBVE~SEL
Vengeance
Harbor of New York Auguat W 1806
SIE,I have the honor to inform you that I arrived here this day d t e r a passage
of seven days from Charleston. I am instructed by Capt Coxes orders to me to
remain here until1 honord with your commands, and also to inform you of the
state of my crew, I have onboard twenty eight men, iriz four officers, Nineteen
seamen, and five marines, seventeen of the seamen and the carpenter have served
the time for which they where shipped, the gunner an[d] boatswain have yet ten
months to serve.
My officers are Mr.Sidney Smith, sailing master, Mr Geq Ross, gunner; Mr
tho^ Gibson, Boatswa~nand Mr Tho* Britton, Carpen*.
Mr James Smith my
masters mate I left sick a t the hospital in Charleston m t h orders to report himself t o you immediately on hi recovery.
I shall take the liberty of anticipating your orders in some meamre, and land
every thin out of the vessel end put i t in the U, 6, store a t this place so &s to be
ready to &charge the men whose term of service has expired the moment I
receive your orders to do so.
As thls Vessel is not coppered I beg leave to recommend her bein graved if
she is to be laid up here, as otherwise her bottom d l Mmuoh exposefto worms,

468

NAVAL. OPERATIONS FROM 1806 TO 1807

should this meet your approbation, I will thank you for permission to employ
caulkers from shore to do it as they will do i t cheaper and better than I can do
i t with my crew.
This Veswl is now in every respect except that she wants graving, ready for
actual service.
I have forwarded to the accountant of the Navev- a -pay- roll of the officers and
seamen of this vessel.
[NDA. Officers LB, Vol. 2, June-Aug. 1806.1
[3 August 18061
To Secretary of the Navy from Lieutenant Theodore Hunt, U. S. Navy
SIR, I have the honor to inform you of the arrival of the U. S. Bomb Ketch
Spitfire under my command, on the 8 4 inst in Hampton Roads; after having
experienced the most extreme bad weather for several days, without intermission:
taking the Westwk winds in Lat 25. and Long. 69. and falling in 20 Miles to theNorthwG of the port of destination, where we continued several days in endeavouring to gain the port, during which time my utmost exertions were used, as well
as the exertions of the Officers and Crew under my command. On the 28tb July fell in with Gun Boat N? 4 Lieutt Henly, who imformed me
of the squadrons having left Charleston differently destined agreeable to your
Orders, and bein confident as well as my Officers, that the Spitfire never could
gain the port of bharleston without a shift of wind, a thing uncertain, and being
for some time reduced to a Short allowance of provissions, the Crew getting sickly
induced me to bear up in company with Lieutt Henly for Norfolk where I have
the honor to wait your Orders If i t Should be your wish to order the Spitfire from this port, it will be necessary
to appoint a person to her Command, as an extreme indisposition which has afflicted me for 7 days will render me incapable of that honor; unless a change
should take place for the better
U. S. BOMB..Spitfire
Hampton Roads Ssl Augt 1806
[NDA. Officers LB, Vol. 2, June-Aug. 1806.1
To Secretary of the Navy from Lieutenant James Lawrence, U. S. Navy
NEWYOBKAugust W [I8061
SIR, I have the honor to inform you of my arrival in this port with the U. S.
Gun boat N? 6, after a passage of six days from Charlestown your letter directed
to the commanding officer of the Gun boats in this place I have received, and
shall immediately discharge the crew and deliver the boats up to Lieut Thorn,
the Vengance which sailed from Charlestown with me has not yet arrived I
expect her in today, the moment the crews are discharged and the Officers, furloughed pursuant to your orders, I shall inform you
[NDA. Officers LB, Vol. 2, June-Aug. 1806.1
To Lieutenant Philemon Charles Wederstrandt, U. S. Navy, commanding U. S.
Brig Fr&lin. Boston, Mass., from Secretary of the Navy
Nav DEP)4 Augt 1806.
I have received your letter of the 28t4 ultq You will deliver to the order of Leander Cathcart Esqr all the pro rty on
board the Brig Franklin belonging to the Tunisian Minister or intendegefor the
Bey of Tunis. In a day or two I shall give you further orders.
[NDA. OSW, Vol. 7, 1805-1807.1
Extract from log of U.S. Brig Hornet, of 18 Guns, Master Commandant John B.Dent,
U. S. Navy, commanding, 4 August 1806
The whole of these 24 hours light and variable winds At 6 P M a Pilot came
off from Reggio At 10 PM came to an Anchor in Messina in 35 fv water and
moored with a stream Cable to the shore, At 8 AM sent down Royal yards
At 9 AM obtained product. and hoisted the 24 Cutter out.
[NA. NDAZoriginal, 1805-1810.1

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS
To Bemetary of the Navy from Master Commandsnt David Porter, U. S. Ham
ON BOARD
TEE U S. Bc: Ehterpn'ze
Gibraltar bay 6* Aug* 1808.
SIR, On the 5'0 [25th]July while lying in the harbour of Malta a Man, (who
by his appearance I su posed to be s sailor) came along aide my Vessel, wss v q
insolent to one of my Bfficers, in conssquence of which I caused him to come on
board and desired him to apologize to the Officer for his insolence, this he refused
to do; I told him if he did not I should certainly punish him a t the Gangway;
he said I might do as I chose he knew where to apply for redress; I caused him
to be punished with twelve lashes in the usual manner that Seamen are punished,
and then ordered him into the boat; next morning I received the following letter
H M. TRAN~PORT
Arethwra
Marsa MasceUin H? 26tP July 1808.
SIB, The Master of His Britannic Majesties Transport ~ r e t h & ahaving
represented to me that Tho9 Grant a .seaman belonging to the said Transport was yesterday afternoon punished with one Dozen lashes on his bare
back on board the Vessel which you Command I request you will be pleased t o acquaint me if his statement be correct
and with the particulars of the transaction as it occurred and likewise with
the reasons for the detention on board of your Vessel of Thor Wilson a
Seaman belonging t o the said Transport.
Signed THO?WITEER~
Commander R Ar And senwr Agent of Transports
Ajloat in this Harbour
To The Commander
of the American Schooner Enterprize
To Which I replied as follows. ON BOARD
THE U S. SC: Enterprize
Harbour Malta 6'h [26th] J u l y 1806
Sra. I am honor'd with yours dated the 26th July and must inform you
that the statement made to you is correct in every respect excepting the
detention of Thor Wilson, as no such man has been detained in the Vessel I
command.A Man (which I presume belongs to the Transport you mention) came
along side this Vessel, was extremely insolent to one of my Officers, I ordered
him on board and on his refusing to make the concessions proposed (which
were to beg the Officers pardon) I caused him to be punished with Twelve
lashes. - The indignity offered to the Flag under which I sail was of such
a nature as 1 waa convinced would not be overlooked under similar circumstances by one of His Britanic Majesties Officers, and as no other means
of redreas presented themselves, I was compel'd t o use the same that they
. would have used, and in so doing I have confined myself strictly to the
Twenty ci hth article of the Act for the better Government of the Navy of
the uniteif states.
Signed D PORTERL$ Cornm?
To THO! WITRERSEsq~a
Commander R N.And Senior Agent
of Dunsports &oat in this Harbour
About two or three hours after I had sent the above letter, an Officer came from
on board his Majesties Ship Madrass, and informed me that the Captain of the
Madruas had directed him t o tell me, that I must not depart from the Port of
Malta without obtaining permission from the Governor; I asked him if War had
trrken place between the United States & Great Britain, he said not that he had
heard of, he beleived my detention was owin to my having caused a British
&aman to be puniahed on board my Vessel, then desired him to inform his
Commander that I should sail that evening, he said the Forts were ordered to
fire into my Veseel if I should attempt to leave the port, 1replied that I should
attempt it, and if the Forts fired a t me I should return the fire as long as resistance
could avail, and when I could resist no longer should strike my colours, surrender
my Vessel and conaider myself a prisoner of War. In about two hours afterwards a Captain in the Royal Navy came on board
and informed me that he had come direct from Sir Alexander Ball to tell me,
that it was his wish that I should remain in Malta until the late sffair should
be investigated. I informed him that duty required that I should go to 8%
wured him of my high respect for Sir Alexander Ball and w t e d that I ahould

-

9

470

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1806 TO 1807

be compel'd t o act contrary to his wishes by proceeding to sea that. evening,
informed him of the insulting message sent me by the Cap!" of the Madrass, and
express'd my doubts of his having been authorized to take such unjustifiable s t e p ,
he assured me that the Capt of the Madrass acted from the authority of Sir Alexq he did a t that moment, and was under the disagreeable necessity
ander Ball a
of informing me that if I attempted to leave the port before the matter was
explained to the satisfaction of every Englishman in the place, force would be
used to prevent my departure. I informed him that I should most certainly
attempt t,o leave the port that evening, that force would be opposed to force as
long as I could make any resistance and then if I could not succeed in my attempt
I should strike my Colours and surrender my Vessel, I told him I did not pretend
t o deny having floged the Man nor did I pretend to say whether my conduct in
punishing him had been correct or incorrect, the only thing I contended was their
right to detain my Vessel, and that I shoul4hot suffer as long as the American Flag was
flying on board of her, that I considered the threat (even should it not be put in
execution) an indignity that could not be justified on any pretence whatever,
advised Sir Alexander Ball to be aware of the consequence of detaining a public
vessel of War sailing under the flag of a free and independant Nation, and recommended a s more proper means of obtaining redress, application to the Government
of the United States or their representative in those seas, the Commander in
Chief of their Squadron. he said that the Order had been given to the Commanders
of the Forts, that Sir Alexander Ball had gone to the Garden of S* Antonio, a
place about six Miles from the City of Valette, that it was too late to countermand
the Orders that evening, and recommended on the strongest terms my not attempting to leave the port until next Morning, by which time he hoped We should be
enabled to arrange matters so as that I should be permitted to depart without
opposition, I told him that I conceived the Orders were rash and unjustifiable, that
I should attempt at all hazards to leave the port that evening and that nothing
short of force could detain me. I accordingly got under way and proceeded to Sea without molestation.[NDA. MC LB, 1806-1807.1

To Secretary of the Navy from Master Commandant David Porter, U. 8. Wavy
ON BOARD
.I*HEU S, S C HEnterprize
~
Gibraltar bay 5 t h Arcgt 1806. SIR,On the 10th Feb? during my stay a t n'aples two Men named John Mahoncv
and Daniel Shaw deserted from this Schooner, and from information receivedl
had every reason to suspect that they had gone on board His Britannic Majesties
Brig Halcyon Cap* Pierce; in concequence of which I waited on Cap? Pierce at
his lodgings, stated to him my suspicions, and claimed them as deserters; he,
without any hesitation promised me that the men should be given up if they
were on board his vessel and immediately wrote orders to the then commanding
Officer to that effect, which Orders he shew'd me, afterwards I set-t an Officer
on board the Brig for the Men, he returned and informed me that the Commanding
Offjcer of the Brig had Assured him that the men were not on board, that they
had been on board but that he knowing them to be deserters from the Ederprize
had turned them off from the Halcyon, I then sent on borrrd some other vessels
of War in the Roads but could gain no information of them. On the 6t4 May I fell in with the U 3. Brig Syren Captz Smith, who informed
me that he had a Man on board his Vessel that had deserted from my Vessel in
Naples, who I found to be Mahoney; I inte~ogatedhis as to the means of his
and he gave
getting off, and the manner of hi being- apprehended,
-- me the following information. Vizt That he and Shaw being a little intoxicated had been prevailed on by
some of the Crew of the Halcyon to go on board that vessel, that on their going
on board the Commandine Offirer had ordered them below and that thev
---., were
.. -- both below and on board +hen the Officer came from my Vessel to demand them,
that he was turned over from the Halcyon to the Sloop of War Pelidies in Gibraltar where every means were wed by her Officers to induce him to acknowledge
himself a British Subject. On her arrival in Malta he obtained permission t o go
on Shore on liberty; but was desired to keep out of the way of the American
Officers, and that he took the first opportunity to go on board an Americsn
Gun Boat then layin there, where he was known anci sent on board the S y m [=or further det&

re this subject, see below-mentioned MNTCB.page 46.1

[NDA. MC LB, 1806-1807.1

'

SWORD.PRESENTED B Y CONGRESS TO CAPTAIN STEPHEN DECATUR. JR. D I R K USED B Y CAPTAIN STEPHEN DECATUR. JR.
CUTLASS USED BY MIDSHIPMAN T H O M A S MACDONOUGH.
1804.

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

471

To Secretary of the Navy from Master Commandant David Porter, U. S. Navy
U. S. S ~ H O O X Enterprize
ER
Gibraltar Bay Augc 6tb 1806
SIR, I am honor'd with yours of the 28th of April accompanied by my commission
as a Master Commandatit.
I hope sir my conduct will prove that the Honor conferd on me hes not been
misplaced.
[NDA. MC LB, 18061807.1
To Captain John Rodgers, U. S. Navy, from Master Commandant David Porter,
U. S. Navy
U. S. SCHOONER
Enterprise
Gibraltar Bay Aug! 6 t k 1806
SIR, I waq this day honord with your esteemed favour of the 28th of May, which
affarded me the highest gratification as it convinced me of your approbation of my
conduct since I have had the honor of being under your command, and the favourable sentiments you have been pleased to express (however diffident I may be of
my abilities to fill my new rank) cannot do otherwise than stimulate me to use
every exertion to confirm you in your good opinion, and convince my country that
the honor has not been conferd on an unworthy object
I cannot help expressing my regret a t the unexpected arangements that have
taken place since I left you off Algiers, nor can I neglect this oportunity of returning you my warmest thanks for the particular marks of friendship and attention
you hflve so repeatedly shown me.
With the most fervent wishes for your health hapiness and prosperity in lie.
[LC. JRP, Series Two, Vol. 2, May-Oct. 1805.1
[5 August 18061
Passport given to American Brigantine TWOBrothers. taking Tunisian Ambassador
to Tunis
JAMES
MADISON,
Secretary of State of the bnited States of Anterica.
To all whom it may concern.
Know ye, That the American Brigantine TWOBrothers, whereof is master John
Chandler, is bound from Boston to Tunis, with Sidi Suliman Mellimelli, late
Ambassador from thence to the United States, who is on his return thither with
his suite & various articles of Merchandise, the property of the United States and
of the said Mellimelli. Wherefore I request all whom it may concern not to give
or suffer to be given to her any hindrance or molestation, but on the contrary to
afford her every %id& facility she may need in the prosecution of her Voyage.
In faith whereof I have caused the seal of the Dept of State, of the United States
to be hereunto affixed and signed the same with my handat the City of Washington,
the 5th day of August A. D. 1806, and in the 31%year of the Independence of the
said States.
JAMES
MADISON
[NA. SDA. Dom. L, Vol. 15, June 1805-July 1810.1
To Captain John Chandler of the Brigantine Tm Brothers from Jacob Wagner for
Secretary of State
DEPARTMENT
OF STATE,AZ(SU.T~
7t4 1806.
SIR. Your Vessel having been chartered to carry to Tunis Sidi Soliman Mellimelli, his suite, baggage and merchandize, and also sundry presents intended for
the Regency, you will proceed on your voyage, whenever he shall signify that he
is ready. You will touch a t Gibraltar, call upon John Gavino Esqr the Consul of
the United States, and make enquiry of him whether Tobias Lear Esqr is in that
place, and finding him there, you will receive him on board and make the best of
your way t o Tunis. Should he not be found a t Gibraltar, you will nevertheless
proceed on your voyage. The presents, of which Mr Cathcart will [give] you a list
and receive your bill of lading, you will deliver on your arrival a t Tunis t o Mr Lear,
or iu case of his absence to Dr Dodge, the Agent of the United States. I t is recommended that the most respectful & attentive demeanor be observed towards the
Ambassador by everyone on board, and that you should take proper precautions

472

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1805 TO 1807

against dissentions or uneasiness between his people and yours, whether springing
from national peculiarities or other accidental Causes.
Dr Thomas Triplitt, now a t Boston, and who is proceeding to Algiers on public
service, is to have his passage on board your Vessel t o Gibraltar or Tunis as he may
prefer. The passports from the British & French Ministers, and one from this
Department, will, exclusively of your ordinary marine papers, protect you from
all arrests and searches, a ~ i dthat this may be the case, all shipments except of the
Ambassador and those of his suite, & except the presents put on board by M:
Cathcart, are strictly forbidden.
[NA. SDA. Dom. L, Vol. 15, June 1805-July 1810.1
To Lieutenant Theodore Hunt, U. S. Navy, commanding U. S. Bomb Ketch Spld~c.
Norfolk, Va., from Secretary of the Navy
NAVYD E P M7~Augt 180R,
I have received your letter of the 34 instant. The Spitfire must be paid off a t
Norfolk. After she shall be paid off and the Crew, excepting the Boatswain &
Gunner and any marines that may be on board, discharged, you will deliver her
up to Lieut Sinclair, and proceed on to thie place to settle your accounts.
Mr Bedinger will supply you with the necessary monies to pay off your Crew
upon your requisition. [NDA. OSW, Vol. 7, 1805-1807.1
To Secretary of the Navy from Midshipman Arthur Sinclair, U. S. Navy
KORFOLKAugust the 8'P 1806
SIR,The arrival of Gunboats NP 4 and NQ1-since I last had the honour
to address you; has enabled me to comply fully with your orders respecting all
the vessels of that discription ordered to this place
I mentioned my opinion respecting the Boatswains and Gunners to be retained
onboard which has been since strengthened by their bad conduct - A few of
them may be trusted; but the majority of them are unworthy and useless
Mr
Henlyr Boatswain and Gunner were men whos times of service had expired;
and as he imprudently paid them their wages, they have left the Vessel; however
I have made an arrangement in consequence of i t which prevents any difficulty
arising on that head
[NDA. Officers LB, Vol. 2, 1806.1

-

To Secretary of the Navy from Lieutenant William M. Crane, U. S. Navy
ON BOARDU. S CUTTER[SLOOP]Hornet
Philadelphia Aug: 9tb 1808
SIR, By' stress of weather I have been compell'd to put into this port; I parted,
owing to the wind and darkness of the night, from the Squadron on the 14*
June last in LattQ 31°50' N Long: 1 8 O W. I pursued my course to the intended
port (Charleston) with favorable winds and moderate weather until the 15tb July
when I encountered a most severe gale from W S W which continued with little
abatement for fifteen days. lost my Top mast, sprung the bowsprit carried away
all the shrouds and the vessel labored so much that she proved very leaky this
with the addition of my being short of provisions and water and part of the crew
afflicted with the scurvy (and no medical aid) induced me to make this port.
The vessel is not now sea worthy
My crew consists of thirty five officers included among which are a Sailing
Master and Midshipman; i t will require upwards of three thousand dollars to
pay them off, I shall here put the vessel in as good condition as I can without
incurring expence and wait your orders.
[NDA. Officers LB, Vol. 2, June-Aug. 1806.1
To Secretary of the Navy from Lieutenant James Lawrence, U. 8. Navy
NEW YOBKAugust 0'4 [I8081
SIR, I have the honor to inform you that in compliance with your orders of
the 19th July the crews of Gunboats N9 6 & 8 have been discharged exce ting
the Boatswains & Gunners and the boats, store8 &q delivered up to Aeut.

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS
Thorn, as your letter did not mention the Bombards, I was a t a loss in what
manner to act, but BS the term of service of her crew had expired I conceived
it was your intention to discharge them, but previous to doing it, consulted
Capt* Hull, who coinsided with me, she has been delivered up to Lc Thorn, The
Officers of the different Vessels, I have furloughed pursuant to your orders I shall
leave this place for Burlington in a few days, and a t the expiration of one month
repair to Washington, if not sooner called on
[XDA. Officers LB, Vol. 2, June-Aug. 1806.1
Extract from log of TI. 8. Brig HOT&, of 18 Guns, Master Commandant Jobn B.
Dent, U. 8. Navy, commanding, 9 August 1806
First part these 24 hours fresh breezes from the S: E
Middle part Calm
At 5 AM unmoored and a t 6 got underweigh
a t 7 took the Boats in - At 8
made sail - At 5 past 10 Calm, let go t,he Anchor near the light house on
the Faro point - At 11 weigh'd and made sail At noon discharged the Pilot
the light house bearing S: B: E distant 2 miles, and Mount Strombolo N. B W.
distant 8 leagues Wind SW. A British Brig of War and several Transports in
sight
[NA. NDA original, 1805-1810.1

-

-

To Secretary of the Navy from Lieutenant P. C. Wederstrandt, U. 6. navy
BOSTON
August lot&1808
SIR, By a letter from Mr hfad'ion to Mr Catcarth, I find he has directed a
Vessel to be Chartered for the purpose of taking the Ambasodor to Tunis, That
the Goods ship'd for him on board the Franklin should be taken out and reship'd
in the Charterd Vessel
As my Orders was to proceed to the hlediterranem
with the Ambasodor and his chattels
I donot Conceive myself Authorized
t o deliver to any person but such as my instructions specefy the Cargo of this
Brig without a n order from you annuling my former directions, I had the Pleasure
to address you immediately on the Ambasodors refusing to sail in the Bri beging
you would if he persisted in determination to inform me how I should Broceed,
As I have nothing to show to authorize my delivering up the Articles in my
Char e and fearing I might commit myself by so doing I have determind not to
let a s o x 01 Bale except wearing apparel go out of the Brig of the Brig and in This
Case should I err I hope it will be on the safe side
IXDA. Officers LB, Vol. 2, June-Aug. 1806.1

-

-

To Master Commandant David Porter, U.S. Navy, from Captain Hugh G . Campbell,
U. S. Navy
US SHIPComtitutwn
Cadiz Harbour 1 1 t h Aug* 1806
SIR, Your Esteemed favour with those of Cap$Dent and our Counsul General
came dul to hand, by all of which I am happy to find that our affairs with the
Barbary %owem continue in a friendly train,
I should have had the pleasure of
seeing you eer this period, but prevented by unexpected delays, which will probably continue till thursday a t which time I expect to hear from our Charge d'
Maim a t Madrid, to whom I have wrote on public business. I hope e'er this you are admited to pmtique, and furnished with the supplies you
staod in need of we &all want three or four hawsers for this Ship likewise a coneiderable Quantity of ratling, Canvsss &c &c, these I presume you will tenderly
touch, peace is confirmed with England & France and in the hopes of seeing you

-

BOOR

-

[LC. D.Porter P, Let. & Ord., 1605-1808.1
Ertrect from log of U. S. Brig Hornd, of 18 puns, Master Commandant John H.
Dent, U, 6, Navy, commandmg, 11 August 1806
First part these 24 hours light breezes with pleasant weather All sail set to the
best d v a n t e
At sunset?!ape
Pelegrino bore NW. distant 4 leagues, got the Boats a he& to
Tow At 10 came too in the Ray of Palermo in 17% fathoms water At 5 A M

-

474

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1805 TO 1807

weigh'd and hauled into the Mole and moored in 5 f m water with her Stern in shore
along side of a Neapolitan 74 Gun Ship
Ends pleasant breezes from the EastwQ and Clear Weather
[NA. NDA original, 1805-1810.1

To Lieutenant P. C. Wederstrandt, U. 6. 'Navy, from Secretary of the 'Navy
BALTQ
Augt 13th 1806
SIRUpon the Goods Ship'd a t Baltimore in the Brig Franklin there are Debentures to the Am*of about $4000 dollars- If those goods should be landed in any

part of the United States the debentures would not be paid a t the Custom house.
This information I have but this instant received-you will therefore not deliver
as instructed in my last the said Cargo to Mr Cathcart unless the Tunisian Minister
or some other person should make the necessary arrangement for the payment of
the debenture
[NA. SDA. CD, Tunis, Vol. 3, 1805-1806.)
To Secretary of the Navy from Midshipman Jonathan Thorn, U. S. Navy
NAVYYARD NEWYORK
13th August 1806
SIR,the gun boats NQ6 and 8 and the bombard Vengeance have been delivered to
me with their stores, having no orders how to dispose of them and not knowing for
what service they may be intended I have only hauled them in to the slip and taken
their provisions and stores, into the public store and made an arraingment with
the commander a t fort Jay to receive the powder, I beg you will inform me
wether they are to be kept in a a state for active service or laid up, and also wether
the o5cers left with them are to be supplyed with a ration from the public store
or find themselves; for the present & I have requested them to find themselves untill farther orders, I shall proceed and take the guns out of the gun boats their
remaining on board any time without any weight in the centre will be apt to hog
them - the Sails belonging to NQ6 are reported to be in bad order, her decks
want caulking, her false keel has never been coppered and is reported to be foul and
some of her spars will require repair--Gideon Soles her Boatswain deserted the
day he was paid off and I have appointed William W Davis a man recommended
by Lt Lawrence to supply his place - NQ8 was left without Boatswain or Gunner L* Harriden not having on board a man adequate to either, I have appointed
James Merley Boatswain and Charles Lindsay Gunner until your pleasure may be
known - the false keel of NQ8 is likewise reported to require some repair and her
decks caulked
the bottom of the Vengeance is very foul and requires greaving
[NDA. Officers LB, Vol. 2, 1806.1

-

To George Harrison, Navy Agent, Philadelphia, Pa., from Eecretary of the Navy
NAVYDEPART.
16 Augt 1806.
The Hornet after being divested of her military stores, must be sold - receive
by inventory, her military stores from her commanding officer and then sell the
Hornet on the best terms in your power, either a t publick or private sale as you
ma judge best.
Jpprize me of the proceeds of the sale - & transmit to the Accountant of the
Navy an account thereof.
[NDA. GLB, Vol. 8, 1805-1807.1
Extract from log of U. S. Brig H d , of 18 Guns, Master Commandant John H.
Dent, U. 6. Navy, commanding, 17 August 1806
First part these 24 hours moderate breezes from the NQ Middle part N. E.
At 5 AM got underweigh with the wind off the land and sailed from Palermo
several sail in Company - At 9 tack'd ship to the W N W. At 10 tack'd
ship to the N EJ At 112 past. 11 tack'd ship to the N & WQ- At Meridian
Cape Alos W B N 112 N. distant 3 miles and the city of Palermo S: W. distant
3 leagues and the Island of Ustica North distant 7 leagues N B. 16 men sick 5
men confined
[NA. NDA original, 1805-1810.1

WARS WITH BARBARY POTERS
To Lieutensnt Philemon Charles Wederstrandt, U.6, Navy, commanding U. 6. Brig
Franklin, Boston, Yass., from Secretary of the Navy
NAVD E P M
18~A U Q1806,
~
You acted correctly in declining to deliver the Cargo of the Franklin without
a previous order from me. Since writing $0 you on the 13tb instant an arrangement haa been made with
the Depart.ment of State obviating the difficulties therein mentioned with respect
to the debencures on the Car o of the F~anklin. You uill therefore proceed to
deliver the Cargo of the ~ran%linto Jamea L. Csithcart Esq? agreeably to the
Instructions heretofore given t o you.
[KDA. OSW,Val. 7, 1805-1807.1
To Secretary of the Navy from Hastar Commandant David Porter, U. S. Navy
TEE U E3 Scar Enterprize
Gibraltar Bay 19Lb Augt 3806.
SIR, On the 15tb Inst about 112 past 6 A M while beating t o the Eastward
through the Streights discovered several Spanish Gun Boats under the Spanish
Coast a little to the Eastward of Tariffa, one of which stood off and fired several
shot a t us, in consequence of which I caused the Colors to be hoisted, but finding
that he continued h
is fire on us I returned it and gave chase to him until he took
shelter under the Spanish Batteries and then hove about and stood across towards the Coast of Ceuta, but the Wind being very light with every appearance
of a c s h , Seven Gun Boats continued to dog us until we were nearly within gun
shot of Ceuta, When I hove about they then form'd a line on our Weather bow
and run down for us and made an attempt to board us under cover of a discharge
of Crape & Musquetry - not wishingto carry matters to extremes without coming
to Borne explanation, I hailed them repeatedly, but received no other replies but
volleys of hfusquetry kc, I then gave orders to fire into them, and from the great
confusion occasioned by our first discharge of Grape & hlusquetry, and 9s they
were under the muzzles of our guns and entirely exposed to our fire conciuded
we must have done them considerable injury. - They immediately hauled
their wind and took a position on our starboard Quarter out of the range d our
shot, bcn as we had shot suEcientlp ahead to gain the wind of them, I hove about
and pursued them close in with the land, keeping up a constant fire on them,
but the wind dying away enabled them to make their escape to the Batteries on
the Coast of Spain where they were reinforced by three more but oweing I s u p
pose to the reception they had met with they did not seem disposed to renew
the contest.
I am happy to inform you that in this unpleasant reincountre Ee have only
suffered in our sails, rigging and Gun Carriages, the latter were in so rotten a
state as to be falling to pieces during the firing in consequence of which I was
compl'd to proceed bireetly into Gibraltar, to endeavour w repair them or to
supply myself with new ones but am fearful i t will be. impracticable to do either
here. I am particularly happy also to be able to inform you that every individual on board the vessel I have the Eonor to Command have shewn the greatest
activity in resenting the daring insult that has been offer'd to our Flag, and have
convinced me that the greatest reliance map be placed in their Courage should
any affair of a more serious nature take place.
I deem i t necessary to inform you also that a few days previous to this affair
I was laying a t Algeziras with this Schooner very near a number of their Gun
boats, that when I left that place they were firing a t some English & Swedish
vessels in Gibraltsr Ray and that. I was compel'd in going out, to pass through
through their line so that they should have had repeated opportunities of seeing
and knowing the Vessek and as our Colors were flying in the usual places during
the whole affair they coul not have supposed us [to] be English.
I sm jn hopes that this affair will prove a useful lesson to them, and induce
them in future to let Neutral Vesseis of War pass unmolested.
[NDA. MC LB, 180&1807.]

ON BOARD

-

-

-

-

To Secretary of the Kavy from James Leander Cathcart
BOSTON
904 Aug* 1806
SIR, I was honoured with your letter of the 13tb Inst by this days post and
participated its oontenta to the Tunisian Ambaasador, was I disposed t o fomept

476

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1806 TO 1807

discord the subject would give me ample means; but as that is not my aim; I will
only inform you that his phrenzy lead him to every species of insolent observation.
The Brig Franklin finished delivering her Cargo over to the Ship Two Brothers
yesterday afternoon & I flattered myself that as soon as the Vessel which we
expect from Washington arrived that in two days, I would be able to deliver the
United States from this political pest of society. I am disappointed, and am
determined to await superior instructions before I take any measure or permit
him to alter his position. - The Ambassador persists in asserting that he is
not subject to our revenue laws, that he was ignorant of them, that on his return
t o Tunis that he will subject the Citizens of the United States to the same duties
& regulations that are exacted from him here; he likewise says that in his letter
to the President he requested that the Brig Franklin might be consign'd to Mr
Lear & if that request is complied with he will reship his Goods on board the Brig
Franklin again & will proceed himself in the Two Brothers: but if this proposal
should not meet the approbation of Government - he requeets that he may be
reimburs'd by them the amount of the debenture which is $3817 82!100 orthat
he may be permmited to sell his Merchandize a t Vendue & be furnlsl~edwith a
passage home in any other Vessel but the Brig Franklin in which he is determined
not to leave the United States.
If I am permitted to give an opinion on the subject I would recommend to
Government to make him a present of the debenture as the freight of the TWO
Brothers which is83500 would be forfeited unless employed on the service accord~ng
to Charterparty a copy of which is in the department of State. and the difference
or even the whole viewed on a national scale, especially when we have so small a
force in the Mediterranean is a mere trifle, you may be assured that lf we do not
make a merit of presenting him with an equivalent to his loss that the demand
will be made by the Bashaw of Tunis upon our Charge des affairs a t Tunis to
probably double the amount - Awaiting your instructions
[NA. SDA, CD, Tunis, Vol. 3, 1805-1806.1

-

TO Secretary of the Navy from Benjamin Cartee, brother of Lieutenant Seth
Cartee, U. S. Navy, deceased

SIR, I have recQinformation without a hope of its incorrectness, that my only
Brother, Lieut. Seth Cartee, Commander of Gun-Boat Nv 10, lately died a t
Syracuse
I take liberty to request directions as to the mode to be pursued
to obtain his pay if any there be due, and his effects I have been refered to this Sourse for information, without knowing precisely
the step to be pursued - If any proof of my relationship, or if information
ehould be required of his family he being a single man I solicit your directions
[NDA. Misc. LB, Vol. 4, 1806.1

-

-

Extract from log of U. 8. Brig-Hornet of I 8 Guns, Master Commandant John H.
Dent, U. S. Navy, commanding, 21 August 1806
The whole of these 24 hours hot sultry weather with calms
At Midnight a light breezes sprung up from the S: E*
At 11 AM hoisted out the 2@Cutter when the llt Lieut and Mr Green went
on shore to land the Lady Passengers
At Meridian the NW. end of Goza bore W. B N. % N. distant 4 miles, the
S. E. end - W. B S. 4 miles - the north end of Malta W. S W distant 6
miles and the S: end S B W. distant 12. miles - 34 day becalmed.
Latdq by O b s ~36'06'
[NA. NDA original, 1805-1810.1
To Master Commandant John H.Dent, U. S. Navy, from Captain Hugh a. Campbell,
U. 8. Navy
U. S. SHIP Constitution
Augt 2 2 ~ 41808 Gibraltar hay
SIB, Your favor of the 16th Ulto came duly to hand contents of which give me
great satisfaction; I regret having nothing new from America to give you, although
we have had frequent arrivals from that quarter since your departure from thia
pwe;

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS
Captain Porter is under the necessity of going to some port on the North Coast
in search of gun carriages for the Enterprize those on baard her being quite
rotten and unfit for use, many of them were so much impaired as to fail in pieces,
during a small skirmish with the Spanish gun-boats, a few days since I n which
I am happy to find that Captain Porter, his Officers and Crew behaved in a handsome and gallant manner, You will receive by the Store Ship a quantity of Provisions, 6, six inch hawsers
and a quantity of powder; we are daily in expectation of Peace between England,
France and Spain; the terms are not known, which has set conjecture afioat and
all the Politicians plying to Windward;
1shdI by every favorable opportunity, give you such information as we receive;
and expect to hear from you by every opportunity,
Captain Porter will join you as soon ss his Gun Carriages are procured;
NB. Captain Porter bas my orders to act as circumstances in your judgement
may require, bearing in mind to communicate fre uently with Tunis, and collect
all the information in your power respecting the zarbary States When the Enterpn'ze joins you and our Mairs should continue quiet in that
quarter, I have to desire and request that a t the expiration of one month you will
order Captain Porter to Gibraltar, takin in his way all the information worthy
of note, that can be collected a t Tripoli j u n k and Algiers [H. E. Huntington L&AG. HR 58.1

To Master Commandant David Porter, U. 6. Navy, commanding U. 6. schooner
En(erprizc, from Captain Hugh G. Campbell, U. 6. levy
U. S. SHIPConstitulwn

A U Q92.
~ 1806. GbraEtnr bay.
SIR, On receipt of this I have to desire that you proceed with ali possibie
dispatch for Algiers, in the U. S. Schooner Entesprize under your command, and
deliver the dispatches which ou have for our Consul general a t that place; from
Algiers you will proceed to 8arthagena, Marseilles, Toulon or Leghorn, for the
purpose of procuring the number of gun-carriages so much wanted for the service
on board of the Enterprize; Toulon I presume will be found the most convenient
arsenal for that purpose; however I shall leave that part of the business to pour
own judgement, as you will be able to inform yourself more correctly on your way
up the Mediterranean; I need not here recommend the necessity of dispatch,
persuaded that every exertion on your part will be used for the good of the service; - When you have cornpleated the gun-carriages and ready for sea, i t is
my desire that you proceed in search of the Hornett C a p t ~Dent; under whose
You will be pleased to
orders you will act until1 countermanded by me;
inform me by the earliest opportunity of the prospect you may have of procuring
the gun carriages, and probable time i t may require to compleat them; [NDA. Misc. LB, Vol. 4, 1806.1

-

Extracts from log of U. 6. Brig Hornet of 18 Ouns, Blaster Commandant John H.
Dent, U. S. Wavy, commanding, 23, 24 and 26 August 1806
The whole of these 24 hours light and pleasant breezes At 5 past 3 set
Studsails
p w t 6 the Castle on Cape Passiero bore N B W. distant 3 leagues and
At
Ca e Porcos N. B E.
E. distant 10 leagues - a t past 6 took in the Royals
&ade and ahort'ne mil ss required
At 3 past 1 tack'd ship to the N & WQ
At 3 tack'd ship to the N. & EQ
A4 5 past 8 Ahl came too in Syracuse with a light breeze from the SouthwQ
and immediately commenced watenng Received on board 3 pipes brandy, 3 loads
water and 6 cags white lead, wt 168 lbr

d"

.

f?4 August 1806
First part these 24 h o w moderate b-s
from the N. E4 At 9 PM completed
filling the water - At 10 PM got underweigh and sailed from Syracuse with
Colonel Brooks an English Officer and his lad , Passengers for Malta
At 11 the light House a t the entrance of &rscuse bore N W. B W
Left
a t Syracuse for the benefit of their heaiths Mr Keene and My Dallas Midabipm811

-

,

478

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1805 TO I807

At 9 AM Cape pssseiro bore N. E distant 3 or 4 leagues Winds variable,
Made and shortned sail as required
LatQo by o b s ~36'21'.
M August 1806
The whole of these 24 hours light breezes and pleasant Weather
At 6 the north end of Goza bore W, N UT.distant 6 leagues and the South
end of Malta S S W. distant 4 leagues
At K past 10 came to an anchor in Malta in 15 fathoms water, Moored ship
with her stern in shore, and struck Royal yards [NA. NDA original, 1805-1810.1
To Benjamin Cartee, Providence, B. I., from Secretary of the Navy
NAVYD E P A R ~97 Augr 1806.
The accounts of your Brother D Seth Cartee (dead) are now under examination
but from the confused state in which they were found, the ballance cannot a t
present be ascertained - The account,ant of the navy however is of opinion that
no balance will be due him - Should it. be otherwise you can receive the balance
in presenting letters of administration.
[NDA. GLB, Vol. 8, 1805-1807.1
To Secretary of State from James Leander Cathcart
BOSTON Augt 28th 1806
SIR I am happy to inform you that Mr hfella hlenni has changed his conduct
since he has return'd, his politeness a t present can only be equal'd by his inconsistency; he has promised t o pay for the Merchandize which I had purchased by
his order, the Schooner with the Guns &9 has arrived & a t present I am in hopes
t o be enabled to inform you of his departure in six or eight days a t farthest from
this date I have the honor t o continue with great respect
P A . SDA. CD, Tunis, Vol. 3, 1805-1806.1
Extracts from log of U. S. Brig Hornet, of 18 Guns, Master Commandant John H.
Dent, U. S. Navy, commanding, 30 and 31 August 1806
First Dart these 24 hours leasa ant breezes from the Eastward
l
sail a6d laid too off & on Tripoli for the Consul At 3 Phf
At 1 ~ h short'ned
Mr Ridgely the Consul came on board.
At 4 P M came to an Anchor in Tripoli Roads in 18 fm water the Town bearing
South distant 4 or 5 miles veered out 50 Fathoms Cable.
At 5 struck Royal Yards.
Middle part fresh breezes from the S. E At 8 AM sent up Royal yards and hoisted the 24 Cutter out. Ends fresh
breezes from the Eastward with pleasant Weather.
31 August 1806
First part pleasant breezes from the Eastward - At 5 Phf received m a
present from the Bashaw of Tripoli, 2 bullocks, 6 sheep, a quantity of Bread,
Melons, Pumpkins Onions & Squashes on receipt of which fired 3 guns aa customary At 5 past 7 got underweigh with a fresh breeze from the Eastward
in heaving up the Cable parted, and being dark with a fresh breeze and heavy
Sea on, was induced to leave the Anchor behind At 8 struck Royal yards At 2 set Studsails - At 6 sent Roval Yards up and set the sails - Ends
Moderate breezes from the Southwg LatQe by O b s ~34"38'
This day the Master having reported the Cables much chafed owing to their
long service a survey was accordingly held on them by Lieutq Trippe, Morris
and the Master it was judged necessary to cut 31 fathom off one and 30 f*
off the other, and then shifted end for end.
[NA. NDA original, 1805-1810.1

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS
To Jacob Wagner for Secretary of State, from James Leander Cathcart
B o s ~ o x SepR 8 4 1806
DEAPSIRThe Ship Two Brothers is a t prest ready for sea & everything onboard
ready to clear out, I intended to have sent her into the stream t h k after noon,
but have just discover'd that the Ambassador has sent Ally Hodgia & Hadgi
Mohamet to ,hew York by this mornings stage, for what purpose I know not,
as he never consulted me upon the subject, and belleves that I am ignorant of it,
I shall take no notice of it, but will clear the ship out & do every t.hing requisite,
& then wish the Ambassador a pleasant passage, & return immediately to R1sshington as I find their is no end to this mans trifling & insolence I have not time to keep a copy of this letter - JACOB
WAGNERE ~ q r
[NA. SDA. CD, Tunis, Vol. 3, 1805-1806.3

To Captain Hugh 6. Campbell, U. S. Navy, from Secretary of the Navy
NAVD E P 4~t h Septr 1806,
I this day received your dispatches by the Store Ship the Slapleton. This letter will be conveyed to Gibraltar by the Ship Commerce Cap+ Josiah
Burnham, which Vessel has on board a Cargo of provisions and stores for the use
of the Squadron. This Vessel is to deliver her Cargo
to Mr Gavino's
- agreeably
directions.
The Tunisian Minister is about to sail in the Ship Two Brothers from Boston
for Tunis. He is sent home entirely a t the expence of the Government and has
been indulged with the Privilege of taking out on his own account a cargo in
the Two Brothers, and has a t the expence of the Government been furnished
with an Agent to purchase the Cargo for him. These and many other facilities
have been granted him. yet he has manifested considerable displeasure, which
may have arisen from his not having entirely succeeded in the general objects
of hi6 mission, or from some accidental circumstances in themselves trifling yet
operating upon a jedous mind produced considerable irritation on his part. We had prepared the Brig Franklin to convey him, his suite, & stores, to Tunis
He went from Washington to Boston by Land, and the Frank!in was sent first to
Balt~
to receive part of his Goods, thence to Boston to receive the residue & himself
and Suite. But on the arrivd of the Franklin a t Boston, he objected to going out
in her on the ground that she had once been the property of his blaster the Bey
of Tunis, who sold her because he did not want her, and who would therefore consider his going out in her (intended ss she was as a present to the Bey of Tunis),
as an insult offered to him and a disparagement to his honor, and who would, should
he go out in her, unish him for such conduct. Upon receiving this information
the Secretary of &ate ordered another Vessel to be chartered and the Goods on
board the Franklin were ordered to be transferred to such Vessel. After the orders
transferring the Cargo of the Franklin to the other Vessel to be chartered in her
place, were given, I was informed by Col. Stricker that himself & others were interrested in Debenture Bonds upon the Cargo of the Franklin nearly to the amount
of D w 4,000 which Bonds would be forfeited if the Cargo of the Franklin should
be transferred to another Bottom or relanded in any part of the United States,, and
that the Minister had solemnly engaged that no part of the Cargo should be elther
transEerred to another Bottom or relanded. Upon this information I gave o ~ d e r s
to prevent the Cargo f ~ bein
m
delivered from on board the Franklin, until the
Minister should indemnify the dentlemen interrested in the Debenture Bonds for
the consequences of such delivery. This order produced considerable irritation on
the part of the Minister; but, prior to our being apprized of it's efect upon him, the
Government determined, upon considering all the Circumstances, that the Cargo
should be delivered and that the Gentlemen interrested in the Debenture Bonds
should be reimbursed out of the National Treasury or that the penalty should be
remitted, and I accordingly ordered the cargo of the Franklin to be transferred to
the Ship Two Brothers. On the arrival of the Minister a t Tunis, it is not improbable but that he may
take an hostile attitude towards us, & endeavour t o move the Bey t o a declaration
of War. Thether he will take such ground or not, or whether if taking it he-would
eucceed in his object - i t is impossible for us to my; but under such cwcumstances i t behoves us to be upon our uard. You will therefore, Sir, keep a watchful Eye upon the movements of the f;ey of Tunis, and his Squadron, and keep

480

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1806 TO 1807

me informed of every circumstance of any consequence. To enable you to do
this effectually you will correspond with our Consuls on the Barbary Coast. The Commerce and Seamen of the United States are to be protected by all lawful
means and you will see to it.
Considerable funds have lately been deposited in the hands of Mess* Degen,
Purviance & Cg and I have this day ordered them a further remittance of D s
30,000. Exercise a sound discretion in using it. [NA. NDA. LB, May 1799-July 1807.1

-

To William Eiggins, U. S. Navy Agent, Malta, from Secretary of the Navy
NAVYDEPAR~
4 Sept. 1806:
The Store Ship the Commerce Cap: Josiah Rurnham, with Stores & provisions
for our publick Vessels in the Mediterranean has been ordered to proceed to
Gibraltar and there to take the directions of M? Gavino respecting the further
disposition of the Cargo. Should Mr Gavino direct a final delivery of the Cargo
a t Malta you will be pleased to receive it as in other similar cases. The freight
of the Commerce has been paid in this Country.
[NDA. GLB, Vol. 8, 1805-1807.1
[4 September 18061
To Secretary of the Navy from John Willis for George Harrison, Navy Agent,
Philadelphia, Pa
SIB, The United States Cutter [Sloop of 10 Guns] Hornet was sold yesterday for
approved Indorsed Notes a t 4 & 6 months for $1090 for George Harrison
JOHNWILLIS
PHIIAD*Sept 4t4 1806
[NDA. Misc. LB, Vol. 4, 1806.1

To James Dodge, U. S. Charge d'Affaires, Tunis, from Master Commandant
John H. Dent, U. S. Navy
Hornet TUNISROADS
Sep: 6th 1806
Dr SIR I am once more in your roads after a longer absence than I expected, and
hope I Shall find you in better health than I left you; I have come here to see if
our new Commodore has been here, I've been expecting him every day for this
Month past, as it is full time he should make his appearance, I suppose the Bey is
getting uneasy about his Ambasssdor but he may look for him hourly - a Btore
ship hati arrived a t Malta but brings no news I suppose you have heard that a general peace on the Continent is expected to
take place soon England has sent an Ambassador to Paris, and it is certain that
Russia haa made peace with france I expect to have the pleasure to see you on
board the Hornet tomorrow mr if deprived of that pleasure you will pleaae inform
I intend to cruize off
me how you are situated with respect to this Regency
Cape Bon untill the Comdr makes his appearance.
[NA. SDA. FA, CL, Tunis, Vol. 2(7240) 1801-1809.)

-

[8 September 18061
Cargo in

U. 8. Brig F r ~ 1 n transferred
.
to American Brigantine Tum Brothers

UNITED
STATESOF AMERICA.

COMMON~AL
OFT M
H assac~vs~rrs.
On this ei hth Day of September, i n the year of our Lord one
Boston
thowand eigft hundred and six before me, WIJ,LXAI
STEVENSON,
i3ufTolk$m
Esquire, a Justice of the Peace for the County of Suflolk, bv legal
authority admitted and sworn, and dwelling i n Boston aforesaid, personally appeared
Lieutq* P C Wederstnmdt, cosmander of the United States Brig Franklin, and on

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS
Oath declared, that in compliance with orders received from the Secretary of the
Navy, dated the 4tb day of August 1806, the whole of the Merchandize mentioned
in the annexed Certificate, was delivered to the order of L a n d e r Cathcart, Eequire, and transhipped from the said Brig Franklin, on board the Ship Two Brothm, whereof John Candler, is Master - both of said Vessels being then in the
lower Roads of Boston harbour - and that no part thereof was landed -

P, C, WDDERSTRANDT
In Testimony whereof I have hereunto set my hand & atbed my Sea

SEAL

of Office the day & year above written

WILLIAMSTEVENEON
Jud Peace
!Various lists of the articles are included in the below-mentioned source.]
[NA. SDA. CD, Tunis, Vol. 3, 1805-1806.1
To Secretary of the Navy from Captain Hugh G. Campbell, U. 6. Navy
US. SEIPConstitu.tio?
Lisbon Harbor 8 t h Septr 1806
SIR,My Isst respects to you were from Cadiz July 28(h by the Schooner Hiram,
Via New York; - since that period I have visited the coast of Barbary, and on the
14th Ultp standing for Larache, and close in with that Port, we came up with and
examined:the ship Suwarrow, one of the Emperors frigates, presented to him last
year by the British, she mounts 20 guns, a high deck ship, and carries her guns
through a high bulwark; the Captain of which informed me they were a t war
with the greeks; that he had then two greek ves~elsin Larache, kden with
wheat;
The War I understandis occasioned by the Russians having extended
their authority over the seven Isles, which has induced the Grand Signior to deny
them further protection, or passports by which they have hitherto navigated; On the 16th U l t ~I anchored a t Tangiers, where I found our affairs perfectly
tranquil, and on the 1 9 t h anchored at Gibraltar, where I found C a p t ~Porter in the
Enterprize, in obedience to my orders of June last, copy of which I had the honor
to forward on the 2 0 t h of July by the ship Three Sisters, of Norfolk, Driver
Commander; - A few days prior to my arrival [August 151 Capts Porter had a
smart skirmish with the gun-boats of Algeziras, in which I have the pleasure to
inform you, he conducted himself in a gallant and Officer-lie manner; the Boats
commenced a fire on him a t long shot, although the American Colours were
hoisted on board the Schooner; which the continued until they came within
hail, when they were receiv'd by a full discLrge of grape and musketry; which
being repeated, by the assistance of a light breeze that render'd the Schooner
manageable; they thought proper to retire; I have not heard their reasons for
enga ing the Enterprize, nor have I thought i t necessary to say any thing to
the 8oommaandant of Marine about i t persuaded, from every information f have
receiv'd that they have been the greater sufferers; the Enterprize receiv'd much
damage in her sails and rigging, without having one man kiied or wounded; I
much regret that on this occasion the gun carriages of !the Schooner were rendered useless, except two that were taken on board a t Venice; in consequence of
which and after a strict survey being held on them, I thought it adviseable to give
Captp Porter orders to procure a new set, copy of which I here enclose for your
perusal and hope i t will meet your approbation; - the Carriages could not be
made a t Gibraltar or Cadiz,
[NDA. Captains' LB, Vol. 3, 1806.1 '

-

-

To Secretary of the Navy from Stephen Cethalm, Jr., U. S. CommercinI Agent,
Marseilles,France
COPY
MARSEILLES
9 t h Septr 1806
SIB, I have the honor of informing you of the arrival in this port of the U. S.
Schooner Enterprize under Command of Lieutt David Porter, on the 6t4 ins* She
left Gibraltar on the 21*t ultq She is in quarantine ?till the 26 ixw' But, in
mean While, her Repam Consisting in new Gun Carnages, Caulking &* will go
on 8s they will work to it on to Morrow

-

482

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1806 TO 1807

It is only this evening that the bearer hereof, Cap9 Jar Forbes of the Schor
Superior of Baltimore has altered her Voyage, t o Sail direct for Baltimore in Ballast, on to Morrow Morning and I apprehend Cap? Porter, whom I advise thereof,
will not have time to write 8: Send me his Letters * * *
I will Supply this Schooner with all the necessaries wanted, wishing to Contribute as far as in my power in any thing whatever for the Service of the U. States.
[NDA. Misc. LB, Vo1.4, 1806.1
To Secretary of the Navy from George Davis, appointed U. S. Consul, Tripoli
GIBRALTAR
Sept? lOtb 1806
SIR, The letter you honored me with, addressed to the Commanding Officer
on this Station, has been left with Consul Gavino, as none of our vessels of war
are here, nor will be for some time The Constitution has gone t o Lisbon to procure, and set up new rigging; the
Enterprise to Marseilles, to procure new carriage guns; and the Hornet off Sicily
& Malta
strong hopes are entertained of a speedy peace; I say hopes, for
England cannot long bear up, against the Storm, and the sooner a peace takes
place, the more honorable it will prove for the Nation: a protraction of the war,
might make the I?. Emp. protector of G: B: as well as Germany - this Garrison
from being the first perhaps in the world, in point of good order & discipline,
is entirely severed much is said of a similar state of things in other quarters;
most probably the effect of a general dissatisfaction a t the continuance of hostilities, without a hope of obtaining any thing but a degrading & humiliatin
peace - in a word, the language of the Nation is wholly altered - all the goo!
effects this might produce in our negociations a t St: Cyr [?I may be more than
do away, by the consequent disadvantages attending those of [space] which inflated with the full tide of Victory may be induced to consider, the right of Power
the only Right or law of Nations [NDA. Officers LB, Vol. 3, 1806.1

-

To Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Navy, from William Eaton
BRIMFIELD Sep. d2Q 1806
DEARSIR, Your favor of 6 t h instant came yesterday - Unforeseen business
mill protract my movement t o the east until the first of October - Young
Danielson will accompany me - Captain Hull left this the 12th for your place;
I request you will hold him in arrest until we meet, when I will exhibit a set
of charges against him - A letter I received from Cap. Cannick, of marines,
dated 14th states that Commodore Rodgers is reenstated in full confidence a t
headquarters - and that he and the Barrons have been reconnoitring each other
but cannot fix on a battle ground - R. wrote J. B. a note a t Hampton roads,
another from Washington - The latter declined any further interference in
his brother's behalf as he had now so far recovered as to be able to fight his own
battles! - R. waited sometime a t Washington, & repaired t o Havre de Grace.
The brothers soon after arrived and notified him - He proposed an interview
in the state of Delaware - The Barrons returned to Hampton - Thus they
seem to be fighting the battles of the Mediterranean over again Have a little patience, Sir, line of battleships & frigates must shortly supercede
gunboats - Rumour says that our negociation with Spain has failed. If i t
has not failed it will fail - Is it rational t o entertain a hope that the Spanish
monarch will enter into friendly negociations with the U States a t the very moment that an expedition, fitted out in our porta, is moving in his dominions?
And what means the hostile operations of the spanish troops in Louisiana? Every
thing portends war * -our alternative is unlimited humiliation - Meek as we
are I do not believe the nation yet prepared for this - But yet, a thought misgives me; what yankee will cordially shed his blood in the marshes of the south
and west t o support overweaming insolence under the prostituted name of republicanism?
Bnrr, late vice president, is on no good errand down the Mississfppi -

[LC. EPP, Vol. 18, June-Nov. 1806.1

[12 May to 23 September 18061
Expenses in connection with Treaties with the Mediterranesn Powers

Dr

James L. Cathcart, In relation to intercourse with Barbary Powers, In Aceoi with the United States- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - . .Cr
--

To Treasor Warrants for amount of the following
issue(9in his favor- - - - - - - - - - - -

NQ 7. 575. dated.

::

May 19th 1806
5. 000.
J t n e 12'4
- - - - - - - - - - 3.000.
236
- .
2. 000.
July 9th " - - - - - - - - - - 4. 000.
"
SepF~rnr 4"
- - - - - - - - - .. 2.000.
8. 012.
16th
---------8. 045. "
1. 500
Balance due James L. Cathcart - - - - - --- - -- . 916.

7. 662.
7. 693.
7. 848.

II

- Viz

"
"
"

b:

91

By Treaties with the Rtediterranean Powers, for
the following Sums- - - - - - - --- ..- - - - - -Viz
Amount paid from the 26th May to the 8'4 of
Septr 1806, for Support of the Tunis~ian
Ambassador and Suite, including his Commission a t 5 pr Cent r Abstract-- - - - - - - - Amount of Sundry &ods purchased and
Shipped in the Ship Two Brothers John
Candler Master to the Consignation of
Tobias Lear Esqr as presents for the Bey of
Tunis and hia Ministers pr Invoice - - - Amount of his own Corn nsatjon from the
12th May to the 23d &tern? 1806, on a
Journey from the Cit of Washington t o
Boston and back, atten$ng on the Embassy,
including Hack Hire, Travelling expenses,
Stationery, Postage, and Commission on
the Charter of the Ship Two Brothers pr
Account--------------------------.----- + - - -

-Dollars.
The balance Claimed by MTCathcart pr his Accoc
Curr* is . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
To which add this Sum under added-- - - - - - - - - - - -

From which deduct this Sum bein amount of Over
on the Accol
Charges as particularly note!
Current----------------------.--------------Balance as above Stated.

[GAO.No. 18,868.1

Dollars.

18.416.

91

929.

27
50

Dollsrs.

8.902.

29

7. 356.

40

2.158.
-

22

18.416.

91

929.

77

-AUDITORS
OFFICE
Deeelnl mtb 1 8 0 B } F ~~R R ~
A L L~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~

12.

86

The above expenditures are all authorized or approved
RH
by the Secretary of State.

---

484

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1806 TO 1807

(25 September 18061
Foremast of U. S. Frigate C0~1il~lfoII.
surveyed
SIR,Agreeable to your order of the 24'h of this month, requesting a strict
m e y on that part of the Foremast complained of We the undersighned have
strictly attended to, surveyed it, and find 16 feet of the Mast head Main Spindle
entirely rotten, so as to render that part of the mast unfit for further service;
But we are also of Opinion that by new heading allowing the scarf to extend
half mast down, i t can be again render'd fit for service
Given under our hands on board the U States frigate Constituzion in Lisbon
this 25tP day of September 1806.
C B LUDLOW
~
firs2 Lieut
WT F. B a a o ~
Master
WILLIAMGODBY
Carpenter
[NDA. Captain's LB, Vol. 3, 1806.1

[26 September 18061
Foremast, U. S. Frigate Constituffon,second survey
SIR, We the undersigned have held a second survey on the Foremast (agreeable to your order of this date) and find the defect to extend much farther in
the heart of the Main Piece, than we had any idea it would in our former survey;
which in our opinion has rendered it unworthy of repairs or further service, and
have accordingly condemned it,
Given under our hands on board the U. States frigate Constitiution the 26tP
day of Septr in the year of 1806 I n the Harbor of Lisbon
CHI LUDLOW
jirst Lieut
WT F. R a a o ~
Master
WILLIAMGODBYCarpenter
P D A . Captain's LB, Vol. 3, 1806.1

To Master Commandant John H. Dent, U.S. Navy, from Captain Hugh G. Campbell,
U.
6. Navv
- . -.
U. S. SHIP Constitulion
Harbour of Lisbon 27th Sept 1806
SIR,Having received orders from the Secretary of the Navy to have ~r Davis
and his Lady conveyed to Tripoli in one of our Public Vessels, I have to desire
that an application being made to you by Mr Davis to that effect, ou will be
leased to receive him on board the Hornet with all his suit, and coniuct him to
h~poli,where you will wait a reasonable time for any public dispatches MTDavis
may have to forward to the United States - I have not one word of News,
the Secretary has not even mentioned the intended return of the Ambassador,
who Mr Davis says must now be on his passage in the Franklin. - My present
situation is truly unfortunate having availed myself of this Port to fit a new gang
of rigging to the lower masts, fish the after part of the Foremast (that being
Sprung a little above the Catharpins insomuch as to open considerably when
carrying Sail) and to Cork the Ship round prior to the winter sitting in. We
find on examination that the Foremast is perfectly rot.ten, consequently have
condemn'd it, and ordered a new one made, which will not be ready in less than
twenty days from this date, consequently that with the necessary trimming off,
will in all probability detain us here the greater part of October, my intention
is then to visit Algiers Tunis &q &F
As the arrival of the Ambassador js soon expected, without as I am indirectly
informed, of having accomplished h e Mission I t will be essentially necessary
for you t~ have frequent Communications with Doct: Dodge a t Tunis, and keep
yourself informed of all that concerns us there. I have ordered Cap* Porter to
join you with all possible dispatch after hie d u n Carriages are procured, the
Junction I hope will soon take place The News is that Mr Fox is dead and Buenos Ayres taken by the English Lord S1 Vincente has been here some time with six Ships of the Line. He is
now in the act of Sailing - I wrote to you the 224 Ult - pray let me hear from
you by every opportunity that may offer for Gibrdtor [From original letter book of Zt.-Commandant J. H. Dent, captured a t Washington in 1814,and purchased by the Naval Hietorical Foundation in 1929.1
[NA. NDA. Area-4, 1806-1810.1

-.

WRRS WITH BARBARY POWERS

485

To Secretary of the Navy from Captain Engh G. Campbell, U. 6. Navy
U 8 SHIP Constitdwn
Harbor of Lisbon Oetr 1 s t 1806
SIX,In my dispatches of the 8th September, I had the honor to inform you of
the arrival of the Constitution a t this place, and the nature of my business here; I beg leave now to acquaint you, that since that period fresh dificulties have
appeared, which have incurred an unexpected erpence and detention in this
Port; the Foremast of this Ship complained of by me has proved on close examination unfit for service, and beg leave to refer you to the enclosed certificates for
particulars of the same;
A new set of Courses and Topsails is required likewise, in place of one of the
old suite that you were informed of in my dispatches of July 10th as being unfit
for further service, for which the Sail Maker has allowed five hundred dollars;
the other old suite has been constantly in use; except the Main top Sail, that blowed
from the yard in the Streights of Gibraltar, although the topsails were double
reefed, not on account of violence of wind but of the crippled state of the Foremast
and lower rigging, that required our serious attention; It being intended to call the ship home next summer, I shall put the canvass
of the remaining old suite to such use as the Ship may require; in hammocks,
hammock cloths &C* &C* which wiU save the expenditure of new canvass; for
those purposes, that on the ships arrival in America would be thrown into a store
and rendered unfit for service when called for while the old canvass will answer
that purpose, and continue of use until1 the return of the ship, and not longer
Herewith I enclose you surveys on the Sails and lower rigging; - The Ship
must be caulked d l over and it may not be improper to purchase an anchor prior
to the Winter setting in, to replace one of those procured from the Navy yard a t
Gibraltar by Commodore Rodgers prior to his leaving the Constitution, that broke
in the shank by fair heaving, in good and clear ground in the roads of Algeziras;
All of which with the able assistance received from Mr Jervis our Consul here, I
flatter myself will be procured on the most reasonable terms, that this market
can possibly aEord; the Mast will detain us a considerable time, it will not be
ready in leas than twenty days, from this date; the expence of it will be considerable ; your refferring to a former account against this Ship for a Bowsprit made
b y the same Carpenter that has the Mast in hand will give yousome idea of the
price;
I shall keep the department regularly informed of my proceedings.
[Attention is invited to surveys of 25 and 26 September 1806.1
[NDA. Captains' LB, Vol. 8, 1806.1

-

-

[4 October 18061
Order forbidding selling of Wine or Liquors at Sphax

COPY
We James Dodge Charged with the M a i m of the U. S. of America for the
City & Kingdom of Tunis Do Request and expressly forbid all Masters and Commanders of American
Vessels that may put in a t Sphax, Selling any Wine or Spiritous Liquors under
pain of formal disobedience I n Witness whereof we have hereunto Set our name and a x e d the Seal of
Office in Tunis this 4tb day of October 1806. (Signed) JAMES
DODGE
[SEAL]
[NA. SDA. FA, CL, Tunis, Vol. 2, (7240),1801-1809.1
[4 October 18061
Appointment of Baie Ahmed Damag as Agent of American Masters and Commanders of American Vessels, at Sphax
COPY
..
We James Dodge Charged with the Affairs of the U. States of America for
the City & Kingdom of Tunis
Wiehing to rocure for the Masters & Commanders of American Vessels that
ma arrive at iphax, the necessary aasistsnce and aid they may stand in need of,
.$to
prevent their being molDsted or deceived in their business, have t o this

'

486

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1805 TO 1807

effect appointed Rais Ahmed Damag as their Agent in Sphax aforesaid, and in order
t o procure for them all Kind & quantity of provisions they may want for their
Vessels, as bread, meat, firewood, Vegetables &c. (oil excepted, which must not
exceed five Matals) without, the Said American Masters or Commanders, being
obliged to pay any duty whatever on said provisions.
We therefore Request all the s a ~ dAmerican Masters and Commanders, t o
acknowledge no other person, than the said Rais Ahmed Damag as their Agent
at Sphax & its dependencies, and to pay him for his troubles and assistance five
Tunisien piastres, (besides the usual duty of Anchorage kc.) that is to say, three
piastree if the Vessel shall unload a t that place, and two piastres only if Loading. Giren under our hand and Seal of office a t the Consulate of the United States
of America a t Tunis this 4 t h day of October 1806 (Signed) JAMES
DODGE
[SEAI.]
[NA. SDA. FA, CL, Tunis, Vol. 2, (7240), 1801-1809.1

-

To Secretary of the Navy from Captain Hugh G. Campbell, U. S. Navy
U. S. SHIPConstitution
Lisbon Harbour Octr 15 1806
SIR, For thirteen months past has Doctor Simm been under my command,
during that time the state of his health was such as to prevent him from giving
common attention to his duty on board, and were in hopes that by the return of
the last squadron, he would have been permited to see his country and friends
once more, but t o my great surprize and his disappointment he was deprived that
Privilage & I then pronounced him a lost man which has been verified, his complaint was consumption, that devolves on me the painful1 task t o make you
acquainted with his dissolution that took place on the l l t 4 Inst, his body was
Intered in the Church Corpo Santo, attended with all the ceremonies of the Roman
Catholick persuation and his beleif Doctor M~Alestercontinues to act in his place and appears to be an attentive
and deserving young man, and the only person on board in that department, who
will require an assistant that must be taken from one of the Vessels in squadron,
until1 I am honord with your orders on this head [NDA. Captain's LB, Vol. 3, 1806.1
To Lieutenant Colonel Commandant Franklin Wharton, U. S. Marine Corps, from
Secretary of the Navy
NAVYDEPAR*
I1 Octbr 1806.
Black gaitem made to come up to the knee instead of the calf of the leg must be
in future worn bv the non-commQ Officer, musicians & privates of the Marine
Corps.
I have no objection to your gratifying the music in the request they have made
t o you of substituting the feather for the Plume - the feather to be worne on the
side of the hat.
[WDA. USMC, LB 1804-1820.)
To Peter Muhlenberg, Philadelphia, Pa., from Secretary of the Navy
NAVYD E P A R24t4
~ Octobr 1806.
I have received your letter of the 21at ins: with a copy of the one dated 18tP ultq
I am not in possession of the necessary information t o enable me to give the
requisite certificate relatively t o the Cutter [Sloop of 10 Guns] Hornet. All that
I officially know respecting her is, that she was purchased in the Mediterraneans
by Commre Barron on account of the United States, that after being so purchased
she was put in commission and employed in the Service of the United States until
she was sold a t Philadelphia. I shall this da write t o Commodore Barron by
whose directions the Hornet was purchased. l f e may possibly be able to furnish
the necessary information upon the Subject.
[NDA. GLB, Vol. 8, 1805-1807.1

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

487

To Lieutenant Philemon Charles Wederstrandt, U. S. Navy, commanding U. S. Brig
Fran,qIin, Boston, Idass., from Secretary of the Navy
N A VD E POdr
~ 87,1806,
Upon receipt of this letter you will proceed with the Brig Franklin to the Navy
Yard Wmhington. Should you require Provisions Mr Brown will supply you.
[NDA. OSW, Vol. 7, 1805-1807.1
To Secretary of State from Stephen Cathalan, Jr., U. S. Commercial Agent,
Xarseiiles, France
MAB~EILLES
T ~ lE
a t h Novemb. 1806.

SIR!

*

*

*

*

*

*

*

The U. S. Schooner Enterprize arrived in this port on the 6tb Septr last., where
She performed 20 days quarantine She wanted many repairs in her Deck & New
Gun Carriagas I Supplied her with every thing She wanted, She Sailed on the
8 t b inst on her Cruise to the Eastward, no man of her Crew war or h e been Sick
during her Stay, owing to the ood order, Cleanness and Subordination Kept on
board of that Vessel of war, by 8apP David Porter, & his officers, who was admired
by many in this place who visited the Enterprize.
[NA. SDA. CL, Despatches, Marseilles, Vol. 2, 1803-1827.1
To Peter Muhlenberg, Philadelphia, Pa., from Secretary of the Navy
NAVYD E P A R12
~ Novembr 1806.
As you have been advised, I wrote to Comm- Samuel Barron relatively t o
the Hornet, [Sloop of 10 Guns] I have received this answer of which the following
1s a copy. HAKPTOX8 Xavernb 1806.
SIRI am honored with the receipt of your letter of the 24th uit9 I cannot
find the Bill of Sale of the Hornet, which induces me to suppose, it may have
been Ieft in the Navy Office by Mr Dennison during my illness. I believe,
however, that I am correct in saying, She was called the Sloop Traueller of
h'ew Bury Port, Tho* Saville t part owner, & built somewhere to the northward of the United States.
I am &s
SAMUEL
BARRON
The Bill of Sale was not left in the Navy Office as Cornmq Barron supposes,
& we have no information relatively to the Hornet other, than that already communicated, and that contained ia the preceding copy of Commv Barrob's letter
t o me.
[NDA. GLB, Vol. 8, 1805-1807.1
To Secretary of State from George Davis, appointed U. S. Consul, Tripoli
LEGHORN
ldth November 1806
N9 4 triplicate
SIRI left Gibraltar two days after I had the honor of addressing you from that
place. We had twenty eight days of passage, and have been quarantined thirty.
I made choice of Leghorn as the most likely place to find a speedy, and cheap
conveyance to Tripoli: there is however no probability of succeeding 'till Spring,
unless a Vessel should be chartered a t an enormous price, a t lesst 25008 - M y
unavoidable detention a t this place, is a subject of real regret, being fully impressed with the necessity of my early arrival a t Tripoli - we have no advices
from Barbary other than a confirmation of war between France and Algiers Mr Nissen is daily expected here, who will be able to give me every information
I could wish respecting the [remainder of this sentence in code]
I have made application t o Captain Campbell to permit either the Enlerpriis
or Hornet to take me to Tripoli and am disposed to believe that my request will
not be refused.
[NA. S D k CL, Tripoli, Vol. 3, 18061811.]

a

488

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1806 TO 1807
To Secretary of State from John Qavino, 0.6. Consul, Qibraltar

NQ33

GIBRALTAR
ldtb Nwembcr 1806
SIR Deprived the honor of any of your favours since my last Respects NQ32
under date 4tb U l t ~ ,since when we have arrived from England Sir Hugh Dalrymple as Commander in Chief, & in consequence of a Pitition from the Merchants he has slowed for the present, the Tobacco from America lod ed in the
Bay to be Landed under bond to be Exported in same Casks, to evade t%e Danger
of the Winter season. On the 4th Instant His Ex7 the Tunisian Embassador in the ship [Two] Brothers
from Boston arrived here, & was detaind by Contrary W~nds& bad weather
until1 yesterday, when cap^ Candler meant to go to Sea, but His ExcM call on
me to request of the Captain to waite four days longer a t this Port, there being
Warr between Algeir & Tunis, & a Cruiser of the latter that put into Oran wae
taken possession of, the Crew sent round by Land to Algeir Prisoners, & the
Vessel is also sent to Algeir with an Algereen Crew, the motive of his request
is on account of two Algereen Cruisers bein a t Sea & the Constitution expected
here every Moment, from Lisbon, as Caps 8ampbell Expected his repairs would
be Compleat by the first of this Month, when would come here, and His Ex?
wishes to get a Convoy from him, cap^ Candler was loath in granting his reuest but in the end has Complied therewith. Cap* Candler Expected to meet
8011. Lear here but he has not appeard, & I have a litter from him of l l t P U l t ~
advising his Bills on me for $5600 acct Govt, one for $4000 has been resented
& is paid he says to have remitted me a Bill for f 1500 st5 on sir fran*%aring &
CQof LondQ to cover same, but it has not yet got to hand, in said Letter he says
nothing with respect to his coming this way. [NA. SDA. CL, Gibraltar, Vol. 3, 1805-1829.1
To the Commodore of the U. S. Squadron in the Mediterranean from Tobias Lear,
U. 6. Consul General, Algiers
ALGIERSNwember 234 1806
SIR, On the 30th of August I received a letter from the Secretary of State of
the United States, dated the 15'4 of Map, stating, that as i t was probable the
Tuneeian Ambsssador would leave the U. States much diitisfied, on account
of his demands on behalf of the Bey having been refused, I was ordered by the
President of the United States, to repair to Gibraltar, by the first conveyance,
and wait there the amval of the said ambassador from the U. States, and repair
with him to Tunis with a View to an adjustment of the differences which might
exist between the two Nations - And on the 14tb of October I received another
letter from the Secretary of State dated the 7th of June 1806 - containing a full
statement of the grounds of difFerence between the United States and the Bey
of Tunis, and repeating the former Order, that I should re air to Gibraltar to
meet the Ambassador; but instead of proceeding directly to tunis, that I should
go from Gibraltar to Malta in the Vessel Containing the Ambassador; and a t
the latter place the Naval Commander of the United States would be instructed
to furnish a Frigate to convey me to Tunis; in which the ambassador might embark Also, unless he should refer continuing on board the same Vessel in which
me might leave the United itstes. Before I received the first of the aforementioned letters, I had been for some
time in a very bad state of health, and about the time of my receiving the second
I was confined to my bed by a very severe and dangerous fever, which brought
me to the brink of the Grave. - From the d e c t s of this fever I am now fast
recovering, and with renewed hedth.
This illness has been one good and sufficient cause for my not having fulfilled
the Orders of the President by going to Gibraltar; and even if this immutable
cause had not existed, there was another almost equally powerful; for since the
time of my receiving the first letter 'till the present moment, there has not been
any Vessel sailing from this place to Gibraltar; and not an American has been
here during that period. 7
I have been for some time past, in M y expectations of seeing some one of
our Vessela of War here from Gibraltar; presuming that as I wm not there on
the amval of the Ambassador $9 Vessel would call here to take me u , or know
I am However informecf b Capt*
the reason of m not being in Gibraltar.
BiUyer of 3.B. ship Nigw, which arrived here yesterday, that he left d b r a l t a ~

-

h.

-

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS
-

about a fortnight ago, and that no Vessel of War of the U. States had then arrived from America.
The Niger goes from this place on a short cruize and then returns to Gibraltar
if rhe was going directly there, I should not hesitate to take my passage on board
her; but aa I am in daily expectation of seeing one of our Vessels here from thst
quarter, in which I may embark for Malta or Tunis, I have thought it most
expedient to wait that event; or untill I have the pleasure of hearing from you.
I should think it would be best, a t all events, to proceed first to hlslta (unlem
some circumstances of which 1 am not informed should forbid it) as i t would
give a better opportunity of making arrangements for any issue which might
take place in the Negotiation, than could be done in the Bay of Tunis.
Every thing is quiet here as relates to us. - The French a t preaent bsve
some misunderstanding with this Regency; and the English appear to stand
well. - They have a New Consul here. - The Insurrection in the interiour
ie pretty well subdued; and a few days ago the Aga or General of the Turka,
who had quelled the insurrection, was strangled, on suspicion of having eome
designa against the Present Dey. A difference exists a t present between this Regency and that of Tunis; and
they threaten hard to go to war; but I rather think their disputes will be adjusted without that extremity. I t may however, operate favourably for our
affairs with the latter power. [Stephen Decatur Col. Book B, 1806-1807.1

-

.-

-

-

To Captain Hugh G. Campbell, U. 6. Navy, from Master Commandant David
Porter, U. 6. Navy
COPY

U.S. SCHOONER
Enterprize
Leghrn Decr 9.1806

SIR, I am sorry to inform you that we have had a tremenduous gale of wind
here, that out of nineteen Vessels which lay in the Roads, has drove seventeen
on shore, many of which will be totally lost; The Vessel that I command hss
suffer'd more than any that lay in the Mole, by a large Imperial Brig which got
on foul of her during the night, and stove in all her upperworks, on the larboard
side from the Fore chains aft, and haa injured her bends and top timbers to such
a degree that I shall be compell'd to take her down to the Waters edge. I calculate on being ready for Sea in the course of three or four Weeks, and shall
then proceed in search of C a p t ~Dent of whom I have had no intelligence since
my departure from Marseilles [NDA. Captain's LB, Vol. 3, 1805.1
To J. B. Corai, Lieutenant of the Port, Keeper of the Inner Mole, from Car'ro
Rerneiri d'Angelo, Colonel Captain of the Port, Chamberlain of Her Majerty,
Leghorn
LEGHORN
?W Deer 1806.His Excellency the Lieu+ General Governor permits the United States Schr
Enterptize to enter into the Inner Mole in order to be repaired, under the following conditions, always practised with Ships of War of every Nation lat the Commanding Officer will understand with the Director of the Custom
House for the p~irposeof receiving the Visit on board the Schooner a t the time
of her entrance into the inner Mole. 2pQk When entered she will not be allowed to beat the Drum nor to have
any visible C~ntinelon board & much leas to put any on shore - No public
all regulations conpunishment can be inflicted on any person of her Crewcerning Lights, Fire &c in the night time must be observed ~ccordingto the exist+
ing Laws, for all Shi s laying in the Inner Mole.
The Lieut* of the Port,
Keeper of the Inner bole will notify the above to the Cap$ Commander of the
Schooner & will receive his word of honor for his exact compiance therewith.
(Signed) CART*
RERNEIBID'ANQELO
Colonel Cap* of the Port
Chumberlaan of Her Majesty
T o the Lt of the Port
Keeper of the Inner Mole
J B. CORSI
[LC. D. Porter P, Let. 6; Ord., 1806-1808.1

-

-

490

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1806 TO 1807

To Josiah Fox, Naval Constructor, from Master Commandant John Cassin, U. 6.
Navy
NAVYYARD3 Decemh 1806.
SIR As the Brig Franklin is ordered to take on board a company of Marines
for New Orleans it becomes necessary to lay a temporary Deck for their accommodition You will please to direct the same to be Laid with all practicable
dispatch say four feet in the clear - also one Fore top Sail yard
[Peabody Museum of Salem, No. 700.1
To Secretary of State from John Gavino, U. S. Consul, Gibraltar
No. 35

GIBRALTAR
6 t h December 1806
SIR Deprived of the pleasure of being honourd with any of your Commands
since my last respects NQ34 under [date] of 2 6 t h Ulto I have now to inform you
that the Constitution not appearing, & the Rumours of the Warr between Algeir
& Tunis having in a manner subsided, the Ambassador proceedQ with the ship
[Two] Eh-othets, & Doctor Triplett on the 34 Instant for Tunis, & as et have heard
from d p p Campbell,
nothing from COUPLesr, nor have any further accounts
or Colli Lears Bills
Yesterday arrived from New York the Ship Mary, William Lander Master with
s Cargo of flower, Pitch, Tarr, Bread Beef &cr for this place, had 10 Men, was
taken possession off by several Spanish Privateers off Tarifa & sent for Alguesiras
with Seven Men belonging to said Privateer, they under the Fort of Cabrita point
by Night, when the Crew of the ship rose upon them, & brought her here, In the
ScufRe the Captain & two of his Men were mounded, on arrival, a British 74 took
out the Spaniards, the Prize Master Excepted, who Caps Lander wishd to keep
The Surgion of said Ship has, and is attending the Wounded, who are doing well
and out of Danger
This day came thro the Lines from the Spanish Batery of Fort Barbara to the
Eastward of the Rock Lerveling [?I altho Commander of the Schooner Alexander
of Baltimore, from Triest bound to the aforesaid Baltimore, his Vessel was within
Gun shott of said Batery, when several shott were fird a t him, which compelld him
to anchor, & to go on shore with his Papers, web they sent to the Commandant of
the Spanish Lines wtb the Caps (the Boat Crew being kept in Confinement) said
Commandant detaind the Papers untill the Caps paid him 30%for cost of the shott,
after which he was let go & returnd to fort Barbara they then released the sailors,
but no one could get on board, the Boat having either drifted away from the water
side or stole by the Spaniards, so that thev could not join the schooner untill next
day by hiring a fishing Boat a t a heavy lhp-nnee P. S. had Caps Campbell appeard I intended to hint to him, his taking the ship
[Two] Brothers and Ambassador for Tunis under his Convoy, to lay too with him
off Algeirs and send an officer on shore in his Boat to Consult Colll Lear on this
Important Subject
[NA. SDA. CL, Gibraltar, Vol. 3, 1805-1829.1

-

-

-

To Secretary of the Bavy from Captain Hugh G. Campbell, U. 6. Bavy
U. S. SHIP Constitution
Lisbon Harbor 6 t h Decr 1806
SIB, I n my dispatches Octr 3rd I had the honor to inform you of my arrival here
and the repairs that were requisite to put the Constitution in a serviceable state;
I have now the satisfaction to advise you of her being so, likewise of m intention
ta leave this place tomorrow, if possible but certainly the following
if the
weather is such as to admit of our going to Seaa- Our detention here haa far
exceeded my expectations, occasioned by bad keather and disappointment in
y i n g Supplies, the Weather for some days p a d has favored us much, and
should have sailed on the 30tb Ulto had not an unexpected circumstance taken
place; the fore and Main Stays of this Ship, although strictly examined and
ta be sufficient for further ser;ice, were observed on the 28tb U l t ~to be stranded
in consequence of which, I thought i t prudent t o procure a new sett, which we,
received yesterday from the rope-walk and are this day in their place;
On the 2 5 4 U l t ~I received advice from MIGavino that the Tunisian Ambas
sador had arrived a t Gibraltar, likewise a atore ahip having on board two Cablea

dby;

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS
for the Constitution, which timely information prevented me from procuring a
Cable a t this place; the ship being much in want of one; Anchors being cheaper
here than in any part of the Mediterranean, I thought proper to purchase one from
the Kings Arsenal, which with the Cable in question will render this Ship in as good
order as a ship can well be I here enclose the Ammt of Bills drawn by me a t Lisbon, which may a t first
View appear great, yet flatter myself when Pursers Slops and Cash advanced to
Officers &Cr are deducted the Expences will not be extravagant [NDA. Captain's LB, Vo1.3, 1806.1
To l a s t e r Commandant David Porter, U. S. Navy, from Xidshipmen Lewis
Warrington, Winlock Clark and Richard B. Jones, U. 6. Navy
Dee? 6tQ1806
LEGHORN
SIR, In conseqllence of your order to us directed; we have taken a strict and
careful survey, of the damages sustained by the Schooner [Enterprize] in the late
gale; during the night of the 294 inst in the outer Mole of this place - By which
we find that thirteen of the top timbers and eleven of the foot hooks, are broken
and ~hatteredin such a manner as to require taking out and replacing with new
ones from the fore to the Main Chains on the Larboard side - That the whole
of the plank-sheer with the water-way plank included in that space must be also
replaced - That the whole of the bends are so much injured that they must be
taken off and renewed With the bulwarks from the Fore Chains to the second port
from abaft on the same side - That the Fore & Main Channels with several of
the chain plates are tom off broken & rendered unserviccable - That all the
hammock stamtions in the Waist with several of those on the Quarter Deck & Five
of the Cranes, in which the small spars are stowed are also broken to pieces and
that a spare Fore Gaff nith several sweeps and Oars are in the same Condition. LEWISWARRINGTON
19 LO
Signed) WINLOCKCLARKE
RICHQB. JONES.
[LC. D. Porter P, Let.& Ord., 1805-1808.1
To Captain Mathew Kelly of American Ship Spartan, Baltimore, Md.,from Secretary
of the Navy
NAVYDEPART6 Decembr 1806
As soon as you shall have received on board the Spartan the provisions and
other Stores, which John Stricker Esqr has been directed to ship in her for the
use of our Squadron in the mediterranean, vou will weight anchor & proceed
immediate1 to Gibraltar and on your arrival there caU on John Gavino Esqr
American Eonsul and follow his directions in respect to the disposal of your
Cargo The enclosed letters you will deliver agreeably to their several directions.
[NDA. GLB, Vol. 8, 1805-1807.1
To Secretary of the Navy from Master Commandant David Porter, U. 6, Navy
U S. Sc: Enterprize
Leghorn 6 t h Decr 1806.
SIR, My long absence and a variety of inducements compel me to solicit permission to return to the U. States in the course of the ensuing spring or as soon aR
any arrangments you can make will admit of it, provided circumstances should
not render my services in this part of the world of more importance than they
are a t present.
[NDA. MC LB, 1806-1807.1

To Secretary of State from Second Lieutenant Charles D. Coxe, U.S. Marine Corps,
acting as U. 6. Charge d'Affaires, T u n ~ s
U. S. SLOOPOF WAR[Brig] Hornet
Tunis Bay Decr 8. 1805.
SIR,I take the earliest opportunity to inform you, that, in consequence of the
recent death of Mr Dodge our Charge d'affairiree at Tunia, I have been authorized

.

492

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1806 TO 1807

by the Commanding Officer on this Station (Capt: Dent) to act as his Successor;
in consequence of which I shall proceed on shore to morrow morning. I do not know, that I am correct in making this communication directly to you,
as I have not yet received any instructions from the Consul General, or wen those
that were given as a guidance to Mr Dodge; yet (as I may not have another
opportunity soon 8fter getting on shore) I have taken the liberty to forward this, &,
at the same time, to assure you of my unremitted sttention to the instructions,
I may receive from Government or those authoriz'd to give them, & my best
endeavours to perform my duty with credit to myself & to the satisfaction of the
President, as long as he may be pleased to honor me with a continuance in this
station.
[NA. SDA. CL, Tunis, Vol. 4, Dec. 1806-July 1816.1

-

To Thomas Foley, in Algiers, from Tobias Lear, U. S. Consul General, Algiers
ALGIERS,Friday Deeember 194 1806. SIB I heared yesterday for the first time, that you had beeh in Algiers for
several days past; aud I now take the liberty of enclosing a letter for you, which
I received some time since in one from Mr Cartwright to me.
I send you this
letter in the manner in which I received it; and as its contents may, I presume,
be considered as coming within the cognisence of H. B. M. Consul General a t
this place, I do not conceive that any agency of mine would be proper in this
business I hold the receipt of Sidi Mahomet for the six thousand dollars which I forwarded to you, by him, a t your request, in August 1804, and as i t may be more
satisfactory for you to withdraw this receipt, and give me yours, I shall be ready
to make the exchange whenever you may think proper. I prav you will have the goodness to let me know if you received any Authority
from bfr Mountford, during my absence from this place, to act as agent or Vice
Consul of the United States of America a t Oran,
[Stephen Decatur Col. Book B, 1806-1807.1

-

To William Kirkpatrick, U. S. Consul, Malaga, Spain, from Captain
Hugh G. Campbell, U. S. Navy
(Circular)
U. S. SHIP Constitution
Gib~altarBay BOtb Decemr 1806
SIB, The Tunisean Ambassador left this on the 34 inst for Tunis, carrying with
him impreasions not the most favorable toward our bovernment, which may
induce the Bey to act in a hostile manner to our Flag, in consequence of which,
I think it prudent to advise you of the circumstance, and recommend to the Commanders of American Vessels not to sail without first being convinced that hostilities have not commenced The present force under my Command are the Conatitution, Brig hornet, and
Schooner Enterprize, with which I shall render every service in my power to the
commerce of the United States. [NA. SDA. CL, Malaga, Vol. 1, June 1793-May 1814.1
To Secretary of the Navy from Captain Hugh G. Campbell, U. 6. Navy
U. S. SHIPConstitution
Gibraltar Bay 9Otb Decr 1806
SIB, In reply to your orders of July 25tb wherein you 0 b 8 e ~ ethat since your
order of May the 15tb res ecting Musicians, you have been inform'd that a band
had actually been shipp9$ and if so they must be immediately diachargld,
I beg leave to observe, my presumption is that you alluded to the band engaged
by C a p t ~Rodgers, which band he took home in the Easex, since that period we
have found among the crew a few men that play on different instruments, which
have been purchased for them a t rivate expence. on which they play when duty
of more consequence is not requirefof them, this I hope Sir ia not an objectionable
part of my conduct; if so be assured that no one will be more ready to correct it
than myself [NDA. Captain's LB, Vol. 3, 1806.1

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS
To Secretary of the Navy from Captain Hugh G. Campbell, U. S. Navy
U. S. SHIP Comtitution
Decr go* 1806. Gibraltar bay
SIR, I aail'd from Lisbon on the evening of the 9Q Instt and anchor'd here on
the 18'4 having- called a t Cadiz on my
- way- to settle with Mr Mead,. -prior to my
going aloft;
The Tunisian Ambaaador left this place on the B4 so shall I on the 2 2 ~ din pursuit of him, and call off Algiers for our Consul General who informs me by letter
that he is waiting for me to take him to Tunis on business of importance;I have not heard from C a p t ~Dent since the 14a of Septr prior to which he had
passed several days at Tunis, where he was received and treated with much attention by the Bashaw and others; What his conduct toward us will be on the arrival
of his Ambassador will soon appear; and flatter myself that the present station
of the Hornet and Enterprize and the timely arrival of the Constitution, will in a
great measure counteract any hostile intentions he may be inclined to practice
against us; be them what they may I shall endeavour to do my duty;-[NDA. Captain's LB, Vol. 3, 1806.1
To Edward Carrington, U. 6. Consul and Commercial Agent, Canton, from Captain
Isaac Channcey, U. S. Navy, on furlough
COPY
SHIPBeaver WHOMPOA
8 0 4 December 1806
SIR,I have to enform you that on the evening of the 19* Inst. near the Boca
Tigris and within the waters of a neutral state the Boarding officer of H. B. M.
Shi Phaeton Captain Wood - Impressed a seaman from my ship by the name
of Gilliam Byrant who entered with me in New York as an americsn Citizen
but by some accident he lost his protection - I have to request you Sir in your
official Capacity as Consul and Commercial Agent for the United States to demand that my man be restored to me - For admiting the position of Captain
Wood that men found without protections are considered as British subjects; yet
i t never can be admitted by Neutrals that a BeUigerent has a right to stop,
search or distress neutrals in anyway within their waters, - I t is a principal well
laid down in the Law of Nations that even Enemy's are held sacred within the
waters of a Neutral [NDA. Captain's IB, Vol. 2, 1807.1
To Master Commandant John Shaw, U. 6. Navy, or the Commanding Naval
OfBcer, Mew Orleans, La., from Secretary of the Navy
NAVD E P 20%
~ Decr 1806,
soon proA military Expedition formed on the W&stern Waters, by Col. Burr,
ceed down the Missiasi pi, and, by the time you receive this letter, WJU probably
be near New Orleans. s o u will, by all the means in your power, aid the Army and
Militia in suppressing this Enterprize. You will, with your Boats take the best
position to intercept and to take, and, if necessary, to destroy the Boats deacending under the Command of Col. Burr, or of any person holding an appointment
under him. There is great reliance on your vigilance and exertions.
[NDA. OSW, Vol. 7, 1805-1807.1

-

-

-

To Secretary of State from John Gavino, 0.6. Conenl, Gibraltar
GIBRALTAR
9s December 1806
NQ36
SIB Not being honourd with any of yours I beg leave to referr to my last
respects under 564 Instant NQ 35, by which YOU will have seen the Departure
of the Ship Two Brothers with the Tunis ambass: & Doctr Triplet for Tunis on
the 34 of this Month. On the 18th Instant arrived the Constitution Cap9 Campbell from Lisbon &
Cadis, when I deliverd him Colll Lears & other letters which had reachd me
for him, he was in great want of Provisions and other Stores, when every Exertion on my part was made use of t o get him eupplyd &ready for sea, which was
compleated on the 21n+I gave Cap9 Campbell the perusal of Colll Lesra letter to me, as pr abstrect
inclosed dated 234 Ultimo, wherefore the Cmtitzctim prooeeded Early on the

494

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1806 TO 1807

Morning of the 224 for Algeir to Communicate with Colll Lear, & make no doubt
will take him to Tunis. On the 17th Instant I was an Eye Witness to the wantoness of the Commander
of the Spanish Baterys in the bottom of this Bay. One of our Merchant Briggs
on working into the Bay made a long Stretch towards the Bottom of it, when
Batterys of Punta Mala &cr they then
got within Gun shott of the Spanish
fird a Gunn a t her, and she imediately stood on for them with her American flag
flying, but this was of no use, all the other Batterys opend on her, she then
hoisted the flag in the Shrouds and a Burgie a t her fore top, still Continuing her
Course for the Baterys finding they notwithstanding kep up the fire, she then
struck her flag to them, this was of no use, she then hoisted her Collours - again,
by this time being close in with the Batterys, they then fired a t her with Grape
shott, and Continued so doing until1 anchord; they that night took her to Alguesiras, where I understand she is still detaind & $180 are demanded of the
Master for the Expenditure of amunition. I am told is from the Coast of Spain
bound to Toningham; I t is so farr lucky that none of the Crew were hurt. All
those Cruel Proceedings were not Committed in the Jurisdiction of my department yet I conceive it my duty to inform the Consul General a t Madrid thereof,
in hopes that some order may be obtain'd for the Commanders of the Spanish
Baterys to behave with more humanity towards Nutrals The British Gun Briggs in this Bay lately pressd three of our Men which I
demanded of the Commanders of said Briggs but was refused, I imediately wrote
Lord Collingwood off Cadis for the first one that was Impressd, & his Lordship
orderd his being given up, as to the latters we had the Hon! cap^ Blackwood in
Port who was a Senior Officers Commanding the Ajaz & to whom I applied, on
being refused by the Cap9 of the Brig, & he orderd their being given up, & sent
to their respective Vessels Doctor 8im having Died a t Lisbon I herewith return two Letters which were
adrwsd me from your office for him [NA. SDA. CL, Gibraltar, Vol. 3, 1805-1829.3

-

To Captain John Bodgers, U. S. Navy, from Tobias Lear, U. S. Consul General,
Algiers

(Duplicate Copy)

ALGIEESDecember 26tP 1806

DEARSIR, The original of the enclosed was forwarded via Leghorn, by the

Brig Friendship Capt Clemmens, mentioned therein, who was detained here by
bad weather till the 18th, when he took his departure for Leghorn, - On the
14 instant arrived here the ship Raleigh, from Kennebeck, with a Car o of Plank
and Spars, for the Regency, on account of our Annuities - She ha2 a passage
of 45 days, and brings no news, not even of the arrival of the U S Ship President The Dey & Regency were much dissatisfied that she had not brought Powder
or Cables none of which, have been sent since I have been Consul here, but as
they are desireous of our good will, I found no difficulty in getting over this dissatisfaction. She brought also 5 Brass Cannon, of the 15 long since desired - but
there is not the same rage for Cannon now, as in the time of the last Dey The three Fri ates, and a Polacre Ship of 22 Guns have been out on a Cruize,
since the 28tP bltimo - The Admiral Hameda hais, in the Algerine built
Frigate, has gone into the Atlantic, and it is supposed he will go on the Coast of
Brazil - He is a dashing fellow. He sent in a Portuguise Sloop, loaded with Wax
and Tobacco, which he took after he got into the Atlantic - The American
built Frigate [Crescent] came into the Bay about Ten Days ago, the Captain complaining that she was in such bad condition and made so much water, that she
could not Keep, the Sea - He had taken two prizes - vie$, a Genoa Bri which
was deserted by her Crew, and a Napoletan, with 14 Persons on board, w%o were
landed from the Frigate, put the Prizes have not yet got in - The Dey would
not suffer the Frigate to enter the Port, but ordered her to Keep out for the Cruize
of 40 Days - The Captain hesitating, was immediately dismissed, and mother
put in his place, and the Frigate sent to Sea, This Dey is not to be triffled with,
so far he has been firm and decided in all his measures; at the same time he is
mil'd and reasonable in his manners and conversation - When the Frigates
return, which will be in about 40 Days from the time of their sailing, the other
Cruisers will probably be sent out, a t least such of them, as can bear the Winter
weather, for they are not all in the best condition, the American built Brig will
hardly be able to bear another Cruize even in summer

-

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

495

A few days ago a small Vessel amved from Oran with 600 Heads, and a vast
number of Ears of the Insurgents, over whom the Bev of Oran had gained a great
Victory - They take off the Heads of the Slain, k d the Ears of the Prisoners
which they send as a proof of their victory For the lafit 15 Days the weather
has been very bad indeed, and is still far from being settled - Khen the American Ship, arrived with the annuity, the weather was so bad that she could not
enter the port, for 3 Days, and lay in a situation not very safe, - Great exertions were made by the Marine for her safety. They sent off 3 Anchors and
Cables, to her relief, when their own prize, the Portuguise Sloop, laying in the
=me situation, did not get one I have not hear'd a word from Tunis or Tripoli, since I have been here, The letters brought me from the Government by the Regalice Ship, were dated
the 15th August, before they had heard of our affairs a t Tripoli or Tunis, and of
courae, say nothing on those subjects
I have been confined to the house, by my Ancle, for the last 3 Weeks and
We wish very much
find that nothing but rest, and great care will cure it
for yourself and some others of our Countrymen to be with us to day, as we have
a very good Christmas Dinner, and but few to partake of it - as i t is Customary
for all the Consuls to dine with their own families on this Day - We shall have
the English Consul, who has no one but himself in farnilv MI* Lear unites with me, in Compliments of the Sea'son, and best wishes for
yourself, and these with you
[NA. NDA. Area 4, 1806-1810.1

-

-

To Secretary of State from Second Lieutenant Charles D. Coxe, U.S. Marine Corps.
acting as U. S. Charge d9Affaires,Tunis
TUNIS December 26*h1806.
SIR, I n consequence of the death of M? ]lodge, (of which you have been inform'd by my letter of the 8th inst:) I have been authoriz'd to act as Charge
d'affaires to This Regency till the pleasure of The President shall be known relating thereto. I arrived here on the 10th inst: & was received & acknowledged by His Excellency The Bey in the most friendly manner. - Nothing of consequence occur'd
'till the 19th when The Shi Two Brothers Capt. Candler arrived here having on
board H. E. Sidi Soliman dellimelli & suite late Ambassador from This Regencv
to the U. States. - By her I recQyour letter of the 7'h August (directed to Mr
Dodge) & another from James L. Cathcart Esquire enclosing Invoice, bills of
lading & Charter Partv with instructions to deliver the contents of said invoice
as presents from The
8. to H. E. The Bey & his Minister according to their
marks kc*
I have seiz'd the first opportunity of writing to Mr Lear & to inform him,
accordin to your instructions, of the necessity of his immediate presence a t
Tunis. fndeed I expect his arrival hourly, as he is already appriz'd by Mr Gavino
who sent dispatches from you off in to him from Gibraltar hefore the amval
there of The Ambassador. The Brig Hornet Capt. Dent saild from hence on the 12th inst: for Algiers &
I expect MI Lear will return in her. I waited on H. E. The Bev immediately on the rect of your letter: He received me in his usual friendly manner, & found he was fully inform'd of the
contents of the invoice by his Ambassador, with which he appear'd to be very
much pleased; & I have no doubt i t will have the desir'd effect from every thing
I can see & hear. The existing state of warfare between this Regency & that of Algiers, has entirely
cut off all communication bv land. - 1 have written Mr L e a by a Grecian
Vessel that will sail to day d'lrect to Algiers. 7
This place is a t resent tolerably healthy, owlng to the coolness of the weather
A few months begre my arrival, there was a plague (or epidem fever) L famine1
& every thing now is extremely dear in consequence. I shall strictly adhere to the purport of my instrnctions, & beg you to rest
assur'd that every endeavour on my part shall be exerted to merit your approBy an opportunity via Leghorn, I shall again very soon do myself
bation.
the honor of addressing you,
[NA. SDA. CL, Tunis, Vol. 4, Dec. 1806July:l816.]

u.

-

-

496

NAVAL OPEEATIONS FROM 1806 TO 1807

To Secretary of State from George Davis, appointed U. 6. Consul, Tripoli
7
LEGHORNDecember 97th 1806
SIR The letter with which I was charged, for Mr Nissen H: D: hl: late Consul
a t Tripoli, waa yesterday delivered in person; his being in quarantine prevented
an unrestrained communication.
Mr Nissen informs me that there exists a Secret Article Singned by the Commissioner stating, "that we shall not have the right to demand the fulfillment
(on his part) of the 34 Article of the treaty until1 the expiration of fourgears,
and with the condition that the Ex-B[ashaw] shall remain perfectly quiet uring
that period". he says, that the Bashaw had constantly manifested a resolution.
not to accede to any arrangement, which concerned his Brother, and that it
was admitted in the Treaty under the full inpression, that the demand would
never be made by the Government of the U: States. Mr Ridgely is represented
ss being on a most friendly and respectable footing I have the honor to enclose you a triplicate of my last; with the original was
forwarded a Gazette (NP 6) under date of the 13th December [NA. SDA. CL, Tripoli, Vol. 3, 1806-1811.1
N9

To Captain Hugh G. Campbell, U. S. Navy, commanding U. S. Frigate Consfitution,
Algiers, from Tobias Lear, U. 6. Consul General, Algiers
ALGIEBS,December S1.t 1806
DEARSIR, In consequence of Instructions received from the Secretary of State,
of the United States, I conceive it to be my duty to proceed to Tunis, with a view
of adjusting any differences (if any exist) between the United States and that
Regency; And as it may be very essential to the Interest of the United States,
that some one of our Citizens should remain here during my absence, to observe
the operations in this place and give due information of any thing which may
relate to our affairs here; I take the libert to request, that you would (if you
can do i t consistently) leave here one of the Bfficers of your Ship in whose prudence,
discretion and steadiness a confidence may be placed, to attend to the usual
course of affairs during my absence.
I know of no special W c i a l duties which will be necessary to transact until my
return; and I am happy to inform you that we appear a t present to stand on very
good ground with this Regency. [Stephen Decatur Col. Book B, 1806-1807.1
[I8071

To Secretary of the Navy from Caesar A. Rodney, Attorney General of the United
States
SIR- I have read & considered your letter of the 7'4 inst, & the papers which
accompanied it, referred to you, by a resolution of the House of Representatives.
From the best consideration, I have been able to give the subject, I concur
with you in the opinion, that the Owner of the Huntress, has no legal claim on the
Nav Department for the compensation he demands.
dIliam Hodgson of Alexandria abi the agent of the owner, chartered this vessel
to your department, for the purpose of carrying provisions & naval stores to
Malta & Syracuse. No stipulations are contained in the charter party, to furnish
any particular or special papers. In general i t is the duty of the Captain toprocure all the usual documents for the protection of his ship & cargo; nor should
he aet sail without them.
I t ie stfLted by Mr Abbot in his treatise on shipping, a work of uncommon merit
& estabhahed reputation - "The master must also take on board, no false
"or colourable papers, that map subject the ship to capture or detention: and he
"must procure & keep on board, all the papers & documents required, for the mani"festation of the ship & cargo, by the law of the count from & to which t h e Ship
"is bound, & by the law of nations in general" - g a d the U. States shlpped
in conjunction with others goods on board this veasel for the accustomed freight
without any charter party, the rule of law would eeem perfectly clear. Whether
the charter party varies the case & constitutes the person who charters a shi
pro hm uire the Owner of the vessel & makes the Captain of course his agent,
do not conceive is material to be decided. Because i t does not appear in this
instance that anv of the ueual apers were omitted. I n fact certificates from the
Resident, ae neb as from the:gritiah & French miniater~were obtained t o prove

!

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

497

that the cargo belonged to the U. States, & that i t was destined to supply our
squadron in the Mediterranean. The reason why a similar certificate was not
obtained from the Spanish Minister as correctly stated in your letter, was because
all official communication between him & our government had ceased.
However I do not consider the certificates of Foreign Ministers as composing
a part of the regular papers with which a Ship is usually furnished for the protection
of herself & cargo. They are a species of eztra documents seldom procured, &
which tho' sometimes of advantage, are at others injurious. The freight was to
compensate for the risk of capture or detention, to which all neutral vessels are
subject flagrante bello. The freight however was not due or rather 113 of it,
according to the express contract, until1 the delivery of the oods a t Malta. unless
some person duly authorized by the Navy Department ha$ released the & tain
from the further prosecution of the voyage, or the vessel's discharge in ~ngrand.
The Consul, you state expressly, had no such authority. The owner therefore
without performing his part of the contract, has not only received all the freight
due by the charter party, but has actually been paid $444.441100 more than was
due to him.
It is true from one of the papers it appears that the officer of the Spanish priva.teer made the want of a certificate from the Spanish Minister similar to those
from the French & English Ministers, a part of the pretext for capture, but as
this is a paper not really required, nor constituting a part of the regular documents
to be exhibited by neutrals, it cannot vary the case. The principal & real ground
of capture was that the vessel was carrying naval stores to a port of an enemy of
Spain. The voyage in this case was settled & the cargo fixed by the charter
party. The freight must therefore have been in proportion to all risks & hazzards
on such a voyage, with such a cargo. No fault can he attributed to the Navy
Department for not procuring a paper, which if there had been a Spanish Minister
corresponding with the government, must have been asked aa a matter of favor &
not of right, a paper which he could grant or refuse a t his pleasure. Hence such
documents as protections from Foreign Ministers are not required of neutrals by
belligerents according to the law of nations. The regular papers are those alone
which the constituted authorities of the country are competent to give.
I think the Owner must bear the loss under the existing circumstances.
C . A. RODNEY
[NA. NDA. Attorney General, Vol. 1, 1807-1825.1
To Secretary of the Bavy from Master Commandant David Porter, U. 6. Revy

U S SCHOONER
E&erpridt?
Duplicate
Leghorn 1 Jany 1807.
SIB,The monument to be erected to the memory of our brother Officers who fell
off Tripoli will be completed and ready for transportation by the latter part of this
month or the commencement of the next; If it should so happen that one of our
Vessels of War, of a suitable size, should be on the point of returning to America,
and the service should admit of her stopping a t this place to take it in, i t will save
to the subscribers a very considerable expence, and the risque attending the
transportation of course would be less I t will be contained in forty five cases the whole weighing together about 15 tons,
the length of time necessary to take it on board would be about 3 or 4 days
w o k A list of the subscribers to this monument is too long for inclusion herewith but is printed in full

In Navy Department Archives, Master Commandants' Letter Book, 1696-1807. It indicates that them
were the following contributions: 8 officers $20. each, 84 at $10. and 49 at 8.00 each, totslling $1246.1

[NDA. MC LB, 1806-1807.1
To Master Commandant John H. Dent, U. 6. Bavy, U. S. Brig Horrid, from Second
Lieutenant Charles D. Coxe, U. 6. Marine Corps, acting as U. S. Char66
d'dffaires, Tunis
TUNISJanuatfl6Q 1807.
DEARSIR, I have to thank you for your favor of 18'h u l t ~dated at Malta, which
reached me on the 30t4 - H. Exc? Sidi Soliman Mellimelli & suite arriv'd here
on the 19Q Decr in the Ship !l'wo Brothers Capt. John Candler, about three m o n t h
from Boston & 17.days from Gibraltar with a Cargo consisting of Coffee, Coohineal, China, chocolate, furniture, Ginger, Logwood, Rum, pepper, Poligraphe k c .
with four Bress field pieces & their carriages complete; a part belonging to the said

498

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1806 TO 1807

Ambassador & a part to the U. States intended as a present to the Bey & his
Minister. I rec? a letter from the Depl of State (directed to Mr Dodge) dated 76b Augt,
referring to another recd from James L. Cathcart Esq. Agent for Govt in the S h i p
ment of said Cargo dated Boston 6tC Sept. enclosing Invoice, Bills of lading,
Charter-party &c. with Instructions to deliver the contents as presents from, &
in the name of the U. States to the Bey & his Minister the Sapatapa; - Doctor
Triplett who came passenger in this Ship on his way to Algiers as Physician to the
Dey, delivered me these letters - he is now with me & will await some favourable
opportunity of proceeding on his destination.
I have not rec? a single line from Mr Lear, since my nrrival here, nor have I been
able to get one to him. He ought to have been here before this period, having rec?
orders to that purpose from Govt; I am directed to dispatch a Courier (in case of
his not being here) to inform him of the necessity of his presence. By the information I recQfrom Docr Triplett, Capt. Campbell was to go to Algiers to convey him
hither, but from his long delay I fear he has no such intentions. - The Ship I wo
Brothers is now nearly discharged at the Gouletta, but I cannot dispatch her till
Mr Lear's arrival, aa it appears (likely) from the Charter party that she is to be
purchased by him of the Captain & presented to the Bey in lieu of the Brig Franklin, which was rejected by the Ambassador. - There is now a Demurrage of 35,
days @ $40. Pr day due to Captain Candler. I wrote to Mr Lear by a vessel that left this place ten days ago bound for Algiers;
unfortunately she has been forced back by headwinds & bad weather into the Bay
and driven on shore the day after her return. - I have now no other alternative
than to dispatch a Courier from hence to Bona & trust to chance for an opportunity
from thence to Algiers, for the existing state of warfare between that Regency &
this, renders it impossible to send one direct - I have in fact been endeavouring
to procure a Courier &B far as Bona since the day of the Ship's arrivalwithout effect,
it being a dangerous undertaking - one has to day however made an offer to go
for a large consideration, which I shall be constrain'd to give. The Bey, seems much pleased with his presents and continues to treat me with
the most cordial politeness; & from existing circumstances all appearance of
host,ility seems entirely to be done away. Capt. Candler had some letters to you with several to myself & some other 05cers of the Hornet, which he has left in the hands of Mr Gavino at Gibraltar.
I presume you have recd news by Mr Winn later from Washington than any I can
communicate. - Mr & MI? Tulin desire to be remember'd to you; they have
been very IGnd & attentive to me. I beg to be remember'd to the Gentlemen of the Wardroom & that you will
accept the assurance of the respect & Esteem with which I remain, Dear Sir, kc.
Ch* D. Coxe

-

P. S.

TUNISJan? 6'4 1807.
Dr SIR, I have found it impossible to dispose of a draft on Mr Lear - Bills on
Marseilles or Leghorn would meet with ready sale; but as I have no authority to
draw on either, I find myself totally at a loss what steps to take, unless I can borrow
to dischar e the rent of the house & several other smaller debts that ought to be
discharge$ but they in aggregate wQ amount to a larger Sum than any one would
be willing or perhaps able to accomodate me with - I have been obliged to borrow 1000, Tunisien pisstres of Mr Holck Danish Consul in addition to 1000,
borrowed of him before my arrival - all of which I shall appropriate to the use
of Captain Candler for necessary disbursements, taking his receipt for the same. [LC. Chas. D. Coxe LB, Ac. 2951, 1806-1809.1
To William Kirkpatrick, U. S. Consul, Malaga, Spain, from Second Lieutenant
Charles D. Coxe, U. S. Marine Corps, acting 8s U. S. Charge d'Affaires, Tunis
TUNIS January 6th 1807.
MY DEABSIB, Since my arrival here, I have not been so fortunate as to
meet with an opportunity of informing you of the Death of our late Charge d'
M a i m a t this place (the late Mr Dodge) whom I have been appointed to succeed.I arrived here on the l O I b ultq - on the 19th followin the american Ship Two
Brothers Capt. Candler, arrived, having on board H.
Sidi Soliman Meliimelli
late Ambassasor from thh Regency near the U. S. with a Car o consisting of
m e r e n t Articles, which I have re& direction to present to H.
the Bey from
& in the name of the U. States. -

8:

#.

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

499

The Ambassador has returned much pleased with his treatment & reception
in America - the Bey seems perfectly satisfied, & from existing circumstances
all appearances of hostility between the U. S. & this Regency are likely to be
entirely done away. - In a few days I will have an opportunity, via Barcelona,
of writing you - in the mean time I request you will present my respectful
remembrances to M* Kirkpatrick, & accept the assurances of the esteem & regard with which I remain (in haste) P. S. I rec* a letter from Capt-Dent afew days ago-the Hornet is at Syracwc[LC. Chas. D. Coxe LB, Ac. 2951, 1806-1809.1
To Daniel Dodge, New York, N. Y., brother of James Dodge, from Second Lieutenant
Charles D. Coxe, U. S. Marine Corps, acting as U. S. Charge d'dffaires, Tunis
TUNISJan? lOtP 1807.
DEARSIR, I t is with the most sincere grief & reluctance that in compliance
with my duty I am obliged to communicate to you the distressing information
of the death of your most worthy brother James Dodge Esq. late Charge D'Affairs
for the U. States a t this Regency. He was attacked with a violent cough &
spitting of blood on the 13th & departed this life the 224 October a t three o'clock
in the morning without the least struggle or pain. - He often spoke of his relations during his last illness with the warmest affection. I was not here a t the
time, but the Secretary to the Consulate Mr A m b ~Allegro attended him most
faithfully to the last & he was interred in the Protestant burial ground attended
by all the foreign Consuls &c. with every honor due him as an officer & Representative of his Country. - I am employed in making out his account Current
with the U. States, by which there is a ballance of $1000 & updr as due him: As this will take some time to accomplish, I fear I shall not be able to forward
it to you Pr this opportunity, but rest assured that every thing that depends on
me to enable you to get this money from Government, shall be done as soon as
possible. I am also making an Inventory of his Effects & wearing apparel which
shall be faithfully & regularly transmitted by first safe conveyance. [LC. Chas. D. Coxe LB, Ac. 2951, 18061809.1
To John Gavino, U. 6. Consul, Gibraltar, from Secretary of the Navy
NAVYDEPART.OF

UNITEDSTATES
10 January 1807.
Capt Davey of the Ship Minema will deliver to you a quantity of provisions
agreeably to Bill lading & Invoice which John Stricker Esqr will forward to you,
which provisions you w~llhold for the use of our publick Vessels of war in the
Mediterranean. The provisions must be landed from the M i n m a a t Gibraltar,
where you will retain them or send them aloft as future occasions may demand.
The freight of these provisions has been paid in this Country.
[NDA. GLB, Vol. 8, 1805-1807.1
THE

To Secretary of State from Charles D. Coxe, acting as U. S. Charge d'aaires,
Tunis
TUNIS Jan7 1lQ 1807.
SIR, I beg leave to refer you to my letter of 26tP ult. since which nothing has
occur'd of an extraordinary nature. - The Ship Two Brothers hse nearly finished discharging her cargo, which has necessarily roceeded very slowly owing
to the great distance of transporting i t from the ghip to the Town in kandal.
across the Lake, which is about nine miles. Ms Lear has not yet made his appearance here nor have I red a sin le ljpe
from him since the arrival of the Ambassador. - I m o t e him Pr a 6recmn
vessel on the 26tP ult? & have also with much di5culty & unavoidable delay,
dispatched a Courier to Bona, from whence I have taken measures to have a
coasting Sandal sent to Algiers. a communication direct from hence being totally
impracticable, & even that by Bona dangerous. I am now occupied in taking an Inventory of the property of the U. Staka
in the Consular house, & another of the effects belonging to the late Mr DodgeI will transmit you his ale with the U. States after it is revised by Mr Lear, together with the Inventory &c. [LC. Chss. D. Coxe LB, Ac. 2951, 1806-1809.1

500

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1806 TO 1807

To Captain William Bainbridge, U. S. Navy, from Nicholas C. Missen, Danish
Consul, Tripoli
THE LAZARETTO
SP ROCKAT LEGHORN
January 13Q 1807.
DEARSIR, At my arrival a t Leghorn I found a dispatch from His Majest '8
Department for Barbary Affairs including the letter dated Gibralter July 2ftb
1805, which was sent by you to His Majesty's Minister a t London accompanied
by a Silver Urn as a present to me from you and Officers of the US late Frigate
Philadelphia.
Accept yourself Dear Sir my most sincere acknowledgments and please in my
name t o thank the Officers, for this distinguished mark of your and their friendship. I know nothing that could have given me a greater pleasure than this
present; not for the Nominal Value; the materials were indifferent to me, I dont
doubt but that you are persuaded thereof; But I co~siderit as a constant recollection
of friends I respect, who probably never again all will meet together with me a t
one place or a t one time, and who collectively have given me this pledge of their
friendship, as a remembrance; and so it shall be to me. I can only repeat here what I often as well verbally as in writing have declared;
that you and Officers have overvalued the few services I have so happy to render
you during your captivity a t Tripoli, and for which I have been fully paid by
the satisfaction my endeavours to serve you always gave me; but the very limited
power I had was the cause that I could not follow in every circumstance the
dictates of my heart or my desires in this respect.
Finding a t Leghorn Capt? D Porter I have thought it incumbent upon me to
avail myself of the opportunity to deliver this letter to him, he will transmit
i t to you, and a t the same time he has accepted my verbal thanks for his share in
the above mentioned present as one of those friends whose recollection shall be
dear to me and whose constant health and happiness my invariable wish. With these sentiments and with the greatest respect I have the honor to remain
(Signed) N NIBBEN,
[LC. D. Porter P, Let. & Ord., 1805-1808.1

-

To President Thomas Jefferson from Secretary of the Navy
NAVYDEPARTMENT
19 Jan7 1807.
The President of the United States. By the act of Congress passed the 21st April 1806 it is provided, that the
whole number of able seamen, ordinary Seamen, and Boys, to be employed
in the Navy shall not exceed--- - - - . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
- - - - 925
We have a t this time in actual service about,. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
700
The Chesapeuke requires- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 292
The W a s p - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -120

- --- -

Exceeding the limited number--

-- - - . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

---

-

1112
- - 187
1112
-

You will hence perceive the impracticability of sending to the Mediterranean
as has been proposed the Chesapeake and Wasp, for the pu ose of relieving the
frigate and the schooner Enterprize now on that station.
may besides from
the letter of Cap, Shaw dated 29th November 1806 presume that he has entered
400 additional seamen in order that he might be the better enabled to aid in
defending the city of New-orleans against an apprehended attack. The terms of service of the crews of the frigate Constitution and the Schooner
Enterprize now in the Mediterranean will expire in the month of April next.
[NDA. Nom. & Appts., 1798-1820.1

tfPe

6

To Captain James Barron, U. S. Navy, Hampton, Va., from Secretary of the Navy
N a n D E P 17
~ January I807
You will make all necessary arrangements with respect to the Gun boats which
ou have been superintending and repair to this pbce prepared for actual service.
ou are ta have the command of the frigate C b a p m k e , & to proceed with her

5.

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS
to the Mediterranean: the Wasp is also fitting for the same service, to relieve
the frigate Constitution t schr Enterprize.
[NDA. OSW, Vol. 7, 1805-1807.1
To Secretary of the Navy from Captain Hugh G. Campbell, U. S. Navy
U. S. SHIP Coorstitution
Tunis Bay Janr 26* 1807
SIR, Agreeable to my last advice from Gibraltar Decr the 20% I left that place
on the 22QQ for algiers, where I arrived on the 29th and waited for our Consul
General until1 the 4th Instt with whom I sailed and anchor'd on the night of the
lltb near the Goletta of Tunis; a t day break sent a boat on shore with a letter
t o the Consulate and observed an American Ship laying within the Mole head,
by the return of the boat I was inform'd that the Ambassador had arrived about
eighteen days before us in the ship above mentioned; and that Lieutt Cox of
Marines had been left a t Tunis by Captain Dent, as charged with our affairs
in place of Doctor Dodge, whose dissolution took place in October last; about
two OClock Lieutt Cox and Doctor Tripplett came on board, passed the night
and left the Ship next morning with Colonel Lear; since that period I have been
a t anchor waiting the result of Colonel Lears mission, which he informs me is
likely to have a favorable termination for our Country, likewise that the Presents
are accepted without further explanations of consequence from our Government,
yet will require a few days to compleat the whole, and insure Peace for perhaps
a few years;
The Ambassado has no limits to his encomiums on the People and Country
of the United States; indeed if we were to judge from exteriors, which by the bye
I a m not disposed io do, the conclusion would readily be that their greatest desire
is friendship in its present shape with the United States; Their conduct towards
us a t Algiers was similar to the present; and I am happy to inform you that a
similar conduct prevails from Tripoli to Mogadore;
On my way from Gibraltar to Algiers I fell in with the Ship Betsy of Plymouth,
from Leghorn, bound to New York by which Vessel I received a letter from C a p t ~
Porter dated Leghorn December the 314informing me of a serious disaster that
had happened to the Enterprize, in the mole of that place, by a large Imperial
Vessel that broke from her moorings, and drifted on board the Schooner and
stove in her larboard side down to the bends; by which Vessel I had the honor to
address you and enclose for your perusal a copy of Captain Porter's letter on that
subject; I presume ere this, Captain Porter has left Leghorn, Captain Dent left this place
the 10th of December and on the 18th he was a t Malta, intending for Syracuse
to arrange the business of the Store Ships,
The Tunisian Army haa marched to meet that of Algiers, since our arrival here;
so has the Algerine Squadron appear'd on this Coast about the 15'h Inst,, and
captured a Danish Vessel from this to Leghorn, having on board the Danish
Consul of Tunis; on board of which Vessel the algerines ut twenty men who
with the Vessel were forc'd into this Bay, by a strong &rthwardly gale; and
run on shore between Cape Carthage
- and Port Ferrino, consequently the Algerines
made slaves;
The Danish Consul was left on board the captur'd Vessel whose only chance
of leaving this Country, was by that conveyance, the Algerines being determined
to carry in for adjudication, all Vessels from Tunis having cargoes on board;
In consequence of which Mr Holt [Holck] the Danish Consul has requested of me
to take him on board and land him a t any Port or place from whence he might
rocure a passage to Leghorn, where his Wife and family ale waiting his arrival;
personal knowledge of that Gentleman would be a sufficient inducement for
me to grant his request, if pubLick reasons did not make it doubly so; ryld hope i t
will meet your approbation
It is currently reported and generally believ'd that France has declared War
against Algiers
[NDA. Captain's LB, Vol. 1, 1807.1

-

Ly

-

To Secretary of the Navy from Captain Hugh G. Campbell, U. S. Navy
U S. SHIP Constitution
Tunis Bay Jan? 26'4 1807
SIR, The great deficiency of Surgeons and Medical aid in the Squadron compels
me to make you acquainted with our present unfavorable situation, m c e the

502

NAVAI, OPERATIONS FROM 1806 TO 1807

death of Doctor Sims, who unfortunately was but of little use the la& ten months
of his life; Doctor M~Alisterhas been our only dependance, although incapable
of exerting himself since November last, and is a t this moment much worse than
he has hitherto been, which leaves us without any person capable of performing
any Surgical operation where the least judgement is required, while near thirty
of our Crew are confined with different diseases, without any person to give them
common attention, except a loblolly-boy who has acquired some skill and judgement in drawing of teeth and applying the Launcet to a well filled Vein, add to
this by last accounts from Doctor Heap, he lay dangerously ill a t Messina, without
a prospect of recovering, which render'd i t necessary to furnish the Enterprize
with a Surgeons Mate from the Hornett:
I n fact this Ships crew are suffering for want of proper assistance which will
oblige me to employ temporary aid, if such can be found, untill your pleasure is
known; indeed the Crisis has become alarming which obliges me to leave Colonel
Lear here for a few days, untill I can run over to Malta or Syracuse for such
assistance as is absolutely necessary. NB. The left arm of Doctor MpAlester is rendered useless by the Rheumatism
[NDA. Captain's LB, Vol. 1,'1807.]
To Captain Hugh G. Campbell, U. 6. Navy, commanding U. S. Frigate CohctiNion.
from Tobias Lear, U. S. Consul General, Algiers
TUNIS,January 26'4 1807
5 past 10 A. M.DEARSIR, Mr Coxe has this moment arrived, and handed me your letter of
yesterday, mentioning your intention of proceeding to Malta for the purpose
of making some necessary arrangements in the Medical department of your ship,
and to get a supply of water $9
Our business stands so far arranged that two or three days more would be
sufficient for me to complete every thing, and embark with you, when you could
roceed to Malta, or to the westward, as circumstances might lead you to decide. ou know my anxiety, as well as the duty incumbent upon me to return to
Algiers as soon as possible; but you must judge of the necessity and expediency
of departing immediately on account the circumstances mentioned in your Letter;
and I shall not say any thing which could alter your arrangements for my personal accomodation. Mr Coxe's great desire of remaining here has been strongly expressed to me,
and I have with truth assured him that I considered his talents and abilities
to manage our affairs fully adequate to any thing he would probably meet with
here; and had not Dr Triplett been sent out with the idea expressed by the
Secretary of State, that besisides his agency as Phisician, he might be found
useful in our affairs in this quarter, I should not have hesitated a moment about
his, (Mr. Coxe's) remaining here untill the pleasure of the President could be
known; but from the letters which Dr Triplett brought me, I doubt weather I
should fulfill my duty and comply with the wishes of Government did I not offer
to him the Residence here until ordered otherwise. - I had however, made no
decision.
I dis atch this letter to the Goletta by land, and i t will be put into the hands
of Ml Eandler, Mate of the ship Two Brothera, to forward on board, if your boat
ehould not be on shore; and he will be requested to send by land, immediately,
an letter which may come from you, if it should be necessary. h e Consuls as well as myself regret very much that we could not have the
pleaeure of seeing you on shore.
I hope to hear from you tomorrow. - James
behaves very well, and send his respects to you.He is much pleased with
being on shore in this bad weather. [Stephen Decatur Col. Book B, 1806-1807.1

%

-

Extract from log of U. 8. Brig Homef, of 18 Guns, Maeter Commandant John H.
Dent, U. 8. Havy, commanding, 3 February 1807
A t 112 past 121 saw a large Ship to windward tack'd to the S: E. a t 112
paet 3 tack'd to the N W. and made the private signal bore away and spoke
the U: S: Frigate Comtitution. A t 4 got the Anchors ofi the Bows. a t 112 past

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS
6 came to an Anchor in Syracuse in company with the Constitution At 8 A M
calm and cloudy. - a t noon light airs from the S: E. with rain
[NOTE.-From 31 August 1808 to 3 February 1807 the Homct's log m r d s routine cruising and calls at
Malm, 8
Tunk and other ports. Nothing of a sufnciently unusual nature to warrant copying Is
reeord6d.v

[NA. NDA original, 180&1810.]
To Secretary of the Navy from William Biggins, U. S. Navy Agent, Malta
SIR, I have the honour of informing you of the safe arrival of the Spartan,
Store Ship Capt? Kelly, a t this place on the 1 1 t h Ins* having been sent me from
Gibraltar by order of Mr Gavino, & by which I have your favour of the 5 Decr
Ult.

As the Commerce which went to Syracuse, has discharged her cargo there, I
intend doing the same by the Spartan at this place, Noting the frieght is paid
in America,
P S. I expected to have had the pleasure of hearing from you on money matters.
[NDA. Miec. Letters, Vol. 1, 1807.1
To Secretary of the Navy from Captain Bugh 6.Campbell, U. S. Navy
U. S SHIPConstitution
Harbour of Syracuse 16tb F e h 1807.
SIR, The British have garrison'd Syracuse and all the principal porta in Sicily,
which renders our Situation a t the former place not so convenient as i t has been,
they claiming an equal share of accomodation with us and probably more, The
British flag is not yet hoisted on the fortifications of Sicily but it is expected they
soon will be, in fact the British or French will have the Island, and in whosoever
power i t falls, Cagliari must follow the Example, which u3l ultimately leave ua
beholden to one or the other, for a rendezvous in these Seas against the Barbary
Powers; - Mr Drummond the British Minister a t Palermo ha9 left that place
in consequence of a misunderstanding between him and the Sicilian Court; and
arrived a t Messina about four days since;
Admiral Duckworth has gone to Constantinople with ten sail of the Line join'd
by six Russian from Corfu making Sixteen sail of the Line, accompanied by all
the large Bomb Vessels that were employ'd against Boulounge he must now be
near the scene of action;
An Expedition of Troops is likewise fitting out a t Messina, conjecture says
they are to follow Admiral Duckworth;
[NDA. Captain's LB, Vol. 1, 1807.1
To Master Commandant John B. Dent, U. S. Navy, U. S. Brig Hwnd, from Captain
Hugh G. Campbell, U. 6. Navy
U. S. SHIPConstitution
Syacuse Harbour 164 Febv 1807.
SIR, The United States Brig Hornett under your Commend being ready for Sea,
I have to desire that you proceed with all possible dispatch to Palermo, and call
on Mr Abraham Gibbs who will deliver to you a bill of Exchange on Grant Webb
& CQof Leghorn which you will be pleaeed to present for payment on your arrival
a t that place, receive the ammount in cash and bring the same to Syracuse, subject
to my order; A good bill on Palermo or Messina, will probably be the most convenient way of doing the business; bearing in mind that Government m7n.ill not
submit to a loss in the Business, but should the bill be negotiated a t Palermo, you
are then to furnish Mr Gibbs with the second of Exchange which is here enclosed;
As the standing rigging of the Hornet requires refitting and her Bowsprit so far
without the knight heads aa to render it dangerous, you are desired to remedy
those defects while a t Leghorn, taking care not to make the Bowsprit shorter
without the knight heads than the extreme breadth of the Hornet, and when you
have compleated her outfitts (which I presume will not require more than eighteen or twenty days) i t is my order that you receive on board Mr Davis with his
family, and convey them to Syracuse, where you will find the Constilution or
farther orders; Should Mr Davis not be ready to embark when you are ready

504

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1806 TO 1807

for sea, nor a prospect of his being so, in less than six or seven days, you are in
that case to proceed without him for this lace,
I herein enclose you an order on Messr*3begen Purviance & CPfor ten thousand
dollars which you will receive in Specie, and hold the same to my order;
(COPY)
[NDA. Captain's LB, Vol. 1, 1807.1
To George Davis, appointed U. S. Consul, Tripoli, from Captain Hugh G. Campbell,
U. 6. Navy
(Extract)

UNITEDSTATESSHIPConstitution,

Harbor of Syracuse Fe& 16. 1807.

DEARSIR.Presuming that you will be ready to embark with Cap* Dent I have
ordered him to receive you on board when ready for sea and convey you to this
place or Malta where I romise myself the pleasure of seeing you prior to your
going to Tripoli. Cap$ g e n t has orders not to wait longer than sir or seven days,
in consequence of his services being wanted in another quarter, that time I hope
will be sufficient for your accomodation.
[NA. SDA. CL, Tripoli, Vol. 3, 1806-1811.1
To Master Commandant David Porter, U. S. Navy, U. S. Schooner Eninprize, from
Captain Hugh G. Campbell, U. 8. Navy
US. SHIP Constitution
Syracuse 161h Feb: 1807. SIR, When the US Sc: Enterprizeunder your command is ready for sea I have to
desire that you proceed to Tunis Bay, where if you do not find the Constitution,
you must not Anchor but proceed for Algiers with all possible dispatch where further orders will await you. [LC. D. Porter P, Let. & Ord., 1805-1808.1
Extract from log of U.S. Brig Hornd of 18 Guns, Master Commandant John E.Dent,
U. 6. Navy, commanding, 16 February 1807
Commences Calm, a t 5 P. M. in 24 Cutter middle part moderate breezes
from the N4 a t 6 A M. hove short. a t past 7. got underweigh, in purchasin
the Anchor carried away the Messenger, one man hurt. got the Viol on it an8
Pendant full. on the Buoy rope, still the strain wm so great as to nearly part
the Cable, before the Anchor broke its hold, - At 8 sailed out of the Harbor
[Syracuse] with the wind a t north a t 9 stowed the Anchors - At % past 9 the
Constitution came out. At Meridian set lower, topmast, and top gallant Studsaib and went by the Constitution with ease, though she had more sail set. Cape
Moro D. Pork bore N N E. - 4 leagues - Survey'd the larboard Cable and
condemned 9 fathoms
[NA. NDA original, 1805-1810.1
To Secretary of the Navy from Captain Hugh G. Campbell, U. S. Navy
U S. SHIP CONSTITUTION
At Sea 1714 Feb? 1807
SIR, You will observe in Captain Dents orders that I have drawn on Degen
Purviance & Cq for ten thousand dollars on account of the Squadron, out of the
deposit recently made by you, with them for that purpose; my reason for so
doing proceeds from the demand of Mr Higgins and Mr Dysen against the En&prize amounting to near six thousand dollars exclusive of the expence that has
attended the Boats procured in the Adriatic, which will amount to about two
thousand dollars more, all of which I should have paid out of the money brought
up from Gibraltar, that I advised you of in my dispatches from that place Decr
2014 but unfortunately prior to my arrival, the Governor of Malta and Military
Commander of the British forces in the Mediterranean issued a proclamation
wherein they order that Doubloons should not pass for more than fifteen and
one half dollars; which prevents me from
them in large sums; however

505

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

there can be no loss on them as they will always pase current in Gibraltar and
Spain;
On my arrival a t Syracuse I found that the Hospital had been given for use of
the British Troops on condition that i t should be restored when demanded, in
consequence of which and not having occasion for it, I have order'd some of the
articles to be sold, that will never be fit for use again, likewise a considerable
quantity of salt fish that was purchased by Commodore Rodgers, that I found
in store in bad condition, particulars you shall be inform'd of in my next; and
if I thought myself authorized I certainly would dispose of the two Gun boats
and those ungainly Vessels that were procured up the Adriatic, i t being probable
that they never will be of future Consequence to us;
[NDA. Captain's LB, Vol. 1, 1807.1

-

To John Bullus, appointed U. S. Navy Agent in the Pediterranean, from Secretary
of the Msvy
NAVYDEPAR~
18 Feb~1807.
You will herewith receive an appointment as Navy Agent for our publick
Ships stationed in the Mediterranean.
It is intended that there shall not, if it can be avoided, be more than one place
of Deposit in the Mediterranean, for all necessary Supplies - & our present intention is that Port Mahon in the Island of Minorca shall be that place of Deposit. But if any circumstances should arise to render it inexpedient in the opinion
of the Commanding Officer of our Squadron in the Mediterranean on his arrival
there or afterwards, to deposit the Supplies of the Squadron at Port Mahon, he
will select such other place as in his opinion will be more suitable - Your residence must therefore be, wherever the place of Deposit may be and your general
duties will be to procure all supplies wanted for our vesst?ls, & safely to keep all
supplies sent from this Country, or elsewhere & to k u e all necessary suppliee
upon the requisitions of the respective Commanding Officers. as occasions may
arise, you will receive further instructions from this department. The Accountant of the Navy will furnish you with all necessry instructions in relation to
accounts.
With respect to the manner of procuring money to procure supplies, I shall
before your Departure from this Country give you particular instructions.
Your allowances will be as follows, that is to say
For your responsibility and trouble in receiving taking care of & issuing out
Supplies, you will be allowed an annual Salary of 1200$ & you will also be allowed
the Sum of $800 in lieu of Clerk hire. Two porters, if you should find two necessary, a t not exceeding 30$ each p: month - store rent & all expences of transportation, drayage, cartage &c of such supplies.
For all purchases of supplies wanted for our Ships you will be allowed 5 p
Cent upon the amount of each Purchases.
On all sales of publick property by you you will be allowed a Commission of
2% per Cent
On all publick moneys received by you and paid over by you to officers of the
Navy for wages, recruiting, & the like Services, you will be allowed a Commission
of 1 pr Cent.
[NDA. GLB, Vol. 8, 1805-1807.1
To Secretary of the Navy from Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Navy
PORTLANDfeb? 18* 1807
SIR I am h o d with your letter of the 7 Inst and conformable to your direction
shall proceed to answer the questions therein proposed -The act; Lieut on Board the respective vessels under my Command, exclusive
of those appointed by me were L* J. Lawrence, Joseph Beinbridge of the Enterprize, Lt Van Schaick of the Atgus, L( Maxwell of the S ten, Lt Trip, & Crane
of YP Vixen & Lt Thorn of the Entetprire Mr Thorn ha{ been act; L t without
warrant for some time previous to my arrival in the Meds but rec? a written
warrant from me Novr 7. 1803 - I believe those officers took rank agreable
to the date of their Actc L* warrants, I subjoin a list of the Lieu* appointed by
me, with the date of their appointment, and who took rank from that time without
regard to their Midshipman Warrants excepting where they were appointed L*
on the same day then the date of the warrant as Midshipmen governd

-

506

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1806 TO 1807

If any instances of dissatisfaction arose in consequence of Junior Midshipmen
being appointed L* previous to their seniors in original appointment they did
not come to my knowledge
Jonathan Thorn
appointed Acts Lt
Henry Wadsworth DP
Apl 17. 18&
Ralph Izard
DQ
Ap! 17. 1804
Chatles Morris DQ
Aug 8. 1804
Aue. 19. 1804
Charles L Ridgley
DQ
Josevh Israel
DQ
~ h M~Donough
4
DP
~ e $ 6. 1804
Danl S Dexter
DQ
Sep 12. 1804
DQ
John M Haswell
Octr 27. 1804
Geo. Marcellin
DQ
Octr 27. 1804
[LC. EPP, Vol. 19, 1806-1807.1

-

[19February 18071
To the Bey of Tunis from Tobias b a r , U. 6. Consul General, Algiers
TOBIASLEAR,
Conszll General, and Agent of the United Stales of America, jot the Regm-ea
of Bar bary. To. His Excellency HAMUDA
BASSA
The Most Illustrious and Most Magnificent Prince, the Bey of Tunis, the Abode
of Happiness. MAYIT PLEASE YOUREXCELLENCY.
-Referring to the letter which your
Excellency's Ambassador, Sidi Soliman Melimelli, had the honor of delivering
to your Excellency from my Mmter the President of the United States of America; and to what has passed in the interviews which I had the honor of holding
with your Excellency on my first arrival here, as well ae since with your Excellency's Prime Minister Sidi Jossuf, Hoggia, Guards Sigilli, I earnestly hope that
the desire of my Nation to continue in harmony and friendship with your Excellency, is fully Manifested; and that I shall have the honor of communicating to
the President my Master the good disposition of Your Excellency towards our
Nation, by giving renewed assurances, that we are to expect a continuance of
that friendship, which has heretofore existed, according to our Treaty, with Your
Excellency; and t h s t our Commercial intercourse with Your Excellency's dominions will receive every facility and security which is experienced by those Nations
with whom your Excellency is in habits of Friendship. I also flatter myself that your Excellency will honor me with a letter to the
President, my Master, to be conveyed to the United States, by a vessel which
will shortly sail for that pert. I pray God may have your Excellency in his Holy Keeping - and preserve
your life for many years. Accept the Assurances of my highest respect and most perfect Consideration
TOBIASLEAR.
Turns February 19th 1807. [NA. SDA. CL, Algiers, Vol. 7, Part 11, Jan. 1806-Sept. 1807.1

-

Extract from log of U,S. Brig H o d , of 18 Guns, Master Commandant John H. Dent,
U. 6. Navy, commanding, 19 February 1807
The whole of these 24 hours strong gales from the S. W. with dark gloomy
weather At past 1 took the 34 reef in the Topsails and struck Top gallant yards. At 2 Tack'd to the westward
At Sunset Cape Gallo. bore West. Cape Pellegrino S W B W. the eastern
cape of the Bay. S B W. and the City of Palermo. S W j4 W. distant 6 leagues At 7 set the Jib a t 8. tackld to the E4 Continued working into the Bay until
]M paat 2. when we came too in 3 fsl water and veered out 80 fv Cable. the light
house bore W B N. dist 2 miles - 2 line of battle Ships, 1 frigate and 1 Sloop of
War. british lying in the Bay and one Neapolitan Frigate - At 8 A M bent
the Sheet Cable. - At 9 A M out 2-4 Cutter. Ends fresh breezes from S. W.
with emall rain [Sailed again 20 February.]
[NA. NDA original, 1805-1810.1

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

507

To John Ridgely, U. 6. Charge diAffsjres, Tripoli, from Charles D. Coxe, U. S.
Charg6 dlAffaires, Tunis
TUNIS Febr? 90. 1807.
Dr SIR, I had the pleasure t o receive your letter of 218; ultv three days ago,
for which I thank you. - The Tunisian Ambassador arrived here on 19"P Decr
in the American Ship TWO
Brother's Capt. Candler from Boston, with a present
from the U. States to the Bey. I n this Vessel came Doctor Triplet as passenger
on his way t o Algiers as Physician to the Dey. The Constitution Frigate Capt Campbell arrived here from Algiers on the 13tb
u l t ~with Col: Lear on board who came in consequence of the arrival of the Ambassador with orders from Government, & with a view finally to arrange & settle
our existing differences with this Regency - They are now happily terminated
on grounds honorable & advantageous to our Country - He has confirm'd my
appointment here & will depart with the Frigate in three or four days a t farthest. - I have no news worth communicating but by The Hornet I have no
doubt you will receive a large Budget. - Be good enough to let me hear from
you pr return of the Courier
[LC. Chas. D. Coxe LB, Ac. 2951, 1806-1809.1
[20 February 1807)
To Captain Edward Preble, U. 6. Navy, from WiIliam Eaton
Burr is taken! He surrendered his whole party, a t Bayou Piere, about the 20LS
ult to a detachment of militia commanded by a hlsjor Claibourne, and is given into
the hands of the civil Authority - B. accuses Gen. W
with deep duplicity
and dark frauds - I expect a developement of this conspiracy will expose to view,
if not to conviction, a great deal of iniquity The Decree of the Emperor and King, which blockades every thing English,
excited a momentary alarm here - Some of our old war horses began t o snuff %he
wind? But every thing is neutralized by Aunt Armstrong's explanation, that the
Emperor & King did not mean US.
While the Potomac
open Congress were employed in projecting facilities to
get from the Capitol to Gadsby's tavern - as soon as the river was closed and the
ice would bear a footman this subject was postponed - They have since been
occupied in devising prohibitions and penalties t o prevent white skins from importin black ones - This has ended in darkness %he capitulation of the combined forces of the Emperor Aaron and the Marquis
of the red house has superceded the necessity of fleets and armies - You will
therefore have leisure t o finish your house and I to build a barrack The Barrons have been a t moorings here about a fortnight; but they are anchored
so far, off in the stream, that they are out of speaking distance - A friend of the
elder Barron called the other day and requested me to sign a certificate, which he
produced, purporting that in my letter of 91%Aug. 1805 to the Sec. of the Navy
I did not mean to derrogate from his character of a Gentleman and a soldier - I
could not prevail on myself to sign any thing which savored of concession - He
ta[l]ked of disagreeable consequences. I assured him that a hint st coercing me
would put even explanation out of view He declared this not to be his intention - But said the Commodore felt himself implicated before the publc in a delinquency of duty, and requested I would
remove the impression as his feelings were much wounded - I had no objection
t o say, that it was not my intention, in that letter, to inculpate Barron, but Lear;
but this I would declare in a letter to him, not in a certi£icate. I wil1 show you our
correspondence when we meet - My appeal is t o the Lo b o o b of the squadron
for the truth of my statements concerning the late ~omrnot%re- I doubt whether
he will meet me on that ground - And am not very apprehensive of his making
war against me by way of healing his wounded feelings
I never felt unfriendly
to Corn? Barron - On the contrary I think him a man of an amiable disposition that's all1

-

I have rec? but one note from you since my arrival here - And shall leave the
city before an exchange of this can reach - I request you will write me st N
York - Where, if I can be useful to you, beg you will command me.
The Committee of Claims reported a bill in favor yesterday
I believe i t will
go throu h both houses without opposition
If so I s h d l recover, at least 8 or 10
t h o ~ s a n d d o b m A trifling sun, indeed if a t sea: but inland, as I am,i t will be
useful t o me
Xf I meet with no disappointment I will positively offer you my my

-

-

-

-

508

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1806 TO 1807

respects a t your seat in Portland in all next summer - How does our Midshipman,
Danielson, merit your consideration?
WASH.CIT. Feb. %O* 1807
[LC. EPP, Vol. 19, 1806-1807.1
Extract from log of U. I.Brig Hornet, of 18 Guns, Master Commandant John H.
Dent, U. S. Navy, commanding, 25 February 1807
The whole of these 24 hours light airs from the Eastward a t $,? past 3 P M came
too in the Bay of Naples in 19 fm water, veered out 50 f m Cable. the light house
bore N W. distant 2 or 3 miles
Mount Vesuvius E. S. E. and the Barracks
N E. B E. - a t 4 obtained Prattique a t sunset struck top gallant yards At 5 past 7. a Turk swam on board from the Shore deserter from a french Brig
of War. confined by the Captain a t past 9 hove up and towed into the Mole.
a t 10 landed the Powder by order of the French King. At Meridian let go the
Anchor in the mouth of the Mole t o wait permission to enter. 10 or 12 American
Merchant Ships lying in the Mole.
[NA. NDA. original, 1805-1810.1

-

[27 February 18071
To President Thomas Jefferson from Hamuda, Bey of Tunis
[Translation]

HAMUDA
BASHAWBEY,
Prince of Princes of Tunis the Well Guarded City, the Abode of Felicity
T o the Most Illustrious Mr. THOMAS
JEFFERSON
President of the Cnited States of America.
MY GREATAND GOODFRIEND- My Ambassador Soliman Melemelli, who
reached here in safety in the middle of the month of December 1806 last, on his
return from your happy and prosperous States, delivered to me faithfully your
ever welcome and responsive letter of the twentieth of June last, entrusted to his
care and diligence.
Shortly thereafter, that is on the 12th of January, the most worthy and always
estimable Mr. Tobias Lear, your agent and Consul General on the Southern Coast
of the Mediterranean, likewise arrived from Algiers.
Thanks to his reasonableness and his tact, a few conferences have sufficed to
explain the misunderstandin s mutually existing between us, and to consolidate
the good amity and good un8erstanding which I am equally desirous with you to
cultivate and to maintain undisturbed between the two Nations.
Referring in consequence to what your Consul General aforesaid will have to communicate to you on the matter, I shall limit myself to transmitting to you directly
my solemn assurance that henceforward as heretofore, our previous treaty will
serve as a law t o be fulfilled, that commerce and communication between our
nations will be cultivated, and that all our relations will be founded on principles
of entire and perfect reciprocity.
The kindnesses and polite reception which you have deigned to show and confer
upon My Ambassador Melemelli aforesaid merit my most sincere thanks, as also
the gracious marks of your Friendship which you sent with him for me which I
shall esteem an honor to preserve as a most courteous remembrance of kou.
And finally, offering prayers for your prosperity, I wish you from Heaven, my
Great and Good Friend, the most complete felicity.
At the Palace of my Residence of the Bardo, the 19th of the Moon Aggi, A.H. 1221,
and the 27th of February 1807 A.D.
HAMUDA
BASHAW
BEY
oj Tunis
(SEAL)
[NA. SDA. CD, Algiers, Vol. 7, Pt. 11, January 180643eptember 29, 1807.1
To Secretary of the Ravy from Captain Hugh G. Campbell, U. 6. Navy
U. S. SHIP Cunstitution
Tunis Bay [%7 February 1807?]
SIR,I arrived here on the 18's Ultq from Syracuse and on the 24'4 received
information from Colonel Lear, that our affairs with this Regenc would be
amicably and honorably adjusted in two or three days which inducezme t o visit

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS
Tunis on the 264 for the purpose of paying my respects to the Bey, and called
a t Bardo on the morning of the following day, accompanied by Colonel Lear,
Mr Cox, and several of our Officers, he received us in his hall of Justice, with
much apparent satisfaction, took coffee, and withdrew after passing the usual
compliments, On the 6* Instt our business being finally closed we called a t
Bsrdo and took leave of the Bey, he received us in his Hall of Justice and after
the usual ceremonies, he gave us a cordial shake of the hand accompanied with
his best wishes for our health and happiness - during my stay on shore the Bey
requested as a favor that Melli Melli might be landed in some port of Spain,
where he was going on business of importance for the Bey to which I readily
consented and have order'd Captain Porter to receive him on board and land
him a t Gibraltar, t o which place I have order'd the Enterprize for the purpose
of carrying dispatches from Colonel Lear and myself. - then to collect all the
news possible and return to Syracuse by way of Algiers
[NDA. Captain's LB, Vol. 1, 1807.1
To John Bidgely, U. S. Charge d'bffaires, Tripoli, from Tobias Lear, U. S. Consul
General, Algiers
Circular
TUNIS 1.t March 1807 SIR, I have the honor and satisfaction to inform you, that the differences
which existed between the United States of America, and the Regency of Tunis,
and which, on the departure of the Tunisian Ambassador from the U. States,
threatened to terminate in a Rupture between the two Nations; are now happily
and honorably settled; And the Commercial intercourse between the Citizens
of the U. States and this Regency, may be carried on with as much security and
advantage, as that of any other Nation with whom the Bey is in friendship And the several consuls of the U. States in the Mediterranean, and to William
Jarvis Esq Consul a t Lisbon, and Joseph Iznadi Esq Consul a t Cadiz [NA. SDA. CL, Algiers, Vol. 7, Part 11, Jan. 1806-Sept. 1807.1
13 March 18071
Act pertaining to the U. S. Navy
UNITED STATES STATUTES A T LARGE.

NINTH CONGRESS.

SESS. I1

An Act i n addition to an act intituled "An act i n addition to an act entitded A n act
supplementary to the act providing jor a nwal peace establishment, and for
other purposes."
Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United States of
America i n Congress assembled, That the President of the United States be, and
he is hereby authorized, in addition to the present naval peace establishment, to
employ a number of able seamen, ordinary seamen and boys, not exceeding five
hundred, should the exigency of the public service require the same.
APPROVED,
March 5, 1807.
[See Act of 21 April 1806.1
[Statutes Vol. 11, p. 443.1

To Master Commandant John H. Dent, U. 5. Navy, U. S. Brig Hornd, from Charles
D. Coxe, U. 6. Charg6 d'Affaires, Tunis
TUNIS
AMERICAN
CONSULATE
34 March 1807.
Dr SIR, I wrote you very fully under date of 5tP January via Palermo of which
you make no mention in yours of 13*bfeb? which I had the pleasure to receive by
Capt. Campbell, consequently I must conclude it has not yet come to hand. The Constitution after leaving Mr Lear & his Secretary a t Tunis proceeded to
Malta & Syracuse, & Capt;. Campbell I have no doubt hrrs communicated all the
particulars within his knowledge with respect to the situation of our affain here.
Doctor Triplett came in the same vessel with the Tunisian ambaasador on his
way to Algiers as Physician to the Dey, - He brought letters to Mr Lear from
the Sec: of State, & from some expression contained in them, Mr Lear concluded
he ought to leave the Doctor here as Char& D1&aires, & about three weeks ago

-

510

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1806 TO 1807

he took him to Bardo to introduce him to the Bey as such. & invited me to accomThe Bey asked why I was removed & said he had calculated on
pany them.
my stayin that I had been left by you & accepted by him. M? Lear said I wes
an otEcer &tined for another service, - it was true. I had been left by you but
that you were not the Commodore. The Bey replied that he must refer him to
When the minister
his Minister who had received his orders on the Subject.
was ready to receive us, we were desired to come to his audience Chamber &
requested to sit down.
The Minister began through his enterpreter by
declaring that Bey his master had order'd him to say that he (Mr Lear) would by
this step be allways ehanging the consuls & charge d'affairs That they did not
like to be allways seeing new faces, that I had been sent by you & accepted by
them; that my peaceable deportment since my arrival, had given them a favorable
opinion of me & t h a t they w-ish'd me to remain. - As for the Doctor he declared
they could not receive him as the ambassador had informed them he was appointed
to Algiers, & that the Bey of Tunis would not receive the Physician of the Dey
of Algiers as a Consul or Charg6 D'affaires to reside in his Dominions. Mr Lear
made the same remarks with respect t o you & myself as he had done to the Bey. The Sapatapa remark4 if I was destined for another service,the Doctorwas aL9o.
Mr L. declared he had nothin against me, but on the contrary approved of my
character & abilities; that he dgid not want to force on them any one who was diseable to them - that he would consider on the subject & consult with the
ommodore on his return from Malta to this place; & we took our leave.
This turn of the sffair surpriz'd me not a little; as i t was quite unexpected, & I had
all packd up for my departure. - A few days after this Col: Lear informed me
that he had attempted to get the Doctor acknowledged without successThat
he thought i t his duty to go thus far in consequence of his letters from the Secretary
of State, but that he was now free to make choice of me, & gave me the appointment & my instructions accordingly, with the permission of the Commodore, which
I not only obtain'd, but his recommendation also previously to his departure Your having sent me was looked on as a sufficient proof of yours On the 18thinstant The Frigate return* having the Enterprize in Company, &
Captains Campbell & Porter with as many officers as can be spared from on board
are now a t the Consular house with the band.
The day before yesterday we
gave a grand dinner to all the foreign consuls in return for the many civilities we
Tomorrow we give a concert & ball to the Consular
have received from them
ladies & gentlemen - The next we are to have another a t the Spanish Consuls However I must refer you to Capt Campbell for a further detail of our amusements
as I would take up too much of your time in recounting them all. - I shall
experience a sad reverse when they leave me. I have paid particular attention to your orders as expressed in yours of 13thFaroud has with a good deal of difficulty procur'd the Sheep & I think at a
high price - I send the finest Bernousses that can be procurd a t Tunis, also
the otto of Roses, of all which I will enclose a list with their cost. Mias Comor's portrait is begun but not finished & when I see you again I shall
have the pleasure of introducing her to you. - We hear you are to proceed to
Leghorn & from thence to Tripoli, & I have already formed some hopes that you
will call this way. I was disappointed in not having rec* letters from America by the Store Ship
& the other that brought the Ambassador.
If you meet with any for me be
kind enough to take them in charge & forward them Pr first opportunity.I sent the sheep three days ago on board the American Ship Two Brothers laying in the Canal of the Goletta to remain there till the Departure of the Frigate
under the care of the Capt. - I am sorry to inform you that I have to day
received a letter from him telling me of the death of one of the rams - he wss
very well the evening before. Old Faroud is much alarmed about it, & has sent
a fine lamb ( a ram) which he says he is willing to lose I am informed you could
procure as fine Sheep a t Tripoli & much cheaper.Commodore Campbell has
offered ss I am short of cash to advance me the amot of the srticles I forward t o
you by him (say 143 dollars 75/100 which you will be kind enough to reimburse
to him. You have the account inclosed
Give my respects to the gentlemen of the wardroom & rest assured Dear Sir
of the sentiments of friendship & esteem with which I allways remain
C. D: Coxm
[LC. Chas. D. Coxe LB, Ac. 2951, 1806-1809.1

-

-

-

-

F

-

-

-

-

WRRS WITE BRRBARP POWERS
To Lt. Colonel Commandant Franklin Wharton, U. S. Harine Corps,from Secretary
of the Navy
NAVYD E P MMarch
~
6, 1807
Si I have r e d your letter of the 41b inst - You will be pleased to inform
Mr &annon that the resignation of his Commission as a Lieuti in the Marine
Corps is accepted.
[NA. MCA. LR, 11807.1

-

To Master Commandant David Porter, U. S. Bavy, U. 8. Schooner Enlnprize, tram
Captain 3ngh G. Campbell, U. S. Navy
U S SHIP Constitution
Tunis 3 a y &far& 75P 1807.SIR,YOUare hereby directed to receive on board the United States Schooner
Enierpn'ze under your command Soliman Mili Nili who goes to GibraItar on
business for his Execllency the Bey of Tunis: It is expected that he will embark
on the 9th Ins+; but should he not be ready a t that time s further indulgence of
fortyeight hours may be granted him, but s farther period is inadmissable as
the services required of the Schr will not sdmit of longer delay that ha&ng
accomplished you will proceed to Algiers and lay off and on until you receive
such communication as our Consul General may have to make to our
Government which with those from me for the Navy Department you will
be pleased to deliver on your ssrivsl at Gibraltar to John Gavino Esquire, our
Consul at that place, then take in such supplies as the Enterprize may require,
comunicste with Mr Simpson our Consul a t Tangiers by letter or otherwise
and return to Syracuse, but previously touch a t Algiers for any communication
that our Consul General may have to make [LC. D. Porter P, Let. & Ord., 1805-1808.1

To Secretary of State from Charles D. Coxe, acting as U. S. Charge d'Affaires,

Tunis

TUNIS March 8 $ b 1807.
SIR, M? Lear, sailed yesterday in the Corzatitution Frigate Commodore Csmpbell

for Algiers; - He has appointed me as Charge D'Mairs for the U: S: near this
Regency till the pleasure of the President shall be known, and handed me Instructions accordingly, to which I shall punctually adhere. - He will no doubt
give you a strict & minute detail of all the circumstances of the progression &
termination of his negotiations with the Bey, & the ounds on which our relations
a t present stand, with reapect to this Regency. They are as advantageous as
thme of t h e most favor'd nations & I believe, I map safely sap the impressions
made on them generally are more favorable to us than thme they have red from
any other nation whatever. - MTLear, has taken our Accr Book of Expenoes,
including all incur'd by bfx Dodge & myself, up t o the day of his departure, as
he has taken the original, it is now out af my power to forward you 6 Co y.
but he will do it no doubt, after a revisal. - I have open'd another n h i c t
shall keep from henceforward with exactness, & furnish both your office & the
Consul General with precise Copies occasionail , as opportunities may offer. Sidi Soiiman MLllimeUi, has been appointed by
E: the Bey, a~ his Ambassador
to Spain - He will take his passage on board the Schooner Enterprize Wt:
Porter, (who mila tomorrow, for Gibraltar) on his way to Madrid.
Having nothing of consequence to communicate but what you will receive from
the Consul General, I beg leave to conctude with reiterating the assurances of my
sttention to the duties of my office & the exertion to the best of my ability to
promote the harmony & good faith, which a t present exist between the U: S t s h
& this Regency.
PC. Chss. D. Coxe LB, Ac. 2951, 1806-1809.1

f

2:

-

10 March 18071
Controversy between Captoins John Bodgers and James Barron
We, the eubscribers, the friends of commodore John Rodgers, end captain
James Barron, of the United States navy, do certify, that the pemonal diffmce,
which has for some time past unfortunately subsisted between those gentlemen,

512

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1806 TO 1807

has been amicably settled, on terms, in our decided opinion, highly honorable
to both parties; and upon the grounds set forth in the letter hereunto annexed.
THOMAS
TINOEY,
FRANKLIN
WHARTON.
WASHINGTON,
9th March, 1807.

-

[Enclosure]
To Captain John Rodgers, U. S. Navy, from John Stricker
HAVREDE GRACE,
January Slst, 1807.
DEARSIR, Your affair with captain James Barron, has been a matter of concern to many of your friends: some of them are of opinion that it might be
settled without resorting to arms. Being myself of this opinion, the sole object
of my visit to this neighbourhood, is, in conjunction with our mutual friend colonel
Hughes, to effect this desirable purpose.
It has been intimated to me, from authority that cannot be doubted, that
captain Barron does not now perceive the necessity of calling on you, on the
ground of the message by capt. Bainbridge; but feels himself injured by the
style of your reply. As I am sure that neither you nor any other person can
entertain a suspicion dishonorable to captain Barron, it is the opinion of your
friends, that you have only to sap, that your reply was the hasty suggestion of
the moment, the effect of an instantaneous irritation, that was excited by so unexpected a notification. They think that you may say this with honor; and
that by so doing you will put an end to an affair of much concern to your friends,
and particularly so to the secretary of the Navy. I flatter myself that you will
do me the justice to believe, that I would not recommend to you a measure, that
I thought you could not adopt with honor;
[LC. JRP, Let. & Doc., Ac. 3647, 1799-1848.1
To Secretary of State from Tobias Lear, U. S. Consul General, Algiers
Triplicate. (Pi ivate and Confidential)
At Algiers, all well
ON BOARD
THE U. S. FRIGATE
Constitution,
At Sea, Off Algiers, March 16th 1807
MY DEARSIR, The public dispatches which accompany this,will give a full
detail of all my transactions and negociations a t Tunis; and I shall feel peculiarly
happy if the issue thereof meets the approbation of the President and yourself. The base and false aspersions which have been cast upon my conduct in the
Tripoli business, in some of our unworthy public prints, gave me some pain; but
I was conscious that what I had done was for the honor and best interest of my
Country, and the effects thereof would be acknowledged, when the contemptable
aspemors shQbe in merited oblivion. The more I see of Barbary affairs, the more I am convinced that Government
has been grossly imposed upon, by representations made from prejudice, resentment, vanity, or ignorance; and I confess I feel a little mortified to see some carreased who deserve more than censure. I have not perhaps fulfilled the expectations of some of my friends, by sending
from Barbary accounts of the Country which might be new and wonderful; nor
of its curiosities and productions. - Altho' my time has been strictly devoted
to my public duties,'I have not been inattentive to those things: But I wish to
send nothing but facts, and things of real utility; in which I hope, a t some time
or another, to be able to gratify my friends. - I have a pleasing hope that Dr
Triplett will be of great use in those things. - He has received some impressions
I find, from my predecessor, which can be of no use to him; but serve to mislead,
as some other impressions made by him have done. - I shall guard the Dr
against them as much as possible, and his own observations will be of use in removing them.
We sailed from Tunis Bay on the 7t0, and in the same night a most furious gale
from North, attacked us, which cost the U. States some sails and rigging, and the
ship was in no small danger of going on shore; and I now write this in a heavy
Gale, which has kept us from running for the land for two days past, altho' we
suppose we are only a few leagues from Algiers, as the weather is so dark and
rainy that we dare not approach the coast. I have not received a line from Dr Davis since he has been in this sea. - I
saw a letter from him to Mr Ambrose Allegro, the Consular Secretary in Tunis,

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS
dated a t Leghorn the 19tb of January, in which he ssys he is going to Tripoli on
special business for the U. States, with Mc Paine, as Secretary of Legation, who
will be left as consul in Tripoli, when he shall go to Tunis, as he knows nothing can
be done there without him; and from thence he goes to Paris and London before
he returns to the U. States: unless he should be ordered to Constantinople, of
which he has some expectation.
I cannot feel too grateful to yourself and the President for the confidence placed
in me to negociate the Tunis business, while I was so severely handled about the
Tripoli Peace. - My friends shall never have reason to blush for my conduct,
while I am able to perform the duties imposed upon me. I pray you to present my best respects to your good Mq Madison, and beleive
me to be, with unalterable attachment and friendship,
[NA. SDA. CL, Algiers, Vol. 7, Part 11, Jan. 1806-Sept. 1807.1
To Secretary of the Navy from Lieutenant P. C. Wederstrtmdt, U. 8. Navy
NEW ORLEANS,March 234 1807
SIB, I had the pleasure to address you on the 236 ultimo from Natchez, infoming you that I was about to leave that place & that I should on my arrival here
turn the Brig Franklin as directed over to M? Spence - which I have done and on
the 218, int she was sold for the sum of 5,300 Dollars.
I shsll this day leave here for Baltimore, on my way to Washington.
[NDA. Officers LB, Vol. 1, Jan.-Apr. 1807.1
To Midshipman William Lewis, U. S. Navy, U. S. Frigate Camtifuiion, from Tobias
Lear, U. S. Consul General, Algiers
ALGIERS March 194 1807. DEARSIR. I beg you will accept of my sincere thanks for the very proper and
pleasing manner in which you have executed such business as occured here during
my late absence, on the Service of the U. States to Tunis, which I shall not fail to
represent to the President. I only regret that pour duty calls you so soon to your St,ation, and deprives us
of the pleasure of pour Company; but if I can a t any time render you any service
I beg you will command me, and let me hear from you by every occasion which
may offer. [Stephen Decatur Col. Book B, 1806-1807.1
Extract from log of U, 6. Brig Hornet. of 18 Guns, Master Commandant John B.
Dent, U. S. Navy, commanding, Z8 March 1807
[Routine cruising and Port calls since 23 February 18071 These 24 hours
commences with moderate and variable winds - At 112 past 2. p m came too
in Leghorn Roads in 5 fm water. & veered out 40 fm Cable [NA. NDA original, 1805-1810.1
To Secretary of the Navy from Master Commandant David Porter, U. 6. Navy
U S Sc: Enterprize
Gibralter Bay d9* March 1807. SIR, I arrived here on the 27thinst* from Tunis via Algiers where (at the latter
place) I left CornQre Campbell who brought down Mr Lear from Tunis. our
&airs a t the t,wo places I beleive stand perfectly well as pre-existing differences
appear to be arranged to the satisfaction of all parties, and the m e good understaiding exists with Tripoli. By orders from Corndm Campbell I brought. to this place Sidi Soiiman Mili
Mili & buite. who amears in cavacitv of Embaasador to the Court of Svain. but
circumstanc& induck's me to beieive "that he is destinId to the Court of Portugal,
or that his object is to solicit the Commander in Ch~efof the Portugeese forces
stationed here to co-openate with the Tunisian forces against Algiem. - As
War between the two places is now carried on with the utmost rancour, and the
measures used by the Regency of Algiers are not only cslculated to create serious
alarms to Tunis but to endanger the subversion of that Power - The m e
plan of Blockade is pureued by them that waa put in practice by us in our late

514

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1806 TO 1807

difference with Tripoli, and a large force has marched to invest the City of Tunis
taking with them nearly two hundred pieces of Artilery, they are increasing their
Marine with a number of deck'd Gun Boats, and speak confidently of having
possession of Tunis in a few Months.
Tunis appears to act on the defencive, her large Vessels are laid u in their
docks, and their Gun Boats ready for service, considerable bodies of h e n have
gone on the frontiers, and some late skirmishes have taken place in Constantine,
(a revolted Providence,) which have rather been to the advantage of Algiers. The large Algerine cruisers anchor frequently in the Bay of Tunis and send in
all vessels bound to or from any Port in the Regency. - The Apprehension
of falling in with some of them gave no little alarm to Sidi Soliman notwithstandin every assurance I gave him of safety.
shall proceed up the Mediterranean for Syracuse immediately on receiving
on board the requisite supplies, from whence I hope (from the re eated applications 1 have made) to oblain permission to return to America as find my services are no ways essential in the present state of affairs, and many private circumstances make my return necessary
[NDA. MC LB, 1806-1807.1

9

f

To William Kirkpatrick, U. S. Consul and U. S. Navy Agent, Malaga, Spain, from
Secretary of the Navy
NAVYDEPARTMENT
OF THE UNITEDSTATES
31 March 1807.
You will consider yourself as hereby appointed Agent for the Navy of the
United States for the Port of Malaga.
For your trouble in executing the duties arising out of this appointment you
will be allowed a Commission of two per Cent on the amount of all supplies
purchased and furnished by you to our publick Vessels; One per Cent on the
amount on t.he amount of all articles sold by you and one half per Cent on ail
monies advanced by you for recruiting and such like purposes.
Thomas Turner Esq? Accountant of the Navy will give you instructions relatively to the forms to be observed in keeping your accounts.
You will be pleased to render to our publick Vessels every attention & assistance which they may require.
[NDA. GLB, Vol. 8, 1805-1807.1
To James L. Cathcart appointed

u

S. Navy Agent, Madeira, from S e c r e t a ~of the
Wavy
NAVY~DEPA
1 April
R ~ 1807.
You will consider yourself as hereby appointed agent for the Navy of the
United States for the Island Madeira. For your trouble &q the rest vide letter
31 March. Wv Kirkpatrick.
[NDA. GLB, Vol. 8, 1805-1807.1
--

Extract from log of U. S. Brig Hornel. of 18 Guns, Master Commandant John H.Dent,
U. 8. Navy, commanding, 6 April 1807
Commences moderate breezes from the N W. with pleasant weat,her At 2
r e d on board 10 boxes containing 10,000 dollars. - and one marked G. Davis
marked. 508. dollars. - also. sundry boxas and Trunks of Presents. for the
Beshaw of Tripoli and Mr Davis's Baggage - At % past 9. got under wei h
with B light breeze. from the East@Midnight Gorgona bore. W B N. and tie
west^ point from Leghorn S E.
Mr Davis Consul for Tripoli with his family on board
Lat4. by Obsp 42'21'
[NA. NDA original, 1805-1810.)
To Secretary of the Navy from Captain Hugh G. Campbell, U. 6. Aavy
UNITEDSTATESSHIP Cmtiiution
Cagliari Bay 84 April 1807 SIE My dispatches up to the 274 of February will make you acquainted with
the proceedings of the Squadron to that period. - I now beg leave to represent,
that I anchor'd on the 18Qnear the Goletta of Tunia, the Entetpirc in wmpsny

-

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

515

On the 25* being informed by Col. Lev, that our &airs had met with a favorable termination, I thought it both proper and polite to pay my personal respects
to the Bey, that took place on the 27tb by appointment, accompanied by Col.
Lear and several of my Officers
The Bey received us in a very friendly manner, and after some conversation
observed, that his letter for the President would be ready in a few days, The
usual ceremonies having past we rose and took leave - On the 34 of March
Col. Lear and myself took leave of the Bey - on the 4th he sent his letter
for the President - the 6tP we got on board, and sailed on the 7t4 for Algiess
leaving the Enterprize to take on board Meilemaley, who the Bey had requested
a passage for to Gibraltar - With orders t 6 Cap Porter t o call a t Algiers for
any farther communications Col. Lear might have to make; Then proceed to
Gibraltar, confer with Simpson and return to Syracuse with all the information
he could collect respecting our affairs I arrived a t Algiers the 20th Ulto Sailed the 23rP and anchored here the 3Otb
for the convenience of performing a reasonable quarantine, and refresh the Crew
with fresh provisions, which a t present is very reasonable, Likewise to inform
myself of the Katural resources of the Island, which I find to be greater than
any part of Sicily sffords - The Present King has resided here about fourteen
Months, who with the Queen appear desirous of cultivating a better understanding
between them and our Government I shall proceed for Malta when the Wind permits which now blows strong
from E. S. E. The British fleet under Admiral Duckworth has passed the Dardanels, in which
they have been roughly handled, the Windsor Castle has return'd to Malta much
damaged - the A ax Cap. Blackwood accidentally took fire a few days before
and blew up; the 6ap and a s m l l part of the Crew are saved. [NDA. Captain's LB, Vol. I, 1807.1
Extracts from log of U. S. Brig Horn& of 18 Guns, Master commandant John H.
Dent, U. S. Navy, commanding
[14 April 18071
The whole of these 24 hours moderate breezes from the Sout,hward with pleasant
weather. at 1 P M tack'd to the South4 At 2 Tack'd to the P; E. At 5 past
2 up Courses. - At 3 P M came to an anchor in Syracuse -the Royal George
110 Guns with Admiral Duckworth's flag, -the Pompey. 80 Guns with Sir
Sydney Smiths Flag flying and the Repulse 74 Guns were in the harbor. At
Sunset struck Royal Yards. At 4 a m out 1.1 Cutter - At 6 A M the above
British Men of War sailed for Malta. At 7 sent 18, Cutter watering.
[I7April 18071
ISyracuse] Cornmenoes fresh breezea from the W S W. and pleasant weather Middle part calm latter part fresh breezes from W S b.with pleasant weather people painting Ship and employed in sundry Jobs about the rigging - Carpenters repairing the Eagle to replaced during the summer and the billet to be
preserved for winter
[I9 April 18071
[Syracuse] The whole of these 24 hours strong gales with severe squalls from
the W N W. - At 8. A. M. the U: S. Schr Enterprize came to an anchor in the
Harbor. - 6 day from Gibraltar - At 10 made the Signal 920. which was
answered in the affirmative
[93April 18W1
[Syracuse] The whole of these 24 hours moderate breezes with pleasant
weather - At 4 P M furled Saila
At 9. A M Dennis Fonderhider was
unished with 24 laehes for neglect of duty and Insolence - At 10. an English
Facket came in from Malta informed the U: S. Frigate Constitution was there Prepared for Sailing - Sent Daniel Maloy on Shore to the Hospital - Draft
of water - Aft. 13'%2ir pa4 April 18071
[Syracuse] The whole of these 24 hours modemte breezes from the W4 with
pleasant weather At 5 A M unmoored: & hove short. - R e d 114 Canta's
wood,35 Barreis Pork, 7 Barrels flour, 1 Tierce rice, 40 Barrels Beef and 30 Gallone

-

516

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1805

TO

1807

Rum. Lt Trippe went on shore to the Hospital sick, fired a Gun and hoisted
the Cornet. - Dft water Aft. 13. 10. - F o M 13. 11.
[,96April 18071
The whole of these 24 hours moderate breezes with pleasant weather - At
4 P M took in the 1st Cutter - At 9. took in the 24 Cutter - this day drafted
Joseph Williams Carpenters Mate to the U: S: Schr Enterprize
At 4 A M. got
underweigh and sailed from Syracuse - At 10. set Skysails, Royal & Top
gallant Studsails stowed the Anchors. - a t 11 took in all Studsails - At
Meridian Cape Moro de Porco. bore N N E # E. and Cape Passeiro S W $$ W.
Lattdp by Obsn 36'51'.
[NA. NDA original, 1805-1810.1

-

[24 April 18071
To Hamet Caramanli, Rightful Bashaw of Tripoli, from George Davis, appointed
U. S. Conslll, Tripoli
(COPY)
GEORGE
DAVIS,
Consul of the United States of America for the Regency of Tripoli
To his Excellency AHMETBASHAW
CARAMANLI.
The two letters which your Excellency did me the honor to write on the 23.
Instant were duly received from the hands of your Chouous Laird. Not understanding the Arabic I can only reply to that written in the Italian, which, I am
told, is a faithful translation of the former.
In the conversations which I had with your Excellency on the 15. and 18. Instant
you were informed that I had no authority to enter into any engagements on the
part of the United States. As far as my friendly services could further your views
they were offered, and if successful, they would meet the approbation of my Government, but that it would disclaim all acts of mine which bound it in any manner,
aa to the fulfilment of the claims or expectations of your Excellency excepting those
which have been recognised by our existing treaty with Jussuph reigning Bashaw
of Tripoli.
A reconciliation with your brother wrts proposed by me from the conviction of
it's being such a measure (if cordially received on the part of Jussuph Bashaw) aa
would not only tend to your personal interest and happiness, but would also be the
most probable means of rejoining all the members of your family.
The expectation of receiving the provinces of Derne & Bengasa, you say, are
founded on a promise or offer of that kind made you by Commodore Rogers. On
this subject I can only observe, that should the offer be made, on the part of your
brother, i t would give me infinite pleasure to be the happy
- - - medium of communication.
I must, however, decline making the demand that your family should repair to
Sicily with their women, slaves, &Q &F as also with the sum of sixty thousand dollars, as yoar Excellency must be convinced that such language does not become the
A ent of a friendly nation. This subject was fully discussed on the 18%instant
wfen your Excellency agreed with me in opinion that neither the laws nor customs
of Tripoli would sanction the demand of separating the wife from the husband by
force; and as all the females of your family were married they were no longer
subject to the control of any individual but their husbands.
Altho' your Excellency informed me that the religion of Musselmen did not
allow the child to emancipate itself a t any period from the authority of the parent,
still it was not ex ected that any force should be used to bring the males of your
family to you. &u only required that they should be placed in an independent
situation when their wishes were declared and if their choice should be in favor of
remaining a t Tripoli, that the Christian Consuls residing at the Court should join
in witneesing a declaration to that effect. I can assure you that full attention shall
be paid to your wishes in this respect, and I feel no doubt whatever may be their
decision, that your Excellency will be satisfied of the determination of my Government to fulfil it's engagements and of my own wishes to contribute to your
happiness.
A copy of your letter will be forwarded without delay to the Honbi~the Secretary
of the State and I shall embrace the earliest opportunity of acquainting yon with
his decision relative to the amelioration of your pecuniary situation.
From the impression that your Excellency has hitherto received, 8s pledges of
public faith, the promises of individual friends, I have been thus frank in my communication, which I am sure you will rather view as a mark of friendship than of
coldness towards your intereata.

WARS WITH BARBARY POWEIZS
This will be handed you by Mr J. Payne, secretary to the American legation.
Be pleased to accept the assurances of the profound respect and consideration
of our Excellency's Mo: ob* servt
&sacvsE 94. A p d 1807
[NA. SDA. CL, Tripoli, Vol. 3, 1806-1811.1
[26 April 18071

To George Davis,appointed U. 6. Consul, Tripoli, from Bamet Caramanli, Eightful
Bashaw of Tripoli
having received the letter you wrote me in answer to mine, I perceive that my
wishes have not been well explained; and for which reason I have caused another
translation to be made, which is herewith enclosed, to manifest in a clearer manner
that which I desire to be effected through your kind mediation - Wherefore I
beg you to regulate yourself wholly by this my second communication, under this
present date - Convinced of your good disposition to aid me I salute you
AHMET
BASHAW
SYEACUSE
26tb A p d 1807.
[NA. SDA. CL, Tripoli, Vol. 3, 1806-1811.1
lEnclosure1

(26 April 18071
To George Davis, appointed U. S. Consnl, Tripoli, from Hamet Caramanli,
Knowing that the most serene Republic of the United States of America
ought in justice to compensate for the losses of his Excellency Ahmet Bashaw
Caramanli, son of Mi Caramanli pate] Bashaw of Tripoli, occasioned by the precipitate peace, msde by the Representatives of the aforesaid serene Republic, without the intervention or knowledge of hi Excellency, - and as George Davis
is charged BS he himself has assured him to go to Tripoli, and offered there to
treat and establish by agreement, in the best manner possible for the interest
of the abovementioned Prince Ahmet Caramanli, perfect peace and harmony
with his brother
His Excellency grateful for such an offer, and considering
the difficulty of again acquiring his lost Kingdom, has determined to accept of
the proposition formerly made him by Commodore Rogers - to wit - that
there should be ceded to him the provinces of Derne & Bengasa with all their
appurtenances and revenues and perfectly independent of every other power,
His Excellency remaining full and absolute sovereign and master forever, and
reserving to himself the right and faculty of disposing of them a t his pleasure.
He requires that there should be fulfilled the unexecuted agreement specified
in the treaty of peace already made - viz* - that all the family of his Excellency, with their property, except the females who are married and may wiah
to remain with their husbands, should be sent to Syracuse, - that there should
accompany the said family a sufficient number of black slaves for their servjce.
That the Male children of his Excellency should repair to Syracuse to learn from
themselves, in person, whether they would follow their father or go elsewhere,
but that their determination shouId be made in that place.
That the females and the families of individuals who are in Syracuse, in the
service of his Excellency, and who wiah to come there, shall be sent with all their
effects.
After the arrival of the family of his Excellency be is to be conducted to such
place as may be resolved on.
In consideration of the spoils of his Excellency's kingdom and loss which he
has suffered in pdaces, gardens, slaves, houses kc*, in Bhort, which has reduced
him to his present miserable state, i t is but a duty that the Usurper of his wealth
should restore t o him a part of that which he has taken, or, at least give him an
equivalent in money, to enable his Execllency to live with decency and support
his family end the persons of his suit until he shall be established in the poseession of the above mentioned provinces, and revenues thereunto belonging Wherefore there should be established a fixed sum equivalent to his necessary

-

eTh"Lt"Enngexile of his Excellency from his Country. urd the rant of means t o
support him~e1fand the people in his service, obhged him t o accept of the offeere
of several individuals to supply him w ~ t hmoney, and whch he is compelled to
return previous to his departure - wherefore he throws himself on the gener-

-

518

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1806 TO 1807

osity of the most serene Republic, which well knows, that by the ill conduct of
it's representatives, this Prince has been betrayed and robbed of that City which
with the blood of his Subjects he had again obtained, and finally compelled to
fly his Country and in a foreign land to seek a miserable and wretched asylum.
His Excellency hopes when the above conditions shall be fumlled, that he
need not fear to be again molested, but, on the contrary to be supported in the
quiet possession of this small part of his Kingdom - and by which the representatives of the serene republic will have found the best means of ensuring the
strict observance of any compact which they may wish to establish.
I n testimony of which I have caused two copies to be written and signed in
the presence of witnesses.
(Signed) AEMETBASHAWCARAMANLI
son of Ali Bashaw of Tripoli.
SYRACUSEApril 96,1807.
[NA. SDA. CL, Tripoli, Vol. 3, 1806-1811.1
To Secretary of State from George Davis, appointed U. 6. Consul, Tripoli
MALTA 29th April 1807.
SIR: Immediately after my arrival a t Syracuse, which was on the 14. Instant
I waited on his Excellency Ahmet Bashaw Caramanli, who, without any reserve
introduced the subject of his residence in Sicily which he said was for the sole
purpose of obtaining his family and learning the decision of the Government
of the United States, relative to himself.
He complained much of the manner in which he had been placed and detained
in Syracuse, of his pecuniary distresses, of the illusive promises made him by
the Agents and Officers of Government and of the inexecution of our treaty.
His Excellency is involved in debt and kept in a state of beggary by a few
nobles who devour his allowance as soon as received. He has the appearance
and reputation of being a good man but better calculated for the Mosque than
the fiefd.
I proposed to him a reconciliation with his brother, which I am satisfied can
only be obtained by his consenting to reside in Tripoli, his person would certainly
be respected because he would not possess the means, if he had the enterprize.
(which I doubt) to make any attempt t o regain the throne.
I have the honor to enclose you (NO@
1, 2, 3, & 4) a copy of our correspondence.
It would have given me much satisfaction to have confined the Consular
present to the sum of three thousand Dollars, but this I found impossible; all
the articles of the Regalia of which a list is enclosed have been purchased by
myself and certainly for one third less than they could be procured in any part
of Barbary.
I regret much that Captain Campbell does not feel himself a t liberty to leave
a t my disposal the Tripolitan Gun boats; - they are of very little value, in a
perishable state and most probably will never be employed to the same advantage.
The Hornet sails for Tripoli on the 1. of May.
[NA. SDA. CL, Tripoli, Vol. 3, 18061811.1
-

-

[29 April 18071
To Hamet Caramanli, from George Davis, appointed U. S. Consul, Tripoli
(COPY)
GEORGEDAVIS
Consul of the United States of America for the Regency of Tripoli To his Excellency AHMETBASHAW
CARAMANLI
Your Excellency's note under date of the 26. instant, enclosing a second communication, reached me a t this place in the 28" - It's contents so nearly
correspond with what you did me the honor to state on the 234, that little can be
observed in reply.
It is my sincere desire to be useful to your Excellency and to promote your
interest by all the good offices in my power. To accomplirJh which i t is necessary
that your Excellency should make a distinction (which I have laboured to impress
on your mind) between my private acts and those which the Government of the
United States will recognise.
A reconciliation with your brother, indemnification for the loss of your Kingdom
& the manner (that is accompanied by their slaves, property $9 &q) in which the

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS
Mules of your family who are desirous to be p h d under your protection, shall
join you a t Syracuse, are left in a great measure to the discretion of the Bashaw
f ussuph.
I shall not fail to urge the justice of your pretensions in the strongest manner
and use every Means of obtaining them, excepting that of holding out the idea
that the United Statea will resort to compulsory measures t o obtain them, so long
BB the stipulations contained in the existing treaty with the Reigning Bashaw shall
be faithfully complied with on his part.
Accept of the Bssurances of the profound respect & high consideration of
MALTA April 20* 1807.
[NA. SDA. CL, Tripoli, Vol. 3, 1806-1811.1

-

To Captain James Barron, U. 8. Navy, Norfolk, Va., from Secretary of the Bevy
~ April 1807.
NAVYD E P U30
I have received from Cap$ Porter the enclosed letter, in which he requests a conveyance on board one of our publick Vessels for "the Monument to be erected t o
the memory of the Officers who fell off Tripoli". If the service should admit of
one of the public Vessels stopping on her return t o America, a t Leghorn, to take
i t in, I willingly consent to &ording a conveyance to the monument agreeably
to Cap$ Porter's request.
[NDA. OSW, Vol. 7, 1805-1807.1

-

To Captain John E.Dent, U. 8. Navy, from Captain Hugh 6.Campbell, U. 6. Navy
U. S. SHIP CmtitzLtwn
May 24 1807. Malta Harbour.
SIR, MI Davis will be ready to embark tomorrow with whom you will proceed
to Tripoli and wait six days for such dispatches as M: Davis may have for the
United Stat= or myself, with which you will proceed to Syracuse for further
orders. - Being at Peace with the Barbary Regencies and having reasons t o
believe that the existing harmony between those Regencies and the United Statea
will continue for some time, I have to desire that you permit their Vessels to psss
freely and unmolested, unless you have reason to suspect they are not furnished
with the necessary Documents as specified in the treaty between the Goverment
of the United Statea and those Regencies, the want of which will render it neeeasary to detain them for further explanation, all other orders Null and Void. [NHF. Dent's LB, 1803-1810.1
Extracta from log of U. 6. Brig No&. of 18 Guns, Master Commandant John H.
Dent, U. 5. Navy, commanding
May 18071
[At Malta since 26 April 1807.1 These 24 hours moderate breezes with pleasant
weather - At A M unmoored Ship, At 9 A M got underweigh & went into the
outer harbor [Malta] where the Constitution lay. - People variousiy employed.
13 May 18071
The whole of these 24 hours moderate breezes from the EQand pleasant weather
At 4 P M: the U: S: Frigate Const%tuhonsailed for Syracuse - A t 9 A M loosed
& ref urled Sails
(4 May 18071
First part moderate breezes from the El middle part Calm - At 112 pest 5.
A M. unmoored. - At 6 hove up and towed out with the boats - At 10 a
breeze s rung up from the 64 $. E4 - Mr Davis came on board. - A t 11made
sail to
EQ and stowed the Anchom found a strange man on board supposed to
be a Deserter from B British M a n of War
At noon the S: E. point of Malta
bore S W B S. diet 6 leagues Tacktd to the S W4 - Draft of water aft. 1Q*
210 f o m d . 1
3'1 $'#.
Lattd* by Obsv 38'20'.
(NA. NDA original, 1805-1810.)

tk

-

520

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1806 TO 1807

To Charles D. Coxe, U. 6. ChargB dlAffaires, Tunis, from Tobias Lear, U. S.
Consul General, Algiers
ALGIERS,May 6th 1807.
DEARSIR, This is the first opportunity which has occurred for writing to you
since my arrival here from Tunis. - The Enterprize went on to Gibraltar; and
I expected she would have returned here before this time.
I had the happiness to find M s Lear i n good health; and our affairs here,
standing on the same good footing I had left them. There were two American Merchantmen in this port on my arrival: vizt the
Brig Sophia, of and from Philadelphia, Robert Arundel Master, with an assorted
Cargo well suited to the Market; - and the Ship TraueUer, of and from Salem,
with a Cargo of Coffee, Sugar and India Goods, to a very large amount. - Both
have sold well, and received payment in Cash. - The former sailed on the 4th
of April, and the latter, on the 29th, having been been detained here about 20
days by an Embargo, which was laid in consequence of the Vessels of the Regency
having gone to Bona, with Troops and Stores, from which place they returned
on the 28th ultimo. - At present all their Cruizers are in port. I have not heard a syllable from the U. States since my arrival here, and we
have not a word of news from Europe, more than is brou ht by Capt Hillyer,
of H.B.M. Ship N i g e ~ ,who takes this to Tunis, and to wEom I pray you will
be so good as to pay attention, as you will find him an excellent man, as I have
known from a long acquaintance with him.
The Spanish Consul has re uested me to put the enclosed letter under my
cover, as he could not request &aptr Hillyer to take charge of it.
I have heard nothing of the Two Brothers. If she gets to Marseilles, she will
make a great Voyage. To Mr Allegro I beg you will present my best regards; and my respects and
kind remembrance to all the Consular families, from whom I received so many
civilities when in Tunis. and also to others of our acquaintances who may regard

usDr Triplett has not yet benefitted by the climate, as he expected; but indeed
the Spring has been remarkably unpleasant.
I am very anxious to hear from you, and know how we stand in your quarters;
but I think while the two Regencies keep up hostilities, other nations will remain
quiet with respect to them. - They talk here, as if they were confident of
success; but I think they will hardly attempt the City of Tunis. The dispatches which you sent to me by the Courier to Bona, have never
got to hand. - The Spanish Consul here tells me he has received frequent
dispatches from his Vice Consul in Bona; but not a word about my letters. MT Lear unites with me in best wishes for your health and happiness; and
I pray you will beleive me to be, with very great esteem & regard
P.S. The Spanish Consul has this moment been here, and met Captlp Hillyer,
who offering to take letter for him. - I have given them accordingly. [Stephen Decatur Col. Book B, 1806-1807.1
Extracts from log of U. S. Brig Hornet of 18 Guns, Master Commandant John B.
Dent, U. S. Navy, commanding
[7 May 18071
M past 7. fired a Gun, hoisted the Jack. and shortned Sail - At 8 came
too with the larboard Anchor in 17 fip water, Tripoli bearing S B E. distant 3
miles - N. Battery. South and a cluster of trees seperate from any thing else.
S W B S. - a t 112 past 8. Consul Ridgely came on board. and was recQwith a
salute of 5. Guns. - At 11 Consul Davis went on shore when 9 Guns were fired
18 May 180q
[Tripoli] Commences moderate breezes from the N W. - At 1. P M the
Castle on shore fired a Salute of 21 Guns the same number were returned by the
returned from shore, sent the Consuls Baggage on shore. Brig. At 6. the C a p t ~
a t 112 past 6 got underweigh.
left Mr Green the Purser on shore.
[lo May 18071
Commences light breezes and clear pleasant weather - a t 1 Tack'd Ship to
the N4 & EQ a t 112 past 2 hauled up the foresail and set Main Royal Staysail At 5 took in Top gallant Sails, Staysails and flying Jib

-

-

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

521

At 7 Tripoli bore S: E: distant 9 or 10 miles sounded in 30 fathoms a t 112
past 7 Calm current setting to N W. let go the Anchor in 30 fw
Calm during the Night with a heavy swell. from the N E. Vessel laboring
considerabl
At 7 A M a light breeze sprung up from the Sd a t 8 got underweigh and t G t e d out 24 Cutter - a t l/2 past 9 fidded Royal Masts. a t 10
sent Royal yards up.
Ends light airs and clear pleasant weather
Sent the 2d Cutter on shore with the Cases of Presents for the Bashaw,
At 11 A M Mustered the People.
[NA. NDA original, 1805-1810.1
To John Taslor, Norfolk, Va., from Secretary of the Navy
NAVYDEPAR~
11 May 1807.
I this day received from Mr Blount a letter dated on the 24 inst in which he
requests for you a passage in the Ship Wasp to England, and I with pleasure
give my assent to this request and have written to Cap* Smith upon the Subject.
I t may be acceptable to you to know that the tables of our Officers are furnished
entirely a t their own expence & altho' we can afford a passage to any Gentleman
in the publick Vessels, yet we cannot say that they shall be accomodated a t the
Commander's tableUpon this point however you will find no difficulty in
making an arrangement with Capt Smith, as he will certainly with pleasure
receive so respectable a guest - Capt Decatur a t Norfolk will I have no doubt
cheerfully assist you in making every necessary arrangement.
[NDA. GLB, Vol. 8, 1805-1807.1
To Master Commandant David Porter, U. 6. Navy, U. S. Schooner Enlnpdze, from
Captain Hugh G. Campbell, U. S. Navy
US SHIP Constitution aaRBoR OF SYRACUSE
11 May 1807.
SIR, The United States Schooner Enterpn'se under your command being ready
for sea, I have to desire and request that you receive on board Mr Holck Consul
of his Majesty the King of Denmark for Tunis, and take him to Leghorn where
you will land that gentleman.
From Leghorn you will be pleased to proceed to Algiers, receive such communication as our Consul General may have for me or the State Department and make
the best of your way to Gibraltar, there remain until the intended releif for the
present Squadron in those seas arrives from America It being my intention to leave Syracuse on the 25th instant, taking Pslermo and
Leghorn in my way down the Mediterranean, and expect to be in Gibralter early
in July which you will be pleased to communicate to the Commander of the
Squadron that may arrive from the United States.
Should you on your arrival a t Gibraltar receive official information from the
Navy Department that the Secretary of the Navy has given orders for the Enterprise to return to the United States, you may proceed with all possible dispatch
for the River Potomac and as far up as the Eastern branch where you will recieve
further orders from the Honble Secretary of the Navy.
[LC. D. Porter PI Let. & Ord., 1805-1808.1
Extract from log of U. S. Brig Hornet, of 18 Guns, Master Commandant John H.
Dent, U. 6. Navy, commanding, 11 May 1807
These 24 hours commences light breezes and pleasant Wr At 5 wore Ship, At
At 7. the
112 ast 5 took 2 reefs in the Topsails and sent the 24 Cutter on shore24 8utter returned, took her in and wore to the N* Tnpoli beamg S B E. distant
one mile
At 9 A M the Captain went on Shore At noon fired 7 Guns
Tripoli bore S B W. distant 2 Cables lengths.
[NA. NDA original, 1805-1810.1

522

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1805 TO 1807

To Secretary of the Navy from Captain Hugh G. Campbell, U. S. Navy
U, S, SHIP Constitution,
HARBOUR
OF SYRACUSE
1Stb May 1807
SIR, My dispatches of February the 27th and April QtP will make you acquainted
with the particulars of my proceedings, I now beg leave to represent that I arrived
a t Malta the 13th of April for the purpose of securing the head of this Ship, and
repairing the Bulk heads of the Cabin &C* &Cz which received much damage on
our passage from Algiers to Cagliari, the head rails and Bumpkins were entirely
washed away, on the night of March the 7tb in the Gulph of Tunis, where we experienced the most severe gale, that I have seen for many years, the Gale came on
about seven in the evening a t N W, and blew so violent that it was with the greatest difficulty we saved our Topsails though double reefed, a new mainsail made in
Lisbon blew from the yard, a new Mizen Storm staysail blew out of the bolt rope,
and fore top mast Stay Sail rendered useless, nor was it in the power of the ablest
men on board to send down top gallant yards, until1 near midnight that favoured
us with a few moments lull, and commenced again with its former violence; I was
a t first in hopes of regaining the anchorage within Cape Carthage in which I found
myself disappointed, and left to the alternative of Keeping sea room till day light,
a t which time we weathered away and run under the lee of Cape Bon; - I left
Malta on the 204Instant and intend leaving Syracuse about the 25'b taking Leghorn
in my way down the Mediterranean, as far as Gibraltar, where I expect to be superceded in the Command; With that impression and having little duty of consequence
for the Enterprize, I have dispatched Captain Porter to Leghorn, from thecce to
Algiers, receive such communication as our Consul General may have for Government or myself, and proceed to Gibraltar and wait the arrival of the intended relief,
which is probably on their way to these Seas; I likewise ordered Captain Porter
to proceed home in the Enterprize, should he on the arrival of the Squadrod receive
official information of your having ordered the Enterprize home, I am rompted to
this premature measure, in consequence of the time for which the R e w of that
Vessel entered, having expired, and hope it will meet your approbation.
Mr. Davis arrived a t Malta the 26th Ultp where I left him the 2nd Instant with
orders to Captain Dent to proceed with him on the 4th to Tripoli, there wait four
or five days and join me a t Syracuse with such information as M? Davis may think
proper to communicate; M? Cox of the Marines continues charged with our Affairs
a t Tunis. [NDA. Captain's LB, Vol. 1, 1807.1
To Captain Hugh G. Campbell, U. S. Navy, from George Davis, U. 8. Consul,
Tripoli
TEIPOLI 12. May 1807.
SIR. I have the pleasure to inform you that our affairs with this regency are
terminated in the most amicable and honorable manner; and that all our claims
however unjust have been accorded us.
The family of the Ex-Bashaw with their slaves, &ca &c* will be ready to embark
in twelve days from this date, and I have promised that the American vessel of
war, which is to come for my dispatches, shall take them to Syracuse. As I did not
receive the definitive answer until this morning and Cap$ Dent gets under weigh
immediately I have not time to write a line to Government. Mr Ridgely will detail
to you the particular circumstances attending the discussion.
I shall wait with impatience the arrival of the vessel which you promised to
send me.
[NA. SDA. CL, Tripoli, Vol. 3, 1806-1811.1
[12 May 18071

To Bamet Caramanli, from George Davis, U. S. Consul, Tripoli
CARAMANLI.
To his Excellency AHMETBASHAW
I have the honor to inform your Excellency that all the members of your
family detained a t Tripoli by Jussuph Bashaw, which you have demanded agreeable to the 3. article of our existing treaty with this Regency, will be ready to
embark for Syracuse in twelve days from this date, excepting our married
daughters who are desirous of remaining with their husbands. %hey will be
accompanied by a suitable number of slaves, with their apparel &o &o*

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS
I profit of this occasion renew my assurance. of profound respect & consideration.
TRIPOLI13. May 1807.
[NA. SDA. CL, Tripoli, Vol. 3, 1806-1811.]
Extractg from log of U. 6. Brig Horn&, of 18 Guns, Master Commandant John 3.
Dent, U. S. Navy, commanding, 15 May 1807
[OfF Tripoli] The whole of these 24 hours pleasant weather, s t i i laying too
off and on Tripoli - At 2 A M discovered a Sail in the S: E, quarter
At 4 fired 3 Guns on receiving on board the Bashaw's regalia consisting of
Two bullocks, 6 Sheep, a quantity of Vegetables, Oranges & Lemons
Tack'd and wore occssionally to keep in close with the T o m Calm from midnight until 2 oclock, when there sprung up a light breeze. from the Nd - Set
Top gallant sails - Calm again - Sprung up 8 breeze from the N N W. Tacked Ship
At before 3 sounded in 17f-q water - At Meridian Tripoli
bore S. S: E distant 2 miles
14 May 1807
At 5 [ P M ] wore Ship - At 6 the Cutter returned and brought on board.
Dr Ridgely, and the English Consul and his Lady, - Passengers - At %
paat 7. Tripoli bore S B E distant 4 miles
Latt24*by Obs* 34'16'
[NA. NDA original, 1805-1810.f

-

To Captain James Barron, U. 6. Navy, Commanding Offlcer of the U. 6. Vessels of
War destined for the Yeditenanean, from Secretary of the Nary
NAVYD E P M16tb
~ May 1807
Aa soon as the Chesapeak shall be prepared for sea, you will weigh Anchor and
proceed direct to the Mediterranean.
We have now in that sea,
--- --- -- -- - - -- - - - - Cap$ Campbell,
the frigate Constitution- - - - - -- - -:
the Hornet - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - _ - - - - - - - - - - - - -Cap6 Dent, &
the Enterprize - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - Cap* Porter. On your arrival in the Mediterranean. the Constitution and the Enterprize are
to be immediately ordered by you to proceed to this place unless, contrary to
our expectations, their further services in the Mediterranean should by any recent event be imperiously required for the protection of our commerce. And
the Hornet is to be ordered to return to this place early in the ensuing yesr, unless
her services should be required in the same way.
Being a t peace 5.it.h all the world, our principal objects in sending publick
Vessels of war into the hlediterranean are: to protect our commerce and seamen
against the predatory dispositions of the Barbary Powers: to keep them a t
peace with US, by a conciliatory deportment, and by displaying a force a t all
times prepared to protect our commerce: and to exercise our young officers in
the practical duties of their profession. These are justly considered interesting
national objects, and to your vigilance, patriotism and skill, they are with confidence committed.
Our interest as well as good faith requires that we should strictly preserve our
neutral relations, and that we should cautiously avoid whatever may have a teodency to bring us into collision with any other Power. If, contrary to our expectations, any of the Barbary Powers shouId commit hostilities against the
United States, you will, in such an event, employ your force in such a manner,
as wiU in your judgment the most effectually protect the commerce and seamen
of the United States.
I t will he your peculiar duty to ascertain from time to time by a 1 correct
means the dispositions of each of the Barbary Powers towards the United States.
And for this purpose you will communicate often and freely with the several
American consuls on that Coast. An early knowledge of a hostile intention on
the part of either of them will enable you to pursue in season the measures which
will tend to convince them that our Commerce is not to be attacked with impunity & cannot be done with effect. I am extremeky anxious to introduce into our service a regular system of economy
equal to that of the British Navy. Without such regular system of economy,
and a rigid attention to the publiok Interest in preserving the pubiiak property,

'

524

NAVXL OPERATIONS FROM 1806 TO 1807

and in the expenditure of publick monies on the part of those who are entrusted
with them, we never can support, and we never shall have, a Navy to any extent.
This idea cannot be too strongly impressed upon the minds of the Officers. They
are all personally and individually interrested, & every friend to the Navy is interrested in promoting a system of rigid economy. The 21st article "of the duties of a Captain or Commander" as prescribed in
the "Naval Regulations issued by command of the President of the United
States" declares "that he (the Captain or Commander) shall make no alteration
in any part of the Ship". This rule must be preserved inviolate, and further
there must never be any repair made without your previous written sanction
when such sanction can be conveniently obtained; and in cases of urgent necessity
when any vessel shall be compelled to put into Port for the purpose of making
repairs and your previous written sanction cannot be obtained in consequence
of your absence from such Port, you will order the Commanding Officers in such
cases to make no repairs that shall not be indispensably necessary and to report
to you in detail the repairs actually so made. A regular account of every repair
made, discriminating those made with from those made without your previous
written sanction, must be kept by you, and copies thereof transmitted by you
to me from time to time. The requisite Instructions relatively t o supplies for the Squadron are given t o
you in another letter accompanying this. I give to the Officers Commanding Vessels under you, no other instructions
than to place themselves under your command. Their further instructions you
will give to them, in conformity to those given to yourself.
You will write to me by every opportunity -inform me of all your operations,
and send duplicates and triplicates of your letters, and returns of supplies,
repairs &Q by different conveyances.
[NA. NDA. LB, May 1799-July 1807.1
To Captain James Barron, U.S. Navy, Commanding Officer of U.S. Vessel8 of War
destined for the Mediterranean, from Secretary of the Navy
NAVYD E P M16tb
~ May 1807.
I have deemed it proper to give to you instructions relatively to the Supplies of
the Squadron in a letter distinct from that containing your general Instructions,
to draw your attention t o them the more particularly, and you will here find
nothing irrelative t o that subject. Hitherto the vessels which we have had in the Mediterranean have been maintained a t an expense so enormous as to induce strong suspicions of an utter disregard to economy in the expenditure of publick money. Hence the idea of
changing fundamentally the system with respect to supplies and of introducing
Checks which it is hoped will be found salutary. When you shall arrive in the Mediterranean, you will fir upon one place of
general deposit for all supplies. Such place should not be too far from the mouth
of the Mediterranean. The Port of Mahon in the Island of Minorca has been
mentioned, and it appears to me to be an eligible situation as a place of resort
for our vessels under existing circumstances. However you will be better able
to judge correctly upon this point on your arrival in the Mediterranean, and you
will fix upon such port as may, under all circumstances appear to you the best
calculated to answer our purposes, and it must be the only place of general
deposit for the supplies of the Squadron.
You will have all the Navy Stores a t the different places of deposit in the
Mediterranean, brought, by the publick Vessels, to the Port of General Deposit,
and placed in the charge of John Bullub esquire, who will reside a t such Port of
General Deposit, and whose receipt for such supplies must be taken and transmitted to the Accountant of the Navy. John Bullus esquire, the Navy Agent will furnish all supplies that may be
wanted upon proper requisitions.
When you shall be in Port, no requisition whatever must be made upon the
Navy Agent without your previous written sanction.
I n your absence, the respective Commanding Officers may make requisitions
for supplies upon John Bullus esquire, and may receive from him such supplies,
without your previous written sanction. But you will give special orders to the
Commanding Officers, in such cases, to procure no supplies that shall not be indispensably necessary, and to forward to you an aocount of such supplies so

-

-

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS
obtained in your absence, that you may judge whether they shall have been
indispensably necessary or otherwise. You will keep a regular account of all supplies furnished to the respective vessels,
discriminating those furnished with from those furnished without your previous
written sanction, and transmit copies of such accounts to me from time to time. The Vessels of the Squadron must exclusively resort to the place of General
Deposit for the purpose of obtaining supplies, and making necessary repairs,
except in cases of the most imperious necessity, such as distress & the like.
The Agents in London and Leghorn will be instructed to pay no drafts but
those drawn by John Bullus esqr The Commanders may draw upon John Bullus esqr only, and their drafts
upon him must be accompanied by letters of advice and by the bills of purchase
or supplies occasioning such Drafts: otherwise they will not be honored. The
Agent is instructed to pay no drafts, that shall not be accompanied by letters
of advice and the bills of purchase or supplies. There will but seldom arise a necessity to draw upon John Bullus esqr, as the
vessels are to get their supplies a t the place of General Deposit, excepting as
before stated, in cases of distress and the like, which msy compel them to put
into some other Port. The Commanders are to inform you of all bills drawn
by them, of which, you will keep a regular account, and transmit information to
me from time to time. John Bullus esqr will from time to time place in the hands of the pursers, such
small sums of money as may, in your judgment, be required to defray small contingent expences &F These are the general instructions which I have deemed i t proper to give to
you, a t this time, relatively to supplies. You will give corresponding instructiom
to all the O5cers Commanding under you, and I enjoin upon you in the
most earnest manner, to observe yourself on all occasions, and to cause the Officers
commanding under you, to observe the most regular and exact economy, and
the most particular attention to these orders, which I confidently hope will
produce a favorable result. [NA. NDA. LB, May 1799-July 1807.1
To Captain John Rodgers, U. S. Navy, from Master Commandant David Porter,
U. S. Navy
ON BOARD
THE U S. S C HEnterprize
~
Algiers Bay 1T t Q May 1806. SIR, During the time that I lay in Naples Mole I became acquainted with Capt*
Pierce of His Britanic Majesty's Brig Halcyon, who informed me, that John P
Lovel now a Sailing.Master in our Service, had been first Lieutt of a British Ship
of War in the West Indies, and that the Ship being on the point of Sailing the
Captu sent Lovel on shore to the Agent to receive the Prize Money due the Crew,
in order to have i t distributed on board, that he (Lovel) received the money, put
i t on board an Americm Vessel then laying in the Roads and went oE in her t o
America.
He also informed me, that the British Government had sent orders to Lord
Nelson, a short time revious to his death, (which Orders Capt? Pierce informed
me he brought from England) to demand Lovel from the American Commodore
as a deserter &c. [NDA. Captain's LB, Vol. 2, 1806.1
To Sir Alexander John Ball, Governor of Malta, from George Davis, U. 6. C o m l ,
Tripoli
TRIPOLI
18. May 1807.
SIR, I have the honor to inform your Excellency that his Brittanic Majesty's
Consul General for this Regency, sailed for Syracuse on the 13. instant, on board
the United States Brig Hornet, and that during his absence I have engaged to
watch over the interests of his nation in this quarter.
The letter which your Excellency addressed to the Bsshaw was delivered yesterday, and as Lt Commandant Skinner, has engaged to proceed direct to Malta, he
will communicate to your Excellency, in person, the result of the audience with
the Bashaw.

526

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1806 TO 1807

Until the return of Consul Genl Langford I shall feel i t my duty, to make
known to your Excellency every occurrence which can in any way interest the
British Government.
[NA. SDA. CL, Tripoli, Vol. 3, 1806-1811.1
To James Mackenzie & A. Glennie, London, England, and S. & W. Y. Pnrviance
& Co., Leghorn, from Secretary of the Navy
NAVYD E P A R18th
~ &lay 1807.
Weighty considerations have induced me to prohibit the practice of the Commanders of our Publick Vessels in the Mediterranean of Drawing Bills upon you Two vessels of war are now about sailing for the Mediterranean, the Chesapeak
Commre Jaq Barron & the Wasp Cap; Smith.
And the Commanding Officer of these Vessels sent as relief to those now in the
Mediterranean has been forbid to draw himself or to allow any Officer Commanding under him to draw Bills upon you.
Instead of allowing this practice as heretofore I have appointed an agent, John
Bullus Esqr who alone is authorized to draw upon you. whose Bills for the Supplies
of the Squadron you will duly honor.
It is uncertain at, this time where MTBullus will reside. The Commodore on
his arrival in the Mediterranean will fix his residence, & you will be duly informed
of it
The enclosed is the Signature of John Bullus Esqr
[NDA. GLB, Vol. 8, 1805-1807.1
To 8. & W. Y. Pnrviance 8t Co., U. S. Navy Agents, Leghorn, from Secretary of the
wavy
NAVYD E P A R18
~ May 1807.
Having been informed that the late House of Degen Purviance & CQhas changed
its firm to that of S & W Y Purviance & Co I herewith enclose to you an appointment under the Seal of this Department as Navy Agents for the Port of Leghorn
and you will be allowed the same Commission as Messrr Degen, Pumiance & CQ
have heretofore received.
INDA. GLB, Vol. 8, 1805-1807.1
To Captain James Burron, U.8.Navy, Commanding Ofacer of U,S. Vessels of War
destined for the Mediterranean, from Secretary of the Bevy
NAVYD E P Y18
~ May 1807. I t has been intimated to me that the W a s p , contrary to my intention, has
received all the fresh Powder lately ordered from Baltimore. My intention was
that this fresh Powder should be distributed between the Chesapeak and the Waap,
and that each Vessel should take to the Mediterranean, a proportion of the
Powder of inferior quality, and there if necesssry, have i t remanufactured. And
this arrangement must still be made. Let the Chesapeak receive her proportion
of the fresh powder, and the W a s p her proportion of inferior quality, in Hampton
prior to your sailing. On your arrival in the hlediterranean you may find, that some of the Officers
now there may wish to continue there, and that aome now going out, may wish
to return in the Constitution and the Enterprize. Under such circumstances you
ma make any arrangement that the good of the service will permit. Zeep me a t all times informed of the Officers Commissioned and Warrant, on
board the respective Vessels under your command, & inform me of every change
made, and of every death or other casualty. - No Detachment of Marines must
ever be left without a Commanding O5cer. The injunction that "no Detachment of Marines must ever be left without a
Commandin Officer" is given to you in consequence of information I have received t J a t kieut COXhas been transferred from his command of the marinee on
board the Hornet, to the Consulate a t Tunis; and that the Marines on board the
Hornet have consequently, been left without an officer competent to their command. RS.
[ N k NDA. LB, May 1799-July 1807.1

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

527

To George Davis, U. 6. Consul, Tripoli, from Charles D. Coxe, U. S. Charge
d'dffaires, Tunis
TUNISMay 20th 1807.'
SIR, I am informed by Captain Quarles that you left Leghorn in the U. States
Brig Hmwl for Tripoly, & I presume Captain Dent has already informed you
of my being placed here by the Consul General Mr Lear. The Bey has requested of me as a favour to procure s passage for the Copigi
Basha & suite to TrjpoIy in the Mohawk; which Capt: Quarles has been good
enough to comply with. - We found this morning (to our surprize) that they
amount t o twenty in number. - Remuneration I suppose from these people
is out of the question. - I think The Captain ought t o be paid, but I do not
see any chsnce he hae for it now except from Government. - You will be good
enough to let me know your opinion on this head by his return t o Suss. The Beys army has returned from before Constantine after having been (aa
they say) allways victorious in the different affairs they have had with The
Algerines.
The Commander in Chief Hameida Benayet has been im risoned
by The Bey and all his property confiscated, for having made a retreat in t i e midst
of rtietory. He is now embodying a larger Camp than the former, consisting of
The Sphaves, Useletis & Tunisians. - They begin their march to day, and The
Sapatapa is to follow in a few days as Commander in Chief. I received a letter from hl? Lear pr H. B. M. Frigate Niger Captain Hillyer
informing of his safe arrival a t Algiers on the 20tb March in The Constitution.
They talk there as if they were confident of success, but I think they will hardly
attempt The City of Tunis. It will allways give me the greatest satisfaction to hear from you by every
opportunity, as on my part, I shall omit none t o keep you advised of every thing
worth communicating. Original pr The Schooner Mohawk Capt. Quarles.
[LC. Cbas. D. Coxe LB, Ac. 2951, 1806-1809.1

-

-

Extract from log of U. 5. Brig H O ~ Cof
F , 18 Guns, Haster Commandant J O H.~
Dent, U. 6. Navy, commanding, 20 May 1807
Commences with gentle breezes and pleasant weather - At X past 3-[PM]
came to a n anchor in Syracuse in 5 f* water a stern of the U: S: Frigate Constztutzm
and received Prattique - A t Sunset sent dourn Royal yards - At 4 hoisted
out the l e t Cutter and moored with the Stream - All hands employed staying
the Masts setting up Rigging &c* At noon moderate breezes from the Ed
[KA. NDA original, 180&1810.]
To Captain James Barron, U. 6. Navy, Hampton, Va., from Secretary of the Bevy
NAVYDEPARTMENT
May 21. 1807. I have understood that Col. Lear has procured 2 or 3 remarkably fine Arabian
Horses the breed of which i t is desirable to introduce into this Country.
Should Col. Lear ask permission to send these Rones to this Country in one
of the publick vessels of War returning from the Mediterranean, you will grant
such permission if the publick service will conveniently admit it.
[NDA. OSW, Vol. 7, 1805-1807.1
126 May 18071
To George Davis, U. S. Consul, Tripoli, from,Eamet Caramanli, Rightful Bashaw
of Tripoh
iTdation]

COPY
Your Lordship's letter of the Twelfth of the month of May current has been
delivered to me, from .which I perceive that the Basbm, my Brother, has permitted
my Family to come to join me, with the exception of my Daughters who wish t o
remain with their Husba~~ds,
and that they will be accompanied by a sufficient
number of slaves and their belongings. I confess myself very much obliged for
the seal with which Your Lordshp has achieved the fulfillment of this agreement,

528

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1806 TO 1807

which had already been made in the treaty of peace concluded in the name of the
Most Serene Republic of the United States of America with the Regency of Tripoli.
I trust that Your Lordship will undertake with the same efficacy to obtain agreement to the other points which I ask. Everything which you do on my behalf,
though it is for the honor of your nation, which holds itself obliged to compensate
me for the injuries which I have suffered, nevertheless will be greatly appreciated
and I shall be grateful for your good offices in discharging this commission, and
I shall always preserve the memory of how much you have assisted me. And
placing myself a t Your Lordship's service and paying my devoted respects
I N SYRACUSE,
the 86th day of May, 1807
Your Lordship's (seal)
Your Lordship will receive another letter signed by me, but since it was written
in the English language and I do not understand it, I have therefore executed
this other in the language which I know.
[NA. SDA. CD, Tripoli, Vol. 3, Jan'y-June 1811.1
To Master Commandant John Smith, U. S. Navy, commanding U. S. Sloop Wacp.
Hampton Roads, Va., from Secretary of the Navy
NAVYDEP*26 May 1807.
After Mr Purviance with his baggage shall have joined you, you will weigh
anchor and proceed with the Wasp to Portsmouth in England, a t which place
Mr Purviance will land and proceed thence to London .You will wait a t Portsmouth, until you shall receive dispatches from our Ministers a t London for our Minister a t Paris, or until you shall hear from them that
they have no such dispatches to send. You will then proceed to L'orient, and
there deliver the dispatches which you will receive from the Department of State,
and the dispatches which you may receive from our Ministers a t London, agreeably
to the directions of the Secretary of State. After you shall have performed this
service you will proceed to the Mediterranean and place yourself under the command of the Officer Commanding the American Vessels of War in that sea, who
will give you your further instructions. [NA. NDA. LB, May 179SJuly 1807.1
To George Davis, U. S. Consul, Tripoli, from Captain Hugh G. Campbell, U. S. Navy

U S SHIP Con~titution
Harbour Syracuse May 27. 1807.
SIR, The arrival of the Hornet on the 18tP Inst. favor'd me with your communication of the 12tP informing of your friendly reception a t Tripoli and the Honorable
& amicable adjustment of our affairs with that Regency
I regret that you have promised The Family of the Bashaw a passage in the
Vessel that calls for your dispatches which is now the Event of the Hornet - with
orders to Captn Dent to join me with them a t some port between this & Alicante
I mention this for your Government. i t being the only safe conveyance that may
offer for America these many months to come. I shall leave this place in a few
days for Leghorn from thence to Gibralter where I expect to be Superceded in the
Command but by whom I am i orant not haveing one word of news from home Captp Dent will return to this gation after delivering me your dispatches who will
assist in the Transportation of the Bashaws Family, which I am of opinion will be
in sufficient time as the Bashaw finds it impossible a t present to procure suitable
accommodations for them. When your Letter was read to him he appear'd much
gratified and seriously affected observing a t the same time he was fully convinced
of American sincerity
[NA. SDA. CL, Tripoli, Vo1. 3, 1806-1811.1
COPY

-

127 May 18071
To Sidi Mohamet Dghiee, Minister of Foreign Affaires and Prime Minister of the
Bashaw of Tripoli, from George Davis, U. 8. Consul, Tripoli
[Translation]

The undersigned Consul General of the United States of America and Chargr5
dlMaires for [the Regency] of His Excellency the Bashaw of Tripoli in Barbary,
to Sidi Mahomed Dghies, Minister of Foreign Affairs, &c. kc.

W D S WITH BARBARY POWERS
SIB, I had the honor yesterday to inform you concerning the unbecoming conduct of two officials of this Regency, who refused to accept the consulsr gifts sent
to them throu h my Dragoman. I should not have wished to communicate such
an affront to Ais Excellency the Bashaw, but after due reflection I am expressly
determined that he shall be informed, without however naming the individuals
who have behaved so ill toward me. In order, therefore, that I may not be obliged
to undergo another such unpleasantness, I have determined not to send any present
to any other persons who may be entitled thereto unless I first receive His Excellency's assurance that i t will not cause me further trouble.
I therefore beg you, Mr. Minister, to inform His Excellency of what occurred
yesterday, without mentioning the individuals.
TRIPOLI, d7 May 1807
[NA. SDA, CD, Tripoli, Vol. 3, Jan'y 1806-June 1811.1

[27 May 1807)
To George Davis, U. S. Consul, Tripoli, from Sidi Mohamet Dghies, Xinister of
Foreign Affairs and Prime Minister of the Bashaw of Tripoli
[Translation]

MAHOMED
DQHIES, Minister of His Excellency The Bashaw of Tripoli in
Barbary - to MR. GEORGEDAVIS, Consul General of the United States of
America [for the Regency of] His Excellency the Bashaw.
SIR, In reply to your favor of this day, I may assure you that, in conformity
with your wish, I shall not fail to inform His Excellency the Bashaw of what is
contained in your letter, and so soon as I have his answer I shall communicate i t
to you without any delay; permit me to take the liberty of herewith sending my
respects to Madame, and to your charming daughter.
DGHIES
(Signed in Arabic) SIDI MAHOMET
TRIPOLI67 May 1807
[NA. SDA. CD, Tripoli, Vol. 3, Jan'y 1806-June 1811.1

'

TOCaptain John H. Dent, U. S. Navy, U. S. Brig Hornet. 18 Guns, from Captain Hugh
G. Campbell, U. S. Navy
U.S. SHIPC o ~ t i t u t i m
Harbour of Syracuse 28'P May 1807.
SIR, The United States Sloop Hornet under your Command being ready for Sea;
I have to request and desire that you roceed with all possible dispatch to Malta,
where you are not to Anchor, but s e n t i n your boat and inform yourself from our
Consul and Agent, whether there are any recent arrivsls from the United States
or letters for me, from the Navy Department likewise of all political matter worthy
of remark - On leaving Malta you will proceed to Tripoli and take such dispatches as Mr Davis our Consul may have for Goverment, then run to Tunis,
confer with Mr Cox, charged with our M a i m a t that place, collect all necessary
information, receive his communications for the State Department and join the
Constitution a t Alicant as soon as in your power - Should any unforseen accident
prevent you from remaining a t Alicant untill the arrival of the Constitution you will
in that case leave the Dispatches and any other information you may have for me,
in charge of Mr Montgomery our Consul a t that place N.B. I n case you should leave Alicant without seeing me or hearing again
from me, I request you to call a t Tripoli and assist Mr Davis in forwarding the
Bashaw's family to Syracuse - The Hornet I presume can accomodate the
most of them, that having accomplished you may act as circumstances snd the
service require untill you receive further orders from me or my Successor t o the
Command of our forces in these Seas. [NHF. Dent's LB, 1803-1810.1
Extract from log of U. S. Brig Hornet, of 18 Guns, Master Commandant John H.
Dent, U. S. Navy, commanding, 28 May 1807
[Syracuse] At
past 4 [PM] got underweigh light breezes. Constitutions
boats took us in P#w - At 5 the boats cast off. Lattd? by O b s ~36O46'.
[NA. NDA original, 1805-1810.1

1

530

NAVAL OPEBATIONS FROM

1806

TO 1807

To Captain James Barren, U. S. Iavy, Commending Ofecer of U. 5. Shim of
War destined for the Xediterranean. from Secretary of the H a w
N a n D E P M G ~May
O 1807.I am informed by Cap* Campbell in his last dispatches to this office, that
there are remaining a t this time in the Mediterranean two Gun Boats and some
small vessels which were purchased by you up the Adriatic in the yesr 1804.
You will be pleased to direct the Navy Agent to wll the Gun Boats and VesBels above mentioned a t such piace and upon such terms as may be judged b a t ,
passing the proceeds thereof to the credit of this Department. [NA. NDA. LB, May 1799-July 1807.1
Extracts from log of U. S. Brig H o d , of 18 Guns, Master Commandant John H.
Dent, U. S. Navy, commanding
31 M a y 1807
Commencecl light airs snd calms st intervals - At f : past 1 [PM] took in
the Staysails flying Jib & Jib Topsail - At K past 3 in Royals up Foread,
tack'd ship and back'd the Main Topsail - Malta bearing W S W. distant 2
miles Sent the 34 Cutter on shore with Lt Morris
A t 11 in Studsails - At Meridian the South point of Malta bore W B S
8 distant 6 miles Lattd9 by Obsn 35O.56'.
8 June 1807
At 34 past 11 [AM] spoke the American Schooner Mohawk from Tripoli At noon Tripoli bore S.E.B.E. distant 5 or 6 miles
h t * ~O h 4 33O58'.
[NA. NDA original, 1805-1810.1

Extract from log book of U, S. Frigate C h w J e , Captain James Barron, U. 8. Navy,
commanding, Saturday, 6 June 1807
Commences with Clear WIWind from the South4 and East4. - people Employed on Various Ships duty a t % past 10.-A. M. Commodore [James] Barron
Came on board, hoisted the Broad Pendant. - The U, S. - Sloop of War Wosp
came down from Craney Island, and Anchored Near the Ship. - the latter
part Squally with rain, Sent down T.G. Yards. [LC. USN, Ac. 540, 1807-1809.1
Presumably to Vice Admiral Edward Thornbrough, B. B., from Captain Jahleel
Brenton, B. I.
HIE MAJESTY'SSHIPSpartun
7Q June 1807
BIB, The violent and unjust clamour which has been so industriously raised
against Great Britian during the present War, for her conduct towards neutrals,
and the virulent paragraphs which have appeared particularly in the American
papers, tending so much to exasperate and indispose the Public mind in that
Country. - a ainat His Majesty's Government, induces me to state to ou a
circumstance tkat occurred during our present Cruize. - which if made # u b h
will I truat considerably invalidate the kind of testimony from which alone the
complsinta of the American Government have been founded. - Viz* thereports
of the Mastere of their Merchant Vesaels respecting their vexatious treatment
they declare to have received from the British Cruizers. On the 27% Ultimo we fell in with the American Ship Urania of [space], Hector
C@n Mester, and [space] Green, of Rhodes Island, Supercargo - she had
8aded from America with a Cargo of Cod-fish for s Market, and put into Alicant,
where not being able to dispose of her fish to advantage, she cleared out for
Leghorn, but when off Genoa, bore up for that Port, knowing it s t the same time
to be in a stste of blockade, as is proved by the Masters thinking it neaeas
a rotest upon the subject. - he sailed from Oenoa shortly after for%:
horn,
he took on board 18,000 dollars, 14,OW of which were mid to be
the produoe of his Cargo, and the remaining 4,000 are Bills upon Americg
with which and a few bale goods he left Leghorn, and was on hie passage to S o u
on the Coast of Africa, - from the suspicious nature of the former part of hie

&

C A N N O N FROM A

TRIPOL~TA
GUNBOAT
N
C A P T U R E D B Y C A P T A I N STEPHEN D E C A T U R . JR..1804.

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS
Voyage, I was induced to send for the Master on board with his Log Book &
papers, and upon his appearance I explained to him the necessity of my acting
as I did, of which he expressed himself perfectly satisfied, and sensible of the
delicacy with which he was treated. I t was a t the same time nearly Calm, in
a few minutes he was discharged, - upon a breeze springing up he voluntarily
steered for some time the same course that we did. On the 814 Instant we fell in with the same ship again between Sardinia and
the Island of Ponzo - and the extraordinary circumstance of her being within
Forty Leagues of the place where we had before seen her, led me again to examine
her log book, in which I found a detail of her being boarded by us before, worked
up to the most rancorous pitch of exaggeration, stating that on such a day, they
were boarded by an English Frigate (the Spartan,) that there Ship was forced out
of her course, that the Master was forced on board with his Papers, that their
hatches were broke open &c - upon my renlonstrating with the Master & Supercargo, upon the unmanliness of inserting falsehoods in their log-Book for no
other purpose than that of cresting enmity between two Countries, whose neutral
interests, led them to the Cultivation of peace, they both acknowleged the justice of my observations, that they had been treated with the politest attention
not only by myself, but by my Officers, assured me that the log-Book should not
be made public in America, and that they would instantly make out a counter
report, contradicting the former, - they appeared at the same time overwhelmed
with shame and confusion a t the detection. I submit to you Sir the propriety of this Circumstance being made known to
the Commander in Chief. (Signed) J A HBEENTON
~
(A COPY)
ED^ THOENBEOUQH
[NDA. Captain's LB, Vol. 3, 1807.1
[7 June 1807 t o 15 February 18081
Statement of the Account of Captain Hugh G. Campbell, U. S. Navy
Department of State of the U.S.
To HUGHG CAMPBELL
D:
1807
June 7t4 To Cash paid Hamet Caramella late Bashaw of Tripoli
$2,400.
per his receipt herewith . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Febr 15" By net proceeds of Robert Gilmor & Sons' draught on
Messs Grant Webb & CQof Leghorn in favr of Wv
Patterson & Sons, for 2651.18.8 in kiiver, as negotiated by AM Gibbs of Palermo pr his letter herewith
to Geo Dyson --------------__---------------------2,223. 73
due $ 176 27
E m u r s Excepted
WASHINGTON,
A p d 88* 1808
The above balance of 176 27/100 is to be paid out of the appropriation for
Barbary Intercourse
S. PLEASONTON
DEPI OF STATE
1 8 4 Apl 1808
[GAO. No. 20,429.1

}

To Secretary of the Navy from l a s t e r Commandant John Smith, U. 6. Navy
U S. SLOOPW m p
Hamvton Roads June 8 4 1807 SIB,I have the honour to acquaint you that the arrival of Mr Purviance on
the 5 t b enables us to proceed to thk place from which we shall repair to sea the
moment the tide admits,
Herewith, 1 have the honour to transmit to you the Wasp muster Roll conaonant with your directions I h.ave attached Midshipman Wilkinson to the

wasp -

[NDA. MC LB, 1806-1807.1

532

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1805 TO 1807

To Secretary of the Navy from Captain Isaac Chauncey, U. S. Navy, on furlough,
Master of American Ship Beeocr, of New York, N. Y.
NEW YOBK June 9 t h 1807
SIR! Being under the impression that as long as I have the honour of holding
a Commission from the Department over which you preside, that I am accountable to that Department for all my official acts I therefor have the honour of
encloseing to you Copy's of two letters to Mr Maddison with their accompaniments
[Enclosure]

To Secretary of State from Captain Isaac Chauncey, U. S. Navy
COPY

NEW YORKJune 9 t h 1807
SIR, I am mortifyed that I am again under the necessity of Complaining to
you of the base treatment received from a people that we are a t peace with and
profess a wish to continue so, yet in the very face of those professions are guilty
of the most unwarrantable and insulting conduct towards the Flag and Citizen's
of a Nation whom they Hypocritically pretend to respect I had the honour of informing you on the 3 0 t h of December last of a seaman
being impressed from my ship by the boarding officer of H, B, M, Ship Phaeton
on the 19th of that month then laying a t Cheunpee near the Boca Tigris and also
of forwarding Copy's of the Correspondence pased on the occation - I have
now to record a more outrageous act than is generally commited by the officers
of any civilized nation I left Whampoa on the 36 of February in the Ship Beaver
belongin to John Jacob Astor & John Wheetten Esqrs of New York, with a full
laid of tea's, Nankeenes and China ware Loaded on the sale account of the
Owners and myself all citizens of the United States - On the 5 t h I droped down
the river in company with the Ships Swift and Projector both belonging and bound
t o New York a t about half past 4 o'clock in the afternoon. three miles below
the Boca Tigris I was boarded by an officer from H. B. M. Ship Lyon Captain
[space] Roles laying a t Cheunpee. the boarding officer after asking the usual
questions such as the ships & Masters Name's cargo &$ (which was all answered
politely) he ordered the ship hove too to examine the people this order I refused
to obey as not acknowledging any power that had a right to detain my ship for
search within the waters of a Neutral and a t least 50 miles from the sea. the
officer then ordered his Boats crew onboard in order to force me to a compliance
which I resisted with my officers and succeeded in driving them from the wheel
and quarter deck - but not being more than pistol shot from the Lyon the officer hailed her and asked for assistance, and immediately three other Boats was
mane'd from the Lyon and in a few minutes my ship was boarded by upwards
of fifty armed men who forceably took possession of the ship, struck the Coulow
drove the pilot out of the ship threatened his life if he came alongside without
his (the officers) orders Finding the ship in this situation I abandoned her t o the Captors for I could
consider them in no other light - and after being very near getting her onshore
twice they anchored with the stream anchor not far from a reef of rocks
about
this time the Szaift Captain Eldridge pased within hail I asked him to send his
boat for me as I was determine'd to leave the Ship but was not permited to make
use of my own boat Captain Eldridge came himself in his boat but as he approched the Ship he was ordered off with very abusive Language and threatened
t o sink him and his boat if he came alongside
in about an hour after he sent
his boat with his chief officer in her but he met with no better success than Captain
Eldridge had done, and was ordered off in the same manner
The o5cer after bringing the ship to an anchor demanded my papers which
I refused to deliver or even shew him he then threatened t o impress every man
out of the ship that was worth takeing if I did not submit to have my papers
and men's protections examine'd. I however persisted in my first determinaI was then sent onboard of the Lyon to see whether the Commanding
tion
officer there could not have better success with me. But there where one might
have expected to have found gentlemen I experienced a Mortifycation not t o
be described and was insulted with Langua e better suiting a Billings gate jidh
womun then a person wearing the Livery of fis country Language too indecent
to be recorded here but degrading t o me as a man and an American
But
finding that I was not t o be frightened into their view's after s, detention of about
half an hour I was again sent onboard of my own ship where an officer from the
Lyon, soon followed me and used milder Language to induce me t o show my
papers and mens protections I still resisted on the prindpal that they had no

-

-

-

-

533

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

right to detain me for search within the waters of a Neutral that their conduct
was arbitrary & tyrannical that they could never make it good to their own
goverment About 9 o'clock in the evening finding me still obstinate (as they
termed it) I was told I might proceed that my wnduct should be represented to my
goverment and they would have me turned out of my ship I at this time was determined not to take charge of the ship but to proceed t o Canton and there enter
a protest, but on more advice I resumed the command again and proceeded on
my Voyage under the impression that it would have all the effect to enter a protest
in the first port of the United States I arived a t and forward to you a statement
of the case I t was evident to me as well as all the gentlemen on board of my
ship that from the extreme anxiety of the officer after I abandoned her to him
that he was conscious of haveing exceeded his authority moreover they giveing
up their point and permiting me to proceed without seeing my papers or all my
mens protections (for some of them shewed theirs Voluntarily) wm a circumstance
that weigh's strongly in my mind that they where convinced that they could not
establish the principal of searching and distressing Neutrals by takeing their men
within the waters of a Neutral State particularly if a proper resistance was made
to such outrage's The american Trade to China has suffered considerable interruptions from
H, B, M, Ship's laying near the Boca Tigris - There was scarcely a ship a t
Canton this year but had one or more men impressed This is a serious injury
for those men cannot be replaced in that Country - They have not only distressed ships by takeing their men but many have been detained several day's
on some frivolous pretex or other after they was ready for sea and droped down
to where the men of war lay
To show a t what pains the officers on that station take to anoy the Americans,
I will relate a circumstance that happened about the time that I arived a t Csnton - The Carpenter of a ship belonging to Philadelphia was impressed onboard
of the Phaeton - Captain Wood acknowledged that he knew him to be an
american but would keep him untill he was ready for sea to punish some other
americans that he was Vexed with Trusting that you will not consider this information impertinent on my part -

-

-

[Enclosure]

To Captain Isaac Chauncey, U. S. Navy, Master of American Ship Bcaar, Whampoa,
from Captain John Wood, B. N.
MAJESTY'SSHIP Phaeton
HIS BRITANNIC
COPY
Cheunpee B6th Dee? 1806
SIR, I have this moment received your letter of the 20th Instant. respecting
the Seaman James Briant - I have to observe he was recognized the moment he
came on board by a Townsman from Ayr in Scotland which he dose not deny
and that he left the Slave Ship George a t Charlestown in May 1806
Therfor under these circumstances i t is Intirely out of my power to give him up
[Endosure]

To Secretary of State from Captain Isaac Chauncey, U. S. Navy, Master of American Ship Bcaoer of New York
COPY
CANTON
30th December 1806
SIR, On the evening of the 19th Inst. I had the mortifycat,ion to be brought too
and boarded by an officer from H. B. M. Ship Phaeton laying a t Cheumpee near
the Boca Ti is who after exsmineing my papers and men's protections, he took
with him a reaman by the name of William Bryant who entered with me in July
last at New York as an american Citizen but by some accident lost his protectionI remonstrated with the officer as to the propriety of takeing men from me within
the Harbour of a Neutral. he told me that he was only executing his orders. I
therefor thought it most prudent to submit to what I could not prevent and to
write to the Captain of the Phaeton and to the Consul on the subject
and when
the business was ropedy represented I had no doubt but my man would be
restored to me. Ifowever I wm deceived in my conjecture for you will peroeive
by Captain Woods answer to my letter that the man was recognised as a BtitMh
subject. I should not have submited tamely to search and detention within the
waters of s Neutral had i t not been for the interest of my employel's, for if
Captain Wood had thought proper to take six instead of one man the ship must
have lain at Whompoa untill acoident could have suplyed the deficiency of the crew

-

534

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1806 TO 1807

I enclose for your information copy's of my letter's to Captain Wood and Mr
Carrington together with Captain Wood's answer
[NDA. Captain's LB, Vol. 2, 1807.1

-

To Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Navy, Portland, Me., from Secretary of the Bavy
NAVYDEPM*June 9Q 1807
I with very great pleasure grant you the permission you ask in your letter of the
115 i n s t y e s ! use "one of the Gun Boats to go occasionally into the Bay for three
or four days a t a time during the hot weather in July and August" and I most
sincerely hope that you will find such excursions of service to your health. Favor me if you please with the result of your observations upon the Shoals
$ 9 of y o u Bay.[NDA. OSW, Vol. 7, 1805-1807.1
To Secretary of the Navy from Lieutenant Samuel Elbert, U. S. Navy
CHARLESTON
11Q June 1807
SIR, Agreeable to your orders I have dismantled N9 2, 3, & 9 & moored them
in their old birth in Ashley River, all the Hands are discharged except the
Gunner & Boatswain & two Men to each Boat [NDA. Officers LB, Vol. 2, May-July 1807.1
To Captain Isaac Chauncey, U. S. Navy, Master of American Ship Bemu of New
York, B. Y., from Secretary of State
SIR, I have recQyour letter of the 9th The circumstances which it, states have,
as you judged, a just claim to the attention of the government; that the statement
may be cloathed with the due formality, I must request that your oath may be
affixed to it. A protest in the usual form before a Notary may be best suited to
the case. Had your letter been written in your official character, this formality
would have been unnecessary; but coming from you in another character, i t might
without the ordinary sanction, encounter evasive attempts for which i t will be
best to leave no room.
It gives me pleasure to find your own conduct on the occasion which gave rise
to your communication, presenting so honorable a contrast to that of which you
complain in the Officers of a foreign government. As a just combination of
manliness and prudence, it is equally a reproach to them, and a praise worthy
example to your fellow citizens thrown into like situations.
[NA. SDA. Dom. L, Vol. 15, June 1805-July 1810.1]
Extract from log of U. S. Brig Hornet, of 18 Guns, Master Commandant John H.
Dent, U. S. Navy, commanding, 16 June 1807
Commences moderate breezes and pleasant weather At 2 saw Alicant bearing
N W. distant 6 or 7 leagues - At 3 Two Spanish Gun boats stood out of Alicant
towards us - At K past 4 they commenced firing on the Brig with round and
Grape - At J/l past 4 fired one shot at them when she hove too while Cap$
Dent sent a boat on board to inform them it was a U: S. Vassell they were firing
into and to enquire the reason of their firing they said they supposed us English
At 5 filled and made sail
At 7 came too in Alicant Roads with the Starboard Bower in 8 fathoms water
the Emternmost part of the Bay bearing East the South point S: S: W. the Castle
on the Hill North and the Mole head N B W - At 4 A M out 2d Cutter and
called all hands to scrub Hammacks and cloaths
Ends pleasant weather
Brig in usrantine - Weigh'd a Barrel Pork. Philipa and MqClennan weighing 208 ounda
[NA. NDA original, 180b-1810.1

-

9

-

535

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

[I9 June 180q
To Vice Admiral Edward Thornbrough, 3.8., from Captain Peter Parker, B. I.
On the 19tb of June being in Company with H M Ship Endymion Off the Lipari
Islands Capt* Capel directed me by Signal to examine a strange sail S, E b El on
my comin up with her she proved to be the American Ship Aurma, from s g h o r n ,
bound to tenedos, but from her having no Charter Party and her Papew being
altogether very irregular & from other Circumstances I detained her & put on
board MI Henry Bourne Midshipman with three Men to carry her to Malta for
the purpose of undergoing legal adjudication; & left all the Americans on board
their Ship, At Midnight Mr Bourne came on board and acquainted me that the
Master had in a fit of Rage shot one of his Men through the body and Wounded
another with a Sabre; I instantly sent the Surgeon with Mr Bourne to attend the
Wounded Men, & directed the detained Ship should be kept close to us duri
the night, a t 6 OQock in the Morning of the 20th the Surgeon returned on b o a 3
& reported to me, the Mans wound who was shot through the body to be mortal,
& the other cut over the hand with a Sabre. - Mt Bourne also informed me that
one of the American Seamen brought up the Sabre from the Cabin on the quarter
Deck & swore he would cut the first Man down that came near him. I then sent
for all the American Seamen on board the Melpomene & took some of them out,
sendin Six Men in addition on board the Awora with orders to confine the Master
to his 8abin until their arrival a t Malta, a Copy of which order I enclose for your
information. The American Seamen cannot account for the Masters conduct any
more than they say, he has lately been very unfortunate in his affairs which they
suppose drove him to this act of desperation. - The detained Ship parted from
the Melpomene a t 11 OClock on the Morning of the 20tP and the Surgeon reported
to me it was utterly impossible the man could live until evening after havlng
received every possible medical aid
(Signed) PETERPARKER,
Captain of H M Ship Melpmene. To Vice AdmJ THOBNBROUQH
N. B. The Master of the Aurora was not drunk -

P

PARKER

(A COPY)

E D WTHORNBROUQH
~
[NDA. Captain's LB, Vol. 3, 1807.1

To Secretary of the Navy from Captain James Barron, U. 6, Navy
UNITEDSTATESSHIP Chesapeak
Hampton Roads. June 8lSt 1807
SIR, On Tuesday the 16tP Inst C a p t ~Gordon reported this Ship ready for Sea,
and I have been daily expecting to address you from Cape Henry, Since that time
nothing but a strong gale from the North East has prevented our sailing. the
Wind is still adverse; but has the appearance of a change
The Moment ft takes place we shall depart, and apprize you of our movements
by the return of the Pilot Boat, which will also bring you an abstract of our Log
which will inform you how we have been employ'd [NDA. Captain's LB, Vol. 2, 1807.1
Extract from log book of U. S. Frigate Chapc&, 40 Guns, Captain James Barron,
U. 6. Navy, commanding, Sunday, 21 June 1807
First part pleasant Wr Wind from North4 8: East4 At 7. A. hf. sent up T. G.
Yards, loosed Sails to dry. At 5 P. M.got under Way and moved higher up the
River. - Commodore Came on board. - this day Ends with pleasant Wr [LC. USN, Ac. 540, 1807-1809.1
[22 June 18071
To Captain James Barron, U. 6. Navy, from Captain Salisbury Prgce Humphries,
B. IU., commanding H. B. M. 6. Leopard
N? 1
The Captain of His Britannick Majestys Ship Leopard has the honor to enclose
the Captain of the United States Ship Cksapcak an order from the Honbl* Vice

536

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1805 TO 1807

Adm! Berkely Commander in Cheif of His Majesty's Ships on the North American
Station respecting some deserters from the Ships (therein mentioned) under his
Command and supposed to be now serving as part of the Crew of the Chesapeak
The Capt of the Leopard will not presume to say anything in addition to what
the Commander in Cheif has stated, more than to Express an hope that every circumstance raspecting them may be adjusted in a manner that the harmony subsisting between the two Countries may remain undisturbed
H M SHIP Leopard
at Sea June l O n ? 1807
[Concerning Admiral Berkeley's Order.]
The purport of the general order said to be issued by Admiral Buckley was,
"that each and every vessel of his squadron should take by force, if they could not
be obtained by other means, any British deserters that could be found onboard the
Chesapeak, and that on the part of the Commanders of the Ships of his squadron,
a search should be admitted for american deserters"
This, as well as my memory serves me, was the tenor of the paper handed me by
the visiting officer of his Britannic majesty's ship the Leopard, and stated to have
been orders recently issued by Admiral Buckley. There were several names mentioned in the body of the demand, neither of which
were known to us. -

-

-

[22 June 18071
To Captain Salisbury Pryce Humphries, R.N., from Captain James Barron, U.S. Navy
Nq 2
I know of no such men as you describe the officers that were on the recruiting
service for this ship was pa[r]tirularly instructed by the Goverment, through
me not to enter any Deserters from his B M. Ships, nor do I know of any being
here. I am also instructed never to permit the Crew of any Ship that I command, to be muster'd by any other but their own Officers it is my disposition
to preserve harmony and I hope this answer to your dispatch will prove satisfactory
Signed JAMES
BARRON
AT SEAJune 22?4 1807 To the Commander of his B M Ship Leopard
[22 June 18071
To Captain S. P. Humphries, B. N., from Captain James Barron, U. S. Navy
NQ3
SIR, I consider the Frigate Chesapeak your prize, and am ready to deliver her
t o any Officer authoriz'd to receive her, by the return of the Boat I shall expect
your answer Siened
JAMES
BARBON
u
Chesapeak AT SEA
June 22?4 1807
To the Commander of his B M. Ship Leopard [22 June 18071
To Captain James Barron, U. S. Navy, from Captain S. P. Bumphries, R. N., commanding H. B. IU.S. Leopard
N9 4
SIR, Having to the utmost of my power fulfuled the instructions of my Commander in Cheif I have nothing more to desire and must in consequence proceed
to join the remainder of the Squadron, repeating t,hat I am ready to give you
every assistance in my power, and do most sincerely deplore that any lives should
have been lost in the execution of a service which might have been adjusted
more amicably not only with respect to ourselves but the Nantions to which
we respectively belong I have the Honor to be Sir
Your obedient Hble Sevt
Leopard At Sea June 22 1807

6. P. HUMPEREY~

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

537

[22 June 18071
Deposition of Master Commandant Charles Gordon, U. 6. Navy
Personally appeared before me William Thornton one of the Justices assigned
t o keep the peace in and for the District of Columbia, duly appointed & commissioned by the President of the United States, Charles Gordon esquire, Msster
Commandant in the Navy of the United States and Captain on board of the
frigate Chesapeake, who being duly sworn on the holy Evangels of almighty God,
does depose & say, That he was on board the United States frigate Chesapeake,
on Monday last the 22nd day of this present month (June) when the British 50
gun ship Leopard fired into her four or five broadsides. That after the Chesapeake
struck her colors, several officers from the Leopard came onboard of her. That
this Deponent informed the Senior British Officer, that the Seamen he was taking
from the Chesapeake, were Native American Citizens. That one of them, in
particular, he knew himself to be a native Citizen of the State of Maryland,
from his own neighbourhood. The British Officer then replied, if they were
native American Citizens, they had received the King's bounty.
C H AGOBDON
~
Sworn before me a t the City of Washington, in the District of Columbia, this
27tbday of June, in the year 1807.
WILLXAM
THOENTON

-

[22 June 1807l
Deposition of Surgeon John Bullus, U. S, Navy
Personallj- appeared before me William Thornton one of the Justices assigned
to keep the peace in & for the District of Columbia duly appointed & commissioned by the President of the United States; Doctor John Bullus, Consul of the
United States for the Islands of Minorca Majorca, & Ivica, & navy agent t o the
United States' Squadron, in the Mediterranean: who being solemnly worn on
the holy Evangels of Almighty God, does depose & say: that he was on board
the United States frigate Chesapeake on Monday last the 22nd day of this present
month (June) then laying too three leagues distant from Cape Henry, or thereabouts. That about 4 oClock in the afternoon of that day she was hailed from
the British fifty gun ship, Leopard, the flag ship of AdmiraI Berkley, by Cap4
H. Humphreys who informed commodore Barron that he had a dispatch t o
deliver to him from Admiral Berkley. Very soon after a Lieutenant from the
Leopard came on board of the Chesapeake and delivered to Commodore Barron
a letter from cap? Humphreys enclosing an order of Admiral Berkley on the
subject of some seamen, said t o have deserted from on board the British frigate
Melampw & to be then in the Chesapeake. Commodore Banon, in the presence
& hearing of this Deponent, then stated to the Lieutenant of the Leopard that
a fair & full enquiry had been made into the case of the Seamen whom he demanded and that ofter a minute investigation into all the circumstances the
British Minister Mr Erskine was perfectly satisfied on the subject, inasmuch as
they were Native American Citizens impressed by the officers of the Melampus.
Commodore Barron then pointed t o this Deponent and stated further t o the
Lieutenant of the Leopard, that this Deponent was particularly acquainted with
all the facts and circumstances relative to the transaction, and that he had received his information from the honorable Robert Smith Secretary of the Navy
of the United States. This Deponent then informed the British officer that he
was ready to go on board of the Leopard and to give t o Cap$ Humphrep all the
information he possessed, but the lieutenant replied that they did not know MT
Erskine in the business. All this conversation was had and explanation given
before a gun was fired from the Leopard.
JOHNBULLUS.
Sworn before me a t the ciby of Washington in the District of Columbia, this
274day of June, in the year 1807.
WILLIAMTHORNTON
[NDA. Captain's LB, Vol. 2, 1807.1
To secretary of the Navy from Captain James Barron, U. S. Navy
[Original]
UNITEDSTATESFRIGATEChesapeake
Chesapeak Bay June 994 1807 SIR, Ye[s]terday a t 6 A M the Wind became favorable and knowing your
anxiety that the ship shoud sail with all possible des atch, we weighd from our
station in Bampton Roads and stood t o sea, in Lin %aven Bay we p w l d two

538

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1806 TO 1807

British Men of War, one of them the BeUona, the other the Melampwr. their
Colours flying and their appearance friendly some time afterwards we observ'd
one of the two line of Battle Ships that lay off Cape Henry to get under way and
stand to Sea, a t this time the Wind became light and i t was not until1 near four
in afternoon that the ship under way came within hail. Cape Henry then bearing
N. W. by W. distance three leagues. the communication which appear'd to be
her commanders object for speaking the Chesapeak, he said he wou'd send on
board on which I order'd the Chesapeak to be. hove too for his convenience, on
the amval of the Officer he presented me with the enclosed paper No 1. from the
Captain of the Leopard. and a copy of an order from Admiral Berkley which
which another officer afterwards took back. to which. I gave the enclosed answer
No 2, and was waiting for his reply-about this time I observ'd some ap earance
of an hostile Nature, and said to Captain Gordon, that it was possible tgey were
serious. and, requested him to have his Men sent to their quarters with as little
noise ss possible not using those ceremonies which we shou'd have done with an
avow'd enemy as I fully su posed their arrangements were more menace thsn
any thing serious. C a p t ~8ordon immediately gave the orders to the ofEeers
and men to go to quarters and have all things in readyness, but before a match
cou'd be lighted, or the Quarter Bill of any division examin'd, or the lumber on
the Gun Deck such as Sails Cables &c cou'd be clear'd, the Commander of the
Leopard hail'd. I cou'd not hear what he said and was talking to him as I supposed,
when she cornmenc'd a heavy fire, which did great execution i t is distressing t o
me to acknowledge that I found from the advantage they had gain'd, over our
unprepared and unsuspicious state did not Warrant a longer opposition. nor shou'd
I have exposed this Ship and Crew to so galling a fire. had it not been with a hope
of getting the Gun Deck clear so as to have made a more formidable defence.
Consequently our resistance was but feeble - in about 20 minutes after I order'd
the Colours to be struck and sent Lieut Smith on board the Leopard to inform
her Commander that I consider'd the Chesapeak her prize, to this Message I
receiv'd no answer. the Leopards Boat soon after came on board and the officer
who came in her demanded the Muster Book. I reply'd the Ship and Books
were theirs, and if he expected to see the Men he must find them. they call'd
on the Purser who delivered his Book, and the men were examind and the three
men demanded a t Washington, and one man more were taken away, on their
departure from the Ship I wrote the Commander of the Leopard, the enclosed
NQ3. to which I receiv'd the answer, XYIP
4 on finding that the men were hi only
object, and that he refused to consider the ship his prize, and the Officers and
Crew his prisoners. I call'd a Council of our OBcers, and requested their opinion
relative to the conduct it was now our duty to pursue the result was that the
Ship shou'd return to Hampton Roads and their wait your further orders Enclosed you have a list of the unfortunate Kill'd, and Wounded, aa also a
Statement of the damage sustained in the Hull, S ars, and Rigging of the Ship
I have sent this Letter to you by C a p t ~~ o r & nin order that you may have
an opportunity of getting such information as you may wish [signed] JAMES
BARRON

-

[Enclosurej

Casualty List, U. S. Frigate Che-~apcoke
Return of Dead and Wounded on board the Frigate Chesapeake -Commodore
James Barron
June the $3'4 1807
KILLED
I
SLIGHTLY
WOUNDED
John Lawrenc
Commodore
Jamea
Barron
James Arnold Mid9 - James Broom
John Sheckly Peter Ellison Wa Hendricks
Tho* Short
WXPMoody
John Haden David Creighton
Cotton Brown J ~ Marter
Q
John Parker
Emanuel Fernandes
George Percival
John Wilson Peter Simmons
Robert M~Donald
Francis Cownoven -

-

James Epps -

I

J G T HUNT- Surgeon

to the Chssapeake

W&S

WITH BARkAEY POWERS
@riel-]

[23 June 18071
Survey of Damage sustained by U. S. Frigate C h t x o d
A eeble to yr requisition of this date to us directed,
have taken a strict and careful survey on the Sails Spare Spara & Boats
of the late U. S. Frigate Chesapeake, and find them in the following state
In
the Foresail, four round shot holes, - Twelve Grape Shot holes, B the Starb*
Leech cut away - In the Main Sail three Round shot holes, full of Grape ditto,
& the foot rope cut away Main Topsail, one Round shot hole, Fore Topmast Staysail much injured by
I n the spare Fore Topmast, Two Twelve pound Shot holes,
Grape Shot.
which have rendered it entirely unfit for service
Main Skysailmaet cut in too - The 2nd Cutter much injured by a shot hole,
which went through and through her, cut both of her Masts & three of her oars
in too.
1st Cutter slightly injured Given under our hands on board the late
U. S. Frigate Chesapeake June 23rd 1807
BEN SMITHLieu*
S I D ~SMITE
Y
Lind*'
SAM!BROOKEMmtGT

a

-

-

[Enclowrs]

[23 June 1807
Survey of Damage Sustained by U. 6. Frigate Chua&
Agreeable t o yr requisition of this date to us directed,
We have taken a strict and careful survey on the Masts and standing Rigging
of the late U. S. Frigate Chesapeake & find them in the following state The Fore & Main Masts are incapable of being made Sea worthy, the Mizen
Mast badly Wounded but not incapable of being repaired on shore - T W
starboard & two larboard main shrouds, two Starboard fore shrouds, two StmW
Mizen Shrouds, Main Topmast Stay, Cap Bobstay & starbg Main lift. - cut
away. likewise the Middle staysail Stay Given under our hands on board the late
U. S. Frigate Chesapeake 23rd June 1807
BENS M1 s t Lieu,
~
SIDNEYSMITE6Q L ~ C U ~ P *
SAM!BROOKE
Maate

-

[Endosnrel

123 June 18071
To Secretary of the Navy from Captain James Bsrron, U. 6. Navy
FRIGATE Chesapeak
Harnpton Roads. June 99* 1807SIR, Enclosed I have the Honor to forward you an Exact Copy of this Ships
Log Book

-

A true Copy taken from the United Statea Frigate Chesapeak's Log Book.
James Barron Esqr Commander. Charles Gordon Esqr Captain, and Samuel
Brook, Sailing Master Monday June 2 2 ~ + Commences with li h t Breezes from the Se & WQand clear
t , hoisted in the second Cutter,
Weather. At 7. A M hoisted out the ~ o l l ~ % o aand
run the Jolly Boat up a stern a t %. peat 7 - Weighed anchor made uail with a
pleasant Breeze from W. 8. T#. and stood out for sea. a t 9. pass'd 2 of H. B. Majesty's Ships a t Anchor. Stow'd the larbourd Anchor and secured the Boats. at
Meridian the light on Cape Henry, bore 6. W. by S. people employ'd in clearing
Shi for Sea
$his Day ends at Meridian snd contains 17. hours
Tuesday 234 Commences with light Breezes from the South and West and
clear Weather. a Ship in sight apparently standing for US, at 1 P M. the bind

-

540

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1806 TO 1807

haul'd to the NQ &Ed, in Studding Sails. and haul'd upon a Wind and a t ,t past
3 the Ship came up with us, back'd the main Top Sail and spoke her, was boarded
by her, She proved to be the British Ship Leopard of 50 Guns She came on board
t o demand some Men who had deserted from the English Navy. the Commodore
refusing to give them up, the Boat return'd. they ranged along side of us. and
commenc'd a heavy fire - We being unprepared and the Ship much lumber'd it was impossible to clear Ship for Action in proper time tho every possible exertion
was made, and not suspecting an enemy so near. did not begin to clear the Deck
untill the enemy had commenc'd firing - In about thirty minutes after receiving much Damage, in our Hull. Rigging and Spars, and having three Men
Killed, Viz, Joseph Arnold, Peter Shakely and John Lawrence, and 16 Wounded.
Vizc Commodore Barron M? Broom, John Hadden, Cotton Brown, Peter Ellison
John Parker, Geo. Perseval, Peter Summers FVsl Hendrick Rob% McDonald,
Francis Conhoven, Thomas Short Wm Moody, David Creighton, John Martyr,
Jamea Epps Emanuel Hendricks, John Wilson, William Warren and John Bates And having one Gun ready fired and haul'd down our Colours. the Leopard ceased
firing and sent her Boat on board. Muster'd the Ships company. At Sun down,
they left the Ship taking with [them] 4 Men. Vizt John Shaun, Daniel Martin, W*
Ware and John R'ilson, who had deserted from their Service at the same time
Lieul Allen went on board and returned a t 8 .OClock - The Leopard left us and
stood We then made sail and stood in shore having 3%feet Water in our Hold - Crew
employ'd in pumping and Working Ship in for HarnptonRoads, got the Anchors
clear for coming too. At 6. A M took the 3 r d reef in - The Main Topsail, and
set Top Gallant Saib, Held a a Survey on the Masts & Rigging. A t 8 Cape Henry
bore S. W. Disr 4 or 5 miles, Employ'd Ship in for Hampton Roads. a t % past
Meridian came too with the star board Anchor in 7. fathom Water in Hampton
Roads

-

[Enclosure]

To Secretary of the N a n from Captain James Barron, U. 6. Navy
FRIGATE
Chesapeak
Hampton Roads June 234 1807
SIR, The enclosed is a Copy of 8 Letter which I am informJdhas this day been
address'd to you. i t Contains two Charges against me. both of which I trust I
shall confute, I will not presume to dictate to you the line of Conduct you are to
pursue on this occasion, an investigation is, I suppose a thing of course and what
every thinking ORGcer wou'd expect on an occasion of such importance s s the
present Captain Gordon is charg'd with a Message from me to you relative t o
my wish on this ground but was directed not to deliver i t untill he knew your
determination. the object of the present is to forward you the charges which
those Gentlemen wish to prefer against me, and to inform you that I am perfectly
ready to meet them It is however probable that I may not for some time be able to travel any distance as my wounds are becoming very sore

-

IEnclcsurel

To Secretary of the Navy from certain Ofecers of U. S. Frigate Cbesupeab
LATE U. S. S. Chesapeake HAMPTON
ROADS
June d3rd 1807
The undersigned Officers of the late U. S. Ship Chwapeake, feeling deeply sensible
of the disgrace which must be attached to the late ( i n their opinion) premature
surrender of the U. S. Ship Chesapeake of 40 Guns to the English Ship of War
Leopard of 50 Guns, without their previous Knowledge or consent, and desirous
of proving t o their country and the World, that it was the wish of all the undersigned, to have rendered themselves, worthy of the Flag under which they had
the honor to serve, by s determined resistance, to an unjust demand, do request
the Honbl~Secretary of the Navy to order a Court of enquiry into their conduct. At the m e time they are compelled by imperious duty, the honour of their
Flag, the honour of their Countrymen, and by all that is dear to themselves, to
request an order may be issued for the arrest of Commodore James Barron, on
the charges herewith exhibited, which the undersigned pledge themselves to
prove true, Vizr

Is$ On the probability of an Engagement, for Neglecting to clear his ship for
action. 2ndly For not doing his utmost to take or destroy a Vessel which we conceive
it his duty to have done [Signed] BENSMITH1 s t l i e u $
WILLIAMCRANEL?
Wm H. ALLEN3Q Leu+
JNPORDECREIQHTON
Lt
SIDNEYSMITH6* Liezltnt
SAM!BROOKE
Master
[NDA. Captain's LB, Vol. 2, 1807.1
To Josiah Fox, Naval Constructor, from William Ball
23d June 1807.
NORFOLK
DEARSIR AS dispatches is forwarded to Goverment there is no doubt you
heard of the Engagement that took place between the Chesapeake and the British
Ship Leopard of 50 Guns oftf] Cape Henry, as all the Public Papers will be exaserated against the British I shall give you the best information I could Colect
gome deserters from the British Ships of War st this place had entered on board
the Chesapeake one in particular who was Gunner on board the Chichester who
had Embsssled his Stores had left the ship while lying a t Gosport last winter
Entered a t Norfolk t o o on board the Chesapeake he had by the Consul been
formaly Demanded an8 refused an Oficer was sent to Commodore Ja? Barron
in Hampton Roads to Demand him and some others, which was also refused the
officer informd him they would take them a t sea b y force, Yesterday morning
a t 9 A M the Chesapealce got under way; Signals were seen passing from the
Belona to the Triumph and from the Tm'umph to the Leopard who immediatly
got under way and stood out to sea and hove to about 20 miles from Cape Henry
waited the Coming up of the Chesapeake; when a Oficer was sent on board her
Demanding the men, which was refused, the officer and Boats crew returned
on Board, when the Leopard fired a gun to Leeward ns did the Chesapeake, which
was returned by a full Broadside, which Continued Some time how long I am
uncertain however the Chesapeake Struck and was boarded by the Leopard and
their men taken out. - the Chesapeake is returned to Hampton Roads the
Wounded men has Just arived here 3 OCiock there is 4 Killed & 15 Wounded in
the Chesapeake it has caused a bustle a t this place, Please let me know how the
Goverment is pleased with it it is expected there will be war with G Britain,
Please to inform me if you hear of any Contracts to give out in the Urar or Navy
Departments I can undertake any thing in the War Department but my getting
Sick before has injured me I Expect however my health is recovered perfectly
I wrote bv Mr Hall a few Days ago respecting the Timber M: Teakle is contracting
for, J ~ cornall
Q
has contracted for $6500 worth of the &fast Pieces agreeing to
deliver them a t Washington Cha* Smith has Contracted for some Beams I much
doubt they will not deliver them a t Washington
P S Commodore Barron is wounded in both legs
[Peabody &fuseum of Salem, No. 735.1
Extract from log of U. S. Brig Hornet, of 18 Guns, Master Commandant John H.
Dent, U. S. Navy, commanding, 25 June 1807
[Alicante] Commences fresh breezes from the E N E. and pleasant weather
At Sunset struck Royal yards - middle part Calm - At % past 7 A M obtained
Prattique - At 8 sent Royal yards up. Received fresh provisions and vegetables for the Crew. 10 men sick - Ends light breezes with hot sultry weather
[NA. KDA original, 1805-1810.1

To Captain Stephen Decatur, Jr., U. S. Navy, Norfolk, Va., to command of U. 6.
Frigate CRuapcab, from the Secretary of the Navy

NAVYD E P M26~ June 1807. You will immediatelv take the command of the Frigate Chesapeak and prepare
her for sea. Make four requisitions upon Dan! Beclinger esquire the Navy
Agent a t Norfolk for every thing necessary.
Caps Bsrron will deliver to you all the Letters he has received from me, which
you will consider as directed to yourself 8nd overn yourself accordingly, but you
are not t o ssil until you shall be so directed f y me.

542

NAVrll, OPERATIONS FROM 1806 TO 1807

You will state to me the condition of the Ship, and from time to time communicate the progress you may be making in her refltment. P. S. This is intended to place you in the same situation as Caps Barron
R S. lately was, with Mr Gordon ss Captain of the Chesapeak under you.[NA. NDA. LB, May 1799-July 1807.1
To Captain James Barron, U. 8. Navy, Hampton, Va., from Secretary of the Navy
~ June 1807. NAVYD E P M66tb
I have ordered Capt Decatur to take the command of the Frigate Chesapeak You will deliver to him all the Letters you have received from this Department,
since you had the command of the Chesapeak, and remain a t Hampton, until
you shall again hear from me. [NA. NDA LB, May 1799-July 1807.1
To O5cers of U. S. Frigate. Chua&

from Secretary of the Navy
NAVYD E P M86tb
~ June 1807.

To
Lieu* BENJ. SMITH
Lieu5 WILL'PCRANE,
Wq0.H.CREIGHTON of the Frigate Chesapeake.
Lieu* J.
Lieur SIDNEYSMITH
Sr Mast,er SAM!BROOKE.
Hampton V*
Your communication of the 234 instant which I received yesterday does you
honor. It will be properly attended to. I have ordered Capt Stephen Decatur, jr to take the command of the Frigate
Chesapeake.
[NDA. OSW, Vol. 7, 1805-1807.1
To O5cers of U. S. Frigate Chuapeak from Secretary of the Navy
~ June 67, 1807. NAVYD E P MLieu* BENJ. SMITH
Lieu* WILLIAMCRANE,
Wq0. CREIQHTON, Of the Frigate Chesapeak. Lieut J.
Lieu* SIDNEYSMITH,
Sr Master SAM!BROOKE,
Hampton - V*
I enclose to you herewith a copy of my letter to you of yesterday's date. I have ordered Com. Preble, Capr Hull, & Capt Chauncey to re air to Hampton.
When they shall arrive a t Hampton, they will be constituted a 8ourt of Enquiry
with orders to declare their opinions upon the late circumstances between the
Chesapeak and the Leopard. The Court will be held on board of the Chesapeak. (by M. C. Gordon.)
[NDA. OSW, Vol. 7, 1805-1807.1
To Captain James Barron, U. 6. Navy, Hampton, Va., from Secretary of the Navy
NAVYDEPM* 27th June 1807. I have ordered Com. Preble, Ca t Hull and Capt Chauncey to repair to Hampton. When they shall arrive at Rampton, they will be constituted a Court of
Enquiry, with orders to declare their o inions upon the late circumstances between
the C4esapeake and the Leopard. The
will be held on board of the Cherapeak.
[NDA. OSW,Vol. 7, 1805-1807.1

80~1%

To Captain Stephen Decatur Jr., U. 8. Navy, Norfolk, Va., from Secretary of the
Navy
NAVYD E P M ~875b June 1807. Capt Gordon will leave this tomorrow to join the Cheeapeak. He can give the
necessary attendance and directions with respect t o her repairs so that you can

543

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

comply with your engagements with Mr Hay the District Attorney. At all events
I wish you to comply with those engagements.
I t is scarcely necessary to express to you the solicitude I feel that all the wounded
from the Chesapeak should have every comfort they require. You will take care

that they want for nothing that may be necessary. Com. Preble, Cap$ Hull, and Csp? Chauncey have been ordered to Hsmpton.
When they shall arrive there they will be constituted a Court of Enquiry, with
orders to declare their opinions upon the late circumstances between the Chesapeak
& the Leopard. The Court will be held on board of the Chesapeak.
[NDA. OSW, Vol. 7, 1805-1807.1
To Secretary of the Navy from Captain Stephen Decatur, Jr., U. S. Navy
NORFOLKJune 23tP 1807
SIR, The enclosed papers NP 1& 2, you will perceive are from the committee of
the people of Norfolk, cslling on me for aid with the gun boats under my command,
to prevent an Invasion which has been threaten'd by the commanding officer of the
British squadron, lying in the vicinity of this place; You will see Sir by NP3 my
reply - The British Commander has also threatened, that he will again take
possession of the Cheaspeake - I have i t also from the most unquestionable
authority, that they have asserted possitively, that, in case the President should
issue a similar order to that issued respecting the Zeander, that they will consider
it as an act of Hostility, & will commence hostile operations immediately -under
an impression that they will do as they say, I hope, I feel satisfied my preparing
to act on the defensive will meet the approbation of the President, & your self; If
however i t should be thought I have been preciptitate, I beg i t may be attributed
to my extreme desire not to omit any service I might render my country
The
four old gun boats are all that can be immediately equipp'd for service, those we
commenced fitting this morning, they are now entirely ready for the reception of
the men, who I trust will come forward in sufficient numbers to authorize our p r ~
ceeding to Hampton tomorrow - Sir, as I have no doubt, from the threats the
British have made, we shall have to fight, I shall not leave this untill the boats are
manned to my satisfaction, to do which it will take one hundred & fifty menThe British if they attempt anything against us, it will be in the night with row
boats, or other boats t,hat they may press, the row boats belonging to their squadron are capable of carrying 500 men with ease, this number if we are full manned,
I feel confident of being able to oppose, I beg you Sir, however, to bear in mind
that our crews will be composed of volunteers, who notwithstanding their great
zeal, will not possess all the skill we could wish
I should however be mort&ed,
if it were under stood I wished to convey an Idea, that as much should not be
expected from us, as ought to be expected from any four gun boats, more, I hope
will not be expected The new boats a t this place can be in readiness in a short time should you chuse
to order it - Altho Sir I shall allways be ready to serve my country in any way
I can be useful, I hope Sir if the Frigates are to be fitted out,I shall not be continued
in Gun Boats
The Gentlemen who have volunterd t h e ~ services
r
have agree'd
to stay with us only untill such time as we shall hear from Washington, what steps
will be taken - which will be on Thursday
[NDA. Captain's LB, Vol. 2, 1807.1

-

-

-

-

Extracts from log book of U. S. Frigate CiKfapurke,Captain Stephen Decatnr, Jr.,
commandmg
Tuesday, 30 June 1807
Commences with pleasant WT At 1 P. M. got under Way and stood up to
Craney Island. - At past 1. - Came too & Moored off the Island. - ships
Company Variously Employed.
wtd~esday,1 July 1807
Moderate and pleassnt, Em loyed getting Guns in order & CQ At 12. A. M. Caps
Stephen Decatur Jr Came on goard and took Commend of the Ship, a t the aame
At 4 P.M. Commodore B a m n
time hoisted the Ensign and Broad Pendant.
All hands to
left the Ship and proceeded to Hampton. - At Sundown.
Quarters.

-

-

-

[LC. VBN, Ac. 540, 1807-1809.1

-

544

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1806 TO 1807

To Secretary of the Navy from Captain Stephen Decatur, Jr., U. S. Navy
U. S. FRIGATEChesapeak
July 4% 1807
SIR, On the receipt of your order of the 26'4 Ultq I repair'd on board the Chesapeak and reliev'd Commq Barron in his Command. I have receipted to him for all
papers delivered me copies of which I shall transmit to you by the next post On an examination of the damage sustain'd by the Ship, I find it t o be as follows,
the Hull has received fourteen Shot, which can be repaired in four days by six Carpenters. The Main Mast three and the Mizen Mast one Shot, which has irreparably injured them. the Fore Mast one shot i t can be repaired. the bowsprit Cap
one shot, the sails many of them injured but all capable of repair, seven of the fore
and main Shrouds, together with the Main & Spring Stays cut, capable of repair the Mizen Rigging very old, much cut and incapable of repair Those Sir are the only damages of any consequence that the Ship has sustain'd,
all of which I feel confident we shall be able to repair in three weeks When I was honored with your orders I was on board the Gun Boats, four of
them are only wanting Men to place them in a complete state of readiness for
immediate service - The Chesapeak when I took command of her had been
brought up into the bite of Crany Island, in consequence of the threats of the
British, their movements Sir are extremely suspicious, since the affair of the
Leopard and Chesapeak, they have been a t Anchor inside the Capes, and have
brought t,oo by firing, a t every vessel that has pass'd in, or out the Capes, they
have sent many insolent and menacing Messages to Norfolk, such as, if the people
did not supply them with articles they might want, they would come up and retake
the Chesapeak and cut out the French Frigate Sybell. This Sir from their Movements it is my opinion they intend to attempt. Yesterday afternoon the four
British Ships came in and Anchord in Hampton Roads, this Morning they sent
their Tenders, and sounded quite through the Narrows, the present possition of
the Chesapeak & Sybell are such, in consequence of the narrowness of the Channel,
that if an attempt was made on either of them by the Ships they coul'd not render
t o each other that support which would be necessary; in consequence of this I have
determined t o move up nearer the Town where we shall be able to take such position as will enable us with the assistance of the Fort t o make such a Defence as may
render abortive any attempt that may be made on us Accept Sir my gratitude for the high trust you have reposed ill me, and I beg you
Sir to rely most Confidently on my doing my duty to the last extremity - Conceiving it necessary Sir that you should have Qhe earliest information of this
movement of the British I have dispatched this by the St. Marys Pilot whom I
have discharged
The Chesapeak is now lying with her masts out and I am sorry to add our
powder is bad P. S. Sir I have just learnt that the depth of Water from Hampton Roads to
Norfolk will admit of three of the British Squadron coming up
[NDA. Captain's LB, Vol. 2, 1807.1

-

-

Extracts from log of U. S. Brig Hornet, of 18 Guns, Master Commandant John H.
Dent, U. S. Navy, commanding

[4 Jdy 18071

[Alicant.e] Commences pleasant breezes from S. E. - At 5. P M. loosed &
refurled Sails - At 8 John Merritt Marine died of a fever - Middle part
Calm - At 8. A M being 4th July dress'd the Brig with Signals and national
flags and a t Meridian fired a Salute of 17 Guns - Rec? fresh provisions for the
crew Ends pleasant breezes from E S. E - 8 men sick
[8 J u l y 18071
[Alicante] Commences moderate breezes from the Ed - At 112 past 10 in
boats. - At 11 got underweigh with a li ht air from the Southd At Meridian Cape St Martin's bore N
distant 3 leagues - Ends pleasant
weather wind E N E.
Latar ObsQ38'25'.

-

[NA.

NDA original, 1805-1810.1

$

545

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

To Secretary of the Raw from Master Commandant John Smith,U. S. Haw
S.SEUP wagp
Falmouth B* July 1807
HONOUBED
SIR, The Vessel which affords this Conveyance is the regular
British Packett from this to New York, her departure is arranged for the ensuing
Wednesday - After taking our departure from Cape Henry on the 1 0 t h Ulto
we were benefitted by a twelve days succession of favourable winds which enabled
us to effect three fourths of the passage; subsequent to the 224 a tedious Continuance of Calms and adverse winds have much deranged our prospect of makinga short passage Through the variety of weather and Winds we experienced the Wasp atForded
us every evidence of her many good properties, such is staunchness, stiffness, and
fleetness, our beating up the Channel with some English Men of War has established the latter in a most gratifying degree My inducements for anchoring here (which I effected yesterday) were the
blowing of the winds strong from the East and anxiety to have immediate Communication by mail with London and an opportunity to refresh the Crew Falmouth's being so immediately in the Channel Way, and having an excellent
harbour makes i t much resorted t o by Vessels under the above Considerstion I shall leave this tomorrow for Portsmouth owing to quarantine We are
denied the priviledge of going on shore until1 a return of post from London; the
dread of our autumnal fevers and the information of our having lost six men on
the passage have induced them to the measure, the diBcul[t]y wilI be removed
on our arrival a t Portsmouth
The Crew are and have been in perfect health with an exception of the six
deaths, three of which of Consumption, one of apoplexy, one of rheumatism,
and one of intermitting fever
[NDA. MC LB, 1806-1807.1

u.

Extract from log of U. S. Brig H o r d , of 18 Guns, Master Commandant John H.
Dent, U. S. Navy, commanding, 9 July 1807
Commences fresh breezes and squally - At 1 P M tack'd to the NQ A t
1/2 past 2 tack'd t o the SQ and took in Top gallant Saih - At 3 tack'd to the
Nd At 112 past 5 came to an anchor in Altea Bay in 14 fw water and veered
out 60 fg Cable the East point ofihe Bay bore E. B N. the west point S. W.
and the Castle of the Town N W. distant 1 112 miles - At 4 A M commenced
watering with 11 boats hired from the shore - it is a very fine place to water
provided the shore boats are engaged - Ships boats being entirely too weak. I think it the best water in the Mediterranean, by noon 4,000 Gallons was
rec4 on board. [NA. NDA origin&, 1805-1810.1
To Secretary 02 the Navy from Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Navy
PORTLAND
J d y 10 1807
SIR,Being absent when your letter of the 3 d Inst arrived, I could not reply to
it sooner

*

-

*

*

*

*

*

*

I have just returned from a four days cruise in the Bay, and find my health
somewhat improved by it, but am still very low, altho I have blood enough left
in my veins to boil with indignation a t the recent Insult and degradation which
our fiag has suffered - Should the late event^ lead to War, I pray you to order
me early into actual service a t sea, and I wiU chearfuuy obey, even if my health
should be such that I must be carried on shipboard in my cot - The Cause, and
the occasion would soon restore me to health. [NDA. Captain's LB, Vol. 2, 1807.1
Bxtracts from log of U. S. Brig Horn& of 18 Buns, Master Commandant John H.
Dent, U. S. Ravy, commanding
110 J u l y 18071
At 112 past 5 sent Royal yards up and hove short - At 7 got underweigh
with a light air off the land. - At Midnight the westernmost head land of Altes

546

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1806 TO 1807

bore N W distant 3 leagues - At Meridian Alicant bore N W B W. diatent
6 or 7 miles

Lat* O h 4 38'21'.
[ I 1 July 18071
Commencea fresh breezes from the EQ- At 112 past 1 [PM] came too in
Alicant & moored Ship with 80 fsl on each Bower.
D A . NDA original, 1805-1810.3

-

To Captain Hull of American Schooner Bold Eagle of New York, 8. Y., from Secretary
of the Havy
NAVYD E P A R14
~ July 1807.
You will immediately proceed t o Sea and after you shall have discharged your
Pilot, not before you will open the enclosed letter addressed to you, and act as
you will find you are therein instructed.
[NDA. GLB, Vol. 8, 1805-1807.1
[Erlcbsure]

To Captain HuU of American Schooner Bald Eagle, New York, B. Y., from Secretory
of the Navy
NAVY DEPART.14 J U E 1807.
~
You will roceed direct to the Mediterranean and deliver this enclosed letter,
Hugh G: Campbell.or the Commanding W e e r of the American
directed to
Publick Vessels of war in the Mediterranean, to the Commander of the first
American Vessel of War you may fall in with. - If you should not f a l l in with
either of the Publick Vessels of War befor your Arrival a t Gibraltar, & should
not have gained certain undoubted official information of the Port, where Cap+
Campbell may be, you will call a t Gibraltar & enquire of John Gavino Esqr the
Navy Agent a t that place, who will inform you - and you will then proceed for
the Port 01 place, where you will be informed, Caps Campbell may be, and deliver
to him the letter directed to him - Or if on your way to such port or place,
you would fall in with any of the other Publick Vessels of war, than the Comtitutwn, you will deliver the dispatches to the Commander of such Publick Veesel
of war. With the dispatches you will deliver the accompaning letter directed to the Commanding OfEcer of any of the Publick Vessels of war in the
Mediterranean. After you shall have delivered the dispatches agreeably to your instructions,
the object for which you are a t this time engaged, will be esected, and your
further Serviw may not be wanted
But if they should Cap+ Campell will
inform you.
[NDA. GLB, Vol. 8, 1805-1807.1

8spt:

-

To Captain Hugh 6. Campbell, U. S. Navy, from Secretary of the wavy
Con$denfial,
NAVYDEPARTMENT,
14 JuZg 1807
SIB, Hostile intentions on the part of Great Britain have been manifested
towards us, and in consequence, the President of the United States has determined t o call home immediately all our Publick Vessels of War, and I dispatch
of conveying
a fast sailing Schooner from New York for the express -purpose
- - to
you them? orders.
Prior to your leaving the Mediterranean you will draw out of the hands of our
Agents a t Leghorn all the funds in their possession belonging to thie D e p a r t
ment - this you will do either by going ta Leghorn youreelf with the Colwfilzrlivn,
or by dispatching one of the small Vessels under our Command with the requisite
order upon the Agenta who are in the enclosed L t t e r directed to pay auah funds
to you or to your order, and if possible I wish that these funds may be received
in specie. All the Provisions and Stores in the hands of William Higgins a t Malta, that
may be rfectly sound and of good quality, are t o be brought home. The
Publick Easela can I presume, bring them, without being overburthened. I
refer that they should be brought in the publick Veseels, but if they cannot
trbgthem without being overloaded, you wdl bring m them such portion as win
conveniently be brought, eeleding thoae of most value, and employ a merchant
V d to bring the residue in caae you should think it more proper to bring them

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

547

than to sell them. All other provisions and stores in the hands of the Agent
a t Malta, that is, dl such stores in his hands as may not be perfectly sound and
of good quality, are to be sold, and I must, though unwillingly, trust to the
Agent to sell them, if you cannot without inconvenience and without delay
sell them while you may be a t Malta. - The Agent will not it is to be presumed, make any difficulty in delivering up these stores to you. To provide as
far as is in my power against any such objection on the part of the Agent, I
have written to him the enclosed letter NQ 1, which however you will not deliver to him unless such objection should be made by him. The letter NQ 2
addressed to him is not to be delivered until after you shall have received from
him all the provisions and stores that may be sound and of good quality.
The Agents a t Leghorn, a t Syracuse, and a t Gibraltar, are ordered to sell on
the best terms in their power, all the provisions and Naval Stores of whatever
kind that may remain in their possession, and to employ the best means that
may be in their power to forward to me the proceeds thereof. The enclosed
letters addressed to them respectively contain instructions to that effect. You
will cause them to be forwarded.
These orders you will execute without one moment's delay. Disclose these
orders to no one, not even to your most confidential officer, and you will manage
so to execute them that no one shall suspect your object. I send a duplicate of
my letter to you of the 16th July 1806, for the sole purpose of affording you a mean
to allay any suspicion that may be excited on the part of those immediately near
your person fropl the circumstance of your receiving these Dispatches. You will
naturally be asked by your Officers for the news and you can tell them that you
received my letter of the 16th July 1806. And i t will bewell if it can be done without
occasioning delay, to call all the Publick Vessels to one point and to be prepared
to sail immediately for America without touching a t any Port before your srrival
previous to your issuing the orders to return to America. And indeed it may be
well for all the Publick Vessels to return in Squadron; but this will depend upon
circumstances, on which you are required to exercise your soundest judgment
and you will act agreeably to it's dictates. The Wasp, Caps Smith, will probably have arrived in the Mediterranean before
you leave that Sea; but if she should not, you will leave with the Agent a t Gibraltar, & with the Agents a t Le horn, sealed orders, directed to Cap$Smith, or to the
Commanding Officer of the #usp, to return immediately to America. All the Publick Vessels under your command are to return to the Port of Boston.
Immediately on your arrival there, you will report your arrival to me, and inform
me of the exact state and condition of the Frigate Constitution - what repairs or
equipments, if an she will require to put her in readiness for actual service $9 $9
And you will or&r each of the other Commanders to make to me a similar
communication and report as to the Vessels respectively commanded by them.
I mention the Port of Boston from the impression that there will be less risk in
going to that than to any other Port in the United States. If however on our
arrival 08the Coast, you should find that you ean safely make either this gort
or New York, you may, if in your opinion it should be advisable, make either of
those ports, or if, contrary to our expectation you should find it unsafe to enter
the Port of Boston, you may make any other safe and convenient Port you can. I enclose for your information copy of my Letter to James Barron esqr (who was
intended t.o have been sent to the Mediterranean as Commanding Officer) dated
29 May 1807, relatively to certain Bills drawn by William Higgins - $9
[NA. NDA. LB, May 1799-July 1807.1
To William Higgins, U. 6. Navy Agent, Malta, from Secretsry of the Navy
NAVYDEPAR~
14 July 1807
I have ordered Capt H. G. Campbell or the Commanding Officer of the American Vessels of war in the Mediterranean to transport from Malta 911 the provieions and other Naval Stores of every description in your possession. That may
be in good order & of good quality. You will deliver such provisions & Stores
agreeably to the requistions that may be made upon you.
[NDA. GLB, Vol. 8, 1805-1807.1
To S. & W. Y. Purvisnce & Co., Leghorn, John Gavino, Gibraltar, and George
Dyson, Syracuse, U. S. Bavy Agents, from Secretary of the Bavy
NAVYDepnat 14 July 1807
You will eell on the best terms in our power all the property of whatever
description, belonging to the Navy gepartment in your p o d o n , tho nett

548

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1805 TO 1807

proceeds of which you will forward to me in the best way and by the earliest
opportunity that may offer. You will sell for cash & upon the shortest notice
either a t private or publick sale, as in your judgment may be the best.
[NDA. GLB, Vol. 8, 1805-1807.1
To Secretary of State from Charles D. Coxe, U. 6. Charge d'Affeires, Tunis
TUNISJuly 16th 1807.
SIB, I had the honor to address you on the 219t ult9 p? the Schooner Mohawk
Captain QuarIes, via Leghorn, dupIicate of which I forwarded to Marseilles. I was in hopes to have had it in my power to write by the U: S: Brig Hornet
Captain Dent, who, I was informed, intended to call in this Bay on this return to
the U: States; but as he has not yet made his appearance, and a considerable time
having elapsed since I recQthis information, I presume he has already taken his
departure without the intention of putting into this port. Yesterday H: E. the Bey, sent his messenger to all the Consular houses, announcing a signal victory gain'd by his Troops (under the command of the Sapatapa or
first Minister) over the Algerines & Constantines, who have lost 300. Killed, 300.
taken prisoners & six pieces of cannon, with a large proportion of their camp equipage - The Tunisians are advancing rapidly in order to invest Constantine, which will no doubt fall into their hands, unless the Algerines receive very
promptly a considerable reinforcement: This in the present situation of their
&airs, is hardly probable. [LC. Chas. D. Coxe LB, Ac. 2951, 1806-1809.1
Extract from log of U. 6. Brig Hornet, of 18 Guns, Master Commandant John H. Dent,
U. S. Navy, commanding, 19 July 1807
[Alicante] This day commences light breezes from the East@and .pleasant
weather At 9 P: M. came to an Anchor in the Bay the U: S: Frigate Constztzction Captain Campbell At 10 sent the 2d cutter on board of her [NA. NDA original, 1805-1810.1
To Secretary of the Navy from Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Navy
PORTLAND
July 20th 1807
SIR. The 17th Inst I wrote. or rather dictated a letter to vou from a sick bed I a m to day somewhat better and have visited the Gun boits, the Gun-Carriages,
Water-Casks &Q progress so rapidly that in a fortnight, I presume the whole of
the Boats will be ready for service, in all respects excepting Military stores,
which I suppose are to come from Washington, as I believe they cannot be procured here.
There will be required, in addition to what I have already rec@the sum of
3957 Dollars to compleat the whole of the Nine Gun boats for sea in all respects,
excepting Military stores, & which sum I will thank you to forward m soon as
may be convenient - Indeed I shall be in want of i t by the time it can reach
here as all my engagements are made for every article. With regard to my health; every Physician, and the best have been consulted
both in Boston & here, advise me to take a Voyage of six or eight weeks, and
to go as far as Madeira, stop a few days to refresh, and return
My friends
here, are a11 desirous that I should charter a convenient Packet for the purpose,
and try the experiment - they all appear to be confident that with proper Medicine, it may be the means of fully restoreing me to health, and that nothing
else will have that effect - I now wait only for your approbation to make the
trial of a voyage to Madeira, as a passenger on board of a vessel which I shall
charter for the purpose a t my own expence.
I should not in the present state of our foreign relations, mk permission t o
go abroad, were I not in hopes, that in a few weeks, i t may enable me to attend
to any duty which may be required of me The service here, will not suffer by my absence, as by the time I can receive
your answer, the whole of the Gun boats will be ready for sea
Lieut E d d
N Cox, appeam to be an intelligent officer, and I have no doubt will take good
care of the Boats, until you may think proper to appoint an officer of higher
grade to command them. - As the season is passing off rapidly I will thank
you to favor me with an early answer, and also for the requisition of money contained in this letter, a~ i t will enable to compleat the equipment of the boats,
& to leave home without embmasments.
[NDA. Captain's LB, Vol. 2, 1807.1

-

-

-

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS
Extract from log of U. S. Brig Hornet. of 18 Guns, Master Commandant John H. Dent,
U. S. Navy, commanding, 20 July 1807
[+icante] Lieut Trippe came on board from the Constitution and resumed
Q
Ward room Steward.
his s~tuationas l e t Lieu+. also J ~ Brown
[NA. NDA original, 1805-1810.1
To Captain John H. Dent, U. S. Navy, U.S. Brig Hornet. 18 Guns, from Captain Hugh
O. Campbell, U. S. Navy
U.S. SKIP CONSTITUTION
Alicant July ,934 1807
SIR, The U.S. Sp Hornet under your command being ready for Sea, I have to
desire and re uest that you proceed to sea in company with the Constitution to
Malaga and Zibraltar, where further instructions will be given you, should any
unavoidable circumstance cause a seperation of the two vessels you will in that
case make the best of your way to Malaga and wait the arrival of this Ship the
Hornets Station will be in the Rear and occasionally take the Larboard or Starboard line of bearing, keeping a t the same time within Distinct Signal Distance
[NHF. Dent's LB, 1803-1810.1
Extract from log of U. S. Brig Horne~of 18 Guns, Master Commandant John H. Dent,
U. S. Navy, commanding, 24 July 1807
[Alicante] Commences fresh breezes from the SG and pleasant Wr At 1 P. M
a signal was made from the Commodore to repare to get underweigh - At 3
P M got underweigh in company with the Ebmmodore
Midnight light breezes tack'd Ship occasionally in company with the Constitution
Captain Dent went on board the Commodore
Meridian light breezes the Commodore a head
Latds Obs4 37' 53'
[Master Commandant Dent returned on board 25 July.]
[NA. NDA original, 1805-1810.1
To Captain Edward Preble, U. 6. Navy, Portland, Me.,from Secretary of the Navy
NAVYDEPM*96th July 1807.I this morning received your letter of the 17th ins. - Deeply indeed do I regret
the delicate state of your health. I oannot expect you in such a situation to attend
to any publick Business. Lieu$ Lawrence if not already arrived will soon be with
you. Decline attending to the Gun Boats until Lt Lawrence shall arrive and then
transfer them entirely to him. And let me recommend to you to pursue the course
which your Physicians may prescribe for the recovery of your health. The sea-air
cannot but be of service to you, and I think a trip to the Southward might greatly
contribute to restore you. We shall be happy to see you at Washington. [NDA. OSW, Vol. 7, 1805-1807.1
To Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Navy, Portland, Me., from Secretary of the Navy
NAVYDEPN*
98th July 1807.
I this morning received your letter of the 20th ins. The sum you require vizt
$3957 was sent to you on the 20tb ins. With great pleasure I grant you the permission you ask. Go to Madeira or any
other place for the benefit of your health, and although we want you, yet I can't
expect you to return till you have recovered your health. I mention this that you
may not be in too great a hurry to return. When you return which sincerely hope you will do, in good health, I shall be
happy to see you in Washington. [NDA. OSW, Vo1.7, 1805-1807.1
To Secretarv of the Navv from Master Commandant John Smith, U. S. Navy
U. S. SHIP
Cowes Roads $94
SIR, I have the honour to acquaint you that we were admitted t o Pratique on the
1bt4 when after observing the accustomed respect to the Admiral Commanding a t

550

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1806 TO 18OY

Spithead I anchored the ship a t this place, from whence we shall proceed to sea
tomorrow We have found the facility much greater in visiting their Dock Yards than I
could have immagined, in satisfying us the have been very attentive The Circumstance of the Chessapecake & i?eapard as in circulation here is a source
of much curious speculation, and the general sentiment appears to be regret; We
lost four of our men yesterday by desertion from One of our Boats, they hsve been
apprehended by an Officer in the impress service a t ryde their delivery I have
required of the Admiral his reply will be received this day; the result I shall do
myself the honour to advise you of in my next
[NDA. MC LB, 18061807.1

-

To Captain John Bodgere, U. 8. Navy, from Liautenant James Lawrence, U. 6.
navy
PORTLAND
July 29*4 [1807]
SIR 1 have this day received orders from Commodore Preble to take the command of all the Gun boats a t present in this port, with directions to use all d'
in getting them to New York, vss i t not for the want of men I should be
leave this in six days, as they are very scarce, it is impossible for me to say when
I shall be able to leave Portland, unless I send Lt Cox to Boston, which is my only
chance, the deficiency of OfficersI will make up, by employing Captains of coasters
who I think capable of navagating the boats to New York, and will use every precaution to prevent separation during the run, on my arrival here I found the
Commodore [Preble] confined to hi bed since then he is somewhat better, yet too
much indisposed to attend to any kind of business he has written to the secretary
for permission to make a voyage to ,Vadiera, and is only waiting for an answer,
be will in all probability sail in ten day or two weeks if he does not I am fearful it
will be too late, I will inform you by post, the time I shall leave this
N. B. the officers a t present in Portland are, Lieutt Lawrence, Cox, & Row,
Midshipmen, KichoBon, Donaldson, Adams, & Pierpoint [LC. U.S.N., 1805-1811.1

%$
:

Extract from log of U.6. Brig Hamd, of 18 Guns, Master Commmdant John H. Dent,
U. S. Navy, commanding, 29 July 1807
At 12. [Midnight] B light breeze sprun up from S. Ea the Constitution on the
At 2 hoisted in the Boat. larboard Bow. - At 2 sent a boat a hea3to towAt 10 a light breeze sprung up from the WestwQ
At 12 the Constitution astern.
h t d q

[NA.

36'36'.
NDA original, 1805-1810.1

To Secretnry of the Bavy from Captain Edward Preble, U. 8. Ravy
PORTLAND
August 1st 1807.
Sra, I am honored with your Letters of the 24th & 25th Ultv, the first of which
has been communicated to Lieut Lawrence for his Government,
I shall follow
the advice of the latter and take the sea air, - I have however altered my plan
of going to Madeira until1 I know what effect the late &air of the Chesapeake
has on our relation with En land
1 h a ~ therefore
e
charterela Packet of pne hundred Tons, and shall sail tomorrow on a cruize on the Atlantic, - my Intentions is t o return to thie Port once
a fortnight for the first month to hear the News, - If I recover my heelth
nothing will sfford me more pleasure than a Voyage to Washington in the
Autumn, - Lieutenant Lawrence yesterday sent off a Gun Boat for Boston
t o procure Men, - I have furnished him with money for the recruiting Service
& advances &c
[NDA. Csptain's LB, Vol. 2, 1807.1

-

Extract from log of y.8.Brig W m ! ,of 18 Guns,adsilter Commandant John E.Dent,
1U.6. Ravy, commanding, 3 August 1807
A t % before 8 came too in Malaga Roads with the larboard bower Anchor in
13% fathoma
At 8. the Comtitution made the signal Nq 334

[NA. NDA original, 1805-1810.]

WARS WITE BARBARY POWERS
(NQ7)

To Secretary of State from George Davis, U. 6. Consul, Tripoli
TRIPOLI 7. August 1807.

SIR. I am waiting with much impatience, the arrival of some vessel of war for
the purpose of transportin the family of Eamet Caramanli. In my letter of the
2. of June I mentioned the Joubts which the Minister had expressed aa to the extent
of my orders; the detention of the family, and more particularly the return of the
Brig Hornet without permission to take them has renewed this suspicion; and those
with whom the Bashaw communicates mnst freely, sssure me, that he believes
the measure to be disapproved of by the Commodore.
The Bashaw's character is not unknown at the seat of government. There are
certain moments in which timidity marks every action, and others in which he is
alike deaf to reason and blind to his own interest. When under the influence of
the latter he is cruel and sanguinary, and, a t such a moment, no exertion of mine
could save the unfortunate children of the Ex-Bashaw.
The frequent revolts in the distant provinces by the avowed friends of Hamet,
a dis-affection to his person even in the city, and the remembrance of psst events,
keep his suspicions awake respecting the exile: for I can assure you, Sir, with the
strongest truth, that the re resentations which have been made of the bignificancy of his friends in this ftngdom are very frrr from being correct.
I t is these circumstances which may probably keep the Bashaw in a state of
peace with a11 the Christian powers. Poverty would drive him to war of 8 sense
of his weakness, and adverse circumstances a t home did not cheek him.
The vicinity of Mslta to this port, with which alone it has any commerce and
the strong msritime force of Great Britian in these seas, give her the precedency
with this Regency.
France, at this moment, is not so much indebted to her own power as to the
Minister Dghies, for the consequence she enjoys here. He has passed some years
to advantage in that country and is unfeignedly attached to it's interests. His
oracle is the French Consul.
Denmark i s the only power to which the Bsshaw can now turn his attention;
it is very uncertain whether his demands will be accorded to the extent mentioned
in my last, but, I have no doubt of the &air being amicably arranged.
This Kingdom has been on the decline for many years, and the American war
has given i t a more severe blow than was believed. On this, the strongest of foundations, we may build our consequence, and our security for peace.
[NA. SDA. CL, Tripoli, Vol. 3, 1806-lSll.]

To Xaster Commandant David Porter, U. S. Navy, York, Pa., from Secretary of
the Navy
l 3 t b A U Q1807.
~
NAVYDEPABTMENT
SIR I t is my intention to give you the command of the New Orleans station You will repair to Washington for detailed information and instructions - On
your way hlther call on me a t Baltimore.
I n consideration of your long absence from your country and your meritorious
services, you will consider yourself a t liberty to remain two or three Weeks with
your FYienda, before obeying this order.
[LC. D.Porter P, Let. & Ord., 1805-1808.1
Extract fromlog of U.6. Brig H o d , of 18 Guns, Master Commandant John H.Dent,
U. 8. Navy, commanding, IS August 1807
[Malaga] RecO from the Constitution 4 32 pounders Carronades with carriages
&c* complete
[NA. NDA original, 1805-1810.1

To Secretary of the Navy from Captain Hugh G. Campbell, U. S. B a v
U. S. S a r ~Constitution
MALAGAROADS16Q Aug* I807
SIB, I left Syracuse the 12bb of June and anchored here the 2* Inst$ the
Horn& in oompany, where I intended to fill up our Water, and proceed immediately for Gibraltar in the expectation of meeting the Chesapeake which Vessel
I have frequently been informed wes fitting out for t h i station. but to mv great

552

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1806 TO 1807

disapointment and surprize I find on perusal of a Boston Paper, that she haa
been attacked by a British 50 Gun ship, and obliged to return into Port In
consequence of which I have determined to wait here for farther information
by post, and shall take the liberty of sendlng home the Enterprize with every
particular respecting the Squadron; I am prompted to this measure in conse
quence of the time of her crew having expired, likewise that of this ship^ Company, which has occasioned some discontent among them, Mr Dyson is the B.earer
of this who has resighned his agency a t Syracuse; Mr William Walter Barker is
left in charge of our M a i m a t that place until1 your pleasure is known, the Trabaccalos or small Vessels procured in-the Adriatic are so much impaired and a
prospect of their defects increasing, hkewise the probability of their never being
more useful to us, has induced me to order them to be sold with all the perishable articles belonging to the Hospital which I hope will meet your approbation,
I expect to hear from Algeziras this evening or tomorrow, where I am informed
the Enterprize was a few days past, hlr Dyson and his lady were passengers on
board the Constitution intending for the United States, but the present Appearance of our Political Horizon, induced me to persuade him to take passage in a
Merchant Ship which offered this morning, and gave him but one hours notice,
which prevents my being more explicit [NDA. Captain's LB, Vol. 2, 1807.1
Extract from log of U. S. Brig Hornet, of 18 Guns, Easter Commandant John H.Dent,
U. 8. Navy, commanding, 16 August 1807
[Malagal First pnrt light airs from the SQ & WQ Sailed in an American
Merchantman Mr George Dyson & lady for America
[NA. NDA original, 1805-1810.1

-

To Master Commandant John H. Dent, U. S. Navy, U. 5. Brig Hornet, 18 Guns, from
Captain Hugh G. Campbell, U. S. Navy
U S. SHIP Constitution MALAGA
ROADS
Augst 19th 1807
SIR, YOUare hereby order'd and directed to proceed with all possible dispatch
in the US. Sp. Hornet under your command to Malta where you will have all the
principal articles among our public Stores immidiately sold including the Barcaloes
and Gun Boats, with all their Sails rigging &$ &$ the remaining Stores of good
quality you will ship on board any vessel you can charter or freight an American
vessel will be more proper for that businiss, as you may charter him by the ton as
a Goverment Transport, you can with great propriety insure him employment
for two months, and ample compensation made him for a longer time
Should
Mr Higgins refuse to give up the public stores you will in that case apply to the
Govenor for redress which will be your last resource, but should you succeed in
getting possession, they must be sent to the US. addressed to such Navy Agent
as should reside there - Should you find it impracticable to send them to the
US. you must order them to Leghorn addressed to our Navy Agenta with orders
to sel them to the best advantage - if the vessel you charter has much more
room than required for the Stores a t iWalta it would not be improper to order her
to Syracuse and take on board as many of our public Stores as will complete her
lading, in doing which provisions & powder must be the articles of your consideration, that having accomplish'd I have to desire that you proceed to Syracuse and
direct the agent to ship on board as much provisions and powder ss will complete
the lading of the Store Ship - from thence you will proceed to Leghorn and
draw from our Navy agent all the public funds in their possission, which must be
in Spanish Dollars, which you are to take on board the Hornet and proceed to the
most convenient port in the US. without delay - on your return down the
Mediterranean it might be advisable to call a t Malaga, where you may receive
further information from the US - which will enable you to judge the plopriety
of calling a t Gibraltar
Immediately on your arrival in the US. you must report yourself to the Navy
Department, and state the particulars of your vessel, mentioning her defects and
the outfits that you may think necessary to put her in a servicable state
Draw from Mr Higgins as much cash as he may be disposed to advance and give
him Bills 011 the Navy Department.
[NHF. Dent's LB, 1803-1810.1

-

-

-

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS
-

-

--

pp

To Secretary of State from John Gavino, U. S. Consul, Gibraltar
GIBRALTAR
19th August 1807.
SIR,I had the honour of adressing you the 19th June last p? N Q44 when accompanied Co y of a letter from Consul Gibbs of Palermo regarding his Sicilian
Majestys Aocad of the Ports of Saples in Possession of his Enemys I now beg leave to hand you a t foot a note of the American Vessels which have
been detaind since my last by British Cruisers, & their fate Collonel Lear of Algeir has lately requested to know of me in case of his being
able to accomplish some arrangements with the Regency for Cash in leiu of some
of the stipulations, whither I mould slow him to draw on me for $20.000 to 25,000
for which he would send Bills on Goverment, I immediately acceded thereto, and
ho e will meet your approbation. r t seems that the Algereen army has lately been Beat by the Tunisians, and in
consequence the Algereens intend to attack Tunis by Water, they have signified
to the Portuguese that they will now treat with them for a Peace, this I conjecture
is a finess to prevent the Portuguese squadron molesting them. I now beg leave to transmit you the list of the last Six Months arrivals at tbia
Port On the 10'h Instant I received a letter from Comodor Campbell advisin his
arrival a t Malaga together with the Hornet, that they Expected t o have 8ompleated their water by the 12'4 t would imediately proceed for this Port
to take some Provisions but the wind continued West untiU the 16'b - late
on the Evening of the 15tQ arrived from New York the schooner Bald Agle,
when I was honourd with the Packet you were pleased to direct me with
sundrys for the Consuls on the Coast which were next day Conveyd to St
Roque and put in the Post Office; it also accompanyd the Proclamation of the
Honourable President on the late event which took place with the Chesapeake
frigate; as the Comander of the Schooner told me he had dispatches for Comodor
Campbell, I Early next morning (as the wind wns fresh East) directed his proceeding to the Eastward in quest of the Conetitutzon & Hornet and if did not fall in
with them to go to Malaga, and if did not find them there to return here; but as
none of them appeard with the Easterly wind I Conclude he met Comodor C a m p
bell a t Malaga. I also found means to Dispatch an Express from St Roque to
Consul Kirkpatrick with the letter adressd t o him from the State Department
requesting a t same time his informing Comodor Campbell of the directions given
the Master of the schooner Bald Agle; I expect in the morning the return of the
Express MF Dyson of Syracuse came Passenger in the Cowlilution on his way to the
U. S. and is now in quarant? in this Bay, he says left the Constztufion and H o m t
yesterday in Malaga but saw nothing of the Schooner I beg leave to trouble you with the inclosed for the Tress-q Department.
[NA. SDA. CL, Gibraltar, Vol. 3, 1805-1829.)

NQ45

Extract from log of U.S. Brig Hwnd. of 18 Guns,Easter Commandant John H.Dent,
U. S. Navy, commanding, 20 August 1807
At 1 A IT got under weigh and stood to the SQ & Ed left the Constitution at
Anchor in the Bay of Malaga
L a t d ~ObsQ3G026'
[NA. NDA original, 1805-1810.1
To Secretary of the Navy from Master Commandant John Smith, U. S. Navy
U. S . SEIPV a s p Aug* 34tB 1807
Rock of Lisbon bearing E. by N.% N.
distance 6 Leagues HONOERED
S I ~ The
, difficulty of obtaining Conveyance for letters to America
from any of the blockaded ports of France, as also my objections to sending them
by Poet to any of the other Ports, induced me to advise you of what concerns
us by the first homeward bound American Vessel we should speake within our
route to the Mediterranean We effected anchorage at the Port of L'Orient on the 9t4 when we arranged
for a Quarantine of ten days, a circumstance that. surprised me much es the Crew
of the Ship were then in perfect health. The Maritime frefete who has the oontroul of Maim of thie Nature here stated his regret to me in a letter that the
deecision of the board of health required my observance of quarantine, however

554

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1806 TO 1807

I conjecture that our direct comin from England must have been the sole cause
i t was my intention to have got unser way some days earlier had the Wind proved
favourable On the 16th we were fsvor'd with a Change of wind which permitted us to
proceed to Sea - Both on the d a s of entering & that of departure from L'Orient
we were boarded by some of his
B. Majesty's Ships, Composirlg the Blockade
of that Port; their conduct was polite The first Vessel that we have discovered (since our leavin LIOrient) standing
e
t o be the
to the Westward we are now in the act of brintxina
- - too:, ~ % Droves
Schooner Virginia of Norfolk bound to [space]
[NDA. M C LB, 1806-1807.1

d

To Charles Prentice from William Eaton, former U.6. Bavy Agent for the Barbary
Regencies
RICHMOND
Aug 96* 1807
M Y DEARSIR, I desire you will have t.he goodness to signify to me what sufficient inducements I can offer you to pass a few months with me a t my seat in
Brimfield, and to assist me in preparin for publication A Histmy of the Tripatitan
a
. I have also in contemplation t%e establishment of a N e w Paper in that
village - which -if the encouragement should meet your views I could wish
you would edit
Write me, I pray you, a t this place and duplicate a t Brimfield - And, as
you love me, keep these propositions secret
[LC. E 172-A35 2d Set.]

-

[25 August 18071
To Secretary of the Navy fro111 Purser lathsniel Lyde, U. 6. Navy
SIR,A task falls on me of the most painful nature that ever occurred during
my life, in announcing to you, the death of our beloved & respected Commodore
Edward Preble - who died a t half past 5 OClock this afternoon, - The gloom
which this Melancholy event causes in this Town, is truely distressing, PORTLAND
Augzlst g6 1807
wo~~.-The
stationery on which the above was written was bordered In black. The muse of Commo.

-

Preble's death was eonsumption or tubarculosis.1

[NDA. Officers LB, Vol. 3, Aug.-Dec. 1807.1
[27 August 18071
Honors shown to Captain Edward Preble, U. S. Bavy
The citizens of his native town determined to pay to his remains every possible
respect: and his funeral was an imposing pageant, uniting with the solemnities
of religion masonic and military pomp and show. Business and labor were entirely
suspended, and the population of Portland and the neighborhood, moved by a
common impulse, and forming a large assemblage, devoted Thursday the 27th
to the sad duty of his burial. It was known a t Boston, that the funeral services
would occur on that day, and the usual mourning honors were accordingly paid
by the shipping in that port. Intelligence of his death reached Washington on
the 1st of September, a few minutes past noon, and, says the National InteltG
geneer of the 2d of that month, "Immediately the flags of the frigates in ordinary,
and a t the marine garrison, were struck half-mast; a t half past noon, one gun was
fired a t the navy yard, which was repeated every five minutes, till seventeen
minutes before sunset, st which time commenced a discharge of seventeen minute
guns; when, with the departing sun, the colors were struck amidst the sincere
regrete of his brother officere." The event was suitably noticed in other places,
while the newspaper press, and the private letters of distinguiehed citizens, bewailed "the loss of so much professional talent, ardent patriotlm, and civic worth
a t so critical a juncture." The master spirit of our navy of that period had
indeed fallen; but the young men whom he had trained, and to some of whom there
is proof before me he had fulfilled the duties of a father, or of a n elder brother,
lived to do him honor, and to win for themselves inperishable names.
[NR&L. 620734, Bnl P 8226.2.1

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

555

To Captain John Bodgers, U. 6. Navy, commanding H s v d Force at New York, B.Y.,
from Gecretary of the Navy
NAVYDEPM+
Augt 37,18U7.I have received your letter of the 24* inst The L w for the government of the Pu'avy provides no punishment for duelling;
but there is s punishment provided for those offences which most frequently
lead to duels. The 34 Art. of the act for the better government of the Navy
declares that "any officer or other person in the navy who shall be guilty of o p
pression, cruelty, fraud, profane swearing, drunkeness, or any other scandalous
conduct, tending to the destruction of good morals, shall, if an Officer, be cashiered,
or enffer such other punishment as a Court Martial shall adjudge". The 15*
Art. declares that "no person in the Eavy shall quarrel with any other person
in the Navy, nor use provoking or reproachfuL words, gestures, or menaim on
pain of such punishment ss a Court Martial shall adjudge."
As I am not particularly acquainted with the circumstances which led to the
duel between Berrymore and Redick I cannot give any instructions at this time
in the case; but if after an investigation of the circumstsncea you should be of
the opinion that either or both parties have committed either of the offencea
provided for in the above recited articles of the act for the government of the
Navy, you will call a Court Martial, otherwise reprimand them. (NDA. OSW,Voi. 7, 1805-1807.1

-

[28 August 18071
To Secretary of the Navy from Purser Nathaniel Lyde, U. 6. Bavy
Era, I wrote on the 2 5 4 instant informing you of the death of our beloved and
lamented
Commodore Edward Preble, - His remains were yesterday inkred
with all the respect due to such departed worth, - and i t is with satisfsction
when I inform you the Funeral was couducted with dl the honors of War, which
possibly could be paid to the Memwy of Man, - Order of procession you will
find encIosed, - The Escort, Military, consisted of Three Companys of light
Infantry and One Artillery, which was conducted with great decorum, and good
judgement, the Committee of arrangement, chosen by the inhabitants of this
To* are psrticularly intitled to much credit for their exertions on the solemn
occaalon, - The bells cornmerlced tolling a t 8 OClock continueing one hour,
a t 1 - OClock alI busishipping in the harbor hoisted their colours half Mast,
ness ceased, Stores & Shops were Shut, - On moving the Corps minute Guns
were fired, and every person's countenance was impressed with the Melancholly
seen, - in fact i t is not in my power to described to you the respect which was
esid to the Memory of the deceased, a person was Appointed to pronounce an
legy but the time would not allow it. I take the liberty of Stating to you these proceedings of the Burial of our kte
Commodore, knowing the high estimation in which he stood, presumed they would
be grstitying, The Nation will feel the loss of a most valuable Officer,& protector, and be assured Sir that I have met with a loss that I shaU never get over, Portland August 28% 1807

-

-

[NOTE.-The stationery on which the above was mitten wa8 bordered in black.]

[NDA. O5cers LB, Vol. 3, Aug.-Dee. 1807.1
The procession wiIl move a t three OClock through the principal Streets in
Town to the burial ground in the following order Vizt
FUNERAL
Escoa~
Military Officers with side arms
Seamen of the port with flags in mourning
Justices of the peace
Judge B Register of Probate
Sheriff of Cumberlend & Mamhall of Maine
Maaonic Bretheren of two lodge
CORPSE
Mourners
Clergy
Slectmen
Physicians
Citieene four deep
The above is only a rough copy taka from recollection
[NDA. O5cere LB, Vol. 8, Aug.-Dec. 1807.1

556

N A V ' OPERATIONS FROM 1805 TO 1807

To Master Commandant John Smith, U. S. Navy, commanding U. S. Sloop Wasp,
from Captain Hugh G. Campbell, U. S. Navy
U. S. SHIPConstitution
Algezeres. Augt 98th 1807
SIR, I am commanded by the Honle the Secretary of the Navy to acquaint
you that on your anival a t Gibralter, you will take on board a supply of provisions and proceed with out delay to Americ~.. and if possible make the Port
of Boston. but should you on your arrival off the coast find that you can safely
make the Potomack. or New York. you may in that case make either of these
ports as your Judgement may advise you. or if contrary to your expectatious
you should find it unsafe to enter any of the port~sabove mentioned. you may
make any other safe and convenient Port you can
On your arrival in the
U. 8. you will report yourself to the Navy Department. giving a correct statement of the 'Ct7asp what repairs or equipment she may want or require To put
her in readiness for actual service.
(COPPY)
[NDA. MC LB, 1806-1807.1

-

To Secretary of the Navy from Captain Hugh G. Campbell, U. S. Navy
Duplicate
TJ. S. SHIP Constitution
Algeziris Road. Sept So 1807
SIE - I beg leave to represent that in Consequence of the time of this Ships
company Having expired with a few exceptions And in the full Expectation of
meeting The Chesapeake, a t Gibraltar, I left Syracuse the 12th of June allowin
time to Call a t Messena, Pilermo and Leghorn, Prior to which I dispatche$
Captain Dent to Tripoli for such communication As hlr Davis might have for
Goverment With orders to Join me a t A h a n t , Which Was effected on the 18th
of July On the 1st of August I arrived a t Malaga the Hornet in company, where I
received the account of Commodore Barrons misfortune and return of the Chesapeake into port, likewise the Proclamation of the president of the U. S. Respecting
that unfortunate affair, which Determind me to wait for farthur Information and
put the two Vessels I n as proper state for defence as the Means in our power
would permit, by Mounting the 8. 321b Carronades that Were on board the
Constitution, two Of them I have on the forecastle and Other two in place of the
after Guns on The Quarter Deck, the remaining four I spared the Hornet and are
mounted Upon that Vessel, Likewise purchased Four Hundred round shot for
them. They being as I thought reasonable, Was the cause of my purchasing so
many 5. Cents Pr lb, which with other preparations Has rendered this Ship as
fit for service as She can be without some alterations that Should be made t o
Enable her to perform Such service as would be expected of her In case of an
active war - While in this Situation the return of post brought a farther account of the Chesapeukes disaster and of Captain Porter having saild For America,
Who until1 that moment I had reaqon to beleive was a t Algezeres, A proceedure so
repugnant to my orders That I hope he will be able to account For in a Satisfactory manner I now Sir come to the most painful1 Part of my duty that has ever occured
since I have been honored with receiving Your commands, which is in not Personally execututing the whole of your Orders of July the 14th which are the first
I have received from the Navy Department since September the 6'4 1806, Yet
rest in the hope when my reasons Are explaind and maturely considered They
will in a great measure paliate The crime - Your orders reached me The 18Q
of August their contents I mark with With attention and took a view of our
situation in these eease, likewise the Nature of your orders respecting Malta
And Leghorn, to effect which nothing More appeared requiuite than a little Address and Mercantile Knowledge Which with the following reasons induced Me
to send Captain Dent on in the Execution of them - In your instructions
I observe a great desire to get home all The publick Vessels with the reatest
Secrecy and dispatch, and having a t The time I received them decenfed the
Mediterranean three Hundred leagues Below Malta, a t a season when calms
Are so prevalent as to render Kavigation Uncommonly tedious, that might have
detaind me in going up and returning clear of the Straits until) the month of
November, In a season that would not only render More difficult the ships ettlng home But expose us much sooner and longer To the British (in case of tkeir
commencing Hoetilityo) then I preaume would me& Your approbation, Eepe-

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

557

ciaUy should They take a premature step arr they have Done by the Deans in
detaining them all, With regard t o the stores thet might have Been stowed in
the Publick Vessels the proportion would be small, when compared With the
Accompanying list, which would Render necessary the Chartering of a vessel
For the remainder and probably cost as Much as if the whole were freighted, f
therefore concluded that the least risk Attending the business by leaving one Vessel
in place of two, in the Mediterranean would be moat agreable to you, And after
a serious conversation with Captain Dent on the Subject stating the Measures
I would persue on the occasion and impressed on his mind the Necessity of Secrecey and despatch all of which he appeared perfect master of I gave him his
orders t o proceed, dopy of which [Au ust 19, 18071 accompany this for your
Information, I likewise wrote to h f f biggins observing that Govement had
Fixed on a more Central Deposite for Our publick stores in the MediterranIean]
And flattered myself thet no exertion on His part would be wanting t o effect
the Object of Captain Dents Mission The Stores I considered the primary object and should he be prevented From
receiving the funds I presume They will always be safe in the hands Of those
Gentlemen and may he drawn For through difTerent Channels I have other reasons of a publick nature that I wish to Explain In person and
request that indulgence - Herewith I enclose for your Farther information,
a Iist of seven Men. whose conduct hns been of so attrocious a nature that I
thought proper to Keep them in close confinement, until1 a court Martial could
be held on them suitable to Their merits INDA. Captain's LB, Vol. 3, 1807.1
To Purser Nathaniel Lyde, U. 6. Navy, Portland, Maine, from Secretary of the
Navy
NAVYDEPARI
9th Sept: 1807.
I n my private as well as in my publick Character I have occasion deeply to
lament the death of Commodore Edward Preble announced to me in your letter
of the 25 u l t ~ . This mournful event will be felt by the Citizens of the United
States as a national misfortune, and his numerous intimate friends well knowing
his personal worth will feelingly participate in the sufferings of his affected family.
[NDA. GLB, Vol. 9, 1807-1809.1
To Captain James Barron, U. S. Navy, Hsmpton, Va., from Secretary of the Navy
NATYDEPM~
I2tb Sept? 1807. By the enclosed copy of a Precept you will find that a Court of Enquiry is called,
to investigate your conduct, in the lete affair between the Chesapeak and the
Leopard, and to state an opinion thereof. You will also perceive that your attendance at Norfolk is required on the 5th Octr next.
[Enclosnre]
PRECEPT

To ALEXANDERMURRAY
Esquire, Captain in the Navy oj the United States. WHEREAS
the President of the United States did give the Command of the
Frigate the Chesapeak to James Barron Esquire a Captain in the Navy of the
United States and did order him to proceed with her to the Mediterranean Sea
and WHEREASthe Fri ate aforesaid waa on her voyage to the Sea aforesaid
attacked by a British &ssel of War, to which Vwe1 of R r r she wae surrendered
without that defence having been made which might have h e n expected fmm
the known valour of Americans: all which by the accompanying papers, to wit,
Paper A. being a copy of a letter from the Secretary of the Navy to James Barron
Esquire dated 15rP May 1807.
B. being a copy of a letter from James Barron &quire to the Secretary of
the Navy dated 234 June 1807 with copies of the papers therewith transmitted by James Barron Esquire to the Secretary of the Navy. C. being the copy of another letter from Jar Barrou Esquire t o the Secretary
of the Navy, dated 234 June 1807.D. being a copy of a letter from the Lieutenants & from the Sailing Master
of the k i g a t e Chesapeak to the Secretary of the Navy dated 234 June
1807.
E. being a copy of a letter from James Barron Esqr to the Secretary of the
Navy dated 291b June 1807 with a copy of the paper therewith transmitted b James Bsrron Esquire tr, the Secretary of the Navy, will more
fully appear. &nuerning the o a u r of which surrender we think i t n e m w ~ ytbt

-

-

-

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1806 TO 1807

558

Enquiry should be made in order that we may have a faithful report made to us
of the causes thereof for our better information. The President of the United States has therefore charged me to call a Court of
Enquiry for the purposes aforesaid, and you are hereby accordingly ordered to
roceed to Norfolk in Virginia to act as a Member of the said Court and being the
k n i o r Officer called, you will be the President thereof. Notifications are also
transmitted to Captains Isaac Hull & Isaac Chauncey with orders to appear a t
Norfolk on the 5th day of October next as members of the said Court. And the
Court is hereby directed and empowered to summon such Persons as may be necessary to give information touching the said matters, and is moreover authorized
empowered and required strictly to examine into the matters before mentioned
and to report a state thereof as it shall appear to them to ether with their opinion
thereon. All which you are to transmit to me to be laif before the President of
the United States, for his consideration. And for so doing this shall be t o you
and to our other said O5cers and all others concerned a sufficient Warrant. Given under my Hand and the Seal of the Navy Department of the
(Seal) United States this 12th day of September Anno Domini 1807.
R* SMITH.
[NDA. OSW,Vol. 7, 1805-1807.1

To Secretary of State from George Davis, U. S. Consul,Tripoli
TRIPOLI 19. September 1807.
SIR. Under other circumstances than those in which I actually find myself,
the unaccountable delay in the return of the H m e t (aspromised by Cap%Campbell)
would prove to me a source of much uneasiness.
The Bashaw has been pleased to honor me with a considerable portion of his
confidence, and I feel no doubt of bein able to maintain the respectable and
friendly footing on which I am placed. k i t h o u t this, my embarrassment would
be great, between the solicitations of the family of Ahmet Cararnanli a t Tripoli,
the uneasiness and importunity of the father a t Syracuse, the suspicions which
are still kept alive as to the uncertainty of their departure, and, the exertions of
jealous Consuls to ward off their own difficulties by involving others.
I received a few days since, three letters from the Ex-Bashaw, who, a t the same
time, addressed the English Consul, soliciting his interference for the recovery of
his family. Copies of his Excellency's letters and my answer are enclosed.
I wrote t o Consul Genl Lear, on the 17, May and 29.of June, statin the impossibility of negotiating a bill on Algiers, and requesting him to forward: me, by the
way of Malta, the sum of four thousand dollars. I am still without any advices
from that quarter, and have been destitute of public funds since the 1. of June.
The sum r uested from the Consul Genl was for defraying the ordinary expence. of theTonsulate as well as to meet the engagements I had entered into
with [code], mentioned in my letter of the 2. of June, and which should be fulfilled on the departure of the family. * * *
Extracts from the Journal are herewith enclosed.

(No8)

-

[Enclamre]
EXTRACTS FROM THE JOURNAL

August 9. 1807.
10.

14.
17.
21.

Arrived the En lish Sloop of War the Bittern with the Consul
W. W. Langford, %sqc
Accom~anied the Endish Consul and the Commander of the
Sloop i t their audiencgwith the Bashaw. He received them with
much coolness, refused to communicate directly with the Consul
and requested him to address me and receive my answers as from
himself. The audience was too mortifying to be continued for any
length of time.
A private audience with the Bashaw on British affairs, when a11
dBicultiea between his Excellency & the Consul were settled.
My visit to the Bashaw was a t the request of Mr Langford.
The Baahaw's wife was delivered last evening of a princess. A
regalo on such occasions being necessary I sent him a piece of
brocade value 194 dollars as pr account.
Murat (Peter
A private audience with the Bashaw.-Admiral
Lisle) arrived from Lisbon and brought a preaent to the Bashaw
of velvet, silks and brocades to the value of about 4000 dollars.
The Portuguese have ieaued an order prohibiting Barbary Cor-

WARS WITR BARBARY POWERS

559

airs from cruizing on their const. This measure is said to have
been adopted in consequence of the bombastical menace8 of the
drunken Admiral.
A private audience with the Bashaw on P, and E. affairs. He
24.
nave the American Consul a female slave Maria Meroot. of CaTania in Sicily.
Augt 25.
A private audience with the Bashaw.
The different negotiations with Sheik Calipha have been thwarted,
27.
as much by the rashness of the Bey, as the increasing demands of
the Sheik. The Camp has, in consequence, been again put in
motion.
S e p t ~ 7.
Received letters from the Ex-Bmhaw kc+ &c*
Wrote t o the Ex-Bashaw &c+ t c *
9.
fNA. SDA. CL, Tripoli, Vol. 3, 1806-18ll.]
Extract from log of U.S. Brig Hornet of 18 Qnna, Master Commandant Zohn H. Dent,
U. 6. Navy, commanding. 14 September 1807
At 12 saw Syracuse, bearing N N W distant 4 leagues - At # past 12 hauled
At 1 hauled aboard AT? Tack. - At 2 hove too off the harbor
up Mainsail
Syracuse - At 5 A M stood in for the Harbor. -at 7. Came too in Syracuse
in 10 fw water light house bearing N E B E. and the South point of the Harbor.
S. E E.
Rece on board 1 Topmast, 1 pair Gallowses - 2 boats Davits, 3 sweeps, 7
blocks, 4 handspikes, 1 Grapling, 2 barrels flour, the remainder of a barrel of Coffee,
left by the Constitution and three Barrels containing Lime Juice
[NA. NDA. original, 1805-1810.1

-

To His Excellency D. Marcello de [fregorio, Qovernor of Syracuse, Royal Fortress,
from W. W. Barker, acting U. S. Navy Agent, Syracuse
Translation of a paper handed His Excellency the Governor of Syracuse by W W
BARKER
acting Navy Agent :in Syracuse, Septr 26th 1807.
EXCELLENCY,
A Transport belonging t o the United States of America having
arrived in this Port; accompanied by H. L. Keene Esqr Naval Officer, for the
urpose of taking awsy the Ammunition, and Provision belonging to the United
tates, deposited in this Fortress, and with positive orders, to take away the POWder, lodged in one of the Magazines of the Castle, in custody of your Excellency as
representative of His Sicilian Majesty, from whom hitherto the United States
of America, have had every demonstration of perfect friendship
On applying to your Excellency t o send a person with the Keys, in order to
embark the Powder, you informed me they had been conaign'd by order of His
Majest together with the other Keys of this Fortress, to Colonel Clinton - To
avoid J l a y , I wrote to Colonel Clinton requestin of him the Keys, and he hath
replied "he could not permit the removal of any Sowder from the M azines of
Syracuse without the orders of the Comr of Hia Brittannick ~ a ~ e s t y ~ ~in o this Island.
This opposition, and delay are of importance to the speedy departure of the
Transport and contravene the order received by H. L. Keene Esqr from his Commander.Besides this the United States of America, have wt confided their
Ammunition and Storesyin Sicily, to a foreign'authority, but solely to that of the
Kingdom of Sicily it therefore behoves your Excellency, t o inform Colonel
Clinton, that the Powder in uestion belongs t o the Nation of America, and
that under the Guarancy of %e August Sovereign of the Kingdom of Sicily
i t hath been confided to your charge; to be in all cases st the free and uninterrupted
disposal of the Naval Agent of the U: S. of America - Your Ekcellency being
responsible for the restitution of the Ammunition deposited in the Castle you will
therefore do away every obstacle t o the immediate embarkation of the Powder
in question - with an offer of my servicea to your Exceilency's Commands end
the most distinct consideration
[NDA. MC LB, 1806-1807.1

E

To Secretary of State from Jamea Simpson. U. 6. Consul, Tangier, Morocco
NQ131
TANGIER
67Q September 1807.SIBI have the honour to acquaint you e Messenger hee thia morning arrived
from His Majeatys Camp a t Alcasaar, with advice of Hashaah having been de-

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1806 TO 1807

560

rived of all command, put in Chains and delivered to the care of the Black
%oops.
Sidy Muhammed Selawy succeeds him in the Governments of Tetuan and
Tangier. - This change removes from all influence with the Emperor an Enemy
of the United States and brings near us one who has uniformly manifested s
disposition to be useful to me as well in Public as private concerns. [NA. SDA. CL, Tangier, Vol. 2, 1803-1810.1

-

[l October 18071
To Sidi Mohamet Dghies, Minister for Foreign Affairs, Tripoli, from George
Davis, U. 6. Consul, Tripoli
The undersigned Consul Gent of the United States of America and Charge
d'Affaires near His Excellency the Bashaw of Tripoli.
Minister for foreign a f i i r s &@ &cQ
To SIDI DGEIES,
The undersigned presents his salutations to the Mir&ter and requests that he
will favor him with the following information.
What. number of females constitute the family of Ahmet Caramanli, and what
number of males? What number of slaves is proposed to accompany them on
their embarkation? The undersigned is induced to make these enquiries to guide
him in the preparation of a vessel for their immediate accomodation.
TRIPOLI 1. Odobet 1807.
[NA. SDA. CL, Tripoli, Vol. 3, 180G1811.1
[3 October 18071
To Sidi Mohamet Dghies, Xinister of Foreign Affairs, Tripoli, from George Davis,
U. 6. Consul,Tripoli
The undersigned George Davis, Consul of the United States of America and
Charge d'AfEaires near His Excellency the Baahaw of Tripoli, has the honor t o
acknowledge the receipt of the Minister's note of last evening.
The undersigned has fully considered the objection urged by His Excellency
the Bashaw to the departure of his brother's family in a merchant vessel; and
h e deeply regrets it's necessity. But the inconveniences attending a ~ h o r voyage
t
in a vessel of inferior accomodations, are certainly overbalanced by the prospect
of speedily uniting the famiIy with a father and husband who anxiously awaits
their arrival. Much more congenial to his feelings would it have been could their
conveyance have been effected in an American vessel of war; a mode more suitable
to the dignity of the personages, more respectful to Flis Excellency, and more
conformable to the wishes of his government. However pleasing this mode would
have been to all parties, i t cannot a t present, from imperious circumstances, be
adopted.
The undersigned must now advert to an erroneous assertion contained in the
Minister's reply, which calls on him for prompt correction. He utterly disclaims
any agreement or engagement with the Bashaw that, the family of Sidi Ahmet
should be transported in a vessel of war. For the reasons above recited and
which are sufficiently obvious he preferred tbat conveyance, and certainly he
did not conceal his opinion from his Excellency.
The undersigned has the honor to represent to the Minister the good faith
and celerity, with which every stipulation contained in the treaty of amity between
the United States and this Regency, hsa been fulfilled on the part of his Government. He bas also to add, that they have giveAlhis Excellency every manifeatation of friendship and good will, of which he had the honor of presenting a very
recent proof. Under these circumstances a similar conduct on the part of the
Bashaw was expected. His Excellency hae agreed that the family of Ahmet
Car-nli
shall be delivered up to the United States tor the purpose of being
restored to it's head. Let him do this and his government is responsible for
their safety.
With such assurances should His Excellency still continue unyielding, the undersigned must attribute hi refusal to motives of a very different nature from that
of consulting either the comfort or security of those individuals who are by treaty
for the time behg under the immediate protection of the United States
When essential engagements between nations are unfulfilled, formalities may
be waved. The undersigned must therefore renew his demand, and begs, in the
m e of his Government, that His Excellency will reflect, that the inexecution on

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

561

bia part of this important stipulation contained in our treaty, must necessarily

compel him to reaort t o such measures as the honor of his country requires. He is disposed to believe that a personal interview with the Bashsw, would not
onlv shorten discussion, but might probably give a more favorable t u n to bis
Excellency's thoughts. With thia view the undereigned renews, thro' the Minister, his application for an audience and hopeti for as early aB answer as his
convenience will permit.
TRIPOLI 3. October 1807.
[NA. SDA. CL, Tripoli, Vol. 3, 1806-1811.1

To Tobias Lear, U. 6. ConsuI General, Algiers, from Gieorge Davis, U. 8. Consul,
Tripoli

(Copy) (duplicate)

TRIPOLI9. Odober 1807

SIR, The vessel by which I forwarded my letter to you of the 29G of June

returned to this port on the 29 ultimo and brought me no letters; consequently
I am still without any of your favors. .
Recent advices from Capt Dent inform me of the order given for all our vessels
of war to leave the Mediterranean. This event will necessarily produce much
embarrassment as i t respects the family of Ahmet Cnramanli but decissive measures must be adopted and steadily adhered to. In consequence of M$ Eiggins'
last communication which informs me that no funds have been placed a t my disposal a t Malts, I have drawn on you as pr letter of advice for the s u m of five
thousand dollars for the public service.
The United States will now incur the additional expence of the charter of a
vessel I%* for the accomodstion of the family of Ahmet Caramanli provided the
Bashaw will allow them to depart. They can remain here no Ionger without the
sscrafice of a great proportion of the advantages we have gained, and should
affairs assume a more serious aspect than I am disposed to believe the vesael which
has been chartered for Syracuse will be dispatched to Algiers. SIR,The foregoing is a duplicate of my last respects. The enclosure for Goverumerit js a detail of the arrangements made here. I have left i t unsealed for your
perusal. The original is sent by the same conveyance to Alicante. I will thank
you to chuse an early conveyance for the one addressed t o your care. TRIPOLI16t4 OCtOber 1807.
A hue Copy
TOBIASLEAR.- Decr 518t 1807
[NA. SDA. CL, Algiers, Vol. 7, Pert 11, Jm. 1806-Sept. 1807.1
f5 October to 4 November 18071
To Captain John Rodgers, U. S. Navy. from Secretary of the Navy
To JOHN
RODOEBG
esq:
captain in the Navy of the Undad Slates}
OC7EEREAS the President of the United States did give the command of the
Frigate the Chesapeak, to James Barron esquire a Captain in the Navy of the
United States, and did order him t o proceed witchher t o the Mediterranean sea:
and WHEREAS the frigate aforesaid was on her voyage to the sea aforesaid
attacked by a British Vessel of war called the hopard, to which Vessel of war
she was surrendered without that defence having been made which might have
been expected from the known valor of Americans: and WHEREAS by Precept
directed to Alexander Murray esq: a captain in the navy of the United States,
issued on the 12th day of September in the year of our Lord 1807, a Court of
Enquiry w w convened for the pur se of enquiring and examining into the causes
of such surrender, and was orderefio report a state of the matters that should be
disclosed to them, with their opinion thereon: - and WHEREAS in virtue of
the Precept aforesaid, the Court aforesaid did convene on the 5% day of October
1807 and did hold their sessions a t Norfolk in the S e t e of Vvginia from the 5th day
of October to the 4fP day of November 1807, mclusively;
and WHEREAS the
Court aforesaid did form and transmit to me through Littleton W. Ta~eweU
eaquire, the Judge Advocate to the Court, their o inion, (copy of which is hereunto
annexed and marked A) touchin the matters &closed t o them, and the causes
of the surrender aforesaid: and #BEREAS by tbe said opinion of the eaid Court
it appesreth,

-

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1806 TO 1807

562

that James Barran, a captain in the Navy of the United Statea and commanding officer of the aforesaid frigate the Ches eak a t the time of the surrender aforesaid: did not visit the said frigate 8hesapeak during the period
she remained in Hampton Roads, as often as he wae in duty bound to do, and
that when he did visit her he did not, as he was in duty bound to do, examine
particularly into her state and condition: and did, on the probability of an engagement neglect to clear his ship for action: and did fail to encourage in his
own person, his inferior officers and men, to fight courageously: and did not
do his utmost to take or destroy the aforesaid Vessel of War the Leopard,
which vessel it was his duty to encounter. And WHEREAS by the opinion aforesaid of the Court aforesaid i t doth also
appear,
that the guns of the Chesapeak were never exercised before she proceeded
to sea, that her crew were quartered but a few days previous to that time and had never been called to quarters more than three times prior to her
sailing for sea: - that some of the guns of the said frigate Chesapeak were
not securely fitted in their carriages - that some of her sponges and wads
were too large - that but few of her powder horns were filled - that her
matches were not primed - and that some of her rammers were not in
their proper places: that her Msrines mere not supplied with enough cartridges, and that none of those which they had were of the proper size:and WHEREAS the Court aforesaid, in the commendation they have passed
upon the other o5cers of the Ship, have excepted those whose duty it wae t o have
remedied the deficiencies above stated: and WHEREAS Charles Gordon es uire,
a master commandant in the Navy of the United States, was, by letter I s t e d
23rd February 1807 copy of which is hereunto annexed and marked B. attached
to the said frigate Chesa eak, as Captain under the command of the said James
William Hook wm, by letter dated 4th March
Barron esquire: and
1807, copy of which is hereunto annexed and marked C. attached to the said
Frigate Chesa eak as Gunner: and WHEREAS John Hall esquire, a captain in
the Marine & r p ~ of the United States, was by letter dated 14* day of May
1807, copy of which is hereunto annexed and marked D, char ed with the command of the Marines attached to the said frigate Chesopeak; an! WHEREAS, the
aforesaid Charles Gordon, William Hook, and John Hall, were on board the
mid fri ate Cksapeak a t the time of the surrender aforesaid:
.
NO# THEREFORE, it doth appear highly fit and proper that a General
Court Martial should be assembled. [See Proceedings of General Court Martralfor
the trial of James Barron, Charles Gordon, William Hook and John Hall January
1808, published by Navy Dep't and printed by Jacob Gideon, Junior, 1822, containing 496 pages.]
for the purpose of trying according to
John Rodgers
Law, the officers herein before menW i i a m Bainbridge
tioned, for the offences with which
Hugh G. Campbell
they do appear to be respectively
Stephen Decatur jr
chargeable - and accordingly a Gen~ h a r l e sstewart
eral Court Martial, to consist of the
John Shaw
Members mentioned in the margin, or
John Smith
any five or more of them, are hereby
ordered to assemble a t Norfolk in the
John H. Dent
State of Virginia on the fourth day of
David Porter
January 1808, for the purpose of trying
the officers whose names-are hereafter
Joseph Tarbell
mentioned, for the offences, with which
Jacob Jones
they do severally stand charged, which
James Lawrence
are also hereafter mentioned.
Charles Ludlow
that is to say:

WIPEREAS

k a & i a lhereby ordered to sssembie, is to try, according
The General ~ o u ~

to Law,

JAMES BARRON esquire, a mptain i n the Nalry of the United Statee.
1st For negligently performimg the duty assigned him.
BPECIFICATION.

I n that he did not visit the Frigate Chesapeak during the period she remained in Hampton Roads, and before she proceeded to sea, as often as he
was in duty bound to do. I n that when he did visit her, he did not as i t
was his bounden duty to do, examine particularly into her state and condition.

W U S WITH BARBARY POWERS

563

2nd. For neglecting on the probability of an engagement t o clear his Ship for
action. SPECIFICATION.
In that certain threats on the part of a commander of a British Vessel of
War, that he would take by force, if he could not otherwise obtain them,
certain men from on board the frigate Chesapeak - and that such threats
were known to or heard by the said James Barron - and still he neglected
to clear his ship for action. In that there were various indications of a hostile disposition towards the frigate Chesapeak, exhibited by the British Ship
of war the Leopard - to wit: her utting to sea after certain signals had
been seen and noticed by the said k m e s Barron, when there ww no other
vessel in sight or any other object to induce her to go to sea, but the Chesapeak - the Ports of the said ship Leopard were triced up and her tompions
were out a considerable time before she commenced firing upon the Chcsapeak - and still that notwithstanding these suspicious appearances, which
were seen and observed by the said James Barron, he neglected to clear his
ship for action. In that by various manouvres, which are set forth in the opinion of the
Court of Enquiry hereunto annexed, the British Ship of war Leopard did
manifest an intention to fire upon the said frigate Chesapeak - and still that
the said James Barron ne lected to clear his ship for action.
In that the said ship %eopard did approach the said frigate Chesapeak,
under all the appearances of being prepared for action - and still the said
James Barron neglected to clear his ship for action.
In that the said James Barron did receive from the commanding Officer
of the Leopard, a communication clearly intimating that if certain men were
not delivered up to him, he should proceed to use force - and still the said
James Barron neglected to clear his ship for act!on.
In that the said James Barron did verily believe, from the communication
he received from the Commanding Officer of the said ship Leopard, that the
said ship would fire upon the said frigate Chesapeak, or take by force if they
could not be obtained by other means, any British Deserters that could be
found on board the Chesapeak
and still the said James Barron neglected
to clear his ship for action. 3
For Failing to encourage in his own person, his Inferior Officers and Men
to fight courageously -

-

SPECIFICATION.

In that he did not on the first moment of an indication or su icious
appearance of a hostile intention on the part of the a i d ship ~ e o p a r T o r d e r
his men to quarters. In that he did not, after he was satisfied that an attack
upon his ship would be made, use prompt and officerlike measures to prepare his ship for battle. In that when he did order his men to quarters he did not order them as
became an officer of the American Navy. In that he ordered that the drum should desist from beating, and that the
men should be got to quarters secretlj without beat of drum.
In that from the manner in which he ordered his men to quarters, he did
not evince a determination bravely to defend his ship.
In that he was not at his station during the attack aforesaid, but remained
a considerable part of the time a t the Gangway as if imploring forbearance. In that he drew his men, or some of them, from their guns to lowering
down a boat or boats, to send on board of the attacking ship, during her
attack upon him. In that he ordered his first lieutenant from his quarters dllring the attack,
to cam a message on board of the Lwpard a t that time firing upon him.
In t i a t during the attack, he used language in the presence of his men
calculated to dispirit them.
In that during the attack he ordered hi men to keep down that they
would all be cut to pieces. 4" For not doing his utmost to take or destroy the Lwpard, which Vessel it
was his duty to encounter. SPECIFICATION.
In that the said ship Leopard did fire upon the said frigate Chapeak,
and the said James Barron did fail suitably to *pel aald attack.
In that the said frigate Chesapeak was by order of the mid James Barron
eurrendered to the said Ship Lcopard a t a t b e when the injuries euetained

564

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1806 TO 1807

either on the said frigate or her crew did not make such a surrender then
necessary.
I n that the flag of the said frigate Chesapeak was by order of the said
James Barron, struck to the said Ship Leopard, when the guns of the said
frigate Chesapeak were loaded. I n that the flag of the said frigate Chesapeak was by order of the said
James Barron, struck to the said ship Leopard a t a time when the main deck
battery of the said frigate Chesapeak was in a situation which would have,
enabled the return of a Broadside in a very short time. In that the flag of
the said frigate Chesapeak mas by order of the said James Barron, struck
to the said Ship Leopard, without the said James Barron's having consulted
any of his officers, as to whether the Flag ought to be struck or not. I n that the flag of the said frigate Chesapeak was by order of the said
James Barron struck to the said ship Leopard before a single gun of any kind
was fired from the said frigate Chesapeak.

-

The General Court Martial hereby ordered to assemble is also to try according
to Law,
CHARLES GORDON esquire, a master commandant in the Navy of the United
States,
For negligently performing the duty assigned him.
SPECIFICATION.
I n that he had the command of the said frigate Chesapeak from the la*
day of May 1807 to the 6th day of June 1807 & during all that time he had
not the guns of the said Frigate exercised.
In that he had not the guns of the said Frigate exercised, as often as he
was in duty bound to do. In that the crew of the said Frigate Chesapeak were not called to quarters
more than three times prior to her sailing for sea.
I n that the crew of the said Frigate Chesapeak were not called to quarters
as often as the said Charles Gordon was in duty bound to call them. I n that from the 181 day of May to the 6th day of June 1807, the crew of
the said frigate were not quartered. I n that the crew of the said Frigate Chesapeak were quartered but a few
days before she proceeded to sea.
I n that the Crew of the said Frigate were not quartered as early as the
mid Charles Gordon was in duty bound to quarter them. In that he did not see that the guns of the said frigate were securely fitted
in their carriages.
I n that he did not take proper care to have the spunges and wads of the
said Frigate of the proper size. I n that he did not take care to have the powder horns of the said frigate
iilled.
I n that he did not take care to have the matches of the said frigate primed.
I n that he did not take care to have the matches of the said frigate in
their proper places.
I n that he did not take care to have the marines on board the said Frigate
su plied with enough cartridges.
en that he did not take care that the cartridges which the Marines on
board the said frigate had, were of the proper size. I n that he did not call upon the Gunner of the said frigate for a regular
report of the state and condition of the guns and all other matters in his
department.
I n that he did not call upon the Commanding Officer of the Marines on
board the said frigate for a regular report of the state and condition of the
Marines and their arms and supplies of ammunition.
I n that notwithstanding some of the guns of the said Frigate were not
securely fitted in their carriages - or that notwithstanding some of the
spunges and wads of the said frigate were too large
or that notwithatanding but few of the powder horns of the said frigate were filled - or that
notwithstanding the matches of the said frigate were not primed- or that
notwithstanding some of the Matches of the said frigate were not in their
proper places - or that notwithstanding the Marines of the said frigate
were not supplied with cartridges enough - or that notwithstanding the
cartridges which the Marines on board the eaid Frigate had, were not of

-

-

-

-

WARS WITH BRRBARP POWEBS

565

the proper size, He, the said Charles Gordon, did report to the said James
Barron, that the said frigate Chesapeak was ready for sea.
In that the said Charles Gordon did report to the said Jamea Barron thst
the said frigate Cheeapeak was ready for sea, when she was not ready for sea. In that he did not, upon the said James Bmon'e going on board the mid
frigate, report to him the exact and particular state and condition of the ssid
frigate; but suffered the said James Barron to remain under the erroneous
impression, excited by the report he had made to him, thst the said frigate
w& ready for sea. In that notwit,hstanding certain indications of a hostile intention, exhibited
towards the said frigate, by the said ship Leopard, the said Charles Gordon
did not report to the said James Barron the exact state and condition of the
aaid Frigate Chesapenk. In that the said Charles Gordon never did make to the said James Barron,
t the exact &ate and condition of the said f r h t e
a true and faithful r e ~ o r of
Chesapeak.

-

The General Court hlartial hereby ordered to assemble is to try according to Law,
WILLIAM HOOK - Gunner of the said frigate Chesapeak,
For negligently performing the duty assigned him.
GPECIFICATION.
I n that he did not have all the guns of the said frigate securely fitted in
their carriages.
In that he did not take care to have all the spungea bc wads of the said
frigate of the proper size. In that he did not fill the powder horns of the said frigate.
In that he did not prime the matches of the said frigate.
I n that he had not the matches of the said frigate in their proper places. In that notwithstanding certain indichtions of a hostile intention exhibited
toward^ the said frigate by the said ship Leopard, he did not report t o the said
Charles Gordon the exact state and condition of the guns and other matters
in his Department. In that he never did make t o the said Chariea Gordon a true and faithful
r e ~ o r of
t the exact state and condition of the suns and other matters in his
de' artment. f n that the said Rry Hook did not repair to his quarters when first ordered
to do so.
In tlmt the said Wv Hook did not repair to his quarters until after repeated
orders t,o that effect were given to him. In that the aaid WW Hook did not repair to his quarters until after the said
Ship Leopard had commenced firing upon the said frigate Chesapeuk notwithstanding repeated orders had been given to him to that effect. -

-

-

The General Court Martial hereby ordered to assemble is also to try according
to Law,
JOHN HALL esq. a captain in the Marine Corps.
For negligently performing the duty assigned him. SPECIFICATION.

In that he did not take care to have the Marines on board the said frigate
supplied with enough cartridges. I n that he did not take care to have such cartridges as the Marines had of
the proper size. In that. notwithstandin certain indications of a hostile intention exhibited
towards the said frigate ~ f e s a p e a kby the said ship Leopard, he did not report
to his commanding Officer the exact state and condition of the Marines, on
board the said frigate Chesapeak, their arms and supplies of ammunition
I n that he never did make to his commanding officer on board the aaid frigate a true and faithful report of the exact state and condition of the Marines
on board the ssid frigate, their arms and suppliea of ammunition. -

-

And now Littleton W. Tazewell esquire is hereby appointed Judge Advocate t o
the Court hereby ordered to assemble, and if he should decline acting, the said
Court will appoint such other suitable gentlemso, learned in the Law, t o discharge

566

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1806 TO 1807

the duties of Judge Advocate'to the said Court as they, or a majority of them, may,
in their wisdom, deem fit and proper.
I n Faith whereof I hereunto sign my name, and a 5 x theseal of the Navy
(SEAL) Department of the United States this seventh day of December, in the
pear of our Lord 1807. Rt SMITH,
Secretat of the N m y
of the United 8katur of America.
A - MENTIONED I N THE P ~ E C E P T
At a Court of Enquiry assembled on board the United States Ship Chesapeak
in the harbor of Norfolk & State of Virginia, by order of the honorable Robert
Smith Secretary of the Navy of the United States,and continued by adjournment
from day to day from monday the 5f4 day of october 1807 until wednesday the
4tb day of November 1807.
Present
MURRAY,
President
Captain ALEXAXDEB
and

Captain
HULLand
C a ~ t a i nIaanc C ~ a o t i c ~ P )thwoJ.
~ ~ ~ ~ " ~
The $oilom-ing opinion and report was unanimously given and directed by the
Court to be transmitted to the Honorable the Secretary of the Navy of the United
States.
Pursuant to an order from the honorable Robert Smith Secretary of the Navy
of the United States to Captain Alexander Murray directed dated the 12tb day
of September in the year of our Lord 1807, the Court proceeded to enquire into
the causes of the surrender of the Chesapeak, a frigate of the United States, then
under the command of Jttmes Barron esquire, a captain in the Navy of the navy
of the United States, to a British vessel of war, which surrender was made (as i t
is in the said o ~ d e stated)
r
without that defence having been made, which might
have been expected from the known valor of Americans, and having heard all
the evidence adduced before them as well by the Judge Advocate as bv the said
captain James Barron, and having maturely and thoroughly considered the same
(captain James Barron having declined to offer any defence) REPORTto the
honorable the Secretary of the navy, as by his said warrant they are required to
do, a state of the matters touching the said surrender, together with their opinion
thereon, as followeth, 1. - I t appears fo the court that the United States ship Cheeapeak of 38 guns
then under the command of James Barron esquire, a captain in the Navy of the
United States, sailed from Hampton roads, on an intended cruise in the mediterranean sea, on the morning of the 224 of June last past, having on board a crew
consisting of more than 370 men, and completely equipped with every thing
necessary for such a ship of war sailing on such a cruise. 2. - It appears to the Court that csptain James Barron w m sppointed commodore of the ships and vesseb destined for the Mediterranean service on the
15* day of May ]last past, and hoisted his broad pendant on board the Cheaapeak
the first time fie came on board of her, after her arrival in Hampton roads, to wit,
on or about the 6 t b day of June last past.
3. - I t appears to the court that commodore Barron visited the Cheaapeak
only twice during the period she remained in Hampton roads, and before he came
on board to proceed to sea, on neither of which occsaiona did he examine particularly into her state and condition.
4*, - It appears to the court, that the guns of the Chesapeak were never exercised before she proceeded to sea; that her crew were quartered but a few days
previous to that time, and had never been called to quarters, more than three
times prior to her sailing for sea. 5* - It appears to the Court, that the ship was reported t o commodore Barron
to be ready for sea on the 17" day of June, that he came on board on the 21't
and that the ship sailed on the morning of the 224 of June lsst past. 6%- It appeara to the Court that antecedent to the sailing of the Chesapeak
there had been received on board of her some pemons, who had been claimed
by the British Government as deserters from their eervice, but had not been
ordered to be delivered up by the American Officers - that there was also s report
in circulation and generally known on board the Chesapeak that a threat had
been used by the csptain of the British ship of war Mekampwr to take these men
from the Cheaapeak. That commodore Barron had full knowledge of the facte
that such mert were on bosrd hie ship, thst they htrd been demanded by the

-

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

567

British Government, and had not been delivered up, the court are perfectly
satisfied; but no positive evidence hes been adduced to prove that the report of
the threat above mentioned, was communicated to him before his ship sailed. 7th - I t appears t o the court t h a t the Chesapeak in proceedin from Hampton
Roads to sea passed a British squadron a t anchor in Lynhaven g a y , who at the
time of her passing them were making signals to each other; which was not only
reported to Commodore Barron by one of his officers, but actually observed by
hunself.
8th
I t appears to the Court, that the British ship of war Leopard of 50 guns
one of the squadron then a t anchor within the limits of the United States, weighed
immediately after these signals were thrown out, and stood bo sea. 9Q
It does not appear t o the Court, that at this time there was any vessel
in sight, or any other object to induce her to sea but the Chesapeak.
10tP - It appeam to the Court, that a t the time the Leopard got under weigh
the wind was a t S.S.W, and therefore fair for her t o proceed to sea, but that
instead of availing herself of this t o clear the land, she hauled by the wind, close
round Cape Henry, and stood to the Southward, under easy sail, thereby shewing
that it was not her intention to et off the land speedily.
11th. It appears to the Court t t a t after this the wind hecame light and baffling
and likely to shift and come out from the Eastward, and that when this happened,
the Leopard shortened sail and stood to the Eastward. 12tb It appears to the Court that after this the wind did come out from about
5. S. E, and that the Leopard having thus got the weather gage preserved it by
tacking in shore when the Chesapeak did so, in order to get off her Pilot, and after
the Chesapeak again stood off to the Eastward, that the Leopard wore and bore
down for her. 13th. It appears to the Court that when the Leapard tacked and stood in shore
on the same tack with the Chesapeak, her lower deck ports were all triced up. 14%. I t appeers to the Court that when the Leopard run down for the Chesapeak
she rounded tooon her starboardquarter and to windward of her and that a t thie
time her tompions were out of her guns. 15*. I t appears to the Court.that Commodore Barron was upon deck observing
the Leopard during the time these manouvres were practising and appearances
exhibited.
16Q. The Court is of opinion, that the circumstances above stated were in themeelvee so suspicious as to have furnished sufficient warning to a prudent, discreet,
and attentive Officer of the probable designs of a ship of war conducted in that
way and ought to have induced Commodore Barron to have prepared h
i
s ship for
action; especially with the information he possessed of the situation of his crew
generally, of those who had been demanded by the British Government particularly and of the general state of the ship a t that time. 174 I t appears to the Court that Commodore Barron nevertheless did not
order his ship to be cleared for action, and that he did not call his men to quarters.
18tb I t appears to the Court, that when the Leopard came alongside the Chesapeak, an officer was sent from her with a commur~icationfrom Captain Humphries
the captaiu of the Leopard to commodore Rsrron, which the !ntter oould not and
did not misunderstand, but very correctly concirided to be a demand with which
he ought not and codd not comply, and o,le which if refused, would be enforced
if possible.
10* I t appears to the Court that although such was the situation and impressions of Commodore Barron a t this time yet that he did not still order his ahip
to be prepared for action, altbough ample time was allowed for that purpose, the
British officer being detaiaed on board the Chesapeak from 35 to 45 minutes. 20tC The Court is of opinion that the neglect of Commodore Barron to order
his ship to be prepared for action under such oircumtsances, is a direct breach of
the 4Q Article of the rules and regulations for the government of the Navy of the
on the 234
United States adopted by an Act of the congress of the U: S. p-ed
day of April 1800, and entitled "An Act for the better government of the N a ~ yof
[See Naval Documents,, Quasi-War
uilh France, Vol. 7,
the United States".
page 462.1
21.1 - It appears to the court, that after the british officer left the Chesapeak.
baring a positive refusal from commodore Barron to the demand which had been
made by captain Humphries, and after commodore Barron was himself satisfied
that an attack upon his ship would be made, he did not take prompt, necessary,
and efficient means to prepare his ship for battle. That his Erst order was merely
to clear his gundeck and his second given after the lapse of some time was to get
his m a to quartam seoretly, without beat of drum; &though with such a crew 8s

--

-

568

N A V . OPERATIONS FROM 1806 TO 1807

he had on board, and in such a situation as the ship then was, i t was not to be
expected that such orders could be effectually accomplished.
22n4 I t appears to the Court that the conduct of commodore Barron during
the attack of the Leopard manifested great indecision, and n disposition to negociate rather than a determination bravely to defend his ship - that he repeatedly
hailed the Leopard during her attack upon him - that he drew nis men from their
guns to lowering down boats to send on board of the attacking ship - and that
he ordered his first lieutenant from his quarters during the attack, to carry a
message on board of the Leopard a t that time firing upon him. 234 I t appears to the Court, that during the attack, Commodore Barron used
language in the presence of his men calculated to dispirit his crew by ordering
them to keep down that they would all be cut to pieces. 24th - I t appears to the court that commodore Barron ordered the coloura of
the Chesapeak to be struck, and that they were struck, before a single gun of any
kind was fired from her, and that a t the time they were so struck, her main deck
battery was in a situation which mould have enabled the return of a broadside in
a very short time. 25t4 The court is therefore of opiriion that the Chesapeak mas prematurely surrendered, a t a time when she was nearly prepared for battle and when the illjuries
sustained either in the ship or crew did not make such a surrender then necessary,
and that for this commodore Barron falls under a part of the 6th articleof the rules
s a d regulations for the government of the Navy of the U. S. adopted by an Act of
the congress of the U: S, passed on the 234 day of April 1800, entitled "an Act for
the better government of the Navy of the United States". 26th The court is of opi-lion that although the conduct of commodore Aarron
before and during the attack of the Leopard evinced great inattention to his duty,
and want of decision, pet that during that attack he exposed hia person, and did
not manifest either by his orders or actions, any ersonal fear, or want of courage.
214 I t appeam to the Court that although tEe Chempeok might and oupht to
have been better defended than she was, yet that she was not in a situation a t
the time of the attack made upon her, to have enabled so gallant a defence being
made as might be expected. Some of her guns were not securely fitted on their
carriages, some of her spunges & wads were too large, but few of her Powder
Horns were filled, her matches were not primed, some of her rammers were not
in their proper places, her marines were not supplied with enough cartridges,
and none of those which they had were of the proper size. These circumstances
however could not have influenced commodore Barron in striking his colours,
because they were not known to him a t the time. 2814 The court is of opinion, that the conduct of all the other officers of the
Chesapeak (except those whose duty i t was to have remedied the deficiences
before stated) was proper, commendable and honorable. 2914 The court is lastly of opinion that the causes of the surrender of the
Chcsapeak were, her being attacked by a ship of superior force a t a time, when
such sn attack having not been expected by her commander, no sufficient preparation for resistance had been made. That there were abundant causes however, t o have induced the expectation of such an attack, and that there was
ample time t o have made such preparation, the court have already stated. That
the ship waa prematurely surrendered even [under] such circumstances the court
have also stated, and the reasons of such want of preparation and improper surrender will be found fully exhibited in former parts of this report. The Court having now fully performed the duties assigned to i t in the warrant
of the honorable Secretary of the Navy adjourned without day. L1n9 W. TAZEWELL,
signed, A. MURRAY
Judge Adooeate.
Cap8N.U. 8.-

P~ecled.

Srs, You will immediately place yourself under command of Corn. J ~Barron
Q
under whom you are to act aa Captain of the frigate C'hesapede to which ship

you are hereby attached
respectfully,

-

Ri SMITE.

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

569

NAVYD E P ~
March 4, 1807. Gunner WILLIAMHOOK.
Navy Yard.
Upon receipt hereof you will place yourself under command of the Commanding Officer of the Chesapeake to which ship you are hereby attached. PAPER

D,

MENTIONED I N THE

PRECEPT.
-

Rf SMITH.

Capt JOHN
HALL,
SIR,You will receive as forming your command on board of the United Statea
frigate Chesapeake, one subaltern, 3 Sergeants, 2 corporals, and 45 Privates, with
which you will proceed on board immediately & report yourself with i t to Captain
Charles Gordon a t present her commander. You will receive from the StafF the
returns which are necessary, and the quarter master will deliver to you with
other papers an invoice of clothing, Military stores &q $9 packed for your delivery
to the Detachment on board, or any other which may be under your charge, as
senior officer in the squadron, when such articles are by you deemed necessary
for the same. I t will be useless here to mention the duties, which may or may
not be expected from our men while serving a t sea; I may presume as they are
unacquainted with the service of seamen, that they will not be ordered aloft:
The commanding officer on board I am sure will, if he is desirous that the 04
tachment should appear military, exact of you or your command, no duty unpleasant or severe, as bein unmilitary for you to perform. Written orders iu
preference to the verbal, wEenever the occasion will permit them I must recommend to you, as they admit not misconception, they certainly when attainable
ought to be expected. The fatigue dress and the intention of i t you are too well
acquainted with, to make necessary any remarks here, i t is a part of the publick
property and must be equally as well preserved as the uniform: The former you
know is t o be used a t particular times, and under particular circumstances as
an Undress, the latter equally so as the Dress of the Corps; loss of either must
be made, up by the Soldier suffering it to take place, in the way most eligible in
your opinion. As Senior Officer on the station I shall look to you for all communications which may relate to our men there. Our officers will apply to you
as such, and the regular returns for the Staff must be delivered to you by them,
and by you transmitted to Head Quarters - great care with great reaponsibility consequently will be required from, and attached to your situation. As
you know how essential to the Adjutant a correct knowledge is as to dates in
the payment of the men, and as you know loss cannot be his which may arise
from the errors of others, I have to request that you will urge to our officers with
you, the propriety of attention to them in their Pay rolls to the Paymaster, that
they may avoid the loss, if any should happen from their neglect, by men discharged in the receipt of more pay than was actually due to them. For the
purpose of sending home the Italians now of the Band, a t their request so to go,
I have added them to your command ss music: you will on reaching that home,
as they have been clothed to the 15th of August next, the supposed time necessary
there to reach, pay as usual to that period, and give to them the discharges,
which will by the adjutant be delivered to you from me. You will receive from
LI Amory now in the Mediterranean, the clothing, military stores & p a B P S
which he may hold beyond the quantity necessary for his Detachment when
relieved, or you will receive from him the necessary papers for the procurement
of them if on shore, under receipts, that he may deliver to the Quarter Master,
an account of the articles so transferred, that you may be charged with them.
Supplies will be regularly furnished from this, to meet any exigence which i t is
presumed will happen in the Quarter Master Department. You will therefore,
unless i t is evident that such supplies have miscarried from unavoidable accidents on the passage, or that they are with-held from causes which you could
not in time be advised of, make no purchases of clothing on account of that
Department. No appropriation contemplated to meet such casualties, you must
ultimately if engaged in them without necessity be involved in difficulties and
losses, equally so any officer on that station, so acting without information from
you. By every opportunity you will report to me the state of the Detachment

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1806 TO 1807

570

in the S uadron, and you will as often as may be in your power, furnish for the
St& su& returns as are required. signed FRANKLIN
WHAITON
Le Cd9 Corn*$M. C.
[Commodore James Barron was sentenced by Court Ma+lal"to he suspended from all command in the
navy of the Unlted Statas, and this wlthout auy pay or ofanel emolument. of any klod, for the period and
tam of flve yeax, from this eighth day of February, in tbe year of our Lord one thousand eight hnndrea and

eight."]

[NDA. OSW, Vol. 7, 1805-1807.1

17 October 18071
To Hamet Caramanli, Rightfal Bashaw of Tripoli, from George Davis, U,S. Consdl.
Tripoli

GEORGE
DAVIS

C o m l of the United States of America for the Regency of WpoZi To His Excellency AEMETCARAMANLI.
The vessel by which you will receive this letter, conveys to you your wife, three
sons and one daughter. Your other daughter, the wife of the Bey, preferring to

remain with her husband, has been allowed her option.
The effects belonging to your family accompany them, together with the number
of slaves fixed upon by your wife.
His Excellency Jussuph Bashaw has promised thro' my representations to make,
from time to time, such remittances as he may deem necessary for your support.
As he will be guided by the dictates of his own breast, both as to the time of sending
you supplies and their value, it will be unnecessary, thro' any channel to solicit
him upon either of those points.
Should the provisions allowed you by your brother be unequal to your expectations, or should i t a t any future period be totally discontinued, you are not thence
to found any claim upon the American government. The United States did not
feel themselves authorbed to demand such a concession and they never will insist
upon it's performance.
I n the mean time your ExceIlency may rely upon my good offices and best
exertions for your interest.
TBIPOLI7. Odobm 1807.
[NA. SDA. CL, Tripoli, VoI. 3, 1806-1811.1

To Secretary of the Navy from George Dyson, New York, N. Y.
NEW YORKlltP Odr 1807
SIR,I have the honor to forward you the enclosed Letter from Captn Campbell,
who I left in Malaga on the 14'P august with the Constdzrlion & Hornet, a Schooner
came into Gibraltar & landed dispatches there from Government which were forwerded b land to Malaga on the 16tb I left Gibraltar on the 24'9 & Supposed we
saw the Zmtitution stand into the Bay that Evening My h d t h obliges me to remain here for a few days which prevents me from
delivering the enclosed in person I hope to be able t o preaent my accounts a t the
Navy office in a very short time [NDA. Misc. Letters, Vol. 4, 1807.1
Extract from letter to Stephen Pynchon, Postmaster, B r i d e l d , Measachnaetta,
from William Eaton

RICHMOND
1dtP Od [I8017
Yes, My Dear Sir, I heard, too soon heard of the death of my much loved much
mpeoted friend PEEBLE! and if I have not mentioned him, i t is because my heart
regrets the poverty of that language which cannot express its feelings - The
world hasl lost s man - America a pillar - and I a friend! I would not arraign
the dispositions of God - but why he should let ordinary deaih kill such a genius,
dismantle such a frame, chain such a patriot, and freeze such a heart, can only be
exphined in his own mysterious cabinet - But that Preble is gone makes to me
the terrors of the mighty king l e ~ terrible,
s
and a futurity more wished for - If
there be s heaven of the just, he is there1

*

*

*

*

[LC. Personal P. Misc, Eaton Ac. No. 2848.1

*

*

*

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS
To Secretary of the Navy from Zdaster Commandant John Smith, U. 8. Navy
U. S. SHIPWasp

Boaton Odober 14" 18W

SIX,I have the honour to acquaint you that I have this moment anchored here
with the U. 8.Sloop V'mp under my Command in Company with the U. S. Frigate

Conslitution with which Ship we left Algeziras on the 8 t b of last month the Wasp's
state will admit of proceeding to sea immediately if an opportunity could be afforded to over had her standing rigging, the rope it consists of having been b i d
and fitted in the Winter Seaon eetablishes the Necessity - I have Cause to regret
the quality of the Crew, they are decidedly the most insufficient. I ever knew, the
small number of Seamen in the U. States a t the period of their enlistment together
with the despatch required in collecting them Can only account for it, Should an
arrangement to obtain good men in this place meet your approbation the thing
Can be carried with speed into effect A Copy of an order from Hugh G. Campbell I enclose with these [See 29 August
18071[NDA. M C LB, 1806-1807.1

To Secretary of the Bsvy from Francis Johonnot, Navy Agent, Boston, Mass.
BOSTON1dth October 1807.
SIR, I may robably not make a requisition for money for the ordinary supplies
in the Naval 8epartment, for this month, as I expect to be otherways furnished.
The Frigate Constitution & the Wasp arrived this day,
[NDA. Misc. Letters, Vol. 4, 1807.1
To Secretary of the Navy from Captain Hugh 6.Campbell, U. S. Bovy
U. S. SHIPConstitution, BOSTONH A B B O U ~
ocr i 4 t ~1807 SIB,Herewith I enclose a Statement of defects, and repairs Necessary to put
the Constitution in a Proper state for teal service, all of which is humbly submited
for your consideration by -

[Endosurc]

Defects of the Constitution and Repsirs necessary to put her in a State for rca
Service.
Her copper must be examind in consequence of a defect about the fore foot
That Catch the cables when winding a t Anchor - A thorough Caulking of The
upper works - New Mainmast, Mizenmast doubtfull, 1, fore and Main t o p
mast - 1 fore, main - and hlisen Top Gt Mast - 1 Fore and Main Topsail
yard - 1 Cross Jack yard And set of Studdingsail Booms - 1 Jibboom - 1
compleat set of mils - 4 Cables of 21 Inchis - .4 set of water Casks, a t least a
large proportion of them
A set of boats - A new rudder At least a new rudder Head - H, G, C,
[NDA. Captain's LB, Vol. 3, 1807.1
To Tobias Leer, U. S. Consul General, Algiers, from Chsrles D. Coxe, U. S. ChsrgB
d'Affaires, Tunis
TUNISOdOber IS* 1807.
Dr SIR,I am this moment informed that Capts Hunter, instead of oing from
hence to b l a h , departs in a few hours for Bona - He delivereif me your
eeteemed favours of 15tb dtimo, with the package contain6 Doctor S h w s ' Travels,
3. vol: of the Laws of the U: S: & the Newspapers, for which I return you many
thanks - The 3. Vol: unfortunately happen to be exactly the same with as
those remr in the office. - I wrote you on the 29'b U ~ by
Q a Maltese Vessel
chartered by the Bey to carry the Algerine Prisoners to A1 iers - My time is
so short, that I fear I shall not lmve time to give you a dupliarte: however I
ho you have r e d it. &e of the Bey's Camairs will sail from the -Goletta tomorrow
for what
objeot remains a profound secret - She is a Xebec of 16. guns & 130. men,

-

572

ATAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1805 TO 1807

commanded by %is Ramadan Amaout. - We have had no arrivals from
Europe since my last; and we are perfectly in the dark, with respect to what is
going forward on the other side of the water. Since writing the above lines I have r e d a letter from Mr Davis enclosing a
package for the Secv of State, which I send to you, as I know of no other way to
forward it - I give you an extract from Mr Davis' letter, vizl TRIPOLISOth Sepr 1807.
I annex an extract from a letter I recd two days since from Capt: Dent, and also
forward you the President's Proclamation. This circumstance may give me
some embarrassment, as the family of the Ex-Bashaw is still here. Extract from a letter recd by Mr Davis from Captain Dent, dated Malta 13th
Septr 1807 I arrived here yesterday from Malaga .k sail to day for Leghorn, from thence direct to the U:States - we

are at length brought to the eTe of a war with England. All Amers vessels are stopt and an embargo laid
in the U: States. Qovs has sent a h'ew York pilot boat to Capt: Campbell with dispatches of the greatest
importance. Capt: C: sailed the 194 ultp for Boston, the Entcrpriu has likewise sailed for home, but it is
doutful whether they will reach it. -

I have succeeded in withdrawing all our property from this place, contrary
to my expectations.
Captain Hunter is tkis moment about to depart, & have only time to say, that
1 remain always, Dr'Sir, with great respect & Esteem,
[LC. Chas. D. Coxe LB, Ac. 2951, 18061809.]
To President Thomas Jefferson from Secretary of the Navy
KAYYD E P M16~ Odr 1807.
The death of Com. Preblc has caused a vacancy in the Corps of Captains in the
Kavy of the United States. To fill up this vacancy, I enclose a commission for
John Shaw esquire, the senior officer in the Corps of bfasters Commandant and to fill up the vacancy in this latter Corps which will be made by the promotion
of Cap$ Shaw, I cnclose a Commission of Master Comn~andantfor hlr P. C.
Wederstrandt the next officer on the list of Lieut)enant,s entitled to promotion.
Should these nominations be approved of by you, the Commissions will require
your signature.
[NDA. Nom. Bt Appts., 1798-1820.1
Extract from log of U. S. Brig Hornet, of 18 Guns, Master Commandant John H. Dent,
U. S. Navy, commanding, 18 October 1807
At 8 P M 17 October weighed and sailed from Malsga.
These 24 hours commences with light breezes & cloudy weather - At 5 took
in Fore top gallant and Royal Studsails
At 112 past 5 took in larboard Fore topmast and Main Royal Studsails - At
sunset Gibraltar bore E B N 112 N, Cape Spartel West and Cape Trafal ar N B
W 1/22 W. - At 8 P hl Cape Spartel bore S. distant 6 miles from whicf I take
my departure [for the United States]
[NOTE.-From 20 August to this entry, routine cmising and calls were performed, with nothing of an
unusual nature recorded.]

[NA. NDA original, 1805-1810.1
To Secretary of the Navy from Captain Hugh G. Campbell, U. S. Navy
U. S. SHIP Con~titution
Bostun harbour Ocl 19's 1807.
SIR, I beg leave to inform you That while a t Leghorn I took on Board the
Monument intended To be errected a t Washington, in Memory of those officers
the Waight I believe is about 15 Tons
that fell before Tripole
(NDA. Captain's LB, Vol. 3, 1807.1

-

-

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

573

To Captain Hugh 6.Campbell, U. B. IYavy, commanding U. 8. Frigate ConrfiMion,
Boston, Mass., from Secretary of the Navy

NAVYD E P30th
~ OCE 1807.
I this dav received your letter of the 34 5epr accompanied by sundry papers.

The ~res>dentapproves the course you have taken in returning to America; and
will, perhaps tomorrow, determine what order he will give relatively to the
Frigate. [NDA. OSW, Vol. 7, 1805-1807.1
To Captain John Bodgers, U. S. Navy, Commanding OBcer, New York, IT. Y.,
from Secretary of the Navy
KAVI DEPM?
8.8 Oct: 18W.
I have received your letter of the 18th
I t is to be hoped tbat the punishment inflicted on Abraham Brist'ead and James
Wilson will deter others from committing similar crimes. We shall not I hope be
compelled to punish such offenders to the extent of the Law, which declares that
if any person in the Navy shall sleep upon his watch or negligently perform the
duty assigned him, or leave his station before regularly relieved - and that that if
any person in the Navy shall desert or entice others to desert: he shsU suffer
death, or euch other punishment as s bourt Martial shall adjudge. [NDA OSW, Vol. 7, 1805-1807.1
To Captain Hugh 6. Campbell, U. 6 . Navy, commanding U, S. higate C d u i i o n ,
Boston, Mass., from Secretary of the Navy
NAVYD E P83
~ Odf 1807. You will proceed with the Frigate Constiluiion, and direct, Capt Smith to proceed
with the Wasp, to Kew York, and you will on your arrival there report youraelf t o
Comv Rodgers, under whose orders you will act, until further orders from me.
I intend that the Constitution shall be paid off, soon after her arrival at New
York. To enable me to know how much money t,o remit to Xew York, for the
purpose of paying off your Crew,you will forward t o me an Estimste of the sum
due to the crew. You will have the command of the Constitution until your crew
shall be paid off. After the order for paying off shall have been received and executed, you will consider yourself a t liberty, agreeably to your request, to come on
to Washington, first giving up the command of the Constitution to C o m m ~
Rodgers. [NDA. OSW, Vol. 7, 1805-1807.1

To Captain John Rodgers, U. S. Navy, Commanding OfBcer, Bew York, B. Y.,
from Secretary of the Navy
NAVYD E P X23
~ OC&Q1807.I have ordered the Frigate Comtitutim and the Ship R7asp to New York, and
their Commanding OEcers are directed to report themselves to you on their
arrival them.
The Constitution will be paid off, and Capt Campbell will retain the command
of her until she shall be paid off. He will then deliver her up to you, and agreeably
to his request proceed on to W-mhington. [NDA. OSW, Vol. 7, 1805-1807.1
To Secretary of the navy from Captain John Rodgers, U. S. Navy

SIR,I have the honor to acknowled e the receipt of your letter of the 23q i n ~ t a n t
informing me that you had ordered t i e U. 8. Frigate CaiatiNioa and Ship Worp
to this port. The respectability which two such vessels will add to my cornmanci, is pleasing
to me in a degree equal to their importance; and I sm equelly gratified that you
have honored me with an opportunity of again hoisting my Pendant on board of
the Conetitution.
[LC. JRP, Let. & Ord., N. Y. Navy Yard, 1807-1808.1

-

574

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1806 TO 1807

To Captain Stephen Decatnr Jr., U. S. Navy, Commanding Offlcer, Norfolk, Va..
from Secretary of the Navy
NAVY
DEP!66 Od: 1807.The deat.h of Lieut Bens Smith, is a circumstance much to be regretted. From
the information possessed by the Department, he was certainly a valuable Officer. Act, as t o your own judgment shall appear proper, in the case of Broome &
Crump. I am not in possession of information to enable me to form a satisfactory
decision upon their case. Probably an appropriate reprimand from you might
be useful. I hear with great pain of duels between Officers of the Navy and Citizens. It
exposes the Officers, especially those of the Chesapeak, to very unpleasant criticisms.
I urge you to discountenance, and prevent this practice by all the means in your
power.
[NDA. OSW, Vol. 7, 1805-1807.1
To Secretary of the Navy from Master Commandant David Porter, U. S. Navy
Oelr 86. 1807.
WASHINGTON
SIR I n the month of January 1806. I received Orders from Commodore John
Rogers to proceed to Naples with the U S Schooner Enterprize for the purpose of
&ording protection to the Americans there and their property.
On my amval there finding the place in a state of Anarchy and that the important duty I had to execute with the small force I had under my command made it
to support appearances far above my rank as Lieut Commt I was
%
n;i(:::
order to attach respectability to my situation, the only means which
could insure success and give me authority to carry my orders into execution) t o
support an establishment far above my means, I consequently incur'd expences
t o which I should not have been liable in the common routine of duty, and have
in my accounts made a charge of three dollars pr day not as a full compensation
for the sacrifices I was necessarily compel'd to make for the good of the service,
but t o relieve me from the burthen of an expence which would fall heavy on my
shoulders.
[LC. D. Porter P., U .S. N., Ac. 198, 1807-1808.1
To Secretary of the Navy from Master Commandant David Porter, U. 6. Navy
WASHINGTON
Oct? 26. 1807.
SIR, In the month of May 1806 I received orders from Commodore John Rodgers t o proceed to Tripoli for the purpose of taking hfr n'eisson his Danish MI*Consul there, to Europe and received permission to toucn a t Malta to procure supplies
for his accommodation. Considering it a complimc~itpaid by our Government to
M? Neisson or the Danish Government procured supplies sufficient to accommodate him in the manner I supposed intended but on my arrival was unhappily
disappointed in my expectations of carrying him t o Europe as his successor had
not arrived and he unable t o depart. The above mentioned stores being on hand,
more than necessary for my consumption and having no other means of disposing
of them, I caused many of them t o be used for the Hospital department and some
for my Cabin, but suppose that the quantity over and above what I should have
procured or consumed for myself to have been about $150. and have made a charge
in my accounts f o ~that Sum.
[LC. D. Porter P., U. S. N., Ac. 198, 1807-1808.1
To Secretary of the Navy from Captain Hugh G. Campbell, U. 8. Navy
U. S. SHIP Constitution,
Boston Harbour Novf Is+ 1807
SIR, Your orders for the Constiiution and Wasp to proceed to New York,
Reached me the 30'4 Ult and have Taken the necessary mecrsur[c]s to c a n Them
into M e c t without delay, and Flatter myself with leaving this place On $uesday
the 34 Ins* wind permiting Being under the necessity of filling up Our water, procuring a new Messenger And taking on board the Necessary Supplies of provision
Wood &Q &Q wiU prevent us from being ready Prior t o that period - ~ n c l o s e d
Is an estimate of money required To pay off the crew up t o the 31.P Ul+ NDA. Captain's LB, Vol. 3, 1807.1

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS
Extract from log of U. 6. Brig H a w i , of 18 Guns, Master Commandant John B.Dent,
U. S. Navy, commanding, 2 Bovember 1801
[En route to the United States from the Mediterranean.]
L a t 4 Obs4 23O19'.
Pass'd a great quantity of Sea Weed
Neptune made his appearance on board in crossing the Line when upwards of
60 of the Crew were Shaved agreable to Custom.
[NA. NDA. original, 1805-1810.1
To the Speaker of the Honse of Representatives from William Eaton
WASHINQTON
CITY,November 9, 1807.
SIR: I beg leave, through the medium of the chair, to l a y the enclosed communication before the Representatives of the United States in Congress.
I have the honor to be, very respectfully, sir, you most obedient servant,
WILLIAM
EATON.
To the Hon. the Speaker of the House o f Rcpresdativea.
T o the honorable the Senate and House of Representatives of the Uniled States in
Congress assembled:
Since the adjournment of the first session of the ninth Congress,I have received,
a t different times, communicatiorls from Hamet Caramalli, ex-Rashaw of Tripoli,
stating his distressed situation, and imploring relief from the beneficence of the
United S t a t e s which communications have been transmitted to the proper
department. t have the honor to offer, for the consideration of Congress, a translated copy of the last address from him, (the original in Italian is in the office of the
Department of State,) which is evidently intended for the representatives of the
people of the United States, and is as follom~s:

SYBACUSE,
February 18, 1807.
T o their most Serene Highnesses:
In the depth of my miseries, my only consolation has been the reliance I
placed on the powerful support of a repulic so dietinguished throughout the
world for that justice which protects and sustains whoever confides himself
to her patronage. This credulity resigned me wholly to her discretion. But
I could never have thought that this my coddence should work out my
individual destruction. I have sacrificed all my means, and exposed my life
in the service of the United States. It w w impossible for me to expect, by
way of recompense, an exilement in Syracuse far from my family, and d e p
rived of every convenience of life. I hoped to be recompensed by an equivalent to my usefulness and to my sacrifices. The promises made to me admitted no suspicion that so much time should have elapsed and that hope not
yet realized; or that I should not yet have found repose. Public ships of war
tediy returned hither which had been bearers of my communicaing myself nevertheless unnoticed, I suspect my letters have been
miscarried; for it is impossible to persuade me, my circumstances and wants
being known to them, that the United States would abandon me.
My situation does not enable me to undertake along voyage for thepurpose
of making a personalrepresentation of my deplorable condition. I hope the
exalted republic will not require this of me, in order to awaken their feelings
to my just expressions of solicitude and concern for myself: i t would be unjust
to neglect my complaints, and severly felt by those who occasion them.
I have lost my family. I have lost my inheritance; my acquisitions and my
fair prospects are lost aiso. I have, indeed, sacrificed my claim to the confidence of a faithful ally (El6 Bey), whom I abandoned through my partiality
to the Ameriosns. I had no right to apprehend that my devotion and my
complacency would overwhelm me in bottomless ruin.
To my own individual sufferings I ought to annex also those of my faithful
people, whoae attachment t o me has involved in the same wretchedness; who
euffer with me the same sequestration from their country, from their families,
and from their property: all which they have left through violations of those
whose duty it was t o sustain them.
I will not, like the world, reproach the representatives of the Ameriamn
nation with ingratitude. I rather implore their commiseration towards me;

%
.; "E

576

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1806 TO 1807

a t least so far as to restore t o me my family, and t o grant me a competence.
I t is yet possible that, absent from my own country, I may become serviceable to the United States. My former subjects are ever ready to devote
their lives to my service: mine with theirs I will hold ever ready to devote
t o that of the exalted republic,
And am, forever, most Serene Highnesses,
HAMETBASHAWCARAMALLI,
Son of Ali Bashaw, &c.
Some expectations have been lately entertained by our Government, from the
representations of Consul Davis, that provisions would be made by the ruling
Bashaw of Tripoli for the subsistence of his exiled brother. But upon information
directly from Syracuse, by George Dyson, Esq. navy agent of the United States,
now in this city, i t is rendered certain, that no relief can be relied on from that
quarter; and probable, that whatever encouragement of this nattlre had been
held out by the usurper, it had no other object than to betray his brother to
destruction.
Having had myself the chief influence, asan agent of the United States, in drawing
the ex-Bashaw from his situation in Upper Egypt; and having, in conformity to
treaty arrangements, been instrumental in reconciling him to the unparalled
reverse of abandoning his flattering prospects; of relinquishing forever his hope^
of recovering the kingdom wrested from him by treason, and now apparently
within his grasp; and of receding from victory, like a prisoner, to a land of strangers. Having effected this by the assurances which I was authorized to make to
him, that his wife and family should be restored to him, and that a manlv respect
to his future well-heing wo111d be had bv our country, it may not be deemed inconsistent witah the dictates of commiseration towards the supplicant, nor with
my duties of respect towards the honorable body to whom his supplications are
addressed, if I indulge a remark on the occasion.
I t is remarkable, for it is an incontestable truth that, whether the claims of
tlie ex-Bashaw go to the justice or the generosity of the United States, the use
which was made of his services contributed much if not wholly influenced the
overtures of peace on the part of the ruling Bashaw; for it was negotiated a t a
time when no coercion of our squadron then in the Mediterranean had as yet
been attempted to be tried upon him, and when the infirmities of Commodore
Barron placed such an experiment a t an incalci~labledistance. That no serious
impressions had from any quarter been made on the apprehensions of the enemy
after the transfer of the squadron from Commodore Preble to Commodore Barron,
except what were impressed by the capture and subj~~gation
of his eastern province.
the internal revolution of his kingdom, and the annihilation of his army through
the influence and co-operation of Hamet Bashaw. That the United States alone
enjoy the advantages resulting from those events, while the ex-Bashaw, as he
has truly represented, reaps no other benefit from his confidence and his exertions
than privation and exile, but a little better than captivitv.
It cannot be contested that Hamet Bashaw has two fair claims on this nation.
To be reinstated i n a situation as eligible as that from which he has been drawn, and
to have his family restored to him: the former guarantied by honorable promises,
the latter by the solemnity of treaty stipulation. And it is firmly believed the
people of the United States are liberally disposed to see those obligations cancelled.
From a country blessed beyond the common lot, of nations, rich in her means,
and proud in the righteousness of her dispositions, does not honor, justice, and
humanity, give the world a right to expect that the hand of charity a t least will
be opened to a friend whom, without his fault or free agency, and from causea
so notorious, accident has thrown into misery so profound as this unfortunate
prince now suffers?
I t ought not to be concealed from Con ss also, that there are a t Malta and
elsewhere sundry foreigners, Frenchmen, g e k s , and Mahometans, whose wounds
received in the service of the United States in the province of Derne render them
incapable of acquiring a subsistence, and to whose cases no provisions made by
law can be extended.
[Am. State Papers, For. Rel., Vol. 111, 1807-1815.1

To Secretary of the Navy from Captain Hugh Q. Campbell, U. 6. Navy
U. S. SHIP Constitution
Boston Harbour Novr 9Q 1807
SIB,The pilots have had charge of thi8 ship and the Wasp Since the 4tb Inst
waiting the first Favourable moment to pass over tne Shoal above the Narrow*

WARS WITH BARBARY POWEBS

577

which They have been prevented from accomplishing, The Wasp will Sail this
Evening the wind being Fair, and her draft of nrater Easy,
The Consiit?ifion will follow In the morning should the Wind admit of her Laying Through the Narrows [NDA. Captain's LB, Vol, 3, 1807.]
To Stephen Cathalan, Jr., U. 8. Commercial Agent, Marseilles, Prance, from J. B.
Ducoster for Frederick Degen, U. S. navy Agent, Naples
(COPY)
NAPLESQtb Nm? 1807
SIR I have the honor to inform j70u, that from the report of Captain Ichabod
Shiffield of the Schooner iC1ar.y Ann, of New York, arrived on the 4th inst in this
Port, from America, it appears that an unexpected f a r has taken place between
the Regency of Algiers, and the United States; he has declared in this Consulate
upon Oath, that on the 26th ultv he fell within the Streights with an Algerine
Frigate of 44 Guns, by which he was made a Prize of, and which without hardly
any examinstion, took three men out of h
is said Schooner, and ordered her into
Algiers, under the charge of Kine Turks, including a Boy, he was in their possession
'till the 29tC when being near the Barbary shore, he determined himself to indesvour to retake his Vessel in which he bad the good fortune to succeed, having
thrown four of the Turks overboard, secured four of the others by surprize, whom
he embarked in a Boat, and Kept the Boy, who is now on board, he after that
shaped hie course for Italy, and came esfe into our Mole on the 4th aforesaid
Captain S. has further declared, that the Brig Violet of Boston, loaded with
Colo~lialProduce for Leghorri, was also taken n-ithiri sight of him, by the said
Frigate, and that he had also heard they had captured sn American Ship &
Schooner, a few days before I mention in haste these circumstances to you, in order that you may make
them known to what Americaris are, or may arrive, in your Port; and take such
steps as you deem mosLpruderrt for their safety
In the absence, & by the authorization of Fredk Degen Esqr Consul [h'avy
Agent] U. S. A.
(sign'd) J. B. DUCOSTEB
A true Copy - MARSEILLES
8B NOVT
1807
(signed) STEP^ CATHALAN
[NA. SDA. CL, hlalaga, Vol. 1, June 1793-May 1814.1
[I1 h'ovember 18071
To Charles W. Goldsborough, Chief Clerk, Navg Department, from George Dyson,
ex-U. 6. Navy Agent, Syracuse
SIR, In answer to yours of this morning by which I Understand that Congress
had appropriated $2400 - for the ReIeif of Hamet Caramalli Ex Bashaw of
Tripoli permit me to state, t h s t I have regularly paid to the said Ex Bashaw, by order
of Commodore Rodgers $200 pr Month from the twelvth of July 1805 to the
twelvth of May 1807 inclusive & that the same allowance is still continued by the
present acting Agent a t Syracuse about the end of May or begining of June last Capt Campbe11 requested me t o
pay the Ex Bashaw Two thousand four hundred Dollars & take a receipt for that
sum in his name n ~ h ~ cIhalso did, consequently that transaction will not appear
on the face of my accounts, the money being furnished by Him Navy Dept 11 Nor. 1807
[NDA. Misc. Lettera, Vol. 4, 1807.1

To the United States Senate from President Thomas Jefferson
November 11, 1807.
(Confidential.)
T o the Senate of the United States:
Some time had elapsed, after the receipt of the late treaty between the United
States and Tripoli, before the circumstance drew particular attention, that,
although by the third article the wife and children of the ex-Bashaw were to be
rerrtored to him,this did not appear either to have been done or demanded. Still
it ww con~tantlyexpected that explanations on the subject would be received.

578

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1805 TO 1807

None, however, having arrived when Mr. Davis went as consul to Tripoli, he was
instructed to demand the execution of the article. He did so; but was answered
by the exhibition of a declaration, signed by our negotiator the day after the
signature of the treaty, allowing four years for the restoration of the family.
This declaration, and the letter of Mr. Davis stating what had passed on the
occasion, are now communicated to the Senate. On the receipt of this letter, I
caused the correspondence of Mr. Lear to be diligently re-examined, in order to
ascertain whether there might have been a communication of this paper made,
and overlooked or forgotten. None such, however, is found. There appears
only, in a journalized account of the transaction by Mr. Lear, under date of June 3,
a passage intimating that he should be disposed to give time, rather than suffer
the business to be broken off, and our countrymen left in slavery: and again,
that on the return of the person who passed between himself and the Bashaw,
and information that the Bashaw would require time for the delivery of the
family, he consented, and went ashore to consummate the treaty. This was done
by the next day; and being forwarded to us as ultimately signed, and found to
contain no allowance of time, nor any intimation that there was any stipulation
but what was in the public treaty, i t was supposed that the Bashaw had, in fine,
abandoned the pro osition; and the instructions, before mentioned, were conaequently given t o Pdr. Davis. An extract of so much of Mr. Lear's communication as relates to this circumstance is now transmitted to the Senate;* the
whole of the papers having been laid before them on a former occasion. How
i t hm happened that the declaration of June 5 has never before come to our
knowledge, cannot with certainty be fiaid: but, whether there has been a miscarriage of it, or a failure of the ordinary attention and correctness of that officer
in making his communications, I have thought it due to the Senate, as well as
to myself, to explain to them the circumstances which have withheld from their
knowledge, as they did from my own, a modification, which, had it been placed
in the public treaty, would have been relieved from objections which candor and
good faith cannot but feel in its present form.
As the restoration of the family has probably been Betted, a just regard to
the character of the United States will require that I make to the Bashaw a candid
statement of facts; and that the sacrifices of his right to the peace and friendship
of the two countries, by yielding finally to the demand of Mr. Davis, be met by
proper acknowledgments and reparation on our part.
TH: JEFFERSON.
8ee the letter of July 5,1805.

[Am. State Papers, For. Rel., Vol. 11, 1797-1807.1
Establishment of a Court of Honor
NAVYYARD,N. YORKNw: 11% 1807
SIR, We have the honor to enclose for your perusal our resolutions respecting
a Court of Honor, and trust they will meet with your approbation.
To establish harmony, & preserve unsullied the Honor & reputation of oEcers,
sa objects, of the most sacred & desirable nature, we whose names are hereunto
annexed have thought it advisable to constitute a Court of Honor, for the attainment of those objects, and do solemnly pledge ourselves to abide by the decision
of that Court whatever i t may be and to protect the said court in the privilidges
which we have vested in them.
For the regulation of this court therefore we establish the following articles,
from which there shall be no diviation until altered by the authority from which
they derive their Source.
1
I n every contest between officers of whatever nature it may be, the party
aggrived shall be oblig'd to lay the circumstances before the Court for their investigation & decision, and if the party so aggrieved should fail to state his
grievance to the Court, it will then be the duty of said court, on application from
any o5cer to investigate the conduct of the o5cer who has received the injury
and to am such sentence as in their judgement may appear Correct.
2.4 b h e v e r a blow, or appmbrious epithets, are unwarrantably used from
one officer to another the whole circumstances relative to the affair shall be submitted to the court & the most Humiliating apology shall be imposed on the
offender. 3.4 I n every situat.ion where the character of an officer is impeachable, it
shall be the duty of officers, who may be acquainted with circumstances, t o ar-

W D S WITII BARBARY POWERS
raign the offender before the Court & in default of this duty, they shall be considered, themselves, 8s amenable to the jurisdiction of said court,
4.q On investigating the conduct of any officer, if it shall appear that an
officer hm behaved in an ungentlemanlike, or unofficerlike manner it shall be
the duty of the Court to represent such an officer to the commander in chief as
a character unworthy of holding a commission or warrant in the service of the
United States.
5.Q Power shall be vested in the Court, in case of the sickness, absence or
arraignment of any member, or members of said court, to appoint any officer,
or officers they may think proper to act in place of mid member or members,
for the time being.
6.64 All circumstances not embraced in the above articles are to be left to
the discretion of the Court; And we do hereby appoint the following officers 8s
members of said court, with full power to act for us, until further arrangements
may be made
JAMES
LAWRENCE
OLIVERH. PERRY
SAM:R. MARSHAL
JOHN
JOHNBON
JOHN
DECATUR
SAM:G. BLODGET.Sec~
Commodore JOHNRODGEBS.
kc. JRP, Series Two, Vol. 4, 1807-1809.1

-

To Captain Thomas Tingey, U. S. Navy, from Naval Constructor Josiah Fox
NAVYYAEDWASHINGTON
Id NOVr 1807
SIE, I n answer to your letter of the 9Q instant requesting a report of the State
of our Frigates and other Vessels a t this Yard, I n compliance thereto, beg leave
to communicate the following subjoined report of their several states. Vie*
Frigates - United States, having undergone a thorough repair, is now preparing
for Coppering, and as her Masts Yards and Spars are nearly ready
she can be speedily got ready for service, provided the weather continues favorable John Adams - is now undergoing repairs which are considerably
advanced, and it is presumed should occasion require her services,
t
she might be completed in a ~ h o rperiod
Esscx - is also, now undergoing a thorough repair; such parts as lye
under the surface of the Water have been nearly completed and C o p
ered, therefore great progress, may be made also on this Ship in a
hort time, provided the Winter is favorable.
President, Congress and New York, will all require considerable repairs,
before they can be fitted for service ConsteUation and Adams, could be immediately fitted for Temporary
service on the Coast, Ports or Bays Boston. I beg leave to refer to the report of 7Q Februsry 1806, on
the state of this ship Brigs.
Syren is in a good state, and might be immediately equipped for
service Vixen, and Schooner Nautilus, requiring but trifling repairs, could be
s eedilp equipped for service Schooner interprize, is in good order and might be immediately equipped service
Gun Boat NQ7 is ready for manning [NDA. Captain's LB, Vol. 3, 1807.1

8

To Eon. D. Thomas, Chairman of the Committee upon the Petition of Eamet
Caramanli, from Secretary of the Navy
NAVYDEPI 16 Nozs 1807. I have had the honor of receiving your letter of the 13Q ins. -

The sum of $2400 appropriated by Act of Congress ?f 21 April 1806, for the
relief of Hamet Caramalli Ex Bashaw of Tnpoh, was remitted to the Officer Commanding the Naval Forces in the Mediterranean, in June 1806; and although the
Navy Department does not possess any official information aa to the fact of this
money having been paid over to Hamet Caremalli, 'yet there exists good reason fo

'

580

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1805 TO 1807

presume that i t was paid to him, that in May 1807,1000$ part of the 2400 was ptbid

to him, and that in June 1807 the balance, viz$1400, was paid to him. The Commanding Officer to whom the remittance was made, has lately arrived

in the Country, and will shortly exhibit his accounts for settlement, when full
information wiIl be afforded upon the subject of these payments.
[NA. NDA. Cong. LB, Vol. 1, Dec. 1 7 9 W e b . 1811.1

-

To Secretary of the Navy from Captain John Bodgers, U. S. Navy
NAVYYARDNEW YORKNOV?18.1807
SIR, I have the honor to acquaint you that a Pilot has this moment arrived, who
reports that the Wasp is inside, and the Constitution off Sandy Hook [LC. JRP, Let. & Ord., X.Y. Kavy Yard, 1807-1808.1
To Captain Thomas Tingey, U. S. Navy, Superintendent, Navy Yard, washington,
D. C., from Secretary of the Navy
84 Nw? 1807
NAVYDEPAR~.
You will suspend procuring the Articles for Algiers directed by my letter of the
10 Septs last until otherwise directed, except only for such Articles, as you may
have already contracted for
[MDA. Barbary Powers LB, 1803-1808.1
To the United States Congress from Master Commandant David Porter, U. S. Navy
WASHINGTONNovr 84.1807
GENTLEMEN
Your Petitioner states that he has imported from Italy on account
of the Officers of the United States Navy A Monument to be erected in Memory
of their Brother Officers who fell during the different Attacks made on the City of
Tripoli in the year 1804. That said Monument has lately arrived a t Boston in the
Unlted States Frigate Constitution, will shortly be landed a t New York and from
thence will be sent to this City to he erected. Your Petitioner states also that said
monument is contained in Fifty one Cases, Numbered from N? 1 to 51 inclusive,
weighs about fifteen Tons and cost about Two Thousand Dollars
Your Petitioner prays that he may be relieved from paying a duty on the same.
[LC. D. Porter P., U. S. X., Ac. 198, 1807-1808.1
To Captain Hugh G. Campbell, U. S. Msvy, commanding U. 6. Frigate Constifuffon,
New York, B. Y., from Secretary of the Navy
NAVYD E P ~86 Noar 1807. You will order the Crew of the Constitution to be paid off and discharged. I send
to Mr Harris your Purser, by this day's mail, the sum of Dv 52,000, for the purpose
of paying off the crew - If you should find that more will be required for this
purpose, Mr Beekman upon your requisition, will be furnish a small sum to enable
the Purser to complete the paying off. But I hope that more will not be required.
[NDA. OSW,Vol. 7, 1805-1807.1
Extracts from log of U. S. Brig H o d , of IS Guns, Master Commandant John H.
Dent, U. 6. Navy, commanding
187 November 18073
Lat4. O b d 32040f.
The Pilots are very negligent off Charleston if we may judge from our situation
we have been cruizing all this morning from 7 to 3 f~ water - fired a Signal Gun
and could not fall in with a Pilot Boat.
[98November 18071
At 7 made Sail - A t 8. A M fired a Gun and made a Signal for a pilot At % pest 9 received a Pilot on board from Charleston from 9 until noon working
to Windward off the Bar. - At noon Came too in 7 fq the lighthouse. beari
W 3 N. about 10 mile distant, hoisted out the Y Cutter - Ship'd the R O
w. and sent the Royal yards aloft. - Ends moderate breezes and olear
pleaeant weather, but very cold.

~

581

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

[B Nouernber 18071
Commences moderate breezes and pleasant weather - At Sunset struck the
Royal yards, and launch'd the Royal masts - At 6 A M got underweigh,
At 9 cross'd the Bar. At 10. when in the Narrows the Slings of the Maia yard
gave way and the yard came down on deck, by the Run, let go the Anchor and furled
the Sail8 At +4 past 11 the Main Yard being got up again got underweigh with
the wind a t East. - Fired a Salute of 17 Guns in passing Fort Johnson
[SO Nmember 180YI
Commences light winds with pleasant weather - At 3 past 1. A M came
too in 7 £@ water off Charleston - At Sunset struck Royal yards - Middle
part light aim and thick foggy weather - At noon fresh breezes from the S. E.
a pilot came on board to take the brig abreast of the Navy Yard.
[NA. NDA original, 1805-1810.1

To Secrerlsry of the Navy from lldaster Commandant John B. Dent, U. 6. Navy

UNITEDSTATES
SLOOP[Bare] Hornet

Charkslown 29% Nod 1807
SIR,I hsve the honor to inform you of my arrival here in forty day8 from
Malaga encountering nothing of moment on the passage, until getting on the
Coast, where I experienced very heavy G a l a from the W. 8. W. to N. N. W for
eleven days in which I am sorry to inform you the main mast of the Hmnet waa
sprung and several of the shrouds parted - the mast appears to have been green
when put in, i t is in consequence much warped & very defective. The Hull of the Brig is in good order & requ[i]res no repairs - the hold must
be broken up; - the Wster Casks &9 examined & new hooped - it will be necessary to over haul the whole of the rigging & until this is done it will be impossible to say what may be wanting - An intire new suit of Courses & topsail8
are absolutely nesessary, as well as three new Cables, which you will discover by
the report of survey herewith sent you. - The Channels are intirely too low in their present state they afford less protection to the masts, and are in continual danger of being washed away by the Sea, to prevent which I have been
obliged to secure them by additional knees - when by the wind they are continually under water and injure her aailing very much. I submit i t to your
judgment whether they would not be much better raised, and placed as those
of the other Brigs, they will then afford much greater protection to the mast%,
and being piaced above the water, could not injure her saili~g.The Gun Carriages are rotten & defective - and the Guns too light & tdfliug
for a vessel of the Hornets tonnage & appearance, She would with ease mount
sixteen forty two pound Carronades and two long brass eighteen pounders An Englisl~vessel of half the tonnage mounts sixteen 320 a much greater weight
in roportion to their sizes. faha11 immediately set about overhauling the rigging
brake up the hold,
and get out the mast & repair it - I shall then be enabled to inform you of
every thing necessary to put her in a state of complete readiness for for sea
[NDA. MC LB, 18061807.]

-

To Secretary of the Navy from Captain IIugh O. Campbell, U. S. Navy
U. S. SHIPComtitution
New York Noar 30% 1807
SIR- I forwarded to you from Boston a statement of repairs necessary for
this ship, a duplicate of which I now transmit to you by thii Days p o a b V i e - A thorough caulking above water and bottom Examind - A new Main
Mast - A Mizinmast doubtful1 and Must be taken out ta be strictly Examind one full set of new sails, One fore Top Mast,one Main D e O n e set of Top Gall*
Masts - One fore and Main Top sail ard-One Cross Jack Yard, and Set of
studdingmil Booms-One Jibb boom, a 6ang of Top Mast and To 0 1 1 RiggingFour Cablea of 21 Inches, and a large proportion of new Water Easks
A wt

-

of Boats Some alteration should be made In the Magazine And Cockpit, the
Plan in my opinion being vary inconvenient, and a m of opinion that the
deok and forecastle of this ship Should be furnished with heavy Carronades, in
plaoe of the long light Twelve ounders now on board-the b e n ia obvious
&ould we have s Formadable &emy to aontand with it would be lhpeotedl that

6
s
:

582

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1806 TO 1804

the Constitution would be superior t o any frigate In the British Navy, when the
fact Can be Easily proved to the contrary Instance the Le~enaof fifty Guns,
Twenty Eight, Twenty four pounders on the Main deck, Twenty thirty two
Pound Carronades, on her quarter deck and forecastle, and two long chases,
All frigates rated thirty six guns In the British h-avy, carry the following
Mettle, Twenty Eight Eighteen pounders On the Gun deck, and Twenty on the
quarter deck and forecastle, Eighteen of which are thirty two pound cerronades,
and to two long Chases.
I likewise enclose a list [bound in below-mentioned source] of men Whose
times are not Expired, having Ship them while a t Lisbon which I shall not pay
off until1 your Pleasure is Known [NDA. Captain's LB, Vol. 3, 1807.1
To Secretary of the Navg from Nathaniel Ingraham & Son, Navy Agents,
Charleston, S. C.
1.9 December 1807
CHARLESTON
SIR, Since our last Respects the U, S - Brig Hornet, Cap9 Dent has arriv'd
here, and we are sorry to add that she has sprung, her main mast, and carried
away the most part of her main rigging and is otherwise damag'd. - Cap1 Dent
informs us, he has written you, of his Situation. - The Supplies pt Schooner
Wolf are received, the receipt of which we have acknowlcdg'd t,o the Navy Agent
a t Baltimore, & are
[NDA. Misc. Letters, Vol. 5,1807.1
Extracts from log of U. S. Brig Hornd, of 18 Guns, Easter Commandant John H.
Dent, U. S. Navy, commanding
1 December 1807
Fresh breezes and hazey Weather - At 3 came too abreast of the Navy yard:
Struck top gallant yards and Masts - unbent
and moored with the 2 Bowers
the Sails and unrove all the running rigging - engaged a Tender and sent the
Spars and Lumber on shore. - Dismiss'd 5 men who came Passengers from
Leghorn
8 Dezember 1807
[Charleston. S. C.] Commences with pleasant weather wind North, people
employed overhauling the Rigging on shore. discharging the Shingle ballast t o
wash and clean it - the Carpenters employ'd fishing the Foremast. - At 10
A. M. took the Bowsprit out to hoop it, and woold it afresh. - Ends pleaant
Weather, Wind East.
[End of remarks concerning Mediterranean crusie which commenced on October
1805.]
[NA. NDA original, 1805-1810.1

-

To Secretary of the Navy from Captain Hugh 6.Campbell, U. 6. Navy
NEW YORK.Decr 19'4 1807.
SIR, I beg leave to inform you That I resigned the command of the Constitution
t o Captain Chancev, on the 8th Inst prior t o which I gave Furloughs t o the following officers, Lieut&'t and Midshipman Ludlow to Newburg state of New York
for thirty days - Lieutenant Woolsey to Plattsborough State of New York, for
Eight weeks - Lieutenant Burrows to Washington for one Month, with orders
t o report Himself - Doctor Heap t o Washington With orders to report himself
to the Navy Department - Mt Shields to Philadelphia - hlidshipman Chancey
to Fairfield, state of Connecticut For Twenty days - Midshipman Anderson to
Richmond Virginia for two Months, with orders to report Himself to the department on his Way through Washington - Midshipman Marshall D? - I
intend t o leave New York about 17tQ on my Way to Washington and will probably
Pass a week in Philadelphia should I t meet your approbation,
I wish much for some indulgence this winter for the bennefit of My health which
is much impaird, and accompanied with Rheumatic Pains
[NDA. Captain's LB, Vol. 3, 1807.1

-

WARS WITH BARBARY POWERS

583

To U. 8. Consuls in the Mediterranean, Cadix and Lisbon, from Tobias Lear, U. 6.
Consul General, Algiers
ALGIERS December 1 6 4 1807
Cirevlat
SIB, YOUhave undoubtedly before this, heard that three American Vessels had
been detained by a frigate of this place, in consequence of the annuities for two
years past, not having been sent from the U States in Naval and Military Stores,
as stipulated by treaty; notwithstanding the amount thereof had been repeatedly
offered in Cash. These Vessels are, the ship Eagle of New Pork, Iiathaniel Shaler, Master, from
Bristol to Palermo; Cargo, Glass bottles - Brig Violet of Boston, James Merret,
Master, from Oporto to Leghorn; Cargo, Sugar, hides, Indigo &c and schooner
Mary Ann of New York, Ichobold Sheffield, Master, from the straits of Belle Isle
to Leaborn:, Cargo.
- . fish. - The two former have been in this port upwards of
40 daFs. The schooner hae not arrived, and is supposed to have made some other Port. The People on board these Vessels have been treated very well, and no pillage of
any kind has been committed. I have now the honor to inform you that I have adjusted this business with the
Dey, who hm received the amount of two years annuities due, in Cash, and the
Vessels are liberated; and that our commerce will receive no further molestation
from the Cruziers of this Regency. I pray you m-ill have the goodness to give this as much publicity as possible, for
the benefit of all concerned therein. P. S. December 17* 1807
We have this moment heard, bv an arrival from Leghorn, t,hat the schooner
before mentioned had arrived in Kiples, having been re&ken by the Captain and
part of the Crew left on board, who threw overboard four of the Captors, and put
four others into the boat to shift for themselves. 1 have myself received no advice of this; and on application to the Dey, who
first sent me the information, he assures me that it shall not alter the arrangement
made yesterday. and that our Vessels may navigate without fear of molestation. At present all their Cruizers are in Port. - TOBIASLEAR
Please to forward a copy of this letter to the Secretary of State of the U States,
by the first opportunity. [NA. SDA. CL, Algiers, Vol. 7, Part 11, Jan. 1806-Sept. 1807.1
To Secretary of the Navy from Captain Stephen Decatur, Jr., U. S. Xavy
U. S. FRIGATEChesapeake D e ~ 1 7 ' b1807
SIB,Your letter of the 7tQof Decr appointing me a member of a court martial,
for the purpose of trying Commodore James Barron & others, I have received I cannot in justice t o Comm? Barron, 8: my own feelings, set on this court, without
stating to you my opinion of his case When the unfortunate affair of the 22.4 of June occurred, I formed & expressed
an opinion, that Cornm? Barron had not done his duty - during.the Court of
Enquiry, I was present when the evidence of the officers was given In - I have
since seen the opinion of the Court, which opinion I think leniant. - I t is probable that I am prejudiced against Comm? Barron, & view his conduct in this case,
with more severit,y than it descrves - previous to his sailing, my opinion of him
as a Soldier, was not favourable - Altho Sir, I hope, & trust, 1should most conscientiously decide, on C o m m ~B m n s case, still Sir, there is no circumstance that
would occasion me so much regret, as to be compelled to serve on the court martial
that tries him - I have therefore to solicit that I may be excused from this dutyWDA. Captain's LB, Vol. 3, 1807.1

To Secretary of the Navy from Captain Isaac Channcey, U. S. Navy
U STATESNAVYYABD
N York %6* D G C1807
~

SIB,Yesterday about 10 OClook the Law of Congress laying a general embargo

on all American V w e h within the Jurisdictional limits of the United States, was
put into my hands
I immediately dispatch4 four Gun Boats to the Narrows
& Hook, with Orders to stop all Vesseh except coasters, Attempting to pass to Sea.
I also sent three Others, above Corleara hook, with simuler Orders, - I made thie

-

584

NAVAL OPERATIONS FROM 1806 TO 1807

Arrangement'with the Gun Boats under the impression that the Law it-self Authorised me to take this Step without waiting for specific orders from the Department
and under full expectation that I should receive those orders to day but ss I have
not received any orders on the subject I am fearful1 that I have been too anxious
to do my duty, and have done that, which perhaps, I ought not to have done If this should be the case I beg that you will Attribute i t to too great a solicitude
tomeetthewishesof governmentandnot fromany intention toexceedmy Authority As soon as I was made acquainted with the law, I waited upon Mr Gibson the
collector of this port, and tendered to him, the Assistauce of any part of the disposable force, under my command to assist him in carrying the law into full & complete
execution he readily accepted of my offer and requested me to send such a number
of Gun Boats to the Hook, as to complet,ely prevent any Vessels from passing to
sea, the Gun Boats has been of considerable service in stoping some vessels, determined to go to sea a t all hazards, and which i t would have been out of the power
of the revenue Officers to have stopd
[NDA. Captain's LB, Vo1.3, 1807.1

To Tobias Lear, U. S. Consul General, Algiers, from Charles D. Coxe, IT. S. ChargB
d'Affaires, Tunis
TUNIS December B6t4 1807.
DEARSIR, By the return of the Maltese Vessel which brought the Tunisian prisoners from Algiers, I received your esteemed lines of 21.1 october, & have not had
an opportunity of replying thereto till the present moment. - I enclose a duplicate of mine pr Captain Hunter to Bona, the original of which I hope, however you
have r e d in due course.
It is with the eatest pleasure I learn that you are satisfied with the arrangements I had m a g respecting the duties to be paid on merchandize imported in
Vessels of the U: States, & i t shall always be my constant endeavour to merit a continuance of Your approbation in all future occurrences which may fall within the
Sphere of my Agency. I n obedience to your request, I immediately seized every opportunity within my
reach to communicate to our reamctive Consuls on the European Coast (as well as
the Secr of State) the informatibn contained in your letter concernin the threat
of the Dey of Algiers - I annex an Extract of Meass Degen, ~ u e b t a r db CQ'*
letter to me, from which there remains no doubt, that advantage has been taken of
the recall of our Ships of war from this Station - of this latter circumstance you
were advised by mine of 16th October. - We are all under the deepest regret &
concern for the disagreeable situation in which yourself and M.9 Lear must now be
placed, as well as our unfortunate Countrymen, who may have been captured. I have not r e d a single line from America, nor any news more than the present
contains of sufficient importance to communicate. The Vessel by which this goes
will sail immediately and leaves me only time to say, that our affairs here are as
they should be, and as you left them. Mr Ambrose joins me in sincere good wishes for the health and happiness of
yourself and Ms k a r , to whom you will be so good as to present our best regards.
Accepting for yourself the sssurance of the great esteem & respect with which I
always remain,
P. S. Extract of a letter from Messs Degen, Guebhard & Cq, dated Leghorn
21.t November 1807. Our last advices from Naples brings us accounts, the contents of which
is of the highest importance to the American trade, wherefore we embrace
the first opportunity that offers, to communicate the circumstances, which
have come to our knowledge - An American Schooner has lately arrived
a t Naples, bringing the unpleasant intelligence that she had been captux-ed
by an Algerine Frigate of 44. Guns, which had already taken another Schooner
and a Brig - Nine Turks were put on board, four of which the Captain of
the Schooner threw overboard by surprise, and the other four he secured,
and then sett adrift in a boat, in sight of the Barbary Shore, and one he
I t cannot therefore be doubted, but that
brought with him to Naples
the Regency of Algiers, has taken advantage of the absence of the United
States forces in these seas to declare war, and there is no calculating the
Evils that will follow, as if we are to believe public reports, a considerable
Squsdron consisting of eleven small and large Vessels, belonging to that
piratical nation, were during the latter end of last month c r u i ~ n goff the
coast of Spain.

-

-

